A DESCRIPTION OF NEW Philosophical Furnaces, OR A new ART of Distilling,
divided into five parts. Whereunto is added a Description of the Tincture of
GOLD, Or the true AVRVM POTABILE; ALSO, The First part of the MINERAL WORK.

Set forth and published for the sakes of them that are studious of the TRUTH.

By JOHN RUDOLPH GLAUBER.

Set forth in English, By J. F. D. M.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Coats, for Tho: Williams, at the Sign of the Bible
in Little-Britain. 1651.

To his Honored Friend, JOHN JENISON in the BISHOPRIC of DVRHAM ESQVIRE.
SIR,
PErceiving in you a singular ingenuity in penetrating into the Arcana's of
nature, and a cheerful forwardness in a charitable improvement of the utmost of
your experience in doing good to mankind, especially to the despised poor, who
cannot come with price in their hands, I esteemed it as a service well pleasing
to God, and most acceptable to man, to be instrumental in adding somewhat to
that experience of yours, and of those of like public spirit with your self,
thereby enabling you to be yet more serviceable to this your generation: I
therefore here present you with a rich Cabinet of natures unvaluable Jewels;
But know, that it has many doors, the one whereof as being shut to many, but
not to all, I have opened with an English key; the other must be entered by a
penetrating judgment quickened with Celestial lightening. Now where there are
public spirits, profound Mediations and a constant industry, Divine
illumination is at the door. The large and boundless secrets of Nature will not
attend private interests, nor the deep mysteries of Nature be fathomed by
shallow apprehensions, no nor her fair daughters be courted by inconstant
servants. But you are otherwise qualified then to despair of seeing her self
in her own colors: She unvailes her self to those only that will admire her
beauty, and not to those that will cast dirt in her face, being altogether
unable to judge of her features.

This Philosophical Treatise being frequently and profoundly read may be
understood, and being understood by you will qualify you with such capacities,
that you may be able to make not only all the poor in your country rich, but all the sick healthy, and thereby bring to your self as much honor as mortality
need care for. Accept of these my endeavors as proceeding from a sensibleness
of your unfeigned love, and respects to him who is

Sir, Yours affectionatly to love and serve you J. F.

English Reader,
FInding the second being the greatest part of this treatise in private hands
already translated into* English by a learned German, I was willing, it being
in such a forwardness, to set a aside for thy good, some few hours to teach the
other parts thereof speak the same language. It is pity that such useful and
so learned writings should be obscured from the English Nation. Many indeed
would not have any that understand no other language but that of England to
read any thing of learning but what is originally writ in English: and what is
the reason? Is it because they would have England kept in ignorance, or because
they think they are not able to understand any thing besides what is writ in
their mother tongue. This is my judgem^nt that they that be intelligent may
understand intelligible things although they do not understand Latin or German
words, as well as great linguist themselves: for I do not believe that tongues
do enlarge the capacity any otherwise then they enable any one for the reading
of learned Anthors. I am so far from having men confined to the knowing of
things writ only in their own language, that I wish that all things truly
worth knowing were writ in every language of the world, that intelligent men of
all Nations may the better understand intelligible things. I abhor to think
that any should make a Monopoly of learning which consists more in the
undrestanding of things, then of tongues. Why should any be unwilling that
learning and Philosophy both theoretical and practical should be propagated?
Are not Philosophers the best moralized men, of the purest lives, and most
serviceable in their generation? It shall be my practice as long as I live to
be instrumental in promoting true knowledge, wheaher by way of Translation, or
any other way of making what is occult manifest. Now as for this treatise in
stead of a commendatory Epistle, it is sufficient to say that Glauber is the
Author of it. He is carried upon the wings of Fame throughout the whole world.
His Fame all know is great, and flies high, but his worth surmounts his Fame.
He is a Philosopher and Chemist indeed, as appears by this ensuing Treatise, in
which are discovered sueh secrets that by the help thereof being understood (as
possible they may) the poorest man may in a short time become very rich, the
most sickly very healthy, and the basest truly honorable. In this translation
look not so much at words as things, as I my self did: and as for Errata's
which perhaps may prove many besides what I have observed in my cursory
reading, be thou so courteous as to impute them neither to the Printer nor my
self, but my absence from the town all the time the book was in the Press. This
together with thine acceptance shall oblige

Thy Friend J. F.

A Preface to the Courteous Reader.
I Have hitherto reserved to my self as secrets, some peculiar furnaces and
compendious ways of distilling, which with diligent study and speculation I
found out some few years since, by which many excellent works, impossible to be
done by the vulgar art, may be performed; but now at last I have, considering
with my self how advantageous it may be to the world, determined to conceal
this art no longer, but for the good of my neighbor to publish it, by giving
to Chemists a perfect and fundamental information of this new invented art,
that they may no longer for the future spend their time, and expend their costs
in long tedious operations, but may after a more easy way by the help of my
furnaces be able to effect many excellent things. Now this book shall be
divided into five parts, the first whereof shall teach how to build a furnace,
in which incombustible things are distilled and sublimed, and indeed such
things which cannot be done by retort or any other vessels, and how the
Spirits, Flowers, and Oils of Minerals, and Metals may by the help thereof be
prepared, as also what their use, and virtues are.

In the second part shall be showed another furnace, in which combustible
things, as Vegetables, Animals, and Minerals are distilled and most perfectly
subtilized: by help whereof many most excellent medicaments for the cure of
most grievous and otherwise incurable diseases and effects may be prepated.

In the third shall be taught a certain new invention hitherto unknown, of
distilling burning spirits, as of Wine, Corn, Fruits, Flowers, Herbs and
Roots; as also the waters of Vegetables and Animals, and that in a great
quantity, in a short time, and without much costs; as also of boiling Beer,
Hydromel, Wine, and other things, which otherwise are made in Copper or Iron
vessels; and all this by the help of wooden vessels, and benefit of a certain
small Copper, or Iron instrument of two or three pound weight, and that after a
certain easy manner without furnaces. This newly invented Art does also teach
diverse Chemical operations, as putrefactions, digestions, circulations,
extractions, abstractions, cohobations, fixations, etc. And this invention is
very necessary and profitable for young beginners in this Art, for they need
not in the making of burning spirits, waters of Vegetables, Extracts, and other
Medicaments so many Furnaces, and so many Copper, Iron, Tin, Earthen and Glass
vessels, for it is here taught how all the aforesaid operations may be done
only by the help of a certain small Copper or Iron vessel in wooden vessels as
well as by Al^mbicks and other great Copper vessels, by which means a great
deal of costs is saved,

In the fourth part shall be taught another certain, and hitherto unknown
furnace, in which all Chemical operations may most easily be done: being most
profitable for the trying of the natures of Minerals and Metals; as also for
the proving, examining, melting, cupelling, and separating of Metals, that
nothing may be lost of them, and that after a compendious and easy way, and
that also to great advantage.

In the fifth shall be taught how to make and prepare Iron, Earthen, Glass, and
other kind of Instruments necessary for the aforesaid four furnaces, as also
other necessary, and most profitable Manuals.

And indeed in the first part, the Fabric of the first furnace being
delineated, I shall also show how by the help thereof may be made Spirits,
Oils, Flowers, and other most profitable Medicaments, also their virtues and
use, and that as faithfully as I may, and without fraud. And truly I do not
doubt but those of understanding will approve of this work, but ignorant Zoiles
will contemn it: For it is said according to the Proverb, He that builds by
the high way will hear many things from them that find fault, and especially
from the vulgar, etc. But it would be well if those Thrasoees would put forth
something more excellent, before they find fault with and carp at other men's
pains and labors.

Wherefore let no one rashly judge of this work, until he be thoroughly
informed concerning the same, and then I do not doubt but the Author shall be
by him commended.

And if happily all things shall not presently succeed well, to his mind, with
him that shall build this furnace, and operate therewith, let him think with
himself that prehaps he has erred in some part (for it is a new and unknown
work, in which any one may easily err) and not presently therefore murmur
against the Author, blameing him, because he has not wrote clear enough, but
let him ascribe it to his own ignorance, and let him study to understand the
Authors meaning, and still be practicing upon it, and then I do not doubt, but
he will have better success, which I pray every one may have,

AMEN.
THE FIRST PART OF PHILOSOPHICAL FURNACES: CONTAINING A NEW ART OF Making
Spirits, Oils, Flowers, and other Medicaments by the help of the first of
those Furnaces, after a most easy, and peculiar manner out of Vegetables,
Animals, and that with great profit: ALSO The CHEMICAL and MEDICINAL use
thereof.

By JOHN RUDOLPH GLAUBER.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, for Tho: Williams at the sign of the Bible
in Little-Britain. 1652.

E. The first subliming pot, which is set into the upper hole of the furnace.
D. The upper hole of the furnace. F. The second pot. G. The third. H. The
fourth.



A. The ash hole with the wideness of the furnace. B. the middle hole by which
the coals and matter to be distilled are cast in. C. A stopple of stone which
is to stop the said hole after injection. D. The upper hole with a certain
false bottom which is to be filled with sand. E. The cover of the upper hole,
which is laid on after the injection of the coals and materials. F. A pipe
going out of the receiver, and joined to the first pot. C. The first receiver,
H. The second. I. The third. K. A stool on which the first receiver stands,
having a hole in the middle, through which the neck of the first pot to which a
dish is annexed, passes. L. The dish, through the pipe whereof the
refrigerated spirits distill. M. A receiver into which the spirits collected in
the dish do flow. N. A screw to be raised higher at pleasure for the better
joining the receiver to the pipe, and it goes through a stool. O. The place
of the pipe for the distilling of spirit of Vitriol and Allome. P. A grate
consisting of two strong cross iron bars, fastened in the furnace, and four or
five more less that are moveable, for the better cleansing of the furnace.



G. The first crooked pipe fitted to the pipe of the furnace. F. The pipe of
the furnace. H. A receiver fitted to that pipe, and set in a tub of water for
the accelerating the operations which recipient has a cover with two holes
through the first whereof goes a single crooked pipe, and through the other
two crooked pipes, whereof one goes into the receiver as did the single, and
the other out of the receiver H. into H. H. I. The tub of water. M. A third
pipe.

By this way flowers are sublimed, and spirits distilled speedily and in great
quantity.



THE FIRST PART OF PHILOSOPHICAL FURNACES.
Of the structure of the first Furnace.
AS for the first Furnace it may be built greater or lesser as you please, a
regard being had of the quantity of the water to be distilled, and also either
round or square; either of Bricks or by a Potter with Potters clay. Now when
the Diameter is of one span, viz. withinside, the height must be of four, viz.
one from the bottom to the grate, another from the grate to the hole made for
putting in of Coals, and two from thence to the top of the Pipe, which must at
least go forth out of the Furnace one span, lest the receivers should by the
worms of the Furnace be heated. The Pipe also must have on the fore part a
Diameter, answering the third part of the intrinsecal Diameter of the Furnace;
also a little larger on the hinder part then the forepart. Let the grate be
such a one, as may be taken out at your pleasure and made clean, being stopped by
the water that is cast in and distilled: for it is easily stopped in distilling
of Salts melted with the coals, whereby the air is kept from coming to the
fire, and the distillation by consequence hindered; Or let there be put into the
vessel cross-wise two strong Iron bars, upon which lay four or five lesser,
distant the one from the other the breadth of a finger, going a little out of
the Furnace, in which when they are stopped, you may take them with a pair of
Tongs, stir them, and cleanse them from the burnt water, and then again put
them into their own places: wherefore also the Furnace must on the fore part be
open under the grate, that you may the better order the grate.

Also the grate must have above, a covering of Iron or Stone, with a hole in
the middle thereof with a certain distinction, which is to be filled with sand,
that the cover may the better and more fitly shut the hole, and prevent the
exhaling of the spirits which by this means will being forced, go forth through
the Pipe into the receivers, after you have cast in the water which is to be
distilled.

Of the Receivers.
Let the receivers be made of glass, or of strong earth, which may retain the
spirits, and such is Waldburgick, Hassiack, Frechheimensian, Siburgic earth,
etc. They are better that are made of glass, if they are to be had, and those
especially which are made of strong and firm glass, which may be smoothed
about the joints with a Smiris stone, and so fitted that they may the better be
joined together, and then they need not laving (but how they shall be smoothed
with the Smiris stone, and be fitted, shall be taught in the fifth part, which
treates of Manuals) because by this means they are joined so close, that no
spirits can go through the joints: otherwise you must close the joints with the
best lute, such as will not let the spirits exhale, which shall be taught in
the book treating of Manuals. The form of the recipient you may see in the
delineation thereof. As for the quantity thereof, know that by how much the
greater they are, so much the better they are, for then you need the fewer, but
the more, by how much the lesser they are. Let the superior orifice be larger
then the inferior, so that always another receiver may with its inferior
orifice be joined to it, and let the inferior orifice have a Diameter of three
fingers breadth or thereabouts, I mean in case the Diameter of the Furnace be
of one span. For a greater Furnace requires greater holes, as also orifices of
the receivers, by which means a sufficient, and due proportion of air may be
given to the fire: or if the Diameter of the furnace be more then a span, it
must also have two or three pipes (which being considered together should have
a wideness answering the wideness of the third part of the Furnace, for so
great a wideness, and so much air is required, if the fire burn freely and do
its office) to which vessels of the aforesaid proportion must be applied, that
the fire be not choked.

Now the figure that is annexed will teach the conjunction of the receivers, as
also their application to the furnace. And in the first place the receiver
stands in a threefoot stool bored through in the middle, that the neck of the
first receiver may pass through, to which is applied a dish with a pipe
receiving the dropping spirits: To the first there is joined a second, and to
that a third, and so consequently (viz. near unto a wall or ladder) so many as
you please. Let the upper receiver, and indeed, all the rest be left open; To
the lower, as has been said is joined a dish with a pipe, by which the
distilled spirits run down into another certain glass vessel added thereunto,
which being filled is taken away, and another is set in the place of it,
because that is set under it without luting, and therefore may easily be
changed. And if you please to distill any thing else, you must take away that
dish with a pipe, and make it clean, and then join it close again (that no
spirit may breath forth) to the work of the lower receiver. And if that dish
cannot be so closely joined, that nothing exhale, pour in a spoonful of water,
for that does astringe, neither does it hurt the spirits, because in the
rectifying it is separated.

Of Subliming vessels.
These you need not make of glass, or of such earth as may retain the spirits,
as has been above mentioned; it is sufficient if so be they be made of good
common potters earth and be well glazed within, viz. of such a form, and
figure, as appears by the annexed delineation.

Yet you must choose good earth that will endure the fire, for the lower pots
are so heated by the fire, that they would be broken if they should not be made
of good earth.

Now I will show you in general the manner it self of distiling; as also the
manual necessaries in every distillation.

The manner of distilling.
In the first place let there be some burning coals put in, which afterward
must be covered with more until the Furnace be full almost to the pipe, which
being done let not the uppermost cover be laid over its hole (that the heat and
smoke, may pass that way, and not through the pipe, and receivers which will
thereby be red hot; and this will be a hind^ance to the distillation) until
the fire be sufficiently kindled and the furnace be thoroughly hot; then cast in
with an Iron ladle of the water prepared for distillation as much as will cover
the coals, which being done, stop the furnace very close, by pressing down
strongly the upper cover upon its hole, or sand, which is put in the lower part
of the hole being a place made for that purpose. Now let him that casts in any
thing through the middle hole, presently stop it with a stopple of stone, and
that very close, for by this means all those things which were cast in, will be
forced after the manner of a thick cloud to break forth through the pipe into
the receivers, and there to condense themselves into an acid spirit, or oil,
and thence to distill into the dish set under, through the pipe whereof they do
yet distill down further into an other glass receiver. The Coals being burnt
out, and all the spirits being come forth, you must cast in more Coals, and
more materials, until you have got a sufficient quantity of Spirits. In this
way of distilling, you may at your pleasure cease, and begin again without any
danger.

When you will make clean the Furnace, you need do nothing else, then draw out
the Iron bars that ly on the cross bar, that the Caput Mortuum may fall down,
which afterward may be taken away with a fire shovel, which being done you
must put in the bars again and ^ay them on the cross bars as before, upon which
you must cast burning coals, and upon them others until there be enough, then
on them all being well kindled cast your materials.

When you go to make clean the receivers, and to begin to distill an other
thing, you need not remove them, but only pour pure water into them, viz. by
their upper receiver, by the descending whereof the other are purified.

And by this way not only out of vegetables, volatiles, and minerals
(incombustible) but also out of metals fixed, and stones, spirits, oils and
flowers are drawn forth wonderfully, easily, and in good quantity, which
otherwise could never have been done by the vulgar art of distilling.

Now in this furnace are distilled only such materials, which being distilled
yield an incombustible quantity, as common salt, vitrial, allom, and other
minerals, and vessels, each of which does yet require their peculiar manuals,
if operated upon.

Now because this furnace does not serve for every water, because the materials
to be distilled are cast upon burning coals, which are things combustible, I
have determined in the second part to give another, viz. a lesser unlike to
this, yet convenient to distill all combustible things that are endued with
volatile spirits, as Tartar, Hartshorn, Amb^r, Salt ammoniac, of urine, etc
There are by the help hereof made most subtle, volatile, sulphurous spirits of
salts, and minerals, as of common salt, vitrial, allom, nitre, antim^ny, and of
all other minerals, and metals, which otherwise without this furnace could not
have been made, with which spirits wonderful things are performed in Medicine,
and Alchymie, as in the second part shall be demonstrated more largely.

Now I will show you a way to make other receivers belonging to the first
furnace, and indeed such as are more fit for some operations, as the former
were more fit then others: wherefore let him that will operate choose these, or
the other, as he pleases.

As therefore the former being erected upwards by a wall, or ladder, by which
means the spirit might ascend from one into an other so long, until being
refrigerated, and condensed might again drop downward into the dish that is
annexed thereto: so these are a contrary way set and placed collateral in a
vessel filled with cold water to condense the spirits, by which means you need
not so many receivers; Also they must not be fashioned like the former, as to
be open above, and below, but only above like pots that serve for boiling: but
this you must observe that by how much the deeper and larger they are, by so
much the better they are.

Also you must join them together by the help of earthen pipes, being so
distinct, that the spirits may be kept back, being yet hot (and not
refrigerated) from passing out of one into the other, but being forced through
the middle of the separation of the pipes may go to the bottom of every
receiver, and thence arise by another pipe into another receiver that has a
double cover like the former, where again descending to the cold bottom, remain
refrigerated, and condensed. Now three or four of these are enough (whereas of
other thirteen or fifteen are required) a regard being had of their greatness.

You may see the figure of these receivers, as also their joining together by
the annexed delineation. Now for the most part one is sufficient for him that
distills a few things, especially if the water be not precious, and then let one
crooked earthen pipe at least be joined, one arm with the pipe that goes
forth of the furnace, the other with the receiver, but so that it go into the
receiver downwards, even to the middle thereof, and then you need not shut the
orifice of the receivers, for it is no great matter if somewhat evaporate, viz.
if the water to be distilled be not precious* And by this way may new spirits,
and new flowers be made every hour, with the help of one furnace, and one
recipient but with this caution, that for every new distillation, the recipient
be washed with water before it be put to the pipe; which being put to, you may
then cast your species into the furnace, and this do till you have a sufficient
quantity of spirits.

And this way of distillation serves especially for the trying of the natures
and properties of many and diverse minerals, such as yield in the fire spirits,
and flowers. For it would be too tedious in every new distillation to apply a
new and distinct receiver: as also many studious of the Chemical art would quit
their study, being able to make by retort but one trial in a day. And no wonder
if expenses, and loss of time should deter many.

Now here there is no need of many Retorts, nor of laving them, without
receivers, and such like superfluous things; neither is there here required the
constant presence of the operator, the observation of the regiment of fire, the
neglect whreof would otherwise endanger the loss of the retorts and receivers,
and by consequence the loss of labor. These and such like tedious things are
not here to be cared for, because it is sufficient only to cast the water upon
the coals, and cover the furnace, and then presently go forth the spirits, and
flowers of the same kind with their mineral: of which when thou have got a
sufficient quantity, thou must draw out the Iron bars, upon which the coals
lie, that they may fall down, and be taken away; and whilst the furnace is yet
hot, to put in the Iron bars again, and upon them to lay fresh coals, which
then will of their own accord be kindled with the heat of the furnace. In the
mean time you must take away the receiver, and make it clean and set it to
again, or if you had rather put another clean one, viz. for the new
distillation of another water.

And by this way diverse things may be in the space of 1. hour distilled, and
sublimed, viz. in a small quantity. But he that will distill, or sublime in a
greater quantity, let him take three or four pots that the spirits may pass
from one into another, that nothing thereof be lost. Here need not (as I said
before) the continual presence of the operator, for he may be gone, cease, or
repeal as he please, because the work is without danger of breaking the
retorts, and receivers.

He that knows the use of this furnace may do many things in a short time
without spending much time or cost. For any one may do more by the help thereof
in one hour, then in the common way in 24. by which way also there is a great
saving of coals, because ten pound of coals will do more this way then a
hundred the other. As for example, he that will try shall make a pound of
spirit of salt in one hour with 3. 4. or five pounds of coals; whereas after
the other way are required fifty or sixty pounds, and at least twenty or thirty
hours time, viz. in the common way by the help of retorts: which is indeed very
tedious.

Also by this way may be made the flowers of minerals, and metals, in a great
quantity, very easily, and in a short time without great cost, so as that in
one hours space with three or four pound of coals may a pound of the flowers of
Antimony be made. And this is no small help to the Physician, and Chemist.

Moreover this furnace being once built endures for many years, and being
broken is easily repaired.

And by this way you shall need only materials to be distilled, no retorts, and
receivers are not in danger, by which means much cost is saved.

Besides the aforesaid ways I have yet another, and that more compendious,
viz. of distilling, and subliming, and more easy, by which means in a very
little time, an incredible quantity of spirits of salts, and flowers of
Minerals, and metals may be made: which I shall refer till another time because
for the present I have said enough.

Now I do not doubt but diligent Chemists will follow my steps, and find out
those things which were unknown to me. For it is easier to add to things
found out, then to find out things unknown.

The construction therefore of the furnaces being in mine opinion clearly
showed, there now follows the manner of distilling, and subliming with it.

Although happily, and contrary to my hope any obscurity should be met withal,
yet one process will explain another: and the diligent operator, and searcher
of nature shall without doubt by his practice attain the effect after the same
manner as I have prescribed. And this is that, which together with the blessing
of God may overtake all pious Chemists, Amen.

How the Spirit of Salt is to be distilled.
THE reason why I enter upon the spirit of salt, before I say any thing of the
spirits of vegetables, is this, viz. because it is even the chiefest, which can
be made in this furnace: for few exceed this in strength and virtues; wherefore
I also have given it the preeminency. Neither is there any of the acid spirits,
about which the Chemists hitherto have been more busied, then this, wherefore
also it was of all, of greatest price, etc. For some have mixed salt with
potters clay; and have made this mixture into little bals, which they have for
to get the spirit, forced by retort into a very strong fire: some have mixed
salt with bole, some with the powder of tyles, others with burnt Allume, etc.

Others using a more compendious way have made salt to flow in a retort, which
has a pipe both in the upper, and hinder part; by the upper pipe of which they
have dropped in cold water, to elevate the ponderous spirits of the salt, but
by the hinder they have blown with bellows, to force the spirits into the
retort: and this way is not altogether to be slighted, yet it has this
inconveniency, that in process of time the retorts are broken, that they can no
longer retain the salt, and so the distillation is intercepted. Some have
attempted it with Iron retorts, but by this means the spirits have been deaded,
because they easily set upon the Iron, whence in stead of spirit they have had
phlegm. And such, and other tedious ways of distilling they have invented; and
by the best of them indeed they could scarce distill one pound in 24. or 30.
hours space with 50. 60. or 100 pound of coals; this being the reason, because
the salt is very little wrought upon, and therefore it is that few ever had the
spirit right, and good, whence also the virtues thereof have been unknown.

And this therefore I was willing to make known, that it might appear, what
price this spirit has hitherto been of, and how easy, and abundantly, and
with what little cost, it may after my new invented way be made.

It is said above, that the materials may in this way of distilling be
immediately cast into the fire; yet this must be wisely understood. For
although some of the species may without any preparation be immediately cast
into the fire, yet it does not follow that all and every one of them must: for
in some of them we must use our discretion, as in the distilling of salt. For
if the salt be immediately cast into the fire, it will not only yield no
spirits, but will leap so long upon the coals, until it find a descent to the
lowest part of the furnace: Now this may be prevented diverse ways; and first
indeed after this manner: Dissolve salt in common water, then quench burning
coals in this water, that they may be impregnated with the salt, which
afterward set on fire in the furnace: but you must first cast in other burning
coals, upon which you must cast those that are impregnated with salt until the
furnace be full, as is above said: and whiles the coals burn the the salt is
resolved by the force of the fire into spirit.

Now you must observe that he that distills spirit of salt after this manner
must make choice of glass receivers, because the spirit whilst it is hot,
penetrates by reason of its wonderful subtilty, those that are earthen. And
this spirit is of a most grateful taste. But in defect of glass receivers, I
shall show you another way, wherein you may use those that be of earth.

Mix salt, and vitrial or allome together, grinding them very well in a mortar
(for by how much the better they are ground the more spirit they yield.) Then
cast this mixture into the fire with an Iron ladle, viz. so much of it as will
be sufficient to cover the coals, and then with a great fire the spirits come
forth into the receivers, where being coagulated, they distill down into a
dish, and thence into another receiver. And if thou know how to work aright,
the spirits will like water continually run out through the pipe the thickness
of a straw; and thou may easily every hour make a pound of the spirit. Now
the reason why thou shall by this way have more spirits then by the other, is
this, viz. because the vitriol, and allome which is mixed with the salt, makes
it flow quickly, by which means it is prevented from falling down through the
coals to the lower part of the furnace, but sticking to the coals is almost all
of it turned into spirits. The Caput Mortuum, which is reddish, easily falls
with the ashes through the grate, and can no more be distilled, but yields by
excoction a white fixed salt, which serves for the flowing of metals; and being
dissolved in warm water serves also for a glyster against the worms, which it
kills, and purges also the bowels.

Thou will object, that the spirit made after this manner is not the true spirit
of salt by reason of the mixture of vitriall and allome, but mixed, and
compounded. I answer; There can by this way distill no spirit of vitrioll, and
allome, being that which I often tried, casting vitriol, or allome into the
furnace, where I received no spirit at all; the reason of this is, because
these spirits are far more heavy then the spirit of salt, neither can they
ascend so great a height, viz. of three spans, but are burnt, whence unless the
phlegm, nothing distills. Wherefore the spirit of salt that is made after this
manner is not mixed, but pure and mere spirit of salt, of the same taste, and
virtue as that is of, that is made by it self; because in this furnace the
spirit of allome, and vitriol cannot be made unless a pipe go out of the
furnace near the grate, as you may see by the delineation of the furnace, for
otherwise it cannot be made; besides, these spirits are better, and more truly
taught in the second part. And if it be granted that somewhat together with the
spirit of salt come forth (which is yet impossible) what hurt I pray you comes
from thence either in the solution of metals, or medicine? wherefore the spirit
made after this way is not to be suspected. Yet I will satisfy the
incredulous, and will show him another way without the addition of allom, or
vitrial, for the distilling of that spirit, but that will be in the second part
of this book, where I will teach you the furnace by which is made spirit of
nitre, Aqua foris, and amongst combustibles; the oils of vegetables, and fats
of animals and other things which cannot be made by this: and by this way I
will satisfy those, who are not pleased with the former.

Now for want of glass receivers we are forced to use earthen, but these cannot
retain the spirit of salt made after the aforesaid ways: in which case I could
indeed discover a certain little manual, by virtue of which the aforesaid
spirit may be received even in a great quantity in earthen recipients: but for
certain causes I shall here be silent, and shall refer it till the edition of
the second part. Let it suffice therefore that I mentioned such a thing,
wherefore omitting that, I shall proceed to show you the virtues, and use of
this spirit, as well in Alchymie, as in medicine, and other Mechanical arts.

Of the use of the spirit of Salt.
IT is worth while to speak of the power, and virtues of this excellent spirit;
what other authors have clearly described, I shall here pass over, and refer
the reader to the writings of those Authors; touching only on some few of which
they said nothing.

The Spirit of salt is by most accounted a most excellent medicine, and safely
to be used as well inwardly, as outwardly: It extinguisheth a preternatural
thirst in hot diseases, abstergeth, and consumes flegmatique humors in the
stomach, exciteth the appetite, is good for them that are hydropical, have the
stone, and gout, etc. It is a menstruum dissolving metals, excelling all other
therein: For it dissolveth all metals and minerals (excepting silver) and
almost all stones (being rightly prepared) and reduces them into excellent
medicaments. It does also many excellent things in mechanical arts.

Neither is it to slighted in the kitchen, for with the help thereof are
prepared diverse pleasant meats for the sick as well as for those that are in
health, yea and better then with vinegar, and other acid things: and it does
more in a small quantity, then vinegar in a great. But especially it serves for
those countries that have no vinegar. It is used also instead of verjuice and
the juce of Lymons. For being prepared after this way, it is bought at a
cheaper rate then vinegar or juice of Lymons. Neither is it corruptible as
expressed juices are, but is bettered by age. Being mixed with Sugar it is an
excellent sauce for roast meat. It preserves aso diverse kinds of fruits for many
years. It makes also-raisins, and dried grapes to swell, so as to acquire their
former magnitude again, which are good to refresh a weak stomach in many
diseases, and serves for the preparing of diverse kinds of meats of flesh and
fish; but you must mix some water with the spirit, or else the raisins will
contract too much acidity. This spirit does especially serve for making meats
delightfully acid; for whatsoever things are prepared with it, as Chickens,
Pigeons, Veale, etc. are of a more pleasant taste then those which are prepared
wirh vinegar. Beef being macerated with it becomes in a few days so tender,
as if it had been a long time macerated with vinegar. Such, and many more
things can the spirit of salt do.

A distillation of vegetable oils, whereby a greater quantity is acquired,
then by that common way, by a gourd still.
AS many distillers as hitherto have been, have bin ignorant of a better way to
distill oils of spices, woods, and seeds, then by a gourd still, or alembick,
with a great quantity of water. And although they may also be made by retort,
yet there is a great deal of care required, or else they contract an Empyreuma;
wherefore that way by a still is always accounted the better, which way indeed
is not to be slighted if you distill vegetables of a low price, and such as be
oleaginous; but not so in the distillation of spices, and of other things that
are of a greater value, as are Cinnamon, Mace, Saffron, etc. which cannot be
distilled in a gourd still without loss, because then there is required a great
quantity of water, and by consequence great, and large vessels, to which
something adheres, wherefore we lose almost half, which is not to be so much
valued in vegetables that are oleaginous, as in annisseed, fennel, and caryoway
seed, etc. But the loss made in the distilling of dryer and dearer vegetables,
as of Cinnamon, Lignum Rhodii, Cassia, is evident enough, and by consequence
not to be slighted. Neither can it be, that all things can be distilled that
way, for a good quantity by coction acquireth a gummy tenaciousness, which
cannot ascend with the water. But that this way for the future be prevented, I
will show another way to distill the oils of spices, and other precious
things, which is done with spirit of salt, whereby all the oil is drawn forth
without any loss, the process whereof is this, viz. Fill a gourd with cinnamon
or any other wood, or seed, upon which pour so much of the spirit of salt, as
will be sufficient to cover the wood, then place it with its Alembick in sand,
and give it fire by degrees that the spirit of salt may boil, and all the oil
will destill off with a little phlegm, for the spirit of salt does with its
acrimony penetrate the wood, and freeth the oil that it may distill off the
better and easier. And by this way the oil is not lost by the addition of that
great quantity of water in those great, and large vessels, but is drawn in
lesser glass vessels with the addition of a little moisture. Distillation being
finished the spirit is poured off by inclination from the wood, being again
useful for the same work. And if it has contracted any impurity from the wood,
it may be rectified: but the residue of the spirit which remains in the wood ye
may recover, if that wood be cast into the aforesaid furnace upon burning
coals, by which means it may come forth again pure, and clear: and by this
means we lose none of the spirit of salt. And after this way by help of the
spirit of salt are drawn forth oils of dearer vegetables together with their
fruit which cannot be done by a still.

There are made also by means thereof oils of gummes and rosins, clear, and
prospicuous.

The clear oil of Mastick, and frankincense.
TAke of frankincense, or mastick powdered small as much as will serve to fill
the third part of a cornute (which must be coated) upon which pour a sufficient
quantity of the spirit of salt, taking heed that the retort be not filled too
full, or else the spirit when it boyles, flows over it, then place it in sand,
and give fire by degrees, and there will first come out some phlegm, after
which a clear transparent oil together with the spirit of salt, which must be
kept by it self, after this a certain yellow oil which must be received by it
self: and last of all there follows a red oil, which although it is not to be
cast away, yet it is very unlike to the first, serving for outward uses, and to
be mixed with ointments and Emplasters, for it does wonderfully consolidate,
and therefore good in new and old wounds. The first being well rectified is in
its subtilty, and penetrating faculty not unlike to spirit of wine, and may
profitably be used inwardly, and outwardly, viz. in cold affects, but
especially in the stiffness of the Nerves caused by cold humors, upon which
follows a contraction; but then you must first rub the member contracted with a
linen cloth, that it may be well warmed, into which then the oil must be
chafed with a warm hand. For it does do wonders in such like affects of the
Nerves.

After the same manner may oils be made out of all gums. The red, tenacious,
and stinking oils of Tartar, Hartshorn, Amber, etc. distilled after the common
way by retort are also rectified with spirit of salt so as to become
transparent and to lose the Empyreuma contracted by distillation.

Now the cause of the blackness, and fetidness of these kind of oils is a
certain volatile salt which is to be found as well in vegetables, as certain
Animals, which is easily mixed with the oil, and then makes it of a brown
color. For every volatile salt whether it be of Urine, Tartar, Amber,
Hartshorn, and of other vegetables, and Animals, is of this condition, and
nature as to exalt, and alter the colors of sulphurous things, and that
either for the worse, or for the better: but for the most part it makes oils
thick, black and stinking, as you may see in Amber, Hartshorn, and Tartar. The
cause therefore of the blackness, and fetidness of these oils being known we
may the more easily take heed thereof in distilling, and being contracted,
correct them again by the help of spirit of salt. For all volatile salt has
contrariety to any acid spirit, and on the other side, every acid spirit has a
contrariety with all volatile salts, that have the nature of salt of Tartar.
For metals that are dissolved with acid spirits are as well precipitated with
spirit of urine or any volatile salt as with the liquor of salt of Tartar;
which shall be more at large declared in the second part.

The volatile salt therefore is by the mortifying acid spirits, as of salt,
vitrial, allom, vinegar, etc. deprived of its volatility, and is fixed, by
which means being debilitated it forsakes its associate which was infected with
blackness by it: it is necessary that we should proceed after the same manner
with these fetid oils, viz. as follows.

Take any fetid oil of Tartar, Amber, etc. with which fill the fourth part
only of a glass cornute, and upon it pour by drops the spirit of salt; and it
will begin to be hot, as it is used to be, when Aqua fortis is poured on salt
of Tartar; wherefore the spirit is to be poured on it by little and little, and
by drops for fear of breaking the glass: Now the sign of the moriification of
the volatile salt is when it cease to make a noise, and then no more is to be
poured on, but set your retort in sand, and give fire to it by degrees, as is
used to be done in the rectifying of things of easy elevation: and first of
all will go forth a certain stinking water, after which comes a transparent
clear, and odoriferous oil, and after that a certain yellow, clear, and also
well smelling oil, but not so as the first, wherefore each must be taken a
part by changing the receivers. Now these oils become more grateful then those
fetid of the shops. For these oils retain their cleerness, and fairness, the
cause of their fetidness, and redness being taken away by the spirit of salt.
In the bottom of the retort remains the black volatile salt with the spirit of
salt, from whence it may be sublimed into an odoriferous salt, resembling salt
armoniack in taste. The spirit of salt is also deprived of its acidity, and
coagulated by the volatile salt, and is like tartarum vitriolatum, appointed
also for its uses, as shall be spoken in the second part of the spirit of urine.

After the same manner also are rectified other oils, which by length of time
have contracted a clamminess, as are oil of Cinnamon, Mace, cloves, etc. with
the spirit of salt, if they be rectified by retort, for then they acquire again
both the same clearness, and goodness, as they had when they were newly
distilled.

Here I must make mention of a certain error of Physicians, not only of
ignorant Galenists, but Spagyricks, committed in the preparations of some
Chemical medicaments. For many have persuaded themselves that oil of Tartar,
Hartshorn, etc. having lost its stink, is a medicine radically taking away all
obstructions; but this must be taken with a grain of salt. For some have
rectified these kinds of oils by calcined vitriol, and by that means have
somewhat made them lose their Empyreuma, but withal their virtues: which
others observing have conceived that the fetidness thereof is not to be taken
away, because the virtue of them is thereby lost, as if the virtue consisted in
the fetidness thereof; but that is a very great error, because fetidness is an
enemy to the heart and brain, and in it is no good. But this is granted, that
they that take away the fetidness of those oils mortify the virtues of them.
But thou say, How then must we proceed in taking away their fetidness without
the loss of the virtues? Must they be rectified by the spirit of salt? as even
now thou taughtest. R. No, for although I said that oils might be clarified
with spirit of salt, yet it does not follow that my meaning was that that
clarification was the mending of them: this is only a way of clarification,
whereby they become more grateful; and it is not to be slighted, a better
being unknown. But how they are to be rectified from their fetidness, and
blackness without the loss of their virtues, and to be made more noble, does
not belong to this place, because it cannot be done by this furnace: I shall
refer the reader therefore to the second part, where it shall be showed, how
such spirits are to be rectified without the loss of their virtues, which being
so prepared may well be accounted for the fourth pillar of Physic. And these
things I was willing at least for information sake to show you, not to offend
you, and that because I was moved with pity, and compassion toward my neighbor.

The Quintessence of all vegetables.
POur upon spices, seeds, woods, roots, fruits, flowers, etc. the spirit of
wine well rectified, place them in digestion to be extracted, until all the
essence be extracted, with the spirit of wine; then upon this spirit of wine
being impregnated pour the best spirit of salt, and being thus mixed together
place them in Balneo to digest, until the oil be separated and swim above
from the spirit of wine, then separate it with a separating glass: or distill
off the spirit of wine in Balneo, and a clear oil will ascend: for if the
spirit of wine be not abstracted, then that oil will be as red as blood; and
it is the true quintessence of that vegetable, from whence by the spirit of
wine it was extracted.

The Quintessence of all Metals, and Minerals.
DIssolve any metal (excepting silver, which must be dissolved in Aqua fortis)
in the strongest spirit of salt, and draw off the phlegm in Balneo: to that
which remains pour the best rectified spirit of wine, put it to digesting,
until the oil be elevated to the top as red as blood, which is the tincture,
and quintessence of that metal, being a most precious treasure in medicine.

A sweet, and red oil of metals and minerals.
DIssolve a metal, or Mineral in spirit of salt, dissolve also an equal weight
of salt of wine essentificated; mix these dissolutions, and distill them by
retort in a gradual heat, and there will come out an oil sweet, and as red as
blood together with the spirit of salt: and sometimes the neck of the retort,
and receiver will be colored like a Peacocks tail with diverse colors, and
sometimes with a golden color.

And because I would without any difference comprehend all metals and minerals
under one certain general process; let him that would make the essence of
silver take the spirit of nitre, and proceed in all things as was spoken of the
other metals. Concerning the use of these essences, I need not speak much
thereof; for to him that knows the preparation shall be discovered the use
thereof. Concerning the corrosive oils of metals and minerals, seeing they
cannot be described by any one process, it will be worth while to set down what
is peculiar to each of them, as follows.

The oil, or liquor of Gold.
DIssolve the calx of gold in the spirit of wine (which must be very strong, or
else it cannot dissolve it) but in defect of the strongest spirit thereof mix a
little of the purest saltpeter; but that oil is the best which is made with
the spirit of salt alone. From the gold dissolved abstract half the solution,
and there will remain a corrosive oil, upon which pour the expressed juice of
limons, and the dissolution will become green, and a few feces fall to the
bottom, which may be reduceed in melting. This being done put this green liquor
in Balneo and draw off the phlegm: that which remains take out, and put upon a
marble in a cold moist place, and it will be resolved into a red oil, which
may safely, and without danger be taken inwardly, curing those that are hurt
with Mercury. But especially it is commended in old ulcers of the mouth,
tongue, and throat, arising from the French pox, leprousie, scorbute, etc.
where the oil of other things cannot be so safely used. There is not a better
medicine in the exulceration, and humors of the glandules, in the ulcers of
tongue and jaws, which does sooner mundifie, and consolidate. Neither yet must
we neglect necessary purgings, and sudorifickes for fear of a relapse, the
cause not being taken away.

Neither will there any danger follow, whether it be given inwardly, or used
outwardly, as in the accustomed use of other medicaments, and gargarismes; for
it may daily, and truly without all danger be used at least three times with a
wonderful admiration of a quick operation.

Oil of Mars.
DIssolve thin plates of Iron in rectified spirit of salt, take the solution,
which is green, of a sweet taste, and smelling like fetid sulphur; and filter it
from that filthy and seculent residence: then in a glass gourd in sand abstract
all the humidity (viz. with a gentle fire) which will be as insipid as
rainwater, because the iron by reason of its dryness has attracted all the
acidity to it self: but in the bottom will remain a mass as red as blood,
burning the tongue like fire: It takes away all proud flesh of wounds, and that
without all danger. It is to be kept in a glass close stopped from the air,
lest it be resolved into an oil, which will be of a yellow color. But he that
desires to have the oil may set it on a marble in a moist Cellar, and within a
day it will be resolved into an oil which will be in color betwixt yellow and
red: It is a most excellent secret in all corroding ulcers, fustula's, cancer,
etc. being an incomparable consolidator, and mundifier. And it is not without
profit mixed also with common water to wash the moist, fetid ulcers of the
legs; which cause humors, by being applied warm like a bath, for it dryes, and
heales suddenly, if withal Purges be administered. It cures also any scab. That
red mass (being yet unresolved) being put on the oil of sand, or flints (of
which in the second part) makes a tree to grow in the space of one or two
hours, having root, trunk, and boughs: which being taken out, and dried in the
test yields good gold, which that tree extracts from the earth, i. e. from the
flints, or sand. Thou may if thou please, more accurately examine this
matter.

Oil of Venus.
SPirit of Salt does not easily work upon Copper, unless it be first reduced
into a calx, and that after this manner. Take plates of Copper made red hot in
an open crucible, quench them in cold water, and they will cleave into red
scales: then the remainders of the plates make red hot, and quench as before:
do this so often till thou have got a sufficient quantity of the calx; which
being dried, and poudered extract with the rectified spirit of salt, in sand,
until the spirit of salt be sufficiently colored with a green timcture, which
you must decant, and filter, and then abstract from it the superfluous
moisture, that there may remain a green thick oil, which is an excellent
remedy for ulcers, especially such are venereal, being applied outwardly.

Oil of Jupiter and Saturn.
NEither are these two metals easily dissolved in the spirit of salt, yet being
filed are dissolved in the best rectified spirit of salt. But the operation is
performed better with the flowers of these metals (the preparation whereof
shall be hereafter taught) Take therefore the flowers, upon which in a gourd
glass pour the spirit of salt, and presently the spirit will work upon them,
especially being set in a warm place; filter the yellow solution, and abstract
the humidity until there remain a yellow heavy oil, which is proper against
pitrid ulcers.

Oil of Mercury.
NEither is this easily dissolved with the spirit of salt: but being sublimed
with vitriol, and salt is easily dissolved. Being dissolved it yields an oil
very corrosive which must be used with discretion, wherefore it is not to be
administered unless it be where none of the other are to be had. For I saw a
woman suddenly killed with this oil, being applied by a certain Surgeon.
But this oil is not to be slighted in eating ulcers, tetter, etc. which are
mortified by it.

Oil of Antimony.
CRude Antimony that has never undergone the fire, is hardly dissolved in
spirit of salt: as also the Regulus thereof; but the Regulus being subtly
poudered is more easily wrought upon in case the spirit be sufficiently
rectified.

The Vitrum is more easily, but most easily of all the flowers are dissolved,
being such as are made after our prescription a little after set down. Neither
is Butyrum Antimonii (being made out of sublimed Mercury, and Antimony) any
thing else but the Regulus of Antimony dissolved with spirit of salt: for
sublimed Mercury being mixed with Antimony, feeling the heat of the fire, is
forsaken by the corrosive spirits associating themselves with antimony, whence
comes the thick oil: whilst which is done the sulphur of Antimony is joined
to the quicksilver, and yields a Cinnabar, sticking to the neck of the retort;
but the residue of the Mercury remains in the bottom with the Caput Mortuum,
because a little part thereof does distill off: And if thou have skill thou
may recover the whole weight of the Mercury again.

And these things I was willing the rather to show thee because many think this
is the oil of Mercury, and therefore that white powder made thence by the
pouring on of abundance of water they call Mercurius vitae, with which there is
no mixture at all of Mercury, for it is mere Regulus of Antimony dissolved with
spirit of salt, which is again separated, when the water is poured on the
antimoniall butter; as is seen by experience: For that white powder being
dried, and melted in a crucible yields partly a yellow glass, and partly also a
Regulus, but no Mercury at all.

Whence it does necessarily follow that that thick oil is nothing else but
Antimony dissolved in spirit of salt. For the flowers of Antimony being mixed
with spirit of salt make an oil in all respects like to that butter which is
made of Antimony, and sublimated Mercury; which also is after the same manner
by the affusion of a good quantity of water precipitated into a white powder,
which is commonly called Mercurius vitae: It is also by the same way turned
into Bezoardicum mineral, viz. by abstracting the spirit of nitre, and it is
nothing else but Diaphoretick Antimony.

For it is all one whether that Diaphoretick be made with spirit of nitre, or
with nitre it self, viz. corporeal, for these have the same virtues, although
some are of opinion that that is to be preferred before the other: but the
truth is, there is no difference. But let every one be free in his own
judgment, for those things which I have wrote, I have not writ out of
ambition, but to find out the truth.

Now again to our purpose, which is to show an oil of antimony made with the
spirit of salt.

Take a pound of the flowers of Antimony (of which a little after) upon which
pour two pound of the best rectified spirit, mix them well together in a glass,
and set them in sand a day, and night to dissolve, then pour out that solution
together with the flowers into a retort that is coated, which set in sand, and
first give a gentle fire, until the phlegm be come off, then follows a weak
spirit with a little stronger fire, for the stronger spirits remain in the
bottom with the Antimony: then give a stronger fire, and there will come forth
an oil like to the butter of Antimony made with sublimed Mercury, and is
appropriated to the same uses, as follows.

The flowers of Antimony white and vomitive.
TAke of this butter as much as you please, upon which in a glass gourd, or any
other large glass pour a great quantity of water until the white flowers will
precipitate no more; then decant off the water from the flowers, which
edulcorate with warm water, and dry with a gentle heat, and thou shall have a
white powder.

The Dose is, that 1. 2. 3. 8. 10. grains be macerated for the space of a night
in wine, which is to be drank in the morning, and it works upward, and
downward. But it is not to be given to children, those that be old, and weak,
but to those that be strong, and accustomed to vomiting. When at any time this
infusion is taken and does not work, as sometimes it falls out, but makes the
patient very sick, he must provoke vomiting with his finger, or else it will
not work but make those that have taken it to be sick, and debilitated even to
death. We must also in the over much working of these flowers drink a draught
of warm beer or rather of warm water, decocted with chervil, or parsley, and
they will work more mildly. But let not him that is able to bear the operation
thereof any way hinder it, for there is the greater hope of recovering his
health thereby, for they do excellently purge choler, and evacuate phlegm in
the stomach, being humors that will not yield to other Catharticks; they open
obstructions, resist the putrefaction of the blood, the causes of many
diseases, such as are fevers, headaches, etc. they are good for them that are
leprous, scorbutical, Melancholical, hypochondriacal, infected with the French
pox, and in the beginning of the plague. In brief, they do work gallantly, and
do many things.

After the taking of them the patient must stay in his bed or at least not go
forth of his house for to avoid the air, or otherwise they may be mistrusted.

And because of their violence they are feared, and hated, I shall in the
fourth part of this book for the sake of the sick set down such as are milder,
and safer, such as shall work rather downward then upward, causing easy
vomits, which also thou may give to children, and those that are old without
danger, yet some respect being had of the disease, and age.

The flowers of Antimony, diaphoretical.
THE foresaid flowers if they be cast into melted nitre, and be left a while in
melting, are made fixed, so as to become Diaphoretical, and lose their
Cathartical virtue. The acid water being separated from the flowers, if it be
evaporated, leaves behind the best spirit of salt, serving for the same, or
such like uses again.

Of the external use of the Corrosive oil of Antimony.
THis oil has been long used by Chirurgions, for they have with a feather
applied it to wounds almost uncurable, to separate impurities, for the
acceleration of the cure that after other medicaments being applied may the
better operate. But it is better if it be mixed with spirit of salt, for they
are easily mixed, and it is made more mild thereby, and the too great corrosive
faculty thereof is mitigated. Neither is there any other beside the spirit of
salt, with which this oil can be mixed, unless it be the strongest spirit of
nitre, for the weak spirit of Antimony precipitates the butter of Antimony, as
you may see in the preparation of Bezoardicum Minerale. But the strongest
spirit of nitre dissolving this butter, makes a red solution of wonderful
virtue in Chemistry, of which we are not to treat in this place; and if this be
drawn off again by distillation, it leaves behind the first time a fixed
Antimony, and Diaphoreticall, which otherwise must be drawn off twice, or
thrice, viz. if it be weak, and not able to dissolve the butter without
precipitation.

Now this Bezoardicum, is the best, and safest Diaphoretick in all diseases
that require sweat, as in the plague, french pox, fevers, scorbute, leprosy,
etc. if it be given from 6. 8. 10. to twenty grains in proper vehicles; it
penetrates the whole body, and evacuates all evil humors by sweat and urine.

The Oil of Arsenic and Auripigmentum.
AS the spirit of salt does not easily work upon Antimony by reason of the
abundance of crude sulphur, unless it be reduced into flowers, in the
preparation whereof some part of its sulphur is burnt; so also Arsenic and
Auripigmentum are hardly dissolved with spirit of salt, unless they be reduced
into flowers, and the spirit of salt be very strong, which may be able to work
upon it. These may be distilled by retort like Antimony into a thick heavy
oil; which being used in cancrous eating ulcers exceeds that of Antimony in
mortifying, mundifying and purging those evils. After the same manner may
corrosive oils be made out of all the realgars being ordained for outward uses.

Oil of Lapis Calaminaris.
TAke of the best yellow or red Lapis Calaminaris very subtly poudered, as
much as you please, and pour upon it five or six times as much of rectified
spirit of salt, mix and stir them well together, and do not leave them long
unstirred, but ever and anon shake the glass with the materials; and this do
oftentimes, or else the Lapis calaminaris will grow together into a very hard
stone, which can be dissolved no more, which is prevented by the aforesaid
often shaking: and when the spirit of salt will dissolve no more thereof in
frigido, set the glass in warm sand so long until the spirit be tinged with a
most yellow color, which then decant, and pour on fresh and again set it in
digestion to extract, and do not forget to shake the glass often. The solution
being finished filter it, and cast away the residue of the terra mortua.
Afterward set the solution in sand, and give fire, and almost three parts of
the spirit of salt will go over insipid, which is nothing but the phlegm,
although the spirit was never so well rectified; the reason whereof is the most
dry nature of lapis calaminaris* to which the spirit of salt is very friendly,
and therefore very hard to be separated from it. For I never knew any mineral
or metal (beside Zinck) which exceeds lapis calaminaris in dryness. At last
when no more phlegm will go over, let all things cool; which being done, take
out the glass, and thou shall find a thick red oil, as fat as oil olive, and
not very corrosive; for that spirit of salt being almost mortified with lapis
calaminaris is deprived of its acidity. This oil is to be kept from the air;
or else within a few days it attracts much air which it converts into water,
and thereby becomes weakened.

This oil is of wonderful virtue, being used as well inwardly as outwardly.
And I wonder that in so long a time there has been no body, who has operated
in lapis calaminaris and described the nature thereof, seeing it has in it a
golden sulphur (of which thing in the fourth part) for if the terrestreity
thereof were separated from it artificially, pure gold would be manifested
therein; now the greatest part thereof is volatile, and immature, and cannot
easily be reduced into a body in melting, wherefore hitherto that stone has
not (...) esteemed of by Chemists, but to the wise was (...) etc.

The use of the oil of Lapis Calaminaris.
(...) given from 1. 2. 3. drops to ten and fifteen with suitable vehicles, it
purges the dropsy, leprosy, gout, and other noxious fixed humors not
yielding to vegetable Catharticks, of which more at large in the second part of
the spirit of urine and salt of tartar. It serves outwardly for an excellent
vulnerary balsome, the like to which can scarce be showed, not only in reducing
old corrupt wounds, but also in those that are green, for it does powerfully
dry, mundifie, and consolidate.

It is also used in household affairs, for birdlime being dissolved in it
yields a certain tenacious matter serving to catch birds, mice, etc. about the
house or in the field. For it is as permanent in the heat of the Sun, as in the
cold of winter, wherefore it may be used at any time of the year; all small
animals stick to it if they do but touch the matter.

A ligature or string smeered therewith, and bound about any tree prevents the
spiders from climbing up thereon, and other kinds of insects that are noxious
to the fruit; a thing worth taking notice of.

This oil is not by the pouring on of water corrupted, neither is it
precipitated, as that of Antimony: wherefore it is useful for many things.
Common yellow sulphur boiled in it, viz. in a strong fire, so as to be
dissolved in it, swims upon it like fat, is thereby purified and made as
transparent as yellow pellucid glass, and a better medicine then those common
flowers of sulphur: it serves also for other uses, all which to relate here it
would be too tedious.

This oil being mixed with clean sand, and distilled by retort in a fire that
is very strong (otherwise the spirit of salt will leave the lapis calaminaris)
yields a most fiery spirit, the lapis calaminaris remaining in the bottom of
the retort.

This spirit is so strong, that it can scarce be kept; it dissolves all metals,
and all minerals (excepting silver and sulphur) wherefore by the help thereof
many excellent medicaments are made, which cannot be made with the common
spirit though never so well rectified, which although it be often rectified,
yet is not without phlegm, which cannot be separated from it by the power of
rectification, so well as with lapis calaminaris.

This spirit does perform many things in medicine, as in Alchymie, as also in
other arts, as you may easily conjecture, but here is not opportunity to speak
more of these things, yet for the sake of the sick I shall add one thing, to
which few things are to be compared, the plain and short process whereof I
would not have thee be offended at. And it is this, viz. Mix this spirit with
the best rectified spirit of wine, digest this mixture somewhile, and the
spirit of salt will separate the spirit of wine, and will make the oil of wine
swim on the top, the volatile salt being mortified: and this oil is a most
incomparable cordial, especially if with the said spirit of wine spices have
first been extracted, and with the said spirit of salt, gold has been
dissolved. For then in the digestion of this mixture, the oil of wine being
separated attracts the essence of the cordial species, and of other vegetables,
being extracted before with the spirit of wine, as also the tincture of gold,
and so by consequence a most efficacious imcomparable and universal medicine
for all diseases, fortifying the Humidum radicale, that it way be able to
overcome its enemies; for which let praise and glory be given to the immortal
God for ever who has revealed to us so great secrets.

Of the extrinsecal use of the spirit of salt in the kitchen.
I Said before that in stead of vinegar, and verjuice it may be used, as also
in stead of the juice of Limons, now it remains that I show you how it is to be
used, and that indeed as will for the sake of the healthy as the sick*

Let him therefore that will dress a pullet, pigeons, veale, etc. in the first
place put a sufficient quantity of spices, of water, and butter, and then as he
pleases a greater, or lesser quantity of spirit of salt: and by this means
fleshes are sooner made ready being boiled, then that common way; an old hen
though the flesh thereof be old is made as tender as a chicken by the addition
of this spirit: but he that will use it in stead of the juice of Limons with
roast meat, must put into it the pill of limons for preservation sake, because
it preserves it. It is used in stead of verjuice by it self alone, or mixed
with a little sugar, if it be too acid.

He that will stew beef, and make it as tender as kid, must first dissolve it
in tartar and a little salt before he wets the flesh therewith, and the flesh
will not only be preserved but made tender thereby: but to keep flesh a long
time you must mix some water therewith, and with weights press down the flesh,
that it may be covered with the pickle: for by this means flesh may be
preserved a great while.

After the same manner may all kinds of garden fruits be preserved, as
cucumbers, purslaine, fennel, broom, German capers, etc. and indeed better then
in vinegar. Also flowers, and herbs may a long while be preserved by the help
thereof, so that you may have a rose all the winter.

It preserves also wine, if a little be mixed therewith. A little thereof being
mixed with milk precipitates the cheese, which if it be rightly made is never
corrupted, being like to such cheese as they call Parmesan. The whey of that
milk dissolves Iron, and cures any scab being washed therewith.

With the help of spirit of salt is made with honey, and sugar a most pleasant
drink, not unlike to wine. There is made also of certain fruits with the spirit
of salt a very good vinegar like to the Rhenish vinegar. Such and many more
things, which I will not now divulge, may be done with spirit of salt*

And thus have I in some measure taught the use of the spirit of salt, which I
would not have you take as if I had revealed all things; for, for brevities
sake, as also for some other reasons I have silently passed over many things.
Neither do I know all things my self: but those things, which I do know, I have
so far declared that others may from thence have hints of seeking further. He
that would describe all, and every power and virtue thereof, had need to write
a whole volume, that which is not my purpose at this time to do, but may
prehaps be done another time. There shall also be showed in the second part of
this book, some secrets which may be prepared by the help of this spirit: as
how it may be dulcified to extract the tincture of gold, and of other metals,
leaving a white body, which tincture is a medicine not to be slighted.
Wherefore now seeing it is manifest how great things this spirit can do, every
one will desire a good quantity for his household uses, especially seeing most
excellent spirits may be made after an easy and short way.

How an acid spirit, or vinegar may be distilled out of all vegetables, as
herbs, woods, roots, seeds, etc.
FIrst put a few living coals into the furnace, then put upon them the wood
that is to be distilled, that it may be burnt: out of which whilst it is
burning goes forth the acid spirit thereof into the receiver, where being
condensed it falls down into another receiver, resembling almost common vinegar
in its smell, wherefore also it is called the vinegar of woods.

And after this manner you may draw forth an acid spirit out of any wood, or
vegetable, and that in a great quantity without costs, because the wood to be
distilled is put but upon a very few living coals, and upon that another, for
one kindles the other; and this spirit requires no more charges then of the
wood to be distilled; which is a great difference betwixt this, and the common
way of distilling, where besides retorts, is required another fire; and out of
a great retort scarce a pound of spirit is drawn in the space of five or six
hours; whereas in ours in the space of one day, and that without any cost or
labor may be extracted twenty or thirty pound, because the wood is immediately
to be cast into the fire to be distilled, and that not in pieces, but whole.
Now this spirit (being rectified) may commodiously be used in diverse Chemical
operations, for it does easily dissolve animal stones, as the eyes of Crabs,
the stones of Perches, and Carps, Corals also and Pearl, etc. as does vinegar
of wine. By means thereof also are dissolved the glasses of metals, as of tin,
lead, Antimony, and are extracted, and reduced into sweet oils.

This vinegar being taken inwardly of it self does cause sweat wonderfully,
wherefore it is good in many diseases, especially that which is made of Oak,
Box, Guaiacum, Juniper, and other heavy woods; for by how much the heavier the
woods are, by so much the more acid spirit do they yield.

Being used outwardly it mundifies ulcers, wounds, consolidates, extinguisheth,
and mitigates inflammations caused by fire, cures the scab, but especially the
decoction being made of its own wood in the same. Being mixed with warm water
for a bath for the lower part of the body, it cures occult diseases of women;
as also malignant ulcers of the legs.

This spirit therefore deserves some place in the shops, i. e. it is unjustly
rejected in the shops, seeing it is easy to be made. In distilling of wormwood
and other vegetables, there remains in the bottom of the furnace ashes, which
being extracted with warm water yields a salt by decoction, which being again
dissolved in its own spirit or vinegar, and filtred, does by the evaporating of
phlegm, being placed in a cold place pass into a Crystalline salt, which is of
a pleasant taste, not like unto a lixivium, nor unto other salts that are
dissolved in air. This salt is also more efficacious (being reduced into
Crystals by its proper Spirit) then that which is made by the help of sulphur,
or Aqua fortis, and oil of Vitrioll, and otherwise which Chemists, and
Apothecaries use.

The spirit of paper and linen cloth.
Pieces of linen cloth gathered, and got from Sempsters being cast into the
furnace upon living coals yield a most acid spirit, which tingeth the nails,
skin, and hair with a yellow color, restores members destroyed with cold, is
good in a gangrene, and erysipelas if linen clothes wet in the same be applied
thereto, etc. The same does spirit made of paper, viz. of the pieces thereof.

The spirit of Silk.
AFter the same manner is there a spirit made of pieces of silk, which is not
so sharp as that which is made of linen and paper, neither does it tinge the
skin, but is most excellent in wounds as well old as green, and it makes the
skin beautiful.

The spirit of man's hair, and of other animals, as also of horns.
OUt of horns also, and hair is made a spirit, but most fetid, wherefore it is
not so useful, although otherwise it may serve for diverse arts: being rectified
it becomes clear and to be of the odor of the spirit of urine. It dissolves
common sulphur, and yields a water, that cures the scab in a very short time.

Now for this business shreds of woollen cloth undyed may serve, being cast in
a good quantity into the furnace. Pieces of cloth dipped in this spirit and
hanged in vinyards* and fields, keep out Deer and Swine from coming in, because
they are afraid of the smell of that spirit as of a huntsman that waits to
catch them.

The spirit of vinegar, honey, and sugar.
HE that will distill liquid things, must cast red-hot coals into them, as for
example into vinegar in the furnace, or if it be honey, or sugar, let them
first be dissolved in water, by which means they will be drunk up by the
coals, which being therewith impregnated, must afterward at several times be
cast into the furnace, and be burnt; and whilst the coals are burning that
which is incombustible comes forth. And by this means you may distill liquid
things in a great ^uantity.

Vinegar which is distilled this way, is of the same nature, as that which is
distilled in close vessels.

But honey and sugar that are distilled after this manner are a little altered,
and acquire other virtues: but how they shall be distilled without the loss of
their volatile spirit shall be taught in the second part. Also after this
manner may all liquid things being drunk up by living coals be distilled.

Of the use of distilled vinegar many things might be said, but because the
books of all the Chemists treat abundantly thereof, I account it needless to
repeat what they have writ. Yet this is worth taking notice of, that the
sharpest vinegar has a great affinity with some metals, which may be extractby
the help thereof; also dissolved, and reduced into medicaments; yea many things
may be made with the help thereof, as the books of all the Chemists testify.

But there is yet another vinegar, of which there is often mention made in the
books of the Philosophers, by the help whereof many wonderful things are
performed in the solutions of metals, the name whereof the ancients have been
silent in; of which I do not here treat, because it cannot be made by this
furnace; but I shall treat of it in another part; yet so that I incur not the
curse of the Philosophers.

How spirits may be made out of the salt of tartar, vitriolated tartar, the
spirit of salt tartarizated, and of other such like fixed salts.
AS many Chemists as there has been, almost all have been of the opinion that
a spirit cannot be drawn out of salt of tartar, and other fixed salts. For
experience has taught that by retort little or no spirit can be drawn from
thence, as I had often experience of before the invention of this furnace: the
reason of which thing was the admixtion of sand, earth, bole, powder of tiles,
etc. for to prevent the flowing of salt of tartar being by this means
dispersed. But this is done through the ignorance of Authors, who have been
ignorant of the properties of salt of tartar. For a stony matter, as sand,
flint, bole, etc. being mixed with salt of tartar, feeling the heat of the
fire, and being made red with the same, is joined to it most closely, so as no
spirit can be drawn from thence, but become a most hard stone. For sand, and
such things that are like to it, have so great an affinity with the salt of
tartar that being once united can scarce ever be separated. Yet it may be made
by Art by the addition of pure sand, or flint, because the whole substance of
the salt of tartar may be turned into a spirit in the space of one or two
hours, as shall be taught in the second part, and it excels all other
medicaments in virtue, in curing the stone, and gout. And if by the regiment of
art there be left any Caput Mortuum in that distillation, it has being
dissolved in the air a power to putrefie metals being prepared, and mixed with
it, in the space of few hours, so as to make them become black, and to grow up
like trees with their roots, trunks, and boughs, which by how much the longer
they are so left, become the better. Of calx of lead being subtilized, and of
salt of tartar may be made a spiritus gradatorius of wonderful virtues as well
in medicine as Alchymie. There is made of the Caput Mortuum, per deliquium a
green liquor which does wonderful things; whence it is proved, That Saturn is
not the lowest of the planets; Enough to the wise.

And so is Lac Virginis, and the Philosophical Sanguis Draconis made.
SOmetimes there is found a certain earth, or bole, which has no affinity with
tartar, which being mixed with salt of tartar yields a spirit, but very little.
But in this furnace may all fixed things be elevated, because the Species not
being included in it, but dispersed, being cast upon the fire, are from the
fire elevated through the air, and are being refrigerated in the recipients
again condensed, which cannot be so well done by a close retort.

He therefore that will make the spirit of the salt of tartar, need do nothing
else then to cast the calcined tartar into the fire, and it will wholly come
over in a spirit: but then there are required glass recipients, because those
that are earthen cannot retain it.

And this is the way whereby most fixed salts are distilled into a spirit by
the first furnace. In the second furnace (viz. in the furnace of the second
part) it may be done better, and easier, where together with the preparation
shall be taught the use thereof.

The spirits, flowers, and salts of Minerals and stones.
BY this way spirits may be raised from any mineral or stone, and that without
the addition of any other thing: yet so as that the minerals, and stones, as
flints, Crystal, talk, lapis calaminaris, Marcasite, Antimony, being ground be
with an Iron ladle cast upon the coals, and there will arise together with a
certain acid spirit, some salt and flowers, which are to be washed off from the
recipients, and filtred, and the flowers will remain in Charta bibula, for the
water together with the spirit, and the salt passes through the filter, all
which may be separated, rectified and be kept by themselves for their proper
uses. Now this you must know, that you must choose such minerals which have not
been touched by the fire, if you desire to have their spirit.

How minerals, and metals may be reduced into flowers, and of their virtues.
HItherto the flowers of metals, and minerals have not been in use, excepting
the flowers of Antimony, and sulphur, which are easily sublimed: for Chemists
have not dared to attempt the sublimation of other metals, and fixed minerals,
being content with the solution of them with Aqua fortis, and corrosive waters,
precipitating them with the liquor of salt of tartar, and afterward
edulcorating, and drying them; and being so prepared they have called them
their flowers: but by which flowers I understand the same water, which is by
the help of fire without the addition of any other thing sublimed, and turned
into a most subtle powder, not to be perceived by the teeth or eyes, which
indeed is (in my judgment) to be accounted for the true flowers; when as the
flowers which others make are more corporeal, and cannot be so well
edulcorated, but retain some saltness in them, as may be perceived by the
increase of their weight, and therefore hurtful to the eyes, and other parts.

But our flowers being by the force of the fire sublimed by themselves, are not
only without saltness, but are also so subtle that being taken inwardly
presently operate, and put forth their powers, viz. according to the pleasure
of the Physician. Neither is their preparation so costly as the others.

Metals also, and minerals are maturated, and amended in their sublimation,
that they may be the more safely taken; but in other preparations they are
rather destroyed, and corrupted, as experience witnesses: Now how these kind
of flowers are to be made I shall now teach, and indeed of each metal by it
self, whereby the artist in the preparation cannot err, and first thus.

Of Gold and Silver.
GOld and silver can hardly be brought into flowers, because many are of
opinion, that nothing comes from them in the fire, especially from Gold,
although it should be left there for ever: which although it be true, viz. that
nothing comes from gold in the fire, although it should remain there a long
time, and from silver but a little, except it have copper or any other metal
mixed, which yet vapors away but by little and little.

Which I say although it be so* yet they being broken and subtilized and
scattered upon coals, and so dispersed, may by the force of the fire and help
of the air be sublimed, and reduced into flowers.

Now seeing the aforesaid metals are dear, and of a great price, and the
furnace with its recipients large, I would not that any one should cast them
in, especially gold, because he cannot recover them all; but I shall to those
that desire to make these flowers show another way in the second part, whereby
they may make them without the loss of the metal; to which I referr the reader.
For this furnace serves for the subliming of metals, and minerals, which are
not so precious, the loosing of part whereof is not so much regarded* And thus
much is said to show that gold, and silver, although fixed, may be sublimed.
Now other metals may more easily be sublimed, yet one more easily then another,
neither need they any other preparation but beating small, before they be cast
into the fire.

Flowers of Iron and Copper.
TAke of the filings of Iron or Copper, as much as you please, cast them with
an Iron laddle upon burning coals, viz. scatteringly, and there will arise from
Iron a red vapor, but from Copper a green, and will be sublimed into the
sublimatorie vessels. As the fire abates it must be renewed with fresh coals,
and the casting in of these filings be continued, until you have got a
sufficient quantity of flowers, and then you may let all cool. This being done
take off the sublimatorie vessels, take out the flowers, and keep them, for
they are very good if they be mixed with unguents, and emplasters: and being
used inwardly cause vomiting; therefore they are better in Surgery, where
scarce any thing is to be compared to them. Copper being dissolved in spirit of
salt, and precipitated with oil of vitriol, edulcorated, dried, and sublimed,
yields flowers, which being in the air resolved into a green balsom, is most
useful in wounds and old putrid ulcers, and is a most precious treasure.

Flowers of Lead and Tin.
YOU need not reduce these metals into small crumbs, it is sufficient if they be
cast in piece by piece, but then you must under the grate put an earthen
platter glazed, and filled with water, to gather that which flows down melted,
which is to be taken out, and cast again into the fire, and this so often until
all the metal be turned into flowers, which afterward are again, the vessels
being cold, to be taken out, as has been said of the flowers of Mars and
Venus. And these flowers are most excellent being mixed with plasters and
ointments in old and geeen wounds, for they have a greater power to dry, then
metals calcined, as experience can testify.

Of Mercury.
THis is easily reduced into flowers, because it is very volatile, but not for
the aforesaid reason, because it leapes in the fire, and seeks to descend. And
if you desire to have the flowers thereof, mix it first with sulphur that you
may pulverize it, and cast it in mortified. And if you cast into a red hot
crucible set in the furnace, a little quick Mercury, viz. by times with a
laddle, presently it will fly out, and some part thereof will be resolved into
an acid water, which is to be preferred before the flowers in my judgment; but
the rest of the Mercury drops into a receiver. But here are required glass
vessels, because the aforesaid water is lost in earthen. And this water without
doubt does something in Alchymie: It is also good being applied outwardly, in
the scab, and venereal ulcers.

The flowers of Zinck.
IT is a wonderful metal, and is found in the spagyrical anatomy to be mere
sulphur, golden, and immature. Being put upon burning coals does suddenly fly
away wholly; it is inflamed also, and partly burns like common sulphur, with a
flame of another color, viz. golden purple: and yields most gallant white, and
light flowers.

The use.
BEing given from 4. 5. 6. grains to 12. they provoke sweat wonderfully, and
sometimes vomit, and stools according to the offending matter. The virtues
thereof being exteranlly used are also wonderful, for there are not found
better flowers; for they do not only speedily consolidate fresh wounds, but
also old, such as always drop water, in which cases they excel all other
medicaments. For they are of such dryness, which has joined with it a
consolidating virtue, as that they do even things incredible. They may be used
diverse ways, as to be strewed by themselves putting over them a stiptick
plaster, or being brought into a unguent with honey to be put into wounds;
which unguents in deep wounds may be boiled to a hardness for the making of
small suppositories, which are to be put into the wounds, which must afterward
be covered with some plaster, and preserved from the air. Being applied after
this manner they cure fundamentally, being mixed with plasters also they do
wonderful things.

If they be mixed with rose, or rain water, so as to be united together, and
afterward some of this mixture be sometimes every day dropped into red eyes that
water, yielding not to other ophthalmicks, do restore, and heal them.

These flowers being taken up in lint and strewed upon those places of Children
that are galled with their urine (those places being first washed with water)
heal them quickly. They heal also quickly any excoriation which is contracted
by lying long in any sickness, and is very paineful, if they be strewed thereon.

These flowers also are more easily dissolved in corrosive waters, then other
metals, and minerals, neither does the spirit leave them in the fire, but an
insipid phlegm only distills off leaving a fat, and thick oil, as is above said
concerning the lapis calaminaris, being ordained for the same uses, but more
efficaciously then that. Which spirit if it be by the violence of fire driven
forth, is of so great strength, that it can scarce be kept. And not only spirit
of salt, but also Aqua fortis, and Regia may after this manner be exalted, so
as to be able to do wonderful things in the separation of metals; but here is
not place for these things they shall be spoken of in the fourth part.

But you need not make flowers for this work, because crude Zinck does the
same, although the flowers do it something better: whence it appears that a
metal contracts a higher degree of dryness in sublimation.

Flowers of Antimony.
THere is no difficulty to make the flowers of Antimony, for Chemists have a
long time made use of them, and because their preparation was tedious, they
were not sold at a low rate.

Wherefore there was no body willing to attempt any thing else in them, because
they were used only for vomiting; the dose whereof was from 1. 2. 3. 4. grains
to 8. and 10. in affects of the stomach and of the head, as also in fevers,
plague, morbus gallicus, etc. Neither is it a wonder if Chemists tried no
farther in them, for we see that there are found men in these days who
persuade themselves that there is nothing which was not found out by the
learned ancients, can be found out in these days, and if there were any thing
to be yet found out it was found out already by them. But this opinion truly is
very foolish, as if God gave all things to the ancients, and reserved nothing
for them that should come after. Neither indeed do they understand nature in
their operations, which works incessantly, and is not wearyed in her labors,
etc. But how ever it is manifest that God has revealed things in these times
which were hid from them of old, and he will not cease to do the same even to
the end of the world.

But to return to our purpose again, which is to show an easier way of making
the flowers of Antimony, whereby a greater quantity may be had, as also that
they may serve for other uses.

Take of crude Antimony poudered as much as you please, and first make your
furnace red hot, then cast in at once a pound of Antimony, or thereabouts* viz.
scatteringly upon the coals; and presently it will flow, and mixed with the
coals by the force of the fire will be sublimed through the air into receivers
like a cloud, which will there be coagulated into white flowers. Note that when
the first coals are burnt up, more must be put in to continue the sublimation,
and those must be first kindled before they are put in, lest the flowers be by
the dust of the coals arising together with the flowers discolored, and
contract thence a gray color: but it matters not if you will not use them by
themselves to provoke vomiting, because there is no danger thereby, for that
color comes only from the smoke of the coals, wherefore you need not be
afraid of them. But let him that dislikes this color, first kindle the coals
before he put them into the furnace, and then he shall have white flowers. Also
you must not shut the middle hole* through which the coals, and Antimony are
cast in, that thereby the fire may burn the more freely: for else the flowers
of the superior pots will be yellow and red, by reason of the sulphur of the
Antimony, which is sublimed higher then the regulus. Now you may by this way
make a pound of the flowers with 3. 4. 5. pound of coals. It is a little that
goes away from the Antimony, viz. the combustible sulphur, which is burnt, all
the rest going into flowers. You must have a care to provide a sufficient
quantity of subliming pots by reason that a large space is required for the
sublimation of the flowers.

The flowers that are prepared after this way are sold at a lower rate, so that
one pound thereof is cheaper, then half an ounce of those that are made after
the other manner. Also they are safer, as being made with an open and free
flame of the fire, for they do not provoke vomit so vehemently; morever the
flowers of the lower pots are not vomiting, but diaphoretical, as if they had
been prepared with nitre, for thus they are corrected by the fire; And by this
way at one and the same operation diverse flowers of diverse operations may be
made, for the flowers of the lower pots are diaphoretical, of the middle a
little vomitive, but of the uppermost vehemently vomitive. For by how much the
more they have endured the fire, by so much the better are they corrected; from
whence the diversity of their power proceeds. Wherefore each of them are to be
kept by themselves, and the uppermost for plasters or butter, or oil, and
those to be made sweet or corrosive thereby; The middle for purging, and
vomiting, but the lowermost for sweat, being more excellent then
Bezoardicum*Minerale, or Antinomium Diaphoreticum made with nitre. Truly I do
not believe that there is an easier way of making vomiting, and diaphoretical
flowers then ours. Now for the use of them, you must know that those that are
vomitive are to be administered to those that are strong, and accustomed to
vomit: but to children, and old men with discretion, as has been said above of
the butter of Antimony: but those that are diaphoretical may be given without
danger to old and young, to those that are in health, and to the sick; in any
affection that requires sweat, as in the plague, Morbus Gallicus, scorbute,
leprosy, fevers, etc. The Dose of them is from 3. 6. 9. 12. grains to 24.
with proper vehicles to sweat in the bed: for they do expel as well by sweat,
as by urine all evil humors. And because they that are vomitive are in a
greater quantity then those, that are diaphoretical, and not so necessary as
these, and there may be many more doses out of them, it is necessary to show
you how those that are vomitive may be turned into diaphoreticall: and that may
be done three ways, the two former whereof I have before showed concerning the
butter of Antimony made of flowers with spirit of salt, the third is this, viz.
put flowers in a crucible covered (without luting) lest any thing fall into it,
so set them by themselves in a gentle fire, that they melt not, but be made
only darkly glow for the space of some hours, then let them cool, for they are
become fixed, and diaphoreticall. Although they had before contracted some
yellowness or ash color, yet by this means they are made white and gallant,
fixed, and diaphoretical. Also these flowers are used in stiptick plasters by
reason of their dry nature, with which they are endued.

Also they are melted into a yellow transparent glass, neither is there taught
an easier way of reducing Antimony by it self into a yellow transparent glass,
where crude Antimony is first sublimed, and being sublimed is melted into glass.

This sublimation serves in stead of calcination, by the help whereof 20. pound
are more easily sublimed, then by the help of the other one pound is brought
into calx.

Neither is there here any danger of the ascending fumes, because when the
Antimony is cast into the fire you may be gone, which is a safe, and easy
calcination, whereas the common way requires the continual presence of the
artist stirring the matter, who also takes out the matter when it is once grown
together, and grinds it again; by which means he has much to do, before the
matter come to a whiteness; but by our way, the matter is at the first time
made sufficiently white, and more then by that common way of calcination and
agitation. I suppose therefore that I have showed to him that will make glass
of Antimony, the best, and hitherto unknown way; which being taught I hope
there is no man will hereafter like a fool go that tedious way of the ancients,
but rather follow my steps. For by this way may any Physician, most easily be
able to prepare for himself vomitive and diaphoretical flowers, and also glass
of Antimony per^se.

Of those flowers may bemade oils both sweet and corrosive, and other
medicaments, as has been above said of the spirit of salt, and shall afterward
be spoken in the second part.

Let him that will make flowers of the regulus, fairer then those which are
made of crude Antimony, east it being poudered into the fire, and in all things
proceed as has been said, and he shall have them, etc. for they are easily
sublimed. Now, how the regulus is to be made after a compendious manner you
shall find in the fourth part. The scory also are sublimed, so as nothing is
lost. But he that will make flowers that shall be dissolved in the air into a
liquor must add some calcined tartar, or some other fixed vegetable salt, and
he shall have flowers that will be dissolved in any liquor: but he that will
make red flowers as well those that are diaphoretical as those that are
purging, must mix Iron, and he shall have flowers like to cinnabar: Let him
that desires green, mix copper, if purple, lapis calaminaris.

And thus out of any mineral may be made flowers whether it be fixed, or
volatile; for it is forced to fly on high being cast into the fire. And these
may be used diversely in Surgery, in plasters and unguents; for they dry,
and astringe potently, especially those that are made of lapis calaminaris.
Neither are they to be slighted that are made of the golden, and silver
marcasite. Those that are made of Arsenic and auripigmentum are poisonous, but
are useful for painters. Arsenic, and auripigmentum being calcined with nitre,
and then sublimed, yield flowers that are safely to be taken inwardly,
expelling all poisons by sweat and stool. For they are corrected two ways,
viz. first by by the nitre, secondly by the fire in the subliming: they are not
therefore to be feared, because that Antimony was poisonous before the
preparation thereof. For by how much the greater poison it was before
preparation, so much the greater medicine afterward.

The flowers of sulphur are taught in the second part, although they may also
be made by this furnace, viz. the nature, and properties thereof being known by
an expert artist or otherwise it is burnt.

So also stones being prepared are brought into flowers, and many other things,
of which we need not say any thing, only let him that pleases make trial
thereof.

And now I suppose I have made plain, and showed you clearly how distillation
is to be made in this our first furnace, wherefore I will now end. He therefore
that nnderstands and knows the fabric of the furnace (which he may understand
by the delineation thereof) and the use thereof, will not deny but that I have
done a good work, and will not disapprove of my labor.

And this is the best way of distilling, and subliming incombustible things. In
the second part you shall find another furnace in which are distilled,
combustible things, as also most subtle spirits, etc. The first furnace serves
also for other uses, as the separation of metals; of the pure from the impure;
for the making of the central salt, and of the humidum radicale of them all.
But because it cannot be done after the aforesaid way, by which things are cast
into the fire to get their flowers, and spirits, but after a certain secret
Philosophical manner, by the power of a certain secret fire, hitherto concealed
by the Philosophers (neither shall I prostrate that secret before all) It is
sufficient that I have given a hint of it for further inquiry, and have showed
the way to other things.

FINIS.
THE SECOND PART OF THE PHILOSOPHICAL FURNACES: WHEREIN Is described the Nature
of the SECOND FVRNACE; By the help whereof all volatile, subtle and combustible
things can be distilled. Whether they be Vegetables, Animals, or Minerals, and
that after an unknown and very compendious way; whereby nothing is lost, but
even the most subtle spirits may be caught and preserved, which else without
the means of this Furnace is impossible to be done by Retorts or other
distilling Instruments.

By JOHN RUDOLPH Glauber.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, for Tho: Williams at the sign of the Bible
in Little-Britain. 1652.

A. The furnace together with the iron distilling-vessel fastened into it,
whereunto a receiver is applied. B. The distiller with his left hand taking off
the lid, and with his right casting in his prepared matter. C. The external
form of the distilling vessel. D. The internal form of the vessel. E. Another
distilling vessel, which is not fastened to a furnace, but only stands upon
coals.



THE SECOND PART OF PHILOSOPHICAL FURNACES.
The structure of the second Furnace.
THE Distilling vessel must be made of Iron, or good earth, such as can abide
in the fire (whereof in the first part of this Book it shall be taught) and you
may make it as big or as little as you please, according as your occasion shall
require. That of Iron is most fit to be used for such spirits, as are not very
sharp or corroding, else they would corrode the vessel: but that of earth may
be used for such things, as show their activity upon the Iron, and do make it
to melt, as sulphur, Antimony and the like; and therefore you ought to have two
such vessels, viz. one of iron, and one of earth, to the end that for both
sorts of materials (corrosive or not corrosive) you may have proper vessels,
and fit furnaces for their distilling, and that they may not be spoiled by
things contrary and hurtful to them. The shape of the vessel is showed by the
figure here annexed, viz. the lower part of it somewhat wider then the upper
part, and twice as high as wide; at the top having a hollow space between the
two edges or brims, whereinto the edge of the lid may close and enter into an
inch deep. The lid must have a ring or handle, by which it may be taken off and
put on again with a pair of tongs. The lid must have a deep edge answering to
the hollow space aforesaid. The lower part must have three knobbs or shoulders
thereby to rest upon the wall of the furnace; the form whereof is no other,
then that of a common distilling furnace with sand Capel, as the figure of it
does show: but if you will not have the furnace, then it needs no knobbs or
shoulders, if so be the distilling vessel be flat at the bottom, or else have
legs, for to stand upon them: Beneath the edge of the vessel there comes forth
a spout or pipe of a span in length, and one or two inches wide, and somewhat
narrower before then behind, through which the spirits are conveyed into the
Receiver.

The way or the manner to perform the destillation.
When you intend to distill, then first make a fire in he furnace, that the
distilling vessel come to be very hot. But if it be not fastened to the furnace,
then set it upon a grate, and lay stones about it, and coals between, and so
let it grow hot, and lay melted lead into the space between the two edges or
brims, to the end, that the lid, when it is put on, may close exactly, so that
no spirit can get through. This done take a little of the matter you intend to
distill and cast it in and presently put on the lid, and there will be no other
passage left but through the pipe, to which there must be applied and luted a
very big receiver. As soon as the species cast in come to be warm, they let go
their spirit, which does come forth into the receiver: and because there was
but little of the matter cast in it has no power to force through the lute or
to break the receiver, but must settle it self. This done, cast in a little
more of your matter, cover it and let it go till the spirit be settled:
continue this proceeding so long, until you have spirits enough: but take
heed, that you carry in no more at once, then the receiver is able to bear,
else it will break. And when your vessel is full the distillation not being
ended, then take off the lidd, and with an iron ladle take out the Caput
Mortuum; and so begin again to cast in, and still but a little at a time, and
continue this as long as you please.

Thus in one day you may distill more in a small vessel, then otherwise you
could do in a great retort; and you need not fear the least loss of the subtle
spirit, nor the breaking of the receiver by the abundance of the spirits: and
you may cease or leave off your distilling and begin it again when you list:
also the fire cannot be made too strong so that it might cause any hurt or
damage; but by this way you can make the most subtle spirits, which is
impossible to be done by any Retort. But if you will distill a subtle spirit
through a Retort, as of Tartar, Hartshorn, Salarmoniac, or the like, you cannot
do it without prejudice (though there were but half a pound of the matter in
it) the subtlest spirits coming forth with force seek to penetrate through the
lute if that be not good, but if that be good so that the spirits cannot pass
through it, then they break the receiver, because it cannot possibly hold such
a quantity of subtle spirits at once. For when they are coming, they come so
plentifully and with such a force, that the receiver cannot contain them, and
so of necessity must fly asunder, or must pass through the lutum; All which is
not to be feared here, because there is but a little cast in at once, which
cannot yield such a quantity of spirits, as to force the receiver to break: And
when there come forth no more spirits, and the former is settled, then more of
the matter is to be cast in, and this is to be continued so long until you
have spirits enough. Afterward take off the receiver, and put the spirit into
such a glass (as in the fifth part of this book amongst the Manuals shall be
discovered) wherein it may be kept safely without wasting or evaporating.

In this manner all things, Vegetable, Animal, or Mineral, can be distilled in
this furnace, and much better then by means of a Retort: especially such
subtle spirits (as by the other way of distilling cannot be saved, but pass
through the lutum) are got by this our way; and they are much better, then
those heavy oils, which commonly are taken for spirits, but are none, being
only corrosive waters. For the nature and condition of a spirit is to be
volatile, penetrating and subtle, and such are not those spirits of salt,
Vitriol, Allome and Nitre, which are used in Apothecary shops, they being but
heavy oils, which even in a warm place do not evaporate or exhale.

But a true spirit fit for Medicinal use, must rise or ascend before the
phlegm, and not after; for whatsoever is heavier then phlegm, is no volatile
spirit, but a heavy spirit or (rather called) a sour heavy oil. And it is
seen by the experience that the Apothecaries spirit of vitriol will cure no
falling sickness, which virtue is ascribed to that spirit, and indeed justly:
for the true spirit of vitriol performs that cure out of hand. Likewise their
spirit of Tartar (as they call it) is no spirit, but only a stinking phlegm or
Vinegar.

The way to make such true spirits, I will now show because much good may be
done by them in all manner of diseases. And this way of distilling serves only
for those which seek after good medicines: but others which care not whether
their medicines be well prepared or no, need not take so much pains as to build
such a furnace, and to make their spirits themselves, for at any they can buy
for a small matter a good quantity of dead and fruitless spirits at the common
sellers and Apothecaries.

Hence it is no marvel, that now a days so little good is done by Chymicall
medicaments, which of right should far outstrip all the Galenical in goodness
and virtue. But alas! it is come to that pass now, that a true Chemist and
honest son of Hermes* is forced almost to blush, when he hears men talk of
Chemical medicines, because they do no such miracles, as are ascribed unto
them. Which infamy is occasioned by none more then by careless Physicians,
which though they make use of Chymicall medicines (because they would feign be
esteemed to know more then others) yet they do take greater care for their
kitchen, then for the welfare of their patients; and so buying ill prepared
medicines of unskilful stillers, and withal using them undiscreetly (whereby
they many times do more hurt then good to the sick) they do lay such foul
aspersions up on the noble Art of Chemistry.

But an Industrious and accurate Physician is not ashamed to make his medicines
himself, if it be possible, or at least to have them made by good and well
exercised Artists: whereupon he may better rely and get more credit, then one
that knows not whereof, nor how his medicine which he does administer to his
patients is prepared. But such wicked and ignorant men will one day fall short
of their answer before the Judgment of the righteous Samaritane.

How to make the Acid oil and the volatile spirit of Vitriol.
HItherto I have taught, how to distill in general, and to get the subtle
spirits. There remains now to describe what manuals or preparations are
fitting for every matter in particular; and first,

Of Vitrioll.
TO distill Vitrioll, there needs no other preparation, but only that it be
well viewed, and if there be any filth amongst it, that the same be carefully
picked out, lest being put together with the Vitriol into the distilling vessel,
the spirit be corrupted thereby. But he that will go yet more exactly to work,
may dissolve it in fair water, then filtrate it, and then evaporate the water
from it till a skin appear at the top, and then set it in a cold place, and let
it shoot again into Vitrioll; and then you are sure that no impurity is left
in it.

Now your vessel being made red hot, with an Iron ladle cast in one or two
ounces of your vitriol at once, put on the lid, and presently the spirits
together with the phlegm will come over into the receiver, like unto a white
cloud or mist; which being vanished, and the spirits partly settled, carry in
more Vitriol, and continue this so long, until your vessel be full: Then
uncover your vessel, and with a pair of tongs or an iron ladle take out the
Caput Mortuum, and cast more in; and continue this proceeding as long as you
please, still emptying the vessel when it is filled, and then casting in more
matter, and so proceeding until you conceive that you have got spirits enough.
Then let the fire go out, and let the furnace cool; take off the receiver, and
power that which is come over into a retort, and lay the retort in sand, and by
a gentle fire distill the volatile spirit from the heavy oil; having first
joined to the retort the receiver, which is to receive the volatile spirit,
with a good lutum, such as is able to hold such subtle spirits, the making
whereof shall be taught in the fifth part of this book amongst the Manuals.

All the volatile spirit being come over, which you may know by the falling of
bigger dropps, then take off the receiver, and close it very well with wax,
that the spirit may not make an escape; then apply another (without luting it)
and so receive the phlegm by it self, and there will remain in the retort a
black and heavy corrosive oil, which if you please, you may rectify, forcing
it over by a strong fire, and then it will be clear; if not, let all cool,
then take out your Retort together with the black oil, and pour upon it the
Volatile spirit, which in the rectifying went over first, put the retort into
the sand, and apply a receiver, and give it a very gentle fire, and the
volatile spirit will come over alone leaving its phlegm behind with the oil,
which by reason of its dryness does easily keep it. Thus the spirit being freed
from all phlegm, is become as strong as a mere fire, and yet not corrosive.
And if this spirit be not rectified from its own oil, it will not remain
good, but there does precipitate a red powder after it has stood for some
space of time, and the spirit loses all its virtue, in so much that it is not
to be discerned from ordinary water, which does not happen when it is
rectified. The reason of this precipitation is no other then the weakness of
the spirit, which is accompanied with too much water, and therefore not strong
enough for to keep its sulphur, but must let it fall: but after it is rectified
by its own oil, it can keep its sulphur well enough, because then it is freed
from its superfluous moisture. However the red powder is not to be thrown away,
but ought to be kept carefully; because it is of no less virtue then the spirit
it self. And it is nothing else but a Volatile sulphur of Vitrioll, It has
wonderful virtues, some of which shall be related.

The use and Dose of the Narcotick sulphur of Vitrioll.
OF this sulphur 1. 2. 3. 4. or more grains (according to the condition of the
patient) given at once mitigates all pains, causes quiet sleep; not after the
manner of Opium, Henbane, and other the like medicines, which by stupefying and
benumming cause sleep, but it performs its operation very gently and safely
without any danger at all, and great diseases may be cured by the help thereof.
Paracelsus held it in high esteem, as you may see, where he does w^ite of
Sulphur embryonatum*

Of the use and virtue of the Volatile spirit of Vitrioll.
THis sulphurous volatile spirit of Vitrioll, is of a very subtle and
penetrating quality, and of a wonderful operation; for some drops thereof being
taken and sweated upon it, does penetrate* the whole body, opens all
obstructions, consumes those things that are amiss in the body, even as fire.
It is an excellent medicine in the falling sickness, in that kind of madness
or rage which is called Mania, in the convulsion of the mother, called
Suffocatio matricis, in the scurvy; in that other kind of madness which is
called Melancholia Hypochondriaca; and other diseases proceeding from
obstructions and corruption of the blood: It is also good in the plague, and
all other fevers: mingled with spirit of wine, and daily used, it does wonders
in all external accidents: Also in the Apoplexy, shrinking and other diseases
of the Nerves, the distressed limb rubbed therewith, it does penetrate to the
very marrow in the bones; it does warm and refresh the cold sinews, grown
stiff: In the Colic, besides the internal use, a little thereof in a clyster
applied, is a present help: Externally used in the Gout, by anointing the
places therewith asswageth the pains, and takes away all tumors and
inflammations: it does heal the scabs, tetters and ringworms, above all other
medicines; it cures new wounds and old sores, as Fistulaes, Cancers, Woolves,
and what name so ever else they may have: It extinguisheth all inflammations,
scaldings, the Gangrene, dissipateth and consumes the knobs and excrescencies
of the skin. In a word, this spirit, which the wise men of old called Sulphur
Philosophorum, does act universally in all diseases, and its virtue cannot
sufficiently be praised and expressed: And it is much to be admired, that so
excellent a Medicine is no where to be found.

If it be mingled with spring water, it does make it pleasantly sowrish* and in
taste and virtue like unto the natural sour water of wels.

Also by this spirit many diseases may be cured at home; so that you need not
go to bathes afar off, for to be rid of them.

Here I could set down a way, how such a spirit may be got in great abundance
for the use of bathing, without distillation, whereby miraculous things may be
done; but by reason of the ungratefulness of men, it shall be reserved for
another time.

Of the virtue and use of the corrosive oil of Vitrioll.
THis oil is not much used in Physic, although it be found almost in every
Apothecaries shop, which they use for to give a sowrish taste to their syrups
and conserves. Mingled with spring water and given in hot diseases, it will
extinguish the unnatural thirst, and cool the internal parts of the body.
Externally it cleanses all unclean sores, applied with a feather; it
separateth the bad from the good, and lays a good foundation for the cure.

Also if it be rectified first, some metals may be dissolved with it and
reduced into their Vitriols, especially Mars and Venus; but this is to be done
by adding common water thereunto, else it will hardly lay hold on them. The way
of doing it is thus:

How to make the Vitrioll of Mars and Venus.
TAke of your heavy oil, just as it came over, viz. together with its phlegm
(but that the Volatile spirit be drawn off from it first) as much as you
please, put it into a glass body together with plate of copper or iron, set it
in warm sand, and let it boil until that the oil will dissolve no more of
the metal, then power off the liquor, filtre it through brown paper, and put it
into a low gourd glass, and set it in sand, and let the phlegm evaporate
until there appear a skin at the top, then let the fire go out, and the glass
grow cool; then set it in a cold place, and within some days there will*
shoot fair green Crystals; if of iron, greenish; if of Copper, then something
bluish; take them out and dry them upon filtering paper, the remaining
liquor, which did not shoot into Vitriol, evaporate again in sand, and then
let it shoot as before; continue this proceeding, until all the solution (or
filtred liquor) be turned to Vitriol. This Vitrioll is better and purer then
the common; for it yields a better Volatile spirit, and for that reason I did
set down the way how to make it. There can also be made a good Vitrioll of both
these metals by the means of ordinary yellow brimstone; but because the making
of it is more tedious, then of this here set down, I think it needless to
describe its preparation in this place.

The way to make a fair blew Vitrioll out of Luna (that is, silver.)
DIssolve the shavings or filings of silver with rectified oil of Vitrioll,
adding water thereunto, but not so much as to Iron and Copper: Or else, which
is better, dissolve calcined silver, which has been precipitated out of Aqua
fortis either with Copper or salt water; the solution being ended power it off
and filtre it, and drop into it of spirit of urine or of Sal ammoniac, as long
as it does hiss, and almost all the silver will precipitate again out of the
oil, and so there will fall a white powder to the bottom; This precipitated
silver together with the liquor pour into a phiall-glass, set it to boil in
sand for twenty four hours, and the liquor will dissolve again almost all the
precipitated silver-calx and become blew thereby. Then pour off the solution
(or liquor) and filtre it through brown paper, and abstract the moisture till a
skin arise at the top; then in a cold place let it shoot to Vitriol. With the
remaining liquor proceed further, as above in the preparation of the Vitriol of
Iron and Copper has been taught.

By this way you will get an excellent Vitrioll out of silver, which from 4. 5.
6. to 10. grains used only of it self, will be a good purge, especially in
diseases of the brain.

If you have a good quantity of it, that you may distill a spirit thereof, you
will get not only an acide (or sour) but also a volatile spirit, which in the
infirmities of the brain is most excellent; that which in the distilling
remains behind, may be reduced again into a body, so that you lose nothing of
the silver, save only that which is turned into spirit.

Moreover, the acide (or sour) oil of common Vitriol, does precipitate all
metals and stones of beasts or fishes; also pearls and corals, they being
first dissolved in spirit of salt or of Nitre, and makes fair light powders
of them (which by the Apothecaries are called Magisteries) much fairer then by
precipitation with salt of Tartar is done, especially of corals and pearls,
such a fair glistering and delicate powder is made; and likewise also of
mother of pearl, and other shells of snailes, that it gives as fair a gloss to
them, as the fairest oriental pearls have; which way has not been made common
hitherto, but being known only to few, has been kept very secret by them, as a
singular Art. Such magisteries commonly were precipitated out of vinegar only
by salt of Tartar, which for lightness, whiteness and fair gloss are not
comparable at all to ours: But if in stead of the oil of Vitriol you take oil
of sulphur, then these powders will be fairer then when they are done by the
oil of Vitriol, in so much, that they may be used for painting for a black
skin.

Having made mention of Magisteries, I cannot forbear to discover the great
abuse and error, which is committed in the preparing of them.

Paracelsus in his Archidoxes teaches to make Magisteries, which he calls
extracted Magisteries: but some of his disciples teach to make precipitated
Magisteries, which are quite different from the former. Paracelsus is clean of
another opinion in the preparing of his Magisteries, then others in the making
of theirs: doubtless Paracelsus his Magisteries were good cordial living
medicines, whereas the other were but dead carkases, and although they be never
so fair, white and glistering, yet in effect they prove but a gross earthy
substance, destitute of virtue.

I do not deny, but that good medicines may be extracted out of pearls and
corals, for I my self also do describe the preparations of some of them; but
not at all after such a way as theirs is. For what good or exalting can be
expected by such a preparation, where a stony matter is dissolved in corrosive
waters, and then precipitated into stone again? Can its virtue be increased
thereby? surely no, but rather it is diminished, and made much the worse
thereby. For it is well known, that the corrosive spirits (no less then fire)
do burn some certain things; for not all things are made better by fire or
corrosives, but most of them are absolutely spoiled by them. Some perchance
will say, that such preparations of Magisteries are only for to be reduced
into a finer powder, that so much the sooner they may perform their operation.
To which I answer, that pearls, corals, and other of the like nature, if they
be once dissolved by corrosive waters, and then precipitated and edulcorated,
never or hardly can be dissolved again by acid spirits. Whence it is evident
that by such preparations they are not opened or made better, but rather closed
or made worse. And we see also by daily experience that those Magisteries do
not those effects; which are ascribed unto them. By which it appears clearly,
that to the Archeus of the stomach they are much less grateful then the crude
unprepared corals and pearls; whose tender essence being not burnt up by
corrosives, do oftentimes produce good effects. For our Ancestors have ascribed
unto corals and pearls, that they purify the impure and corrupt blood in the
whole body, that they expel Melancholy and sadness, comforting the heart of
man, and making it merry, which also they effectually perform: whereas the
Magisteries do not. And this is the reason, why unprepared corals, pearls and
stones of fishes have more effect, then the burnt Magisteries. For it is
manifest and well known, that the abovesaid diseases for the most part do
proceed from obstructions of the spleen, which obstructions are nothing else,
but a tartarous juice or a sour phlegm which has possessed and filled up the
entrals, and coagulated it self within them. By which obstruction not only
headache, giddiness, panting of the heart, trembling of the limbs, a
spontaneous lassitude, vomits, unnatural hunger; also, loathing of victuals;
then cold, then hot flushing fits, and many more strange symptoms are caused;
but also a most hurtful rottenness and corruption is introduced into the whole
mass of blood, from whence the leprosy, scurvy, and other loathsome or
abominable scabs do spring.

Of which evil the only cause (as has been said) is a crude acide Tartar,
from which so many great diseases do rise.

This to be so may easily be proved; for it is notorious, that melancholik
folks, hypocondriaques, and others do often cast up a great quantity of acid
humor, which is so sharp that no vinegar is comparable to it, and does set
their teeth on such an edge, as if they had eaten unripe fruit.

What remedy now? take away the cause and the disease is taken away. If you
could take away the peccant matter by purgings, it would be well, but it
remains obstinate and will not yield to them. By vomit it may be diminished
in some measure. But because that not every one can abide vomiting, it is
therefore no wisdom to turn evil into worse. Shall then this tartar be killed
and destroyed by contraries, which indeed in some sort may be effected; as when
you use vegetables or animals, whose virtue consists in a volatile salt: such
are all species or sorts of cresses, Mustard Seed, horseradish, scurvy grass,
also the spirit of Tartar, of Hartshorn, and of urine and the like, which by
reason of their penetrating faculty pass through all the body, finding out the
Tartar thereof, destroying the same, as being contrary unto it; and in this
combat two contrary natures is kindled, a great burning heat, whereby the whole
body is thoroughly heated and brought to sweating; and whenever by these
contraries a sweating is caused, there is always mortified some of this
hurtful Tartar. But because that of that acid humor but a little at a time can
be mortified and edulcorated by contrary volatile spirits, and that therefore
it would be required to use them often, for to kill and expel all the Tartar;
and because also (as has been mentioned before) a strong sweat always is
caused by every such operation, whereby the natural spirits are much weakened,
so that the patient would not be able to hold out long thereby, but by taking
away of one evil, another and greater one would be occasioned.

And therefore such things must be offered to that hungry acid humor, by which
the corrosive nature thereof, may be mortified and grow sweet, with that
proviso nevertheless, that those things be such as are not contrary or hurtful
to the nature of man, but grateful and friendly, as are corals, pearls and
crabs eyes, etc.

For amongst all stones none are more* easily to be dissolved then Pearls,
Corals, Crabbs-eyes, and other stones of fishes.

But the truth of this, viz. that every corrosive is killed by feeding upon
pearls and corals, and thereby can be made sweet; and besides, how a sour
coagulated Tartar, by the help of corals or pearls may be reduced to a sweet
liquor (a pleasant and acceptacle medicine to the nature of man) which never
can be coagulated again by any means, shall be afterward proved and taught
when I shall come to treat of Tartar.

Now in tartareous coagulations and obstructions of the internals proceeding
from the predominancy of an acid humor there is no better remedy, then to give
the patient every morning fasting from ss. to i. (more or less, according to
the condition of the patient) of red corals and pearls made into powder, and
to let him fast two or three hours upon it, and so to continue daily until you
see amendment: By this means the hurtful acid humor is mortified, and dulcified
by the corals and pearls so that afterward it may be overcome by nature,
whereby the obstructions are removed, and the body freed from the disease.

This my opinion of the abuse of Magisteries and the good use of Corals I could
not conceal although I do know for certain, that it will take but with few, in
regard that it will seem very strange to most. However, happily there may be
some yet, that will not be unwilling to search into the truth and to consider
further of it, and at last will find this not to be so strange, as it seemed
to them at the first: but he that cannot believe or comprehend it, may keep to
his Magisteries.

And if it seem so strange unto any, that corals or pearls made into powder
shall be concocted in the stomach, and so put forth their virtue, what will you
say then, if I do prove, that even whole pearls, crab's-eyes, and corals being
swallowed, are totally consumed by the Melancholy humor, so that nothing comes
forth again among the excrements? and which is more, even the like may be said
of hard and corrupted metals, as Iron, and speaucer or Zinck: But this must be
understood only of those that are of a Malancholick constitution but uot so in
others, viz, those that are of a sanguine, and those that are of a phlegmatic
constitution, to whom such like things are seldom prescribed. For I have seen
many times, that against obstructions to strong bodies there has been given at
once from ss. to i. of the shavings or filings of iron, and they found much
good by it, yea more help then by other costly medicines of the Apothecaries,
whereof they had used many before, but to no purpose, by reason whereof their
excrements came from them black, just as it uses to fall out with those that
make use of medicinal sour waters, which run through iron mines, and thereby
borrow a spiritual mineral virtue.

Now if those filings of iron had not been consumed in the stomach, how come it
that the excrements are turned black? so then it is sufficiently proved, that
even a hard unprepared metal can be consumed in the stomach: and i^ so, why not
as well soft pearls and corals?

Which is also to be seen by children, that are troubled with worms, if there
be given unto them 4. 6* 8. to 12. or 16. grains of the finest filings of steel
or iron, that all the worms in the body are killed thereby, their stomach and
guts scowred very clean, and their stools also turned black. But this must be
observed by children, when the worms are killed, and yet remain in the guts
(because that the iron in a small quantity is not strong enough for to expel
them, but only make the body soluble) that a purge must be used after, for to
carry them out; for else if they do remain there, others will grow out of
their substance. But to those that are more in years, you may give the Dose so
much the stronger, as from i. to i. that the worms also may be carried out,
they being better able to endure it then little children, and although
sometimes a vomit does come, yet it does no hurt, but they will be but so much
the healthier afterward.

And thus Iron may be used, not only against worms, but also against all
stomach-agues, headache, and obstructions of the whole body, without any danger
and very successefully, as a grateful or very acceptable medicine to Nature;
for after a powerful magnetical way it does attract all the ill humors in the
body, and carries them forth along with it. Of whose wonderful virtue and
nature, there is spoken more at large in my treatise of the Sympathy and
Antipathy of things. Which some Physicians perceiving and supposing by Art to
make it better, they spoiled it, and made it void of all virtue: for they
taking a piece of steel, made it red-hot, and held it against a piece of common
Sulphur, whereby the steel grew subtle, so they did let it drop into a vessel
filled with water; then they took it out, and dried it, and made it into
powder, and used it against obstructions, but to no effect almost; for the Iron
was so altered by the sulphur and reduced to an insoluble substance (which
ought not to have been so) that it could perform no considerable operation: But
if they had made the steel more soluble (whereas they made it more insoluble)
then it was of it self before, then they had done a good work: for he that
knows sulphur, does know well enough, that by no Aquafortis or Aqua Regis it
can be dissolved; and how could it then be consumed by an animal humor?

Hitherto it has been proved sufficiently, that in some men, especially in
those that are of a Melancholic constitution there is an acid humor, which can
sufficiently dissolve all easily soluble metals and stones: and that therefore
it is needless to torture, and dissolve pearls, corals and the like with
corrosive waters before they be administered to patients: but that the Archeus
of the stomach is strong enough by the help of the said humors to consume those
easily soluble things, and to accept of that which serves his turn, and to
reject the rest.

But it is not my intent here, that this should be understood of all metals and
stones; for I know well, that other metals and stones (some excepted) before
they are duly prepared, are not fit for physic, but must be fitted first,
before they be administered or given unto patients.

For this relation I made only for to show, how sometimes good things (though
with intent to make them better) are made worse and supplied by those that do
not make an exact search into nature and her power.

I hope this my admonition will not be taken ill, because my aim was not
vainglory, but only the good of my neighbor.

Now let us return again to Vitriol.

Of the sweet oil of Vitriol.
THE Ancients make mention of a sweet and green oil of Vitriol, which does
cure the falling sickness, kills worms, and has other good qualities and
virtues besides: and that the Oil is to be distilled per descensum. To attain
unto this oil the later Physicians took great pains, but all in vain:
because they did not understand at all the Ancients about the preparing of this
oil, but thought to get it by the force of fire, and so using violent
distillation, they got no sweet oil, but such as was very sour and corrosive,
which in taste, efficacy and virtue was not comparable at all to the former.

However they ascribed unto it (though falsely) the same virtues, which the
ancients (according to truth) did unto theirs. But daily experience shows,
that the oil of vitriol as it is found ordinarily, cures no falling sickness,
nor kills worms, whereas this Philosophical does it very quickly. Whence it
appears, that the other is nothing like unto the true medicinal oil of
vitriol, neither is it to be compared to it.

I must confess indeed, that per descensum out of common vitriol, by the force
of the fire, there may be got a greenish oil, which yet is not better then the
other because it proves as sharp in taste, and of as corroding a quality, as
if it had been distilled through a Retort.

Those that found out this oil, as Paracelsus, Basilius, and some few others,
did always highly esteem it, and counted it one of the four maine pillars of
Physic. And Paracelsus says expressly in his writings, that its viridity or
greenness must not be taken away or marred (which indeed a very little heat can
do) by the fire; for (says he) if it be deprived of its greenness, it is
deprived also of its efficacy and pleasant essence. Whence it may be perceived
sufficiently, that this sweet green oil is not to be made by the force of the
fire as hitherto by many has been attempted, but in vain.

And it is very probable, that the ancients, which did so highly praise the
oil of vitriol, happily knew nothing of this way of distilling, which is used
by us now a days: for they only simply followed Nature, and had not so many
subtle and curious inventions and ways of distilling.

But however it is certain, that such a sweet and green*oyle cannot be made of
vitrioll by the force of the fire, but rather must be done by purification,
after a singular way; for the Ancients many times understood purification for
distillation: as it is evident, when they say, Distill through a filtre, or
through filtring paper: which by us is not accounted for distillation, but by
them it was.

However, this is true and very sure, that a great Treasure of health (or for
the health of man) lies hidden in Vitriol: yet not in the common, as it is
sold every where, and which has endured the heat of the fire already; but in
the Oar as it is found in the earth, or its mine. For as soon as it comes to
the day light, it may be deprived by the heat of the Sun of its subtle and
penetrating spirit, and so made void of virtue; which spirit, if by Art it be
got from thence, smells sweeter then musk and amber, which is much to be
admired, that in such a despicable mineral and gross substance (as it is deemed
to be by the ignorant) such a royal medicine is to be found.

Now this preparation does not belong to this place, because we treat here only
of spirits, which by the force of fire are driven over Likewise also, there
does not belong hither the preparation of the green oil, because it is made
without the help of fire. But in regard, that mention has been made of it
here, I will (though I kept it always very secret) publish it for the benefit
of the poor patients, hoping that it will do much good to many a sick man.

For if it be well prepared, it does not only cure perfectly every Epilepsie or
Convulsion in young and old; and likewise readily and without fail kills all
worms within and without the body, as the Ancients with truth ascribed unto it;
but also many Chronical diseases and such as are held incurable, may be happily
overcome and expelled thereby, as the plague, pleuresie, all sorts of fevers
and agues, what ever they be called, headache, colic, rising of the mother;
also all obstructions in the body, especially of the spleen and liver, from
whence Melancholia Hypochondriaca, the scurvy, and many, other intolerable
diseases do arise: Also the blood in the whole body is by the means thereof
amended and renewed, so that the Pox, Leprosy and other like diseases
proceeding from the infection of the blood are easily cured thereby: Also it
heals safely and admirably all open sores and stinking ulcers turned to
fistula's in the whole body, and from what cause so ever they did proceed, if
they be anointed therewith, and the same also be inwardly used besides.

Such and other diseases more (which it is needless here to relate) may be
cured successefully with this sweet oil; especially, if without the loss of
its sweetness it be brought to a red color; for then it will do more then a
man dare write of it, and it may stand very well for a Panacea in all diseases.

The preparation of the sweet oil of Vitriol.
COmmonly in all sat soyles or clayie grounds, especially in the white, there
is found a kind of stones, round or oval in form, and in bigness like unto a
pigeons or hens-egg, and smaller also, viz. as the joint of ones finger, on the
outside black, and therefore not esteemed when it is found, but cast away as a
contemptible stone. Which if it be cleansed from the earth, and beaten to
pieces, looks within of a fair yellow and in streaks, like a gold Marcasite,
or a rich gold Oar; but there is no other taste to be perceived in it, then in
another ordinary stone; and although it be made into powder, and boiled a long
time in water, yet it does not alter at all, nor is there in the water any
other taste or color, then that which is had first (when it was powered upon
the stone) to be perceived. Now this stone is nothing else, but the best and
purest Minera (or Oar) of Vitrioll, or a seed of Metals; for Nature has
framed it round, like unto a vegetable seed, and sowed it into the earth, out
of which there can be made an excellent medicine, as follows.

Take this Oar or Minera beaten into pieces, and for some space of time, lay
or expose it to the cool air, and within twenty or thirty days it will
magnetically attract a certain saltish moisture out of the air, and grow heavy
by it, and at last it falls asunder to a black powder, which must remain
further lying there still, until it grow whitish, and that it do taste sweet
upon the tongue like vitriol. Afterward put it in a glass-vessel, and pour on
so much fair ^aine water, as that it cover it one or two inches; stir it
about several times in a day, and after a few days the water will be colored
green, which you must power off, and power on more fair water, and proceed as
before, stirring it often until that also come to be green: this must be
repeated so often, until no water more will be colored by standing upon. Then
let all the green waters which you poured off, run through filtring paper, for
to purify them; and then in a glass-body cut off short let them evaporate till
a skin appear at the top: then set it in a cold place, and there will shoot
little green stones, which are nothing else but a pure vitriol: the remaining
green water evaporate again, and let it shoot as before: and this evaporating
and Crystallising must be continued until no vitriol more will shoot, but in
warm and cold places there remain still a deep green pleasant sweet liquor or
juice: which is the true sweet and green oil of Vitriol and has all the
virtues above related.

But now this green oil further without fire may at last (after the preparing
of many fair colors between) be reduced to a blood red, sweet and pleasant
oil, which goes far beyond the green both in pleasantness and virtue, and is
in comparison to it like a ripe grape to an unripe: Hereof happily shall be
spoken at another time, because occasion and time will not permit me now to
proceed further in it. And therefore the Philo-Chymical Reader is desired for
the present to be contented with the green oil, to prepare it carefully, and
to use it with discretion; and doubtless he will get more credit by it, and do
more wonderful things then hitherto has been done by the heavy corrosive oil.

The use and Dose of the sweet oil of Vitriol.
OF this green oil, there may be taken from 1. 2. 4. 8. to 10. or 12. drops at
once, according to the condition of the patient and the disease, in fit
Vehicles, in Wine or Beer, in the morning fasting, as other medicines are
usually taken: Also the Dose may be increased or lessened, and as often
reiterated as the disease shall require it.

This Oil expels all ill humors, not only by stool and vomits, but also by
urine and sweating, according as it does meet with superfluities; and this very
safely, and without any danger at all; whereby many diseases radically or
perfectly can be cured.

Let no man wonder that I ascribe such great virtues unto this oil, it coming
from such a despicable stone, and its prepara^ion requiring no great Art or
pains, as those intricate deceitful processes do, that are every where extant
in books quite filled up with them. And it is no marvel, that men are in love
with such false and costly processes; for the most of them do not believe, that
any good is to be found in things that are not in esteem; but only make great
account of deer things, far fetched, and requiring much time and pains for to
be prepared.

Such men do not believe the word of God, testifying, That God is no respecter
of persons, but that all men that fear and love him, are accepted of him. If
this be true (which no good Christian will doubt) then we must believe also,
that God created Physic or the matter of Physic as well for the poor as for
the rich. Now if it be also for the poor, then certainly such will be the
condition thereof, that it may be obtained by them, and easily prepared for
use. So we see that Almighty God causes not one^y in great men's grounds to
come forth good vegetables, Animals and Minerals, for the curing of the
infirmities of mankind, but that the same also are found every where else.
Whereby we perceive, that it is also the will of God, that they shall be known
by all men, and that he alone, as the Maker of all good, may be praised and
magnified by all men for the same.

I doubt not but that there will be found self-conceited scoffers, that will
despise this so little regarded subject, as if no good thing could be made of
it, because they could find nothing in it themselves. But be it known to them,
that neither to me nor them all things have been discovered, but that yet many
wonderful works of Nature are hidden to us: and besides that I am not the first
that writ of Vitriol and its medicine. For the Ancients our dear Ancestors had
always Vitriol in very great esteem, as the following Verse does prove:
Visitabis Interiora Terrae Rectificando
Invenies Occultum Lapidem Veram Medicinam.
Whereby they would give us to understand, that a true medicine is to be found
in it. And the same also was known to the latter Philosophers: for Basilius and
Paracelsus have always highly commended it, as in their writings is to be
found.

It is to be admired, that this Oar or Metallical seed, which may justly be
called the gold of the Physicians (in regard that so good a medicine can be
made of it) is not changed or altered in the earth, like other things that grow
in it, but keeps always the same form and shape, until it comes to the
air, which is its earth or ground, wherein it putrefieth and grows. For
first it swells and grows like as a vegetable seed does in the earth: and
so takes its increase and grows out of theaire, just as a seed of an herb in
the earth; and the earth is no^ only its Matrix, wherein it grows and does
increase like a vegetable, but it is also its Sun which makes it ripe. For
within four weeks at the furthest it putrefieth and grows black: and about a
fourtnight after it grows white, and then green; and thus far it has been
described here: But if you proceed further Philosopher-like therewith, there
will come forth to light at the last the fairest red, and most pleasant
Medicine, for which God be praised for ever and ever, Amen.

Of the sulphurous volatile and Acide spirit of common Salt, and of Allome.
THE same way, which above has been taught for the making of the volatile
spirit of vitriol, must be likewise used in the making of the volatile spirits
of common salt and allome.

The manner of preparing.
ALlome is to be cast in as it is of it self, without mixing of it, but the
salt must be mixed with bolus or some other earth, to keep it from melting:
with the spirit volatile, there goes also along an acid spirit, whose virtue
is described in the 1. part. The Oil of allome has almost the like operation
with the oil of vitriol. Also the spirit volatile of both these, is of the
same nature and condition with that which is made of vitriol: and the common
salt, and allome do not yield as much, as the vitriol; unless both, viz. salt
and allome be mixed together, and so a spirit distilled of them.

Of the sulphurous volatile spirit of Minerals and Metals, and of their
preparation.
SUch a penetrative sulphurous spirit can be made also of Minerals and Metals,
which in virtue goes beyond the spirit of vitriol, that of common salt, and
that of allome, viz. after the following manner.

The preparation of the volatile spirits of Metals.
DIssolve either Iron or Copper, or Lead or Tin with the acid spirit of vitriol
or of common salt: abstract or draw off the phlegm; then dri^e the acid spirit
again from the Metal, and he will carry along a volatile spirit, which by
rectifying must be separated from the corrofive spirit. And such Metallical
spirits are more effectual then those that are made of the salts.

The preparation of the volatile spirit of Minerals.
TAke of Antimony made into fine powder, or of gold-Marcasite, or of some other
sulphurous Mineral, which you please, two parts, Mix therewith 1. part of
good purified Salt nitre, and cast in of that mixture one little quantity, and
then an other, and so forth after the manner above described; and there will
come over a spirit which is not inferior to the former in efficacy and virtue;
but it must also be well rectified.

Another way.
CEment what laminated or granulated Metal you please (except gold) with half
as much in weight of common Sulphur, closed up in a strong melting pot or
crucible, such as does not let the Sulphurgo through, for the space of half an
hour, until that the Sulphur has penetrated and broken the plates of Metals:
Then beat them into powder, mix them with the like quantity in weight of
common salt, and so distill it after the way above mentioned, and you will get
a volatile spirit of great virtue: and every such spirit is to be used for such
special part or member of the body, as the Metal is proper for it, out of which
the spirit is made. So Silver for the brain; Tin for the lungs, Lead for the
spleen, and so forth.

The spirit of Zinck.
OF Zinck there is distilled both a volatile and also an acid spirit, good for
the heart; whether it be made by the help of the spirit of Vitrioll, or of
salt, or of Allome: or else by the means of Sulphur; for Zinck is of the nature
of gold.

The volatile spirit of the Dross of the Regulus Iron.
THe black scoria of the Regulus Martis, being first fallen asunder in the air,
yields likewise a very strong sulphurous volatile spirit, not much unlike in
virtue unto the former.

The like Sulphurous volatile spirits can be made also of other minerals,
which for brevities sake we do omit, as also in regard, that they are almost
the same in virtue.

How to make a white acid, and a red volatile spirit out of salt nitre.
TAke two parts of Allome, and one part of salt nitre, make them both into
powder, mix them well together, and cast into the still a little and a little
thereof, as above in the making of other spirits has been taught, and there
comes ove^ an acid spirit together with the volatile spirit; and so many
pounds as there is of the materials, which are to be cast in, so many pounds of
water must be put into the receiver, to the end that the volatile spirits may
so much the better be caught and saved. And when the distillation is performed,
the two spirits may be separated by the means of a gentle rectification made in
Balneo; and you must take good heed, that you get the volatile spirit pure by
changing the receiver in a good time, so that no phlegm be mixed with the red
spirit, whereby it will be weakened and turn white. The mark whereby you* may
perceive, whither the spirit or the phlegm does go forth is this: when the
volatile spirit goes, then the receiver looks of a deep red: and afterward
when the phlegm does come, the receiver looks white again: and lastly, when the
heavy acide spirit goes, then the receiver to be red again, but not so as it
is was, when the first volatile spirit came over.

This spirit can also be made and distilled after another way, viz. mixing the
salt nitre with twice as much bole or brick dust, and so framed into little
bals to prevent melting: but no way is so good as the first; especially when
you will have the red volatile spirit.

Of the use of the red volatile spirit.
THis volatile spirit, which (being quite freed from phlegm) remains always
red, and does look like blood, in all occasions may be accounted like in
virtue unto the former fulphureous spirits, especially in extinguishing of
inflammations and gangrenes it is a great treasure, the clothes being dipped in
it, and laid upon the grieved place; Also it goes almost beyond all other
medicines in the Erysipelas and colic: and if there be any congealed blood in
the body (which came by a fall or blow) this spirit outwardly applied with such
waters as are proper for the grief, and also taken inwardly, does dissolve and
expel it: and being mingled with the volatile spirit of urine it does yield a
wonderful kind of salt, as hereafter shall be taught.

The use of the white acid spirit of salt nitre.
THe heavy and corrosive spirits of salt nitre is not much used in Physic,
though it be found almost in all Apothecaries shops, and there is kept for such
use, as above has been mentioned of the spirit of vitriol, viz. to make their
conserves and cooling-drinks taste sowrish. Also it is used by some in the
colic, but it is too great a corrosive, and too gross to be used for that
purpose; and although its corrosiveness may be mitigated in some measure, by
adding of water thereto, yet in goodness and virtue it is not comparable at a^^
to the volatile spirit, but is as far different from it, as black from white,
and therefore the other is fittest to be used in Physic; but this in dealing
with metals and minerals, for to reduce them into vitriols, calxes, flores, and
crocus.

Aqua Regis.
IF you dissolve common salt (which has been decrepitated first) in this acid
spirit of salt nitre, and rectify it through a glass retort (lying in sand) by
a good strong fire, it will be so strong, that it is able to dissolve gold, and
all other metals and minetals, except silver and sulphur; and several metals
may by the means thereof be separated much better then by that Aqua regia which
has been made by adding of Salt Armoniack. But if you rectify it with lapis
calaminaris or Zinck, it will be stronger yet, so as able to dissolve all
metals and Minerals (silver and sulphur excepted) whereby in the handling of
Metals, much more may be effected, then with common spirit of salt nitre or
sulphur, as now hereafter shall be taught and first in the preparing of gold.

The preparation of Aurum fulminans or Aurum Tonitruans.
TAke of fine granulated or laminated gold (whither it he refined by Antimony
or Aqua fortis) as much as you please: put it in a little glass body, and power
four or five times as much of Aqua regis upon it, set it stopped with a paper in
a gourd in warm sand; and the Aqua regis within the space of one or two hours
will dissolve the gold quite into a yellow water: but if it have not done so;
it is a sign, that either the water was not strong enough, or that there was
too little of it for to dissolve it. Then power the solution from the gold,
which is not dissolved yet into another glass; and pour more of fresh Aqua
Regia upon the gold: set it again to dissolve in warm sand or ashes, and the
remaining gold will likewise be dissolved by it, and then there will remain no
more, but a little white calx, which is nothing else but silver, which could
not be dissolved by the Aqua Regia (for the Aqua Regia whither it be made after
the common way with salt Armoniack, or else with common salt, does not dissolve
silver) so in like manner common Aqua fortis, or spirit of salt nitre
dissolveth no gold; but all other metals are dissolved as well by strong Aqua
fortis as by Aqua Regia. And therefore you must be careful to take such gold as
is not mixed with Copper, else your work would be spoiled: for if there were
any Copper mixed with it, then that likewise would be dissolved and
precipitated together with the gold; and it would be a hindrance to the
kindling or fulminating thereof: but if you can get no gold; that is without
Copper, then take Ducats or Rosenobles, which ought to have no addition of
Copper, but only of a little silver, which does not hurt, because that it
cannot be dissolved by the Aqua Regia, but remains in the bottom in a white
powder. Make those Ducats or Rose nobles red hot, and afterward bend them, and
make them up in roles, and throw them into the Aqua Regia for to dissolve. All
the gold being turned into yellow water, and poured off, pour into it by drops
a pure oil made of the Salt of Tartar per deliquium, and the gold will be
precipitatcd by the contrary liquor of the Salt of Tartar into a brown yellow
powder, and the solution will be clear. But you must take heed, to pour no more
oil of Tartar into it then is needful for the precipitation of the gold; else
part of the precipitated gold would be dissolved again, and so cause your loss.
The gold being well precipitated, pour off the clear water from the gold calx
by inclination and pour upon it warm rain or other sweet water, stir it
together with a clean stick of wood, and set it in a warm place, until the gold
is settled, so that the water stands clear upon it again; then pour it off,
and pour on other fresh water, and let it extract the saltness out of the gold
calx: and this pouring off, and then pouring on of fresh water again, must be
reiterated so often, until no sharpness or saltness more be perceived in the
water that has been poured off: Then set the edulcorated gold into the Sun or
another warm place for to dry. But you must take heed that it have no greater
heat then the heat of the Sun is in May or June, else it would kindle or take
fire, and (especially if there be much of it) give such a thunder clap, that
the hearing of those that stand by, would be much endangered thereby, and
therefore I advise you to beware and cautious in the handling of it, lest you
run the hazard both of your gold and of your health by your oversight.

There is also another way for to edulcorate your precipitated gold, viz. thus,
take it together with the salted liquor, and pour it into a funnel lined with
brown paper laid double, and so let the water run through into a glass vessel,
whereupon the funnel does rest, and pour on other warm water, and let it run
through likewise; do this again, and again until that the water come from it
as sweet as it was poured on. Then take the paper with the edulcorated gold
calx, out of the funnel, lay it together with the paperupon other brown paper
lying severally double together, and the dry paper will attract all the
moystness out of the gold calx, so that the gold can be dried the sooner. Which
being dry, take it out of the filtring paper, and put it into another that is
clean, and so lay it aside, and keep it for use. The salted water that came
through by filtring, may be evaporated in a little glass body (standing in
sand) until to the dryness of salt (ad siccitatem salis) which is to be kept
from the air: for it is likewise useful in physic; because some virtue of the
nature of gold is yet hidden in it: though one should not think it, in regard
that it is so fair, bright and clear; which for all that may be observed by
this, that when you melt it in a clean covered crucible or pot, and pour it
afterward in a clean Copper mortar or basin (being first made warm) you get a
purple colored salt, whereos* 6. 9. 12. to 24. grains given in, does cleanse
and purge the stomach and bowels, and especially it is useful in fevers and
other diseases of the stomach. But in the crucible, out of which the salt has
been poured, you will find an earthy substance, which has separated it self
from the salt, and looks yellowish; this being taken out and melted in a
little crucible by a strong fire, turns to a yellow glass, which is
impregnated with the Tincture of Gold, and does yield a corn (or grain) of
silver in every regard like unto common cupellated silver, wherein no gold is
found, which is to be admired: because that all Chemists are of opinion, that
no Aqua regia can dissolve silver, which is true* The question therefore is
from whence or how this silver came into the salt since no Aqua Regia does
dissolve silver? whereupon some perchance may answer, that it must have been in
the oil of Tartar, in regard that many do believe, that the salts likewise may
be turned into metals, which I do not gainsay* but only deny that it could have
been done here; for if that silver had been existent in the Aqua Regia or salt
of Tartar (whereas Aqua Regia cannot bear any) it would have been precipitated
together with the gold. But that it was no common silver, but gold which turned
to silver after it was deprived ofits Tincture, I shall briefly endeavor to
prove. For that salt-waters (of Aqua Regia and salt of Tartar) out of which the
gold has been precipitated, is of that nature, before it be coagulated to
salt, though it be quite clear and white, that if you put a feather in it, it
will be dyed purple within few days, which purple color comes from the gold,
and not from silver; in regard that silver does dye red or black: and hence it
appears, that the salt water has retained something of gold.

Now some body peradventure may ask: if that the said salt water has retained
some gold, how is it then, that in the melting no gold comes forth, but only
silver? To which I answer that some salts are of that nature, that in the
melting they take from the gold its color and soul; whereof if the gold be
truly deprived, it is then no more gold nor can be such; neither is it silver,
but remains only a volatile black body, good for nothing, which also proves
much more unfixt then common lead, not able to endure any force of fire, much
less the cupel: But like Mercury or Ar^enicum vanishes (or flies away) by a
small heat. Hence it may be gathered, that the fixedness (or fixity) of gold
does consist in its soul or Tincture, and not in its body, and therefore it is
credible, that gold may be anatomized, its best or purer part separated from
the grosser (or courser) and so that a Tingent medicine (or Tincture) may be
made of it. But whether this be the right way, whereby the universal medicine
of the ancient Philosophers (by whose means all metals can be changed or
transmuted into gold) is to beattained unto, I will not dispute; yet I believe
that peradventure there may be another subject, endued with a far higher
Tincture then gold is, which obtained no more from nature, then it does need it
self for its own fixedness. However, we may safely believe, that a true Anima
or Tincture of gold, if it be well separated from its impure black body, may be
exalted and improved in color; so that afterward of an imperfect body a
greater quantity, then that was from which it was abstracted, may be improved
and brought to the perfection of gold. But waving all this, it is true and
certain, that if the gold be deprived of its Tincture, the remaining body can
no more be gold; as is demonstrated more at large in my treatise (de Auro
potabili vero) of the true potable Gold: And this I mentioned here only
therefore, that in case the lover of this Art, in his work should meet
perchance with such a white corn, he may know, from whence it does proceed.

I could have forborne to set down the preparation of the sulminating gold, and
so save paper and time, in regard that it is described by others: but because I
promised in the first part to teach how to make the flores of gold, and that
those are to be made out of fulminating (or thundering) gold, I thought, it not
amiss to describe its preparation, that the lover of this Art need not first
have his recourse to another book for to find out the preparation, but by this
my book may be furnished with a perfect instruction for the making of the
flores of gold, and this is the common way for to make Aurum fulminans, known
unto most Chemists; but in regard that easily an error may be committed in it,
either by pouring on too much of the liquor of Tartar (especially when it is
not pure enough, so that not all the gold does precipitate, but part of it
remains in the solution, whereby you would have loss; or else, the gold
falling or precipitating into a heavy calx, which does not fulminate well, and
is unfit for to be sublimed into flores.

Therefore I will here set down another and much better way, whereby the gold
can be precipitated quite and clean out of the Aqua Regia without the least
loss, and so that it comes to be very light and yellow, and does fulminate
twice as strong as the former, and there is no other difference between this
and the former preparation, but only that in steed of the oil of Tartar, you
take the spirit of urine or of Salt Armoniack for to precipitate the dissolved
gold thereby; and the gold (as before said) will be precipitated much purer,
then it is done by the liquor of the salt of Tartar, and being precipitated, it
is to be edulcorated and dried, as above in the first preparation has been
taught.

The use of Aurum fulminans.
THere is little to write of the use of Aurum fulminans in physic; for because
it is not unlockt, but is only a gross calx and not acceptable to the nature
of man, it can do no miracle. And although it be used to be given per se from
6. 8* 12. grains to i. for to provoke sweating in the plague, and other
malignant fevers, yet it would never succeed so well as was expected. Some
have mixed it with the like weight of common sulphur, and made it red hot (or
calcined it) whereby they deprived it of its fulminating virtue, supposing thus
to get a better medicine, but all in vain, for the gold calx would not be
amended by such a gross preparation. But how to prepare a good medicine out of
Aurum fulminans, so that it may be evidently seen, that the gold is no dead
body nor unfit for physic, but that it may be made quick and fit for to put
forth or show forth those virtues which it pleased God to treasure up in it, I
shall briefly discover it here.

First get such an instrument (as above has been taught) made for you out of
Copper, but not too big, nor with a lid at the top, but only with a pipe, unto
which a receiver may be applied, which must not be luted to it, but it
suffices, that the pipe enter far into the belly of the receiver; and at the
lower part it must have a flat bottom, that it may be able to stand: over the
bottom there must be a little hole with a little door, that closes very
exactly: and there must be also two little plates or scales of silver or
copper, as big as the nail of ones finger, whereupon the Aurum fulminans is to
be set into the the Instrument; which is to stand upon a Trevet, under which
you are to lay some burning coals for to warm or heat the bottom withal. The
Instrument together with the glass receiver being so ordered, that it stands
fast, and also the bottom thereof being warmed or heated, then with little
pinsers one of the little scales, containing 2. 3. or 4. grains of Aurum
fulminans must be conveyed into the Instrument and set upon the warm bottom,
and then shut the little door, and when the gold does feel the heat, it
kindles and gives a clap, and there is caused a separation and especial
unlocking of the gold; for as soon as the clap is done, the gold does go
through the pipe like a purple colored smoke into the receiver, and sticks on
every where like a purple colored powder. When the smoke is vanished, which is
soon done, then take the empty scale out of the Instrument or Oven, and set in
the other with the gold which will likewise fulminate and yield its flores,
Then the first being cooled in the mean time, is to be filled again and put in,
in stead of that which is empty, and so forth* putting in one scale after
another by turns, continue it so long till you have got flores enough: After
the sublimation is performed, let the Copper vessel grow cool, and then sweep
or brush the gold*powder which is not sublimed with a hairs foot or a goose
feather out of the vessel, which powder serves for nothing, but to be melted
with a little borras, and it will be good gold again, but only somewhat paler
then it was before it was made into fulminating gold. But the flores in the
receiver cannot be brushed out thus, especially when they are cast in with an
addition of salt Nitre, as by the flores of silver hereafter shall be taught,
because they are something moist, and therefore pour in as much of dephlegmed
Tartarised spirit of wine unto it, as you think it to be enough, for to wash
off the flores with. This done, pour out the spirit of wine, together with the
burnt Phoenix into a clean glass, with a long neck, set it (being well luted
first) into a gentle Balneum, or into warm ashes for some days, and the spirit
of wine in the mean time will be colored with a fair red, which you must
pour off and then pour on other fresh spirit and set it in a warm place for
to be dissolved, this being likewise colored, put both the extracts together
in a little glass body, and abstract the spirit of wine (in Balneo) from the
Tincture, which will be little in quantity, but of a high red color and
pleasant in taste. The remaining flores from which the Tincture is extracted,
may be with water washed out of the glass, and then dried if they are to be
melted; and they will yield a little pale gold, and the most part turns into
a brown glass, out of which perchance something else that is good may be made,
but unknown to me as yet.

N. B. If you mix the Aurum fulminans with some salt nitre* before
fulmination, then the flores will be the more soluble, so that they yield their
Tincture sooner and more freely, then alone of themselves; and if you please,
you may add thereto thrice as much salt nitre, and so sublime them in flores,
in the same manner, as shall be taught for the making of the flores of silver.

The use of the Tincture of Gold.
THe extracted Tincture is one of the chiefest of those medicines, which
comfort and cheer up the heart of man, renew and restore to youthfulness, and
cleanse the impure blood in the whole body, whereby many horrible diseases, as
the leprosy, the pox, and the like may be rooted out.

But whether this Tincture by the help of fire may be further advanced into a
fixed substance I do not know: for I have not proceeded further in i^, then
here is mentioned.

Of the flores of silver and of its medicine.
HAving promised in the first part of this book (when I was describing the
preparation of flores out of Metals) to teach in the second part to make the
flores of gold and silver, those of gold being dispatched; there follows now
in order after the gold, to speak also of silver and of its preparation, which
is to be thus performed.

Take of thin laminated or small granulated fine silver as much as you please,
put it into a little separating glass body, and pour upon it twice as much in
weight of rectified spirit of salt nitre, and the spirit of salt nitre will
presently begin to work upon the silver and to dissolve it. But when it will
not dissolve any more in the cold, then you must put the glass body into warm
sand or ashes, and the water will presently begin to work again; let the glass
stand in the warm ashes, until all the silver be dissolved. Then put the
solution out of the little glass body, into another such as is cut off at the
top, and put on a little head or Limbeck, and in sand abstract the moity of the
spirit of salt nitre from the dissolved silver; then let the glass body remain
in the sand till it be cool; after take it out, and let it rest for a day and
a night, and the silver will turn into white foliated crystals, from which you
must pour off the remaining solution which is not turned; and from thence
abstract again the moity of the spirit, and let it shoot or turn in a cold
place; and this abstracting and crystallising you are to reiterate, until
almost all the silver is turned to Crystals; which you must take out and lay
them upon filtring paper for to dry, and so keep it for such further use, as
hereafter shall be taught. The remaining solution, which is not crystallised,
you may in a copper vessel by adding of sweet water thereto, precipitate over
the fire into a calx, and then edulcorate and dry it, and keep it for other
use, or else melt it again into a body. Or else you may precipitate the same
with salt water, and so edulcorate and dry it; and you will have a calx, which
does melt by a gentle fire, and is of a special nature, in the spirit of urine,
of salt Armoniack, of Hartshorn, of Amber, of soot, and of hair it does easily
dissolve; and it may be prepared or turned into good medicines, as shortly in
our treating of the spirit of urine shall be taught. Or else, you may choose
not to precipitate the remaining solution of silver, but with the spirit of
urine to extract an excellent Tincture, as hereafter shall be taught.

Of the use of the crystals of silver.
THese crystals may safely be used in Physic alone by themselves 3. 6. 9. 12.
grains thereof being mixed with a little sugar, or else made up into pills; they
do purge very gently and without danger; but by reason of their bitterness they
are somewhat untoothsome to take; also, if they be not made up into pills, they
color the lips, tongue and mouth quite black (but the reason of that blackness
belongs not to this place to treat of, but shall by and by follow hereafter)
Also if they touch metals, as Silver, Copper and Tin, they make them black and
ugly, and therefore they are not much used. But if you put into the solution of
silver (before it be reduced into Crystals) half as much quicksilver as there
was of the silver, and so dissolve them together and afterward let them shoot
together, there will come forth very fair little square stones like unto
Allome, which do not melt in the air, as the former foliated ones use to do;
neither are so bitter, and they purge also quicker and better, then those tbat
are made only of silver.

How to subline the Crystals of silver into flores, and then to make a good
Medicine of the flores.
TAke of the foliated Crystals of Silver as many as you please, and upon a
grinding stone made warm first, grind as much purified and well dried salt
nitre amongst it, and lay it into your Iron distilling vessel (to the pipe
whereof there is to be applied and luted a great receiver) coals made into
powder two inches high, and make a fire under it, that the vessel every where
together with the coals that are in it, become red hot. Then take off the lid,
and with a ladle throw in at once of your Crystals of silver i. yea more or
less, according as you think that your receiver in regard of its bigness is
able to bear. This done, presently put on the lid, and the salt nitre together
with the crystals of silver will be kindled by the coals that lie on the
bottom of the vessel, and there will come forth a white silver fume through
the pipe into the receiver, and after a while when the cloud is vanished in the
receiver, cast in more, and continue this so long, until all your prepared
silver is cast in; then let it cool, amd take off the receiver, and pour into
it good Alcolized spirit of wine, and wash the flores with it out of the
receiver, and proceed further with them, as above you have been taught to
proceed with the gold, and you will get a greenish liquor, which is very good
for the brain.

Take the coals out of the distilling vessel, and make them into fine powder,
and wash them out with water, to the end that the light cole-dust may be got
from it, and you will find much silver dust (or a great many little silver
grains) which the salt nitre could not force over, which you may reduce, for
it will be good silver.

There can also be made a very good medicine out of the crystals of silver,
which will be little inferior to the former, whereby the diseases and
infirmities of the brain may be very well remedied, which is done thus:

How to make a green oil out of silver.
Pour upon Crystals of silver twice or thrice as much (in weight) of the
strongest spirit of salt Armoniack, put it in a glass with a long neck well
closed, into a very gentle warmth for the space of 8. or 14, days in
digestion, and the spirit of salt Armoniack will be tinged with a very fair
blew color from the silver, then pour it off, and filtre it through brown
paper, and then put it in a little glass retort or glass body, and abstract in
Balneo by a gentle fire, almost all the spirit of salt Armoniack (which is
still good for use) and there will remain in the bottom a grass green liquor,
which is to be kept for a medicine.

But in case, that you should miss, and abstract too much of the spirit from
the Tincture of silver, so that the Tincture be quite dry, and turned to a
green salt, then you must pour upon it again as much of the spirit of salt
Armoniack, as will dissolve the green salt again to a green liquor, but if you
desire to have the Tincture purer yet, then abstract all moystness from it, to
a stony dryness: upon which you must pour good spirit of wine, which will
quickly dissolve the stone, and then filtre it, and there will remain faeces,
and the Tincture will be fairer: from which you must abstract most of the
spirit of wine, and the Tincture will be so much the higher in virtue. But if
you please, you may distill that green salt or stone (before it be extracted
once again with spirit of wine) in a little glass-retort, and you will get a
subtle spirit and a sharp oil, and in the bottom of the retort there
remains a very fusile silver which could not come over.

It is to be admired, that when you pour spirit of salt Armoniack or spirit of
wine upon that stone for to dissolve it, that the glass comes to be so cold by
it, that you harldyare able to endure it in your hand, which coldness in my
opinion comes from the silver (being so well unlockt) which naturally is cold.

The use of the green liquor in Alchymy, and for Mechanical operations.
THis green liquor serves not only for a medicine, but also for other Chemical
operations (for both Copper and glass may be easily and very fairly silvered
over therewith) very useful for those that are curious and love to make a show
with fair household stuff; for if you get dishes, trencher plates, salters, cups
and other vessels made of glass, after the same fashion as those of silver use
to be made, you may very easily and without any considerable charge silver them
over therewith within and without, so that by the eye they cannot be discerned
from true silver plate.

Besides the above related good medicines, there may be made an other and
especial good one out of the crystals of silver, viz. dissolving and digesting
them (for a space of time) with the universal water, which has been distilled
by nature it self; and is known to every body: and after its digesting for a
short time, and change into several colors, there will be found a pleasant
essence, which is not so bitter as the above described green liquor, which is
not brought yet by heat to ripeness and maturation.

N. B. In this sweet universal Menstruum, there can also all other metals by a
small heat and the digestion of a long time be ripened and fitted for medicines
(having first been reduced into their vitriols and salts) and then they are no
more dead bodies, but by this preparation have recovered a new life, and are no
more the metals of the covetous, but may be called, the metals of the
Philosophers and of the Physicians.

Besides Physic or physical use.
LAstly there may be many pretty things more effected (besides the medicinal
use) by means of the Crystals of silver, viz. when you dissolve them in
ordinary sweet rain water, you can dye beards, hair, skin, and nails of men
or beasts into carnation or pinck red, brown and black according as you have
put more or less thereof in the water; or else, according as the hair was more
or less times wetted therewith, whereby the aspect of man and beast (which
sometimes in several occasions may not be contemned) is changed, so that they
cannot be known.

This coloring or dye may be also performed with Lead or Mercury no less then
with silver, but otherwise prepared, whereof in the fourth part.

Now I have taught how to make flores and tinctures of gold and silver by the
help of the acid spirit of Nitre. There may be many other medicines taught to
be made out of them, but in regard that they belong not to this place, they
shall be reserved for other places of this second, and also for the other
following parts.

As by the help of the spirit of Nitre good medicines can be made out of gold
and silver; so the like may be done out of other inferior metals. But in
regard that their description is fitter for other places of this book, I do
omit them here. Yet nevertheless I thought good, to describe one preparation of
every metal, and after the silver there follows now the copper.

A medicine out of copper externally to be used.
DIssolve burnt plates of copper in spirit of salt, and abstract the spirit
again from thence to a dryness, but not too hard, and there will a green mass
remain behind, which you may cast in by little and little, and so distill it,
as of silver has been taught. It does yield a strong and powerful spirit and
flores also for outward use in putrid wounds to lay a good ground thereby for
the healing.

A medicine out of iron or steel.
IN the same manner you may proceed with iron and steel* and there will remain
behind a good crocus of a great stipticity or astringency, especially out of
iron or steel, and may with good success be mixed with ointments and plasters.

Of Tin and Lead.
IF Tin or Lead be dissolved therein, after the abstracting of part of the
spirit, they will shoot into clear and sweet crystals. But Tin is not so
easily dissolved as lead; both may safely be used for medicines. Also there may
be spirits and flores got out of them by distilling. The rehearsing of the
preparation is needless, for what for the preparing of silver has been taught,
is to be understood also of other metals.

The use of the crystals of Lead and Tin.
THe crystals of lead are admirably good to be used in the plague for to
provoke sweating and expel the venom out of the body; they may also with
credit be used in the bloody flux. Externally dissolved in water, and clothes
dipped therein and applied they excellently cool and quench all inflammations, in
what part of the body so ever they do befall. Likewise the spirit thereof used
per se (and the flores mixed among ointments) do their part sufficiently.

But the crystals of Tin do not prove altogether so quick in operation, though
they do act their part also, and they are more pleasant then those that are
made of Lead; for in Tin there is found a pure sulphur of gold; but in Lead a
white sulphur of silver, as is proved in my Treatise of the Generation and
nature of metals.

Of Mercury.
When you dissolve common Mercury in rectified spirit of Nitre, and abstract
the spirit from it again, then there will remain behind a fair red
glistering precipitate; but when the spirit is not rectified, it will not be so
fair, because that the impurity of the spirit remains with the Mercury and
pollutes it. This calcinated Mercury is called by some Mercurius praecipitatus,
and by others Turbith minerale, wherewith the Surgeons and sometimes one or
other unskilful Physicians do cure the pox; they do give at once 6. 8. 10.
grains (more or less) according to its preparation and force in operation to
the patient; for if the spirit be not too much abstracted from it, it works
much stronger, then when by a strong fire it is quite separated from it; for
the spirits that remain with the Mercury make it quick and active which else
without the spirits would not be such.

The other metals also, if they be not first made soluble by salts or spirits,
can perform either none or but very small operation, unless it be Zinck or Iron,
which being easily soluble are able to work without any foregoing dissolution,
as has been shown above, when we treated of the oil of vitriol. But that the
sharp spirits are the cause of that operation, may hence be perceived and made
manifest; that although you take ss. of quicksilver and pour it down into the
stomach, yet it would run out again beneath, as above it was poured in. But if
it be prepared with the spirits or salts, then but few grains of it will work
strongly, and the more it is made soluble, the stronger it works, as you may
see when it is sublimed from salt and vitriol, that it grows so strong
thereby that one grain does work more then eight or ten grains of Turbith
Mineral, and three or four grains thereof would kill a man by reason of its
mighty strength. Also it works extremely and much more then the sublimate,
when it is dissolved in spirit of Nitre and crystallised, so that you cannot
well take it upon your tongue without danger. Which some perceiving, evaporate
the Aqua fortis by a gentle heat from it, so that the Mercurius remained
yellow, which in a smaler dose wrought more then the red, from which the
spirits were quite evaporated. And they used it not only externally strewing it
into impure sores, for to corrode or fret away the proud flesh, not without
great pain to the patient: but also without distinction of young or old gave
it inwardly for to purge; which is one of the most hurtful purges that can be
used. For this evil guest, however he be prepared, cannot leave his tricks,
unless it be reduced into such a substance, as that it never can be brought
back to a running Mercury, for then much good can be done therewith in physic
without any hurt or prejudice to the health of man, whereof perchance something
more shall be said in another place.

I cannot omit for the benefit of young innocent children, to discover a great
abuse. For it is grown very common almost among all that deal in physic, that
as soon as a little child is not well before they know whether it will be
troubled with worms or with any thing else, they presently fall upon Mercury,
supposing that in regard it has no taste, it be so much the better for to get
the children to take it for to kill the worms.

But those men do not know the hurtful nature of it, which it does show against
the sinews and nerves: For some are of opinion, that if they know to prepare
Mercury so, that it can be given in a greater dose (as is to be seen in
sublimed Mercurius dulcis) that then it is excellently prepared: but they are
in a great error, and it were much better, it were not so well prepared, that
the less hurt might be done to man, in regard that then they durst not give it
in so great a dose. For if that which is prepared with Aqua fortis or spirit of
salt nitre be used in the pox to men that are advanced in years, it cannot do
so much hurt, because it is given in a small dose, and does work with them,
whereby nature gets help for to overcome and expel that hurtful venom, and its
malignity is abated by the strong salivation, which the provident nature has
planted in it, so that not so much mischief can come by it, as by Mercurius
dulcis, whereof is given to little weak children from ten to thirty grains at
once, which commonly (unless they be of a strong nature, and do grow it out)
does cause a weakness and lameness in their limbs, so that (if they do not come
to be quite lame at last) they have a long time to struggle withal, till they
overcome it.

In like manner those also do err, which do shake Mercury in water or beer so
long until the water come to be gray-coloured, and so give that water or beer
to little children to drink for the worms, pretending that they do not give
the substance or body of Mercury, but only its virtue. But this gross
preparation is no better then if they had ministered the running Mercury it
self. Neither have I ever seen, that the use of Mercurius dulcis or of the gray
colored water was seconded with good success in killing of the worms. But it
is credible, that it may be done by yellow or red precipitate, in regard of its
strong operation. But who would be such an enemy to his child, as to plague
and torture it with such a hurtful and murdering medicine; especially there
being other medicines to be had, which do no harm to the children, as is to be
found by iron or steel, and the sweet oil of vitriol.

And so much of the abuse of Mercury: I hope it will be a good warning unto
many, so that they will not so easily billet such a tyrannical guest in any
ones house, whereby the ruin thereof of necessity must follow. And that cure
deserves no praise at all, whereby one member is cured with the hurt of two or
three other members. As we see by the pox, when one infected member is cured by
Mercury, and that but half and not firm at all, that all the rest of the body
is endangered thereby for the future. And therefore it would be much better
that such crude horse-physick might be severed from good medicaments, and such
used instead of them, as may firmly, safely, and without prejudice to other
parts perform the cure of which kind several are taught in this book. But in
case that you have patients, which have been spoiled by such an ill-prepared
Mercury, then there is no better remedy to restore them, then by medicines made
of metals, wherewith Mercury has great affinity, as of gold and silver: for
when they are often used, they attract the Mercury out of all the members, and
carry it along with them out of the body, and so do rid the body thereof. But
externally the precipitated Mercury may more safely be used, then internally,
in case there be nothing else to be had, viz. to corrode or eat away the proud
flesh out of the wound. But if in stead of it there should be used the
corrosive oil of Antimony, Vitriol, Allom or common salt it would be better,
and the cure much the speedier, and it would be better yet, that in the
beginning good medicaments were used to fresh wounds, and not by carlesness to
reduce them to that ill condition, that afterward by paineful corrosives they
must be taken away. But such a Mercury would serve best of all for soldiers,
beggars and children that go to school, for if it be strewed upon the head of
children, or into their clothes, no louse will abide there any longer. In which
case Mercury must by his preparation not be made red, but only yellow, and it
must be used warily, and not be strewed on too thick, lest the flesh be
corroded, which would be the occasion of great mischief.

Of Aqua fortis.
OUt of Salt nitre and vitriol, taking of each a like quantity, or (if the
water is to be not altogether so strong) two parts of vitriol to one part of
salt nitre, a water distilled is good to dissolve metals therewith, and to
separate them from one another; as gold from silver and silver from gold, which
in the fourth part punctually shall be taught.

The Aqua fortis serves also for many other Chemical operations to dissolve
and fit metals thereby, that they may be reduced the easier into medicaments:
but because the spirit of salt nitre and the Aqua fortis are almost all one and
have like operations: for if the Aqua fortis be dephlegmed and rectified, you
may perform the same operations with it, which possibly may be performed with
the spirit of salt nitre; and on the other side the spirit of salt nitre will
do all that can be done with the Aqua fortis; whereof in the fourth part shall
be spoken more at large.

Now I know well that ignorant laborators (which do all their work according to
custom, without diving any further into the nature of things, will count me an
Heretic (because I teach, that the Aqua fortis made of vitriol and salt nitre
is of the same nature and condition with the spirit of salt nitre, which is
made without vitriol) saying that the Aqua fortis does partake likewise of the
spirit of vitriol, betause vitriol also is used in the preparation of it. To
which I answer, that although vitriol be used in the preparation of it, yet for
all that in the distilling, nothing or but very little of its spirit comes over
with the spirit of salt nitre, and that by so small a heat it cannot rise so
high, as the spirit of salt nitre does: and the vitriol is added only
therefore unto the salt nitre, that he may hind, its melting together, and so
the more facilitate its going into a spirit. And for the more to be convinced
of this truth, the unbelieving may add to such spirit of salt nitre, as is
made by it self, a little of oil of vitriol likewise made by it self, and try
to dissolve silver gilded with it, and he will find that his spirit of salt
nitre by the spirit of vitriol is made unfit to make a separation; for it
preyeth notably upon the gold, which is not done by Aqua fortis.

Of the sulphurized spirit of salt nitre.
THere can also be made a spirit of salt nitre with sulphur, which is still in
use with many, viz. that they take a strong earthen retort, which has a pipe
at the top, and fasten it into a furnace, and having put salt nitre in i^, they
let it melt, and then through the pipe they throw pieces of sulphur of the
bigness of a pea one after another, which being kindled, together with the
nitre does yield a spirit called by some spirit of salt nitre, and by others
oil of sulphur, but falsely; for it is neither of both, in regard that metals
cannot be dissolved therewith as they are done with other spirit of salt nitre
or sulphur; neither is there any great use for it in physic, and if it were
good for any Chemical operations, by the help of my distilling instrument might
easily be made and in great quantity.

N B. But if salt nitre be mixed with sulphur in due proportion, and in the
first furnace be cast upon quick coals, then all will be burnt, and a strong
spirit comes over, whose virtue is needless here to describe; but more shall
be mentioned of it in another place.

Of the Clissus.
AMong the Physicians of this latter age, there is mention made of another
spirit, which they make of Antimony, Sulphur, and salt nitre, a like quantity
taken of each, which they call Clissus, and which they have in high esteem, and
not without cause, because it can do much good, if it be well prepared.

The inventor for the making thereof used a retort with a pipe, as was
mentioned by the sulphurized spirit of salt nitre, through which pipe he threw
in his mixture. And it is a good way if no better be known: but if the Author
had known my invention and way of distilling, I doubt not but he would have set
aside his, that has a nose or pipe retort, and made use of mine.

The materials indeed are good, but not the weight or proportion; for to what
purpose so great a quantity of sulphur, it being not able to burn away all with
so small a quantity of salt nitre. And if it does not burn away, but only
sublime and stop the neck of the retort, whereby the distillation is hindered,
how can it then yield any virtue? Therefore you ought to take not so much
sulphur, but only such a quantity as will serve to kindle the salt nitre, viz.
to lb i. of salt nitre four drams of sulphur: but because Antimony also is one
of the ingredients, which has likewise much sulphur (for there is no Antimony
so pure, but it contains much combustible sulphur, as in the fourth part of
this book shall be proved:) therefore it is needless to add so much sulphur unto
Antimonie, to make it burn, because it has enough of it self. And therefore I
will set down my composition, which I found to be better then the first.

Take Antimony lb i. salt nitre lb ij. sulphur iij. the materials must be made
into small powder and well mixed, and at once cast in ij. thereof, and there
will come over a sulphurous acid spirit of Antimony, which will mix it self
with the water, which has been put before in the receiver; which after the
distillation is finished must be taken out and kept close for its use. It is a
very good diaphoretick (or sweatprovoking) medicine especially in fevers, the
plague, epilepsie, and all other diseases, whose cure must be performed by
sweating. The Caput Mortuum may be sublimed into flores in that furnace, which
is described in the first part.

Of the Tartarifed spirit of nitre.
IN the very same manner there may also be distilled a good sweat-provoking
spirit out of salt nitre and Tartar, a like quantity taken of each, which is
very good to be used in the plague and malignant fevers.

The Caput Mortuum is a good melting powder for to reduce the calxes of metals
therewith; or else you may let it dissolve in a moist place to oil of Tartar.

Of the Tartarised spirit of Antimony.
A Much better spirit yet may be made of Tartar, salt nitre; and Antimony, a
like quantity being taken of each and made into fine powder, and mixed well
together, which though it be not so pleasant to take, is therefore not to be
despised. For not only in the plague and fevers, but also in all obstructions
and corruptions of blood it may be used with admiration of its speedy help.

The Caput Mortuum may be taken out, and melted in a crucible, and it will
yield a Regulus, the use whereof is described in the fourth part. Out of the
scoria or dross a red Ticture may be extracted with spirit of wine, which is
very useful in many diseases. But before you extract with spirit of wine; you
may get a red lixivium out of it with sweet water, which lixivium may be used
externally for to mend the faults of the skin and to free it from scabbiness.

Upon this lixivium if you pour Vinegar or any other acid spirit, there will
precipitate a red powder, which if it be edulcorated and dried, can be used in
physic. It is called by some Tartar auratum diaphoreticum: but it is no
Diaphoretick, but makes strong vomits, and so in case of necessity, when you
have no better medicine at hand, it may be used for a vomitory from 6. 7. 9. to
15. grains.

Also out of the scoria there can be extracted a fair Sulphur with the spirit
of urine and distilled over the Limbeck, which is very good for all diseases of
the lungs.

Of Stone-coles.
IF you mix stone-coles with a like quantity of salt nitre, and distill them,
you will get an admirable spirit and good to be used for external sores; for it
cleanses and draws the wounds together exceedingly, and there will also come
over a metallical virtue in the form of a red powder, which must be separated
from the spirit, and kept for its use. But if you cast in stone-coles alone by
themselves, and distill them, there will come over not only a sharp spirit, but
also a hot and blood red oil, which does powerfully dry and heal all running
ulcers; especially it will heal a scald-head better then any other medicine,
and it does consume also all moist and spongious excrescencies in the skin,
where ever they be: but if you sublime stone-coles in the furnace described in
the first part, there comes over an acid metallical spirit, and a great deal
of black light flores, which suddenly stanch bleeding, and used in plasters,
are as good as other metallical flores.

Of the Sulphreous spirit of salt nitre or Aqua fortis.
IF you take one part of sulphur, two parts of salt nitre, and three parts of
vitriol, and distill them, you will get a graduating Aqua fortis, which
smells strongly of sulphur; for the sulphur is made volatile by the salt nitre
and vitriol. It is better for separating of metals, then the* common Aqua
fortis.

If silver be put in, it grows black, but not fixed; some of it poured into a
solution of silver a great deal of black calx will precipitate, but does not
abide the trial. You may also abstract a strong sulphurous volatile spirit
from it, which has like virtue as well internally as externally for bathes,
and may be used like unto a volatile spirit of Vitriol or Allome.

Of the Nitrous spirit of Arsenick.
IF you take white Arsenick and pure salt nitre of eacha a like quantity ground
into fine powder, and distill them, you will get a blew spirit, which is very
strong, but no water must be put into the receiver, else it would turn white,
for Arsenick, from which the blew comes, is precipitated by the water. This
spirit dissolveth and graduateth the copper as white as silver, and makes it
malleable but not fix. The remaining Caput Mortuum makes the copper white, if
it be cemented therewith, but very brittle and unmalleable, but how to get good
silver out of Arsenick and with profit, you shall find in the fourth part. In
physic the blew spirit serves for all corroding cancrous sores, which if they
be anointed therewith, will be killed thereby, and made fit for healing.

To make aspirit of Sulphur, crude Tartar and Salt nitre.
IF you grind together one part of Sulphur, two parts of Crude Tartar, and
four parts of salt nitre, and distill it Philosopher-like, you will get a most
admirable spirit, which can play his part both in Physic and Alchymie. I will
not advise any body to distill it in a retort; for this mixture, if it grows
warm from beneath, it fulminateth like gunpowder; but if it be kindled from
above, it does not fulminate, but only burns away like a quick fire: metals
may be melted and reduced thereby.

To make a spirit out of Salt of Tartar, Sulphur, and Saltnitre.
IF you take one part of salt of Tartar, and one part and half of Sulphur, with
three parts of salt nitre, and grind them together, you will have a
composition, which fulminateh like Aurum fulminans, and the same also (after
the same manner as above has been taught with the gold) can be distilled into
flores and spirits, which are not without special virtue and operation. For
the corruption of one thing is the generation of another.

How to make a spirit of saw dust, sulphur and salt nitre.
IF you make a mixture of one part of Saw-dust made of Tilia or Linden-wood,
and two parts of good sulphur, and nine parts of purified and well dried salt
nitre, and cast it in by little and little, there will come over an acid
spirit, which may be used outwardly, for to cleanse wounds that are unclean.
But if you mix with this composition minerals or metals made into fine powder,
and then cast it in and distill it, there will come not only a powerful
metallical spirit, but also a good quantity of flores, according to the nature
of the mineral, which are of no small virtue: for the minerals and metals are
by this quick fire destroyed and reduced to a better condition* whereof many
things could be written: but it is not good to reveal all things. Consider this
sentence of the Philosophers. It is impossible to destroy without a flame. The
combustible Sulphur of the Calx, which the dug Mine does do.

Also fusible minerals and metals may not only be melted, therewith, but also
cupellated in a moment upon a Table in the hand or in a nut shel; whereby
singular proofs of oars and metals may be made and much better, then upon a
Cupel, whereof further in the fourth part of this book. Here is opened unto us
a gate to high things; if entrance be granted unto us, we shall need no more
books to look for the Art in them.

To make metallical spirits and flores by the help of salt-nitre and linen
cloth.
IF metals be dissolved in their appropriated Menstruums, and in the solution
(wherein a due proportion of salt nitre must be dissolved) fine linen rags be
dipped and dried, you have a prepared metal, which may be kindled, and (as it was
mentioned above concerning the saw dust) through the burning away and consuming
of their superfluous sulphur, the mercurial substance of the metal is
manifested. And after the distillation is ended, you will find a singular
purified calx, which by rubbing colors other metals, as that of gold does
guild silver, that of silver over-silvereth copper, and copper calx makes iron
look like copper, etc. which coloring though it cannot bring any great profit,
yet at least for to show the possibility, I thought it not amiss to describe
it: and perchance something more may be hid in it, which is not given to every
one to know.

Of Gunpowder.
OF this mischievous composition and diabolical abuse of Gunpowder much could
be written: but because this present world takes only delight in shedding
innocent blood, and cannot endure that unrighteous things should be reproved,
and good things praised, therefore it is best to be silent, and to let every
one answer for himself, when the time comes that we shall give an account of
our stewardship, which perhaps is not far off; and then there will be made a
separation of good and bad, by him that tries the heart, even as gold is
refined in the fire from its dross. And then it will be seen what Christians we
have been. We do all bear the name, but do not approve our selves to be such by
our works: every one thinks himself better then others, and for a words sake
which one understands otherwise, or takes in another sense then the other
(and though it be no point, wherein salvation does depend) one curses and
condemns another and persecuteth one another unto death which Christ never
taught us to do, but rather did earnestly command us that we should love one
another, reward evil with good, and not good with evil, as now a days every
where they use to do, every one stands upon his reputation, but the honor of
God and his command are in no repute, but are trampled under foot, and Lucifers
pride, vain ambition, and Pharisaicall hypocrisy or show of holiness, has so
far got the upper-hand with the learned, that none will leave his contumacy or
stubbornness, or recede a little from his opinion although the whole world
should be turned upside down thereby. Are not these fine Christians? By their
fruit you shall know them, and not by their words. Woolves are now clothed with
sheeps skins, so that none of them almost are to be found, and yet the deeds
and works of Woolves are every where extant.

All good manners are turned into bad, women turn men, and men women in their
fashion and behavior, contrary to the institution and ordinance of God and
Nature. In brief, tke world goes on crutches. If Heraclitus and Democritus
should now behold this present world, they would find exceeding great cause
for their lamenting and laughing at it. And therefore it is no marvel, that God
sent such a terrible scourge as the gunpowder is upon us; and it is credible,
that if this do not cause our amendment, that a worse will follow, viz. thunder
and lightning falling down from heaven, whereby the world shall be turned upside
down for to make an end of all pride, self-love, ambition, deceit and vanity.
For which the whole creature does wait, fervently desiring to be delivered
from the bondage thereof.

Now this preparation, which is the most hurtful poison, a terror unto all the
living, is nothing else but a sulmen terrestre denouncing unto us the wrath and
coming of the Lord. For Christ for to judge the world is to come with
thundering and lightning: and this earthly thunder perchance is given us for to
put us in mind and fear of that which is to come; but this is not so much as
thought on by men, who prepare it only for to plague and destroy mankind
therewith in a most cruel and abominable manner, as every one knows.

For none can deny but that there is no nimbler poison, then this gunpowder. It
is written of the Basiliske, that he kills man only by his look, which a man
may avoid, and there are but few (if any at all) of them found: but this poison
is now prepared and found every where.

How often does it fall out, that a place wherein this powder is kept is
stricken with thunder as with its like, in so much that all things above it are
in a moment destroyed, and carried up into the air? Also in sieges, when an
Ordnance is discharged, or mines blown up, all whom it lays hold on, are
suddenly killed, and most miserably destroyed. What nimbler poison then could
there be invented? I believe there is none, who will not acknowledge it to be
such.

And seeing that the ancient Philosophers and Chemists were always of opinion,
that the greater the poison is, the better medicine may be made of it, after it
is freed from the poison, which with us their posterity proved true by many
experiences; as we see by Antimony, Arsenick, Mercury, and the like minerals,
which without preparation are mere poison, but by due prepartion may be turned
into the best and most effectual medicaments, which though not every one can
comprehend or believe, yet your Chemists know it to be true, and the doing of
it is no new thing to them. And because I treat in this second part of
medicinal spirits, and other good medicaments, and finding that this which can
be made out of the gunpowder, is none of the least, I would not omit in some
measure, and as far as lawfully may be done, to set down its preparation: which
is thus performed.

How to make a spirit of Gunpowder.
YOur distilling vessel being made warm, and a great receiver with sweet water
in it, being applied to it without luting, put a dish with gunpowder,
containing about 12. or 15. grains a piece, one after another into it; in the
same manner as above was taught to do with gold. For if you should put in too
much of it at once, it would cause too much wind and break the receiver.

As soon as you have conveyed it into the vessel, shut the door, and the
gunpowder will kindle, and give a blast that it makes the receiver stir, and a
white mist or steam will come over into the receiver. As soon as the powder is
burnt, you may cast in more before the mist is settled, because else the
distilling of it would cost too much time, and so you may continue to do until
you have spirit enough. Then let the fire go out, and the furnace grow cool,
and then take off the receiver, pour the spirit with the water that was poured
in before (the flores being first every where washed off with it) out of the
receiver into a glass body, and rectify it in a B. through a limbeck, and
there will come over a muddy water, tasting and smelling of sulphur: which you
must keep. In the glass body you will find a white salt, which you are to keep
likewise in the glass-body. Take out the Caput Mortuum, which remained in the
distilling vessel, and looks like gray salt, calcine it in a covered crucible,
that it turn white, but not that it melt; and upon this burnt or calcined salt,
pour your stinking water, which came over through the limbeck, and dissolve the
calcined white salt with it, and the feces which will not dissolve cast away.
Filtre the solution, and pour it upon the white salt, which remained in the
glass body, from which the sulphurous spirit was abstracted before, and put
the glass body (with a limbeck luted upon it) into sand, and abstract the
sulphurous water from it, which will be yellowish, and smell more of sulphur
then it did before. This water if it be abstracted from the salt several times,
will turn white, almost like unto milk, and taste no more of sulphur, but be
pleasant and sweet. It is is very good for the diseases of the lungs. Also it
does guild silver, being anointed therewith, although not*firmely, and by
digestion it may be ripened and reduced into a better medicine.

The salt which remained in the glass body, urge with a strong fire, such as
will make the sand, wherein the glass stands red hot, and there will sublime
a white salt into the limbeck, in taste almost like unto salt Armoniack, but in
the the midst of the glass body, you will find another, which is yellowish, of
a mineral taste and very hot upon the tongue.

These sublimed salts, as well the white which did ascend into the limbeck, as
the yellow, which remained in the glass body are good to be used in the plague,
malignant fevers and other diseases, where sweating is required; for they do
mightily provoke sweating, they comfort and do cleanse the stomach, and cause
sometimes gentle stools.

But what further may be done in Physic with it, I do not know yet.

In Alchymie it is also of use, which does not belong to this place upon the
remaining salt which did not sublime you may pour rain water, and dissolve it
there in the glass body, (if it be whole still) else if it be broken, you may
take out the salt dry, and dissolve and filtre and coagulate it again, and
there will be separated a great deal of saeces. This purified salt, which will
look yellowish, melt in a covered crucible, and it will turn quite blood red,
and as hot as fire upon the tongue, which with fresh water you must dissolve
again, and then filtre and coagulate; by which operation it will be made pure
and clear, and the solution is quite green before it be coagulated, and as
fiery as the red salt was before its dissolution.

This grass green solution being coagulated again into a red fiery salt, it may
be melted again in a clean and strong crucible, and it will be much more red
and fiery.

N. B. And it is to be admired, that in the melting of it many fiery sparks do
fly from it, which do not kindle or take fire, as other sparks of coals or
wood use to do. This well purified red salt being laid in a cold and moist
place, will dissolve into a blood red oil, which in digestion dissolveth gold
and leaves the silver: this solution may be coagulated, and kept for use in
Alchymie.

There may also a precious Tincture be extracted out of it with alcolized
spirit of wine, which Tincture guildeth silver, but not firmly.

And as for use in Physic, it ought to be kept as a great Treasure. But if the
red fiery salt be extracted with spirit of wine before gold be dissolved
therewith, it will yield likewise a fair red Tincture, but not so effectual in
Physic as that unto which gold is joined. And this Tincture can also further
be used in Alchymie, which belongs not hither, because we only speak of
medicaments.

Of the use of the medicine or Tincture made of the Gunpowder.
THis Tincture whether with or without gold, made out of the red salt, is one
of the chiefest that I know to make, if you go but rightly to work, and prepare
it well: for it purifieth and cleanses the blood mightily, and provokes also
powerfully sweat and urine; so that it may safely and with great benefit be
used in the plague, fevers, epilepsie, scurvy, in Melancholia Hypochondriaca,
in the gout, stone, and the several kinds of them; as also in all obstructions
of the spleen and liver: and in all diseases of the lungs, and it is to be
admired that of such a hurtful thing such a good medicine can be prepared.
Therefore it would be much better to prepare good medicaments of it, to restore
the poor diseased to health there with, then to destroy with it those that are
whole and sound.

I know a Chemist, that spent much time and cost to search this poisonous
dragon, thinking to make the universal medicine or stone of the ancient
Philosophers out of it. Especially because he saw, that so many strange changes
of colors appeared, whereof mention is made by the Philosophers when they
describe their medicine and the preparation thereof.

The dragons blood, Virgins milk, green and red lion, black blacker then
black, white whiter then white, and the like more needless here to relate,
which easily may persuade a credulous man as it happened also unto him. But
afterward he found, that this subject in which he put so much confidence, was
leprous and not pure enough, and that it be impossible to to make that tingent
stone of it, for to exalt men and metals, and so was glad to be contented with
a good particular medicine and to commit the rest unto God.

And so much of that poisonous dragon the gunpowder* but that there is another
and more purer dragon, whereof the Philosophers so often made mention, I do not
deny: for nature is mighty rich, and could reveal us many Arcana by Gods
permission: But because we look only for great honor and riches, and neglect
the poor, there is good reason why such things remain hidden from the wicked
and ungodly men.

To make spirits and flores of Nitre and Coals.
IF you distill Nitre (well purified from its superfluous salt) mixed with good
coals, the Egyptian Sun bird does burn away, and out of it does sweat a
singular water, useful for men and metals. Its burnt ashes are like unto
calcined Tartar, and for the purging of metals not to be despised.

To make flores and spirits of flints, crystals or sand, by adding of coals
and salt nitre to them.
TAke one part of flints or sand, and three parts of Linden coals, with six
parts of good salt nitre mixed well together, and cast of it in, and the
combustible sulphur of the flints will be kindled by the piercing and vehement
fire of the salt nitre, and makes a separation, carrying over with it part
thereof, which it turns into spirits and flores, which must be separated by
filtring. The spirit tastes as if it had been made of salt Tartar and flints,
and is of the same nature and condition; and the remaining Caput Mortuum also
yeildeth such an oil or liquor in all like unto that, and therefore its
condition is not described here, but you may find it where I shall treat of
the spirit made of salt tartar by adding of flints.

To make a spirit and oil out of Talck with salt nitre.
TAke one part of Talck made into fine powder, and three parts of
Linden-coales, mix them with five or six parts of good salt nitre, cast in of
that mixture one spoonful after another, and there will come over a spirit and
a few flores, which must be separated as has been taught above concerning
flints.

The spirit is not unlike unto the spirit of sand: the Caput Mortuum, which
looks grayish, must be made red hot or burnt well in a crucible, so that it
melt, and then power it out, and it will yield a white transparent Massa, like
as the flints and crystals do, which in a cold moist cellar will turn to thick
liquor, fatter in the handling then the oil of sand. It is something sharp
like unto oil of Tartar; it cleanses the skin, hair and nails, and makes
them white; the spirit may be used inwardly for to provoke sweat and urine:
externally usedit cleanses wounds, and heals all manner of scabs in the body
out of hand. What further may be done with it, I do not know yet: But how to
bring Talck, pebles and the like stony things to that pass, that they may be
dissolved with spirit of wine and reduced into good medicaments shall be taught
in the fourth part.

To make a spirit, flores, and an oil out of Tin.
IF you mix two parts of the filings of Tin, with one part of good salt nitre,
and cast it in, as you were taught to do with other things, then the sulphur of
Tin will kindle the salt nitre, and make a flame, as if it were done with
common sulphur, whereby a separation is made, so that one part of the Tin
comes over in flores and spirit, and the rest stays behind, which if it be
taken out, some of it in a moist place will turn into a liquor or oil, which
externally may be used with good success in all ulcers for to cleanse them. It
has also the virtue, if it be pertinently applied to graduate and exalt
wonderfully all the colors of vegetables and animals, which would be useful
for dyers. The spirit of it mightily provokes sweating: the flores being
edulcorated and used in plasters, do dry and heal very speedily.

To make a spirit, flores and a liquor out of Zinck or speauter.
IN like manner as has been taught with the Tin, you may also proceed with the
Zinck, and it will yield a good deal of flores, and also a spirit and oil,
almost of the same virtues with those made of Tin: and these flores corrected
with sale nitre, are better then those which were taught to be made by
themselves in the first part of the book.

To make a spirit, flores and oil of Lapis Calaminaris.
Mix two parts of salt nitre with one part of lapis calamiaris and cast it in,
and it will yield a sharp spirit very useful for separating of metals, and
there will come over also a few yellow flores. The rest remaining behind is a
dark green Mass very fiery upon the tongue, like salt of Tartar, and if it be
dissolved with rain water, yeildeth a grass green solution, which being not
presently coagulated into salt, the green separateth it self from the fixed
salt nitre, and there falls to the bottom a fine red powder, and if it be
edulcorated and dried, and given in from one grain to ten or twelve it causes
gentle stools and vomits, better then prepared Antimony; for lapis calaminaris
and Zinck are of the nature of gold, as in the fourth part shall be proved: the
white lixivium or lie, from which the green is precipitated, may be coagulated
into white salt, like unto salt of Tartar; but if you coagulate the green
solution, before the green be separated from the salt nitre, then you will get
a very fair green salt, high in color and much more fiery then salt of
Tartar, whereby special things can be done in Alchymy, which does not belong
hither. And if you desire to make such a green salt for to use it in Alchymie,
you need not to take so much pains, as first to distill a spirit out of the
mixture, but take three or four parts of good salt nitre, and mix it with one
part of lapis calaminaris, and let this mixture boil together in a wind
furnace, till the salt nitre be colored green by the lapis calaminaris, then
power it out and separate the green goldish salt from it, and make such good
use of it as you think fit.

But if you will extract a good Tincture and Medicine, make it into powder, and
extract it with spirit of wine, and it will yield a blood red Tincture, both in
Physic und Alchymie of good use.

Further you are to take notice, that among all metals and minerals, which I
know (except gold and silver) there is none found, out of which can be
extracted a greenness which is of fire proof, but only out of lapis
calaminaris, which deserves to be well considered and further thought upon.

To make a spirit of salt nitre, sulphur and common salt.
TAke one part of fast, two parts of sulphur, and four parts of salt nitre,
grind all together, and cast in one spooneful after another to distill, and it
will yield a sharp yellow spirit, which if it be put among common water, so
that the water be not made too sharp of it, it is a good bath, good for many
diseases; especially it heals all scabs very suddenly. The Caput Mortuum may
also be dissolved in water and used among bathes, and it is good likewise, but
the spirit is penetrating, and does operate suddenly in shrinkings and other
defects of the nerves, of such kind of bathes there shall be spoken more in
the third part. Also the remaining fixed yellow salt is good to be used in
Alchymie: for it graduateth somewhat the silver by cementing.

To make a spirit, flores and oil out of salt nitre and Regulus Martis.
TAke one part of Regulus Martis setellatus (made of one part of Iron or
steel, and three parts of Antimony whose preparation is described in the
fourth part) and three parts of pure salt nitre, mix and grind all together,
and cast it in by little and little to distill, and there will come over a
spirit together with a white sublimate, which must be separated with water, as
has been taught above with other flores and both the spirit and and the flores
are good to provoke sweat. The remaining Caput Mortuum (as they usually call
it) is not dead, but full of life and virtue, whereby much good may be done
both in Physic and Alchymie, as follows. The remaining Mass, which looks
white, and is very sharp and fiery (if the Regulus have been pure, if not,
then it will look yellowish) may be edulcorated with fresh water, and it will
yield a lixivium or lie in all like unto calcined Tartar, but sharper and
purer, and may be used almost in all operations in stead of salt of Tartar (but
first the Regulus Antimonii must be precipitated from it by the help of water)
and afterward it may be coagulated into salt and kept for its use; the
edulcorated, as also that which was precipitated with water is a white and fine
powder, useful in the plague, fevers, and other diseases to provoke sweating
thereby, and may very safely be used, and although if it be given in a greater
quantity then usual, it do cause some vomits also, yet for all that it does no
hurt. It is easily taken because it has no taste. It is given to children from
3. 4. to 12. grains: to elder folks from ss. to ss. they work successefully
in all diseases, where sweating is needful. This Antimonium diaphoreticum, may
also be melted into glass, and so extracted and dissolved with spirit of salt,
and it may be prepared into several good medicaments: and if all that which may
be done with it, should be described at large, it would require too much time.
The lixivium, if it be coagulated, has wonderful virtues, so that if one
should describe them, he would hardly be credited by any body, because it is
not made of costly things; and truly the life of man is too short to find out
by experience all that lies hid in it: and it would be but a laughing matter to
a proud fool, if one should reveal it: therefore it is better to keep counsel,
then to sow strife. Basilius Valentinus in his Triumph of Antimony, where he
writes of the signed star, hinted it sufficiently, but very few take notice of
it. Paracelsus also, here and there in his books under an unknown name, makes
frequent mention of it; but its true preparation and use, by reason of the
unthankeful was never described by the Philosophers, which for instruction of
good honest men we do here mention.

Before you edulcorate the Regulus (made by fulmination) you may extract of it
a good medicinal Tincture with spirit of wine, and if you dissolve it with
spirit of salt, there will shoot a white foliated Talck in all like unto the
Mineral Talck: whereof a liquor may be made, which colors the skin very
white, but if this calx of Antimony, before it be extracted with spirit of wine
or dissolved with spirit of salt be made into fine powder, and exposed to the
moist air, it will dissolve into a fat liquor, which though it be something
sharp, yet does no hurt to the skin, if it be used with discretion, but rather
cleanses it more then any other thing, and so it does likewise to the hair
and nails; but as soon as the liquor has been applied for that purpose, it
must be washed off again with water, lest it do not only take away the gross
and unclean skin, but also work upon the tender white skin and do hurt, and
therefore I give warning, that you use it discreetly: for according to the old
proverb, you may misuse even that which else is good in it self. If you put
some of it into warm water and bath your self in it, the gross skin will peele
off all the body, so that you will almost seem to be another body. And this
bath also is good for many diseases: for it opens the pores mightily, and
cleanses all the blood in the body, by drawing many ill humors out of it,
which makes a man light and strong, especially if he be purged first, before
he uses the bath. It is also good for Melancholy, scurvy and leprosy,
especially when the red Tincture drawn out of it with spirit of wine, be used
besides. It is also good to be used in a foot bath for those that are troubled
with corns and other excrescencies upon their feet, or with nails that cut the
flesh; for it softeneth them and makes them fit for cutting, and as tractable
as wax. For there is nothing known under the Sun, which softneth more a hard
skin, hair, nails and other excrescencies, then this oil. And this I did set
down therefore, because I know, that many are so tormented therewith, that they
cannot well endure their shoes upon their feet. But if you coagulate this oil
into salt, and melt it in a crucible, and power it out into a flat brass basin,
that it flow at large and may be broken, then you have the best Causticum, to
open the skin withal where is need. If you dissolve crude Tartar with it and
coagulate it again, you will get a salt which is useful in many Chemical
operations; and there may be extracted out of it a blood red Tincture with
spirit of wine, which proves very effectual against all obstructions.

Also every combustible sulphur can be easily dissolved with it, and used among
bathes, it acts his part admirably. If any oil of spices be boiled
therewith, then the oil will dissolve in it, and they turn together to a
balsome, which does mingle it self with water, and is good to be taken inwardly
for some infirmities: but women with child must not meddle with it, because it
makes them miscarry. But after their delivery, it is good to expel after
burden and other relics. But if you boil Oleum ligni Rhodii with this
liquor and rose water so long till the oil do incorporate with the liquor and
waters and then separate the watery substance from it, you will get a soap as
white as snow, which may be used for to wash the hands with it, and it does
smell very well. You may also wash the head with it; for it strengthens the
brain and cleanses the head and hair. This soap may be distilled, and it
will yield a penetrating oil, very good for the sinews and nerves.

Now as this liquor of Regulus Antimonii softneth the skin, nails, hair,
feathers, horns, and the like, and dissolveth them more then any thing in the
world: In the like manner also it has power to dissolve not only metals, but
also the hardest stones, but not in that manner which is done by boiling, and
was mentioned by the sulphur, but after another way, which is not proper for
this place. It suffices that I hinted it. The fiery fixed salt nitre can be
dissolved with spirit of salt or vinegar, and sublimed into a Terra foliata.
What further can be effected with it, does not belong to this place, and
perchance some where else more shall be spoken of it.

To distill Butyrum out of Antimony, Salt and vitriol, like unto that, which is
made out of Antimony and Mercury sublimate.
TAke one part of crude Antimony, two parts of common salt, and four parts of
vitriol calcined white, beat all to powder and mix them well, and so cast it in
as you were taught to do with other materials, and there will come over a thick
oil of Antimony like butter, which may be rectified like any other oil, that
is made after the common way with Mercury sublimate, and is also the same with
it in use, which use you may see in the first part: the same also can be made
better and in a greater quantity in the furnace described in the first part,
and also with less coals and time by the help of the open fire, because it
endures greater heat then in the second furnace.

To distill Butyrum of Arsenick and Orpiment.
AFter the same manner as was taught with Antimony, there may also out of
Arsenick and Auripigment together with salt and vitriol a thick oil be
distilled, which not only outwardly but also inwardly is safe to be used, and
may be so corrected, that it shall be nothing at all inferior in virtue unto
the butyrum Antimonii, but rather go beyond it: which perchance will seem
impossible to many. But he that knows the nature and condition of minerals,
will not be astonished at my words, but they will be to him as a light in a
dark place.

To make a rare spirit of vitriol.
IF common vitriol be dissolved in water, and you boil granulated Zinck in it,
all the metal and sulphur contained in the vitriol will precipitate on the
Zinck, and the solution will turn white, the precipitated matter is nothing
else, but iron, copper, and sulphur, which the salt of vitriol did contain,
and now is drawn from it by the Zinck. The reason why the metal precipitateth
out of the salt upon the Zinck, belongs to the fourth part, where you will
find it sufficiently explained; The white solution, from which the metallical
matter is separated, must be coagulated to the dryness of salt, and so by it
self a spirit distilled of it, which rises easily, and is in taste and virtue
not unlike unto common oil of vitriol, but only that this is a little purer
then the common.

Here perchance many may object: you take the green from the vitriol, which
Paracelsus does not teach, but bids us to keep it. To which I answer, that I do
not teach here to make the sweet red oil of vitriol, whereof Paracelsus has
written, but the white acid oil; which is as good, or rather much better then
the common, which is made of the common impure vitriol. To what purpose is it
that you take green vitriol to distill, whereas the green does not come over,
and although that green should come over, why should that oil be better then
the white? for the green in the common vitriol is nothing else but copper and
iron, which the salt water running through the passages of Metals did dissolve
and take into it self, and as soon as such a green vitriol feels the fire,
the green turns into red, which is nothing else but a calcined iron or
copper, which in the reducing by a strong fire and by melting is made manifest.

Paracelsus has not taught us, that we should drive over the green by the
force of the fire into a red and sweet oil, but he has showed us an other
way, which is found out by few men, whereof in the beginning of the second part
already has been made mention.

This spirit or acid oil distilled out of the purified vitriol i^ of a
pleasant sowreness, and serves for all those uses, which above by the vitriol
were described. And this process is set down only for that end, that we may
see, that when the vitriol is purified, that then it is easier distilled, and
yeildeth a more pleasant spirit, then if it be yet crude and impure.

And that such a purifying of the vitriol i^ nothing else but a precipitating
of the metal, which the water (as before said) running through the veins
thereof has assumed, is thus to be proved; dissolve any metal in its
appropriate Menstruum, whether it be done with distilled acid spirits or sharp
salts, adding common water to them, or else dry by the fire in a crucible,
according as you please, and then put into that solution another metal, such as
the dissolvent does sooner seize on, then upon that which it has assumed and
then you will find, that the dissolvent does let fall the assumed metal or
mineral, and falls upon the other, which it does sooner seize on, and dissolveth
it as being more friendly to it; Of which precipitation in the fourth part
shall be spoken more at large.

This one thing more is worthy your observation, that among all metals there is
none more soluble then Zinck, and therefore that all the other (as well in the
dry as in the wet way) may be precipitated thereby and reduced into light
calxes, in so much that the calx of gold or silver precipitated in this manner
(if so be you proceed well) retains its splendour or gloss, and is like a fine
powder wherewith you can write out of a pen.

To make a subtle spirit and pleasant oil of Zinck.
BEcause I made mention here of Zinck, I thought good not to omit, that there
may be made a penetrating spirit and wholesome oil out of it by the help of
vinegar, which is thus to be done. Take of the flores (which were taught to be
made in the first part) one part, put them into a glass (fit for digestion) and
pour upon them 8. or 10* parts of good sharp vinegar made of honey; or in want
thereof take wine vinegar, and set the glass with the flores and vinegar in a
warm place to dissolve, and the solution being performed, power off the clear,
which will look yellow, and after you have filtred it abstract the phlegm, and
there will remain a red liquor or balsome, to which you must add pure sand,
such as is well burnt, and distill it, and first there will come over an
unsavory phlegm, afterward a subtle spirit, and at last a yellow and red oil
which are to be kept by themselves separated from the spirit as a treasure for
to heal all wounds very speedily. The spirit is not inferior unto the oil,
not only for inward use to provoke sweat thereby, but also externally for the
quenching of all inflammations, and doubtless this spirit and oil is good for
more diseases, but because its further use is not known to me yet, I will not
write of it, but leave the further trial to others.

To distill a spirit and oil out of lead.
IN the same manner as was taught of the Zinck, there may be out of lead also
distilled a subtle spirit and a sweet oil, and it is done thus: Pour strong
vinegar upon Minium. or any other calx of lead, which is made per se, and not
with sulphur, let it digest and dissolve in sand or warm ashes, so long till
the vinegar be colored yellow by lead, and turned quite sweet. Then pour off
the clear solution, and pour on other vinegar, and let this like wise
dissolve, and this repeat so often, till the vinegar will dissolve no more, nor
grow sweet, then take all these solutions, and evaporate all the moisture, and
there will remain a thick sweet yellow liquor, like unto honey, if the vinegar
was not distilled, but if it was distilled and made clear, then no liquor
remains, but only a white sweet salt. This liquor or salt may be distilled
after the same manner as was taught with the Zinck, and there will come over
not only a penetrating subtle spirit, but also a yellow oil, which will not be
much, but very effectual, in all the the same uses, as of the spirit and oil
of the Zinck was taught.

N. B. This is to be observed, that for to make this spirit and oil, you need
no distilled spirit, but that it may be done as well with undistilled vinegar,
and the undistilled yields more spirit then the distilled. But if you look for
a white and clear salt, then the vinegar must be distilled, else it does not
shoot into crystals, but remains a yellow liquor like unto honey, and it is
also needless to make the solution in glasses, and by digestion continued for a
long time, but it may as well be done in a glased pot, viz. pouring the vinegar
upon the Minium in the pot, and boiling it on a coal fire; for you need not
fear that any thing of the vinegar will evaporate, in regard that the lead
keeps all the spirits, and lets only go an unsavory phlegm. You must also
continually stir the lead about with a wooden spatula, else it would turn to a
hard stone, and would not dissolve: the same must be done also when the
solution is done in glasses; and the solution after this way may be done in
three or four hours: and when both kind of solutions are done, there will be
no difference betwixt them, and I think it providently done not to spend a
whole day about that which may be done in an hour.

And if you will have this spirit and oil better and more effectual, you may
mix i. of crude Tartar made into powder with lb j. of dissolved and purified
lead, and so distill it after the same manner as you do distill it by it self,
and you will get a much subtler spirit and a better oil then if it were made
alone by it self.

To distill a subtle spirit and oil out of crude Tartar.
MAny think it to be but a small matter to make the spirit of Tartar, for they
suppose, that if they do but only put Tartar into a retort, and apply a
receiver, and by a strong fire force over a water, they have obtained their
desire: and they do not observe, that in steed of a pleasant subtle spirit,
they get but a stinking vinegar or phlegm; the pleasant spirit being gone.
Which some careful operators perceiving, they caused great receivers to be
made, supposing by that means to get the spirit. Now when they after the
distillation was done, weighed their spirits together with the remainder, they
found, that they had suffered great loss, wherefore they supposed it to be an
impossible thing, to get all the spirits, and to lose none, and indeed it is
hardly possible to be done otherwise by a retort: for although you apply a
great receiver to a small retort, and that there be also but a little Tartar in
it, and the joints being well luted, so that nothing can pass through, and
though you make also the fire never so gentle, hoping to get the spirit by that
way, yet for all that you cannot avoid danger and loss. For at last the retort
beginning to be red hot, and the black oil going, then and but then the
subtlest spirits will come forth, which either steal through the joints, or
else do break the retort or receiver, because they come in abundance and with
great force, and do not settle easily: wherefore I will set down my way of
making this most profitable, and excellent spirit.

The preparation and the use of the spirit of Tartar.
TAke good and pure crude Tartar, whether it be red or white, it matters not,
make it into fine powder, and when the distilling vessel is red hot, then cast
in with a ladle half an ounce and no more at once, and so soon as the spirits
are gone forth and setlted, cast in another ss. and this continue, till you
have spirit enough, then take out the remainder, which will look black, and
calcine it well in a crucible, and put it in a glass retort, and pour the
spirit that came over together with the black oil upon it, drive it in sand at
first gently, and the subtlest spirits will come over, and after them the
phlegm, at last a sour vinegar together with the oil, whereof you must get
each by it self. But if you desire to have the subtle spirit which came over
first, more penetrating yet, then you must take the Caput Mortuum that stayed
in the retort, and make it red hot in a crucible, and abstract the spirit once
more from it, and the calcined Tartar will keep the remaining moystness or
phlegm, and only the subtlest spirit will come over, which is of a most
penetrating quality, whereof from half a dram to an ounce taken in wine or any
other liquor provokes a quick and strong sweat, and it is a powerful medicine
in all obstructions, and most approved and often tried in the plague, malignant
fevers, scurvy, Melancholia Hypochondriaca, colic, contracture, epilepsie and
the like diseases. And not only these mentioned diseases, but also many others
more, which proceed from corrupt blood under God may successefully be cured
with it.

The phlegm is to be cast away, as unprofitable: the vinegar cleanses wounds:
the oil allayeth swelling and pains, and does cure scabs, and disperseth knobs
that are risen upon the skin, as also other excrescencies of the same, if it be
used timely, and the use thereof be continued.

N. B. If the black stinking oil be rectified from the calcined Caput Mortuum,
it will be clear and subtle, and it will not only assuage very speedily all
pains of the gout, but also dissolve and expel the conglobated gravel in the
reins, applied as a plaster or unguent. In like manner it will dissolve and
extract the coagulated Tartar in the hands, knees and feet, so that the place
affected will be freed and made whole thereby: because in such a despicable
oil there lies hid a volatile salt which is of great virtue. But if you desire
experimentally to know whether it be so, then pour upon this black stinking
oil an acid spirit, as the spirit of common salt, or of vitriol or salt nitre,
or only distilled vinegar, and the oil will grow warm and make a noise and
rise, as if Aqua fortis had been powered upon salt of Tartar, and the acid
spirit will be mortified thereby, and turn to salt. And this well purified
oil does dissolve and extract the Tartar out of the joints (unless it be grown
to a hard stony substance) even as soap scowres the uncleanness out of cloths,
or to compare it better, even as like receives its like, and is easily mixed
with it, and does love it; but on the contrary, nothing will mix it self with
that wherewith it has no affinity at all. As if you would take pitch out of
cloth by washing it with water, which never will be done by reason of the
contrary nature; for common water has no affinity with pitch or other fat
things, nor will it ever be taken out therewith without a mediator, partaking
of both natures, viz. of the nature of pitch and that of the water, and such
are sulphurous salts, and nitrous salts, whether they be fixed or volatile. As
you may see at the soape-boylers, who incorporate common water by the help of
sulphurous salts with fat things, as tallow and oil. But if you take warm
oil or any thin fat substance, and put it upon the pitch or rozin, then the
oil easily accepts of and lays hold on its like, and so the pitch is
dissolved and got out of the cloth, and the remaining fatness of the oil may
be fetched out of the cloth with lie or soap and common water, and so the cloth
recovereth its former beauty and pureness. And as it falls out with the
sulphurous things, so it does likewise with the Mercurial. For example, if you
would take the salt out of powdered flesh or pickled fish with lixivium it would
not succeed, because that the nitrous and acid salts are of contrary natures.

But if upon the powdered flesh or pickled fish you pour on water wherein some
of the same salt (wherewithal the flesh was powdered) is dissolved, that salt
water will extract the salt out of the flesh, as being its like, much more then
common sweet water, wherein there is no salt.

In this manner the hardest things also, as stones and metals, may be joined or
united with water, whereof more in my other books are extant; it is needless
here therefore to relate. I gave a hint of it, only for to show, that always
like with like must be extracted. True it is that one Contrarium can mortify
another, and take the corrosiveness from it, whereby the pains for a time are
assuaged, but whether the cause of the disease it self be eradicated thereby is
a question.

Here may be objected, that I made a difference between the sulphurous and
Mercurial salts, whereas neither Mercury nor sulphur apparently is to be seen
in either. It is true, he that does not understand nor know the nature of
salts, is not able to apprehend it. And I have not time now to demonstrate it,
but the same is showed at large in my book de Natura salium, that some of them
are sulphurous, and some Mercurial: but he that looks for a further direction
yet, let him read my book de Sympathia and Antipathia rerum, wherein he shall
find it demonstrated that from the Creation of the World to the time present,
there were always two contrary natures fighting one against the other, which
fight will continue so long till the Mediator betwixt God and Man, the Lord
Jesus Christ shall put an end unto this strife, when he shall come to separate
the good from the bad, by whose lightning and fire flame the proud and hurtful
superfluous sulphur shall be kindled and consumed; the pure Mercurial being
left in the center.

How to make precious spirits and oils out of Tartar joined with some minerals
and metals.
TAke any metal or mineral, dissolve it in a fit menstruum, mix with it a due
proportion of crude Tartar, so that the crude Tartar being made into powder
together with the solution make up a pap as it were; then at once cast in one
spoonful of it, and distill it into a spirit and oil, which after the
distillation must be separated by rectification, for to keep each by it self
for its proper use.

The use of the metallized spirit and oil of Tartar.
THis spirit of a Tartarized metal is of such a condition, that it readily
performs its operation according to the strength of the spirit, and the
nature of the metal or mineral, whereof it is made. For the spirit and oil of
gold and Tartar is good for to corroborate the heart, and to keep out its
enemies: the spirit of silver and Tartar does serve for the brain; that of
Mercury and Tartar, for the liver: of lead and tin for the spleen and lungs: of
iron and copper for the reins and seminary vessels: that of Antimony and Tartar
for all accidents and infirmities of the whole body; and these metallical
spirits made with Tartar, provoke sweat exceedingly whereby many malignities
are expelled out of the body Likewise also the oil has its operation, though
this of several metals, as of Mercury and copper, is not well to be used
inwardly, because it causes salivations and strong vomits. But externally they
are very good for to cleanse all putride ulcers, and to lay a good and firm
ground for healing them.

The remainder, whereof the spirit and oil is distilled, you may take out, and
reduce it in a crucible into a metal, so that what is not come over, may not be
lost, but made to serve again.

And as you were taught to distill spirits and oils out of dissolved metals
and crude Tartar, so you may get them likewise out of common vitriol and
Tartar, viz. thus, take one part of Tartar made into powder, two parts of good
pure vitriol, mix them well together, and distill a spirit of them, which
though it be unpleasant to take, for all that in all whatsoever obstructions
and corruption of blood it is not to be despised, but very successefully
performs its operation; especially when it is rectified from its Caput
Mortuum, and so freed from its phlegm; and its best virtue, which consists
in the volatility, be not lost in the distilling.

N. B. But if you will have this spirit more effectual, then you may join
Tartar and vitriol by boiling them together in common water, and crystallizing;
and then cast it in, and distill it, and there will come over a much purer and
more penetrating spirit; because that in the solution and coagulation of both
many faeces were separated: but if to one part of vitriol you take two parts of
Tartar, and dissolve it together and so filtre and coagulate it, then the
Tartar with the vitriol will shoot no more, but there remains a thick liquor
like unto honey, out of which with spirit of wine there may be extracted a good
tincture against obstructions. This liquor taken from i. to i. does purge very
gently, and sometimes it causes a vomit, especially if the vitriol was not
pure and good: and it may also be distilled into a spirit not inferior unto the
former in virtue. Besides the way above taught, there is yet (for to distill a
metallized spirit of Tartar) another way, whereby several metals and minerals
may be reduced into much pleasant spirits and oils, and of more virtue, and it
is done in this manner.

Take of the Tartar of white Rhenish wine made into powder, power upon it sweet
rain or running water, so that to lb j. of Tartar there come lb x. or lb xij.
of water, or so much that the Tartar may be dissolved by it in the boiling, and
then boil the mixture with the water in a tinned kettle, or which is better,
in a glased pot, until it be quite dissolved, and in the mean while take off
the skum (with a wooden skimmer) still as it rises in the boiling: and when
no more skum rises, and all the Tartar is dissolved, then power the solution
thus hot through a linen cloth, tied straight on an earth glased vessel, that
the remaining slymigness may be separated. The Tartar water being strained, let
it stand for 24. or 30. hours without stirring, and there will stick a
crystallised Tartar to the sides of the vessel, which after the water is powered
off may be taken out, and washed with cold water, and then dried. This purified
Tartar keep, until I shall teach you, what further is to be done with it; and
this Tartar is pure enough for the above said purpose, viz. to reduce metals
into oil with it, as shall follow anon. It is also good taken of it self for
an abstersive to make the body soluble. But if you desire to have it yet whiter
and fairer and in great crystals, you must proceed thus.

You must know this that all salts, if they shall shoot into great crystals,
there must be a great quantity of them, for of little there comes but little.
And if you will make great and fair white crystals of Tartar, which will be
not better then the former, but only pleasant to the eye, then you must proceed
in this manner.

Take of white Tartar made into powder about ten or thirty lb. power so much
water upon it, as is needful for to dissolve it, and boil it by a strong fire
in a tinned kettle until all the Tartar be dissolved, which you may know by
stirring in it with a wooden ladle, and skim off diligently all the filth
rising on the water; and you must take heed, that you take neither too much nor
too little water to it; for if you take too little, part of the Tartar will
remain undissolved, and so will be cast away and lost among the slime: but if
you take too much of it, then the Tartar is too much dispersed in the water,
and cannot shoot well, and so will likewise be lost, being cast away
afterward with the water. For I heard many a one complain, that they could get
but little of a pound, and therefore supposed the Tartar to have been naught,
whereas the fault was not in the Tartar but in the workman, that managed not
well his work, pouring away one half which did not shoot with the water: but if
you proceed well, then four pound of common Tartar will yield lb iij. of pure
white Crystals. The solution being well made, and one, and no skim more rising
at the top, cover the kettle, and let it cool without removing from the warm
place it stands in, which will be done within three or four days, if the
kettle be bigg. But the fire must be taken away from under the kettle, and so
let it stand for the time mentioned. In the mean while the Tartar will
crystallise to the sides of the kettle, which crystals after the time is
expired and the water powered off, are to be taken out and washed and boiled
again with fresh water, and so skimmed and crystallised; and this proceeding
must be still reiterated, until (which is done the third or fourth time) the
crystals are white enough: then take them out, dry and keep them for use;
whereof from j. to j. made into powder, and taken in wine, beer, warm broth or
other liquor, will give some gentle stools, and serves* for those, which
cannot endure strong physic. This Tartar may be sharpened with Diagridium or
any other purging drug, that so you need not take it in so great a quantity at
once, but a lesser dose may serve turn. But if you do not look for great
crystals, but only for Tartar well purified, then you may use this following
manual, and you will get exceeding fair and glistering little crystals, which
need no beating into powder, but by the working come to be so pure and fine, as
if they had been ground upon a stone, and looking not like a dead powder, but
having a gloss, like unto small glistering snow that fell in very cold weather,
and it is done thus: when the crystals are come to be pure enough by often
dissolving and coagulating, then dissolve them once again in pure water, and
pour the solution into a clean vessel of wood, copper or earth being glased;
and let it not stand still (as above taught with the crystals) but as soon as
it is powered in, with a clean wooden stick stir about continually without
ceasing, till all be cold, which will be done in half an hour. In this
stirring the Tartar has no time to shoot into crystals, but does coagulate
into the smallest glistering powder, pleasant to behold, and like unto frozen
snow settleth to the bottom of the vessel; then pour off the water, and dry
the powder, and keep it for use. The waters which you powered off, in regard
that they contain yet some Tartar, ought not to be cast away (as others do)
but evaporated, and the Tartar contained in them will be saved, and so nothing
will be lost, and in this manner not only white Tartar may be reduced into
clear crystals, but also the red being several times dissolved and
crystallised, loses its redness, and turns white and clear. Besides the
above said there is another way to reduce the Tartar into great white crystals
at once by precipitation: but these being good enough for our purpose, viz. to
make good medicines out of metals, I hold it needless to lose more time by the
relation of it, and so I will acquiesce.

The other way to make a metallised spirit of Tartar.
TAke of purified Tartar dissolved and coagulated but once as much as you
please* pour so much rain or other sweet water to it as will serve to
dissolve it; in which solution you must boil the plate of metals, until the
Tartar have dissolved enough of it, so that it will dissolve no more; the sign
whereof is, when the solution is deep colored of the metal, and during your
boiling you must often supply the evaporated water with pouring on of other,
lest the Tartar come to be too dry and burn; and this solution may be done best
of all in a metallical vessel; as when you will make the solution of iron, you
may do it in an iron pot; and for copper you may take a copper kettle, and so
forth for other metals, a vessel made of the same is to be taken. But you must
know that gold, silver and crude Mercury, unless they be first prepared cannot
be dissolved like iron and copper, but when they are prepared first for the
purpose, then they will also be dissolved. In like manner some minerals also
must be first prepared, before they can be dissolved with Tartar an water. But
if you can have good glasses or glased vessels of earth, you may use them for
all metals and minerals for to dissolve them therein, and the solution you may
not only use of it self for a medicine, but also distill it, and make a very
effectual spirit and oil of it as follows.

To distill the spirit and oil of Lead and Tin.
TAke the filings of Lead and Tin, and boil them with the water or solution of
Tartar in a leaden or tin-vessel, until the Tartar be sweetened by the water,
so that it will dissolve no more, to which pass it will be brought within
twenty four hours, for both these metals will be dissolved but slowly, but if
you would perform this solution sooner, then you must reduce the metals first
into a soluble calx, and then they may be dissolved in less time then an hour.
The solution being done, you must filtre it, and in B. abstract all the
moisture to the thickness or consistency of honey, and there will remain a
pleasant sweet liquor, which of it self without any further preparation may
safely be used inwardly for all such diseases, for which other medicaments,
made of these metals are useful. Especially the sweet liquor of lead and tin
does much good in the plague, not only by driving the poison from the heart by
sweating, but also by breaking or allaying the intolerable heat, so that a
happy cure does follow upon it: but externally the liquor of lead may be used
succesfully in all inflammations, and it heals very suddenly, not only fresh
wounds, but also old ulcers turned to fistulaes; for the Tartar cleanses and
lead consolidates.

The liquor of tin is better for inward use then for outward whose operation is
not so fully known yet, as that of lead. But if you will distill a spirit
thereof, then cast it in with a ladle by little and little, as above in other
distillations oftentimes was mentioned, and there will come over a subtle
spirit of Tartar, carrying along the virtue and best essence of the metals and
therefore does also prove much more effectual, then the common spirit of
Tartar, which is made alone by it self, and this spirit as well that which is
made of tin, as that of lead, if it be well dephlegmed first, may be used and
held for a great treasure in all obstructions, especially of the spleen; and
few other medicines will go beyond them; but besides there must not be neglected
the use of good purging medicines, if need require them. With the spirit there
comes over also an oil, which is of a quick operation, especially in wounds
and sores of the eye, where other ointments and plasters may not so fitly be
used, for it does not only allay the heat and inflammation, a common symptom
of the eye wounds, but also does hinder and keep back all other symptoms,
which few other medicaments are able to do; and for the residue, if it be
driven further by the strongest fire, then there will come over a sublimate,
which in the air dissolveth into oil, which is also of a powerful operation,
not only in physic, but also in Alchymie.

And the Lead runeth together in a fair white Regulus, which is much whiter,
purer and fairer then other common lead: but the Tartar retains the blackness,
and raises it self to the top as a fusible dross, which is impregnated with
the sulphur of lead, wherewith you may color hair, bones, feathers and the
like, and make them to be and remain brown and black*

I made trial once of such a distillation in an iron vessel, whereby the same
in the inside was so whitened by the purified lead, that it was like unto fine
silver in brightness: which afterward trying again, it would not fall so
fair as at first; whereat none ought to wonder, for I could write something
more (if it were fit) of Tartar, knowing well what may be effected with it, if
I did not stand in fear of scoffers, which do vilify all what they do not
understand. I durst presume to call Tartar the soap of the Philosophers; for in
the cleansing of some metals by long experience I found it of admirable virtue;
though I would not be understood thus, as if I did count it to be the true
Azoth universalis Philosophorum, whereby they wash their Laton: but I cannot
deny, but that it is of particular use for the washing and cleansing of several
metals: for it is endued with admirable virtues for the use of metals, whereof
in other places more shall be said hereafter.

How to make a Tartarised spirit and oil out of Iron or Steel and Copper.
IF you intend to make a good medicine out of iron or steel or copper joined
with Tartar, then* for the iron or steel take an iron pot, and for copper a
kettle of copper, make them very clean and put in it the filings of iron or
steel or copper, which you please, and twice as much of pure Tartar made into
powder, and so much water, that the Tartar may be dissolved well by it in the
boiling, and so boil the metal with the Tartar-water so long, till it be
deeply colored by the metal, as red by the iron, and deep green by the copper;
and when the water in the boiling does waste, you must still supply it with
other, that the Tartar may not burn; for there must be always so much water,
that no skin of the Tartar may rise at the top, but that it remain always
open, and there must not be too much water neither, lest it be too sweet, and
not able to dissolve the metal. The solution of iron or steel being come to be
red and sweet, and in taste like unto vitriol, but green and bitter of copper,
power it off warm by inclination into an other clean vessel, and let it stand
so long again in a very gentle heap of coals, till almost all the water be
evaporated, and the dissolved metal with the Tartar remain in the consistency
of honey.

Which metallical liquor may be used inwardly and outwardly (especially that of
iron) which does purge gently, and opens the obstructions of the liver and
spleen; cleanses the stomach and kills the worms: externally used it is a
good wound balsame, and goes far beyond all such as are made of vegetables. It
is a singular treasure, not only for to cure new wounds; but also for to
cleanse and heal old corrupt exulcerated sores, turned to fistulaes: but the
liquor of copper is not so safe for to be used inwardly, for it is not only
very unpleasant in taste, but also causes vehement vomits: and therefore I
would not advise any one to be forward to use it, unless it be for strong
folks and for to kill worms in them, for which purpose it is excellent good
and surpasses all other medicines whatsoever; but to little children it ought
not to be given at all, in regard that it is of far too strong an operation
for them.

N. B. And if you will use it to strong bodies against the worms or
stomach-agues you must observe that the patient (in case he cannot get it up)
thrust his finger into the throat to further the vomiting, that it may not stay
behind, but come forth again out of the body, which done health follows
upon it; but if it remain in the body, it causes a loathsomness to use it any
more. And therefore you must take heed to use it warily: and in regard that
this liquor is very bitter, you may mix it with some sugar, to facilitate the
taking thereof: but that of iron needs no such correction, it being sweet
enough of it*self, and therefore I commend and prefer it before the other. But
if you will needs that of copper (becauseth it works so strongly) then the
patient must keep in from the cold air, and not presently after the operation
load the stomach with strong drink and superfluity of meat, contenting himself
with some warm broth and a little cup of wine or beer, and the next day his
meat and drink will taste the better with him, and do him so much the more good.

But externally this liquor is of the same use with that of iron or steel, yea
proves more effectual and speedier in healing. It would be good that Surgeons
knew how to prepare i^, and would use it instead of their salves, wherewith
many fresh wounds are spoiled and turned into horrid ulcers, especially it
requiring so little cost and pains to make it. And if you would have these
liquors purer yet, you must pour on spirit of wine, and extract them, and they
will easily yield their Tincture, and leave many faeces behind which are good
for nothing: but the Tincture will be so much the better, purer and more
effectual, so that you need but one to four or five drops for purging, whereas
of the gross liquor you must have from 4. 6. 8. to 12. or 16. drops: and this
extracted Tincture works also much better externally and keeps longer then
the balsame or liquor, which in time is corrupted, but the extraction is never
spoiled. But if you will distill the liquor or balsame, it is needless that it
be extracted first, but may be distilled so as the boiling made it, after the
same manner, as above was taught for Lead, and there will come over a yellow
spirit and oil from iron or steel, and from copper a greenish spirit and oil.

The spirit and oil of iron may safely be used in the plague, fevers,
obstructions, and corruption of blood, from i. to i. It is much better to
provoke sweat, then that which is made of crude Tartar, without addition of a
metal: the like does that also which is made of copper and more effectually yet
and sometimes causes a vomit, if it be used in a greater quantity, then is
fitting.

N. B. Although the Chemists do perfer copper before iron as a more firm and
ripe metal, nevertheless it is found by experience, that iron or steel by
reason of its sweetness is better to be used for an inward medicine then
copper. But for external use copper (if it be well prepared) has the
pre-eminence, being an appropriate medicine for all ulcers and open sores, in
all the parts of the body, if the same inwardly be kept clean besides by
fitting purges. For not only the now described medicine, but also many more
besides, are taught to be made out of copper in other places of my books.

A Country-physick and purge I will teach for those, which either live far from
Apothecary-shops, or have no money to spare for physic, and it is to be made
out of iron and copper, whereby they may cleanse their slymie stomachs, spoiled
by a disorderly diet, whence headaches, worms, agues and other diseases are
occasioned, warning withal those that are either too old or too young, or else
decayed and weak, and so not strong enough for such powerful physic, that they
will forbear to use it, lest besides the worms they kill and expel life it
self also; but those that are of a strong constitution, and a middle age, and of
a sound heart, may safely use this purge, whereby stomach-agues, belly-worms,
and many other occult diseases may be cured with good success. The preparation
is done thus: Take ss. of pure Tartar made into powder, and ss. or j. of sugar
or honey, and v. or vj. of spring or rain water, put all into a clean copper
vessel which is not greasy and boil it upon a coal fire as long or somewhat
longer then you use to boil an egg, or at the furthest half a quarter of an
hour; take off the skum in boiling, let it stand till it be milk warm, so that
it may be drunk. This potion tasting almost like warm wine sweetened with
sugar, give unto the patient to drink, and let him fast upon it, and within
half an hour it will begin to work upwards and downwards: whereat you need not
to be amazed, but only keep the body warm, and within an hour it will have
done working. But if you will drive out worms from little children by purging,
then in stead of the copper-vessel, take a clean iron-vessel, and put in a less
quantity of Tartar, sugar and water, and boil it as abovesaid, and give it to
them, and it will purge only downward, but sometimes it will also give a
gentle vomit, which will do them no hurt, but rather will cleanse the stomach
the better. But if the drink be too weak, so that it does not work, it may be
used again the next day (but you must take more of the ingredients, or else
let them boil longer) there is no danger in it at all, if you proceed aright
and it is much pleasanter to take, then the bitter wormseed, wherewith they
usually torment children.

The reason why this decoction works in this manner is that the Tartar and
sugar being boiled in metallical vessels with water work upon the metal, and
extract virtue out of it, which causes vomiting and purging (the Tartar also
being helpful to it.)

How to make a Tartarised spirit of Mercu^y.
VUlgar Mercury cannot be dissolved like the former metals with Tartar and
water, without any foregoing preparation; but must be sublimed first with salt
and vitriol, or crystallised with Aqua fortis, and then it may be dissolved by
boiling with Tartar and water, and reduced into a balsame, like other metals,
but it is not to be used inwardly, unless it be digested a sufficient time, so
that its fierceness be allayed: Externally it may safely be used in all
desperate, especially venereal sores, and it is a very effectual and profitable
medicine for them. But most of all it does serve for Alchymie, although few do
know this guest, because he will not be seen by every one. The spirit which
comes over from it by distillation, is an admirable thing not only in physic,
but also in Alchymie: yet you must take heed, that in stead of a friend, you do
not harbor a great enemy: for its force and virtue is very great and powerful.

How to make a Tartarised spirit of Gold and Silver.
GOld and silver also can by no means be dissolved with Tartar in a wet way:
but in a dry way adding its helper to it, it will easily dissolve, which does
not belong hither; but if you will draw a spirit of it, then the gold and
silver must first by dissolving and coagulating be reduced to crystals, and
then dissolved with purified Tartar and water, and of Gold you will get a
yellow solution, and of silver a white inclining unto green, which being
reduced to the consistency of honey, may be used safely and without fear. The
solution of Gold does loosen and keep the body open, it effectually
strengthens the stomach, heart, lungs, and liver, and other principal
members: and that of silver purges very forcibly, according to the quantity
given, like another purge, but without harm or danger, so that in all diseases
where purging is necessary, it may be used safely from i. to ss. but that of
gold is used in a smaller quantity: and both the liquor of gold and of silver
may very suceessfully be used externally: but because for external uses
inferior metals will serve ^he turn, it is needless to use costly things
thereto.

The spirit which is forced from it by distillation, is endued with great
virtue: for the volatile part of the metal comes over joined with the spirit
of Tartar, the remainder may be reduced, so as it was taught of other metals.
This spirit especially that of Gold is exceeding good in the plague and other
diseases, where sweating is necessary: for it drives not only by sweating all
malignities from the heart, but also does strengthen the same and preserves it
from all hurtful symptoms. Likewise also that of silver is very commendable,
especially if it be first dephlegmed from its Caput Mortuum, as above was
taught in the preparation of the common spirit of Tartar. For any Physician
expert in Chemistry may easily guess what the spirit of Tartar well rectified
and impregnated with the virtues of gold may effect, and therefore it is
needless to make any further mention of it, but it shall be left to the trial
thereof.

To make a Tartarized spirit of Antimony.
CRude Antimony cannot be dissolved in such a manner as above has been taught:
but if it be first prepared into flores, or a vitrum, it yeildeth easily its
virtue in boiling, and it is done thus: Take to one part of the flores or of
small ground vitrum Antimonii made per se, three parts of pure Tartar, and 12.
or 15 parts of clean water, boil the Antimony with the Tartar and water in a
glased pot for three or four hours, and the evaporated water must be still
supplied with other that the Tartar may not burn for want of water, and the
vitrum must be sometimes stirred about with a wooden spatula (which the flores
being light do not need) This done, the Tartar water will be deep red colored
by the Antimony, and leave the remaining Antimony settled in the bottom, from
which power off the solution, and after having filtred it, evaporate the water
from it, and then extract it once more with spirit of wine, and you will get a
blood red Extractum, whereof 1. 2. 3. to 10. or 12. drops given at once,
causes gentle vomits and stools, which may be safely used by old and young
people in all diseases that have need of purging, and you need not fear any
danger at all: For I know no vomit, which purges more gently then this, and if
you please you may make it work only (per inferiora) downward, so that it shall
cause no vomits at all: and you need do nothing else but make a toste of brown
bread, and hold it hot to your nose and mouth, and when this is almost cold,
have another hot in readiness, and so use one after another by turns, till you
feel no more loathing, and that the virtue of Antimony has begun to work
downward: This is a good secret for those that would use Antimonial physic,
but that they are afraid of vomiting, which they are not able to endure. But if
you will not spend so much pains, as to make such an Extract, then do as you
was taught above to do with the copper, and take ten or twelve grains of
prepared Antimony for an old body, but for a young one 5. 6* grains or more or
less according to the condition of the person, and ss. or vj. of pure Tartar,
and together with iiij. or v. of water put it in a little pipkin, and boil it
a quarter of an hour, then pour the solution only into a cup, and dissolve a
little sugar in i^, whereby the acidity of the Tartar will be somewhat
qualified. This decoctum drink warm, and keep your selfas it is fit and it will
work much better, then it had been steeped over night in wine, which not every
one can abide to take fasting: but this decoctum, because it tastes like warm
and sweet wine, is much pleasanter for to take.

N. B. It is to be admired, that well prepared Antimony is never taken in
vain: for although it be given in a very small quantity, so that it cannot
cause either stools or vomits, yet it works in sensibly, viz. it cleanses
the blood, and expels many malignities by sweat, so that mighty diseases may
be rooted out thereby without any great sensible operation. Which many times
happened unto me, and gave me occasion to think further of it: and therefore I
sought how to prepare Antimony so, that it might be used daily without causing
of vomits or stools, which I put in execution accordingly, and found it good,
as afterward shall follow.

Of the solution above described, viz. of the flores of Antimony with Tartar
make a good quantity, and after the evaporation of the water distill a spirit
of it, and there will also come over a black oil, which must be separated from
the spirit, and rectified per se; and externally applied it will not only do
the same wonderful operations, which above have been ascribed to the simple
oil of Tartar, but it goes also far beyond it, for the best essence of
Antimony has joined it self thereunto in the distilling, and so doubled the
virtue of the oil of Tartar; and this oil may with credit be used not only
for all podagrical tumors to allay them very readily, but also by reason of its
dryness it does consume all other tumors in the whole body, whether they be
caused by wind or water: for the volatile salt by reason of its subtlety
conveigheth the virtue of Antimony into the innermost parts of the body in a
mavelous and incredible way, whereby much good can be performed in
Chyrurgerie.

As for the spirit, you may not only use it very succesfully, in the plague,
pox, scurvy, Melancholia Hypochondriaca, fevers and other obstructions and
corruptions of blood; but also if you put some of it into new wine or beer, and
let it work with it, the wine or beer comes to be so virtuous thereby, that if
it be daily used, it does stay and keep off all diseases proceeding from
superfluous humors and corrupted blood, so that neither plague, scurvy,
Melancholia hypochondriaca, or any other disease of that kind can take root
in those that daily use it, wherein no metal or mineral (except gold) can be
paralleld with it: but in case you have no convenience for to make that spirit,
and yet you would willingly have such a medicinal drink made of Antimony, then
take but of the solution made with Tartar, before it be distilled, and put lb
i. or lb iss. of it into 18. or 20. gallons of new wine or beer, and let it
work together, and the virtue of the Antimony by the fermentation of the wine
will grow the more volatile and efficacious to work. And if you cannot have new
wine (in regard that it does not grow every where) you may make an artificial
wine of honey, sugar, pears, figs, cherries or the like fruit, as in the
following third part shall be taught, which may stand in stead of natural wine.

These medicinal wines serve for a sure and safe preservative, not only to
prevent many diseases, but also if they have possessed the body already,
effectually to oppose and expel them. Also all external open sores (which by
daubing and plastering could not be remedied) by daily drinking thereof may be
perfectly cured. For not only Basilius Valentinus and Theophrastus Paracelsus,
but many more before and after them knew it very well, and have written many
good things of it, which few did entertain, and (because their description was
somewhat dark) most despised and diffamed them for untruths.

In like manner and much more may this my writing be lightly esteemed of,
because I do not set down long and costly processes, but only according to
truth and in simplicity do labor to serve my neighbor, which does not sound
well in the ears of the proud world, which rather do tickle and load themselves
with vain and unprofitable processes, then hearken unto the truth; and it is
no wonder, that God suffers such men, which only look after high things, and
despise small things to be held in error.

Why do we look to get our Medicines by troubling our brains, and by subtle
and tedious works, whereas God through the simple nature does teach us
otherwise. Were it not better to let simple nature instruct us? surely if we
would be in love with small things, we should find great ones. But because all
men do strive only for great and high things, therefore the small also are kept
from them; and therefore it would be well, that we could fancy this maxim,
that also things of small account can do something, as we may see by the Tartar
and the despicable Antimony, and not only so many coals, glasses, materials,
and the like, but also the precious time would not be wasted so much in
preparing of medicaments: for all is not gold that glistereth, but oftentimes
under a homely coat some glorious thing is hid; which must be taken notice of.

Some may object why I do teach to join the Antimony first with the Tartar by
the help of common water before its fermentation with the wine: whether it
would not be as good to put it in of it self in powder, or to dissolve it with
spirit of salt (which would be easier to do then with Tartar) and so let it
work? To which I answer, that the working wine or drink, receives no
metallical calx or solution, unless it be first ptepared with Tartar or spirit
of wine. For although you dissolve Antimony, or any other metal or mineral in
spirit of salt, or of vitriol, or of salt nitre, or any other acid spirit, and
then think to let it work with wine or any other drink you will find that it
does not succeed; for the acide spirit will hinder the fermentation, and let
fall the dissolved metals, and so spoil the work; and besides, Tartar may be
used among all drinks, and does more agree with ones taste and stomach, then
any corrosive spirit.

In the same manner as was taught of Antimony, other minerals and metals also
may be fitly joined with wine or other drink, and the use of such Antimonized
wine is this, viz. that it be drunk at meals and betwixt meals like other
ordinary drink to quench thirst, but for all that it must not be drunk in a
greater quantity, then that Nature be able to bear it. For if you would drink
of it immoderately, it would stir vomits, which ought not to be, for it is but
only to work in an insensible way, which if it be done, it preserves not only
the body from all diseases proceeding from corrupted impure blood, as the
plague, leprosy, pox, scurvy, and the like, but by reason of its hidden heat,
whereby it does consume and expel all evil and salt humors (as the Sun dries
up a poole) by sweat and urine, and so does unburthen the blood from all such
sharp and hurtful humors, etc. It does not only cure the above said diseases
but also all open sores, ulcers, fistulaes, which by reason of the superfluity
of salt humors can admit of no healing, and it does dispatch them in a short
time in a wonderful manner, and so firmly that there is no relapse to be
feared.

This drink is not only good for the sick, but also for the whole (though in a
smaller quantity) because that it wonderfully cleanses the whole body, and you
need not fear the least hurt either in young or old, sick or healthy. And let
no man stumble at it, that many ignorant men do diffame Antimony and hold it to
be poison, and forbid it to be used: for if they knew it well, they would not
do so: but because such men know no more, then what they get by reading or by
hearsay, they pronounce a false sentence, and it might be replied unto them,
as Apelles did to the Shoemaker: Ne ^utor ultra crepidam: but what shall we
say? Non omnis fert omnia tell us. When an Ass after his death does rot, out of
the carcass there grew beetles, which can fly higher then the Ass from whence
they came; In the like manner we wish it may fare with the haters of the royal
Antimony, viz. that their posterity may get seeing eyes, and what they know
not, they may forbear to despise and scoff at.

I must confess that if Antimony be not well prepared, and besides be
indiscreetly used by the unskilful, that it may prejudice a man in his health,
which even the vegetables also may do. But to reject it by reason of the abuse,
would be a very unwise act: If perchance a child should get into his hand a
sharpe-edged knife, and hurt himself or others, because it does not understand
how to use a knife, should therefore the use of a knife be rejected and
forbidden to those that are grown up and know how to use it? Good sharp tools
make a good workman; so good quick working and powerful medicines make a good
physician; and the sharper the tool is, the sooner a stone carver or other
crafts man can spoil his work by one cut which he does amiss: which also must
be understood of powerful medicines, for if they be used pertinently in a short
time more good may be done with them, then with weak medicaments in a long
time. Now as a sharp tool is not to be handled but by a good workman, so
likewise a powerful medicine ought to be managed by an understanding and
conscientious physician, who according to the condition of the person and the
disease knows to increase or abate the strength of the medicine, and not by
such an one, as does minister it ignorantly without making any difference at
all.

Let no man marvel, that I ascribe such great virtues unto Antimony, it being
abundantly enriched with the primum ens of gold. If I should say ten times as
much more of it, I should not lie. Its praise is not to be expressed by any
man's tongue; for purifying of the blood, there is no mineral like unto it; for
it cleanses and purifieth the whole man in the highest degree, if it be well
prepared first, and then discreetly used. It is the best and next friend to
gold, which by the same also is freed and purified from all addition and filth,
as we said even now, of man. Every Antimony for the most part agrees with the
gold and its medicine; for out of Antimony, by the cleansing Art may be made
firm gold, as in the fourth part shall be taught, and which is more, by a long
digestion a good part of the same is changed into gold. Whereby it is evident,
that it has the nature and property of gold and, it is better to be used for a
medicine then the gold it self, because the golden virtue is as yet volatile in
this, but in the other is grown fixed and compacted, and may be compared to be
like an old man to a young child, which you may lead whither you please.
Therefore it is my advice, that in the Antimony its medicine should be sought,
it being hid therein very richly, and not to trifle away time and cost in vain
and useless things.

Further note, That if you desire to contract nearer together the virtue of
Antimony or any other mineral or metal, as above was taught to be done with the
Tartar, you must by exhalation of the superfluous moystness in Balneo, reduce
the solution to a honey thick liquor, and pour spirit of wine upon it for to
extract, and within few days it will be very red; then power it off and power
on other, and let this likewise extract: continue this proceeding with shifting
the spirit of wine, till the spirit of wine can get no more Tincture; then put
all the colored spirit of wine together into a glass with a long neck, and
digest it so long in a tepide Balneum, till the color or best essence of
Antimony be separated from the spirit of wine and settled to the bottom like a
blood red thick fat oil, so that the spirit of wine is turned white again;
which is to be separated from the fair and pleasant oil of Antimony, which is
made without any corrosive, and is to be kept as a great treasure in physic.
The spirit of wine retains somewhat of the virtue of Antimony, and may be used
with success of it self both inwardly and outwardly. But the Tincture as a
Panacea in all diseases acts its part with admiration and as here mentioned
of Antimony, so in the same manner all metals by the help of Tartar and spirit
of wine may without distilling be reduced into pleasant and sweet oils, which
are none of meanest in Physic: for every knowing and skilful Chemist will
easily grant, that such a metallical oil, as without all corrosives out of the
gross metals is reduced into a pleasant essence, cannot be without great and
singular virtue.

How to make good spirits and oils out of Pearls, Corals, Crab's-eyes, and
other light soluble stones of beasts and fishes.
TAke to one part of pearls or corals (made into fine powder) three or four
parts of pure Tartar, and so much water as will dissolve the Tartar by boiling;
put the corals, Tartar and water together into a glass body, which must stand
in sand, and give it so strong a fire, that the water boil in the glass body
with the Tartar, and may dissolve the corals. (This solution may be done also
in a clean earthen pot that is glased, and the evaporated water must be
supplied with other, as above was taught to be done with the metals.) The
corals being dissolved, let them cool, filtrate the solution, and abstract all
the moisture from it in Balneo, and there will remain a pleasant honey-thick
liquor, which may be used in Physic either of it self, or else once more
extracted with spirit of wine and purified, or else distilled, as you please.

The extract or Tincture is better then the liquor, and the spirit is better
then the extract or tincture: and all three may well and safely be used; they
strengthen the heart and brains; especially those which are made of the pearls
and corals, they expel the urine and keep the body soluble. Those of crabs eyes
and of pearches and other fishes open and cleanse the passages of the urine
from all slyme and impurity, and they powerfully expel the stone and gravel in
the reins and bladder.

N. B. The distilled spirit of corals being well rectified, is good for the
Epilepsie, Melancholy, and Apoplexy. It expels and drives out all poison
by sweating, because it is of a golden nature and quality, whereof in another
place more shall be said.

To distill a spirit out of salt of Tartar and crude Tartar.
IF you take a like quantity of crude Tartar and of salt of Tartar, and
dissolve it with clean water, and then evaporate the water still skimming it,
till no skim more do rise, and then let it cool, there will shoot white
crystals, which being distilled as common Tartar, they will yield a purer
subtler and pleasanter spirit, then the crude Tartar does, in all to be used as
above has been taught of the simple spirit of Tartar: therefore it is needless
here to describe its use. Before you distill a spirit thereof, you may use them
in stead of Tartarus vitriolatus for purging, they will cause gentle stools,
and drive also the urine and stone, and are not unpleasant to take. The dose is
from i. to i. in waters fit for your purpose. This salt dissolved with water
purifieth metals (if they be boiled therein) and makes them fairer then common
Tartar does.

How to get a powerful spirit out of the salt of Tartar, by the help of pure
sand or peble-stones.
IN the first part of this book I taught how to make such a spirit, but because
the materials, which are to be distilled in that furnace must be cast upon
quick coals, whereby the remainder is lost, and that also not every one has
the convenience to set up a furnace that requires more room then this here
does: therefore I will set down how it may be got with ease in this our present
furnace, without the loss of the remainder, which is not inferior to the spirit
it self, and it is done thus.

Make a fair white salt of calcined Tartar by dissolution, filtration and
coagulation, pulverise that salt in a warmed mortar, and add to it a fourth
part of small pulverised crystal or flints or only of fine sand, washed clean,
mix it well, and cast one spoonful thereof at once into your red-hot vessel
(which must be made of earth) and so cover it, and the mixture as soon as it is
red hot, will rise and boil (like common Allome does, when it comes to a
sudden heat) and yield a thick white heavy spirit; and when it cease to come
forth, and then cast in another spoonful, and stay out the time of its
settling, and then another part again, till all your mixture be cast in. When
no more spirit goes forth, then take off the lid from the distilling vessel,
and with an iron ladle take out that which stayed behind, whilst it is yet
redhot and soft, and it will look like unto a transparant clear white fusible
glass, which you must keep from the air, for it will dissolve in it, till I
teach you what you are to do with it.

The spirit which came over, may either be kept as it is, or else rectified per
arenam in a glass retort, and used in Physic; it is clean of another taste
then the spirit of common salt or vitriol, for it is not so sharp; it smells
of the flints after a sulphurous manner, and tastes urine-like, and it is
very good for those that are troubled with the gout, stone and Tisick: for it
provokes urine and sweat mightily, and (because it cleanses and strengthens
the stomach) it also makes one have a good appetite to his Victuals. What it
can do else is unknown to me as yet, but it is credible that it may act his
part in many other diseases, which is left free for every one to tire. In my
opinion (since the spirit of the salt of Tartar is good to be used of it self
for the stone, and that here it is strengthened by the sand, which have the
signature of the stone of the Mic^ocosme) there is hardly any particular
medicine, which can go beyond it, but I leave every one to his own opinion and
experience. Externally used it quenches inflammations and makes a pure skin,
etc. The remainder, which I did bid you to keep, and looks like a transparent
clear glass, is nothing else but the most fixed part of the salt of Tartar and
flints, which joined themselves thus in the heart, and turned to a soluble
glass, wherein lies hid a great heat and fire. As long at it is kept dry from
the air, it cannot be perceived in it: but if you power water upon it, then
its secret heat will discover it self. If you make it to find powder in warm
mortar, and lay it in a moist air, it will dissolve and melt into a thick and
fat oil, and leave some faeces behind. This fat liquor or oil of flints, sand
or crystal may not only be used inwardly and outwardly of it self, but also
serves to prepare minerals and metals into good medicines, or to change them
into better by Chemical art. For many great secrets are hid in the contemptible
peble or sand; which an ignorant and unexpert man (if they were disclosed to
him) would hardly believe: for this present world is by the devils craft so far
possessed with cursed filthy avarice, that they seek for nothing but money, but
honest and ingenious sciences are not regarded at all; and therefore God does
close our eyes that we cannot see what lies before our eyes, and we trample
upon with our feet. That worthy man Paracelsus has given it us sufficiently to
understand, when he says in his book (containing the vexations of Alchymists)
that many times a despicable flint cast behind a Cow is more worth then a Cow,
not only because that gold may be melted out of it, but also that other
inferior metals may be purified thereby, so that they are like unto the best
gold and silver in all trials; and although I never got any great profit by the
doing of it, yet it does suffice me that I have seen several times the
possibility and truth thereof, which in its proper place likewise shall be
taught.

This liquor of the flints is of that nature toward the metals, that it makes
them exceeding fair, but not so, like women do scowre their vessels of tin,
copper, iron, etc. with lie and small sand, till all filth be scoured off, and
that they get a bright and fair gloss: but the metals must be dissolved
therein by Chemical art, and then either after the wet or dry way digested in
it for its due space of time; which Paracelsus calls to go into the mothers
womb, and be born again: if this be done rightly, then the mother will bring
forth a pure child. All metals are engendered in sand or stone, and therefore
they may well be called the mother of metals, and the purer the mother is, the
purer and sounder child she will bear, and among all stones there is none found
purer then the peble, crystal or sand, which are of one nature (if they be
simple and not impregnated with metals:) And therefore the peble or sand is
found to be the fittest bath to wash the metal withal. But he that would take
this bath to be the Philosophers secret Menstruum, whereby they exalt the king
unto the highest purity, would be mistaken; for their Balneum is more friendly
to gold by reason of its affinity with it then with other metals, but this does
easier dissolve other metals then gold. Whereby it is evident, that it cannot
be Bernhards his fountain (Bernhardi fontina) but must be held only to be a
particular cleanser of metals. But omitting this and leaving it to the further
practice and trial of those that want no time nor convenience for to search
what may be done with it, let us take notice of the use of this liquor in
physic, for which uses sake this book is written. That which has been said,
was only done to that end, that we may observe, that we must not always look
upon dear and costly things, but that many times even in mean and contemptible
things (as sand and pebles) much good is to be found.

How to extract a blood-red Tincture with spirit of wine out of the liquor of
peble-stones.
IF you will extract a Tincture out of peble-stones, for use in Physic or in
Alchymie, then in stead of the white take a fair yellow, green or blew peble,
or flint, whether it hold fixed or volatile gold, and first with salt of Tartar
distill the spirit thereof, or if you do not care for the spirit, then melt the
mixture in a covered crucible into a transparent, soluble and fusible glass,
and in a warm mortar make it into fine powder; put this powder in a long
necked glass, and power upon it rectified spirit of wine (it needs not to be
dephlegmed, it matters not if it be but pure) let it remain upon it in a gentle
warmth, till it be turned red (the glass with the prepared peble or flints must
be often stirred about, that the peble be divided and the spirit of wine may be
able to work upon it) then power off the colored spirit of wine, and power on
other, and let this likewise turn red: this pouring off and on must be iterated
so often, till the spirit of wine get no more color out of it. All the
tinctured spirit of wine put together, and abstract in a Balneum through a
Limbeck from the Tincture which will remain in the bottom of the glass body
like a red juice; which you must take out and keep for its use.

The use of the Tincture of pebles or flints in Physic.
THis Tincture if it be made of gold pebles or sand, is to be held for none of
the least medicines, for it does powerfully resist all soluble Tartareous
coagulations, in the hands, knees, feet, reins and bladder; and although in
want of those that hold gold, it be extracted but only out of common white
p^ble, it does act its part however, though not altogether so well as the
first. Let no man marvel, that sand or pebles made potable, have so great
virtue; for not all things are known to all; and this Tincture is more powerful
yet, if first gold have been dissolved with the liquor of pebles before the
extraction. And let no man imagine that this tincture comes from the salt of
Tartar (which is taken to the preparing of the oil of sand) because that of it
self also does color the spirit of wine for there is a great difference
betwixt this Tincture and that, which is extracted out of the salt of Tartar:
for if you distill that of the salt of Tartar in a little glass body or retort,
there will come first a clear spirit of wine, then an unsavory phlegm, and a
salt will remain behind, in all like unto common salt of Tartar, wherein
after its calcining not the least color appears, and because none came over
neither, it might be questioned where it remained then?

To which I answer, that it was not a true Tincture, but only that the sulphur
in the sprit of wine was exalted or graduated by the corporeal salt of Tartar,
and so got a red color, which it loses as soon as the salt of Tartar is
taken from it, and reassumeth its former white color: even as it happens also,
when the salt of urine, or of hartshorn or soot or any other like urinous salt
is digested with spirit of wine, that the spirit turns red of it, but not
lastingly, but just so as it falls out with the salt of Tartar, for if by
rectification it be separated again from the spirit of wine, each (viz. both
the salt and also the spirit of urine) does recover again its former color,
whereby it appears, that (as above said) it was not a true Tincture. He that
will believe it, let him dissolve but i. of common white salt of Tartar in lb
i. of spirit of wine, and the spirit will turn as red of it, as if it had stood
a long time upon several pounds of blew or green calcined salt of Tartar; and
if I had not tried it my self several times, I should have also been of that
opinion: but because I found it to be otherwise, therefore I would not omit to
set down my opinion: though I know I shall deserve small thanks of some,
especially of those which rather will err with the greater number, then to know
and confess the truth with the less number. However I do not say, that the
supposed tincture of the salt of Tartar is of no virtue or useless; for I know
well enough that it was found very effectual in many diseases: for the purest
part of the salt of Tartar has been dissolved by the spirit of wine, it being
thus colored thereby, and therefore that tinctured spirit of wine may very
fitly be used. But as for the Tincture, which is extracted out of the prepared
pebles, it is clean of another condition: for if you abstract the spirit of
wine from it, though it also comes over white, yet there remains a deep
tinctured salt, whose color is lasting in the strongest fire, and therefore
may be counted a true Tincture.

How by the help of this liquor out of Gold its red color may be extracted so
that it remains white.
THis oil or liquor of pebles is of such a condition, that it does precipitate
all metals which are dissolved by corrosives, but not after that manner as the
salt of Tartar does; for the calx of metals which is precipitated by this
liquor, (because that the pebles do mingle themselves therewith) is grown much
heavier thereby, then if it had been only precipitated with salt of Tartar.

For example, dissolve in Aqua Regia as much Gold as you please, and power of
this liquor upon it, till all the Gold fall to the bottom like a yellow
powder, and the solution turn white and clear, which you must power off, and
edulcorate the precipitated Gold with sweet water, and then dry it (as you was
taught to do with the Aurum fulminans) and you need not fear that it will
kindle and fulminate in the drying, as it uses to do, when it is precipitated
with salt of Tartar or spirit of urine, but you may boldly dry it by the fire,
and it will look like yellow earth, and will weigh as heavy again as the Gold
did weigh before the solution; the cause of which weight are the peble stones,
which did precipitate themselves together with the Gold. For the Aqua Regia by
its acidity has mortified the salt of Tartar, and robbed it of its virtues so,
that it could not choose but let fall the assumed pebles or sand: on the other
side, the salt of Tartar which was in the liquor of pebles, has annihilated
the sharpeness of the Aqua Regia, so that it could not keep the dissolved gold
any longer whereby both the gold and the pebles are freed from their dissolver.

This edulcorated and dried yellow powder put into a clean crucible, and set it
between live coals, that it begin to be red hot, but not long, and the yellow
will be changed into the fairest purple color, which is pleasant to behold,
but if you let it stand longer, then the purple color vanishes, and it turns
to a brown and brick color: and therefore if you desire to have a fair purple
colored gold, you must take it off from the fire, as soon as it is come to
that color, and let it not stand any longer, else it loses that color again.

This fair gold-powder may be used by the rich (which are able to pay for it)
from i. to ss. in convenient vehicles; and in all diseases, where sweating is
need^ul: for besides the provoking of sweat, it comfort not only the heart,
but also by the virtue of the peble it expels the stone in the reins and
bladder (if it be not grown to the height of hardness) like sand together with
the urine: so that it may be safely used as well to prevent, as to cure the
plague, gout and stone.

How to make further out of this purple colored gold a soluble Ruby for
medicinal use, shall be taught in the fourth part: for in regard that it must
be done by a strong fire in a crucible, it does not belong hither, but to its
proper place, where other like medicaments are taught to be made.

If you will extract the color out of this precipitated gold, then power upon
it (before it be put into the fire for to calcin) of the strongest spirit of
salt, and in a gentle heat the spirit will dissolve part of the gold, which
will be much fairer and deeper in color then if it had been done with Aqua
Regia: upon this solution power five or six times as much of dephlegmed spirit
of wine, and digest both together its due time, then by the digestion of a long
time part of the Gold will fall out of the solution to the bottom like a fair
white powder, which may be reduced with Borax or salt nitre and Tartar; it is
white like silver and as heavy as other gold, and may easily get its color
again by the help of Antimony. The residue out of which the white gold is fallen,
viz. the spirit of salt mingled with the spirit of wine, must be abstracted
from the Tincture, and there will remain a pleasant sour liquor colored by
the gold, upon the bottom of the glass body, which is almost of the same
virtue, which above has been ascribed to other tinctures of the gold.
Especially this liquor of gold strengthens the heart, brain and stomach.

N. B. Sometimes there comes over with the spirit of wine a little red oil,
which the strong spirit of salt has separated from the spirit of wine, and it
is impregnated with the Tincture of gold. It is an excellent cordial, few are
found like unto it, whereby weak people decayed by sickness or age may be kept
alive a long time, they taking daily some drops of it, who else for want of the
humidum radicale would be forced to exchange their life for death.

Here some body may ask, whether this Tincture is to be counted or taken for a
true Tincture of gold; or whether there be another better to be found?

To which I answer, that though many hold it to be such, and I my self do call
it so here, yet that after due examination it will not prove to be such: for
although some virtue is taken from the gold by this way, yet it does still keep
its life, though it be grown weak and pale, because it can so easily recover
its former sound color by a contemptible mineral: if its true Tincture or soul
were gone from it, surely an inferior mineral could not restore it to life, but
of necessity there would be required such a thing for to do it, which has not
only so much, as it has need of for itself, but has a transcendent power to
give life unto dead things. As we may see by a man or any sensible beast, that
if they have lost their vigor by adversities, in that no life more is perceived
in them, yet by medicines fit for the purpose, they may be refreshed and
brought to their former health, so that their former disease appears no more
in them; but if their soul be once gone, the dead body can by no medicines be
restored unto life again, but must remain dead so long, till he in whose power
it is to give and to take life, have mercy upon it. So likewise it is to be
understood of the gold, when its color is taken from it, and yet its life is
left, which by the help of Antimony, being its medicine, as also by the help of
iron or copper can be restored unto it so that it recovereth its former fair
color, so that you cannot see at all, that it ailed any thing before. But if
its life be gone from the body, it is impossible for any ordinary metal or
mineral to restore it to life, but it must be done by such a thing, which is
more then Gold it self has been: for even as a living man cannot give life
unto a dead man, but God must do it, who has created man, so Gold cannot
restore to dead gold the life which has been taken from it, and how could it
then be done by an unfixt mineral? but there is required a true Philosopher for
to do it, such a one as has good knowledge of gold and its composition.

Now as we heard that like cannot help its like, but he that shall help must be
more then he that looks for help from him; Hence it is evident that the
Tincture, whose remaining body (from which it is taken) is still gold, can be
no true Tincture; for if it shall be a true Tincture, it must consist in its
three principles, and how can it consist therein, the body from whence it came
being yet alive, and possessing indivisibly all its three principles? How can a
man's soul be taken from him, and yet the body live still? some will say, that
for all that, this may be counted a true tincture, although the body still
remain gold, and have kept its life: even as man may spare some blood out of
his body, which though it will make him somewhat pale, yet he lives still, and
the lost blood may be supplied again by good meat and drink. But what lame and
senseless objections are these? who would be so simple as to think, that a
handful of blood may be compared to a man's life? I believe no wise man will do
it. Although life goes forth with the blood, yet the blood is not the life it
self; else the dead could be raised thereby, if a cup full of it were poured
into a dead body; but where was such a thing ever heard or seen? With such
groundless opinions some did presume to censure the truth, set down in my
treatise de Auro Potabili vero, saying, Geber and Lullius were also of opinion,
that a true tincture can be extracted out of gold, the same nevertheless
remaining good gold: but it may be asked, what it has lost then for to yield a
true Tincture, since it remained good gold? Here no body will be at home for to
answer I doubt. What are the writings of Geber or Lully to me? what they have
written I do not despise, they were highly enlightened and experienced
Philosophers, and would defend their writings sufficiently, if they were alive:
and what I write, I am also able to maintain.

Do those men think, that the writings of Geber and Lully are to be understood
according unto the bare letter? show me a tincture of gold which was made by
the writings of Geber or Lully? if it were so, then every idiot or novice, that
could but read Latin, would not only by their writings be able to make the
Tincture of gold, but also the Philosophers-stone it self, whereof they have
written at large; which does not follow, because it is seen by daily
experience, that the most worldly learned men spent many years, and have been
at vast charges, and taken great pains and studied in their books day and
night, and found not the least thing in them.

Now if such Philosophers were to be understood literally, doubtless there
would not be so many poor decayed Alchymists. Therefore the writings of such
worthies are not to be understood according to the letter, but according to the
mystical sense hid under the letter.

But because the truth is eclipsed in their books by so many seducing and
sophistical processes, there will hardly any man be able to pick it out from so
many seducements, unless a light from God be given to him first, whereby he may
be able so to peruse the dark writings of those men, that he know how to
separate the parabolical speeches from those that are true in the letter it
self: or if an honest godly Chemist by the grace of God in his labors do hit
upon the right steps, and yet do doubt, whether he be in the right way or no,
then by reading of good and true Philosophers books, he may at last learn out
of them the firm and constant truth: else hardly any ones desire may be
obtained out of their books, but rather after the precious time spent, means
and health wasted, a man shall be forced to fall a begging at last.

In like manner, if the true tincture be taken from copper the rest is no more
a metal, nor by any Art or force of fire can be reduced to a metallical
substance.

N B. But if you leave some tincture in it, then it may be reduced into a
brittle gray body, like unto iron but brittle.

Another way to extract a good Tincture out of gold by the help of the liquor
of sand or pebles.
TAke of that gold calx (which was precipitated with the oil of sand) one
part, and three or four parts of the liquor of crystals or of sand, mix the
gold calx in a good crucible with the liquor, and set this mixture into a
gentle heat so that the moystness may evaporate from the oil of sand which is
not easily done; for the peble or sand, by reason of their dryness keep and
hold the moysteness, and will not let it go easily; it rises in the pot or
crucible, as borax or Allome does when you cal^ine them; therefore the crucible
must not be filled above half, that the liquor together with the gold may have
room enough, and do not run over the pot: and when it rises no more, then
strengthen the fire, till the pot be red-hot. The mixture standing fast, put a
lid upon it, which may close well, that no coals, ashes or other impuritie may
fall into it, and give it so strong fire in a wind furnace, that the liquor
together with the gold-calx may melt like water; keep it melting so long, till
the liquor and gold together be like unto a transparent fair ruby, which will
be done in an hours time or thereabouts; then power it forth into a clean
copper mortar, let it cool, and then make it into powder, and power spirit of
wine upon it for to extract, which will look like unto thin blood: and it will
prove more effectual in the use, then the above described Tincture.

The residue from which the Tincture is extracted, must be boiled with lead,
and precipitated and driven off as you do oars, and you will get the remaining
gold, which went not into the spirit of wine: but it is very pale and turned
like unto silver in color, which if it be melted through Antimony, it
recovereth its former color without any considerable loss in the weight. How
the melting in crucibles, and boiling of the remaining gold is to be done shall
be more punctually set down in the fourth part, I know several other fine
processes, for to extract the color easily out of the gold, but because the
gold must be first made fit for it by melting in the crucible, and that it is
not pertinent to speak of that operation here in this second part, therefore*
it shall be reserved for the fourth, where you shall be informed at large, not
only how to prepare gold, Antimony and other minerals, and make them fit for
extraction, but also how to reduce them into a transparent, soluble and
fire-proof ruby (which are none of the meanest medicines) and as it was done
here with the gold, so you may proceed likewise with other metals and minerals
for to extract their colors. And therefore being needless to describe each
metals tincture by it self, all the processes of them shall be disclosed in
one, viz. in that of the gold. The book would grow too big, if I should
describe them severally, which I count needless to do. Let this suffice for
this second part, that we be taught* how to extract out of the gold its color
after a common way. Which indeed are good medicines, but for ought I know of no
use in Alchymie. But he that seeks to have a true Tincture out of the gold,
let him endeavor first to destroy the gold by the universal Mercury, and to
turn the inside outward, and the outside inward, and proceed further according
unto art, then the soul of gold will easily join it self with the spirit of
wine, and come to be a good medicine, whereof more in my treatise de auro
potabili is handled. If one know the Chalybs of Sandivogius, which is well to
be had, he might with little labor quickly get a good medicine: but because we
show our selves still ungrateful children unto God, therefore it is no marvel,
that he withdraws his hand from us, and leaves us in errors.

What further may be done with the liquor of pebles.
MAny more profitable things, as well in Alchymie, as in medicine may be
compassed by the oil of sand: as for example, to make fair painting colors
out of metals, which abide in all Elements: Also to frame all sort of
transparent hard stones out of crystal, which in beauty are like unto the
natural, yea fairer sometimes: also how to make many fair Amauses and the like
profitable arts: but they belonging not to this second part, shall be reserved
for the fourth, where all such shall be taught very punctually with all the
circumstances thereunto relating.

How by the help of this liquor to make trees to grow out of metals; with their
colors.
Although this process in Physic may be of no great use: yet in regard that to
a Chemical Physician it gives good information of the condition of natural
things, and their change. I thought it not amiss to set it down here.

TAke of the above described oil made of sand pebles or crystals as much as
you please, mix therewith a like quantity of the lixivium of Tartar, shake
both well together, so that the thick liquor may not be perceived in the
lixivium, but be thoroughly incorporated therewith, both being turned to a thin
solution, and then your water is prepared, wherein the metals do grow.

The metals must be first dissolved in their proper corrosive Menstruum, and
the Menstruum must be quite abstracted from thence again, but not too hard,
that the calx of the metal may not grow red-hot, whereby its growing virtue
would be taken from it. Then take it out of the little glass-body, and break it
in pieces about the bigness of a pulse, and lay them in the above described
liquor in a clear bright glass, that the growing of the metals may be discerned
through it, and as soon as the prepared metals are taken out of the glass body,
they must be kept from the air, else th y lose their growing virtue. Therefore
thus dry they must be broken in pieces, and laid in the bottom of the glass
(wherein the liquor is) a fingers breadth one from another asunder, and must
not be laid together on a heap: The glass must stand still in a quiet place,
and the metal will presently swell in it and thrust forth some bulks, out of
which branches and twigs do grow, so finely that one shall admire at it: and
let none think that this growing serves only for to please the eye, for some
special thing is hid in it: for all sand or pebles, although they be white,
invisibly contains a hidden tincture or goldish sulphur, which none without
experience will be able to believe; for if for a time you digest the pure
filings of lead in it, there will gold come to stick to the outside thereof
(which gold may be washed off with water) and lead will look as if it were
gilded. Which gold came from no where else but from sand or pebles, although
they were white and clear, so that it could not be perceived in them It shows
also its meliorating virtue, when the metals do grow therein, and for a certain
space of time are digested therewith. For it may be seen apparently, that the
metals in the growing do increase from this liquor, and attract what is for
their turn; which hence also may be perceived, that when but as much as the
bigness of a pea grows therein, it will grow twice or thrice as big, which is
worthy to be considered of. Also the pebles or sand-stones are the natural
matrixes of metals, and there appears a great sympathy between them,
especially between the unripe metals and them; as if nature should say to such
raw or unripe metals, return into thy mothers womb, and stay there the due
time, till you have attained there to perfect ripeness, for you were taken
thence too soon against my will. Further out of this liquor there may be made a
good borras to reduce the metals thereby. There may be made also with this
liqour fair glased and firm colors upon earthen vessels like unto Porcellan
or China. Also by boiling it with water, a tender impalpable snow-white earth
may be precipitated out of it, whereof there can be made vessels like unto
Porcellan.

Many other useful things may be brought to pass thereby in mechanical
businesses, needless here to relate.

Also the unripe and volatile minerals may be tied and ripened thereby, so that
not only they may be the fitter to be used in Physic, but also the volatile
gold and silver containted in them may be saved thereby, whereof more in the
fourth part.

N. B. Hither belongs also the process of the spirit of lead, virgins-milk and
Dragons blood.

Of the spirit of urine and of the volatile spirit of salt Armoniack.
OUt of urine or salt Armoniack a powerful and penetrating spirit may be made
several ways, which not only is to be used in physic for many diseases, but
is also found very useful in mechanical and Chemical operations, as follows.

Take of the urine of sound men living chaste gather a good quantity together
in a wooden vessel, let it stand for its time to putrefie, and distill a spirit
thereof, which afterward in a great glass retort with a wide neck must be
rectified over calcined Tartar, and still that which comes over first, may be
saved by it self, and so the second and third also* the strongest may be used
for the preparing of metallical medicines and the weaker for a medicine alone
by it self, or else mingled with fit vehicles: and the stronger may serve for
the preparations of metallical medicines: the salt which in the rectification
comes over with the strongest spirit; may be put to the weakest, to make it
the stronger, or else it may be saved by it self in a good strong glass.

But because the spirit of urine is tedious to make, therefore I will show, how
to get it easier out with salt Armoniack. The preparation is thus:

Take of salt Armoniack, and lapis calaminaris, ana, make each by it self into
powder, and then mix them together, and cast of it into the red hot vessel at
once no more then ss. or i. Unto the vessel there must be applied a great
receiver: for this spirit goes with such a force and power, that it were
impossible to distill it in a retort without danger or loss, for I broke more
then one receiver with it, before I did invent this instrument. The spirits
being well settled in the receiver, cast in more of your mixture; this continue
so long till all your matter is cast in; then take off the receiver, and power
the spirit into a strong glass, which must be well closed at the top, but not
with wax and a bladder, because it softeneth the wax and does penetrate through
the bladder; but first stop it with paper, then melt Lacca or sulphur and power
it upon it, so that it come to be very well closed, and then it will not be
able to exhale, or thou may get such glasses made, as in the fifth part
shall be taught, for to keep all the subtle spirits in them, for more security
sake. And this spirit if no water have been mixed with it in the receiver
needs no rectifying: but he that will have it stronger yet, may rectify it
through a glass retort, and so keep it for use.

And this is the best way to make a strong spirit out of salt Armoniack: the
same may be done also, by taking of filed Zinck, in stead of lapis calaminaris:
also by adding of salt of Tartar, salt made of the Lee of wood ashes, unquencht
lime, and the like: but the spirit is nothing near so strong (although all
those things may be done with it, that are done with the former) as that which
is made with lapis calaminaris or Zinck.

The process or the manner of making it is this.
TAke lb i. of salt Armoniack made into powder, and as much of salt of Tartar,
mix both together by the help of a lie made of Tartar, or only with common
water, so that all come to be like a pap, and cast in one spooneful thereof at
once, into a distilling vessel, then cast in more till you have spirit enough.

N. B. The salt of Tartar may also be mixed dry with the salt Armoniack
without any lie or water, and so distilled: but it is not so good, as when the
mixture is tempered with lie or water: for if it be cast in dry, the spirit
will come over in the form of a volatile salt: but if the mixture have been
moystened, then most part thereof will come over like a fiery burning spirit:
in like manner also the mixture of lyme and salt Armoniack may be tempered
moist, and it will yield more spirit then if it be distilled dry.

It may be asked: why lapis calaminaris, Zinck and unquencht lyme, calcined
Tartar, salt of potashes, fixed salt nitre or the like things prepared by the
fire, must be added unto salt Armoniack, and whether it be not as good to add
some bolus, or other earth* (as usually is done to other salts) and so to
distill a spirit of it? To which I answer, that there are two sorts of salts in
salt Armoniack, viz. a common acide salt, and a volatile salt of urine, which
without mortifying of one of them, cannot be separated: for as soon as they
feel the heat, the volatile salt of urine carries the acid salt upwards, and
they both together yield a sublimate, of the same nature and essence with
common salt Armoniack which is not sublimed, salt Armoniack is purer then the
common. And no spirit would come over from it, if it should be mingled with
bole, brick, dust, sand, or any other strengthless earth, and so distilled, but
the whole salt as it is of it self (leaving its earthy substance behind) would
sublime thus dry: but that it falls out otherwise with the lapis calaminaris
(which is also like an earth) so that a separation of the salts is wrought
thereby, and a volatile spirit comes over, the reason is that the lapis
calaminaris and Zinck are of such a nature, that they have a great affinity
with all acid things, and do love them, and are loved by them likewise (whereof
some mention has been made in the first part) so that the acide salt sticks to
it in the warmth and uniteth it self with it, and the salt volatile is made
free, and distilled into a subtle spirit; which could not have been done, if
the acide salt had not been kept back by the lapis calaminaris or Zinck. But
that a spirit is distilled off by addition of fixed salts, the reason is
because that fixed salts are contrary unto acid salts, and (if they get the
upperhand) do kill the same, and rob them of their strength, whereby those
things which are mixed with them are freed from their bond: and so it falls out
here with salt Armoniack, that when by addition of a vegetable fixd salt the
acidity of the salt Armoniack is killed, the salt of urine, which formerly was
bound therewith, gets its former freedom and strength, and sublimated turns
into a spirit. Which could not have been done, if common salt had been added to
the salt Armoniack in stead of salt of Tartar; for the salt of urine would
thereby (as by a far greater enemy be killed and kept back, so that it could
yield no spirit. I thought it fit to give notice hereof to the ignorant (not
for those, who knew it before) and to the unknowing it will do much good, and
that they may have a light for other labors: for I have many times seen, and
see i^ still by daily experience, that the most part of your vulgar Chemists,
whatsoever they do (having got it either by reading, seeing or hearing) they
hurl it over like botchers, and are not able to give any solid reason, why
this or that must fall out in such or another manner, not laboring to find
out the natures and conditions of salts, minerals and other materials, but
contenting themselves only with the Receipt, saying this or that Author has
written so, and therefore it must be so, whereas many times such books are
patcht up out of all sorts of authors. And those that stick to so many books,
will hardly ever come to get any good, but are lead out of one Labyrinth into
another, spending their life miserably in watching and cares: but if they would
first seriously consider things, and learn to know nature, and then take their
work in hand, then they would sooner attain unto true knowledge; and so much
of this matter by the way. I hope that he that has been in error will be
pleased with it, and the knowing will not grudge to have it imparted to the
ignorant.

That which remains after the distillation is done, is also good for use; if
the addition have been of salt of Tartar, a melting powder may be made of it,
to reduce metals. Of lapis calaminaris or Zinck, yields per deliquium a clear,
white and heavy sharp oil; for the sharper part of salt Armoniack, which did
not turn to spirit, has dissolved the lapis calaminaris, and is almost of the
same virtues for external use in Chyrurgury with that, which above in the first
part which was taught to be made out of lapis calaminaris and spirit of salt,
save only that this in the distilling does not yield so strong a spirit as the
other, but only yields a sharp sublimate.

Of the use and virtue of the spirit of salt Armoniack.
THis spirit is of a sharppenetrating essence, and of an airie, moist and warm
nature; and therefore may with credit be used in many diseases, 8. 10. 12.
(more or less) drops thereof used in a convenient vehicle, do immediately
penetrate all the body over, causing sudden sweating, opening the
obstructions of the spleen, and dispersing and expelling many malignities by
sweat and urine, it cures the quartane, colic, the suffocation of the Matrix,
and many more diseases.

In brief, this spirit is a safe, sure and ready medicine for to disperse and
expel all tough, gross and venomous humors. Also, this spirit acts his part
externally, quenching all inflammations, curing the Erysipelas and Grangrene;
it allayeth the pains of the gout, clothes being dipped in it and applied: and
although it draw blisters, it matters not; laid to the pulse, it is good in
ardent fevers, it asswageth swellings and pains; discusseth congealed blood,
helps strayned limbs, and benumbed nerves: only smelled unto it cures the
megrim and other Chronical diseases of the head: for it dissolveth the peccant
matter and evacuateth it through the nostrils; it restores the lost hearing,
being externally laid on with a little instrument fit for the purpose. Also in
the obstructions of women's courses applied by a fit instrument in a spiritual
way, opens presently and cleanses the womb and makes women fruitful, etc.
Mingled with common water, and h^^d in the mouth, asswageth the toothache,
proceeding from sharp humors which are fallen into the teeth. A little of it
applied in a glister, kills the worms in the body, and allayeth the colic.

This spirit can also further be used to many other things, especially by means
thereof many precious and effectual medicaments may be made out of metals and
minerals, whereof some shall be described as follows.

N. B. There is yet another matter, which is found every where and at all
times, and is to be got by every one without distillation and charges, and is
as good for the abovesaid diseases, as the distilled spirit, and if all men
knew it, there would not be found every where so many sick people, nor so many
Doctors and Apothecaries.

To distill a blood red oil of vitriol by the help of the spirit of urine.
DIssolve Hungarian or other good vitriol in common water, and let it run
through a filtring paper, power of this spirit upon it so much, till all the
green be vanished, and the water be made clear, and a yellow sulphur be settled:
then power off the clear, and the rest which is muddy, power together in a
filtrum, that the moisture may run off, and the earth of the vitriol remain in
the paper, which you must dry, and distill to a blood-red oil, which will open
the obstructions of the whole body, and perfectly cure the epilepsie. The
clear water must be evaporated dry, and there will remain a salt, which being
distilled, yields a wonderful spirit. Before it be distilled, it is a
specificum purgans, whereof 8. 10. 12. to 24. grains taken, may safely be used
in all diseases.

The tincture of Vegetables.
SPices, seeds or flowers being extracted therewith and digested and distilled,
the essence of them will come over with it, in the form of a red oil.

Vitriol of copper.
IF you power it upon calx of copper, made by firing and quenching it again,
it will extract within an hours time a fair blew color, and having dissolved
as much thereof as it could, power it off and let it shoot in a cold place,
and you will get a fair sky colored vitriol, a small quantity whereof will
cause strong vomits; the rest of the vitriol remains a blew oil, good to be
used in ulcers.

The Tincture of crude Tartar.
IF you take common crude Tartar, and power of this spirit upon it, and set it
in digestion, the spirit will extract a blood-red Tincture, and if the spirit
be abstracted from it, there will remain a pleasant red oil, of no small
virtue and power.

To make the oils or liquors of salts.
THis spirit also dissolveth crystals and other stones, they being first
dissolved, precipitated and reduced to impalpable powders, turning them into
oils and liquors, good to be used in Alchymy and Physic.

To precipitate all metals with it.
ANy metal being dissolved in an acid spirit can be precipitated better and
purer therewith, then with the liquor of the salt of Tartar; for Aurum
fulminans which is precipitated with it fulminateth far stronger then if it
were done with oil of Tartar.

. Some juice of Lemon with the solution of gold, before it be precipitated, and
then not all the gold will precipitate, but some of it will remain in the
solution, and in time many small green stones (not unlike unto common vitriol)
will appear; which in a small dose will purge all noxious humors.

The oil and vitriol of silver.
IF you dissolve silver in Aqua fortis, and power so much of this spirit into
it till it cease to make a noise, some of the silver will precipitate in the
form of a black powder, the rest of the silver remains in the liquor: the
phlegm abstracted from it in Balneo, till it get a skin at the top, and then
set into a cool place, there will grow white crystals in it, which being taken
out and dried are a good purge in madness, dropsy, fevers and other diseases,
safely and without danger to be used to young and old. The rest of the liquor
which did not crystallise may be extracted with spirit of wine, and the saeces
being cast away the extraction will be pleasanter. The spirit of wine
abstracted from it, there will remain a medicine of no small value in all
diseases of the brain.

To extrast a red Tincture out of Antimony or common sulphur.
Boil sulphur or Antimony made into powder in a lie of the salt of Tartar,
till the lie turn red, and power this spirit upon it, and distill gently in a
Balneum, and there will come over a fair Tincture with the volatile spirit,
silver anointed therewith will be guilt, though not lastingly. It serves for
all diseases of the lungs.

How to ripen Antimony and common sulphur, so that several sorts of such smells,
as vegetables have, arise from thence.
DIssolve Antimony or sulphur in the liquor of pebles or sand, coagulate the
solution to a red mass; upon this mass power spirit of urine, and let it
extract in a gentle warmth. The spirit being colored red, power it off, and
power on other spirit, let it extract likewise, and this you must iterate so
often, till the spirit will extract no more tincture; then power all the
extracts together and abstract the spirit of urine from it in Balneum through a
limbeck, and there will remain a blood red liquor, and if you power upon this
spirit of wine it will extract a fairer tincture then the former was, leaving
the saeces behind, and this tincture smells like garlic: and if it be
digested three or four weeks in a gentle warmth, it will get a very pleasant
smell, like unto the yellow prunes or plums: and if it remain longer yet in
digestion, it will get a smell not inferior to musk and ambar; This Tincture
having been digested a long time, and got several smells, is not only notably by
the fire increased in pleasantness of smell and taste, but also in virtue: for
so many and various sweet smells are perceived in it, that it is to be admired,
which variety and exaltation proceeds only from the pure and ripening spirit
of urine for there is hid in it a fire, which does not destroy but preserve and
graduate all colors, whereof in another place more shall be said.

N. B. Betwixt the spirit of urine and the animal and mineral Copper there
appears a great sympathy; for it does not only love copper above all other
metals, and mingleth easily with it, and makes it extraordinary fair and of
good use in Physic, but it prepares it also to such a medicine, whereby all
venereous sores (both by inward and outward use) how deep so ever they took
root in the blood, without the use of any other medicaments, are perfectly
cured; it makes fruitful and barren according as it is used; it cleanses the
matrix, hinders the rising thereof, and miraculously furthereth women's courses
that have been stayed, above all other medicamenes of what name so ever.

If this spirit be mingled with the volatile (but not corrosive) spirit of
vitriol or common salt there will come a salt out of it, which is inferior to
none in fusibleness, and useful both in Alchymy and Physic.

N. B. The liquor of the salt of Tartar, and the spirit of wine do not mix
without water, this being the mean partaking of both their natures, and if you
add unto it spirit of urine it will not mingle but keep its own place: so that
these three sorts of liquors, being put in the same glass, and though they be
shaked never so much will not encorporate for all that: the liquor of the salt
of Tartar keeps to the bottom, next to it will be the spirit of urine, and
on the top of that is the spirit of wine: and if you power a distilled oil
upon it, they will keep uppermost of all, so that you may keep four sorts of
liquors in one glass, whereof none is mingled with the other.

Although this be of no great profit, yet it serves for to learn thereby the
difference of spirits.

Of the spirit and oil of Hartshorn.
TAke Hartshorn, cut it with a saw into pieces, of the bigness of a finger, and
cast in one of it at a time in the aforesaid distilling vessels, and when the
spirits are fettled, then another; and continue this until you have spirits
enough; and the vessel being filled with the pieces that were carried in, take
them out with the tongs, and cast in others, and do this as often as is
needful. The distilling being finished, take off the receiver, and power into
it dephlegmed spirit of wine, which will cleanse the volatile salt: power the
oil with the spirit and salt volatile through a filtring paper made wet first
and lying in a glass funnel, and the spirit of wine together with the spirit of
Hartshorn and the volatile salt will run through the paper, and the blackish
oil will stay behind, but it must quickly be powered out, else it will through
after them. The spirit together with the volatile salt rectify through a
retort, and the best part of the spirit will come over together with the spirit
of wine and volatile salt: and when the phlegm is coming, take off the spirit,
which is come over, that the naughty phlegm may not come amongst it; keep it
well, for it is very volatile, the oil may be mingled with salt of Tartar, and
rectified through a glass retort, and so it will be clear; if you will have it
fairer, you must rectify it with spirit of salt.

The first, which is done with salt of Tartar, is of more virtue; it cures the
quartane, proveketh sweating extremely, cures all internal wounds and pains,
which were caused by falls, blows, or other ways: 6. or 8. 10. to 20. drops of
it taken in wine and sweated upon it in the bed. The spirit is very good for
all obstructions of the whole body, from ss. to ss. thereof taken in a fit
vehicle, provokes urine, and forces down women's courses, it cleanses the
blood and makes sweat mightily. In the Plague, Pox, Leprosy, Scurvy,
Melancholia Hypochondriaca, malignant fevers and the like where sweating is
necessary, it proves a rare medicine.

To make the spirit of man's hair an excellent medicine.
AFter the same manner you may make spirits out of all kind of horns and claws
of beasts: but since by reason of their ill smell the use of them is not liked
of (though in several heavy diseases, as in the fits of the mother and
Epilepsie, they do admirably well:) therefore I will acquiesce. However it is
worth observing, that the spirit made of mans*haire is not to be rejected in
metallical operations; for it dissolveth the common sulphur, and reduces it
into a milk, which by further ripening may be turned into blood, the like
whereunto no spirit is able to do. The same spirit may also of it self, without
addition of sulphur be fixed into a ruby; but that which is ripened with
sulphur is the better: and if it be brought so far by the fire, that it have
lost its stink and be made fix, then it will be able sufficiently to pay for
the pains and coals bestowed upon it.

N. B. Hither belongs the Process to power dissolved metals upon filed
hartshorn, and so to distill them.

Of the oil of Ambar.
AMbar yeildeth a very pleasant oil and of great virtue, especially the white
Ambar: the yellow is not so good and the black is inferior to this: for by
reason of its impurity it cannot be well used inwardly: and there comes over
also along with it a volatile salt and an acid water, which must be separated:
the water (for ought that I know) is of little virtue: the salt if it be
sublimed from the salt of Tartar and purified, is a good diuretic, and in the
stone and the Gout, and may successefully be used both inwardly and outwardly.
The oil if it be rectified, especially that which comes over first, is an
excellent medicine against the plague, epilepsie, rising of the mother and
megrim, 6. 8. 10. to 20. drops being taken thereof at once, and the nostrils
also being anointed therewith for to smell to it: and it is to be observed, that
when it is rectified through spirit of salt, it proves much cleerer, then done
by it self without addition: but if it be rectified with salt of Tartar, it is
of much more virtue: though it fall not so clear, as that which is done by
spirit of salt.

N. B. If it be rectified over a strong Aqua Regia having before once already
been rectified with spirit of salt, it will turn so subtle, that it is able to
dissolve iron or copper in some sort, and to reduce them into good medicines:
and in this second rectification by Aqua Regia all will not come over, but part
of it will be coagulated by the corrosive water, so that it turns thick, like
unto mastick, which in the warmth is soft, and may be handled with ones fingers
like wax: but in the cold it is so hard, that it may be broken and made into
powder, and glistereth like gold.

Of the oil of soot.
OF the soot, which is taken from Chimneys, where nothing is burnt else but
wood, there may be distilled a sharp volatile salt and a hot oil. The salt is
in virtue not unlike unto that which is made of hartshorn or ambar; and it
quenches inflammation, from what cause so ever it do proeeed: The oil may
without rectification externally be used very successefully for all loathsome
scabs and for a scald head, etc. But if it be rectified, as has been taught to
be done with the oil of Tartar, of Ambar, and of Hartshorn; then it may safely
used inwardly, as the above written oils are used; for it be does prove, as
good as these, yea better in some special cases.

How to make a good oil out of soot without distilling.
Boil the soot in common water, till the water turn blood-red (urine is better
then water) and set this solution (being in an earthen pot) in winter time into
the greatest frost so long till all in the pot be frozen into one piece and
turned white: then brake the pot and the ice, and in the midst thereof you will
find the hot oil unfrozen and liquid in color like blood, which is not much
inferior in virtue unto that which is distilled, yet afterward it may be
rectified, and so exalted in its virtue, when you please, and is to be noted,
that this separation does only succeed in the greatest frost and cold, and not
else.

Of the spirit and oil of haney.
OF honey there may be made a subtle spirit and a sour vinegar, if it be
mingled with twice as much of pure calcined sand and so distilled; and it
falls muchbetter yet if it be made with the flores of Antimony, which were
taught to be made in the first part, whereby the spirit is increased in its
virtue, and its running over hindered thereby; and so distilling it, there will
come over a pleasant spirit, a sharp vinegar and some red oil also, which must
be separated: the spirit after the rectification inwardly used is good in all
diseases of the lungs. It opens and enlarges the breast, strengthens the
heart, takes away all obstructions of the liver and spleen: it dissolveth and
expels the stone, resists all putrefaction of the blood; preserves from
and cures the plague; all agues, dropsies, and many other diseases, daily used
from j. to j. taken with distilled water proper for the diseases: the sour
vinegar colors hair and nails as yellow as gold: it cures the itch and
scabs of the skin; it cleanses and heals old and new wounds, they being
bathed and washed therewith.

The red oil is too strong to be used of it self, it may be mingled with the
subtle spirit which came over first and so used, and the spirit will be exalted
thereby in its virtue.

Of the oil and spirit of sugar.
IN the same manner as has been taught of honey, there is also made a spirit
and oil of sugar, viz. adding pure sand to it; or (which is better) of the
flores of Antimony, and then according to the rules of Art one spoonful after
the other of this mixture cast in, it will yield a yellow spirit, and a little
red oil, which after the distillation must be digested in Balneo so long
together, till the spirit have assumed the oil and be turned thereby very red
color; it needs not to be rectified, but may daily be used either by it
self, or with such vehicles as are proper for your purpose: in all it is like
in virtue unto that which was made of honey: yet this of sugar is more pleasant
then the other: it renews and restoeth all the blood in man, in regard that
it received great virtue from the diaphoretical flores of Antimony; and this
spirit may fitly be used in all diseases, it can do no hurt, neither in cold
nor hot diseases: it does help nature mightily, and does so much good, that it
is almost beyond belief. Especially if for a time it be daily used from j. to
j. The residue of it is black, and may be kept for the same use again, viz. for
an addition to other honey or sugar, or else you may sublime it again into
flores in the furnace described in the first part, or in the furnace described
in the fourth part of this book with an addition of iron or Tartar or salt
nitre into a Regulus, etc.

To distill an excellent spirit and a blood red tincture of corals and sugar.
IF you mix sugar with red corals made into powder and distill it, there will
besides the spirit come over a blood-red Tincture like a heavy oil, which is
to be joined with the spirit by digestion in Balneo, and it will be as virtuous
as that which was made with Antimony diaphoreticum. It does perfectly and
lastingly cure epilepsie in young and old; it cleanses the blood* from all
filth, so that leprosy together with its several species may be cured thereby,
etc. Its use is the same as was taught above of the Antimonized spirit of sugar.

Of the spirit of Must or new wine.
TAke sweet Must or juice of grapes, as soon as it is squeezed out, boil it
to the consistency of honey, and then mix it with sand, corals, or (which is
better) with flores of Antimony, and so distill it, and it will yield such
another spirit as that which is made of honey or sugar: only that this is
somewhat tarter then that of honey. With honey, sugar and the juice of grapes
several metals may be dissolved in boiling and so prepared and made up into
diverse medicaments, both with and without distillation, after the same manner
as was taught above with Tartar: for honey, sugar and the juice of grapes, are
nothing else but a sweet salt, which by fermentation and addition of some sour
thing, may be changed into a sour Tartar, in all like unto that which is
gathered in the wine vessels. There can be made also a Tartar out of cherries,
pears, apples, figs, and all other fruit, yielding a sweet juice: as also of
rye, wheat, oats, barley and the like, whereof in the third part more shall
be said.

For every sweet liquor of vegetables, if it be turned inside out, by
fermentation may be changed to a natural sour Tartar; and it is utterly false,
that (as some do suppose) only wine yields Tartar, which by daily use made of
it by those that have very hungry stomachs (like Woolves) indistinctly together
with the nourishment went into the limbs, and the^e turned to a stony matter.
If this were true, then in cold countries, where no wine grows, men would not
be troubled with the gout or stone; the contrary whereof is seen daily: though
I must confess, that among all vegetable none yeildeth more then the vine, the
concurrent acidity being cause thereof; for it turns the sweetness into
Tartar: for the sowrer the wine is, the more Tartar it yeildeth; and so much
the sweeter, so much the less Tartar. By this discourse an industrious Chemist
may easily come to know the original nature and proprieties of Tartar, and in
default of wine, how to make it out of other vegetables, the common salt or the
salt of Tartar may be distilled with honey, sugar, or sodden wine (sapa) and it
will yield as strong spirits, as that metals may be dissolved with them, and
they are not to be despised in Physic and Alchymie.

Of oil Olive.
OUt of oils made by expression (as oil olive, rape oil, wallnut oil,
hempseed oil, linseed oil and the like) there may be distilled a penetrating
oil, useful both outwardly and inwardly, which is done thus: Take common
potters clay not mingled with sand, frame little bals of it, as big as a
pigeons or hens-egg, burn them (but not too strong) to a hard stone, so that
they may attract the oil; and when they are no more quite red-hot, but pretty
hot, then throw them into oil olive which is the best; let them lie in it,
till they be quite full and drunk of the oil, which will be done in two or
three hours (some cast them red hot into the oil, but amiss, because the oil
contracts thence an Empyreuma) Then take them out, and cast in one or two of
them at once into your distilling-vessel made red-hot, and let it go; and
within a while after carry in one or two more, and continue this till you have
oil enough. If the vessel be full of the bals, take them out with the tongs or
ladle, that you may proceed without let in your distillation, and in this manner
you need not fear the breaking of your retort or receiver, or the burning of
your oil. The distillation being performed take off your receiver, power the
oil that came over into a glass retort, and rectify it from calcined Allome
or Vitriol, and the Allome will keep back the blackness and stinck, and so the
oil will come over clear, which must be yet rectified once or twice more with
fresh calcined Allome, according to the intensness of penetrating which you
look for: that which comes over first, ought still to be caught by it self,
and you will get a very fair, bright and clear oil, which is very subtle; but
that which comes after is somewhat yellow, and not so penetrating neither as
the first; and therefore it is but for external use to extract flowers and
herbs therewith, and to make precious balsames for cold and moist sores. Also
you may dissolve with it ambar, mastick, myrrh and the like attractive things,
and with wax and Colophony reduce it to a plaster, which will be very good in
venomous sores and boyles, for to attract the poison and to heal them out of
hand. If you dissolve in it common yellow sulphur made into powder, you will
get a blood red balsame, healing all manner of scabs, and other like defects of
the skin; especially when you add to it purified Spanish green, and in hot
sores Saccharum Saturni, which in a gentle heat and by continual stirring about
do easily melt and mingle therewith. It needs not to be done in glasses, but
may be done in an ordinary earthen pot or pipkin.

The use of the blessed oil.
THe first and clear is of a very penetrating nature: some drops thereof given
in some Aqua vitae, presently stays the colic, proceeding from winds that
could not be vented; as also the rising of the mother, the navil being anointed
therewith: and a cold humor being fallen upon the nerves, whereby they are lamed;
if you do but anoint them with this oil, and rub it in with warm hands, it
will quickly restore them, and therefore in regard of its present help may well
be called Oleum sanctum. If you extract plate of iron or copper with this oil,
it will turn deep red or green, and is a sovereign remedy for to warm and dry
up all cold and watery sores. It consumes also all superfluous moisture in
wounds and ulcerous sores, as also all other excrescencies of the skin: it
heals tettars and scald-heads and other like defects proceeding from
superfluous cold and moisture. You may also dissolve in it Euphorbium and other
hot gums, and use them against great frost, for what limb so ever is anointed
therewith no frost how great so ever can do it any hurt. The balsames made with
gum or sulphur may be also distilled through a retort, and in some cases they
are more useful then the undistilled balsame.

Of the oil of Wax.
IN the same manner may be distilled also the oil of wax, the use whereof is
in all like unto the former; and for all cold and infirmities of the nerves,
this is found more effectual yet then the former.

A Spirit good for the Stone.
OUt of the stones which are found in grapes, there may be distilled a sour
spirit, which is a certain and specifical remedy for the stone in the kidneys
and bladder, and also for all pains of the gout. It is not only to be used
internally but also externally, wetting clothes in it, and applying them to the
places affected, and it will assuage and drive away the pains.

Of the spirit or acid oil of Sulphur.
TO reduce sulphur into a sour spirit or oil has been sought hitherto by
many, but found by few. Most of them made it in glass-bels, but got very little
that way; for the glasses being quickly hot, could not hold the oil, so that
it went away in a smoke. Some thought to get it by distilling, others by
dissolving, but none of all these would do the feat. Which is the reason why
nowadayes it is found almost no where right and in the Drugsters and
Apothecaries shops they usually sell oil of Vitriol in stead of it, which by
far is not to be compared in virtue to the oil of sulphur. For this is not
only of a far pleasanter sour taste, but in efficacy also much exceeds the
other. And therefore being of so great use both in Physic and Alchymie, as in
all hot diseases, mingling the patients drink therewith, till it get a pleasant
sour taste, for to quench the intolerable drowth, to strengthen the stomach,
to refresh the lungs and the liver: Also externally for to cure the gangrene:
Also for to crystallise some metals thereby and to reduce them into pleasant
vitriols, useful as well in Alchymie as Physic; I thought good to set down the
preparation, though it be not done in this our distilling furnace, but in
another way by kindling and burning it as follows.

Make a little furnace with a grate, above which a strong crucible must be
fastened resting on two iron bars, and it is to be ordered so that the smoke be
conveyed (not above by the crucible, but) through a pipe at the side of the
furnace: the crucible must be filled with sulphur even to the top; and by a
cole-fire without flame be brought to burn and kept burning. Over the burning
sulphur, a vessel is to be applied of good stony earth like unto a flat dish
with a high brim, wherein is always cold water to be kept, and whereunto the
burning sulphur do flame: Which thus burning its fatness consumes, and the
acid salt is freed and sublimed to the cold vessel, where it is dissolved by
the air, and in the form of a sharp oil runs from the hollow vessel into the
receiver, which must be taken off sometime, and more sulphur supplied in stead
of that which has been consumed, to the end that the sulphur may still burn in
the crucible: and beat with the flame to the cold head: and within few days
you will get a great quantity of oil, which else by the (campana) glass-bell
in many weeks could not have been done.

N. B. Such a sour spirit or oil may also be got by distillation together
with the flores, viz. thus: If you take pieces of sulphur as big as hens eggs,
and carry them one after another into the hot distilling vessel, a sour oil
together with flores will come over into the receiver, which must with water be
separated out of the flores and the water abstracted from it again in a
cucurbit and in the bottom of your glass body you will find the oil, which
in virtue and taste is equal to the former, but you get nothing near so much in
quantity by this way, and if you do not look for the oil, you may leave it
with the flores, which by reason of their pleasant acid taste are much
toothsomer to take then the ordinary ones.

To the courteous Reader.
THus I conclude this second part; I could have set down more medicinal
processes in this Treatise: but having as many as will be a sufficient guide
for the distilling of other things also, I thought it good here to acquiesce;
and whatsoever is proper for this Treatise, and has been forgotten or omitted,
shall be made amends for in the following parts.

FINIS.
THE THIRD PART OF THE PHILOSOPHICAL FURNACES: IN WHICH Is described the Nature
of the THIRD FVRNACE; By the help whereof, and that without Stils, and
Caldrons, and other Copper, Iron, Tin, and Leaden Instruments, various
Vegetable burning Spirits, Extracts, Oils, Salts, etc. By the help of a
certain little Copper Instrument, and wooden vessels are made for Chemical and
Medicinal uses.

By JOHN RUDOLPH Glauber.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, for Tho: Williams at the sign of the Bible
in Little-Britain. 1652.

A Preface of the Copper Instrument and Furnace.
NOW this Instrument is made of strong Copper plates after the following
manner. You must make two strong hemispheares of Copper or Latten of the
bigness of a man's head (or thereabout) and join them together with a most
strong soder, and that without tin, whereof the one must have a pipe: Now the
pipe must be of a most exact roundnesse, that it may most accurately fit the
hole that is made with an auger or wimble to keep the water from flowing out
like to a tap, of the length of one span at least, wider on the hinder part
toward the globe, then on the forepart, which also must be according to the
bigness of the globe, greater or lesser, and be exactly joined with the best
soder to its hemispheare, and the diameter of the forepart being very round
like a tap, and most exactly filling the round hole must be of two fingers
breadth. Now there is required to the foresaid instrument or globe a certain
peculiar little furnace made of iron or copper, viz. most strong copper plates,
covered within with stones or the best lute, i^t^ which is put that globe like
a retort, so that it may lie upon two iron barrels of the distance of a span,
or span and half from the grate; the work whereof (that pipe) goes forth of
the furnace one span at least. The furnace also must have below a place for the
ashes, and above a cover with its hole for the letting forth of the smoke, and
for regulating the fire, as you may see by the annexed figure. It must also
below have a treefoot on which the furnace must be set, and on the sides two
handles by the help whereof it may be removed from place to place; the which is
very necessary; for it is not only used for the distilling of burning spirits
by wooden vessels instead of copper, but also for such distillation, and
digestion that is performed in gourds, boltheads, and other instruments, of
glass, stone, copper, tin, etc. which are to be set in Balneo: also in the
boiling of beer, methegline, wine, and other drinks, which are to be performed
by the help of wooden vessels.

A. The furnace with a Copper globe.

B. The Copper globe.

C. The distilling vessel.

D. The refrigeratory with a worm.

E. The receiver.

F. Stools on which the vessels stand.

A Balneum with a cover having holes in it for the glasses, set upon a treefoot.

A wooden vessel for the making of Beer.



A Tub for a moist Bath, which is to be warmed by the Copper Globe.

A wooden Box for a dry Bath to provoke sweat with volatile spirits.



THE THIRD PART OF PHILOSOPHICAL FURNACES.
Of Wooden Instruments of that are to be used instead of Stills, Baths, and
Cauldrons.
IN the first place I shall speak of wooden vessels that are to be used instead
of Copper stils, in the distilling of burning spirits, out of wine, beer, lees,
malt, wheat, meal, roots, herbs, flowers, seeds, and other vegetables, as also
oils of vegetables.

See that thou have an oaken barrel, like to those wherein wine and beer are
kept, of a just bigness, viz. answerable to the bigness of the globe, as is
sufficient for the coction: For a barrel that is too big will make the coction
slow, and tedious. A greater globe may be fitted to a lesser barrel, but not on
the contrary, a great barrel to a little globe: For by how much bigger the
globe is and the less the barrel, so much the sooner is the work hastened. Now
seeing that this Art was invented for the saving of costs, which otherwise
would have bin expended in providing of stils, cauldrons, furnaces, etc. it is
best not to have too great a globe, which requires a greater furnace, and is
more hardly to be carried, because it is to be covered within with lute, or a
wall; for it is sufficient if it be big enough for the coction. Wherefore I will
give you a just and due proportion of both, viz. of the globe, and vessel,
which in distillations and other operations, the courteous reader may imitate.

A globe of the bigness of a man's head, containing three or four cannes,
whereof each containing four pints, is sufficient for the heating of a barrel
of 30, 40, 50, 60 and 100 gallons, which by how much the more remote from 100
and nearer to 30, so much the sooner is it heated, and the coction furthered;
and on the contrary, by how much the nearer it is to 100 and more remote from
30, so much the slower is the coction. I do not therefore advise that a huge
barrel be chosen for a small globe, by reason of a long and tedious operation:
And if all and every thing be not so accurately observed to a hair, yet it
matters not much, because it suffices to do the same thing by the help of any
small copper instrument, which otherwise is done by diverse copper instruments
of diverse forms. For in this way of distilling, wooden vessels that are
requisite to the distilling of spirits, and boiling of Beer, and for baths are
more easily provided, then so many copper vessels in the common way. For by
this means not only costs are spared, but also it is in stead of building of
furnaces; because when any barrel has been used, you may remove it, and set
another in the place of it for another operation, the which cannot be done with
stils and cauldrons fastened into a furnace. And this invention is for those
that want Artificers, as Coppersmiths, etc. because wooden instruments are more
easily provided: also by the help of this globe may most secret operations be
performed.

For the furnace with the copper globe may be built in one place, and in
another place the Balneum, viz. places divided with a wall, so that he that
looks to the fire may not know what is done in the Elaboratory; for oftentimes
the care of the fire is committed to heedlesse servants, that break glass
instruments by their carelesseness, by which means oftentimes a most precious
medicine is lost; which danger this invention is without.

Wherefore this copper globe with its wooden vessels is more convenient then
those copper stils and cauldrons. But this I would have thee know that this new
invented distillation is slower, then the common way which is performed by
stills, and consequently requires a long fire. I desire therefore the rich that
dwell in large and spacious houses, that they would use the old way of
distilling; but the poor, who have but little household conveniences, and the
covetous, that they would use this little copper globe with its wooden vessels:
for although there be a longer fire required, yet these are not to be compared
to those costs which are otherwise expended upon so many copper vessels of so
many diverse forms. Let him therefore keep to his copper vessels, who cannot
understand me, for it concerns not me. Without doubt there are some whom this
my new invented way of distilling will please, before other, being communicated
for the sake of the poor laboring housekeepers, that cannot boil Beer, and
distill burning spirits for lack of vessels: for a globe of five or four pound
is more easily provided, then other copper vessels of 60, 80, 100 pound: also
those wooden vessels are more easily provided then furnaces, which some for
want of place only cannot build. Choose therefore which way thou will, for
these things which I have wrote, I have wrote for the poores sake rather then
of the rich. Certainly rich men that have spacious Elaborateries need not be
ashamed to follow this way, for it is free for every man to go a shorter way,
unless they had rather prefer the old and true way before a new and
compendious, whom I cannot help, being contented with a publication which is
made for the sake of my neighbor, whether it be taken well or ill, with a good
mind, certainly knowing that more profit then disprofit may be obtained by the
help thereof. It shall not therefore repent him of his labor, who knows
rightly to prepare and use copper and wooden vessels.

There follows now the preparation of the vessel.
THE vessel being made is to be placed with one bottom, upon a stool that is
fitted for it, which being done, make a hole with a wimble near the bottom,
for the receiving of the neck of the copper globe, which is to be covered over
with a linen cloth: make also about the lower bottom another hole for a tap,
by the help whereof the remainder of the distillation is drawn forth: also you
must make a large hole in the upper bottom, the diameter whereof must be one
span for to pour in the water to be distilled, with a funnell. Also there must
be made a hole near the upper bottom of two or three fingers breadth, into
which is to be sent a copper pipe of a span long, which is to be fastened
closely therein; and to this pipe another oaken vessel with a copper worm and
cold water like to other refrigeratories, must be applied. Also the joints of
the aforesaid short pipe, viz. of the first barrel, and of the second barrel,
viz. the refrigeratory must be straightly, and closely united together, which
afterward may be the better joined together with a fit lute for the distilling.
And this is the form and fashion of the wooden vessel, that is to be used in
the place of copper vessels, in the distilling of burning spirits and oiles.
But thou will object that these kind of wooden vessels are porous, and drink
up great part of the spirit and oils.

I answer; none of the spirits seeks a violent passage out, in case the ways
be open. There is no danger therefore, when there is passage enough given them
by a pipe that is wide enough. Neither does oil stick to them in distillation,
for whatsoever is by force of the boiling water to be separated from the
spirit, and seeds that also is sublimable by the force of the seething water,
so as to distill in the refrigeratory no more is lost then in the stils.
Distillation being made, the aforesaid spirits may be rectified in these wooden
vessels, (being first washed) as well as in the copper stils.

The making of a wooden vessel for a Balneum, which is to be used in stead of
copper and leaden Cauldrons for digestion, and distillation by glass vessels.
MAke an oaken vessel as big or as little as you please, according to the
greatness, or littleness, multitude, or forms of the vessels, of two or
three spans high, a little narrower above then below, and so fashioned above,
that a cover of wood, copper, or lead, may most closely be joined to it: the
cover must have holes greater or lesser, according to the glasses, as is wont
to be in the making of a Balneum, as you may see by the annexed figure. This
vessel also must be placed upon a stool of the height of an el, or such height
as is required for the joining of the copper globe with the Balneum, which must
have a hole near the lower bottom, for the receiving of the neck of the
aforesaid globe. In defect of such a vessel, which yet you may provide easily
enough, take a wine or beer vessel divided in the middle and make a hole near
the bottom for the neck of the globe, make also a wooden cover with holes,
etc. He that will be curious may provide all things according to the best Art.

A wooden vessel serving for boiling of beer, metheglin, vinegar, etc. as
well as copper Iron and tin vessels.
MAke a wooden vessel, which shall be more high then broad, a little under
above then below, as you please; or take a wine or beer barrel divided in the
middle, and near; the bottom make a hole for the neck of the globe, which is
to be covered with boards, which serves as well for the boiling of beer, etc. as
those of copper.

A wooden vessel for a bath for sweet, or mineral water, which may be
according as you please, kept warm, for the preserving of health.
MAke a long wooden tub convenient to sit in, which is to be set upon a stool
of a just height, viz. that the bottom of the vessel may answer the neck of
the globe which is put into the furnace: you may also have a cover, that may
cover the whole tub, which may be divided and united in that place where the
head goes forth, as appeates by the annexed figure; or you may cover it with a
cloth, laying it upon small crooked sticks fastened in the tub, yet so that the
head may have its liberty, especially in a vaporous bath of common sweet, or
medicinal water; or make a high wooden cover shutting very close, for a dry
sweat, where it is no matter whether the head be shut in or no.

Of the use of wooden vessels in distilling, boiling, bathing, etc. And first
of the distilling vessel.
HE that will distill any burning spirit by help of the distilling vessel, out
of wine, metheglin, beer, barley, wheat, meal, apples, pears, cherries, figs,
etc. also out of flowers, seeds, and other vegetables, has need so to prepare
his materials, that they may yield their spirit. Where I thought it convenient,
and indeed necessary to say something of the preparation of each vegetable, for
better information sake, or else a profitable distillation is not to be
expected; but labor in vain to be feared.

And first of the preparation of the lees of wine, beer, hydromel, and other
drinks.
THe lees of wine, beer, hydromel, etc. have no need to be prepared, because
they do easily enough of themselves yield their spirit, unless happily having
lost all their humidity they be dried, which you may make moist again by the
admixtion of common water, l^ft they be burnt in distilling and stick to the
vessel; of which thing more in the distillation it self. Now flowers, roots,
herbs, seeds, fruits, apples, pears, cannot be distilled without a foregoing
preparation. You must therefore first prepare them, as follows.

Of the preparation of all kind of corn, as wheat, Oats, Barley, etc. which must
go before the distilling of the spirit.
ANd first of all a malt must be made of the corn, as it is wont to be in the
making of beer. Now the manner of making of malt is known almost to all,
wherefore I need not speak much of that, because in all places that have no
wine, there is scarce any house found in which Malt and Beer is not made, as
well in the country as cities. But however there is a great deal of difference
of making of it, for a long knife does not make a good Cook, nor all drinkers
of wine are good planters. For many have persuaded themselves, that, if they
follow the footsteps of their fathers, they have done well (although they have
been in an error) and being scornful refuse instruction. Wherefore something
is to be said of the difference of malting. Although I never exercised the Art
of making Beer, yet I am certain I do in that excel all other distillers, and
Brewers. For I often saw, and indeed with admiration, the simplicity of many in
their operations, although common, and daily, to whom though an age should be
granted, yet they would never be more thrifty, being content with their
ancient customs. Good God! How perverse is the world, where no body labors to
find out any good, neither is there any one that thinks of perfecting, and
amending things already found out: Where all things run to ruin, and all
manner of vice increase: for now almost every one seeks only after riches by
right or wrong; for it is all one with them, if they have them, not thinking
that things ill gotten shall perish, and that the third heir shall not enjoy
them, and that unjust riches shall devour hose that have been honestly gotten,
with danger also of eternal damnation. I pray you if our Ancestors had been so
negligent, and had left nothing to us, I pray you, I say, what Arts and
Sciences should we have had now? It is come to this pass now that virtues
decrease, and vices increase.

Of the difference of malting.
THe difference of malt, by reason whereof it yields better or worse beer, and
spirit, consists for the most part in the preparation thereof: for being made
after the vulgar way it retains its taste, wherefore it cannot yield good
spirit, nor good beer, which is observed of very few, wherefore they could not
draw forth good spirit out of corn, but such as savours of the taste and smell
of the malt. Which is not the salt of the corn, but of the artificer not
operating aright in the preparation of his malt, in distilling and rectifying.
For if it were prepared a right in all things, corn yields the best spirit, not
unlike to that which is made out of the lees of wine, in taste, odor, and other
virtues. Which Art, although it be not known to all, yet it does not follow
that it is impossible: Now I did not say that it is that common way, whereby
that spirit, which is like to the spirit of wine, is distilled, but another
which is more subtle, and witty. Out of all vegetables is drawn a burning
spirit, yet such as is perceived by some difference of the taste, and odor, but
that is not the spirits fault, but of the vegetable, as of herbs, seeds, corn,
etc. communicating their virtues, taste, and odor to the spirit: whence that
spirit deserves to be called not simple, but compounded; for else all the
burning spirit (being rightly rectified from its phlegm) is made out of any
thing, having the same virtues with the spirit of wine, although it seem
unprobable to some. I do not deny that one simple may yield more or less sweet
spirit then another. For sweeter wines yield sweeter spirits: Also clear wine
yields a sweeter spirit then the lees of wine, although they come forth out of
one and the same vessel: For clarified wine, and that which is sparated from
the faeces yields a sweeter spirit then the Lees, and impure and heterogeneal
sediment which corrupts the simple, and sweet spirit, with (...) strong taste
and smell: so that that may deservedly being as it were simple, be preferred
before this which is accidentally corrupted. And this is to be understood of
all other spirits. What has hitherto been said, has been spoken for the sakes
of them, who have persuaded themselves that they could not perform chemical
operations so well by the spirit of corn, as with the spirit of wine, for I
never found any difference of both in the extraction of minerals, as
vegetables. Let him therefore that can receive my opinion, and experience,
seeing I will have nothing to do with contradicting Carpers: Without hurt to
others I dare not reveal the Art of distilling sweet spirit with great profit
out of corn, in all things like to that which is made of the faeces of wine,
viz. without preparation or grinding of malt, which shall happily be communicated
elsewhere at some time or other. For this Book is not written for the
publishing of secrets, but of a new invented distillation. But thou that wilt
make a sweet burning spirit out of malt or honey; know this, that the corn must
be brought after a certain peculiar manner into malt, and lose its ungrateful
savor before its distilling, and fermenting, or else after the wonted manner a
certain ungrateful spirit will be drawn from thence, that cannot be compared
to the spirit of wine. The whole Art therefore consists in a true preparation;
For ungrateful things are by Art brought into a gratefulness, and on the
contrary grateful things are made ungrateful by negligence. And thus much for
information sake.

Of the fermentution of Malt.
TAke of malt ground in a mil as much as you please, upon which in a wooden
vessel set up right, pour cold water, as much as will moisten it, and serve for
mixtion and comminution; then also pour as much warm water as will suffice for
the making the mixture moist, and thin, and also warm; for it must be neither
hot nor cold; which being done mix with it some new barm, and cover it with a
cloth, and in a short space being exposed to heat, it will begin to ferment
(wherefore the vessel is not to be filled to the top) and leave it so long in
fermentation, until the mixture descends, which for the most part is wont to be
done the third day, and the malt will be ready for distillation.

Of the fermentation of Honey.
NEither has honey any need of a singular Art in its fermentation, because
being mixed with 6, 7, 8, 10 parts of warm water, it is dissolved, and unto the
solution is added ferment, as has been spoken concerning malt, which afterward
is left covered in some heat for to be fermented, being fit for distillation
when it becomes to wax hot. Now know that too great a quantity of honey makes a
very slow fermentation, viz. of some weeks and months; wherefore for
acceleration sake, I advise that a greater quantity of water be added;
although otherwise it yields plenty of spirits, but ungrateful, which therefore
I advise no body to distill as being unprofitable, unless any one know how to
take away the ungratefulness thereof.

Of the preparation of fruits, seeds, flowers, herbs, roots, etc.
THe fruits of trees, as cherries, plums, apples, pears, figs, juniper berries,
elder-berries, dwarf-elder, and mulberries, etc. are bruised in wooden vessels,
with wooden pestils; and upon them being bruised is poured warm water, and
ferment added to quicken it, as has been abovesaid of malt. Seeds are broken
in a mill; flowers, herbs, and roots, are cut small, and are stirred up to
fermentation by mixing of warm water and barm.

An Annotation.
BEfore thou distill the aforesaid vegetables prepared by the help of
fermentation, diligently weigh, and accurately observe whether the mixture be
sufficiently fermented, for sometimes there is sometimes too much cold, or hot
water put to it; sometimes the vessel is not well covered, by which means the
cold air is let in, whence the fermentation is hindered, and consequently the
distillation of the spirit: For by the help of fermentation the burning spirit
of the vegetables is set at liberty, without which it cannot be done; also the
distillation is hindered by too much have, as well as by too much delay: for if
thou begin to distill before the time, viz. fermentation not being yet
perfected, thou shall have but few spirits; wherefore also the better part is
by many that are unskilful cast to the swine, but without any great loss, if
the matter were malt, because that swine are fed therewith: But not so if other
vegetables were the matter of the distillation. Also too much slowness where
the matter begins to be sour before it be distilled, yields very few spirits,
that which often happens, whilst herbs, and flowers, etc. are out of
ignorance left in fermentation 3, 4, 5, and more weeks, before they be
distilled, for the greatest part of the spirit is then turned to vinegar, which
would not be so very ill done, if so be these men knew how to clarify the
remainders, and torn it into vinegar, that nothing thereof be lost; for the
vinegars of herbs, flowers, seeds, and roots are not to be contemned. And so
often times (a thing to be lamented) the better part, if they be spices, and
precious things, is lost.

The matter of the distillation, and other choice things, as seeds, and herbs
are cast away with loss: wherefore for admonition sake I was willing to add
such things that the operators may have an opportunity to consider the matter a
little more profoundly with themselves, or at least of learning the art of
distilling from countrymen, who do not suffer their malt to putrefie, grow
sour or moldy, before they fall upon their distillations, but presently
fermentation being made (the third or the fourth day) begin their distillation.

But some one will object, that my vegetable spirits are not pure by reason of
the ferment that is mixed, having in it self a spirit. I answer, there is not
so great a portion of the ferment mixed which can corrupt the vegetable spirit.
For although some spoonfuls of ferment yielding but a few drops of spirit be
added to a great quantity of the vegetables; yet there can come no hurt or
detriment to so many quarts of the vegetable spirit. I have seen some
supercilious men that would not add ferment to the matter of their spirit, but
sugar or honey, by which they would promote fermentation, and so have thought
to get a pure spirit not considering that honey, and sugar after fermentation
are made to yield their spirits also, whereof one spoonful yields more then ten
or twenty of Barm: But honey and sugar fermenting not without difficulty
themselves, how can they promote the fermentation of other things? Who also
have had experience, that the addition of their ferment has been superfluous,
whilst their flowers and herbs have stood some weeks in maceration, before
they begun to ferment, and that oftentimes they have contracted an acidity,
mustiness and stink, the reason of which was an unsuitable ferment. There are
indeed the fruits of some trees that have a sweet and full juice, as grapes,
cherries, apples, pears, figs, etc. which need not the addition of any ferment,
having a natural ferment of their own, but other vegetables not so, being lean,
as herbs, flowers and roots. It is necessary there to promote the fermentation
of them by the addition of a suitable ferment, left in length of time these
herbs and seeds lose their spirit exhaling in maceration. And thus much I was
willing to say for information sake, and indeed for the sake of them who seek
after the best, and choicest medicines, wanting a good burning spirit as a
companion applicable to them. For this spirit came not only by it self, as Aqua
vitae into a medicinal use as well internal as external, especially that which
is prepared of cordial, and cephalic herbs; but also being united with the
proper oils of those herbs in many desperate diseases, where it could put
forth its virtues eminently.

And thus much suffices concerning the preparation of vegetables that goes
before the distillation of burning spirits.

The manner of distilling in general follows.
HE that is going to distill has need to stir his fermented matter very well
with a stick, that the thicker parts may be well mixed with the thinner, and
then he must fill therewith his distilling vessel set upon a treefoot, and
joined to the copper globe in the furnace on one side, and to the refrigeratory
on the other, the joints in all places being well closed either with Ox
bladders, or with starch and paper. Also the interior part of the globe in the
distilling vessel must be fenced with a copper or wooden basket, that the
herbs, seeds, and other things enter not into the globe, into which only water
must come. Also the upper hole must be close stopped with a fitting stopple
wrapped about with linen clouts, (viz. that hole by which the matter to be
distilled is put in) like to vessels of wine that are stopped. Which being well
done, you must kindle the fire in the furnace under the globe; until all the
matter in the whole vessel boil well, and that burning spirit rise, and go out,
though the refrigeratory (where it is condensed) into the glass receiver that
is set under it, no less then distilled out of a still; and you must continue
the fire til all the spirit be come forth, which you may know by the taste.
Which being done and all things being cold let the remainders be taken out by
the lower largetap hole, for meat for swine, or other uses. The spirit that is
drawn off may be exalted, and rectified at your pleasure in the same vessel,
being first made clean together with the refrigeratory. Note well, that
sometimes there is left a fat oil with the phlegm in rectifying of the spirit,
proceeding from that herb of which that was the spirit, which did distill off
with the spirit from the matter with a strong fire in the first distillation,
but in the rectifying could not ascend with the spirit in a gentle fire, but is
constrained to remain with the insipid phlegm. And this oil also has its
virtues, especially that which is rectified by a glass gourd in Balneo, with
spirit of salt, and clarified. Now the like oil is got almost from all herbs,
roots, seeds, flowers, and fruits, but out of one subject more then another,
according to the hot and cold temper thereof. Especially the sediment of wines
yields a good quantity of such oil, which is as medicinable as the true oil of
wine, being rectified not before it be endued with a sweet savor, and it is an
excellent cordial, although I knew no body that knew this before.

And thus I have showed the general way of distilling, burning spirits, by
help of the aforesaid wooden distillatory. Now also follows,

The manner of distilling spices, seeds, flowers, herbs, roots, Woods, etc.
FIrst, the seeds must be broken in a mill, flowers, herbs, and roots cut
small, the woods broken are filed, upon which afterward a good quantity of
water (in which they may swim) must be powered for the maceration of them, so
that when the distillation is ended there may remain some water, lest for want
of water they be burnt in the distilling, and yield an oil savouring of the
empyreuma, and not sweet. Neither is too great a quantity to be powered on them,
but as much as shall serve to prevent the burning of the aforesaid vegetables
in the distilling of the oil thereof. And indeed fresh vegetables may presently
without any foregoing maceration, being put with their proper waters into the
distilling vessel be distilled. But they that be dry may for the space of some
days be macerated before they be distilled. Also the water appointed for
maceration must be salted, for the better mollifying, and opening the aforesaid
materials, that they may the sooner yield their oil. Now green and fresh need
not any salt water, yet it will not be hurtful to mix some therewith, because
salt helps the boiling water, so as to make the oil more easily to ascend. It
also helps and furthers distillation as does Tartar and Allome, if they be
rightly mixed and ordered. Which being all rightly done, the materials that are
macerated must be put by a funnel into the distilling vessel, and fire must be
given as has been spoken concerning the burning spirit, and the oil of the
seed, or wood macerated in the water will come forth in the coition together
with the water. And although by this way more oil comes forth, viz. Maceration
being made by the addition of salt, then without salt, by the help of the sweet
water alone, as is the fashion in all places almost to distill oils of spices;
yet much remains inseparable by the water, and consequently not to be sublimed
with the water. Therefore the better way is that which I showed in the first
part to be performed with the spirit of salt, which if you please you may
follow. All the oil being come forth (that which is perceived by the changing
of the receivers) the fire is to be extinguished, and the remainder is to be
taken out, which if it be of seeds, herbs, or fruits, may being yet warm be
fermented by the addition of ferment for the distilling of the spirit, of which
there cannot be so great a quantity by reason of taking away of the oil, as
otherwise is drawn out of things that have not lost their oil: For all burning
spirit partakes of much oil, of the essence, and nature whereof more a little
after. Now the oils must be made without the addition of any salt, for salt
hinders the fermentation, without which the burning spirit cannot be had. But
the water that is distilled together with the oil, is to be set in a certain
temperate place, until the oil ascend, and swim upon the water, from whence it
is to be separated with a Tunnel (of which in the fifth part,) also there are
some oils which do not ascend, but fall to the bottom, which are are also to
be separated with a Tunnel, and kept for their uses. Now how these oils may be
kept clear long, and not contract any clamminess, shall be taught in the 5
part: but how they shall after they have lost their clearness by long standing,
and are become tenacious, be restored and clarified again, is taught in the
first part, wherefore I need not here repeat it.

How Oils are to be coagulated into Balsames.
IT has been the custom a long time to turn aromaticall oils into Balsames,
where always one has been willing to excel another in this Art, which
nevertheless was nothing hitherto, but for a washing and cleansing; for they
could not be used inwardly, but only outwardly for their odor to comfort the
heart and brain. Now the aforesaid oils are coagulated many ways and are made
portable in Tin, Silver, and ivory boxes.

Some have mixed the fat of a lamb with them by help of heat and have turned
them into a liniment, which they have colored with diverse colors; as for
example, they have corrupted the oils of green herbs; as rosemary, majoram,
lavender, rue, sage, with a green color, by the admixtion of verdigrease
(which is noxious to the head and heart) where one corroborates and refreshes,
another destroys. They have tinged the Balsame of Cinnamon, and lignum Rhodium
with a red color by the help of a poisonous Cinnabar. Others that are more
industrious have tinged their Oils with extracted colors of vegetables, which
balsames are more safely taken inward: But they are not durable, acquiring a
sliminess and stink; wherefore they have mixed a white wax to coagulate them:
By which means they are become more durable without stinking; but yet in length
of time so tenacious, that being smeared or rubbed upon the skin, they stick
fast by reason of the wax that is mixed with them: at last others have found
out a better way of coagulating aromatical oils, and other things, viz. by the
addition of the oil of Nutmeg made by expression, having lost its odor and
color by spirit of wine; which they called the Mother of Balsames. And this
way has been a long time concealed by Apothecaries as a great secret, until at
length it be made of public right) so that balsames prepared after this manner
are sold almost in all shops: But however that be the best way, yet they are
not durable balsames that are made that way, because they lack salt. I do not
contemn and disapprove of Balsames made after this way, for if a better way
were known, better had been made; for no man is forced beyond his power.
Wherefore they are not only to be excused that have used Lambs fat, Wax,
and the oil of Nutmegs in the making of their Balsames, but also to be honored
for their communication. Now seeing the aforesaid Balsames cannot be taken
inward, nor be so well outwardly administered by reason of their unctuosity,
others have consulted to congelate the Oils by the admixtion of their own
proper fix-salts: and Balsames prepared after this manner are made free from
clamminesse, or tenaciousnesse, and may be dissolved in wine, beer, or any
liquor.

Wherefore they may be not only conveniently taken inward, but also more
conveniently then those old be rubbed outwardly for the odours sake, because
they are easily washed off again with water. They do not only give a most
sweet odor being rubbed, but also by reason of the admixtion of a fixed salt,
having the nature of salt of Tartar, do beautify the skin. Wherefore they are
commended, being dissolved in fair warm water for a washing for the head, and
face; not only because they beautify, but corroborate with their excelcellent
odor: that which those fat Balsames cannot do. Wherefore this way is to be
preferred far before the other.

Let him therefore that will, receive what I have said, for rare things and new
things are not always accepted, especially being obscure: but I hope for the
approbation of the age to come.

The manner of preparing follows.
TAke the remains of the burning spirit, and being put into a sack, press it
hard: reduce the water pressed out into vinegar, and of roses thou shall have a
rose vinegar, and of other things another, being the best in a family for to
season meats: then take the remains out of the sack, and reduce it to white
ashes in a potters furnace, upon which pour the phlegm of its own burning
spirit (being separated) to extract the salt, from which evaporate again all
the humidity in a glazed earthen pot: calcine the coagulated salt gently in a
clean crucible, and it will be white and be like to salt of Tartar in taste;
from which abstract sometimes its own proper burning spirit, calcining the
salt first every time; and the spirit will be so exalted by its proper salt, so
that it will presently assume its proper oil, and will being powered upon it
associate it to itself so as to be perceived no more in the spirit which will
remain very clear: Which being done calcine the salt yet once more very well
in a crucible, and dissolve so much of it in its proper phlegm, as suffices
for the coagulation of the oil, then mix this solution with the burning
spirit, mixed with its oil, and set it in a vial of a long neck well stopped, in
a Balneo, that the spirit may not exhale, for the coction of it, and in the
space of a few hours there will be an union of the mixture which will be as
white as milk. Which being done, let the glass cool, for there is a
conjunction of the spirit, oil, and salt, so that neither can be discerned
from another, which is to be powered into a vessel of a wide mouth, and it will
be congealed in the cold like a white ointment, not only to be anointed with
all, but also to be dissolved in any liquor, being of an excellent odor, which
may also be given inwardly very conveniently, and being used outwardly it makes
the skin beautiful and sweet; wherefore this is that most desired balsame of
Princes and Ladies. And by this way the three principles of vegetables, being
separated, and purified, are again remitted, in which union there is of that
whole vegetable, found the whole virtue, taste, and odor.

Note well, That he that will color balsames, must draw the color out of
vegetables with spirit of wine, which he must make to be coagulated together
with it. After this aforesaid manner, therefore you may draw out of any
vegetable that has in it salt, spirit, and oil, soluble and well smelling
balsames without the addition of any other strong thing, which are not to be
contemned.

And because here also is taught that most odoriferous balsame of roses, for
roses yield but a little oil, without which that cannot be done, know that not
only roses or rose leaves also are to be taken for the making the aforesaid
balsame, but also together with the leaves those whole knots; for that yellow
that is in them yields that oil, not the rose leaves, etc. And let what has
been said suffice concerning our preparation of balsames, which if they be
rightly made are not I suppose, to be contemned, neither do I reject those that
are made without salt: Let him that has bettet communicate them, and not carp
at ours. And so I would that all and each process should be comprehended under
some one general, viz. of distilling burning spirits, and oils, by the help of
a wooden distilling vessel, and their conjunction by the help of their proper
fixed salt, I could here add more things concerning the use, and virtues of
spirits of wine, and of those most sweet vegetable oils; but because they are
clearly enough spoken of by others, I account it a superfluous thing to repeat
the sayings of others, being contented with the description of one only
general process, which you may imitate in other particulars.

There follows now the use of the second wooden vessel, which is to be used in
stead of those of copper or lead, serving for distillations, digestions,
extractions, and fixatious.
THe vessel being made ready according to the prescription set down before,
there is nothing else to do, then to fit the furnace with the globe, and at
your pleasure to heat water in it, with a government of the fire in the
furnace. Now all things may here be done, which otherwise are done in a common
Balneo; where there is no other difference but of vessels; here is used a
wooden vessel, there a copper, leaden, or iron, etc. In this operation also is
used the same furnace with the same globe, which was used above in the
distillation, whrefore you need add nothing else beside, for nothing is more
common then a Balneum in distillation; let the demonstration therefore of the
use of a copper globe suffice. Now I thought it worth while to set down some
Chemical medicinal extracts, not common, which may be made by the help of this
Balneum, which being rightly prepared do many things in many diseases.

And first of a vomitive Extract.
TAke an once of the flowers of Antimony, of purified Tartar ij. of sugar candy
vj. of rain water two pints, being mixed together set them in a strong vial in
Balneo for to be cocted, and make them to boil strongly the space of ten or
twelve hours. Then the Balneum being cold, take out the glass, and power forth
the decoction, and filter it through a brown paper put into a tunnel; the
filtred water will be reddish betwixt sweet and sour, which take (the faeces
in the filtre being cast away) and in a small gourd glass draw off all the
moisture with a gentle fire in Balneo unto the consistency of honey of a
brownish color, upon which again power a pint of spirit of wine, powered forth
into a vial of a long neck; and set it in Balneo with a moderate heat the space
of eight or sixteen hours, and then the spirit of wine will separate, and
extract the essence, which will be more pure and noble, the faeces being left
in the bottom; which after all things are cold are to be separated by the help
of filtration through a double brown paper. Then take the red tincture that is
filtred, and in a gourd glass in a gentle Balneo draw off almost all the spirit
of wine until there remain a mattet like a very sweet syrup, which being taken
out keep as a most excellent vomitive, most profitable in many diseases, where
other Catharticks can do nothing. For this medicine works most gently,
wherefore it may be given to children of a year and half old without danger,
and also to old men. This medicine purges all humors and attracts all humors
from the nerves, and veins, opens all obstructions of the liver, spleen, lungs,
and kidneys, by which means many most grievous diseases are cured.

I never found a vomitive comparable to this, which works quickly and safely.
The dose of it is from grain 1. 2. 3. 4. to 10, and 30 according to the age and
sickness. It may be taken by it self, or in wine, beer, etc. and it will within
a quarter of an hour begin to work, and cease within two hours. Sometimes it
does not provoke vomit at all, but only stools, where a glyster is very helpful
if it be given a little before the administering of the aforesaid medicine,
being made of two or three spoonful of oil Olive, and salt water; for the
glyster prepares the way below, so that it seldom then works by way of vomit:
when also the patient may presently after the taking of the medicine hold hot
tosted bread to his mouth, and nose, which hinders vomiting and promotes the
operation by stool. But in my judgment it is better not to hinder the medicine
seeking a spontaneous way of operation, and not forced: For vomiting is more
convenient for some, then purging by stool. Now these things I have spoken for
the sake of those, who although they abhor vomiting, yet desire to be purged by
the essence of Antimony, which is of all that I know the most safe, and sweet
Cathartick. For it searches the whole body far better then all others, and
frees it from many occult diseases, that which all other vegetable Catharticks
could not do. It has also this commodity in it, that although by littleness of
the dose, or the strong nature of the patient it does not work by vomit, or
stool, yet it does not like other medicines hurt the body, but works either by
sweat, or urine, so that Antimony being rightly prepared is seldom adminstred
without profit. When as on the contrary vegetable Catharticks being given in
less dose or by reason of some other causes do not work, although they do not
make the body swel, and produce manifest diseases, yet they may threaten to the
body occult sicknesses.

Now the Arcanum of Antimony does not only not do hurt, if it do not sensibly
operate, but by insensible working does much good to the body of man. Wherefore
there is a great difference betwixt purging minerals, and vegetables. For
minerals are given in a less dose without nauseousness, but vegetables with a
great deal of nauseousness, and sometimes with danger to the sick in a greater
dose. Now that nauseousness also proceeding oftentimes from the great dose of
the ungrateful bitter potions does more hurt then the potion it self. I wish
that such kind of gross medicines were abolished, and the sweet extracts of
vegetables and essences of minerals were substituted in their place.

A purging Extract.
TAke of the roots of black Hellebor gathered in a fit time, and dried in the
air one pound, the roots of Mechocan, J^llap, of each four ounce; Cinnamon,
Annisseed, and Fennelseed, of each one ounce; of English Saffron a dram, powder
all these ingredients, then power upon them the best rectified Spirit of wine,
in a high glass gourd, and upon this put a blind Alembick, and set it in
digestion in Balneo, until the Spirit of wine be tinged red, which then decant
off, and power on fresh, and set it again in digestion; until the spirit be
red, which also decant off: then power on fresh again, and do this so often
until the spirit will no more be tinged red, which commonly is done at three
times. Mix these tinged spirits, filter them, and in Balneo by a glass Alembick
with a gentle heat draw them off from the Tincture, and a thick juice will
remain at the bottom of a brounish color, which you must take out whilst it
is yet hot, and keep it in a clean glass for its uses. The Spirit of wine drawn
off from the extract may be reserved for the aforesaid same use. Now this
extract is given from grains 3. 6. 9. 12. to 31. according to the age, and
person, beeng mixed with Sugar, it has not an ungrateful taste, and it works
gently, and safely if it be not given in too great adose. And if thou will have
it in the form of a pill, mix with it being yet hot an ounce of clear Aloes,
and half an ounce of Diagridium powdered, being mixed bring it into a mass for
pills, and keep it for your use. The dose is from grains 1. to a scruple. It
evacuates all superfluous humors, but it is not to be compared with the
medicine of Antimony And this extract I put down for the sakes of those that
fear minerals, and abhor vomits, which in my judgment is the best of all
vegetable Cathartickes.

A Diaphoretical Extract.
TAke the Wood Sassafras, Sassaparilla, of each six ounces; Ginger, Galangal,
Zedoary, of each three ounces; long Pepper, Cardamoms, Cububs, of each an
ounce; Cinnamon, Mace, of each half an ounce; English Saffron, Nutmeg, Cloves,
of each a dram: Let the woods be rasped, the roots and spices powdered, power
upon them being mixed the spirit of wine, and let the tincture be drawn forth
in Balneo, as has been above said of the purging Extract, evaporate away the
spirit to the consistency of honey; which keep for your use. It is good in the
plague, fevers, scorbute, leprosy, frenchpox and other diseases proceeding
from the impurity of the blood, curing them by sweat. The dose of this Extract
is from a scruple ^o a dram with proper vehicles: it provokes sweat presently,
drives away all venenosities from from the heart, and mundifies the blood.

And although it be a most effectual vegetable Diaphoretick, yet it may not be
compared to those subtle spirits of minerals, of which in the second part.
Also animal diaphoreticks have their commendations, as the flesh of vipers, the
fixed salt of spiders, and toads, in their peculiar operations, where each
alone without the mixture of any other thing puts forth and shows its
operations; neither are animal, and vegetable diaphoreticks to be compared to
the mineral, as bez^a^ticum minerale, antimonium diaphoreticum, and aurum
diaphoreticum.

A Diuretical Extract.
TAke the seeds of Saxifrage, Caryoway, Fennel, Parsley, Netles, of each 3.
ounces, the root of liquorish, the greater bur, of each an ounce, the powder of
woodlice half an ounce. Let these being mixed and powdered be extracted with
spirit of Juniper according to art: then mix these following things with the
extracted matter: Take the salt of Ambar, soot, netles, of each half a dram,
purified nitre a dram: Let these be powdered, and mixed with the extract, and
this mixture be kept for use. The dose is from a scruple to a dram, in the
water of parsley fennel, etc. This extract forces urin, opens the ureters,
purges the reins, and bladder from all viscous phlegm (the mother of all
tartareous coagulation) viz* if it be used timely: In this case is commended
also the solution of flints, and crystals made with spirit of salt. A greater
commendation have salts of nephretick herbs made by expression, and
crystallisation, without calcination, the preparation whereof shall not here,
but elsewhere be taught.

A Somniferous Extract.
TAke of Thebaic opium four ounces; of Spirit of Salt two ounces, purified
Tartar one ounce, set them being mixed in maceration in Balneo in a glass
vessel for a day and night, and the spirit of salt with Tartar will open the
body of the opium, and prepare it for extraction, upon which power half a pint
of the best spirit of wine, set it in a gentle Balneo to be extracted. Decant
off the spirit that is tinged, and power on fresh, set it in digestion till the
spirit be colored. Then mix the extractions together, and put to them in a
glass gourd two drams of the best Saffron, of oil of Cloves a dram, and draw
off the spirit of wine in Balneo, and there will remain a thick black juice,
which is to be taken out, and kept in a clean glass vessel. The dose thereof is
from grain one, to five or six, for those of a man's age, but to children the
sixth or eighth part of a grain. It may be used in all hot distempers without
danger. It provokes quiet sleep, mitigates pains as well outward, as inward,
it causes sweat; but especially it is a sure remedy for the epilepsie in
children that are new born; for as soon as it is given to them to the quantity
of the eighth part of a grain in wine, or woman's milk, there presently follows
rest, and sweat with sleep, by which means the malignity is expelled, the
children are refreshed, and desire victuals, and the fit returns no more
afterward. Although happily the like symptoms may be perceived again, yet if
the aforesaid dose be administered again, the children are refreshed, and cured
wholly, whereas otherwise they would have dyed, etc. whereof I have not
restored few with this medicine. Moreover also there are very effectual anodyne
medicines, as those volatile spirits of vitriol, allome, antimony, and other
minerals, with which, as also with that narcoticke sulphur precipitated from
the volatile spirit of vitriol, nothing may be compared.

A Cordial Extract.
TAke of red roses four ounces, of the lilie of the valley two ounces, the
flowers of borage, rosemary, sage, of each an ounce; cinnamon, lignum aloes, of
each two drams; cloves, mace, nutmeg, galangal, cardamoms the lesser, of each
half an ounce; the shaving of ivory, hartshorn, of each an ounce; of English
saffron a dram, of nux vomica a dram: Mix them and reduce them to a fine
powder, and let the tincture be extracted with spirit of wine in Balneo, which
is to be drawn off again, unto a just consistency. Let the extract be kept for
use. It may be used in almost all faintings, and other affects that are not
joined with a preternatural heat. The dose thereof is from grains 3. 6. 9. to a
scruple with proper vehicles; being often administered it refreshes the
spirits, corroborates the brain, and other parts of the body. It is made more
efficacious by the adding of the essences of minerals, especially of gold, of
which thing see the first part concerning the sweet oil of gold.

Of an odoriferous Extract.
I Need not teach the making of any odoriferous vegetable extract, because the
manner of drawing forth, or distilling oils of vegetables that have sweet
odours, has been showed a little before, as of herbs, flowers, and seeds,
which are the most noble, and sweet essences of vegetables, by the odor
whereof the heart, and brain are corroborated, which being reduced into
balsams are made transportable. Better extracts therefore, and more excellent
cannot in my judgment be made out of vegetables, then those aforesaid oils,
unless any one would mix aromatical extracts made with spirit of wine with
metallic solutions, and being mixed digest them, then there will a certain
most odoriferous oil go from the extract not only more efficacious, but more
excellent then that common distilled oil by reason of the admixtion of the
spiritual metallic virtue, especially of gold and silver, dissolved in the
acid Menstruum communicating its virtues to the Aromatical oil. Moreover any
vegetable oil may be exalted in virtues and odor by the help of spirit of
urine, or salt Armoniack, by the help whereof not only odoriferous oils are
exalted, but also the inodorous oils of vegetables are made odoriferous, if
they be a while digested in spirit of urine: and not this only, but every
mineral, and metallic sulphur, although the odor thereof be bound up with
most strong bonds, is opened by the benefit thereof, and is reduced by
digestion in a very little time into a most sweet and odoriferous essence.
Lixivial spirits exalt the odours, and colors of sulphurs; acid purge
sulphurs, but change their colors, and odours. Musk and Civet get the
sweetness, and excellency of their odor from the subtle urinous spirit of a
certain Cat* digesting some certain fat and converting it into such a kind of
most odoriferous matter.

And let this that has been said suffice concerning Extracts, which might have
been omitted, because many of these kind of Extracts are found in the writings
of other authors in many languages: but I was willing to set down these, lest
this book might seem to contain in it nothing else besides the new way of
distilling, being furnished also with good medicines.

Of Baths.
A Little before has been given a description of a Tub for a Bath in which any
one may sit with his whole body except his head, not only to be washed in sweet
warm water, whether medicinal and mineral, but also to sweat in without water,
where the vessel is heated by warm vapors, either of sweet waters, or
minerals. And every one may provide such Baths for himself according to his
necessity at home, whereby the same diseases are cured as those that are cured
by the help of natural Bathes, so that he need not for the Baths sake go a
great journey, but may stay at home with his family and follow his calling
without trouble, when he has occasion and need to use them.

And whereas it cannot be denied, that by the use of the Baths most grievous
diseases which cannot be cured by Physicians, are happily cured; I was willing
for the sake of my neighbor to publish this instrument together with the
preparation of mineral waters; which publishing will not without doubt be
without profit, and advantage. Wherefore I will in brief show you the
preparation of mineral, and sweet waters, and their use, and first,

Of a Bath of sweet or common water.
THere is no art to make a Bath of sweet water, for you have nothing else to
do, then to fill your vessel with river or rain water, and to make a fire,
which by the help of the copper globe will heat the water, which being
sufficiently heated, you may sit in it, and cover the Tub, that the hot vapors
evaporate not, nor the cold air enter in, and cool the exterior parts of the
body: Wherefore also you must apply a clean linen cloth about your neck, lest
the warm vapors may evaporate there: which being rightly observed, you may sit
the space of 1. 2. 3. hours, or as long as you please or your sickness require.
You must keep a continual heat as much as is necessary, which may be done by
the help of that globe. If you be thirsty in the mean time you may drink some
proper distilled drink according to the nature of your disease, of which thing
nothing now, because I am resolved to write a peculiar book de Balneis, and
here only to show the use of that copper globe in heating of Baths. And
although there be not a perfect instruction of all, yet of some Baths, and
their uses there shall a short instruction be given in this place.

Of the nature, and property of natural Baths.
KNow that the greatest parts of medicinal waters in Germany, and other
countries as well hot as cold carry with them from the earth a certain
sulphurous acidity more or less: in which acidity consists that medicinal
faculty and virtue of this or that water. And if those waters lose their odor
and taste by the exhal^g of their subtle spirits, then also they loose their
virtues; although also there be found some waters, which have not only a
spiritual sulphur, but also are impregnated with a certain mineral, or
metallic body mixed with Allome, or Vitriol, which comes not elsewhere then
from the common water running through the mines. There are found also other
baths, the power and virtue whereof consists not in any spiritual sulphur, nor
in any metallic body mixed with salt, but only in a certain spiritual salt
mixed with a certain subtle fixed earth, which waters do not run through
metallic mines as others do, but rather stones of the mountains calcined with
a subterraneal fire, whence also they borrow their subtle acidity with their
insipid earth. And this no man will deny that has the knowledge of volatile
and fixed salts of minerals, and metals: that which I am able to demonstrate
with very many, and most evident reasons, if time and occasion would permit;
but it shall be done sometime or other as has been said in a peculiar
treatise. Now therefore I will only teach how by salts, minerals, and metals
artificial Bathes may be made, which are not only not inferior to the natural
in virtue, but also oftentimes far better, and that without much cost or
labor, which any one may use at home in stead of natural for the expelling of
diseases, and recovering of health. And although I am resolved to set forth a
book that shall treat largly of the nature, and original of Bathes, and of
their use; yet I am willing now also to say something in brief concerning it,
and that from the foundation, seeing that there are so many different opinions
of learned men, and those for the most part uncertain.

As concerning therefore the original of the acidity as well volatile, as
corporeal, as also the heart of Baths, though that is not one, and the same;
for else each would have the same properties, but daily experience testifies
the contrary: For it is manifest that some Bathes help some diseases, and
others are hurtful for them, which comes from nothing else but from the
difference of the properties of the mineral waters proceeding from a diversity
of mines impregnating those waters. In a word, sweet waters attract their
powers, and virtues in the caverns of mountains from some metal and minerals
of diverse kinds, that have naturally a most acid spirit of salt, as are diverse
kind of marcosites containing copper and iron, and sometimes gold and silver;
also kinds of vitriol and allome called by the ancients Misii, Rarii,
Chalcitis, Melanteria, and Pyritis, whereof some are found white like metals,
but others dispersed in a fat earth, of a round figure in greater or lesser
pieces: which sulphurous salt mines whilst the water runs through, and
humectates, that spirit of salt is stirred up, having got a vehiculum, and falls
upon the mines by dissolving them, in which solution the water waxes warm, as
if it had been powered on quick lime, or like spirit of vitriol, or salt mixed
with water, and powered on iron, and other metals; where continually and daily
that water running through the mines whose nature and properties it imitates,
carries something with it: wherefore there are so many, and such various kinds
of Baths as are the mines by which the water is heated. Let him that will not
believe take any mineral of the aforesaid quality, and wrap it up in a wet
linen cloth for a little while, and he will see it experimentally that the
mineral stone will be heated by the water, and so heated, as if it were in the
fire, so as thou can scarce hold it in thy hand, which at length also by a
longer action will cleave in sunder and be consumed like quick lime.

I will publish some time or other (God willing) more fully, and clearly in a
peculiar treatise this my opinion, which I have now delivered in very few
words. Although to the sick it be all one, and it matters not them, from what
cause the baths come, and whence they borrow their virtues, if so be they may
use them; this controversy being left to natural Philosophers that will
controvert it, which none of them can better decide then a skilful Chemist,
that has the knowledge of minerals, metals, and salts.

And first of sulphurous Bathes that have a subtle acidity.
IN the second Treatise I have demonstrated the manner of distilling subtle,
volatile, sulphurous spirits, viz. of common salt, vitriol, allome, nitre,
sulphur, antimony, and other salts of minerals, and metals, and their virtues,
and intrinsecal properties, now also I will show their extrinsecal use, as they
are to be mixed with waters for Baths. The virtues therefore of Baths coming
not from insipid water, but from those most subtle, volatile, sulphurous, and
salt spirits, but these being of themselves not mixed with water unfit for
Baths, to be used for recovering of health, by reason of their too great heat,
and subtilty; the most high God has revealed to us unworthy and ungrateful men
his fatherly providence showing to us by nature the use of them, and the manner
of using of them for the taking away of diseases; which (nature) being never
idle, works uncessantly, and like a handmaid executes the will of God, by
showing to us the various kinds of distillations, transmutatious, and
generations. From which teacher we must learn all arts and sciences, seeking a
certain, and infallible information, as it were out of a book writ with a
divine hand, and filled with innumerable wonders, and secrets. And this is a
far certainer knowledge then that empty, and imaginary Philosophy of those
vulgar disputing Philosophers. Do thou think that that true Philosophy can be
sold for a hundred Royals? How can any one judge of things hid in the earth,
who is wilfully blind in things exposed to the light of the Sun, hating
knowledge? I wish knowledge were suitable to the name: how can any one that is
ignorant of the nature of fire, know how to work by fire? fire discovers many
things, in which you may as in a glass see things that are hid; The fire shows
to us how every thing, waters, salts, minerals, and metals, together with other
innumerable things are generated in the bowels of the earth by the reflection of
that central, and astral fire: for without the knowledge of fire all nature
remains veiled, and occult. Fire (always had in great esteem by Philosophers)
is the key for the unlocking of the greatest secrets, and to speak in a word,
he that is ignorant of fire is ignorant of nature with her fruits, and he has
nothing, but what he has read, or heard, which oftentimes is false, according
to that; He easily speaks untruthes that speaks what he has heard.

He that is ignorant knows not how to discern betwixt the truth and falsehood,
but takes the one for the other. I pray thee, thou that art so credulous, do
thou think that thy teacher writ his books from experience, or from reading
other Authors? May they not be corrupted and sophisticated by antiquity, and
frequent description? Also do thou understand the true, and genuine sense of
them? It is better to know, then to think; for many are seduced by opinions,
and many are deceived by faith that is without knowledge.

There are many indeed ambitious of sciences, that are too covetous, and idle,
loathing the blackness of coals, and the rust of the tongs, who had rather
handle the viol and bandore, then coals, etc. And these are deservedly compared
to that young man of whom in the 19. Cha. of Mat. it is said, he had a desire
to learn the truth, but was unwilling to follow Christ in poverty, and misery.
From proud Peacockes, and prattling Parrots, nothing but tedious clamours:
whereas on the contrary, the auditors are refeshed with the voices of birds.
Therefore that perverse condition of man is to be bewailed, affecting rather
the vanities of a proud world, then virtues and praiseworthy arts, then which
nothing is more honest, and nothing more profitable after the world of God,
revealing to us the will of God concerning charity toward our neighbor. And
thus much for youths sake I was willing to say, that they would not spend their
tender years in vanities, but rather would make trial in the fire, without
which no man obtaines a true knowledge of natural things; which although it
seem hard in the beginning, yet it is pleasant in old age.

Now follows the mixture of those subtle mineral, sulphurous, and salt
spirits with water.
AS concerning the weight of the aforesaid spirits that are to be mixed with
sweet water, giving it the nature, and property of natural bathes, I would have
thee know, that of those, which in the second part I showed to be various, and
diverse, being, viz. not equal in virtue, the same weight cannot always be so
accurately observed: seeing also there is a consideration to be had of their
strength, and of the strength of the patient.

Now you may at the beginning mix one or two pound of the spirits to a
sufficient quantity of the water, and then by sitting in it make trial of the
strength of the artificial bath, which if it be too weak, is to be increased by
adding a greater quantity of the spirits, but if it be stronger, then it is to
be diminished by abstraction; of which more at large in Art nostra
Balneatoria. Now this observe, that it is best to make Baths in the beginning
weak, then stronger by little and little by degrees, as the nature of the sick
is accustomed to them, that it be not overcome by the unaccustomed use of them
being too strong. Wherefore Baths are to be used with discretion, and
cautiously, for which matter I refer the reader to my Artem Balneatoriam, in
which he shall find plain, and perfect instruction; Let it suffice therefore
that I have showed the use of that Copper Globe, in heating Baths, which let
the sick take in good part, until more come. Now follows the use.

Of Sulphur Bathes.
APply the furnace with the Copper globe to the tub after the manner aforesaid,
and power in a sufficient quantity of sweet water, which make hot with the fire
kindled in the furnace by the help of the globe: which being sufficiently
warmed make the patient sit in it, and power into it so much of the sulphurous
spirit as is sufficient; which being done cause that the tub be covered all
over, that the volatile spirit vanish not, and as necessity requires, continue
the heat till the patient come forth. Know also that the water is to be changed
every time, and fresh spirits to be mixed. And this is the use of the Copper
globe, in heating bathes of sweet or medicinal water, and that either of
vegetable, or mineral; and this made sulphurous is by art or nature; whereby
most grievous, and otherwise incurable diseases are happily cured: Of which
enough now in this Treatise.

The use of the Copper Globe in dry Baths, which are more excellent then the
moist in many cases.
I Might have put off this matter unto its proper Treatise, where all things
shall be handled more largely, and clearly: yet by reason of some unthought of
impediments for a while procrastinating the edition of the promised Treatise, I
am resolved to say something of their use, after I have made mention of the
humid, and indeed not only of the use of those subtle, sulphurous, and dry
spirits, but also of the use of subtle, vegetable and animal spirits which are
medicinal, because in some diseases dry baths are more commodiously used, then
moist. He therefore that will provoke sweat by a dry bath without water, let
him provide a wooden box, or wooden instrument convenient to sit in, standing
upon a stool boared through that you may raise it up more or less according as
you please, and having boards appointed for the arms and feet to rest upon.
This box also besides the great door must have also a little door serving for
the putting in of a burning lamp with spirit of wine, or of any earthen vessel
with coals for to heat it. The box being well warmed, let the patient go in,
and sit upon a stool, let the box be very close shut all about, and the furnace
with the Copper Globe be fitted thereunto, under which let there be a small
fire kindled, by help whereof the volatile spirit growing warm, goes forth
into the box like a most subtle vapor, penetrating all about the patient. But
when this spirit is not sufficient to heat the box, set in it a burning lamp
with spirit of wine, or some earthen pot with coals (the best whereof which
are made of Juniper or the vine, especially of the roots as being such that
will endure long, and cannot easily be extinguished by the vapors of those
spirits) that the patient take not cold, and the vapors of the spirits may the
better penetrate the body of the patient. Let the wick for the spirit of wine
in the burning lamp be incombustible made of the subtle threads of gold, of
which thing more in Art Balneatoria. In the mean time that volatile spirit
penetrates, and heates the whole body, and performs its office, being this way
used better then by being mixed with water. When the patient has sat there
long enough let him come forth, and go into a warm bed to sweat. Now before he
go into the box let him take a dose of that volatile spirit, which is used
outwardly to provoke sweat, and accelerate the action. And by this means not
only those volatile sulphurous spirits of salts, minerals and metals, are used
outwardly without water to procure sweat, but also the spirits of many
vegetables, as of mustard seed, garden cresses, crude Tartar, also of animals,
as hartshorn, urine, salt Armoniack, etc. for the expelling of most grievous,
and desperate diseases. Now the aforesaid spirits have diverse properties, the
volatile spirits of salt, minerals, and metals have some, those of vegetables
and animals have others; those have a sulphurous and fiery essence; these a
mercurial, and aerial; wherefore they serve for different uses. In some
diseases those sulphurous are preferred; but in others vegetable and animal,
where also a consideration is to be had of the sickness, and bath it self, that
one be not used for the other, to the great damage of the sick. For almost all
natural baths, and volatile spirits of salts, minerals and metals partake of
some most subtle penetrating, heating, and drying sulphurous salt spirit; but
the spirits of vegetables, and animals partake of a certain volatility that is
most subtle, penetrating, heating, opening, cutting and attenuating, both
urinous, and nitrous, viz. contrary to the former; as appears by the pouring
on of any volatile sulphurous spirit, as of common salt, vitriol, allome,
minerals, and metals, upon the rectified spirit of urin, or salt Armoniack:
where presently the one mortifies the other, and takes away its volatility, and
subtilty: so that of both subtle spirits of diverse natures there comes a
certain salt of no odor and efficacy. Whence it is manifest that all spirits
partaking of diverse natures, and essences have not the same faculties.
Therefore be thou cautious in giving most potent spirits, lest thou give an
enemy in stead of a friend, and learn their natures, virtues, and essences,
before thou usest them in medicine. But thou do ask, whether is that great
force of those spirits gone as it were in a moment? did it evaporate in that
duel? No I say, but transmuted into a corporeal substance, for of a most pure,
mineral, subtle, and most volatile sulphur, and a most penetrating animal,
Mercury is made a certain corporeal salt, which is wonderful, and deserves to
be called Aquil^ Philosophorum, because it is easily sublimed with a gentle
heat, in which many things lie: for it does not only conduce to the solution of
metals, especially of gold, but also of it self by the power of maturation does
become a most efficacious medicine: Of which no more at this time, because I
will only advise the reader, that he be diligent in searching out the spirits
of nature, which although they change their bodies, yet are not therefore to be
called dead, but rather reduced to a better perfection. And let this suffice
concerning the dry use of baths in provoking sweat for the expelling of
diseases: now for what diseases this or that spirit serves, thou shall reader,
find in its proper Treatise, of which there has been mention above but in a
word, know that those volatile sulphurous spirits of salts, minerals, and
metals are good in all obstructions of the inward parts, viz. of the spleen,
lungs, and liver, but especially are most excellent in heating the cold nerves,
because they do most efficaciously heat, attenuate, cut, expel, and mundifie,
wherefore they are good in Contractures, Palsies, Epilepsie, Scorbute,
Hypochondriacal Melancholy, Morbus Gallicus, Itch, and other corrosive ulcers,
and Fistulaes, etc.

But the spirit of another kind, as of Tartar, Hartshorn, salt Armoniack,
Urine, etc. are hot also, but not so dry, and besides the heating virtue, have
also a penetrating, cutting, mollifying, attenuating, absterging, and expelling
power; wherefore also they work wonderfully in all obstructions of the inward
and outward parts: for they do better then all others, open the pores of the
skin, and provoke sweat, mollify, and open the hemorrhoides; proyoke the
menses of young and elder women, purge and heat the womb, and therefore cause
fruitfulness; they heat and purge a cold and moist brain, acuate the
intellect, and memory, let they that be great with child take heed of them, and
also they that have a porous open skin. Such and other more properties, and
that deservedly are ascribed to these spirits. Now those two aforesaid baths
(in one whereof those spirits are used in a humid way, being mixed with warm
water, for the whole body to be bathed and sweat in, but in the other in a dry
way where the vapors are by force of the fire made under the Globe, forced up
into the sweating box toward the patient, which being used after this manner
do oftentimes penetrate, and operate more efficaciously then that humid way)
are not to be slighted for the recovery of health, as doing things incredible.
Now those spirits not being found in shops, nor being to be made by any
according to the manner that I have showed in the second part, I would have
thee know that there is yet another matter, which needs not to be distilled,
and it is mineral; which being put into the Copper instrument does of its own
accord without fire yield such a sulphurous spirit, which penetrates very much
and goes into the sweating box, like in all things to that which is made out
of salts, minerals, and metals. Nature also has provided us another matter
that is to be found every where, which being in like manner put into the
instrument does by it self, and of its one accord without fire yield a spirit,
in virtue not unlike to that which is made out of crude Tartar, or salt
Armoniack, Soot, Urine, etc. Of which in the second part, doing, viz. the same
things with that which is made with costs and labor. Those foresaid 2. matters
therefore can do the same things, which are required for a bath and sweating,
which those two foresaid kinds of spirits, viz. mineral and sulphurous,
vegetable and animal can do, etc. Now what those two matters which are easily
every where to be found are, thou desire to know; but I dare not if I would,
for the sake of the pious, to reveal them for the sake of the ungrateful, and
unworthy. For it is an offense to cast pearl before swine, which yet the pious
may, by the blessing of God, find out by the reading of the rest of my
writings.

Now follows a wooden vessel which is to be used in stead of a Caldron in
boiling of Beer, Metheglin, Vinegar, etc.
MAny things might be said concerning this matter, for although men may be
found in any part of the world who know how to make malt of corn, and of this
beer and vinegar; yet many things may be said of this matter for the correcting
of it; but because it is not my purpose to show such things now, yet I shall
say something of the use of that copper globe which any one may provide in
stead of Caldrons, and which is to be used with a certain wooden vessel in the
boiling of beer, which by this way he may, as has been spoken above concerning
the operations, make as well as by the help of Caldrons. Moreover I could here
also teach some other most profitable secrets, viz. how honey may be freed from
its ungrateful odor, and taste by the help of precipitation; and how afterward
a most sweet spirit is to be drawn out of it very like in all things to the
spirit of wine: also how the best and sweetest wine clear, and durable like to
Mallago, may be made thence: also how after purging it is to be crystallised,
so as to resemble Sugar Candy in goodness and taste: also how the sweetness
thereof may be converted into Tartar, very like to the natural: Also how out of
fruits of trees, as cherries, apples, pears, etc. a very good, and durable wine
in goodness, color, taste and virtue, like to the natural, may be made; also
now out of unripe grapes, that are not maturated either by the inclemency of
the country, or air, their acidity being changed into sweetness very good
wines like to the Rhenish may be made: also how out of sorrel, and other
vegetables a very good Tartar may be made, and that in a great quantity without
much costs, resembling the Rhenish in color, taste and other virtues: Also how
out of Corn, (whether malted, or ground in a mill) a very good spirit is to be
made, and also a very good vinegar like to the Rhenish; also how of corn,
ground in a mill, or meal, a very good spirit is to be distilled without any
loss of the meal, continuing yet fit to make bread. Such and more of this sort
may be taught in this place, but because it is not good to divulge all things
together, and at once, and this book would by this means grow bigger then I am
willing it should, if such things should be here taught, I shall make an end of
this book (omitting other excellent possible secrets of nature) which although
it be but little, yet will without doubt be profitable to many. And so Reader
farewell.

FINIS.
THE FOVRTH PART OF THE PHILOSOPHICAL FURNACES: IN WHICH Is described the
Nature of the FOURTH FVRNACE, By the help whereof Minerals, and Metals are
tried, and examined after a more compendious way, then hitherto after that
common manner; ALSO The separation of Metals by the force of Fusion, and other
necessary things that are done by the power of fusion or melting. Most
profitable for Chemists, Tryers, and Diggers of MINERALS.

By JOHN RUDOLPH Glauber.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, for Tho: Williams at the sign of the Bible
in Little-Britain. 1652.

A. The place of ashes with its door.

B. The Register appointed for governance of the furnace.

C. The hole with its door assigned to receive the crucibles and coals

D. The hole with the door of the first Story.

E. The long pipe of Iron in the top of the furnace.



THE FOVRTH PART OF PHILOSOPHICAL FURNACES.
Of making the Furnace.
THis Furnace may be made greater, or smaller, as you please, according to the
matter to be tried: and if the Diameter thereof within, be but of one foot, you
may in it set a crucible containing two or three pound: but greater crucibles
require a greater furnace. Now this furnace must be quadrangular, and be built
of stones, and lute, such which abide the fire, of the height of one or two
feet from the bottom to the grate, which must be such as may be cleared from
the dross mixed with coals, or such as was the grate of the first furnace,
consisting of two strong cross iron bars fastened in the furnace with certain
distances for the receiving of 5, 6, or 7 other lesser, iron bars which are to
be moveable, so that when they are obstructed they may be removed; and cleared
from the dross; the lower part of the furnace must have near the bottom a hole
(in the forepart) of the height, and breadth of a little span, with an iron or
copper door, shutting close: the lower part also must have another hole near
the grate on the other side with its register for the government of the fire,
and for the attracting of wind. Above the grate, and a hand breadth from the
grate must be another hole for the putting in of coals, and crucibles, suitable
to the proportion of the furnace, and the height thereof must be of one foot,
and the latitude of half a foot, if the inward Diameter of the furnace be of
one foot, whereby the crucibles may be the more conveniently handled, and the
coals be cast in with a fire-pan; Let this hole also have a very strong door of
stone covered over with lute, either of which may endure the fire, and shut
very close, that the fire may thereby (when the crucible is placed in the fire)
attract air, but only from the collateral hole under the grate. Let the height
of the furnace (being coated above) from the hole appointed for the putting in
of coals and crucibles, be of one great span: Let there also be a round hole in
the furnace, having the third part of the intrinsecall diameter of the furnace,
appointed for the flame, and smoke; to which if you will use a very violent
fire, put to it a strong iron pipe of the height of 5, 6, 8, or 12 feet; for by
how much the higher you set your pipe, the stronger fire may you give, and if
you will you may erect above the surnace 1, 2, or 3 partitions with their
doors serving to diverse uses according to the flame that is gathered into
them, by reason of diverse degrees of fire, which is in them, for the lowest is
so hot, that it can easily contain in the flux*fusible metals, minerals, and
salts; and serve for cementation, calcinations, and reverberations; also for
burning of crucibles, and other earthen vessels, made of the best earth (of
which in the fifth part) and for vitrifications, and sometimes for trials and
burnings, etc. The second division of heat which is more remiss, serves for the
burnings of minerals and metals, as of lead, tin, iron and copper, that are
necessary for calcinations; also for the necessary calcination of Tartar, and
the fixed salt of other vegetables, that is required in chemical operation, as
also the calcining of bones, and horns for cuples, and the ashes of wood. The
third division or chamber is yet more remiss, and serves for the drying of
crucibles, and other vessels that are made of the best earth, and are
afterward to be burnt in the first partition. There may also other things be
done by the help of these partitions, so that thou need not for their sakes
kindle a peculiar fire. But if thou will give a melting fire the strongest of
all, put a long pipe to the lower hole appointed for drawing wind, and having a
register; for by how much the fire attracts the air more remotely and another
flame is forced to beat upon the metals, so much the greater power of the heat
is there in the fusion of them. For which business sake thou have need to have
as that inferior pipe, so also that superior pipe in the top of the furnace.
And if thou have a fit chamber, in which another may go up from below by the
proper chimney, thou may build another furnace in the superior chimney, and
perforate the wall with the applying of a register, that the fire may be forced
to attract the air from below through the collateral chimney, where you need
not that long pipe but only may open a door, or window of the lower chamber,
that the air may come into the chimney; and the fire attract the wind out of
the collateral chimney, which it does very vehemently, yea and stronger, then
if it were helped with bellows, so that even the furnace, unless it were built
of very good and fixed earth, would by too great a heat be destroyed; For
oftentimes the strongest crucibles melt with too much heat, wherefore a
register is made for the governing of the fire.

And by the help of this furnace, with Gods blessing, I found out my choicest
secrets. For before, and indeed from my youth I under went the trouble of those
v ulgar labors performed by bellows, and common vents, not without loss of my
health, by reason of the unavoidable malignant and poisonous fumes, which
danger this furnace was without, not only of poisonous and malignant fumes,
but also of all excessive heat: For our furnace sends forth no fume (but above,
o drawing, that the door being opened for the putting in of coals, it attracts
by the vehemence of the fire, another fume, that is remote by the distance of
half an ell. And because the fire does so vehemently attract, it keeps its
heat within it self, so that there is no fear of burning; yet you must cover
your hand that holds the tongs with a linen glove twice double, and wet in
water, and with the other hand a wooden fence that is perspectible to preserve
your eyes: otherwise it wants all danger of vapors, or fumes, as has been
said, and all excessive heat: that which is a great benefit in Art. I do
ingenuously confess, if I had not found this a few years since, I had not
without loss left off all Alchymy together with its tedious labors. For I had
spent many years of my life in great misery of my labors, in superfluous
cares, and watchings, as also in stinks, so that going into my Elaboratory with
loathing, I should behold so many materials in so many, and such various pots,
boxes, and other vessels, and also as many broken as whole instruments of
earth, glass, iron, and copper, and did judge my self so unhappy that I had
made my self a slave of this Art, and especially because scarce one of 100,
whereof I was one, did get his victuals and cloths thereby. For these reasons I
was determined to bid farewell to Chemistry, and to apply my self to Physic,
and Surgery, in which I was always happy. But what? Whilst I thought to do
as I resolved, and to cast forth of the doors all and each vessel of diverse
kinds, I found some crucibles broken, and in them many grains of gold and
silver, formerly melted in them, which together with others gathered together,
I thought to melt; but seeing I could not melt such things being very hard to
be melted, without the help of bellows (which I had sold) I began to consider
the matter with my self more seriously, and so I found out this furnace, and
being invented, I presently built and proved it, which in tryings I found so
good, that I did again take hope of my labors, and would no more despair.

Seeing therefore an easy, and compendious way of melting metals, I began to
work, and to begin a new search, and every day I found more and more in nature,
viz. the greatest and most pleasant secrets of nature; wherefore I did without
ceasing seek, until God had opened mine eyes to see that which I sought a long
time for in vain. Where also I observed, that although I had before had more
knowledge of nature, yet without this furnace I could scarce have done any
thing that had been singular. And so God willing, by the help of this furnace,
I found out more and more daily, for which blessing I give to the immortal God
immortal thanks, resolving to communicate this new invention heartily, and
faithfully for the sake of my neighbor. Judge therefore O Chemist! whether
this, or that which is made by the help of bellows and common vents, be the
best? For how long does he that will melt a hard metal in a wind furnace give
fire to it before it will flow, and with what loss of time, and coals? He that
does melt by the help of bellows has need of a companion to blow, with great
danger of breaking the crucible with the wind, and of making it fall when the
coals are abated, or of impurities falling into the crucible in case the cover
thereof should fall off, although there can be no detriment by impurities
falling in, if the matter be metallic, but not so if it be a salt or a
mineral, (without which that cannot be perfected in the fire) not enduring the
impurities of the coals, but boiling over by reason of them. Now our furnace is
free from this danger, because the wind comes from beneath and crucibles come
always into sight, not being so overwhelmed with coals as in the common way,
etc. For by this means the matter to be melted is flowed, although the
crucibles be not covered over with coals, nor with a cover, and although thou
have not a companion to blow, for you may at pleasure give any degree of fire
by the direction of the register. When therefore thou make any trial in the
fire have this furnace, which is recommended to thee, which build rightly with
its register for the governing of the fire, and for the drawing of wind, and
without doubt this labor shall not be in vain.

How minerals are to be tried.
THe manner of trying minerals has been already made known, wherefore it is
not needful here to write many things, because diverse authors, as Georgius
Agricola, Lazarus Ercker, and others have sufficiently wrote thereof, to whose
writings I refer thee, especially to that most famous Lazarus Ercker which is
so much commended, De Probatione Mineralium, as well malignant (obstinate) as
mild. But thus much know being that which experience has also taught us, that
neither he nor his predecessors had a perfect knowledge of all things, nor
would reveal all things they knew. For many excellent things do yet lie hid,
and perhaps shall yet for a while lie hid by reason of the ingratitude of the
world; although the most famous Philosophers do with one consent affirm that
imperfect metals, as lead, tin, iron, copper, and Mercury, are intrinsecally
gold, and silver, although it may seem very improbable to many that are not
curious, but contented with the opinions of their parents; supposing those
minerals to be barren that leave nothing in the cuple, when they are tried with
lead: when as yet that proof by cuples although famous, is not yet that true
Philosophical trials of metals, but only vulgar, according to the testimony of
Philosophers, as of Isaac Hollandus, and others, especially of Paracelsus in
many places treating of metals, but especially in his book Vexationum
Alchymistarum, containing a true description of the properties, and perfection
of metals. Which although not being to be understood by all, matters not; for a
very easy art is not to be communicated to all, according to Paracelsus
saying. Imperfect metals being freed from their impurities have in them
abundance of gold, and silver. But how metals are to be purged, and separated
he does not teach, but only commends lead to be the author; which made the
Alchymist believe that it was common lead, not knowing that the water thereof
(lead) did not only purge other metals, but also lead it self; supposing also
that the trial of tin, copper, and iron made in a cuple with lead to be that
true genuine bath thereof; not observing that lead has no affinity with iron,
and tin in a stronger fire, but to reject what is black, and unclean* without
any perfection. Now this lead can do, if viz. it be mixed with a mineral that
has gold or silver in it, and be melted in the fire being incorporated with
it, it may together with their impurities enter into the Cuple, the good gold
and silver being left in the Cuple, which is the proof of minerals that are
dug, and used; and it is done upon this account, viz. gold and silver may be
naturally purged of their snperfluous sulphur, so as never to be any mo re
radically united, and mixed with those that be imperfect, as being polluted
with abundance of crude, impure sulphur, although they may, be melted together
in the fire; yet that mixture being retained in the fire, the combustible
sulphur of common metals, acts upon its own proper argent vive, and turns it
into dross, which being separated from the metals enters into the porous matter
of the cuples, that which does not happen in tests, fixed in the fire, which
that dross being separated from the metals cannot enter into, being made of an
earth that is durable in the fire, the dross remaining in them, which otherwise
was wont to enter into those cuples that are made of the ashes of bones, or
wood. Wherefore by little and little it goes away into the cuple, viz. as much
as the fire reduced into a Litharge, or dross, until all the Lead mixed with
the Gold, and Silver together with other imperfect metals mixed with it go
into dross, and hide themselves in the cuple, the pure gold and silver being
left in the cuple. For Lead in a plain vessel, feeling the heat from above, but
beneath cold, is turned into a Litharge, which if it be in an earthen fixed
vessel, the Litharge remains, and goes into a yellow transparent glass at
last, if it be not mixed with other metals, as iron, copper, tin; which being
mixed therewith give to the glass a green, red, black or white color,
according to the quantity of the metallic matter: but in a porous cuple made
of ashes, the Litharge, or dross finding pores enters into the cuple by little
and little, and successively, until all the Lead be entered in, which it could
not be if it were turned into Litharge. This vulgar trying is therefore nothing
else but a transmutation of Lead, with the imperfect metals mixed with it, into
dross, which entering into the cuple leaves in the cuple pure gold, and silver,
that cannot be turned into dross by reason of their purity.

But perhaps this discourse may seem to thee unprofitable, and superfluous,
because this trial of metals is known all the world over: but for answer, I say
that is not superfluous, because many refiners err, supposing that corporeal
Lead together with the imperfect metals that are mixed with it, goes into the
cuple, not being yet turned into Litharge, because corporeal Lead is again
melted from thence; for whose sake this discourse is not properly ordained as
being those that operate out of use, and custom only without discretion; but
rather for their sakes, who do incessantly seek after, and search into the
secrets of nature, viz. seeking after that philosophical trial, which is known
to few, by the help whereof more gold and silver is obtained then by that
common way, but it is not to be discovered in this place; for all must not have
the knowledge thereof; It is sufficient that I have demonstrated the
possibility thereof. Yet know this, if thou know how to prepare Lead, Tin,
Copper, and Iron, and to fit them to the radical union, viz. that aforesaid
water of Saturn, so as they may endure the force of the fire together, thou
may separate and attract gold, and silver from the aforesaid imperfect
metals, and with gain leaving them in the cuple, or else you shall draw little
or nothing from thence. And if you do intend to try them with Lead after the
vulgar way, and bring them into dross, yet you do nothing because tin, and
iron abounding with gold and silver, do not remain with the lead in a strong
fire, but are lifted up like a skin or dross, by reason of their superfluous
sulphur, swimming like fat upon water, without any separation, unless it be tin
or iron, which got gold or silver from the mine in their first fusion.

And by this means it falls out sometimes, that some may make a good proof but
out of ignorance, not knowing a reason of their operation, wherefore they
cannot do the same again. For if Chemists, and Refiners did consider the matter
more profoundly, enquiring the cause, wherefore lead being tried, deprived of
its silver, and melted in a cuple, should yet contain in it self silver,
without doubt they would hit upon a good foundation; without which knowledge
all their labor in imperfect metals would be in vain. And let this suffice
concerning that Philosophical trial, which is known to few; There is no need of
speaking any thing of that vulgar, being everywhere known, of which Lazarus
Ercker wrote plainly and fully.

There is also another proof of minerals, which is without Lead, with Venice,
or any other good fusible glass, where one or two ounces of the powdered
mineral are mixed with half an ounce of the powdered glass, and being mixed and
covered in a crucible, are melted, and powered out; by which means the glass
attracts, and dissolves that mineral, and is thereby colored, which shows what
metal is contained in the mine, after which may be made another trial by Lead
afterward, trial being first made to know the first proof. And this is the
fittest proof for the hardest minerals, which are even invincible, as are the
stone hemalitis, smiris, granats, talck black and red, and those which abound
oftentimes with gold, and silver, which because they cannot be mixed with Lead
are not esteemed, but are oftentimes cast away, although they abound with gold
and silver, and this because they cannot be tried, Which being tried after the
aforesaid, and consequently the treasures lying therein being discovered, thou
may afterward with more confidence handle them, and reduce them to better
profit. Now those colors which follow, indicate the tenure of them. Glass
resembling the greenness of the Sea signifies mere Copper, but the greenness
of grass, signifies copper, and iron mixed together: glass of a rusty color
signifies iron: yellowish glass signifies tin: glass of a yellow golden color,
or like a red rubie signifies silver: Blew glass like a saphir signifies pure
gold; a smaragdine signifies gold mixed with silver: An Amethyst color
signifies gold, silver, copper, and iron mixed together. Besides these, glass
sometimes gets other colors, according to the diversity of the weight of
diverse metals mixed together; which use will teach with a further practice that
is to be made with Saturn.

There is also another precursory trial of minerals, and metals, which is made
with Salt Petre; where especially tin, iron, and copper do largely draw forth
their treasures hid in them, which they will not yield being tried by Lead,
that which is not a sign of their poverty, but rather of not a true trial made
by Lead, which is not the true, and genuine judge, and trier of metals. For
otherwise (if it were) it would draw forth their treasure as well out of a
greater quantity of metallic matter, as out of a lesser. Now follows the
trial by Nitre: Make a mixture of one part of sulphur, of two parts of pure
Tartar, and four parts of purified Nitre, then take an ounce of this mixture,
and one dram of the mineral or metal ground small, mix those together, and
being put into a crucible, put a red hot iron or burning coal to them, and that
mixture will be enflamed, and yield a most vehement fire, reducing that mineral
or metal into dross: And what is not brought into dross must again be mixed
with the aforesaid mixture, and be burnt as before, until the whole be consumed
by the fire. Then make that dross or salt containing in it the metal that is
destroyed, to flow so long in a strong crucible, until it be made glass; which
being powered out there are found grains of gold or silver, which came from the
mineral or metal that was tried. And this operation (if it be well done) will
be a pleasant sight, but without profit, because it cannot be done in a great
quantity, and by reason of the price of the Nitre. Where I set this way of
trial only for demonstration sake that it might appear how almost all tin,
iron, and copper, contain in themgold and silver, althoug h they do not draw
it forth in the Cuple.

Now do not suppose that this is transmutation, which is only separation;
wherefore thou must consider with thy self how that may be performed otherwise.
But take heed that thou do not kindle this mixture from beneath, being put upon
the coals, but from above by reason of the danger of flashing: Also metals are
easily fusible by the following mixture. Take one part of the saw dust of the
wood of the teil tree being well dried, two parts of sulphur, eight or nine
parts of pure Nitre. Make stratum supar stratum in a crucible, and take to 11,
or 12 parts of this mixture, one part of the metal subtly ground, and kindle
them, and the mine being melted will yield grains of pure Gold, and Silver, if
the mine were not too impure, the impurity thereof being consumed by that most
vehement fire. And if this trial be not for thy profit, yet it is rational, and
may be for thine instruction.

Of the melting of mines and metals.
THe melting of these in a greater quantity is not for this place, because they
cannot be done by this furnace, but it is treated of plainly enough by others
in their writings of minerals.

Of the separation of metals.
THis is a most ancient and profitable Art, whereby one metal may be separated
from another: And it is for the most part done 4 ways, viz. by Aqua Fortis, by
cement, by flux with sulphur, and lead, and lastly by Antimony, which ways
that most witty Lazarus Ercker, has clearly, and distinctly described, whose
description is not to be found fault with, although some necessary things may
be added thereunto, which being but few I thought it superfluous to add them
in this place.

And that separation consists in three chief metals, Gold, Silver, and Copper:
he made no mention of other metals, and two of the aforesaid four ways are in
use, as very ^a^ie, for they are done with Aqua fortis and Cement, the two
others most commonly neglected, which are done by benefit of melting with
Sulphur and Lead; and also by Antimony: that which is admirable, because metals
are easier separated by benefit of these two ways then by Aqua fortis and
Cements, suspected of wast, whereas not Sulphur and Antimony, but the ignorant
worker, not knowing the nature of Sulphur and Antimony, is rather to be blamed,
because he knows not how to order them, and withal leaves the-nearer way of
separation: and I must needs confess it that without this furnace I would not
separate with them, because with that common way of furnaces and bellows, that
stink of Sulphur and Antimony hurtful to the Liver, Lungs, Brain, and Heart, is
received by the Nosethrils to the hazard of health: for which cause I do not
wonder that those two ways requiring greater diligence than those two former
by Aqua fortis and Cements are rejected. But this Furnace being known with
which without danger one may melt, I doubt not of excelling the two former
ways hereafter as more profitable than them. For he who knows Antimony may
not only easily with small cost separate Gold from the addition without any
loss of it, and speedily refine it, but also easier separate gilt silver, than
by Sulphur, Lead, etc. in great store without any loss of Gold or Silver.

And this is the easiest way of the separation of Gold and Silver which is done
by the benefit of melting, requiring no more charge then the coals; for there
is Antimony which has Gold in it as much as it is worth, which will be the
Separatours gain: I would have you know this how Antimony may again be
separated from Gold and Silver, not by the common way which is done by bellows,
but by the special way of separation wherewith Antimony is preserved, so that
it may be used again for the same purpose; which I will treat of in another
place. Besides the four ways spoken of, there is also another way, best of
all, by the nitrous spirit of salt, namely after this manner: the spirit of
salt (prepared by our first and second Furnace) exasperated with Nitre
dissolved in it, to which add grain. Gold mixed with Silver and Copper; put it
in a glass vial in hot sand to dissolve, and the Gold together with the Copper
will be dissolved in it, and the Silver left in the bottom of the vial: decant
off the solution, to which add something, precipitating Gold, and make them
boil together and the pure fine Gold will be separated and precipitated like
the finest meal, serving writers and Painters; the Copper being left in the
water; which thou may if thou will precipitate from the water, but it is
better to take away the water, which will serve again for the same use. If the
precipitated Gold be washed and dried it gives in the melting (by which nothing
is lost) the best and purest Gold. For finer gold can neither be made by Aqua
fortis nor by Antimony.

Therefore this is the best way of all, not only for the small cost, but also
for the easiness yielding the best Gold of all others.

Then take calcined Silver left in the gourd, sweeten and dry it, which done
make a little salt of Tartar to melt in a crucible, to which by course put a
little refined silver with a spoon, and it will be presently made a body
without any loss. You may also boil that Calx as yet moist newly taken out of
the gourd with the Ley of Salt of Tartar, even to the evaporation of all
moisture: and melt the dry remnant, wherealso nothing is lost. Without this
medium of Silver the calcination (drawn from Aqua Regia) is not fusible of it
self, turning into brittle matter, like horn that is white or of a middle
color between white and yellow, called therefore of Chemists the Horn of the
Moon; in reducing which many have tried much, which reduction we have already
taught. For want of spirit of salt take Aqua Regia made of Aqua Fortis and salt
Armoniack, which does the same, but with greater charges. This also is to be
preferred before other ways, which makes to the separation of any Gold of any
degree, if so be it exceed Silver in weight; which is necessarily required in
the solution made with Aqua Fortis.

But that you may see the prerogative of this separation, mark a little when
thou separatest by Quarta and Aqua fortis, you must put just two or three parts
of refined Silver to one of course Gold, where first the cost and labor of
refining the Silver to be melted and grained with Gold are required: then a
good quantity of Aqua fortis to dissolve, precipitate, edulcorate, dry and melt
a great deal of silver. Consider then I pray my labors and charges of my
separation and the vulgar. When thou separatest with Cements there is need of
boxes, and continual fire of one degree, which labor is tedious for times
sake, and costly for coals, which labor you must twice or thrice take in regard
of the mixed dross. Now again consider the labor and charges of both
separations. When thou separatest by Sulphur and Antimony which is the best
way, without great charges, if thou know to separate Gold from Antimony
without blowing, but this is tedious for thrice greater labors then our way,
tedious indeed for hard and perfect separation of Gold and Silver from
Antimoniall dross. Think therefore what way of separation you will use to
refine Gold speedily, surely you will choose mine.

This Prerogative also has this way of separation, that it has no need of
refined silver which is done by the benefit of burning, but only it is
granulation, solution or separation by the use of Aqua Fortis, where though
copper mixed with silver makes wast, yet by the help of this salt it is soon
precipitated. By this means gilt silver is soon separated, the gold being
dissolved by a nitrous spirit, and precipitated with the aforesaid matter
precipitating, it is for the separation of gilt silver done by help of fusion,
none is easier done then what is with Sulphur and Antimony, where when the
necessary manual (ingredients) are known; a great deal is separated in short
time, but knowing not to use Antimony and Sulphur (for which our Furnace very
well befits) leave them and use the common way; therefore lay not thy fault
afterward on me writing for thy good.

Of separating courser metals.
THe manner of separating Tin from Lead and Copper from Iron, whithout loss of
both metals, by preserving both; which seems impossible to me for the
combustibility of both metals; and superfluous for the small profit and saving
charges. How Gold and Silver may be separated from Tin with which commonly this
abounds, without any wast, has been long sought to no purpose: but a
possibility will appear to a serious considerer; and though I never tried in
great quantity, content with precipitation made with a little; I am yet
persuaded this business will succeed in a great quantity and with much profit;
namely by the help of a Furnace made on purpose where gold and silver
precipitated with lead and Halb Kopf by extreme heat of fire; that tin is
extracted to the quantity of the tenth part, which remainder you must
peculiarly take and keep. Which done you must precipitate new tin in the
foresaid Furnace, and so extract to the remainder of the Regulus which extract
again: the first received is to be added and reserved; which labor is to be
reiterated, till thou have a sufficient quantity of Regulus filling the
Furnace; which again thou must precipitate; for by this means gold and silver
are brought together, so that they may easily afterward be separated from the
superfluous tin. By this means I count the separation profitable, where but
little substance is lost, which is turned into ashes and smoke. Nor does adding
lead and Halb Kopf hinder, because sometime lead is mixed with tin, and Halb
Kopf separated again. It is good therefore to separate pots and old dishes,
for the mixture of lead, and to precipitate gold and silver from them, by the
adjection of Halb Kopf only, where the residue is no way altered from Halb
Kopf, therefore thou may self it or refine it again: which I suppose will be
to thy great advantage.

What is to be held concerning the perfection of Metals.
THis knot is scarce soluble, for so many and diverse opinions of so many ages,
so that most men sleighting the testimonies of true Philosophers, will not
believe the truth, especially because scarce one of an hundred can be found who
is not impoverish't with this art: the incredulous therefore is not to be
blamed for his doubting, no signs of truthappearing, yet experience testifies a
possibility by art and nature, though examples are rare. I pray with how great
absurdity should one deny heaven and hell never seen? But thou say we must
believe this as revealed by God his Prophets and Apostles; but so is not this,
but the Philosophic traditions of heathens. I answer, though most Philosophers
were heathen (yet some have been Christians) yet their works are not to be
despised, because not handling our salvation: to whom if Christ had preached,
surely they had believed him. For it appears by their Books that they were
pious and honestmen, who though not professors of Christ, yet they did his
will indeed, which we though not in words, in action deny; who if they had been
wicked, why took they such pains in making books for the good and profit of
their neighbor about virtue and piety? Why spent they not rather their life
time in leisure and pleasure, as is the custom now adays with them who are
appointed to instruct us? Why should they gul posterity with trifles and lies,
expecting from thence no profit? for most of them were not poor, but very rich
Kings and Princes. Besides these there have been many Christians seriously
confirming the truth of the Art, men indeed of special note, namely Bishops,
Doctors, etc. Such were Thomas Aquinas, Albertus Magnus, Lullius, Arnoldus,
Koger Bacon, Basil, etc. Why should very pious men deceive posterity with
their works, and reduce them into errors? Though there remain not the works of
famous Worthies, yet there would be a plain confirming the truth of this Art.
For I am persuaded there are some to be found having this knowledge and
privately possessing it. For who is so madd to reveal himself to the world, to
receive naught but envy for his reward? Let no man therefore doubt of this
secret Art's truth. But say you: Why stand you so much for the Art? Did you
ever see or perform any thing in it? I reply, though I never made projections
to perfect metals, nor saw transmutations; yet I am sure of this, I have often
from metals with metals, leaving no gold and silver in the cupel, extracted
gold and silver by the help of fire: But I will not have you think that one
imperfect metal will perfect another, or turn it into gold or silver, impure
and drossie without, in comparison of gold and silver; for how can such metals
perfect another imperfect? which thus understand. For as in the vegetable
kingdom water cleanses water, or juice with seething as is wont to be done in
purifying honey and sugar, or any other vegetable juice, with common water and
white eggs: so also you must understand of mineral juices or metal, of which
if we know the water and white, surely we might refine the impurity, in which
gold and silver lie hid, as in black shales, and powerfully extract gold and
silver, which is not a transmutation of metals, but an eduction of gold and
silver from the dunghill; Do thou ask how gold and silver can be educed from
copper, iron, tin, and lead, to wit, by the help of lotion, out of which none
is drawn with that best probe, (as it is thought) of Cupels? to which we
answered before of the probe of cupels not to be sufficient for all several
metals. I need therefore say no more, but I refer the studious Reader to
Paracelsus his book the Vexation of Chemists, where thou shall find another
lotion and purification of metals which heretofore was unknown to Miners and
dealers in minerals. As for example: A Miner finding the oar of copper, uses
his skill delivered by the ancients to his utmost endeavor, whereby he may
cleanse it and reduce it to metal: where first he breaks it into pieces, and
boils it, for to take away the superfluous sulphur, then by virtue of melting
he brings it into a stone (so called) which afterward again he commits to fire,
and freeth it by the addition of lead, of its gold and silver; which done he
blacks and reddens it, turning it into copper, which is his last labor,
whereby the copper is made malleable and vendible: which done the Chemist
coming tries another separation, by whose help gold and silver is extracted, as
yet tried of very few, of which mention is here made. Paracelsus also says in
the same place, that gold has given some an easier way of separating gold and
silver from courser metals, and indeed without refining the oar, which is a
special and curious Art, which he teaches not in plain terms, but only says
it is sufficiently taught in seven rules of that book, where he treats of the
nature and propriety of metals; in which you may seek it. And this purification
of courser metals I count most easy, which I have often tried in small
quantity: and I doubt not but God has shown other Artizens also other
purifications, which imperfect metals are perfected; for example, if one would
purge the fruit of the earth by distillation, so that the dregs and impurities
being taken away, it would grow up with a new clear clarified body: as if one
distill black and impure Amber by a retort, the separation would be made by
fire, of the water savouring of the Empyreum of the oil and volatile salt, and
the Caput mortuum be left in the bottom of the retort; by which means, in a
very short time without great labor, is made a great alteration and emendation
of Amber, though the oil be black* impure, and stinking: but if it be again
distilled by the retort with some mundifying water, as with the spirit of salt
(namely through a fresh clean glass retort) shall be made a new separation by
that spirit ofi salt, and a far clearer oil shall be extacted; the dregs with
the stink left in the bottom of the retort, which afterward may be twice or
thrice rectified again with fresh spirit of salt, until it get the clearness
of salt, and sweetness of sent resembling amber and musk.

And this transmutation makes of a hard thing a soft; unlike the former in
shape, which though never so soft and liquid, oily, may again be coagulated, so
that it become as it was at first, after this manner following. Take the said
oil very well clarified, add to it new spirit of salt, yea salt enough for
its own recoagulation, and again it requires the hardness of amber, of an
excellent clear and admirable color; of which half an ounce is worth more than
some pounds of black amber; of which scarce the eight or tenth part remains in
purifying, all the soul superfluities cast away.

By this means I think one may cleanse and mend black metals, if so be the
manner of their cleansing were known by distillation, sublimation and
recoagulation. But thou say that metal cannot like vegetables be purified by
force of distillation, to which I present our first furnace not given to
peasants, but Chemists trying metals; so also the possibility of their
perfection is shown by help of fermentation. For as fresh leaven may ferment
the vegetable juices, which are perfected with fermentation, the dregs being
cast away as one may see in wine, ale, and other liquors, whose lasting and
perfection proceeds from no other thing but fermentation purifying the
vegetable juices, without which they could not otherwise withstand the
Elements, subject to corruption in a very short time, which fermented last some
years: so also if we knew the proper ferment of metals, surely we might refine
and perfect them, so that they would not be any more subject to rust, they
would prevail against fire and water, and be nourished and fed by them. For so
the world heretofore perished with water, and shall at last perish with fire,
and our bodies must rot and be purified with fire before we come to the sight
of God. And thus far of the fermentation of metals, wherewith they are resisted
and perfected. Metals also are pur'd and mended like milk set on the fire;
whose cream the better part (the substance of butter) in the top is separated
from whey and cheese, and according to the heat of the place the separation is
speeded: even so it is with the separation of metals; where metals putinto a
fitted hot place by themselves without any addition of another thing (for
metals were before reduced to a milky substance o^ curd) are separated in time,
by parting the nobler parts from the ignobler, opening a great treasure: and as
in winter time milk is hardly separated with a weak heat; just so metals if not
not helped with fire, as one may see in iron, which in long time under the
earth is turned into gold without Art. For often iron oar is found with golden
veins very goodly to behold, severed from the course, earthy and crude sulphur,
by force of the centers heat. And commonly in such oar no vitriol is found,
separated and bettered by its contrary. But a long time is required for that
subterraneous separation, which Art very speedily performs; as is wont to be
done with milk in winter when we presently make butter of it, when we put it
to fire to part the cream speedily; which separation, precipitation made with
acid things, mortifying the urinous salt of milk much helps; by which means all
principles are separated by themselves, as butter, cheese, whey: so in a
quarter of an hour separation is made by boiling, which else without acid
things could not be done in some weeks. If then it be possible in vegetables
and not animals, why not in minerals? For what but gold and silver is found in
lead, iron, tin and copper, though they do appear? Why is all goodness denied
to courser metals, granted to vegetables and animals not equal to them for
lasting? Whence is the natural perfection of lead, tin, iron, and copper to be
proved? Nature ever seeks the perfection of her fruits; but course metals are
imperfect; Why then is not nature helped with Art in perfecting them? But the
bond of metallic parts is worth observation, which being broken, the parts are
separated. Urinous salt (as I may say) is the bond of the parts making milk, as
of butter, whey, and cheese, which is to be mortified by its contrary acid for
separation. But in iron the parts are bound with vitriol salt, as with a bond,
which is to be mortified with its contrary, urinous or nitrous salt for
separation. He therefore who knows to take away the superfluous salt of iron,
either by moist or dry means, doubtless shall have iron not soon subject to
rust.

Fire also has incredible force of it self in changing metals. Is not steel
made iron by force of fire, and iron of steel by different proceeding?
Experience daily teaches us also diverse kinds of changes and refinings by
fire; why is it not possible in metals by an expert Chemist having skill in
them? Who would believe that a live bird lurkes in an egg, and an herb having
leaves, flowers, and sent, in the seed? Why may not then abortive metals,
getting not yet perfection, be perfected by Art, with help of fire? Is not an
unripe apple or pear ripened by the heat of the Sun? which some curious and
industrious marking have imitated nature in their works; and have found some
metals not destroyed with the heat of fire, but enriched with a secret gainful
heat, so that melted (digestion being made) they have yielded double weight of
gold and silver. Yea I my self have seen the common oar of lead digested after
the aforesaid manner, which was not only enriched with silver thereby, but also
partaked of gold which it wanted before in ordinary trial. Besides one might
work this in great quantity, as wi th an hundred pounds; which work of minerals
will without doubt bring great profit to the skilful triers of lead. But know
this not every one by this trial of lead to be furnished with gold, but the oar
to be ever enriched with silver, experience being witness.

More such things are found in Nature incredible to the ignorant, and those
that are unacquainted. But if we mortals were more diligent in reading the book
written with the hand of God in the pages of the four Elements, surely we
should find more secrets and wonders in them, but skill and wealth is got with
sweat of face and not by sloth; therefore labor and pray. Metals are also by
help of gradation equal to germination.

For it is well known, that the shoot or graffe of some fruitful garden-tree
implanted in a wood, makes after that tree to bear not wild fruits, but very
good and sweet like them of the implanted shoot, as one may see in iron
dissolved in an acid spirit, fermented with Venus and turned into Copper: by
which means doubtless copper is turned into Silver, and silver into gold, if by
manner of fermentation, the true way were known.

Now this transmutation is like digestion, making beef or horse flesh of grass
in the stomach of ox and horse; and man's flesh of beef in the stomach of man.

The better parts also are separated from worser by the attractive strength of
the like, as is to be seen in metal abounding with sulphur, to which if iron be
added in fusion, the sulphur deserts its native metal (by which means it is
more pured) and joins its self to iron, with which it has more affinity and
familiarity, then with its own. For example, if iron be added to lead oar full
of sulphur in the melting, this melted metal is made malleable, which else
would be black and brittle. And if something else to be put to the melted
malleable metal were known to us, to take away in the melting the redundant,
crude combustible sulphur, questionless it would yet be made purer, which thing
unknown, metals remain in their impurity. And indeed God has done well in
this as in all other his works, that he has concealed his knowltdge to us: for
if it were known to the covetous, they would buy up all lead, tin* copper and
iron, to turn into gold, so that rural and poor Laborers could hardly buy
metallic instruments for their use, for the scarcity; but God will not have
all metals turned into Gold.

By a given similitude of taking away the superfluous sulphur of some metals in
fusion, for to keep the purer parts; so likewise is given, of separating the
purer parts from the impure, namely by the attractive power of the like, where
the purer parts are drawn together by their like, the impurer and heterogeneous
part is rejected: and that may be shown us well by a moist or dry way: an
example of the moist way ensues.

If quick Mercury be added to impure gold or silver dissolved in its proper
menstruum, the mercury draws with it invisible gold and silver from the
Menstruum and mine with the refuse, and associates what is pu^est to it self
which separation soon succeeds. Mercury performs the same likewise a dry way:
namely when some earth having some gold and silver is moistened with acid
water, and they are so long bruised together, till Mercury draws the better
part; which done you must wash the dead earth left, with common water, and
separate Mercury dried from the attracted gold and silver, by trajecting them
through a skin. And Mercury draws but one metal from the earth, and indeed the
best for one time; which separated, it draws the second another metal; for
example, if in some one earth, gold, silver, copper and iron lie hid, the first
time mercury draws gold, the second silver, but copper and iron hardly for the
dross, but tin and lead easily, but easiest of all gold for its purity like to
Mercury.

Another Demonstration by a dry way.
PUt under a tile the cuple with lead, to which add a grain of very pure gold,
most exactly weighed (for memories ^ake) make the gold in the cuple to
fulminate, and lead will enter the cuple, the gold left pale in the cuple: of
which pale color there is no other cause then the mixture of silver, drawn from
the lead by gold. But thou say, that thou know this, that gold fulminated
with lead, to be made paler and weightier, for silver in the lead, left with
gold in the trial, augmenting the weight, and thence making it pale: to which I
reply, though lead leave some silver in trying in the cuple, mixed with gold
added to it, the weight of gold augmenting, and changing the color; yet it is
proved by weight, that lead leaves more mixed with gold in the cuple, then tried
without gold. Hence it is proved, that gold in fire draws its like from other
metals, augmenting its weight: and this also gold does in the moist way: for if
it be dissolved in its own menstruum, together with copper, and put in
digestion, it draws gold separated from copper which labor though not done with
profit, yet witnesses a possibility. But if the menstruum of gold augmenting
the attracting power of gold or multiplying the same were known, but
diminishing the retentive power of copper, doublesse some gain were to be
expected; and indeed more, if gold and copper together be melted in fire with
the drymineral menstruum: by which means the weight of gold would be increased
according to Paracelsus saying: Metals mixed together in a strong fire,
continued a pretty while, the imperfection to vanish, and leave perfection in
its place.

Which surely well done is a work not wanting gain. For I freely confess, that
I would sometime incorporate silver with iron, when as gold from iron gave me a
good increase of pure gold, instead of fixed silver sought after. And by this
means often some not thought on thing happens to Artists, as to my self with
fixed silver, uot rightly considering the business. Therefore meddling with
metals be sure when you find some increase, to weigh well what it was at
first. For many think, long trying silver with iron, by the Bloud-stone,
Loadstone, Emraud, lapis calaminaris, red talc, granats, antimony, arsenic,
sulphur, flints, etc. having mature and crude, volatile fixed gold in them,
finding in the trying good gold; that this gold is made of silver by help and
use of the foresaid minerals; it is false. For silver drew that gold out of
those minerals, in which before it lurked volatile. Yet I deny not the
possibility of changing silver, as being inwardly very like gold, but not by
help of cementation with the said minerals, because that gold proceeds not from
silver but those minerals, attracted by silver. This labor is compared to seed
cast into good ground, where dying by its own power it draws the like to it
self, when it is multiplied an hundred fold.

And it behooves in this work now and then to wet the metallic earth, with
their proper metallic waters, dried with heat (which operation is called of
the Philosophers inseration) else the earth will be barren, and it behooves
that this water be near in kind to earth, so that when they are united they
yield a certain fatness. For as it appears from sandy, dry earth moistened with
rain water, not bringing forth fruit agreeable to its seed, for the small heat
also of the Sun consuming the moisture, and burning the seed in the earth,
which mixed with cows dung or other, keeps the water so as that it cannot be
soon consumed. By the same reason it is necessary that thy earth and water be
mixed, lest thy seed be burnt up. Which work if well handled, it will not be in
vain, requiring exceeding diligence of nourishing the earth with warmth and
moisture when the earth is drowned with too much moisture, and with too little
it cannot increase, and this is one of the best labors, with which I draw
forth good gold and silver of baser metals, requiring the best vessels,
retaining seed together with their earth, and water in its proper heat. I doubt
not but this work also in a greater quantity, may be performed, firmly
beleiving that the courser metals especially lead, the fittest of all not only
to be perfected into gold and silver, but also into good medicine: which
without question is the Philosophers labor granted from God, ^s a great
comfort to the Chemist, but warily to be used. For that all and singular Gods
gifts he will not have common; as indeed I have found to be an inventer of a
very excellent work, that I showing it to a friend, neither could I afterward
teach it to him, nor do it again for my self. Therefore and indeed justly men
are doubtful in writing matters: for many seek not at pleasure to detract the
inventions of others performed with great costs and labor. Therefore it is
safer to be silent and to give leave to seek, then to publish, secrets, that
they may undergo the pains and charges to be born in inventing high matters;
nor any more hereafter may the ungrateful so impudently gape after others
Labors. Therefore I would entreat all men both of high and low degree that
they would not molest and tire me hereafter with their petitions and Epistles,
and that they would not turn my good will of benefiting others to the ruin of
my self, contented with my writings published with the profit of my neighbor.
Nor do you think that I possess and promise golden mountains. For what I have
written I have writ to discover nature, in these discourses of the perfection
of course metals in small quantity, For I never made trial in a great
quantity, trying truth and possibility in a lesser only, in small crucibles:
therefore those things which I have writ are written to that end that the
possibility of the Art may appear, of perfect metals to be wrought out of
imperfect, therefore he who has occasion may make trial in a greater
quantity: but a^ for my part wanting opportunity, I expect Gods blessing,
whereby upon occasion I may make trial in a greater quantity, and so receive
the fruit of my labor and great charges.

Also metallic bodies are transmuted by another means, namely by that benefit
of a tinging metallic spirit, as one may see in aurum fulminans, sometimes
kindled upon a smooth clean metallic plate, fixing a very deep gold tincture
upon the plate, so that it may bear the touch*stone. The same also happens in a
moist way, where plated metals put on a gradatory spirit made of nitreand
certain minerals, pierced by the spirit obtain another kind agreeing to the
spirit. But if one doubt of the metallic gradation, made with aurum fulminans,
he shall try the certainty from the often fireing of fresh aurum fulminans,
upon the same plate, for he shall see that it is not the color of the metal,
and outwardly gilded but deeply tinged. Likewise one may try the certainty by a
humid spirit, if transformed metals are tried, whence the mutual action and
passion of subtilized spirits plainly appears, for the power of spirits is
very great, and incredible to one not exercised: and this gradation of
inferior metals Philosophers both ancient and modern, do not only confirm,
but also diggers of minerals taught by experience, that mineral vapors by
penetration change courser and to purer metals. Lazarus Ercker being witness,
that Iron is changed into a good natural copper in green salt waters, and that
he saw a pit, in which iron nails and other things cast in, by the penetration
of a cupreous spirit were turned into a good copper. I do not deny that
metallic dissolutions of some metals do stick precipitated to the plates and
to make them of a golden, silver, o^ cupreous color; for it is well known, that
iron cast into a vitriol water not to be turned into copper, but to draw copper
out of the water, of which thing we treat not here, confirming the possibility
of metallic transmutations by a tinging and piercing spirit; therefore I
again maintain that great power is in metallic spirits; look only upon course
and o^^ke earth, and besides that clear and limpid water with which the clearer
and more powerful air proceeding from the water comes from the earth. Are not
whole countries drowned with water sometimes, Towns and Cities taken away?
cannot the air destroy the strongest houses; especially shut up in the earth
shake the land for some miles; and after ward demolish whole cities and
mountains with the death of men? all which things are done naturally. Wind
artificially raised by Nitre threatens a far greater danger, which no man can
deny. Although that corporeal Elements exercise so great power, yet they cannot
pierce metals without hurt, nor stones and glass, and things soon penetrated by
fire. Therefore not by an occult but a manifest power of Sun and fire, which it
has over metals, stones and glass, which are easily pierced by them without
any impediment: and why should not metals compact of a certain metallic
subtle and piercing spirit be penetrated by help of fire, and changed into
another species? As is already spoken of Aurum fulminans and aqua gradatoria.
Therefore there is no doubt of the possibility of the metallic tingent spirit
changing courser metals into finer both by a dry and moist way; For metals may
be purified the same way that Tartar and Vitriol and other salts, namely by the
benefit of much water. For it is manifest that vitriol is purged with iron and
copper mixed with it, namely dissolved and coagulated in much water, so that it
wax as white as alum; which purification is but a separation of metal from
salt, made by benefit of much water debilitating salt, so that it cannot longer
return mixed metal, which is precipitated like some slime, not unprofitable,
because the chiefest part of vitriol, from which is the greenness, viz,
Copper, Iron, and Sulphur. And as by help of separation metals are drawn from
vitriol, more perfect then salts; so also to be taken from metals with the
perfecter and better part is separated by help of precipitation: as for Tartar
it is purified by the addition of water, but its better part is not
precipitated as in vitriol, but the courser part by reason of blackness and
faeculency. As for example: Tartar by the often solution of the vulgar (made
with a sufficient quantity of water) and coagulation made very pure and white,
because in every solution made with fresh clear water, it always becomes
purer, and not only by this means white Tartar, but also red and feculent, is
reduced into transparent crystals, and indeed very speedily by virtue of a
certain precipitation; whose limosity, for obscuration sake of the salt of
crystalline Tartar, is nothing else but an unsavory thing, dead and useless,
mixed with Tartar in its coagulation in Hogs-heads of wine, and separated again
by power of solution.

And these are the examples of the two salts of Vitriol and Tartar, not in vain
set down, because they show the difference in precipitation: for in some metals
by force of precipitation the courser part is separated; but in other the
better and choicer according to the prevalency of this or that part.

In vitriol, the better part (copper and iron) is the least, which is
precipitated and separated from the courser and greater part, viz. salt. But in
Tartar the courser and less part is precipitated and separated from the greater
and better part clarified: the like is in metals. Therefore let every one be
wary in separating, and consider before, whether the better or courser part of
metal is to be precipitated, without which knowledge no man can meddle with
this business, let also the workman be ware who expects any profit from his
labor of corrosive waters, as Aqua fortis, Aqua Regia, spirit of salt,
vitriol, allome, vinegar, etc. in the solution from which no good proceeds, as
utterly destroying and corrupting all and each of them; proving the same in
these words, From Metals, by Metals and with Metals metals are made perfect,
metals are also purified, matured and separated from their vitiosioties by
Nitre burning up the superfluous sulphur.

And all the aforesaid perfections of metals are but particular. For every
particular medicine, as well humane, as metallic, purges, separateth and
perfecteth or amendeth by the taking away the superfluity. For universal
medicine works its perfections and emendations, by strengthening and
multiplying the radical moisture as well of animals as metals, expelling then
by its own natural virtue his enemy. But thou say excellent examples indeed
are delivered by me, but not the manner of doing them. R. I have delivered more
then you think, although you don't perceive it: for I am sure after my death
that my books will be in greater esteem, from which i^ will appear that I have
not sought vain glory, but the profit of my neighbor to the utmost of my
power. But do not seeing my freeness of writing think that you may wrest ma ny
things from me. For assure your self that although I have written many things
for the public good, yet I intend not by this means to trouble my self. For I
cannot satisfy the desires of all men, nor answer their Epistles, nor enrich
all men, who neither am rich my self nor have sought riches. For although I
have gotten the knowledge of these things by Gods blessing, and have tried the
truth of it in small quantity, yet have I never made experience in great store
for wealth sake, contented with Gods blessing. Therefore I would advice all
illuminated by God, that they fall not into this sin of ingratitude; but that
they be mindful of the poor, as in thankfulness to God, as hoping to escape
eternal damnation. Nor let the envy of the malicious move thee famous for
knowledge e by divine favor, for the covetous and ambitious wish well to none
but to themselves; who o ught to consider, that as they brought nothing with
them, so also they shall carry away nothing. Be thou only a good husband in
the gift from God entrusted to thee, and do thou justice undauntedly.

And let this suffice of the several purifications of metals according to my
experience, as for that universal medicine so famous, I cannot judge of it
being a thing unknown to me; but the possibility thereof I am forced to affirm,
moved with the several transmutations of metals; which unknown it behooves us to
be contented with that favor which God has bestowed on us. For oftentimes
questionless it is better to know little, for Eternal Salvations sake; for most
commonly wealth and learning puff up. And pride brings to the Devil the author
of it, from whence God of his mercy preserve us.

Of the Philosophers Stone.
THe Universal Medicine is believed from many ages, by many very famous men,
Jews, Ethnicks, and Christians, to bring men and metals to the highest degree
of perfection, and the possibility thereof by Art; nor is only believed, but
also proved by many sure reasons, for which thing numberless writings of
diverse tongues are true and false: there is no need to add any thing of my
self; altogether ignorant of this thing: although I have some times heard, how
many times in diverse places pure fine gold is made of courser metals,
especially of lead, prepared by some medicine artificially: yet I have left
this kind of discourse in its worth, never yet resolved to undertake such a
business, scared with the example of other men as well of high as low degree,
learned and unlearned loosing their labor and charges in this Art; but I am
rather persuaded that such a wondeful universal medicine cannot be found in the
world. And though I have often seen wonders in my labors giving occasion, yet
I never durst try wanting the opportunities of time and place; until at length
a belief of the possibility comes into my hands, seeking something else of no
great moment. For I have undergone much charge and labor for many years to
extract the tincture of salt of gold, for a medicine made therewith, which at
length I have obtained, where I have observed the remainder of the gold, the
soul or better part being extracted to be no more gold, nor longer to endure
fire. Whence I conjectured, that such like extraction being fixed again, can
perfect courser metals and turn them to gold: But I could not hitherto try the
truth of my conceived opinion living at this time in a foreign place;
therefore against my will, although greedy of novelty, I have been forced to
abstain from the work. In the mean time considering the opinions of
Philosophers concerning their gold, not the vulgar, asserting the universal
medicine to be prepared therewith. I have again affused some Philosophical
Vinegar to the Copper for to extract the tincture, where almost all Copper like
whitish earth is separated from the tincture in digestion, which earth by no
Art I could again reduce into a metallic body.

Which experiment again confirmed me of the possibility of this Medicine. Which
labor though I never followed, yet I doub t not but it is humane medicine,
thought not also metallic, attainable thence by a diligent workman. The soul
therefore with all the metallic attributes, consisting in so small a quantity,
which is scarce the hundredth part of the weight, which extracted and separated
the remaining body is no more metal but a useless and dead earth; not to be
doubted but fixed again may reassume and perfect another metallic body.
Therefore I am confident persuaded with the aforesaid reasons, that such a
medicine is to be made of mineral and metallic things, viz. in the flowing,
changing baser metals into better. But do not think that I writing these
things make gold or copper the matter of this medicine; which I do not hold,
well knowing that there are other subjects easily to be handled, abounding with
tinctures.

Which medicine though rare and hardly can be obtained, yet Art and Nature are
not to be blamed therefore, but w^ rather slothful, covetous, proud and
impious: for no wicked man is worthy this Art, or a despiser of God and his
Word, and an ambitious hater of his neighbor. Thou Wilt say this is a work of
Nature and Art, not therefore to be attributed to our life, heretofore given to
Ethnicks, not to be compared to us for piety, as not having the true knowledge
of God. Therefore my life (though wicked) cannot hinder me: because this Art
consists in the knowledge of natural things. I answer, O pretty fellow! thou
art quite mistaken; do thou think that the Ethnic Philosophers did not know
the true God? They had greater knowledge of God then thou; to whom although
Christ was not preached, yet they knew from Nature; and according to the rule of
this knowledge they led their lives, obtaining this profit from God, that they
put it not to ill use but to the profit of their neighbor. But thou then
perswad^st thy self to excel thy neighbor in learning, whose mote thou see,
knowing not the beam in thine eye, spending thy life in covetousness, pride,
envy, hatred and other sinful pleasures, do thou so think thy self hid from
the sight of God that he cannot hinder thy endeavors? Truly so great a gift is
not given of God to covetous and proud false Christians. Therefore every one
must specially examine himself undertaking this work, whether he come with
washed or polluted hands. For it is very certain and true, that never a wicked
man though running shall obtain this profit, which is of God alone, not of man.

So thou have heard now my opinion of the Universal Medicine, which my
experience in Gold, Copper, and other Minerals, and*metals has caused: which I
will not preach for Gospel, because it is humane to err.

Therefore no certainty is to be had, before its final and complete perfection,
and indeed once or twice tried for certainties sake. For it is not lawful to
try often an excellent way once found out, which happens doubtless as well to
others as to me. Therefore we must not triumph before the victory for unthought
on impediments frustrating hope; but God is rather to be implored in our
labors, that he would be pleased to bless our endeavors, that we may use well
his gifts in this life as good stewards and afterward bestow the free reward of
our labors, watchings and cares on us sinners, namely everlasting rest and
salvation out of his mere mercy.

Whether minerals, As Antimony, Arsenic, Orpin, Cobolt, Zinck* Sulphur, etc.
may be transmuted into metals, and into what?
IT is long since debated among Chemists, whether the aforesaid minerals
proceed from the same principles with metals, and whether to be counted metals;
in which controversy they have not agreed to this day, when as one approves
this which another denies, so that a student of Chemistry knows not to what
side he had best assent.

But this knowledge not a little concerning the purifying of metals I would put
my opinion also grounded upon experience, for the satisfying the doubtful, the
simplicity of them is strange who hold not one and the same beginning to be of
minerals and metals, but if metals might be made by nature, surely it had long
since been done; but it never was, experience witnessing, for permanent
minerals are never transplanted into metals. I Answer, metals grow one way,
also vegetables another, soon budding and again soon dying; but it is not so
with metals, for all lasting things have long time of digestion; according to
the saying, That which is soon made does soon fade, this is to be understood
not only of vegetables and minerals, but also of animals, as appears from that
budding of some vegetables, coming in six months space to their perfection and
then again iron perishing: when as things requiring longer time of digestion
and perfection are much more lasting. A Mushroom in the space of one or two
nights grows out of rotten wood, again soon vanishing: not so the Oak. Oxen,
and horses in the space of two or three year come to perfection, scarce living
the twentieth or the twenty fourth year: but a man requiring twenty four years
to his perfection, lives sixty, eighty, or a hundred years. So also we must
conceive of lasting metals requiring many ages, and also very long times of
digestions and perfections; metals therefore requiring very long times of
digestions to their perfection, it is granted to no man ever to see the
beginning, and end of them, the transplantation of minerals into metalsby
nature cannot be divided; especially because that in the oars of metals,
especially of course ones, minerals are also found; wherefore diggers of
minerals, when they find them, conceive good hopes of finding metals, of which
they are termed the Coverlids, for seldom metals are found without minerals,
or minerals without metals; nor also are ever minerals found wanting gold or
silver; therefore minerals are properly termed Embryon metals, because by art
and fire a good part of gold and silver is drawn out of them by fusion; which
if they do not proceed from the metallic root, whence proceeds that gold and
silver? for an Ox is not born of an infant, nor man of a Calf; for always
like is produced of its like.

Therefore minerals are counted but unripe fruits in respect of metals, not yet
obtaining their ripeness and perfection, nor separated from the superfluous
earth; for how should a bird be hatched of an egg by heat, not predestined for
the generation of the bird? for so we must understand of minerals, which if
they be deprived of their metallic nature, how should by fire metals be
produced from thence? But thou say that thou never saw the production of
perfect metals out of courser, therefore that it is neither likely, nor
credible to thee to whom many things as yet lie hid from most men, perversely
and foolishly denying things unknown: for daily experience witnesses, that the
viler minerals and metals by taking away the superfluous sulphur (however it be
done) to obtain a greater degree of perfection, therefore should not thy heart
believe, and thy tongue speak what thou see with thine eyes? for experience
shows that good gold and silver might be drawn out by art almost out of all
course minerals and metals, yet more out of some then of others and speedier;
for there is not that dark night, that is altogether deprived of light, which
may not not be manifested by a hollow glass; nor is there an element (though
never so pure) not mixed with other elements, nor any malignity deprived of all
good, or on the contrary. And as it is possible to gather the hidden beams of
the Sun in the air, so also hidden perfect metals dispersed in imperfect, and
minerals by fire, and an expert Artist; if once they are placed in fire with
their proper solvents where the homogeneous parts are gathered, and the
heterogeneous separated, so that there is no need to go into the Indies to seek
gold and silver in those new Islands which is possible to find plentifully
here in Germany, if so be the merciful God would please to turn away those
present cruel plagues, and bring them out of old metals, viz. Lead, Iron, Tin
and Copper, there left by the dealers in minerals; indeed without the
husbanding of metals. Let no man therefore judge himself to be poor, because he
is only poor and in want (although otherwise very rich and abounding in wealth,
which yet in a moment he is forced to forsake) that being ungrateful, neither
knows nor acknowledges God in his works.

What I pray is in less esteem in the world then old Iron and Lead? which are
acceptable to the wise to use in the Lotion of Copper and Tin with the mineral
white. But how they are to be washed, is a difficulty to the unexercised in the
fire, and shall be delivered by similitudes: You see Antimony fresh dug out
of the earth very black and impure; which by fusion separated from its
superfluity (which though nature gave to it not in vain, but as a help to its
purification, according to that: God and Nature do nothing in vain) is made
more pure and endowed with a body nearer to metals then its mineral, which if
afterward cast with salt of Tartar, the crude and combustible sulphur is
mortified thereby, and is turned into dross separated from the pure mercurial
part, so that hereby is made a new and fresh separation of the parts, of which
one portion white and brittle sinks to the bottom, the other lighter, to wit,
the combustible sulphur is on the top with salt of Tartar; which powered out
into a Cone, when they are cold, may be separated with a hammer; the inferior
part of which is called by the Chemists Regulus, which is purer then Antimony
cast the first time out of its mineral, and this is the usual purging of
Antimony used by Chemists, to which (Regulus) if afterward any thing should be
added, for a third purification, without doubt it would not only be made purer
but more fixed and malleable. For if white Regulus be preparable out of black
Antimony, why not as well malleable metal out of the Regulus?

Another away of separating the superfluous Antimonial sulphur.
ANtimony powdered one part, salt petre half as much, mingle them, and kindle
the mixture with a live coal, and let that Antimonial sulphur with the nitre be
burnt up, the darkish mass being left, to wit, of a brown color, which melted
for the space of an hour in a strong fire yields an Antimony like to that which
is made with salt of Tartar, but somewhat less in quantity, like to these the
parts of animals are separated, viz. if Antimony, nitre and crude Tartar be
mingled in an equal weight, and they being mixed are kindled and melted. There
is also another separation of Antimonial parts; when of small bits of Iron one
part is put into a strong crucible, in a wind furnace, to which being red hot,
cast two parts of ground Antimony, for fusion, and the superfluous combustible
sulphur will forsake the Antimony, and join to the iron a metal more amicable
to it then sulphurous; mixed with which forsakes its own proper pure Mercury
and sulphur or Regulus, which is almost the half part of the Antimony.

And these four ways, by which the superfluous combustible sulphur of Antimony
is separated are most common, not set down as secrets, but for demonstrations
sake, that it may appear how sulphurous minerals are to be perfected and
purified, which are little amended, yet showing a better way not only for
Antimony; but also for Arsenick and Orpin, although these two cannot be so done
with iron, nitre and tartar by reason of theit volatility, but with oil or
other fat things in close crucibles, giving a Regulus like to the Antimonial,
And these Reguli make tin hard, to sound and be compact, if to one pound one
ounce be added in fusion, for making good household stuff. And in trial they
give good Gold.

And as it is said of purging Antimony, so also it is to be understood of the
^est, as Wismuth, Zinck, lapis calaminaris, lead, tin, iron and copper to be
purged from their superfluous sulphur, if thou will draw more perfect metals,
viz. gold and silver out of them with gain. And so I make an end of metallic
lotions, recommending to Chemists, nitre, tartar, flints, and lead; for who
knows to use them, shall not lose his labor in Chemistry; but it is to be
lamented, that every where good earth and fixed in the fire is not to be gotten,
retaining lead and salts; for without our old lead little or nothing can be
done in the refining metals; therefore who goes to try any thing in this art,
let him seek the best earth retaining lead twenty four hours space; afterward
let him consult with tin, what Vulcan has to be done with iron; who will tell
him what he must suffer, before he obtain the Crown.

Of the tincture of Sol and Antimony.
SOmetimes another alteration happens to man's body from the attraction of
mineral vapors (which cannot be done by my furnace) in the trial, therefore
here I will set down a certain medicine for the workmans sake, as well for
preserving as curing, namely a clear rubin fixed and soluble of gold and
Antimony. Take of pure gold half an ounce, dissolve it in Aqua Regia,
precipitate the solution with liquor of flints, as before said in the second
part, edulcorate and dry the calx, and it will be prepared, take Regulus Martis
(of which is spoken a little before) beaten fine, to which mix three parts of
the purest nitre: place the mixture in the crucible between burning coals,
putting to fire by degrees: which done make a stronger, viz. for fusion, for
then the mass will be made purple; which taken forth and cooled bake very small,
of which take three or four parts and mix with one part of the aforesaid
golden calx; place it mixed in a strong crucible covered over in the aforesaid
wind furnace, and make the mass to flow together like metal, and it will
assume that Antimonial nitre in the fusion, and it will dissolve gold or the
calx of gold, and a mass of an Amethyst color will be made therewith; which so
long leaves the fire, till it get the cleerness of a Rubie, which one may try
with a clean wier of iron bowed and put therein, although in the mean time the
mass deprived of fusibility is thickened, it is meet to add some nitre or
tartar, for speeding fusion, and that as often as shall be needful. Lastly pour
the mass when it shall come to the utmost redness of a rubie, hot into a clean
copper mortar, which there leave until it cool, and it will be in color very
like to an Oriential Rubie; then bruise it hot into powder, also taking air it
would melt, and extract the tincture by the fusion of the spirit of wine in a
vial; and the gold together with the Antimony will remain very white like the
finest talc, to be washed with clear water, in a glass edulcorated and dried,
which melted with a stronger fire, gives a green glass, in which no gold
appears, yet separable by way of precipitation with the filings of iron and
copper, from which it recovers its ancient color, but without profit by reason
of the wast, the tinged spirit is to be taken away from the tincture, which is
a very sovereign medicine in many grievous diseases.

Although thou may suspect this not to be the simple tincture of Sol, but of
nitre and tartar mixed, be sure that the quantity of nitre added not to exceed;
and suppose that tincture of Tartar and nitre, I pray what waste is there?
since that is so good a medicine by it self, and I am persuaded, this tincture
of Sol to be better then those set down in the second part. That Ruby may be so
used by it self with the proper vehicles, seeing it is a sovereign medicine of
it self; or else exposed to the air and resolved to a liquor, for the medicine
is not less then its tincture because gold in it self and the purer part of
Antimony are made potable without corrosives. Wonderful is the power of salts
in metals to be destroyed, perfected and changed by fusion: for it happened to
me one time making this Ruby, placing two other crucibles also with metals, by
this containing gold with the prepared Regulus of Antimony (for easily two or
three, or more crucibles may be placed in this furnace, to be ruled with one
fire which cannot be done in a common furnace by that means) about to put in a
certain salt in the crucible next to the crucible of gold, that by a mistake I
cast it into the crucible with gold only, whence so great a conflict arose,
that there was danger of boiling over; therefore forced to remove it out of the
furnace presently with tongs and to effuse it, supposing that the Ruby was lost
by my rash putting in of salt, therefore I would only keep the gold. And I
found the effused mass red like blood, purer then a ruby but no gold, but white
grains like lead dispersed here and there in the salts, separable for the
smalness, not by the solution of salts which separated by the solution of water
with red tincture like blood, remained in the bottom of the glass, which
afterward for fusions sake together I placed in a new crucible in that furnace,
but willing to try the fusion I found the crucible empty, and all the gold
vanished, a little excepted sticking on the top to the crucible and the cover,
which I took away and melted for experience sake in a new close crucible, but
all of it presently feeling heat flew away, no sign being left in the crucible
like Arsenick; And so I was deprived of my gold.

At length I took the red solution and took the water from the salts, and I
found the red salt like blood, which I put in a clear crucible in the furnace
for to try whether any metallic body might thence be extracted; but I found
the effused salt deprived of all tincture and redness: which seems strange to
me even to this day, that by help of this salt the whole substance of gold,
viz. the tincture together with the remainder flew away, having so great
volatility.

Which labor afterward I would reiterate, but it happened not so at all as at
the first time; there was indeed some alteration of gold made, but its
volatilization was not so great, the cause of which thing, I think was the
ignorance of the weight of the aforesaid salt, cast in at the first time
against my will.

And two reasons chiefly moved me to insert this history, first that it may
appear how soon one may mistake in a small thing frustrating the whole process.
Secondly, that the truth of Philosophers may appear writing that gold by art is
reducible into a lower degree, equal to lead (which happened to me in this
work) and that it is harder to destroy gold and make it like to an imperfect
metal, then to transmute imperfect metal to gold; therefore I am glad in my
heart that I saw such experiment; of which thing our fantastic Philosophers
will hear nothing, writing whole volumes against truth, stiffly affirming, gold
to be incorruptible, which is an arrant lie; for I can show the contrary (if
need be) many ways. I wonder indeed what moves such men to slight a thing
unknown, I do not use to judge things unknown to me.

How dare they deny the transmutation of metals, knowing not to use coals and
tongs? truly I confess those rude and circumforaneous Mountebanks, not a little
to defile and disgrace true Chemistry, every where surprising men by their
fraud, needy and oppressed with penury unless peradventure they find some
credulous rich man giving them food and raiment for the conceived hope of gain
and skill, of which also some covetous men furnished with gold, go clad like
painted Parrots, whom I judge to be hated worse then a dog or a snake; but
harmless Chemistry is not therefore to be despised. Some covetous men besotted
with folly and madness, laying out their moneys with an uncertain hope of gain,
who afterward the thing ill succeeding, are forced to live in poverty, whose
case is not to be pityed laying out of covetousness, some seek wealth not out
of covetousness, but rather that they may have wherewith to live, and may
search nature, which are to be excused if they are deceived of knaves, yet not
to be praised if they spend above their ability.

Another tincture and medicine of gold.
DIssolve gold in Aqua Regia, precipitate it dissolved in liquor of the salt of
flints, power some part of the aforesaid liquor to the precipitated gold, then
place them in sand to boil for some hours space, and that liquor of flints
shall extract the tincture of gold, and shall be dyed with a purple color; to
which power in rain water, and make it to boil together with that purple
liquor, and the flint shall be precipitated, the tincture of an excellent
color with salt of Tartar left; out of which it is necessary to extract water
even to drought, and a very fine salt of a purple color will remain in the
bottom of the glass, out of which with the spirit of wine may be drawn in a
tincture as red as blood, little inferior in strength to potable gold; for many
things lie hid in this purple salt, of which more things might be spoken if
occasion permitted; therefore let it suffice to show the way of destroying
gold, for that golden salt can in a very short time, viz. an hour, be
perfected with small labor and transmuted into miracle of nature; confuting the
slanders of the noble art of Alchimy; for which gift we ought to give immortal
thanks to immortal God.

Of looking glass.
I Have made mention in the treatise of potable gold, not only of the material
heat of fire, but also of turning the finest beams of the Sun into a material
bodily substance, by help of certain instruments by which they are gathered. I
have also mentioned there the preparation of the hollow glass; I will here give
it being not known to all men, the best that I know as follows. First
patterns are to be made of the best mold, namely hair and clay, of which
thing in the fifth part, conformable to the glasses in form and figure
circularly round; for else they cannot gather the Sun beams together and again
put them forth; the fault of which thing is to be ascribed only to the pattern,
for the fusion and polishing of glasses is not an excellent art known even to
bel-founders, but to melt them very well shaped of the best matter and rightly
to polish them this is art: and first to cut the patterns round very well
shaped by use of a sharp instrument cannot briefly be demonstrated; therefore I
will send the Reader to Authors prolixly handling this thing, viz. Archimedes
and Johan. Baptist. Porta, and others, though thou want those Authors, or
do not understand them, see thou have a globe exactly turned for making
patterns as follows; and first make a mixture of meal and sifted ashes,
which spread equally between two boards as the manner is to spread paste made
of meal and butter for pyes and Tarts, answering in thickness to the glass to
be shaped, then put on a compass and make a measure as you please, which cut
with a knife, and put it on a globe, and sprinkle quick lime on it out of a
searce or five, and put clay well prepared with hair of the thickness of two
fingers breadth: although it be a great piece you must lay across wires
strengthening the pattern, lest it be bent or broken. Afterward one part
hardened with the heat of the Sun or fire, take away all that from the round,
and put it on some hollow, on which it may on all sides stand well, and also
sprinkle quick lime on the ashes of coals on the other side, and put upon this
the other part of the pattern, and again expose it by degrees to be dried by
the heat of Sun or fire, lest it crack, which done take away the ends making
those parts of type or pattern from that inward or middle, which ends set one
against another to the inward parts the distance at least of a span, and put
between in the top a few live coals to harden the type all over, to which put
on other coals, and then more, and so by degrees even to the top, that they
may be well kindled in their lighter parts. Although the types are very thick
one fire will not suffice, and it will be necessary to add more coals, until
they be thoroughly kindled in the inner parts: afterward let the fire be kindled
by degrees that the types may grow cold, but not altogether, but so that you
may touch them: and presently besmeare finely the sifted ashes mixed with water
with a pencil to stop up the chincks arisen for burning the hair and smoothing
the types, then again makeboth parts (after thou have framed the first hole in
them for a Tunnel) clean by being wary left any foul thing fall upon them, and
carefully bind them with iron or copper wier; and very well lute over the
joining with clay prepared with hair; and put on an earthy tunnel, and the
type on the top of dry sand: And thou ought in the mean while thou burnest
and preparest the type to melt the metallic mixture, that it may be powered on
the hot type, the metal well melted put on a searcloth, which burning power out
melted metal into the burning type, being wary lest coals or some other thing
fall into the crucible, and be powered with the metal into the type spoiling the
glass; then let the glass cool of it self in the type, if the matter be not
mouldred in the cooling. And though it do moulder in the cooling, which indeed
would be lessened, it behooves that the cast glass be presently taken out of
the type, and covered over with a hot earthen or iron vessel that it may cool
under it, which otherwise cooling shut up in the type not able to moulder, is
broke in pieces, but soon after you shall perceive, what be those mouldering
metals.

And this is the common way (and the best) of melting, if so be thou art
exercised; there are also other ways; first when types are made of wood or
lead, agreeing to the glass to be printed the sand, in the finest powder of
tyles or other earth as is the custom of copper smiths; and th is way only
serves for lesser glasses.

The third way best of all, but hardest to one not exercised, is as follows,
make a waxen type with a cylinder to be placed between two boards as is
aforesaid of the first way, which put upon the globe for to shape it, and let
it be hardened in the cold: then take it away, and spread the following mixture
with a pencil; which see that it be dried in the shadow, then apply the clay
prepared with hair the thickness of one or two fingers broad: then take away
the wax from the earthen type, make a round hole in the earthen type with a
knife coming even to the wax, which done, place near that coal fire the type
bending down, and the melted wax will run through the hole, into which power
hot (not burnt) metal, etc. that liniment which is anointed on the wax must be
very well prepared lest while the wax melt, it fall and melt away with the wax,
nor let the wax pierce the earthen type and spoil it. Now the liniment
follows: Burn clay well washed in an earthen furnace even till redness;
afterward bruise it and take away its finest part with washing of water, so
that thou take the finest dust, which dry and again burn with a strong fire:
after grind the dust with rain water and salt Armoniack sublimated, upon a
stone, as painters use to make their colors, bring it to the just consistence
of a paint, and mixture will be made; salt Armoniack keeps that fine powder
lest it melt away with the wax: but prepared earth makes a tender and fine
fusion.

Metallic mixture for the matter of the glass.
THere are diverse of these mixtures of which one is always better then the
other, which by how much it is the harder, by so much the glass is the better;
and by how much the harder the metal is, by so much the better it is polisht,
nor does the hardness of the mixture suffice but its whitness is required: for
red proceed from too much copper; becoming black from too much iron, or duskie
from too much tin, does not make the true representations of things, but
changes the shape and color of them: for example sake, too much copper makes
shapes too red, and so of the rest; let therefore the metallic mixture be very
white, but if burning glasses are made, it is no matter what color it be of,
if so be that the mixture be hard. I will set down one of the best,. of copper
plates the thinnest beaten to pieces one part, of white Arsenick a quarter,
first moisten the plates with the liquor of the salt of Tartar, and make a bed
upon a bed with plates and Arsenick powdered, by sprinkling this on them, until
the crucible be filled; to which power to the oil of flax as much as suffices
to cover the copper and Arsenick: which done put to the cover with the best
lute, then place the crucible (the lute being dried) in sand, so that only the
upper part of the cover may stick out and administer fire by degrees, at first
little; Secondly, somewhat stronger, till at length it be hot that all the oil
may evaporate; in the mean time the oil shall prepare the copper and retain
the Arsenick and shall make it enter into the plates like oil piercing dry
leather: Or place the crucible upon a grate and put fire on it, which
administer by degrees, until the oil evaporate in the boiling. Lastly when it
shall cool, break the crucible, and thou shall find the copper of diverse
colors, especially if thou shall take Orpin in stead of Arsenick, twice or
thrice increased in bigness and friable.

of this copper one part, and of latton two parts, melt it with a very quick
fire, and first indeed the latton to which afterward add the friable copper;
power out the mixture melted and thou shall have a very hard metal unfileable,
yet not so brittle but like steel, of which diverse things may be shaped
serving in stead of iron and steel instruments; take of this hard metal the
third part, of the best tin without lead one part, effuse it and the matter of
looking glasses will be made. This mixture is a hard white metal making the
best looking glases, but if this labor seem tedious, take of copper three
parts, of tin one part, of white Arsenick half for the matter of looking
glasses, which are fine but brittle as well in the melting as polishing,
therefore carefully to be handled. I must here set down a thing worthy to be
observed, and known to few; false is the opinion of many, especially of those
who attribute knowledge to themselves of the proprieties of metals, in the
second part (of subtle spirits) mention is made of the pores of metals, for
experience witnesses, that those subtle spirits as of hartshorn, tartar,
soote, and sometimes those sulphurous of salts and metals do evaporate through
pewter vessels, which at the first time no man conceives, for whose sake this
discourse is made. Make two bals of Copper, and two of pure Tin not mixed with
lead, of one and the same form and quantity, the weight of which bals observe
exactly, which done again melt the aforesaid bals into one, and first the
copper, to which melted add the Tin lest much Tin evaporate in the melting; and
presently power out the mixture melted into the type of the first bals, and
there will not come forth four but scarce three bals, the weight of the four
bals reserved; if then metals are no^ porous, how I pray does that great
alteration of quantity proceed? therefore know that metalsare porous more or
less, gold has the finest pores, silver has more, Mercury more then that,
Lead more then Mercury, Copper more then Lead and Iron then copper, but tin
has most of all.

If we could destroy metals and again educe them destroyed from power to act,
surely they would not be so porous. And as a child without correction is unfit
to any goodness, but corrected is endued with all kind of virtue and learning,
so also we must understand of metals which left in their natural state, namely
drawn out of the earth without correction and emendation remain volatile, but
corrupted and regenerated are made more noble, even as our bodies destroyed and
corrupted, at length shall arise clarified before they come into Gods fight.
Well said Paracelsus, that if in one hour metals were destroyed an hundred
times yet they could not be without a body, reassuming a new species and indeed
a better, for it is rightly said, Vnius corruption, alterius generatio; for the
mortification of a superfluous sulphurous body is the regeneration of the
Mercurial soul, for without destruction of metals perfection cannot be;
therefore metals are to be destroyed and made shapeless that after thereby the
superfluous earthy combustible sulphur separated the pure fine Mercurial
species may spring, of which thing more de amausis.

Of the smoothing and polishing looking glasses.
A Looking glass though it be very exactly fused and proportioned, yet it is of
no value not rightly polished and smoothed, for easily in the smoothing some
parts it may suffer some damage hurtful to it, and it is necessary to take
from them first the grosser part by the wheel as the custom is with Pewterers
and Coppersmiths with a sandy stone, then to apply to them the purer whetstone
with water, until they are sufficiently smoothed by grinding, which done the
looking glasses are again to be taken from the wheel and to be moved to the
wooden wheel covered with leather, rubed over with a fine prepared glazing
stone until the crevises contracted in the turning no more appear having got a
cross line, afterward another wheel covered with leather is required, to which
a blood stone prepared and washed with the ashes of tin rubbed on, to which
likewise by the aforesaid means according to the same time looking-glasses are
so long to be moved till they get a sufficient fineness and brightness. You
must keep such looking glasses from the moist air, and breathing, and to wipe
them infected with air and breathing not with any woolen or linen cloth, but
with a Goats or Hearts skin, and not any where but on the cross line, with which
sleeked looking glasses are smoothed. They can also be smoothed with lead
artificially melted with an emrald and water, first by grinding; secondly with
a purer emrald and lead; lastlywith a blood stone ashes of tin: likewise also
with whetstones, by putting in another purer every time, whence at length
brightness is procured to them by ashes of tin.

Also the outward part of the looking glasses convexe may be smoothed, which
represents short shapes, and spreads the dispersed rays: but the inward part
hollow gathers and multiplies, and presents a shape.

Let these things suffice of melting looking glasses and polishing requisites
to the collection of the Sun beams, and although from the aforesaid mixture
other kinds of looking glasses might be made representing wonderful shapes and
several excellent things, as Cylindrick, Pyramidal, Parabolick, etc. yet they
are omitted as impertinent, yet I could show a way to make them, because I have
not undergone small labors and charges in the searching of their preparation
and use if it were necessary. But of all looking glasses that is most useful
whose preparation we have shown, whose diameter is at least two or three spans,
if thou will perform any special thing, although it be but of one or two spans,
yet it gathers abundance of beams, so that thou may melt tin and lead with
it, if it be well shaped: yet the larger are the better. Nor ought they to be
too broad that they may further cast their beams, and better perform their
actions or functions, let them have the twentieth or thirtieth part of the
sphere the section exactly observed which is the fundament of the Art.

Of metallic glasses.
ASfor metallic glasses much conducing to the perfection of metals and
esteemed by the Ancient Philosophers, I would not omit in this place because
they are easily made by this furnace.

And indeed the Ancients have found these glasses questionless by chance,
reducing the calcined bodies into glass by a strong fire, for very many secrets
by this means not sought for are found out. Oftentimes it happens to our labors
that past hope we find something better or worse, then the thing sought; and I
think this happens with these glasses, but however it be I am sure these
glasses have stood us in much stead, for Izaak Holland says plainly, that
vitrified metals brought to metals by that reduction do give better and nobler
metals then the first vitrified, and indeed gold gives a tincture, but silver
gold, and copper silver; and so consequently the glass of other metals give
better metals in reduction, the truth of which experience proves, and although
I have not yet made great trial in this work, yet I know that metals brought
into dead ashes to be turned into clear glass cannot be again reduced into
metals without great profit: yet one metal is more pliable then another, nor
are our glasses the metallicks of goldsmiths fixed to other large ones for
ornaments sake, made by the addition of glass made of fusile sand; but ours of
the juice of metals. But I do not deny the virtue of Venice glass,
mundificating another fusile of metals, chiefly copper and tin, which though is
not comparable with metallic pieces. I freely confess I have tried this thing
twenty times, and I never was deceived by it: but I know not whether it may
prove so in a greater quantity because I never tried it, doubting of my vessels
not fit to retain fusible glasses a requisite time: for I have spent much
labor in making these kind of vessels, but hitherto in vain. For there is
very great hope of gain if thou have very strong crucibles. But this
perfection is not without reason, for whilst the metal is burnt to ashes, much
of the superfluous combustible sulphur is burnt (as you may see in Lead, Tin,
and Copper, from the sparks appearing in their calcination whilst they are
stirred and separating) which if again reduced (viz. calcined) its better part
(by benefit of melting) and the weightier sinketh, the worser flowing on the
top is changed into dross or glass. And the separation of metal is done by the
help of fire alone, to the ignorant and unexpert incredible: but consider gilt
silver to be separated in fusion, which is as it were corrupted by that common
sulphur, and the metallic species, being lost it turns to black dross before
in melting it forsake the gold: which way also silver is separated from copper,
and this from iron. Observe also that black and crude Antimony, which reduced
into ashes by calcination, and melted is separated by a strong fire, the purer
parts descending pure and white like silver, but the impure parts ascending
changed into glass or dross, which separation was never made without
incineration although the Antimony stood long fluid.

Thou see therefore the power of fire alone in melting metals, wherefore
believ thou that thy labor shall not be in vain if thou know how to help the
fire. Exercise thy self therefore in it, for thou art sufficiently instructed,
and this furnace will help thee, without which it is impossible to meddle with
such things as experience testifies confirming my words.

Mention being made of metallic glasses, which belongs to the perfection of
metals, I am forced to say something also of other Amausa, or colored glasses,
which are called Gemmes, and are worn for beautifying, which though it be not
profitable, yet it is a delightful labor, which knowledge as well noble as
ignoble have long sought, not for gain, but recreation sake, erring from the
true way (although prolixly described in many tongues) through ignorance of the
art to render crystal or flint fusible and coloring it, content with lead
glasses made of one part of crystals or flints, and three or four parts of
minium or ceruss, glass of no worth, as not only very soft and unapt for
polishing, but also heavier then it ought by means of lead, and having a yellow
or green color, or every glass of crystal or flint and minium or ceruse by
themselves, viz. without the addition of other colors, the lead gets a yellow
color hindering and altering other mixed colors, therefore a good stone is not
made this way of lead and flint, but there may be of these Saturnine glasses,
Venice glass, Ashes of Jupiter and colors being added to them, be used
diversely of the goldsmiths, namely to color gold; otherwise of no moment.

Therefore I will give another preparation, namely out of the flints etc.
crystals of Sol with minium and ceruse, with metallic colors, natural in
color and elegancy of excellent stones; but not harder then glass; for
although crystal is harder then iron, yet it is deprived of its hardness in
some measure, and is made like to glass, yet so much hardness reserved, as
serves to write in another glass, which glasses are easily polished, in all
things and by all most like, hardness excepted, to natural stones; with which
not only various kinds of stones be made, and other gold, silver, and wooden
works or pictures adorned; but also diverse supellectils, as salts, hafts or
hilts, cups, etc. and also images and antiquities may be formed (by fusion)
with gold, silver and stones of impresses, like to those cut out of gems by the
hand of an ingenious workman most delightful.

They are made after this manner: and first you must look for flints and
crystals not colored, but very white, gathered out of sand or streams, which
you must heat in a covered crucible, and quench them glowing in cold water,
that they crack and may be pulverised; otherwise they are so hard that when
they are powdered, they take part of the mortar and so are defiled; therefore it
is worth your labor to handle them well. Afterward of flints prepared, and the
purest salt of Tartar, equal parts, made in glased vessels, but not in copper
or iron, equal parts, mingle them and keep them to use.

And if thou will make this mass into a gem, you must first mingle some color
(what you desire) afterward so long place it (being put into a clean covered
crucible scarce half full) in a very strong fire till all the salt of Tartar
has evaporated, and the flint together with the color come into substance
fusible like glass: you must then put a small clean iron wier, and draw out a
little of the melted mass for trial; whether it have stood long enough in the
fire, whether there be yet pustles and little sands, or whether it being
exactly melted it shall descend to the bottom, which done you must take off
the crucible and place it under some hot iron or earthy vessel, that it may wax
cold with the melted stone; otherwise the mass will be broken in the crucible
into very small parts, and would be unfit for greater works: neither must you
power out the melted mass for fear of the attraction of air, ad pustles to
arise thence. But willing to make out of the mass by fusion, not carving, money
or pictures; thete is no need to leave the mass in the crucible to cool, but
presently to power it perfect and hot into a copper mortar, and nothing will
stick to the crucible, but all the mass will be poured out without any wast;
And this mass if thou will thou may powder or break into very small bits for
fusion and impression. But the mass cooled in the crucible is to be taken by
breaking the crucible, and to be reduced into greater or lesser stones by
cutting. But melting for money or images, you must place the money or image,
which you will imitate, with the backside or hinder dart downward in an iron
ring a fingers breadth broad of greater capacity then the money, upon a stone
or plain wood, and spread a little earth or fine sand, or earth through a
cloth, namely as much as suffices to cover the type, and upon this to put more
of the best moistened with water like ashes of cupels, and to impress it being
most tenacious firmly to the type, but warily lest the type be moved; which
done you must turn the ring, and with a knife lift up the type, and to take it
lifted up with ones hands or tongs, the image being left in the sand, to be
dried by the heat of the Sun or fire. Afterward casting the image, place the
ring with the image of sand impressed under a tile, and adminster a strong
fire, that the whole ring with the sand and the image of sand may be very hot:
then take off the ring to see if the image have suffered any loss; which if it
have not, you must put upon it so much of the aforesaid glass coursly beaten,
as suffices in the fusion to fill the image impressed on the sand, which done
put the ring again under the tile, and administer the fire of fusion till the
glass melt in the ring; to which touch with a smooth iron and light (with a
handle) being hot, the ring taken first out of the furnace with tongs, pressing
the glass well to the type; and then place it under a hot iron, or earthen
vessel to cool; and being cold take image from the type which answers to it in
all things, if thou have aright proceeded, exactly representing the Carvers art
or a seal impressed to a jewel, which excellent work is most fit to faigne,
and represent antiquities and rarities.

The coloring of the aforesaid mass follows, in which it is made most like to
Gemmes.
IT behooveth that colors be taken from metals and minerals, namely from
copper, iron, gold, silver, Wismuth, Magnesia and Granate: of other colors I
know nothing of certainty, copper commonly makes a color green like the Sea,
copper of iron grass-green; Granate smaragdine color, iron yellow or Iacynth;
Gold the best sky color; Wismuth common sky color; Magnesia Amethystine:
mixed, they give other colors; E. gr. Gold mixed with Silver gives an Amethyst
color; Iron and Copper, a pale green; Wismuth and Magnesia, a purple; Silver
and Magnesia various colors like an Opal.

Images are also made of diverse colors, if the masses of diverse colors be
broken into bits and mixed be put upon the type, etc. And if thou desire an
opac mass (green, red, sky color, etc.) add a little calx of Tin darkning, on
which as on a Basis the colors insist. For example; in making a Turcoise stone
or a Lazulus, mingle to the Azuremade of the silver Marcasit or Zafora (to
color the mass) the calx of tin, that they may melt together, and before the
impression be made, put upon the type some prepared gold, then spread and put
upon this the aforesaid glass; and the fusion and impression being made, let be
made thence having golden veins like lapis Lazulus very delightful; But there
must be calx, gold is not loosing its splendour in the fire, such as is made by
Mercury, or that, which better is precipitated out of Aqua regia, of which
above.

Of the preparation of the colors for coloring the mass of flints and
Crystals.
THe plates of copper often heated, are quenched in cold water, of which more
in the fifth part, from three to six grains of it may be mixed to j. of the
mass for a sea green color. Iron is reduced into crocus by reverberation; of
which from four to ten grains are added to the mass for a yellow or Iacynth
color; Silver is dissolved in Aqua fortis and precipitated with the liquor of
flints, after it is edulcorated and dried, whereof from one to six grains,
added to j. of the mass, they make mixed colors.

Gold is dissolved in Aqua regia, edulcorated and dried, precipitated first
with liquor of flints, whereof from grain four to ss. mixed with one ounce of
the mass make a most elegant Sapphire. And if from three to six of that soluble
ruby made of the nitrous gold and silver of iron be added to j. of the mass
they make a very polite ruby, Magnesia pulverised, whereof from six to fourteen
grains to j. of the mass, make an Amethyst.

Marcasit dissolved in Aqua regia precipitated with the liquor of flin ^s, let
be edulcorated and dried, whereof from one to five grain to j. of the mass give
a Sapphire, but not comparably so polite as one made with gold.

But being unwilling to calcine Marcasit, let him take Zafora, and mingle to j.
from five to ten grains; Granates of Bohemia or Oriental pulverised add from
six grains to j. to j. of the mass, for little green stones like to the natural
smaragd or emrald: other things which remain of the mixture of the colors are
to be learned by experience.

To what uses colored flints and crystals are appointed is not here to be
treated of; one use being excepted, which I set down for the eyes, which are
weakened by too much watching, the heat of fire and smoke; see thou have a
waxen type circularly round, of the bigness of a dish or trencher (The Optiques
are wont to call such lentes) to which put the best clay well mixed with hair:
anoint the waxen type with oil, and exactly apply the best prepared earth of
crucibles (and durable in the fire) the thicknes of a finger, which dried
perforate in some part, that the wax being melted by the fire may flow forth;
afterward burn the type in an earthen furnace; being burnt fill it with
prepared glass, and place it in a wind furnace till the glass melt; which at
length cooled take off the type by attrition; and there shall thou have the
crystal resembling the force of the type; which afterward thou must make and
polish like spectacles in an iron dish on both sides; and take cover it wrought
with a strong iron wier, and thou shall have a good crystalline lent bought for
small price which otherwise is scarce made of crystal of so great a bigness. And
if thou will thou may color the glass green very pleasant to the sight, and
fit the foot to it for greater benefit. And the glass does not only make in
this for the multiplication of light in the night time that you may see a thing
afar off in a chamber, but also for the fixing and calcining minerals by the
sun beams, and melting of metals and multiplying of pictures like a hollow
glass, and also so to compare it for other uses with a hollow looking glass
which does the same of an equal bigness which the hollow glass; nor is there
any other difference of them but reflection. This glass instrument is made
likewise another way and by less cost and labor, if it be of a polisht
looking-glass if 2. great orbs are cut out with a diamond, and if they are
somewhat softened with fire and are left there so long in the heat until they
shall stick like wax very close to the stone, which done let them be cooled
again, which afterward taken out will represent the form of a hollow glass, to
which it behooves to fix a leaf on the unequal part. And these glasses do the
same that a hollow metallic looking glass does; the reflection excepted, which
is not so strong as of the hollow glass: And although the glasses are sooner
broke, yet they are very fit for the making of the following instrument.

And they are bound together by strong wier applied across on the concave part,
and a hole is cut in the brim with a diamond on one side of the bigness of a
pea, to which is put an Ascent, then the crevises are exactly closed in every
place with the best lute, which done, a silver or copper ring is to be tied
about it, holding those glasses straightly, so that the instrument may be
fitted to the foot, all which well done those strong wiers are separated or
cut off, with which the glasses were bound at first, namely near the copper
ring; afterward it is infused with very pure Aqua vitae through a funnel as
much as is required for the filling it up, the instrument being filled the
Ascent is shut up, which is to be laid up to use; and this instrument is better
then the hollow glass, especially if it have in its diameter the breadth of one
foot, and may be applied to prospective pictures, it does excellently
represent and multiply them.

Behind which if you place a candle in the night, it gives so much light in the
chamber, that you would think it came from the Sun. It does also many other
things which here are omitted as superfluous. And you may gather the dispersed
light in the air in the night time with it, so that you may read the smallest
writing. Such and others of the like things may be done by this furnace, all
which to set down would swell the book too much. Other things of the metals
examination and purification by fusion, in another place.

Take this, Reader, which is given to thee, in good part, at another time thou
shall have better; and do not mistake my writings, as if I did reprove the
examinations of metals by the Ancients, fusions and separations, who only would
communicate my opinion, and yield my assistance for further proceeding; for I
know that dealers in metals giving too much credit to their small probes, when
they find nothing, do contemn oars as barren, often abounding with gold and
silver; yet when he, John Mathes. says expressly in his Sarepta, that minerals
oftentimes tried in a small quantity do yield no gold and silver, which in a
great quantity yield a great deal, wherefore ^redit is not always to be given
to such probes, often deceiving, as experience testifies.

But this not only in those minerals which are dug out of the earth; but
also in those clayie and sandy minerals, abounding with silver and golden
flames; out of which neither by the less nor greater probes, nor ablution nor
Mercury is drawn with gain that thin and fiery dispersed gold: which by some
waters is done without fire easily; for I know such mines are found near many
rivers of Germany and many places in other Nations of Europe, out of which
honest gain without much cost and labor may easily be gotten. Neither are they
dreams, which I have spoken parabolically of the perfection of metals, for it
is possible by art to help nature in the perfecting things. There is therefore
no more need of any thing then of knowledge; therefore the nature of metals
being known, and their properties, they are easily separated, purged and
perfected.

But what I have written of the universal medicine, I have done for the
aforesaid causes, which have made me believe the thing, not as professor of the
Art. The other things of colored red glasses and looking glasses I have added,
because they are easily prepared by this furnace, as sometimes necessary in
some works. Other things of the handling metals are not without cause now
omitted, which happily may be sometime delivered in another place, wherefore
now we end.

FINIS.
THE FIFTH PART OF THE PHILOSOPHICAL FURNACES: WHERE It is treated of the
wonderful NATVRE OF THE FIFTH FVRNACE; ALSO Of the easy preparation of the
Instruments and Materials belonging to the foresaid four FVRNACES. Most
profitable for Chemical PHYSICIANS.

By JOHN RUDOLPH Glauber.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, for Tho: Williams at the sign of the Bible
in Little-Britain. 1652.

THE FIFTH PART OF PHILOSOPHICAL FURNACES.
Of the preparation of the Furnace.
AS concerning this, of which though I made no mention in the Preface, for it
was not my resolution to mention it in the last part, because I was purposed
only to treat of the instruments, as well earthen as those of glass, and also of
the other necessary things belonging to those four parts premised; yet I am
willing now in this part, (which I have judged to be the most convenient place
for it, for which I did before design another) to discover the wonderful nature
thereof, as far as I may for the studious Artists sake. And although I know
that more in this part then in all my other writings, especially the ignorant
and unskilful, will be offended; yet I will not therefore pass it by,
persuading my self that by this means I shall do a work that will be most
acceptable to the searchers of Art, and Nature. For I do devoutly affirm, that
this is the choicest of all my secrets that I confide in, in which I have
already seen wonderful things, hoping that the divine benediction will some
time or other be obtained upon the practice thereof. And as for the structure
thereof, much cannot be said thereof, because it is not built as other furnaces
are, but it is every where found extructed by Nature, being ordained for no
other works then those of Nature, viz. for the making of any menstruum that
shall dissolve gold, silver, and all other metals, and minerals without any
noise, as also precious, and common stones, and also glasses: the original of
which is the original of the Menstruum. Now what, and what manner of furnace
that is that produces this royal menstruum (coming from the menstruum it
self) and that easily without any labor, you may easily conjecture, that it
is not any common one, by the help whereof other things are distilled, that can
yield such a menstruum that is not corrosive: which certainly is not any common
menstruum, because there is but this one menstruum that I know, which does not
partake of any corrosive quality, that does more then any or all other
corrosive waters whatsoever. For all corrosives whatsoever they are, as aqua
fortis, aqua regia, spirit of salt, vitrioll, allome, and nitre cannot
together, and at once dissolve the close union of gold, and silver, and other
most hard subjects, that cannot be dissolved in waters, though never so
caustic.

This indeed is wonderful, and stupendous, that a thing every where found most
vile and base should do so great a miracle, I know not what moved me to write
of it, knowing that I shall in this part offend not only the wise by writing
so openly, but also the ignorant detractors, and slanderers that will accuse
me of falsity. And truly these considerations might justly have deterred me
but that I knew I might do a good work, recalling many from their errors. For
many being persuaded that there is no other dissolving menstruum, besides the
aforesaid corrosive spirits; but those are Chemists that are ignorant of
nature; yet the Philosophers with one consent say that those corrosive
destructive spirits make a fruitless solution of metals. For experience
testifies that the solutions made by the help of aqua fortis, and regia, and
other spirits, color the hands, being that which a true Philosophical solution
does not, and furthermore testifies that those, viz. which color the hands,
are not to be reckoned among the true Philosophical solutions, but to be
contemned as Malignant. Wherefore I was willing to write these things to
instruct those that err. Let no man therefore persuade himself that a
menstruum is so vile, and contemptible is of less efficacy then those corrosive
spirits. I my self did once scarce believe that so great virtues could be in so
most vile a menstruum, until I had experience of the truth in good earnest.
And the same thing happens here, which happens every where: viz. great and
costly things are sought after, but small and vile things are neglected,
contrary to the course of nature, doing all her works simply: let no man
therefore be offended at the vileness of any thing. The Jews also were offended
at the poverty of Christ, who was all things in all. These, although they did
see miracles, which no man but the Messiah could do, yet did not believe,
being obstinate by reason of the simplicity of his form, which if he had not
assumed, being humane, he could not have been our Mediator before God. For we
were wholly separate from God by that fall of Adam, so as that being hardened
in sins we became the slaves of death, and hell, and so should remain for ever
by reason of the loosing of the Holy Spirit, which we had. Now that divine dew,
or celestial Manna that does from heaven water our dry hearts refreshing us by
his saving Word, and blood shed for us, that holy Spirit, which otherwise we
could never have received, was again communicated to us. Hence therefore we may
see, how we were reconciled by a disesteemed man, and that necessarily. And as
formerly the Pharisees and Priests were offended at the poverty of Christ being
the son of a Carpenter, not acknowledging him for the Messiah; so also that
universal Menstruum (openly named) no man does esteem, as being base, and found
in every dunghill. But do not thou account it as a fault that I have here
alleged the poverty, and humiliation of Christ: for the discourse does not
tend to his disparagement, but to his great honor; because he alone amongst
the sons of men, although most contemptible could deliver mankind from the
power of the devil; as that universal Mercury the basest of all subjects,
being overcome by death, does rise again gloriously for the metallic genus.

Now here may and that not without cause be brought in some similitudes
demonstrating our discourse; and first of all how two contraries or extremes
can without a medium be joined together: as for example, the subtle spirit of
wine, as also of urine, cannot be reunited to its proper salt, viz. separation,
and purification, being once made, although they are of one and the same
original, without a medium, that is, water, which is in stead of a mediator in
this reunition. So also before the fall, God was with Adam, afterward having
transgressed the command of God, he was thereby deprived of that Divine
society, and made subject to diverse kinds of miseries, to an eternal, and
spiritual death, until the incarnation of Christ the Mediator, who unless he
had partaked of both natures, could never have reconciled and reunited us; as
that most subtle spirit of wine or urine can never again be reunited to its
proper fixed salt, without water which partakes of both natures. And if it were
lawful I could, and that easily compare the Philosophical work with the
incarnation and nativity of Christ, with his life and death; as also his
resurrection; but this is not my work at this time, for it suffices to make
mention of it at this time. I wish it were lawful to compare terrestrial with
celestial miracles; without doubt the unbeleeving Thomas would have opened his
eyes. But now it is not lawful; and although Moses, Daniel, Josephus^, and
others that were skilled in natural Philosophy, and Magic, by the help
whereof as well celestial as terrestrial miracles are known, made mention of
this thing in their writings, yet it is taken notice of by very few readers.
Finally, if we might, and time would admit, we could demonstrate, that God does
not always esteem of great things, but rather threaten ruin to them; for he
is no respector of persons, or creatures, of which there are extant many
examples. Now the world judges all things amiss, esteeming, and respecting
only glorious things; but our care should not be about them; for always great
things are done even by the smallest, and most contemptible.

I could here add more things concerning the original of the universal
menstruum, which is so contemptible, which does by its wonderful powers and
virtues dissolve all metals, minerals and stones radically without any noise,
unites and fixes them; the solution whereof does not color the hand; the
conjunction is inseparable, and the fixation incombustible, I say I could add
more things concerning it, but that diverse inconveniences, which by this means
I might incur, as also the envy and hatred of others do deter me. For although
any one does think to discover the possibility of Art, and Nature; yet few
would be content therewith, being very desirous of all manner of revelation;
and if we should not gratify them, we should forthwith incur their hatred and
envy, who would without doubt judge otherwise of the matter, if they had but
any experience of our labors. Be thou therefore (courteous reader) contented
with this discourse, that shows thee the possibility of Art and Nature; and
diligently seek after it in the fear of God, and without doubt thy labor shall
not be in vain.

Of the Building of the Furnaces.
HOw those furnaces of the first and second part are to be built and made of
potters clay, and stones; I need not say much, because there be many books
extant treating of this matter sufficiently, yet this caution is to be observed
in the building of the furnaces, viz. that those furnaces in which a very
strong fire is not kindled, need not so strong walls, as those in which we
distill, sublime, and melt, with a most strong fire. And for what belongs to
subliming and distilling furnaces; you may erect them of those common bricks
which are made of the best clay, and well burnt, compassing them about with
very strong walls, that they may the longer retain the heat: or else you will
continually have something to do in mending them, and closing their chinks,
which hinder the regiment of fire. Wherefore they must be compassed about with
iron hoops, that they may be durable and not gape. Now what concerns the
melting furnaces, the aforesaid bricks are not of use in the building of them,
because they not being durable melt in the fire, wherefore you must make other
bricks of a very good earth that is fixed in the fire, such as is that of
crucibles, etc. of which afterward, which are to be made in a brazen or wooden
mould, and to be burnt, and it matters not whether they be round or square, a
regard being had of the furnace, that six or eight of them make one course, or
row. But you need not build the whole furnace of those stones, for it is
sufficient, if the place only where the coals still lie, be made of them, and
the other part of the furnace be made of common bricks.

A Lute for the erecting of Furnaces.
LUte may be made diverse ways for this business; for men prepare their lute
several ways as they please. Some mix with sifted potters earth, the beaten
hairs of cows, oxen, hearts, or the chafe of barley, tow, flocks, horse-dung,
and the like, that hold together the clay, and prevent chops, to which they
add sometimes sifted sand, if the clay be too fat, beating the mixture
together with water, and bringing it to a just consistency. And this is the
best mixture, that is not subject to cleaving, yet weak, because in length of
time the hair and chafe are burnt, wherefore the furnace becomes thin and
weak. Many leave out combustible things, and mix potters clay, and sand
together, and temper them with brine, for the making of their furnaces. And
this is the best mixture, because it is not combustible as the other is,
neither is it subject to cracking by reason of the salt: and for this purpose
the brine of fish and salt flesh does serve, and is very good, because the
blood helps the joining of them together: but if the caput mortuum of vitriol
or aqua fortis, being mollified, be mixed with potters clay and sand, you go a
better way to work: for this lute is not at all subject to cracking, but fixed
in the fire and permanent. With this lute are retorts, and goards very well
luted, and coated, also the joints of retorts, and receivers closed: this being
mollified with a wet cloth applied to it may again be separated, and taken off,
as that also with which salt is mixed: but the other lutes that want salt will
not be separated, by reason whereof glasses oftentimes are broken. Wherefore in
defect of the caput mortuum of Vitriol, temper the clay and sand with brine.
But many mix the filings of iron, powdered glass, flints, etc. but you need
not them for the building of the furnaces, but only for the coating of certain
glasses used for separation, and distillation, because the filings of iron
being helped with salt binds and joins together most strongly.

Of the closing of the joints, hindering the evaporation of subtle spirits.
THe aforesaid lute is sufficient for the closing of the joints of the first
furnace where air is not kept from the spirits, but not of the vessels of the
second furnace, where most subtle spirits are distilled, which it cannot
retain, penetrating the same with the loss of the better part: wherefore you
must make choice of another; unless upon the other being well dried besmeared
over with a pencil, a mixture made of quick lime most subtly powdered, and
Linseed oil, which the porous clay attracting to it is fortified, so as to be
able to retain those most subtle spirits: but this lute can hardly be
separated again; because refusing water it cannot be mollified, wherefore the
clay is to be tempered only with the white of eggs, and to be applied with
linen clouts: but you must prevent the burning of the linen by reason of the
extreme heat of the neck of the receiver, by putting between an iron or strong
glass neck, viz. betwixt the receiver and the retort. The joints also may be
closed with ox bladders wet in the white of eggs, also with starch tempered
with water, if it be sometimes applied, being smeared on paper. For by this
means those most subtle spirits are easily retained, but not corrosive, for
which use the caput mortuum of aqua fortis is more convenient, which after it
is dried must be smeered over with a mixture made of linseed oil, and quick
lime.

And diverse kinds of these lutes are had being destined to diverse uses.

Another lute for broken glasses.
IT happens sometimes that glass vessels, as receivers, and retorts have some
cracks, but otherwise are whole and sound; which are greater in those glasses
that do again suffer the heat of the fire, wherefore at last the glasses* are
broken, which if you will prevent, make a liniment or thin lute of linseed oil,
quick lime, and red lead; which being smeered over a linen cloth apply to the
crack, upon which being dried apply another: but if the crack be very great,
you may apply 3 or 4 linen cloths, for the greater safety sake: as you may
apply the whites of eggs beaten together, upon the cracks with linen and cast
upon it quick lime sifted very fine, and press it down hard with your hand:
which being done, you may apply over them more linen clouts wet in the whites
of eggs, and cast upon them quick lime again: which when the lute is well
dried, retains the spirits, but sooner subject to the corrosion of corrosive
spirits then the former.

Note well that quick lime is not to be mixed with the white of eggs, and so
used upon linen clouts, as the manner of some is; because the whites of eggs
acquire a hardness from the lime before they be united, and therefore cannot
stick, but linen clouts wet first therewith before the quick lime be cast upon
them, so that the lime does not immediately touch the glass, being applied
betwixt two linen clothes.

How those subtle spirits when they are made may be kept that they evaporate
not.
THose glasses in which those spirits are kept are for the most part stopped with
cork, or wax, upon which afterward bladders are bound: which stopping is
convenient for some spirits, that do not prey upon cork or wax: For all
corrosive spirits, as of vitriol, allome, common salt, nitre, etc. corrode
cork; and lixivial spirits, as that of hartshorn, tartar, salt armoniack,
urine, wine, etc. melt wax, and penetrate it.

And although other stopples might be made, which might retain both sorts of
spirits, yet it would be tedious and laborious to open those so often, and to
stop them again. Wherefore I have found out a fit kind of glasses, viz. of
such, whose mouths have distinctions, and are fit to receive their covers; as
it appears by the delineation. A. signifies the cover: B. the glass containing
the spirit. C. a drawer by the help whereof the spirits are taken out of the
glass, when there is occasion, into the distinction in the brim of the mouth;
viz. of the glass that contains the spirit, is put quicksilver, and upon this
is put a cover; this being done the Mercury closes the joints of both glasses
running in the brim, so that nothing at all can evaporate: for the spirits do
not penetrate the Mercury, unless they be very corrosive (a thing to be noted)
which then in process of time turn the Mercury into water, but very seldom;
and then the Mercury is to be renewed. But we need not give so much honor to
corrosive spirits, as not to be compared to those volatiles, which being
abstracted from corrosives do not prey upon Mercury; and much less then these,
do lixivial spirits corrode Mercury: and for the sake of these were these
glasses invented, by the help whereof most subtle spirits are without any loss
of their virtues, if you please, a very long time preserved and kept. And
because when there is occasion the spirits cannot be poured forth by reason of
the Mercury in the brim, you must get a drawer like to that, by the help
whereof wine is taken out of the vessel, but lesser, having a belly with a
little mouth made very accurately. This being let down you may take up as much
as you please, as is needful; the upper orifice whereof being stopped with the
finger nothing drops out; being put into a lesser glass is thence poured forth
for your use. Then you must again cover the remainder of the spirit that is in
the glass, and as often as is needful take out with that drawer as much as is
useful. And this is the best way by which most subtle spirits are retained;
which also are very well retained in those glasses, whose steeples are of
glass smoothed with grinding. But this is a more costly way of keeping in
spirits, and it is done after this manner.



How glass stopples are to be smoothed with grinding for the retaining of
spirits in their glass vessels.
FIrst of all order the matter so that you have glass bottles of several sorts,
some greater, some lesser, with strong necks, and mouths, with their glass
stopples, which being smoothed by grinding shut the orifice of the bottle very
close: Now they are smoothed thus. Put the stopples in the turn, being set or
fastened in some wood, bring it into a round shape, then being moistened with
Smiris, and water mixed together, let it be put to the mouth of the bottle, so
as to be turned round in the mouth of the bottle, which you must often take
away from the stopples being fastened to the turn, for the oftener moistening
of it, which is with that mixture of prepared Smiris and water, with the help
of a pencil, or feather; and that so often and so long, until the stopple stop
the mouth of the bottle most closely: which being done, you wipe off the Smiris
with a lint from the stopples and mouth of the the bottle, then smeer over the
stopple with a liniment made of some fine washed earth, and water, or oil, and
again turn it round in the mouth of the bottle, and often smear it over with
this fresh mixture, until the stopple be most exactly smoothed, which
afterward is to be tied to its proper bottle; the same also is to be understood
concerning the rest, that one may not be taken for an other, etc. And that you
may not need to take away so much from the stopples, and bottles, get some
copper moulds made for the stopples, which stopples must be taken whilst they
be yet warm, soft, and new drawn from the furnace, that they may be made of a
just roundness, as also other copper moulds. Which must be put into the mouths
of the bottles, whilst they be yet hot and soft, for the better making of them
round, whereby afterward the stopple may more easily, and quickly become fit
to stop the mouths of the bottles very close, (as for example: A. is the
stopple, B. the glass or bottle) if thou know how to order them rightly,
they will quickly and easily fit one the other.



In defect of a turn, proceed after the following manner, which is slow, yet
safe, because in a turn the glasses oftentimes waxing hot are broken by reason
of the over great have; and it is thus, make an iron or wooden receptacle fit
to receive the glass bottle, which being covered about with linen, and put in,
join both parts of the receptacle warily and softly, with the help of a screw,
that the bottle be not broken, and because that instrument, or receptacle of
the bottle being fastened to a form with the help of a screw, cannot be moved.
Afterward cause that another wooden instrument be made for the stopple (as for
example, A. the stopple with its receptacle B. the bottle with its receptacle)
that may be separated in the middle, and be again reunited with a screw after
the putting in of the stopple, which being smeered over with the aforesaid
mixture of smiris and water, take an instrument with both hands, and put the
stopple round about the neck of the bottle, and grind it round upon the other,
as Wine Coopers are used to do in smoothing the taps; and that so long until
the stopple be fit for the bottle; then reiterate the same labor with the
earth tripolis, until it be completed; and it will stop as well as a stopple
made by the help of a turn.



After this manner also you must work those greater glass receivers of the
first furnace, that without luting they may be closed. Stopples also of vials
for fixation may be wrought after this manner, which instead of luting may be
put into the mouths of the vials, upon which are put caps of lead; by which
means in case of necessity they may be lifted up, viz. in case the spirits by
too strong a fire be stirred up and rarefied, by reason of the danger the
glasses are in to be broken, and may again fall down into the mouths of the
bottles being pressed down with the leaden caps, and so stop close again. And
this way of stopping is better then that which is done with cork, wax, sulphur,
and other things: because in case the regiment of fire be well governed, and by
consequence an error is committed, you may preserve your glasses by lifting up
of the stopples, viz. when the spirits are too much stirred up. And although
this be a better way of stopping then the other common way; yet that which
follows is better then this, whereby the spirits are easily retained, the
glasses being preserved, and without all danger of being broken. And it is
thus, viz. get a glass pipe to be made crooked according to the figure set
down, into the belly whereof is quicksilver to be put from half an ounce to an
ounce, or thereabouts, and let this pipe which has a belly be put into the
vial containing the matter to be fixed (as for example, A. the pipe with a
belly, B. is the vial, and again A signifies the aforesaid leaden cap with
the vial B) the joints whereof afterward are to be covered over with lute,
and the vial will never be in danger of being broken.

These foresaid ways of stopping are the best, by which the breakings of
glasses are prevented, viz. whilst men are in an error about the fixing of
spirits of salts, minerals, and metals, which although they are fixed with
great costs and labors, yet do not satisfy what is promised and expected,
because those kinds of fixations are violent and forced, and by consequence
contrary to nature: but in the profitable fixation of spirits, not so, where we
must follow Nature, and not commit our selves to fortune in our labors. For
only fools are wont to break their glasses in their supposed tincture; but
Philosophers not so; for every violent thing is an enemy to Nature; and all the
operations of Nature are spontaneous. They err therefore, and never shall come
unto their desired end, who attempt violent fixations. I cannot be persuaded
that bodies dead, or half dead can be so mixed together as to multiply: but I
could easily believe that the conjunction of male and female of one and the
same species, sound and nourished with sound and wholesome meats to be
natural, and to make a spontaneous propagation, and multiplication of their
species; viz. of those that endure in a good, and adverse fortune, in life, and
death; but the conjunction of dead things to be dead, and barren. Do but
consider how many and various instruments both gold, silver, copper, iron, tin,
and lead; as also earthen, glass, stone and other vessels of other materials
have been already invented, and found out for the fixing of Mercury alone with
gold and silver, but in vain, because they have no mutual affinity. For
although Mercury adheres to metals, or metals to it, yet that is not by, reason
of any affinity for multiplication, or perfection sake: for it appears by
experience that Mercury flies away in the fire, and leaves the gold, silver,
and other metals. Where it is clear that they have no mutual affinity
requisite for the multiplication of metals, nor is it ever possible: For they
that have a mutual affinity embrace one the other and abide together for ever,
although volatile, yet never leave one the other like gold and Mercury, when
they are united together with the strongest bond, so that they can never be
separated although with the strongest fire. Wherefore a great care is to be had
in the fixation of things joined together; which if they have a mutual
affinity, will embrace and retain one the other, without the help of any
curious glasses with long necks. Of which things if thou art ignorant, abstain
from meddling with them, as being more hurtful then profitable, as daily
experience both mine own, and others do witness. But that thou may the
better understand what things have a mutual affinity one with the other:
attend a little what I shall say.

Is not he to be laughed at for his folly who will pour rain, or common
water on gold, silver, and other metals to fix them? See therefore the unwise
actions of many covetous Alchymists in so hard a matter, that spend their time
in trifles, reaping according to what they have sowed, and at last leave off
their work which they have undertaken, after they have expended much cost, and
spent their labor in stenches, watchings, and cares. For I have oftentimes
seen those, that although they have not chosen common water for their
menstruum, yet have made choice of Maydew, snow or rain gathered in March, and
water distilled out of Nostock, or excrement of Stars; vegetables and
animals, for their solvent, in which they have lost their labor.

For as the radical union of the aforesaid things with metals is impossible:
so never is any good to be produced from thence, by reason of their difference.
And such may deservedly be compared to those, who ascending a very high ladder
that has many steps, do presently endeavor to fly from the lowermost to the
uppermost; which is a thing impossible: so neither can there be any conjunction
of things that do so much differ. But as any one may easily ascend the highest
step by degrees, so also any one may (which yet he need not do) join together
extremes, by adding first a thing that is most near to one of the extremes,
and then to this another next to it, and so by consequence until you come to
the other extreme, which is a thing that requires a very long time, and is a
work without profit. And if things be joined together that have the next
affinity, the one will be delighted in the other, and the one will embrace the
other, will overcome, and retain it. As for example, there is a certain salt,
and that only that can coagulate and turn into a body like to it self, even
common water, which can be fixed in a very little time with and by one only
certain mineral, which is very volatile. Minerals also may be fixed by
metals, and metals, (a thing which I never yet tried) by a certain thing more
excellent then metals, without all doubt. But therefore it is not needful in
the fixation of minerals to begin with the coagulation of water, whereby it is
turned into salt; and this afterward into a mineral; which would be too
tedious; but it is sufficient to begin in things most near, in which nature
has begun to operate, but has left imperfect: for then there is hope of gain,
if contrary things are not joined together, else not. Behold how ready Nature
is at hand to help any thing that is administered to it, which it can help: as
for example, make salt of calcined Tartar by the help of solution and
coagulation (but do not take that for it, of which a little before mention
has been made, which is far better then salt of Tartar) of which after it
is calcined observe the weight; upon which afterward pour half the weight of
most pure rain water; distilled to avoid the suspicion of impurity, then draw
off the water gently in Balneo, or sand, which again pour upon the remaining
salt of Tartar, and again draw it off; and this do so often as is needful,
until all the water be consumed. Which being done take out the salt, and weigh
it being first made red hot in the fire, and thou shall find it to be increased
in weight, which increase came from the water, and not elsewhere.

Note well that the cohobution of the water is to be reiterated often upon the
salt of Tartar. Observe that by this means the water is convertible into salt
by Art, etc. And if thou do not believe the conversion of things material
and corporeal, how will thou believe the conversion of things immateriall, as
of the Sun, and fire into a material fixed substance; of which thing
something shall be treated in our treatise of Aurum potabile, and more at
large afterward in a treatise De Generatione Metallorum, if God permit: For
you must know that the circulation of the elements, and things elementated,
viz. how one is converted into another; and how they nourish and cherish one
the other. As for example, The earth yields water, the water air, the air
fire, and the fire again earth, which if it be pure yields pure earth. But
that thou may understand aright how any thing to be fixed, may be retained by
another by reason of affinity, observe the following example. The Husbandman
casting seed into the earth for to multiply, does not choose any earth, but
that which is convenient for multiplication, viz. an earth that is neither too
dry, nor too moist. For the seed cast in sand cannot grow, and is lost. For
whatsoever is to be preserved is to be preserved by an equal temper; which by
how much it is more equal or like, so much the more perfect substance it does
produce. Humidity therefore being necessarily requisite for the growth of
vegetables, without which they can neither grow, nor multiply, but the seed
being cast into moist sand, and the rays of the Sun acting upon that sand,
and suddenly consuming the humidity thereof, whence follows the burning up of
the seed in the dry sand, because there was no affinity betwixt the water, and
sand, without which the water could not be retained by the sand, and
consequently the seed deprived of its nutriment; it follows necessarily, that
some medium be required, or bond joining and binding the rain, and sand; viz.
salt by the help whereof the rain water is retained by the sand, that it be
not so easily consumed by the heat of the sun.

The sand therefore retains the salt, and the salt the rain water for the
nutrition of the bud. But every salt is not convenient for this business. For
although Christ says, Luke Chap. 14. verse the last, that earth without salt
is barren, yet any common salt is not to be understood thereby. For some
salts, as common salt, salt of Vitrioll, Allome, etc. do not only not do
good, but do hurt to vegetables, hindering by reason of their dryness their
growth and increase. Now lixiviall salts promote them, that which countrymen
do better understand, then our supposed Philosophers: For they know how to
help their barren ground with the excrements of animals, which are nothing else
but a lixiviall salt mixed with sulphur, making the earth fat and fertile. And
by this means a vebiculum (rather a bond) is administered to the rain water,
that it may the less be consumed by the heat of the Sun. Moreover all seed
(consisting in lixiviall salt and sulphur) loves its like, from whence it
borrowes its nutriment, which is observed by a few learned as unlearned.
Husbandmen may well be excused of their ignorance, because they work only out
of use and custom. But others that bear the title of learning not so: whose
duty it is to render a reason of germination, who may deservedly be ashamed of
their ignorance, being less knowing then husbandmen. It is manifest that dung
makes the earth fruitful; but how and for what reason, not so; but if it did
want nitrous salt, it would neither make it fertile, nor promote germination.
For it is not unknown that Nitre is made out of the excrements of animals. The
goodness therefore of the dung consists only in the lixiviall salt contained
in it, and not in the straw.

But you will ask perhaps, why does not any other salt help germination? Why is
the salt of dung required to germination, and no other? We have already
answered that, like are helped with like, and contraries are destroyed by
contraries. For experience does testify that any seed consists in lixiviall
salt and sulphur, and not in any acid salt; wherefore also it does desire and
embrace its like. Let him therefore that will not believe it make trial of the
distillation of the seed of any vegetable, of which let him force over a pound
by retort; and he shall see by experience, that not an acid spirit, but a
phlegm together with plenty of oil, and volatile salt whitening the whole
receiver, comes over; being that which no root or stalk can do: For the
chiefest virtue, odor, and taste of vegetables, animals, and minerals is found
in the seed, in which thing provident Nature has done very well, whilst she
attributes the chiefest faculties to the seed, being more obnoxious to injuries
then the rest, which is also preserved, nourished, and cherished by its like.

Now this discourse which might otherwise have been omitted, was therefore
appointed, that the cause of the germination of vegetables might be made the
more manifest; and that what things have been spoken of attraction, and
fixation of all things might the better be understood. The germination
therefore, and multiplication of both minerals, vegetables and animals must be
spontaneous, and not forced, as is that barren and frustraneous of the false
Chemists, because preternaturall. Wherefore when you fix any thing be cautious
in the adding of any thing that should retain it, with which nothing can be
fixed. Fire indeed does always do its office; but it knows not how to help
any preternaturall thing; which it does wholly destroy, against which nothing
can be prevalent, unless it be rightly ordained according to Nature.

And thus much be spoken for instruction sake, to thee that intendest to fix
any thing, lest otherwise thou losest thy labor.

Of the making of the best crucibles.
THe best crucibles that are requisite for the fourth furnace, not being found
in every place, I thought it worth while to set down the manner of making them:
for I am not ignorant how oftentimes many for want of these are constrained to
be content with those that are useless, and truly with great loss of metals,
whilst the crucibles are broken in the fire, and consequently with a
tediousness in drawing them out of the ashes.

Chemists have been in a great error a long time, and not only they but also
goldsmiths, and they that separate metals, as also others that need the help of
crucibles, who persuade themselves that the best earth that is fit to make the
best crucibles is to be found no where but in Hassia; and therefore with great
charges have caused that Gibsensian crucibles be brought over; not considering
that almost in every place in Germany such earth is to be found, which indeed
is a very great folly of men, proceeding from the not knowing of good earth
which is to be found almost every where. I do not deny but that the earth of
Hassia is very good for crucibles, tyles, retorts, and other vessels which are
to be set in a very great fire, for which cause also is commended Gibsensian,
and Waldburgensian crucibles.

A few years since some have made their crucibles, and other vessels that will
endure the fire well, of earth brought out of England, and France into Holland,
which have retained metals very well in the fire, but not salts, because they
are too porous and not so compact as those of Hassia, wherefore those of Hassia
are still preferred before others, retaining better, metals, and salts. But
although this earth be brought from thence to other places, yet such strong
crucibles could not be made thereof, the cause whereof being not the
constitution of the air, and place to which some have falsely imputed it, but
an error in the making and burning of them. For in Hassia there is a great
abundance of wood, of which there is no sparing in the burning the crucibles
even to a stony hardness, which could not be done by a small fire of turffes.

The like error is committed about stone pots, and other vessels which are
made at Frechemium and Siburgus and other places near Colen, which are carried
almost through all Europe, the goodness whereof is ascribed only to the earth,
and not to the making. But now experience has taught us that any good earth
does become stony in a violent fire, without respect of the place where it is
taken. Wherefore it is very probable, being a thing possible* that such vessels
are made else where: for every earth being burnt retaining a white color, viz.
with an indifferent fire, makes pots, and crucibles porous, but with a
stronger, and with a longer delay, compact like glass, especially if common
salt be cast in a plentiful manner upon them, being burnt with a very strong
fire, because it adds to them being very well burnt within an external glasses
smoothness, by which means they will be the better able to retain spirits in
the fire. Wherefore let no man doubt concerning the making the foresaid vessels
of any other earth that is white in burning, with the help of a very strong
fire: which by how much the greater whiteness it gets in burning, by so much
the better and excellent pots it makes; and seeing there is a great difference
of making crucibles to be set in the fire, and of stone pots retaining liquid
things, I shall show the manner of making both, viz. of stone pots belonging to
the first and second furnace, and of crucibles to the fourth, and thus it is.

He that will try the goodness of white and pure earth, viz. whether it grows
stony in the fire, let him cast a piece of crude earth of the bigness of a hens
egg into a very strong fire, observing whether it does quickly or flowly
cleave and break in pieces; which if it does not cleave and become powder,
although it may have some cracks, is good earth, and fit for burning, if so be
the mixture be well made, in which lies the art.

The earth that is to be burnt for pots, receivers, and botles, need no other
preparation then that for bricks, which because for the most part it is too
fat, you must mix with it clean sifted fusible sand, tread it with your feet,
and knead it with your hands before vessels be made thereof; which being made
are to be dried in the heat of the Sun, or in some other warm place; and being
dried are to be burnt in a very strong fire for the space of twenty four or
thirty hours, on which in the mean time you may cast salt if you please, which
being thus burnt do like glass retain easily all liquid things. But let him
that makes crucibles, tyles, bricks and other vessels appointed for a very
strong fire, use more diligence in the making of them. And truly first he must
pound very small with a wooden hammer, the earth being dried well in the Sun, or
elsewhere, and being pounded searse it through a great searse, and to one part
of the sifted earth mix two, three, or four parts (the saltness of the earth
being considered) of the earth burnt in a potters furnace, and powdered, which
being mixed with a sufficient quantity of water he must tread with his feet,
and afterward knead with his hands, and the earth will be prepared for the
making of vessels, and when he makes crucibles and tests, let him provide for
wooden moulds both greater and smaller, made in a turn, by the help whereof
they may be made; for the aforesaid vessels cannot be formed by the usual art
of the potters; because the matter of them must be very lean, appointed for a
most strong fire, wherefore commonly they are made by the help of moulds after
the following manner.

Let a piece of the prepared earth be applied with your hands to the mould,
which you must hold in one hand, applying and fitting the earth thereto with
the other, or hold it with your legs, that the earth may be applied with both
your hands. Also you must first rub the mould very well with clean sifted sand,
for else the earth will so stick to the wooden mould, that a crucible can
scarce be taken off without danger, which being done, it is further fitted by
striking it with a wooden instrument smoothed for the purpose, by which means
the crucible lies very exactly upon the mould, for by this means crucibles are
made very strong; which being done also let the crucible be taken off, and set
upon a board, and be dried, first in the air, then by the heat of the fire, or
sun, and then be burned in the first chamber of our fourth furnace, or in a
potters furnace. And if you intend only to melt metals* and not salts, you need
not burn the crucibles if they be well, and exactly made.

Now this caution is to be observed in melting by the help of crucibles not
burnt, that you must give fire above by little and little, for fear of breaking
the crucibles feeling a sudden heat.

Now that they may be made equal in strength, weight, and thickness, you must
weigh one crucible rightly made by the help of the mould in one scale, and a
piece of the prepared earth, which is to be put into the other scale, and if
they be equal in weight, take out that piece, and put in another; and this do
so often, till you be come to the number of the crucibles which you have made:
By this means they are made equal, and you need not cut off any overplus of the
earth when it is sitted to the mould, because all are made equal, by reason of
the equal weight of the matter of each of them, and the work is sooner done
then otherwise.

This indeed is the best way but tedious and laborious, where considering the
matter a little more seriously, I found at last that the following way is far
better then the former: whereby not only stronger crucibles are made, but also
more in one hour, then in that former common wayin three or four. Where first
the mould is made of latten (on which I advise you to apply the earth)
signified by the letter A. viz. that being the best, which is made by the help
of fusion. Then the counter-mould answering this, signified by the letter B.
yet so that that do not enter too deep into this, not touching the bottom by
the distance at least of one fingers breadth; but in greater crucibles a
greater thickness of the bottom is required, as the practice will teach thee.



Let him therefore that is making crucibles apply the earth to the mould, as
has been above said in the first manner, which being done, let him again take
off the crucible that is formed or cast, and set it in the air to be dried.
Then having first made a sufficient number of crucibles, let him make the mould
clean from the earth or sand, and annoint it with grease, or oil Olive taken
up with a sponge, as also the counter-mould, into which let him put the
crucible being half made and dried, and into this the mould, which he must
strike above twice or thrice with a heavy wooden mallet, that the earth may be
rightly, and exactly applied to the mould; which being done let him take off
the mould, and turn the countermould together with the crucible, which let him
knock a little against the form (where the crucibles are made) and let him
take in his hand the crucible falling from thence; which he must afterward dry
and burn, as has been above said in the first manner. And by this way are made
the best, and the best proportioned crucibles, fixed and smooth, not only for
melting of metals, but also for minerals and salts; the like to which I never
yet saw, as being without all danger, if so be rightly made of the best earth.
And that they may be made equal in weight and strength, they must be weighed as
before has been said. And this labor is easy and pleasant, when they are
made with ones own hand, and that greater or lesser at pleasure.

After the same manner also are made tests viz. by the help of the like kind
of moulds, which must not be long but plain like tests, as it appears by the
annexed figure, A. and B. Not only tests but also cuples are made by the help
of these moulds.

Now tests are made more easily this way then crucibles, because the earth only
is weighed, and being handled with the hands is put into the counter-mould,
which then you must with the upperpart press hard; that it may be made
conformable to the mould, viz. plain, not long, that which may easily
therefore be made; and for this cause those crucibles are easily again taken
out, viz. if the mould be turned, or the counter-mould be a little knocked
against the sides of the form. And if the earth be beaten in too fast that it
goes out at the sides, you must cut it off with a knife, or else the crucible,
or test is hardly taken out, sticking to the brims, that which practice will
teach thee. For all things cannot be so accurately demonstrated by pen.

And take this for a caution, that thou do not make thy tests and crucibles of
earth that is too soft, but of that which is half dry, otherwise they are
hardly taken out of the moulds; for that is more easily and rightly applied to
the mould. And if thou proceed rightly according to the prescript, scarce one
crucible of a hundred will be lost.

This also is to be observed, that the superfluous earth which is cut off must
not be mixed again to the mass for crucibles, because it is spoiled with the
fat, or oil that is smeered over the moulds, and therefore cannot be so well
mixed again, and being burnt cleaves, for which cause bad crucibles are made.
Wherefore it is to be kept apart for mending of furnaces that are spoiled with
an extraordinary heat of the fire; or for cover of crucibles that are to be
made by the help of the hands only, or of moulds, which we cannot want, if we
would work all things exactly.

Now for tyles, and other vessels that serve for distillation, and melting,
they are made by the help of wooden moulds after this manner. Let the mould be
made exactly like to tyles, and other vessels, then cut off leaves from the
earth being very well prepared, with a copper wier upon two equal tables of
wood, and then a piece of the earth is to be laid with a knife upon the mould,
that it may there get some hardness; which afterward is to be taken away, dried
well, and burnt. And if any thing further is to be done, viz. by cutting off,
or adding, it must be done by earth half dried, or a little hardened. For by
this means any one may get for himself earthen vessels that are necessary,
without much cost or pains for certainty sake. For those that are sold are
negligently made, in which oftentimes in the drying cracks which are made are
filled up with some earthen liniment, before they are burnt, which therefore
are not durable in the fire, but are broken, and that oftentimes not without
great loss of the metal, which is again to be gathered out of the ashes by the
help of a tedious washing. It is better therefore to work those vessels with
ones own hand for certainty sake. For not all and every crucible can always
and every where be made equal, and be of a like durableness in the fire, though
they are made most diligently: and therefore a consideration being had of their
goodness they may be used for diverse uses, and the better may be used in the
melting of the better metals. But let no man persuade himself that all these
can indifferently hold in the fire, although they be the best of all, how many
so ever you make; for I never yet saw any earth which could hold litharge in
the fire and salt of Tartar, because the best that ever I saw is not free from
penetration of them, that which is the greatest impediment of some profitable
operations, which therefore are omitted.

And let this which has been spoken suffice concerning the making of
crucibles: let every one therefore that has a care of his business use better
diligence for the time to come in the making crucibles for more certainty sake,
and he will not repent of his labor. Now how tests and cuples may be exactly
applied to the aforesaid moulds is not my work at this time to show, because
many years since it has been done by others, especially by that most ingenious
man Lazarus Ercker, whose writings concerning the manner of making of tests and
cuples I cannot mend, to which Authors I refer the reader, where he shall find
sufficient instruction and information concerning this matter. But there are
also other tests of which I shall say nothing in this place, but elsewhere
happily may, by the help whereof lead is bettered in trial if it be sometimes
melted again.

Of the vitrification of earthen vessels belonging to the first and second
furnace.
IN the defect of glass instruments belonging to our first furnace you may make
such as are very useful of the best earth, which being well glazed or double
glazed are sometimes better then old glass, especially those that are made of
earth that do not drink up the spirit such as is found almost every where,
which becomes stony being burnt; now the art of burning has not hitherto been
so well known, of which something has been said already where the earth being
burnt with a very strong fire is made so compact as that it becomes hard and
solid as a stone. The potters furnaces being too weak for this strong burning,
there is required a peculiar furnace for this work, in which the strongest fire
for the burning of them may be made; But because no body thinks to build such
an one only for some few vessels not worth the spending of costs and labors;
there is yet another way of vitrifying of any sort of earth (red clay only
excepted) not to be slighted if well done, especially if the matter vitrifying
when it is cold after the burning is ended, does not cleave and chop, and it is
not hurt by corrosive spirits as that glass made of lead retaining spirits, as
well subtle as corrosive, as that white vitrification of the Italians and
Hollanders; you must therefore in defect of a fitting furnace, wherein vessels
being burnt become stony, make them of the best earth and glaze them with the
best glass of tin, but not of lead; and by how much the calx of tin goes into
the vitrifying mixture, so much the better is it made; for tin being reduced
into a calx with lead, has no more affinity with corrosive spirits; wherefore
it is more fit for vitrification. But he that will not not be at so much costs,
let him vitrifie with Venice glass powdered, which vitrification also is not to
be slighted, requiring a very great heat for the burning, and therefore flowing
with great difficulty in these common potters furnaces; wherefore you must mix
some borax with the glass that it may flow so much the more easily in the
potters furnace. Else you must prove upon the earthen vessels being burnt,
water mixed with glass, so that the glass may stick to them every where exactly,
which afterward being very well dried, shall be gathered together into one
heap artificially, lest they take up two great a space like earthen dishes that
are to be burnt, and afterward compass them round about every where with burnt
bricks, a hole being left open above for the casting in of coals, yet so that
the bricks be distant from the vessels the breadth of a hand, whereby the coals
being cast in above, may the more freely round about go down to the bottom:
which space being filled with dry coals you must put upon them other living
coals, that the fire being kindled above, may by little and little burn
downward and perform its work; which being so done the vessels will be out of
all danger, if so be they are well dried.

The fire being kindled and burning, you must cover the hole with stones,
until the fire of its own accord be extinguished; the coals being spent and the
vessels become cold.

N. B. Now if there be a great heap of vessels, you must the first coals being
burnt, add fresh coals once more; for else the vessels being placed in the
middle, cannot be sufficiently burnt, nor the glass sufficiently flow; wherefore
caution is required in the governing of the fire this manner, where if all
things are rightly done, the vessels are better and more truly burnt and
vitrified then in any common Potters furnace whatsoever; yet with greater
danger to the vessels then in a potters furnace compassed about with walls. But
let him that burns crucibles and other smaller vessels, burn them in our
melting or distilling furnace, being covered with coals, giving fire first
above, for so I my self was wont hitherto to burn all my crucibles, and burn
and glaze all other distilling vessels; and this in defect of fitting furnaces
is the best way of burning and vitrifying, where in three or four hours space,
the vessels are exactly burnt and vitrified. Now the earth that is burnt
quickly must be the best and durable in the fire, for fear of the breaking of
some of the vessels. Let him therefore in this case for security sake use our
fourth furnace, who has built it with his chambers, in the first whereof he
may burn and vitrifie without any danger. But that foresaid way of burning and
vitrifying, is not to be slighted; wherefore I would have thee be admonished to
be cautious in giving of fire that you give no more or less then you should,
lest afterward you impute the cause of your error committed to me whilst the
vessels are broke as if I had not wrote the truth, but to thy self that errest,
and must for the future be more diligent and cautious in this work.

I know other vitrifications of diverse colors hitherto unknown, and indeed
most secret, not to be communicated to every one indifferently. But he that
knows to reduce metals into a true glass, retaining the color of his metal, is
indeed the inventor of a very great secret, to whom if he consider the matter
more profundly, and exercise himself therein, a gate is open, with the blessing
of God, to a greater light.

There are also other vitrifications, with which the earth being covered does
appear, as if it twere adorned with gems, but because it is not our purpose now
to treat of such kinds; I shall make an end of vitrifications, only one
excepted, which yet I shall communicate for the sake of the sick and
Physicians, and it is this.

Make little earthen cups very smooth and white of the best earth being burnt:
then make the following glasses to flow in a very strong crucible, in which dip
one cup after another, being held with tongs, and first made red hot in some
little furnace, letting them lie covered therein for a while, that the earth
may the better attract the glass, which being done, let them be taken out and
be set again into the aforesaid collateral furnace, where they were before made
red hot, when one is taken out dip another in the molten glass in its place,
which also is again to be set as the first into the aforesaid furnace; and this
is to be reiterated so often until all the pots be covered over with glass:
all which being done, the furnace is to be shut close every where, that the
wind enter not into it, and so it is to be left until it become cold of it
self, and the glass covering over the cups remain entire, which otherwise
cannot be if the cups be set in a cold place; now the glass is made after this
manner.

Take of crude Antimony two parts, of pure nitre one part, grind them well
being mixed together, kindle the mixture being put into a crucible with red hot
iron, and the sulphur of the Antimony will be burnt together with the nitre, a
mass of brown color being left behind, which you must take out while it is
hot with a spatle that it may cool, which afterward being melted in another
strong crucible for the space of half an hour, or an hour, makes that glass
with which the aforesaid cups with their covers are covered over.

Of the use of the aforesaid cups.
THere is no one that can deny that Antimony is the most excellent of all
vomitives, wherefore so many and so various preparations have been invented by
Physicians for the taking away of the malignity thereof; whereof I have showed
some, together with the use thereof in the first and second part of this book,
where always one is better then another; yet nothing withstanding it is confessed
that Antimony reduced in o glass, is sufficient to purge the stomach and bowels
from all corrupt humors, and that without all danger (being rightly
administered) as well by vomit as by stool, by which means many grievous
imminent diseases are not only prevented, but also presently are cured.

But you infer, that this is yet a crude and imperfect preparation, and
therefore not so safe. To which I answer, that Antimony that purges, needs
no great preparation, for if all the crudity thereof were wholly taken away by
fixation it would no more cause vomiting or stools; wherefore the aforesaid
glass of Antimony is not to be feared, because it is not dangerous, but may
safely be given to children that are one or two years old, but not in form of a
powder, but in infusion or extraction of its chiefest virtue made with honey,
sugar and wine, sweet or sour. After which manner being given it attracts from
all the bowels all vicious humors, and evacuates them as well upward as downward
without danger, of which thing elsewhere more at large. Let him that uses the
aforesaid cups infuse one or two ounces of wine, and set them a whole night in
some warm place, and the wine will attract from the glass so much as does
suffice it, which afterward being drunk in a morning, does perform the same as
infusion made with the powder of Stibium; and this is a more delicate way then
the other, because a cup is sent to the patient that he may infuse in it the
space of a night two or three spoonfuls of proper wine, placing it in some warm
place, which he may drink up blood warm in the morning, with a due ordering of
himself afterward. Which in my judgment is a more delicate way, being made
with ones own wine, and ones own hand, then that tedious way of potions both
large, bitter, and nauseous. And this cup may oftentimes be used, and if at
length the wine should not attract sufficiently, the cup with the wine is to be
set in seething hot water for a little time, that the wine might the better
attract, and work, when need shall require. Now he that gives such kind of
cups to others must instruct them concerning the ordering, and administering of
the same. One cup is sufficient for the master of a family, with his whole
family for all the days of their life. It is not to be used by all and every
one, and in all diseases indifferently, but only by those that are strong and
young, and where the principal parts are not hurt. Cups may also after another
way be covered over with glass without Antimony, as follows.

Sublime auripignemtum in a glass or earthen gourd; and take the gallant golden
colored flowers thereof, which being after a peculiar manner melted yield a
red and most beautiful glass, almost like oriental ruby, wherefore being broken
in pieces may be used in stead of an ornament; but this is more soft, and
brittle then glass of Antimony. This glass or those flowers of auripigmentum,
which are not yet reduced into glass, do notably devitreat the aforesaid cups
with a red beautiful color.

He therefore that will vitrifie the aforesaid cups must first heat them red
hot in a fire made with coals, and being thus hot dip them in the aforesaid
melted flowers, and being taken out thence put them under an earthen, or iron
red hot vessel, and there let them cool; which do perform the same things as
those which are said of the Antimonial cups.

These cups are not dangerous, as to be feared, because as Antimony is
corrected by calcination, so auripigmentum is by sublimation: from which if all
the malignity be taken away either by fire, or by nitre, the vomitive virtue is
taken away, as afterward shall be demonstrated more at large in these five
parts, when they shall come forth again with enlargements, viz. what purging
things are, and how they put forth their virtues, a consideration being had of
their malignity.

There are also other ways of vitrification, and indeed very fine, and most
desirable by all, if they should be communicated; but because it is not now my
purpose to treat here of mechanical things, but only of some particular
vitrifications of vessels belonging to our furnaces, I am resolved to omit them
at this time, and make an end of these things. I am resolved, God willing, to
set forth these parts more corrected, and in a larger manner, where many
excellent things now omitted for some reasons shall be published, and
commuincated.

Wherefore I will now put an end to this fifth part, where although I might have
added something that is singular concerning artificial furnaces, yet because
time will not now permit, it shall be deferred to another time and place, where
we shall treat further of the examining, trying and separation of metals: For
the best way of melting of metals in a greater quantity has not yet been
known: And although they that deal in minerals persuade themselves of the
perfection of their art, yet I can demonstrate an easier, and more compendious
way of melting of metals in a shorter time, in a greater quantity, and with
less costs and pains. Of which more at large elsewhere, wherefore (Courteous
Reader) be contented with these things, and if I shall see that these few
things shall be acceptable to thee, I will sometime hereafter for thy sake and
to thy profit communicate wonderful secrets which the world will not believe,
and which hitherto are hid, either out of envy or ignorance.

A Cup or melting vessel belonging to the fourth Furnace.



AN APPENDIX.
TWO years since I began to publish my new invented furnaces where also there
was mention made of some secrets, which though I thought never to divulge; yet
nevertheless I underwent many troubles for the communicating of them. Wherefore
I beseech every body that they would no more create troubles to me or to
themselves by their petitions or writings, because for certain causes* I shall
for the future communicate nothing but those things which follow. Expect
therefore patiently the time of another Edition, when these five parts shall
come forth more corrected and enlarged, and many most choice secrets shall be
communicated, which were for certain causes omitted in the first Edition.

I shall now God willing communicate those things which follow, yet upon this
condition (because many are such, that by means thereof thou may with a good
conscience, without hurt to thy neighbor, through Gods blessing, get great
riches) that thou be mindful of the poor, and a good steward of riches got
honestly, and use them to the glory of God and the eternal salvation of thy
soul.

The preparation of corn, as of Barley, Wheat, Oats, etc. of Apples, Pears,
Cherries, etc. where fermentation being made they do yield by way of
distillation a pure spirit very like the to spirit of wine without great costs;
of the remainders whereof if the matter were corn, may be made good beer, or
vinegar; but if the matter were any kind of fruit, as apples, pears, a very
good drink like to wine, so that by this means thou may find a double
profit, by which thou may not only have whereby to live honestly, but also
to lay up for thy heirs.

An excellent and wholesome drink of fruit, and corn, that is durable and like
to Spanish, French, and Rhenish wine.

A distillation of the Aqua vitae of certain vulgar things not costly and like
to the Aqua vitae of French and Rhenish wine.

A preparation of sugar like to the Western, and of tartar like to the natural
Rhenish, out of honey and not costly; where one pound of sugar does not exceed
the price of eight or ten stivers, and a pound of tartar, that does not exceed
the price of two stivers.

A peculiar purification of crude tartar without loss, and a reduction of it
into great crystals not costly, so as the price of one pound does not exceed
six stivers.

The taking away of the ungrateful taste and odor of honey so as afterward
there may be made from thence a certain good Aqua vitae retaining no more the
smell and taste of honey: also a very good Meade or Methegline like unto very
good wine, with which the same things may be done as with the best wine.

A preparation of Meade out of raisins, great and small, very like in all things
to Spanish wine; out of which also is made a very good vinegar without great
costs.

A preparation of wine and good vinegar of wild grapes.

Durable and wholesome drinks of gooseberries, barberries, mulberries,
strawberries, and the like.

The mending of troubled acid musty wines, etc.

The preparation of a very good vinegar out of certain vegetables which are to
be found every where, which may be compared to that which comes out of France,
and in a great abundance, whereof two runlets of nine Gallons do not exceed the
price of one Ryal.

The promoting of the ripening of wines of the cold countries of Europe (a very
few that are very cold being exempted) that they may yield very good sweet and
durable wines, whereas otherwise they could come to no maturity being very like
to those which hotter countries yield.

A certain secret way of carrying wines from mountainous places, where carts,
ships, and other commodities are wanting, where the carrying of ten pipes, does
not exceed the price of one pipe otherwise carried, so that by this means,
outlandish wines may be brought to any place with great profit.

A very good and easy preparation of verdegrease out of copper, whereof one
pound does not exceed the price of six stivers.

A new and compendious distillation of vinegar, of which a runlet of eighteen
gallons does not exceed the price of half a ryal, with which many things may be
done, especially the crystallizing of verdegrease, of which one pound prepared
after this manner, does not also exceed the price of half a Ryal.

A compendious and very easy way of distilling a very strong spirit of urine,
and that without any cost and pains, so that twenty or thirty pints shall not
exceed the price of one ryal, being very excellent in medicine, Alchimy and
Mechanique affairs, by the help whereof a most beautiful blew vitriol may be
made out of copper, being very profitable in Alchimy and medicine, making
silver so fusible, that by the help thereof glass vessels, as basins, dishes,
and candlesticks, etc. may be so gilded as to be taken for silver.

A way of distilling the spirit of salt in a great quantity, and that with small
costs, so that one pound thereof will scarce exceed the price of 6. stivers
being very excellent in Alchimy, medicine and other arts, especially for the
doing of these following things, viz. the separation of gold from silver
without hurt to the cups or other things, also the solution and separation of
gold mixed with copper and silver by the force of precipitation, where the
menstruum that is preserved, may again be used for the same uses, which
separation is the easiest of all other humid separations, whereby gold is
reduced to the highest degree.

The separation of volatile sparkling gold out of sand, etc. very profitable,
without which otherwise it could never be separated, neither by the help of
washing, nor by Mercury, nor by the force of melting.

An Artificial secret, and hitherto unheard of trying of stubborn metals
finding out their tenaciousness, which otherwise could not be found out: for
oftentimes there are found golden mines, which are stubborn, in which nothing
is found out by that common way, and therefore they are left unlaboured in, and
sometimes elsewhere, where there are not found mines of metals, there are found
other things, as white and red talc, that yield nothing, being tried the common
way, or very little, all which yet abound with gold and silver which may be
separated this way.

A new and unheard of compendious way of melting mines in great plenty, where
in the space of one day by the heat of a certain separating furnace, more may
be melted then by the common way in the space of eight days, where not only
costs are separed, but where also is hope of greater gain.

Another way for the better proving of things melted, and a new way of
separating silver from lead.

A very speedy way of melting minerals, whereby they are melted in great
plenty, by the help of pit coals, in defect of other coals.

The fixation of minerals, sulphurous, Arsenical, Antimonial; and others that
are volatile, which cannot be retained and melted by the force of fire, by the
help of a certain peculiar furnace with a grate, so that afterward they may by
infusion yield gold and silver.

The melting of gold and silver, that sparkles, and is rarefied, out of sand,
pure clay, flints, etc. by the help of melting.

The separation of gold lying hid in baser minerals and metals most profitable,
which cannot be done the common way.

A very quick Artificial and easy separation of melted gold and silver by the
help of fusion, so that in the space of one day, by the help of one furnace,
some hundreds of Marks may be separated with far less costs and labor, then
that common way by cement and Aqua fortis.

The reduction of elaborated gold of chains and other ornaments unto the
highest degree; also the separation of gold from gilded silver, by the help of
fusion, by which means a hundred marks are more easily separated then twenty of
the common way.

A certain way whereby more silver is separated from lead them by copper.

A separation of good gold from any old iron, which although it be not a labor
of great gain, yet it is sufficient for those who are contented with a few
things.

A separation of gold and silver, from tin or copper, according to more or
less. The maturation of mines, so that they may afterward be able to yield
more gold and silver, then by the common way, also the separation of gold and
silver out of Antimony, Arsenick, and Auripigmentum.

The separation of the external sulphur of Venus, that the son Cupid may be
born.

The separation of silver from the cuples, into which it enters in the trial
without melting or any other labor or cost.

The preparation of diverse earthen things to be done in any part of the world,
like to the Porcelane, that hold fire and retain spirits.

A certain Allome exalting and fixing any color, especially requisite for
scarlet and other precious colors, with a certain prepetual cauldron, that
does not alter colors, and is not costly.

A making of colors for painters, as of purple gum, ultramarine, not costly,
and especially of that rich white, never before seen, like to pearl and
Margarites, also a peculiar coloring of gold and silver.

FINIS.
A Preface to the Reader.
WHAT moved me to annex an Appendix to those five books of my Philosophical
Furnaces, you may presently see in the entrance thereof, which therefore I
accounted superfluous to repeat. Moreover my aim was to declare to the world,
how great, and hitherto unknown, and most profitable secrets God has reserved
for this age for the sustaining of our life, not doubting, but to provoke, and
excite many perverse men to a due thankfulness to God. But the contrary falls
out: For the Appendix which you have seen has begot great admiration in many,
as well learned, as unlearned, that God should reserve so great and hitherto
unknown secrets to be revealed to this age, who therefore have given God
thanks. But others, and indeed very many, have according to their usual manner
derided the Appendix, and have proclaimed the contents thereof for things
impossible and lies, whereof even some that are scornful, and slanderous (being
ignorant of nature and art) have broke forth into these words. It is a wonder
that Glauber does not teach how to make bread of stones, since he has taught
the possibility of making wine out of water, that husbandmen for the future may
not be at so great labors. Such sort of cavillations as these, men have such
devised in their meetings, whereof some would seem learned and wise, who by
reason of too much wisdom (folly) know not themselves, who indeed are
blockish, unlearned, rude, and proud asses, although puffed up, despising
others far more skilful; whose ignorance I do so much admire, as they do my
writings, seeing now with open eyes the reasons of many men's silence, to whom
God has given a singular knowledge of natural things, who left nothing to
posterity. But it matters not much, For it is impossible to please all; as
experience can witness from the beginning of the world till this day, wherefore
there is nothing strange. But how ever it be, yet it is no wonder that any one
should take it ill that the ingratitude of wicked men should be a reward of his
labors, as also their cavillations and contumelious reporting of men's writings
to be false and lies. Why does not Glauber, if he had the knowledge of so great
things, of which he made mention in the Appendix, make himself rich, but lives
in idleness? Therefore they are nothing but vain dreams. Thou do judge very
excellently of colors, which thou never saw, to whom I am not constrained
to give an account of my idleness; of which if thou had asked me, without
doubt I had given thee satisfaction, and had prevented thy foolish censure. But
such kind of men betray their own ignorance of things that are to be performed
by fire; for he that goes about to catch fishes, does not cast his net upon the
mountains, but into the water; so he that gets his living in metals must needs
be conversant in these places where metals are found.

Now that I have lived in these places so many years with disprofit besides my
will, has been a hindrance to my fortune, which elsewhere, where I might have
operated, perhaps might have happened to me. But it is better to possess a few
things in peace, then many things in the hazardousness of a dreadful war. But
now I am fully resolved, whether that most desired peace of Germany succeed or
no, to betake my self to such places, where I may have opportunity to handle
coals and mines; which when I have done, let cavillers, if they will, enquire,
whether I do any thing, whereas indeed in this place I was not minded to
attempt any thing whereby to be rich, by reason of inconveniences: For in this
place I had enough to do, all things being dear, to get an honest livelihood,
and to search into the secrets of nature for thy good, and to make experiment
in less things, greater being neglected. Hence the cause of my slothfulness
will appear to thee; wherefore do not thou any more judge rashly, but mind
thine own affairs, and let other men alone. And this is the cause of
explaining the Appendix which was made not for the general and universal
communicating of those secrets, the knowledge whereof (as you may guess) is not
so easily to be attained to, but for the demonstration of the truth, that toys
and and trifles may no more be esteemed by the incredulous and ignorant, but
the profitable secrets of nature (the inventor whereof I can boldly pronounce
my self to be) prized, and received by all, and every one.

Wherefore from the beginning to the end I shall treat of each of them briefly,
and shall give the explanation of each, as far as I may without prejudice, that
they may be received not for dreams, but for natural sciences, certain, and
most profitable, for the confutation sake of cavillers.

Annotations upon the Appendix of the FIFTH BOOK.
PARAGRAPH I.
A preparation of corn, wheat, barley, oats, etc. also of pears, apples,
cherries, and other tree fruits, to be performed by the help of a certain
fermentation, whereby through the help of distillation they yield a very good
and most pure spirit, very like to that which is made of the lees of wine,
without great costs: where also from the remainders of the corn (the burning
spirit being drawn off) may be made a very good beer or vinegar; and of the
remains of the fruits a very good drink like to wine. Whence there is a double
benefit, so that any one may not only have from thence wherewith to live, but
also to lay up.

THis Art has appeared to many very strange, of which no man yet has made
mention. Some having knowledge of the common distilling Art, have thought that
that which is to be distilled, having a burning spirit is to be put into a
still, yielding all its spirit in the fire, nothing thereof being left in the
remainders: This is to be ascribed to their ignorance, they not knowing to give
an account of their operations, operating only out of use and custom things
which they have seen and heard, not considering with themselves, that there may
be given a better or nearer way of distilling of spirits; with whom I will not
contend, but only show in brief, which way all kinds of corn, and fruits being
distilled yield more spirits then that common way, or at least how, the spirit
being abstracted, something may be made of the residue of the matter, being
equal in the price to the matter distilled, so that by this means the burning
spirit may be had almost for nothing: and it is done after this following
manner. It cannot be denied, that all vegetables whatsoever, as all kinds of
corn and fruits, also grass it self, being prepared and fermented, yield a
burning spirit more or less in quantity and quality, viz. a consideration
being had of the maturity, or immaturity, fatness or dryness of them. For those
things which are fatter, and sweeter, yield more spirits, then things which are
unripe, sour and dry; for by how much more the subjects are dry and less ripe,
so much the fewer spirits do they yield, and that not before fermentation,
which gives them such a maturity as to make them yield their spirit in
distillation, which otherwise they would not do. Hence therefore it does
necessarily follow that fermentation is the only cause of the burning spirit,
and by consequence the only Medium whereby plenty of spirits are obtained,
viz. if the things be rightly and well fermented, whereby they are so qualified
as to be able afterward to yield their burning spirits the more easily; which
by how much the better they are fermented, do yield the more. But seeing that
common fermentation is not sufficient for the total elevation of the burning
spirit, it comes to pass that the best part thereof is left in the still, which
hitherto by reason of ignorance has been used to no other purpose then to feed
hogs, which is ill done, for the matter that is left ought first to have lost
its fatness, and that either by distilling of more spirits, or by the making of
beer or vinegar, before the relics be cast to Hogs; whence there comes a
double profit to the operator. But you must not be ignorant that for this
operation you must not make choice of any common Cauldron in which fruits are
used to contract an Empyreuma, viz. an ungrateful taste, and smell, but another
certain instrument of the same Nature, which will hinder and not permit the
adustion of the matter which is to be distilled, though it be thick, by the
help whereof there is obtained a very sweet spirit, and in a great abundance
by the help of our secret fermentation. And so thou do understand the
reasons, by the help whereof more, and sweeter spirits are obtained from corn,
and fruits (whence a double gain) viz. by the help of a certain vessel or
instrument, and of our secret fermentation.

PARAG. II.
The making of wine not unlike to Rhenish, French, or Spanish, that shall
endure for the space of many years, out of corn and fruits.

IN this Paragraph the matter is otherwise then in the first, for in the first
is showed how out of corn, and fruits are drawn spirits, both more and better
then by that common way; but in the second, how out of those may be made a
drink like to natural wine, of diverse kinds, colors, tastes, and odors,
according as you please, and indeed like to Rhenish or French wine, for
ordinary drink, or to Spanish, being sweeter and fatter then that; also such as
shall be durable for many years, and serve for the same uses to which natural
wine is appointed: so as that there can scarce any difference be perceived.
Which indeed is a most excellent and profitable Art, because clear wine is
deservedly preferred before muddy beer. But thou will say that that beer which
is made of corn, although it be like to wine, viz. in color and taste, yet it
is not true wine, as not being made of grapes, but rather clear beer of a good
taste. But know that I am not the first that put the name of wine upon drinks
that resemble wine in odor, taste and color. For that expressed juice of pears
and apples is called new wine, or the wine of pears and apples, and that not
without cause; for if any individual things agree in all and each property,
why may they not be called by one and the same name? Is not that burning spirit
which is drawn out of corn every where called the wine of corn, which if men
knew (as they know not) how to prepare, it would be like in all things to
spirit of wine, that which no body yet besides my self, as I ever knew, could
do. Where let no man judge this secret to be impossible, but rather let him
consider the matter profoundly, or enquire the truth of the thing of those who
know it, and he will find it to be an Art most excellent and useful for the
preserving of life. If any one could in cold countries that have no wines, make
out of corns, and fruits, a drink like wine, clear, wholesome, well rellished,
and lasting, would he not do a thing that would be acceptable to all? Truly
although men would choose for their drinking muddy beer as an accustomed drink,
yet that would be more acceptable for the comforting of the old and weak.
Besides also there is made out of the same wine a very good and clear vinegar,
better then that which is made out of beer. Although thou say that that
making of wine, viz. out of pears and apples is a very common thing, and that
these wines may in some qualities agree with those natural that are out of
expressed grapes, yet in some they do not, because they will not last above
half a year, or a year, but will be corrupted; and that vinegar made thereof
is not durable, hut corruptible, and will grow red and contract a slimyness;
and therefore for goodness not to be compared with those expressed out of
grapes: To which I answer, I confess that this wine made out of apples and
pears, is not comparable to that which is expressed out of grapes. For apples,
and pears, and other fruits of trees want some qualities which grapes have; and
on the contrary have some qualities which grapes have not; which being taken
away, and those added, they yield a wine in all things comparable to that which
is expressed out of grapes: Such as I have always by me for my ordinary drink,
being drunk of many for Rhenish wine, being better then that French sulphurated
and sophisticated wine. Wherefore this is a very profitable and excellent art,
not only for countries that lack wine, but also for those that abound with it:
For in any place of the world corn is had and tree fruits are had, yea even in
the coldest countries, out of which a very good wine may be drawn, which may be
used in stead of dearer wine, that is brought from other places, or is made at
home with greater costs; for grapes are propagated with greater costs, then
corn, and tree fruits, whereof some also are had for nothing, and are produced
in all places, in fields, and every where with manuring; whereas grapes require
the best manuring, and a due heat of the Sun, and other labors. I was brought
up in Franconia, a country abounding with wine; where the most common drink of
most that keep vineyards is water, for they sell their own wine for to buy
necessary things, because wines require a great care, and diligence, through
out the whole summer, which if it be hot, yield better wine then if otherwise,
and dearer, which is sent into other countries that have no wine. It is very
little that those that keep vineyards reserve for themselves for recreation
sake: but when the coldness of May spoils the buds; or a blast in June the
flowers, or hail the grapes when almost ripe (that which often happens in
mountainous places) then they have little hope for the present, being
constrained for the future, to dress vineyards for a livelihood, who are
oftentimes forced for the avoiding of poverty, to sell one vineyard that they
may manure another, or else to borrow money which they must return with
interest in the harvest. What counsel then shall I give them in case there
should be a scarcity of some years? Wherefore I testify that those
Vinedressers are for the most part very poor, and drink water and not wine,
which they are wont to make for others; but others who are well monyed, and are
able in the time of great scarcity, to dress their vineyards become richer,
lending or putting their money to use to the poorer, etc. Now that this Art of
making wine is very profitable, not only for countries that have no wine, but
also for those that abound with wine, I will thus prove* Most of those places
that have much wine want beer, wherefore the rich drink wine, and the poor are
constrained to drink water, or such drink which is made out of expressed
grapes, and water, with which they quench their thirst in summer time, because
necessity of buying things to eat, forces them to sell the wine, and forbids
them to drink it. Who if they knew how to make this kind of drink of pears and
apples which are every where had there in woods in great abundance, they might
refresh themselves a whole year therewith, and sell their own native wine to
buy necessary things therewith: which art being unknown they must be content to
drink fountain water, etc. Perhaps thou will demand whether those places have
any corn, out of which they may make bear. Truly they have abundance, but the
Inhabitants care not for beer, the poor whereof had rather drink water, that is
clear and pure, then beer that is as muddy as horse piss, being without doubt
mindful of that German Proverb, Eat things boiled, drink things clear, and
speak things true, that thou may live.

Let these things therefore which have been spoken and demonstrated concerning
the possibility of the art of making wine out of corn and fruit, in any place
of the world, suffice, etc.

PARAG. III.
A making of a burning spirit out of the baser sort of things which are
commonly known, like to that made out of Rhenish and French wine, and at an
easy rate.

THis Paragraph needs no long demonstration, because you may easily understand
it out of what has been already said, which are very like to those things
which are spoken in the third Paragraph, of which you need make no doubt, but
take them for truths.

PARAG. IV.
The making of sugar (like to that of West India) and of Tartar (like to the
Rhenish) out of honey, not costly: so that the price of one pound of sugar does
not exceed 8 or 10 stivers: and a pound of Tartar exceed not the price of 2
stivers.

THe possibility of this operation will easily appear to him that shall rightly
consider the Nature, and properties of honey. For there is a great affinity
betwixt sugar and honey, as it appears by the separation of the principles of
both, of which it is not now my purpose to treat, but only to demonstrate the
possibility of the Art. Sugar is a certain sweet juice found in a cane or reed,
like marrow, where being maturated in hotter countries by the heat of the Sun,
it is cut off, broken in a mill, and pressed forth, being not unlike in color
to brown honey: which afterward is purified and clarified, and being clarified
is carried from thence into Europe. So also is honey a certain sweet vegetable
juice attracted by Bees out of the flowers of trees, and other vegetables
growing in medows, and fields, and gathered together with a great deal of
diligence for their livelihood: resembling for the most part course and crude
sugar, but yet a little impurer, and cruder then sugar, as experience can
testify. The matter being so, why may not honey be by Art purged from all
impurities, and be made like to sugar? Is not sugar oftentimes used in
Apothecaries shops in the place of honey, and honey in the place of sugar, viz.
in the preparing of syrops, and Conserves, because there is no difference
betwixt them, then that sugar is naturally a little purer then honey, and of a
more grateful taste? but the unpleasantness of the taste of honey is easily
taken away, so as that it may be made like to honey in all things. Which art at
length without doubt will become known to the world, (with the help of these my
writings) viz. the making of sugar out of honey, that we need no more obtain it
at such great costs.

As for the making of Tartar out of honey, we need not doubt of the possibility
thereof, as neither of the making of sugar thereout; but this seems more
probable then that; because both are sweet, viz. honey and sugar; but tartar
not so, being hard and acid; wherefore I will demonstrate the possibility
thereof by a few certain similitudes, and examples, beginning with the example
of new wine that is sweet in the beginning before fermentation, which by
decoction is inspissated, and reduced to the consistency of a thick syrop, like
to honey and sugar in taste; which being kept in clean earthen vessels, or
rather glassen, yields of its own accord in process of time an essential
proper salt sticking to the brims of the bigness of eggs, like to red sugar
candy; the faeces being left apart, together with the residue of the sugar,
which by reason of its too great filthiness could not produce crystals: This is
not inferior in sweetness to the Indian sugar, that grows in Canes, which
sweetness being alterable by fermentation i^ converted into acid Tartar. In
this example there is given to us by nature an opportunity to consider better
of the possibility of this Art, whilst sugar is made of new wine, by taking
away the filthiness and superfluous aquosity thereof. The same also is apparent
in raisins (grapes dried by the heat of the Sun) in which there is found corned
sugar, if they are kept for the space of an year, like to that which is
produced in new wine inspissated: Wherefore good housewifes in countries that
abound with wine are wont often to inspissate their new wine to the thickness
of honey, which they keep for the space of a year, and use in meats and drinks.
The same is done with sweet pears and cherries being bruised, expressed, and
inspissated to the consistency of honey, which being reserved for the space of
some years, yield a sugar as must does: the purer part whereof oftentimes in
defect of strong earthen vessels penetrates the pores of those that are infirm,
viz. the essential salt sticking to the outside of the earthen vessel,
coagulated and crystallized, most beautiful, and very white even as the purest
sugar, because the purest part only penetrates the porous earth, the faeces
being left behind in the pot. Hence therefore it appears that every sweet
vegetable, and every sweet juice yield a salt as sweet as sugar, which
sweetness is converted into Tartar. Why then do thou make any doubt of honey
which is more pure then those expressed juices? But thou say that the
conversion of honey into sugar is indeed probable because the same thing
happens in other inspissated sweet juices, that are of affinity with sugar in
sweetness, but not the conversion of it into Tartar, because Tartar is an acid
salt, but sugar sweet, and therefore they cannot come from one and the same
root.

I answer, the cause of incredulity is the stupidity of the brain, which if it
were so porous as the women's pots penetrated by the sugar of the new wine,
without doubt a belief of the possibility would find entrance into it, and
that in as great a plenty as the sugar that sweats out of the pots. Behold now
thy long ass ^ares, which thou can not cover, and thy little understanding
of natural things! What advantage is it to contradict the truth with ignorance?

Now I will tell thee how an acid tartar may be made out of sweet things, and
that not for thy sake (who art wise only to thy self to the deceiving thy self,
and others) but for their sakes, who are not ashamed to learn. Consider that
new sweet wine is pressed out from grapes, and that most sweet salt comes from
thence by the help of inspissation, which is made by evaporating the aquosity,
which not being separated, there is by fermentation produced plenty of Tartar;
the cause of the separation of which is nothing but the fermentation,
congregating the purer parts, and separating the thicker. But thou do yet
further demand, whether this be to be ascribed to fermentation only, that sweet
things produce tartar, and wherefore it is not produced in water dulcified with
honey and sugar, viz. Mead or Metheglin; in whose vessels is never found
Tartar; wherefore thou concludest that it cannot be done by any common
fermentation. Now thou do rightly urge; but that is not a vulgar or common
fermentation, by which that Tartar of Hydromell is obtained, because by that
operation the separation of tartar cannot be: wherefore such kind of drinks
are unwholesome, and ungrateful, and laxative, although old, because nothing
is added to the honey that may cause that separation. For he that knows not
how to make Tartar out of honey cannot also make wine thereof. But I may not
now publish that secret by the help whereof these things are done, but it must
a little while be reserved for friends until the time (in which all things are
changed) of revelation shall draw nigh. In the mean let the demonstration of
the possibility ^suffice. I had truly sooner attained to this Art at the first,
if any one had given me so much light: And because I never could read or hear
any such thing, thou may easily conjecture, what great costs, and what great
labors I underwent for this things sake.

PARAG. V.
A peculiar purification of vulgar impure Tartar, without any loss, and the
crystallizing or reduction of it into great crystalls, a pound whereof being
purified does not exceed the price of 6 stivers.

THis Art consists only in a convenient precipitation, whereby together, and at
once all the muddiness is separated from the dissolved Tartar. Wherefore
nothing or little is lost; and therefore Tartar is easily converted into great
crystals.

PARAG. VI.
The taking away of the ungrateful odor, and taste of honey, which being taken
away there is drawn forth out of the honey a very good burning spirit which
savours not of the qualities of honey, and also a hydromel like to natural
wine in taste and other virtues, etc.

THis secret also consists in the precipitation of the superfluous muddiness,
and ungrateful odor. Whereby the honey obtains a grateful taste, and odor,
so that from thence may be made a good wine and vinegar.

PARAG. VII.
The making of a hydromell, very good and clear, out of Raisins, both greater
and smaller, resembling the best Spanish wine; out of which also is made a very
good and clear vinegar.

RAIsins are nothing else but ripe grapes dried, which in Spain, and other hot
countries are cut off in a just season, and are dried upon warm Earth, and
being dried are sent into Germany, and other countries; which in their nature
and property are nothing elce but the juice of grapes dried in the husk, for
the aquosity whilst they are in drying, leaves in the husk a sweet juice, as
the sugar or essence of grapes; which being lost by the heat of the Sun, the
humidity may be restored again by other water, so that wine may be made
thereof; that which has been tried of many, who have poured upon raisins whole
or cut, warm water, and fermented them in a tub or other vessel, that by this
means they might obtain Spanish wine or Sack: but it has not succeeded
according to their expectation, for they have not got wine, but a certain
sweet liquor; because the raisins in drying have assumed another nature, by
reason whereof they cannot yield such a wine as those that are new are used to
do. Wherefore hitherto the making of sack out of raisins has not been known,
like to that which is made out of new grapes, which is now found out. It is
believed by many that raisins by the pouring on of water, recover that which
departed from them in the drying, and therefore that the making of wine out of
them is possible, like in virtue and taste, to that which is made out of new
grapes. But this is not done by the common way, but by another, viz. by the
help of a certain precipitation, or taking away of the taste of the raisins, by
the promoting of fermentation, and separation of the heterogeneall parts. For
it is not any peculiar Art to make a certain sweet drink out of raisins by the
addition of water after that common known way, which cannot undergo the proof
of true durable wine, but being not yet clarified by the fermentation that is
made, does by little and little grow sour, that which good Spanish wine
(although that grow sour before others) does not, being durable for the space
of some years, if it be rightly ordered. Wherefore because those wines made
after that common way out of raisins, are not durable (as experience can
witness) the making of them was afterward neglected, because of an opinion
which men had of the impossibility thereof; which fault is not to be imputed to
the raisins, but to the Artist; for if in the drying nothing but the insipid
humidity evaporate, all the goodness being left in the raisins, why should the
making of wine out of them be impossible by restoring of a humidity like to the
natural? But the strong taste of the raisins which is got by drying which no
one can take away hinders it: But in case any one knew how to do it, he shall
not be able only to make thereof a Spanish, but also a Rhenish wine. But thou will ask, how can Rhenish wine be made of Spanish raisins; which being new
yield only a sweet wine? The answer is given in the preceding Paragraphs, where
the possibility of making diverse kinds of wines out of any sweet matter is
demonstrated.

I dare devoutly affirm that I have sometimes made out of those common raisins,
and honey, sweet wines, which have been drunk by most for Spanish. No more
therefore of this thing which will be confirmed by experience.

But I shall say this in the place of conclusion, that if thou did know to
take away the ungrateful taste and odor of honey, thou may in any place of
the world, where honey is to be had, or sweet pears, make good sack, or happily
any other, as Mallago, or that which is called the wine of Simon Peter's Mount,
viz. without raisins, because the matter of them is to be had in every place.
These kinds of wine yield also a white, clear, and very sharp vinegar, and
indeed better then the French, and Rhenish. Such kinds of wines may also be
made all the year long, so that thou needst not be tied to any certain time of
the year; that which is a great profit for those, who every year have a great
loss of wine.

PARAG. VIII.
How good wines, and good vinegers may be made in those places, where grapes
grow in unmanured placs, and are acid.

THis secret also is very profitable; grapes indeed may be planted in colder
places, but not coming to a maturity, cannot yield good wine, being immature
and sour; witness Germany, where oftentimes in a cold summer season, as also
in other places otherwise hot, not attaining to a ripeness yield a thin and
acid wine, wherefore also oftentimes the masters of the vineyard suffer great
loss, not knowing how to sell their wines, not being worth transportation,
being left for themselves to drink, or for another year to be mixed with better
for the better selling of them, and indeed not without great disprofit to them:
for if there follow a barren year also, they know not how to help their sour
spring wine; and if there follow a year fertile enough, producing sweet
grapes, yet those wines cannot wanting their own proper goodness, be sold,
wherefore they cannot add any goodness to the sour wines of the former year,
their own being scarce sufficient for them. Wherefore those have need of a very
good helper, which yet they have not found; For I have often had experience for
the space of many years, of the various corruptions of those wines being lost.
Also it often falls out that the vinedressers do in a bad harvest choose only
the better grapes, the worst being left on the wine, to their great disprofit,
who if they knew how to take away the sowreness of the unripe grapes, would not
without doubt cast them away thus. For sour wine being expressed from unripe
grapes, may easily be corrected and amended, so as to be taken for the best,
that which I know by my own experience, viz. that very good wine may be made
out of unripe hard grapes being pounded, and pressed, like to Rhenish in the
judgment of all. Let others also judge of the excellency of this secret, by the
help whereof, not only in colder places, where wine cannot at all come to
maturity, but also in hotter countries by reason of the inclemency of the air,
may be so corrected and amended by helping the unripe grapes, that it becomes
to be the best and most excellent, which being known to many it may be so
helped, that afterward they may sell wines corrected by their Art so much the
better. Moreover unripe grapes growing natural in vineyards unmanured by reason
of the distemper of war, left upon the vines, and otherwise unprofitable, may
by the help of this Art be corrected and bettered, as to yield good wine. This
Art therefore, if it be practiced is very good and profitable, yet not to be
communicated to all, and each indifferently, because it may being published be
helpful to enemies as to friends: wherefore it is rather to be concealed, then
to be revealed to the disprofit of others, until it shall please God at last
to have it done. Let this suffice therefore to have been said of the
possibility therefore.

PARAG. IX.
Also the preparation of wholesome drinks out of Gooseberries, Barberries,
Mulberries, and other wild fruits.

THis refers it self to the second, and 8 Paragraph: for the same Art which
makes for the maturation of immature grapes serves also for this business, and
it is one and the same process on al sides, only one excepted, which is the
correcting of that wild odor of those wild fruits, which is not in grapes, for
which cause grapes are to be preferred before those; but those before these for
the abundance of them in every place; and these also may be planted sooner,
and easier then grapes, which cannot be propagated in unmanured places. For if
any sprout of one or two spans, of gooseberries, or barberries, be set in the
earth in the spring, it can produce fruits the very same year, even in cold
countries, and unmanured places: yet a fatter place produces fatter, and
greater kernels, and fruits.

PARAG. X.
The correcting of troubled, viscous, wines, and such as begin to be red,
musty, and sour.

THis Paragraph seems to be of no moment, yet vintners cannot well be without
this secret. For we often see that whole buts of wines are spoiled, and
contract a viscousnesse, redness, filthiness and stink. Are such now to be cast
away? No; for it would be a great loss, but we may help them by medicaments, as
we do sick men. If therefore thou chance to have such wine, thou must
precipitate all its filth, and within a few days it will recover all its
former goodness, color, and clearness. Also that which begins to be sour, and
is not yet turned to vinegar, may recover its former goodness; viz. being
helped by due means: but that which is too acid is rightly turned into vinegar
which no one can want, and that without loss.

PARAG. XI.
A very easy making of vinegar in great quantity out of certain vegetables,
that are every where to be had, viz. very good, clear, and durable, like to
French vinegar, etc.

THis is a very excellent secret, by the help whereof very good and durable
vinegar may be made in any place of the world out of certain vegetables, and
that in great quantity, and with little costs. And this secret is for those
great Sea Marttowns, where there is great trading, whence with great gain, it
may be carried into other Provinces.

PARAG. XII.
A production of wines in cold places, which otherwise by reason of the cold
air do not bring forth wines, (the coldest places of all only excepted) viz.
of the best, sweetest, odoriferous, and durable, not giving place for goodness,
clearness, sweetness, durableness, to those that are made in Germany, France,
Italy and Spain.

THis secret agrees almost with 8 or 9, but this here is required in the first
place, that the Vine-dresser apply to the root of the Vine, that is to be
helped, a nourishing, comfortting and fructifying medicine, which may also
preserve it from the cold, which is necessary for the production of grapes;
which although they do not attain to a m^turity may yet afterward as well as
in the fermentation be perfected, so as you may have very good and excellent
wine from thence.

PARAG. XIII.
A certain secret, by the help whereof wines are easily transported from
mountainous places, remote from rivers, and destitute of other conveniences of
carriage, so that the carrying of ten vessels is of a cheaper price then
otherwise the carrying of one.

THis Paragraph offends many, as well learned as unlearned, ignorant of
secrets, judging the thing impossible, and nothing else but dreams and fancies.
Which coming to my ears made me repent of what I had wrote, because I have
created to my self diverse troubles, and the contradictions of many: Yet I was
comforted again, considering, that this is the fashion of this perverse and
ignorant world, being wont to carp at honest men, and their knowledge. Many
judge this thing incredible, because of the want of winged Carts, that need not
horses, confirming one the other in unbeleife, leading one another after the
manner of the blind, by the hands, and concluding the impossibility thereof.
But wherefore I pray thee do thou judge so perversely? for if thou wast master
but of one secret before others, thou would not judge so rashly, but rather
would judge of things unknown to thee, as not to be contemned; for it is the
manner of detractors to seek their own glory, despising the opinions of others,
who if they were not blockish and sluggish, need not play the Parasites and
Sycophants, being crafty appendixes of Courts, doing all their businesses
cunningly, whose misfortunes are not to be lamented, being ashamed to learn,
and to handle coals. But to my purpose that I may demonstrate the truth. New
wine decocted, and inspissated before its fermentation loses nothing of its
virtues, besides an acid insipid humidity, as experience testifies, when as yet
when fermentation is made, feeling heat loses its burning spirit, viz. its
better part, the insipid and unprofitable being left behind, as you may see in
the distilling of wine. It follows therefore, that new wine as soon as it is
pressed forth, must before its fermentation be boiled to the consisting of
honey, but not after that tedious way in a cauldron, which gives an ungrateful
taste to the new wine, but in a certain peculiar secret vessel. The humidity
being evaporated there remains the eight or tenth part, which resembles honey
in its form, in which all the virtue lies. Which juice being thickened, and
brought into a narrow compass, and shut up in a vessel may more easily be
transported into other places, then those ten parts not inspissated, the
carrying or transportation whereof is not only far dearer, but also oftentimes
is suspected of being sophisticated by the wagoners, mixing water with the wine.

That inspissated juice being transported to other places is turned into wine,
if it be dissolved in a sufficient quantity of water, viz. as much as went from
it in the decoction or inspissation, or in a less quantity, if thou desire a
stronger and better wine, and being dissolved is put up into the vessels to be
fermented.

Not only one kind, but diverse kinds of wines may be made out of new wine
inspissated, viz. according to the different quantity of water, that is to be
mixed with it, and indeed not without great gain, so that we need not that
tedious and costly transporting of outlandish sweet wines, out of France,
Spain, and Italy.

N. B. that the new wine is not to be inspissated in a cauldron, by reason of
the ungrateful odor, and taste, which it contracts thence, or adustion. But
there is required a certain peculiar precipitation, by the help whereof that
yellowness, and taste contracted in the decoction of the new wine is separated
for clarification sake: without which two secrets, viz. the secret decoction
and precipitation, or clarifying in time of fermentation, good wine cannot be
made. He therefore that knows those may within a few years get great riches by
the making of diverse sorts of wines: but let the ignorant abstain from this
wine-making. Thou may first make trial in a Cauldron, inspissating new wine
of a lesser value, and thou shall see by experience that no wine goes from the
new juice, that which inspissated being left in the bottom of the vessel, and
to this thou may again mix a sufficient quantity of water, for the dissolving
of it, and thou shall have a new wine having the same sweetness of the first,
except the taste attracted from the Cauldron, which dissolution, fermentation
being made, yields a wine, but ungrateful by reason of the yellowness, and
taste contracted from the Cauldron. But if thou know those two aforesaid
secrets withous doubt thou shall make most excellent wines of new wine
inspissated.

PARAG. XIV.
A very easy preparation of verdygrease out of old copper, of which a pound
does not exceed the price of 6 stivers.

THis indeed is a very good secret, whereby after a most easy, not tedious, or
costly way, verdy-grease is made in great quantity very useful for Painters,
whereby any one may be able to maintain his family honestly.

PARAG. XV.
A new and unheard of distillation of vinegar in great quantity, of which two
runlets of nine gallons exceed not the price of half a ryall, with which many
excellent things may be done, especially the crystallizing of verdy-grease, of
which one pound does not exceed the price of half a ryall.

THis way of distilling has yet hitherto been altogether unknown, and worthy
to be mentioned in this place, because no body can be without distilled vinegar
in Chymicall operations, and the rather because by the help thereof colors are
purged, and clarified, so as to be sold for a greater price, by which means any
man may honestly maintain his family. Which otherwise cannot be done in the
distilling of vinegar in glass vessels, which is tedious and costly.

PARAG. XVI.
A very easy distillation of the most strong spirit of urine, very speedy, not
costly, nor tedious, where 20 or 30 pints may be made for a ryall, by the help
whereof many excellent things may be done in Physic, Alchymy, and Mechanical
affairs, but especially with it vitrioll is made out of copper, very
beautiful, blew, and most excellent in Medicine, and Alchymy: with which
silver is made so fusile, that by the help thereof glass vessels (as cups,
basins, dishes, and other vessels) may as well inwardly, as outwardly be
gilded: so as to appear like silver.

IN the second treatise of the Philosophical Furnaces, I made mention at large
of the distllling of this spirit, and I showed diverse ways of it; but of this
way, of which here I treat, I made none; because this distillation has no
affinity with all others that are to be done by instruments, whether of earth,
glass, or metal, but only by wooden without any fire, so that 100 pints
require not one pound of coals: where not only 20, 30, but even 100 pints may
be made for one ryall: Which distillation indeed is artificially.

N. B. After the same manner almost is the distillation of vinegar performed.
Now what I said in the appendix of making 20, or 30 pints for one ryall, I did
it therefore because it might be more probable then if I had said 100. And
because that price of 20 or 30 pints does not seem probable to the ignorant, I
say now openly, that the price of 100 pounds does not exceed one ryall; let him
therefore believe it that will, it is all one to me, whether thou beleevest or
not, because the truth is certain. Although this spirit be most excellent in
diverse Chymicall operations, yet I shall communicate only the medicinal uses
thereof, for if it be made in a great quantity easily without costs and labor,
it may be used liberally in medicine, but especially in moist and dry baths, by
the help whereof may grievous and otherwise incurable diseases are oftentimes
happily cured. For this spirit does many wonderful, and incredible things; so
that honors and riches follow it. Hence therefore it is manifest that this
paragraph is not to be contemned, after the manner of detractors. I could add
more things concerning the power and virtues thereof, but time will not now
suffer.

PARAG. XVII.
A most easy, and not costly way of distilling of the spirit of salt, of which
one pound may be sold for the price of 6 stivers, and it is very profitable in
medicine, Alchimy, and other mechanical arts, but especially for the doing of
those things which follow.

IN the first part of our Philosophical furnaces, I showed an easy way of
^i^tilling of spirit of salt in a great quantity: But this Paragraph treats of
another certain peculiar distillation, which I will not divulge; new spirit of
salt being necessarily requisite for diverse excellent operations (unknown to
the vulgar) I thought it worth while to speak of the commendation thereof. I
shall at this time for brevities sake speak only of the chymicall uses
thereof, reserving the rest for some other place and time.

PARAG. XVIII.
The separation of gold from silver without hurt to the jewels: also the
solution, and separation of gold that contains silver, and copper, and the
precipitation of gold from the water, without any hurt to the water, so as that
it may serve for the same uses again; wherefore this is the best way of
separations which are done by a humid way, reducing gold to the highest degree.

THe separation of gold from gilt silver by aqua regis is well known to
Chemists, as also the dissolving, and separation of gold, containing sylver,
and copper: but it is seldom used for these following reasons, viz. because
that separation of gold from gilt silver, (viz. when the silver is not covered
thick with gold) does not quit cost, by reason of the cost and pains that is
required for the making of the aqua regia. Now the spirit of salt that is made
this way is with costs. Secondly, although the gold be dissolved in aqua regia,
yet it is hardly separated again: Some have precipitated gold that is dissolved
in aqua regia with lixivium of salt of Tartar, and being precipitated have
edulcorated it, and with borax have reduced it, and because this calx when it
feels this heat of the fire is kindled with a great noise, they have mixed it
with common sulphur, and being mixed have calcined it to take away the cracking
and kindling of it, viz. before they have reduced it with borax.

This operation requires a great deal of diligence, great labors, and not
small costs, if thou would not lose any of the gold, wherefore it is not the
best way. Others have by the help of distillation separated the aqua regia from
the dissolved gold, but besides their labors and stenches, as also the danger
of breaking their glass, have lost some of the Gold by means of the aqua regia.
Wherefore this way of separation also is not to be esteemed as good. Some have
precipitate the dissolved gold from the aqua regia with the solution of
vitrioll, and allome, into a black powder, which in the melting have been found
mixed with iron; and copper attracted from the vitrioll: wherefore this also is
an unprofitable way of separation. But in our separation there are not such
obstacles, for the gold being dissolved in the spirit of salt, there is
presently put a certain precipitating thing to it, and the solution being in a
copper vessel (where there is no danger of breaking vessels) is set upon the
fire to boil, in the interim whereof a most fine gold is separated, and
precipitated; the copper being left in the spirit of salt, which you must
decant off from the gold (which you must edulcorate, dry, and melt afterward)
and keep for your use By which means all things are done without loss, or
costs. Which indeed of all humid separations is the best and most profitable;
whereby gold that contains copper and silver is dissolved. Of which thing more
in the fourth part of Furnaces.

PARAG. XIX.
The separation of gold from pure fat clay (argilla) sand, flints, and other
mines, which is sparkling, spongeous, and light, which otherwise could not be
separated either by the help of washing, or with Mercury, or by melting; viz.
by a certain easy way of elixation not without much gain.

THis Paragraph treats of a certain operation to be performed with spirit of
salt; whereby any one may in any part of the world, where mountains, rocks,
stones, sand, or pure fat clay are, easily get an honest livelihood, and more
then that. For in every part of the world may be found potters clay, sand or
flints that have subtle gold in them, viz. invisible in clay, and sand, but
visible sometimes in flints, and stones, when they are broken, which if they be
too hard must be heated red hot, and quenched in cold water, that they may
clear, and be brought to a powder by grinding, or pounding, by which means the
gold is made more manifest in them. There are sometimes found whole mountains
full of those stones, which have such a spiritual or subtle gold in them,
which is so subtle, light, and thin, that it will not quit cost to melt them.
But by this way it is easily drawn forth with spirit of salt, so that any one
may privately, honestly, and plentifully get his maintenance. N^w you must have
a knowledge of these stones, of all which flints are best known, in which being
made red hot, quenched, and broken in water, if there be gold, it appears every
where in all and each part thereof, of a resplendent yellow and red color,
which if it be ground to powder, appears with a red color, which flints had
not before they were made red hot in the fire: these kinds of stones have also
in them iron, which yet is no prejudice to this business, because only the gold
is precipitated from the spirit of salt, the iron being left in the water. This
is a very excellent and easy labor, which in a great quantity of the matter
may be practiced with a great deal of gain, so that by this means thousands of
men may get their livelihood without any prejudice to their neighbor. Now this
secret consists in two things, viz. in a plentiful and most easy preparation
of spirit of salt, and a due precipitation.

PARAG. X. X.
A new and unheard of proving of tough and stubborn minerals, viz. of all and
each, whereby their nature and form is found out, that which cannot be done
otherwise by any vulgar way: And this secret is especially for those places,
where there are abundance of mines. For oftentimes there is found a stubborn
mine of gold, which if examined yields nothing, but is left unlaboured in, etc.
Sometimes there are found other things, where there are not found mines of
metals, as white and red talc, etc. which being tried after the common way,
yield little or nothing, yet abound with gold, and silver occult in them, which
cannot after any other way be separated with advantage.

THis trying or proving is far different from that vulgar made in tests, and
cuples, especially being ordained for those tough and stubborn minerals, that
will not mix with lead; of which if they will not be mixed with lead, how shall
we know their form and nature? This secret therefore is very profitable and
excellent, for those especially, which seek their fortunes in mountains, in
the earth, mines and stones: For by this means their form, although it be never
so little, is easily found out, which being known, you may also know, whether
such things, as clay, sands, stones, etc. may be operated in with gain or
disprofit. Now this secret consists chiefly in the joining of lead therewith.
For it is impossible to find out the form of minerals and other things dug
out of the earth, if they cannot be mixed with lead, whereof many abounding
many times with gold are, because they have not affinity with lead, left
unlabored in as unprofitable stones Which if by help of any medium, they can
rightly be united to lead, do not less yield their form or golden parts, then
other milder minerals, and that not without profit: wherefore this secret is to
be accounted the foundation of Alchymy.

PARAG. XXI.
A new compendious, and unheard of way, whereby minerals are speedily in a
great quantity melted, and that not without great profit. Where in the space of
one day by the help of a certain peculiar furnace by way of abstraction, more
is melted than in that common in the space of eight days: by which means there
is not only a great deal of costs saved, but also more gain, then if
otherwise.

THis way of melting, whereby metals are in a great quantity melted has not
yet been known, but without doubt shall at one time, or another be published
because it is far to be preferred before that common way. Now this secret
consists in this, viz. that it is performed without bellows, but by certain
vents, blowing the coals as strongly as bellows. For they that operate in
minerals know well how much costs they are at every year upon bellows, and mils
that move, and lift them up. Moreover you must transport your minerals and
coals into valleys for the waters sake, without which the bellows cannot be
ordered, which labor is tedious and costly. Also there is this commodity in
it, that in this way of melting you may make your furnace as great as you
please, which you may not do in the other way: because greater furnaces require
greater bellows, and a grater quantity of water, and therefore greater and
larger milles; but there is not such a commodity in every place. In this our
new way of melting we need not bellows, nor mils although we erect never so
great furnaces, for by how much the greater they are, so much the greater
quantity may be melted in them. Wherefore I do not doubt but that of all, this
is the most noble, profitable, and excellent way of melting. Now whether or no
all minerals may be melted in this furnace, I know not, for I made trial only
in the mine of lead, and in no others by reason of defect of mines, and place
conveient for the erecting of the furnace. But I hope shortly to live in a more
convenient place, where I shall neither want coals, nor mines whereby to make
trial in fire and mines.

PARAG. XXII.
A better way to separate things melted. A better separation of silver from
lead.

THis secret is nothing else but a certain peculiar separation of lead from
silver contained in the lead. For as every where in shops lead that has silver
in it is separated, being in the fire by the force of blowing, turned into
lytharge; so almost after the same manner is this our separation: where lead is
reduced into lytharge, but not by the force of blowing, but by the help of a
certain furnace, wherefore this is far better then the vulgar. And this is to
be understood concerning that separation, which is done in great quantity, but
there is also another separation, which is practiced in the separation of
metals of a less weight, viz. of a hundred pound weight, which is not done by
the help of common copples made of ashes, but of crucibles, whereof four, or
six, or eight are placed together in a little furnace amongst coals, viz.
immediately, not under a tyle, by which means more proofs are made in one day
then under a tyle by the help of copples in eight; because by this means in a
short and at one time separation is made in one vessel; but in the common way
minerals (if they be stubborn) must be burnt, and then be boiled in a crucible
with some certain addition in a wind furnace, or by the help of bellows; then
being boiled in a test under a tile be converted into dross, then the dross be
coppled. Which four labors, bnurning, decoction, scoriation, and coppling can
scarce be done in three or four hours times; but in this separation minerals
whether mild, as stubborn, are not dried, nor decocted, but all by one and the
same labor are finished in a quarter or half an hour, and in one crucible.

Which trying of minerals is most excellent, and profitable, without which I
had scarce ever attained to so much knowledge of metals. For it is an easy
matter to conjecture how much labor, and time is required (to say nothing of
coals) in every proof, if a particular fire should be kindled in its own
furnace for every particular proof, viz. for diverse separations; All which are
performed by one fire, and in one furnace, viz. by this new way of separation.
And this is a speedy separation of metals for the studious searchers of nature,
who by reason of multitude of other occasions cannot practice that common way,
as also for those that digg and are employed about minerals of all sorts, also
for Chemists that operate in gold, and silver, for the trial of the goodness of
their work. Also this secret separation may be practiced not only in a lesser
but also in a greater quantity; for ten or twenty pound may as easily be tried
as one or two ounces, but because in a greater quantity a greater weight of
lead is required, greater crucibles are required also. But in this new
separation there is not so great a quantity of lead required as in that vulgar.
For if a double, or threefold quantity of lead be added to one of any metal, or
mineral although it be copper (which requires otherwise sixteen or eighteen
parts of lead) it shall be as well and truly purged. Moreover neither the lead
nor the copper is by this means lost, neither is it again to be melted out of
the copple into which being porous it entered in that common way; because in
this copper is easily separated from the lead, viz. in a small fire.

Wherefore it is no small Chemical secret, opening a gate to diverse others. But
thou say; you do indeed promise many things, but perform few; you do indeed
make mention of many secrets, but teach nothing; who can ever I pray you by the
acuteness of his own wit find out such things? I answer, It is not my purpose
to offer to thee a morcel chewed before, wherefore seek, and labor incessantly
as I have done, and others have done, thou who covetest new things. No body
taught me besides exercise, use, and fortune, according to the Proverb. Use
makes an artist, and by working we become workmen. If I had had so much
guidance, as here I have given to thee, I had without doubt attained to greater
things with less costs and charges. America a most vast and fourth part of the
world being searched and examined by Christopher Columbu^, and that not without
great care and pains, how much privilege I pray you have others with less
danger, and labor to deport from thence treasures? Did not he deserve praise,
being a finder out of a most rich country, although he did not demonstrate with
his finger to every one? Did not many follow his direction, and transport from
thence through the wide ocean most vast riches? What now if thou should
betake thy self to some labor for this secret sake, by the help whereof gold,
and silver might be obtained without the danger of Navigation. But thou will
say with the Fox; Foot steps make me afraid, I have seen many lose their labor
and costs, and spend their houses and lands. I answer; I confess it, but the
fault is not the arts but the Artists. But I do not doubt but that these my
writings will illustrate the whole body of Alchymie, and recall many from their
errors. But know thou that there is another Saturn, with which wonderful
things are done in Alchymie (where that vulgar is not used) viz. that, which
Paracelsus does so much commend in his Coelum Philosophicum. Now in this
separation that common lead which is known to all is used, being no way
inferior to that of the Philosophers its brother, which being washed, and
spiritualized dares no less then the other enter into the kings closet for to
receive its preferment.

PARAG. XXIII.
How minerals in defect of coals made of wood; may be melted by the help of
pit coals, after a most easy, and profitable manner.

NEither is this labor performed with bellows, but by the flame of the fire of
coals, whether they be made of wood, or are pit coals, compassing the minerals,
as if they were compassed about with a crucible. Now this way is only for
metals that are soft, and easily fusible, where there is not so much loss of
the minerals, as in the other way.

PARAG. XXIIII.
The fixation of sulphurous, arsenical, antimonial, cobolts, and other
volatile poisonous minerals, which otherwise by reason of their volatility
cannot be retained, and melted in the fire, viz. by the help of any cementing
furnace, or such that has a grate, that go d and silver may the better be
drawn from thenc^.

IT is not unknown to the diggers of minerals that sometimes there are immature
minerals found which have neither gold nor silver in them, which being a little
while exposed to the air, and then being tried yield gold and silver as well in
a greater as in a lesser proof; such are Bismuth, Coboltum, Auripigmentum; and
other Antimonial, and Arsenical minerals. The air therefore causing this
maturation (viz. exciting the active, and maturative salt of the minerals) why
may not such minerals be perfected, and maturated by such kind of fixing
salts? certainly it may be done by art, and nature, although it cannot be
conceived by a dull wit. What advise therefore is to be given? Is this secret
to be revealed to the incredulous and ignorant? By no means, let them seek it
as others did, and they that shall find it out are predestined of God so to
do, or else they shall not, although they should be informed more of this
thing. But be not thou ignorant that the gold and silver that was drawn forth
out of those immature minerals after maturation, did not lie in them
corporally; for then they might be separated by that artificial separation, but
spiritually like an infant in its mothers womb compassed about with many
coverings. As Paracelsus calls such minerals sulphura embryonata, wanting
nothing but maturation, of which they are deprived by being taken too untimely
out of the mines by the miners. Now which way they are fixed, is not to be
taught in this place; yet this I will say that every volatile immature sulphur
has not affinity with corporeal fixed gold, and therefore scarce to be mixed
with it; as it appears by the separation of metals by the help of fusion, where
some metals are melted together, viz. fixed, and unfixed, for in the adjection
of common sulphur, which being mixed with the unfixed being next to it,
converts them into dross, but the fixed, viz. the gold and silver (especially
the gold) will not mix with it, but reject it, and separate themselves
naturally from that mixture, and falling to the bottom are turned into a
regulus, especially the gold, which being purged from all dross refuses to be
again polluted with impurities, by reason of the antipathy, which is betwixt
sulphur fixed, and unfixed.

N. B. Now common sulphur fixed is easier mixed with gold then with other
imperfect metals; that which is wonderful in the eyes of the ignorant, in which
there lies a great secret worthy to be taken notice of Arsenicall minerals, and
Kobalta also are fixed so as that afterward they being united with silver will
remain with it. But Antimony and Auripigmentum partake of both natures, viz.
golden, and silver, in which in part they may be fixed. Now I must confess that
this is a very dangerous labor, where it is to be handled cautiously, and not
but in our fourth furnace. As for my part I profess that Arsenical fumes never
hurt me, who never used any other preservative then that I never entered upon
those operations fasting: wherefore let him that sets upon such operations eat
first a piece of bread with butter, and drink a draught of wormwood beer, and
avoid the fume as much as he can.

PARAG. XXV.
A certain profitable separation of sparkling, and spongious and thin gold,
and silver from sand, pure clay, and flints, etc.

I Said above in the 19. Paragraph of such gold, that it could be separated
from sand neither by the help of washing, or amalgamation, because being
lighter then the sand cannot be reduced a part into a straight place, yet it
may be separated with profit by elixation with spirit of salt: but here it is
said, that it may be separated by the help of fusion, that which will seem
incredible to many by reason of that small quantity of gold that is mixed with
a great quantity of sand, viz. how that little quantity of gold may with profit
be separated from that great quantity of sand or clay. To whom I answer, that
it cannot be separated by the help of flowing or addition of any thing (though
never so vile) I say with profit by the force of liquefaction, because the
melted gold will not quit cost: It must therefore be done another way. There
are some lesser metals, which being to be destroyed, and perfected by art
require the addition of sand or flints, without which their destruction, or
perfection cannot be done, in the place of which if such flints and sand be
added, then their gold which otherwise cannot be melted is produced into (...)
that which the destroyed, and amended metals yield, and that with greater
profit.

PARAG. XXVI.
A certain profitable and secret melting of gold contained in baser metals and
minerals, which cannot be done in any other common way.

THis Paragraph treats of the same business as the foregoing did, And this
operation is nothing else but the destruction of baser metals, as of lead, tin,
iron, and copper, and a reduction of it into a certain earthy being, like to
glass, or dross, by which destruction and reduction the metals are by force of
the fire maturated, and partly purged by the help of addition, so that
afterward they may yield their gold, and silver in separation, which otherwise
they could not.

PARAG. XXVII.
A certain speedy and not costly separation of melted gold, and silver by the
help of fusion, so that by one man in one day in one furnace some hundred
pounds weight may be separated, and indeed with less cost, and labor then by
Aqua fortis or Cements.

THis operation indeed is very excellent, speedy, and profitable (because it is
done without Aqua fortis) whereby gold is separated from silver; there is no
man that is experienced who is ignorant of the tediousness of the separation
made by the help of Aqua fortis. But this operation is thus. Silver is broken
into pieces, with which a crucible is filled, then a separating flux being
given, the silver being melted the gold is precipitated in the silver with a
certain thing precipitating it into a regulus, which being done let all be
poured forth together into a cone, which being cold, the regulus is separated
from the rest of the mass by the striking of a hammer, but yet (...) lost all
the silver, but containing to one part of go^^ ^wo or three of silver, which
after cupellation is done must be separated by Aqua fortis. And by this means
gold contained in a hundred marks (or fifty pounds) of silver is reduced into
two or three, which afterward are separated by Aqua fortis: where you need not,
first purge those 100. marks by burning, or break them into small bits, and
then separate them by Aqua fortis; but now we have need of Aqua fortis only for
a few Marks, where much charge is saved in buying abundance of Aqua fortis, as
also in glasses being subject to breaking; as also much labor. Secondly, a
very great quantity of gilt silver may in the space of one day be separated by
this way, and that with little labor and costs, which by Aqua fortis could not
be done. But do not thou think that this is that way of which Lazarus Erker
wrote, because there is a great difference betwixt them. For although that way
of separation spoken of by Erker be not to be slighted, yet it is somewhat
tedious, and costly; but ours is not.

PARAG. XXVIII.
A very speedy reduction of wrought gold, as of chains, rings, etc. to the
highest degree; also an easy separation of gold from gilt silver, so that by
this way a hundred mark may be more easily separated, then twenty the common
way, where much labor, costs and time is spared.

HEre is mention made of another certain separation having no affinity at all
with the foregoing, respecting only gold, which is to be separated after a most
easy way from silver and copper, and to be reduced to the highest degree.
Which labor also is very profitable and easy, because it is not done per
quartam, by Cement, or Antimony, but by a certain peculiar flux which is to be
added to the metal when it is to be melted, which being melted, that flux
congregates the silver, copper and other metals, and turns them into dross,
which afterward being poured out are separated by knocking them, the pure gold
is to be taken away being separated from the addition. Afterward also the
addition of the flux is separated from the addition of the gold by
precipitation; so that first silver only is precipitated (if you please) from
the flux, then the copper; or let the silver only be separated, the copper
being left in the flux. By this way gold, silver and copper are separated in
the space of one hour, and every one apart, which otherwise could not be done
in the space of a day; This indeed is the most excellent secret of separation.

PARAG. XXIX.
The separation of silver in a greater quantity out of any lead, then by proof
of cuples.

THese words being read, there will without doubt arise a disputation amongst
Chemists and refiners of the possibility of this thing; but to them answer is
made in the fourth part of our furnaces, where also it is treated concerning
the proving of metals, where it is demonstrated that the proof of cuples is not
sufficient for all manner of separation of silver from lead, to which I refer
the reader. Now that in any lead there is contained great quantity of silver I
can testify that oftentimes have made trial of this separation. I do
religiously protest before all honest Chemists, that lead is nothing else but
impure, and unripe silver; he therefore that knows how to purge, and maturate
it, without doubt shall have a most singular thing. I indeed have tried many
things, seeing the possibility of it, but could never attain to my desired
end, because I could never have fitting vessels, that could hold lead with its
soap the whole time appointed for that operation: Yet I could do it with lesser
crucibles by placing them, one in another, so that the matter that penetrates
the first may be retained by the second, or third, but not with profit. The
time therefore of mercy is to be expected till God shall at length show the
matter, out of which such vessels may be made, which may shorten the other leg
of old Saturn, with which he is used to escape, that he may against his will
abide the due time of maturation, and purification.

PARAG. XXX.
The melting of good gold out of old iron, which although it cannot be done
with great profit, yet suffices them that are contented with few things.

THat iron partakes of a golden nature, not only Philosophers but also ancient
and modern diggers of minerals testify: Now they did not say that all iron was
of one, and the same goodness, because always one is more pure, and more
golden then another, wherefore there is a great difference in iron. Sometimes
it is so rich with gold, that sometimes in a mine that is dug (before the
iron be melted) there are found grains, veins, and little stones of pure
gold, witness John Matthesius in his Sarepta, together with other Philosophers,
saying that they have in diverse stones (mines of iron) brought out of the mines
of a mountain, which is called Fichtelberg, as also out of the mines of Stiria
seen pure gold like little veins. Paracelsus also does much cry up the Iron
mines of Stiria and Corinthia, and their riches, and that without doubt not for
their iron and steel, but for the plenty of gold hid in them, unknown to the
diggers. On the contrary the Swedish, and German iron has sometimes no gold in
it, as I have often tried. Whrefore let him that will search into it be
cautious in the choice of his iron.

Now let this melting de done with Antimony, which also for the most part has
gold in it self (yet one more then another) that of Hungary, Transylvania, and
Cranachia are the best; the rest have but little in them; now gold may be
melted though never so little, in iron and antimony, but not with so much
profit, as if a greater quantity thereof were in them. But thou will ask if it
be so, why is it not separated from them by the miners? I answer, the miners
are ignorant of this separation, laboring only out of use and custom, as
mercenary, without any other consideration. That most witty Lazarus Erker
himself also confesses, that the mine of iron has much gold in it; which is
ignorantly by the miners put under the hammer, who also teaches the separation
of silver from iron, but of gold makes no mention; which happily he knew not: for
no man can know all things. But if the miners did know that gold was in the
foresaid mines, yet it is a question whether in those places be afforded the
conveniences of separating it with profit. For I do easily believe if the
separation of gold from Antimony were known to them, that they would not
neglect it, but rather separate the gold, then to sell it being left in
Antimony, at a low rate. They indeed do know that there is gold in Antimony, as
also how to separate, it but with loss. What profit I pray you by the
separation of gold which will cost more then the gold is worth? Wherefore they
do rather sell the gold with the Antimony, then separate it. For the miners are
ignorant of that Antimonial separation by which not only the gold, but the
Antimony it self is preserved: and they that will separate that, do it by the
addition of a great quantity of lead by the help of cupellation, but with the
loss both of the lead and Antimony. But after this manner our separation is
not performed, but gold is separated from iron, and Antimony being melted,
without the addition of any strange thing (corrupting the iron or antimony) so
that the separation of the gold being made, the iron and antimony may be used
again, so that nothing thereof perishes, but what evaporates in separation; or
is unwittingly cast away. And by this, and by no other way gold is separated
from iron and antimony with profit. Now this separation is not used about iron,
and antimony only, that have gold in them, but also about others; as for the
seperating of gold from some Marcasites, lapis calaminaris and other stubborn
minerals, in which there is a very spiritual, and thin gold (and therefore not
to be separated thence by the help of the common separation with profit) and
that with great profit without the loss of the Antimony, viz. whilst those
minerals are melted with antimony, and the gold thence precipitated by iron
into a Regulus of one pound weight proceeding from a hundred of the mine and
antimony containing in it all the gold of the mine, iron, and antimony, which
Regulus may afterward be further elaborated for the separation of all those
sorts of gold, and that without much costs; where also the antimony is
preserved, which may again be used for other things. This separation therefore
is a most profitable secret (although iron and antimony having gold in them
should be found in no place) for the separating of gold, viz. out of other
stubborn minerals, where gold is without any loss reduced into a narrow
compass, or Regulus, which may easily be elaborated further, where the whole
Antimony melted with the mine, need not to be boiled, and so destroyed with
lead, and that rather with loss, then profit, because in this operation not
only the gold is drawn forth, but the antimony also is preserved.

Which way of separation I submit to the censure of all Chemists, and honest
refiners that are skilful, and that for diverse causes. I question not but to
have the approbation of all and every one of them that will not contradict the
truth. Moreover there is also another separation of gold from iron, and
antimony, which is not done in crucibles; where they are first mixed together,
then immediately reduced with a strong fire of coals for the obtaining of the
Gold of Iron and Antimony.

PARAG. XXXI.
Also a separation of gold and silver from any tin and copper, according to
more or less.

THis separation is performed otherwise, not with antimony, but with lead, viz.
when before tin and copper are in a spiritual manner mixed with it, without
which spiritual mixtion the corporeal mixtion of metals is nothing worth. For
every one that is skilled in metals is not ignorant, that tin melted with lead
after the common way is not radically mixed with it, without which radical
union of metals they cannot be perfected, nor bettered one by another. They
err therefore whosoever they be that endeavor to separate gold, and silver
from tin, copper, and other imperfect metals by the force of common liquation;
let them therefore whilst that Philosophical union, or conjunction is unknown
to them, timely abstain from such vain and unprofitable labors, being that
which I counsel them faithfully, having tried the truth of the thing with loss
of time and costs. But now what that spiritual mixtion is which may be done by
the help of waters as well humid as dry, that excellent Philosopher and Chemist
Theophrastus Paracelsus, wonderfully magnifies it, and wrote many things of it.

Yet here I would especially have you take notice that to this radical mixtion
of imperfect metals there is also required gold by the help whereof there is a
separation of the pure from the impure, in impurer, and imperfect metals: And
this may be compared with that divine separation, where Christ being present
the good shall be separated from the bad (their bodies befirst corrupted) God
attracting the pure in heart, but rejecting the impure. Which also ought to be
done in this separation of imperfect metals, viz. they must first lay aside
their impure bodies, which must be corrupted and purified; for then gold does
radically associate it self to them, and makes a separation attracting like to
it self, and reject what is unlike. For as every man has a soul, which is a
Divine spark, but polluted with sin, infernal sulphur, the craft and deceit of
the devil; so also metals have in their center something that is incorruptible,
which is yet so compassed about with impure terrestial sulphur, that (in my
judgment) cannot be mended unless they be corrupted and brought to nothing,
out of which nothing gold does afterward attract that good spark, and converts
it into a good substance, which before the taking away of that sulphurous,
black accidental impurity could not be done. In like manner we also cannot be
with God before our hearts are purified from that old leaven (left to us by
Adam) and put on Christ, and become like children. Which few words truly, with
which nature does in this place agree, inculcating faith in us, are observed by
few. And as it has been said of gold, so also it is to be understood of
silver, which being mixed with corrupt metals attracts its like to its self as
its nutriment, like to diverse seeds in the earth, whereof every one does
attract its like, the superfluity being left. As for example, if any one should
cast into the earth fennel-seed, cummin, and onyon-seed, the fennel-seed would
attract from the earth only that which is proper to it self for the production
of fennel, with leaves, stalks, and seeds, the same is to be understood of the
seeds of onyons, etc. The same also falls out in the mineral matallick kingdom,
whilst perfect metals are sowed into imperfect, where they putrify, and
attract for their nourishment their like. Now I did not say by this similitude
that gold and silver were the general seed of metals, for gold is only a
receptacle of that of the metallic seed, and not the seed in its whole
substance. Moreover this similitude is brought in, that it might appear, how
like things being spiritualized, embrace and retain one the other. But I would
not have thee persuade thy self that metals are to be dissolved in corrosive
waters, and to be distilled; which labor of the Chemists is noxious to metals,
and therefore sterile, fraudulent, and Sophistical; by which many men, yea very
learned have been deceived, thinking to make the tincture by this way, contrary
to the course of nature; wherefore never any good fruit could be produced from
thence; Neither could ever any artist insisting in this vain way have any hope
of profit thereby, until he decline from this to the true and right way.

Now metals must be Chymically spirituallized without corrosive waters, and
without various artificial instruments, by the help of their proper humidum
radicale without much costs and labor. For that whole business (viz. the
purificatlon, vivification and spiritualis tion of metals; which is done by
solution, putrefaction, distillation, and circulation (viz. Philosophical) may
be done by a skilful Chemist without glasses in the space of one hour, so that
it then needs not the space of so many months to be with corrosive waters
vexed, and macerated. And this is to be understood of the humid Philosophical
way of a particular separation. But he that knows how to drown gold, or any
other golden subject in any most pure, most penetrating, fixed, and fusile
substance which has ingression into other slowed metals, and would be
radically mixed with the purer parts thereof, he without doubt will come
speedily to a particular transmutation or separation of the pure from the
impure with a legitimate and true manuduction to that universal work, with
which many hitherto have in vain been intricated.

PARAG. XXXII.
A maturation of mines, that they may give more gold and silver in the fusion.

THis concerning the maturation of minerals, and metals is one of the most
excellent of my secrets of the mending of metals. For I have often endeavored
by a certain secret way to fix metals and minerals, and I found that they
might be in some part maturated, so as to leave gold and silver in the cuple,
which before they could not leave, viz. before they were maturated. Now I never
had experience of the truth in a greater quantity, viz. of many pounds; and
what the cause of this thing is, you may see in the beginning of these
Annotations; it is needless therefore here to repeat it.

But this I must yet say, that this fixation is somewhat costly, which moreover
cannot be done in any part of the world with gain (although it may in a
greater quantity, which yet I am ignorant of) for that fixation is done by the
benefit of a certain water, which also nature uses in the earth (which you
cannot have in every place, where there is not good earth) And if you expect
good by the water, the minerals, fixation being made, must yield plenty of gold
and silver, or else we labor in vain. I often made trials with a hundred pound
weight of the lesser immature minerals, or semimetals, and I found in a hundred
pound weight of cobolt a Mark and half of pure silver, and in bismuth 2. 3. 5.
ounces of gold, Also lapis calam inari^ and Zinck (being dug in a due place)
yielded their gold abundantly. But oftentimes computation being made of the
price of the mineral to be fixed, and of the matter fixing, and abstraction of
this price being made from the price of the gold and silver produced from
thence I found very little and sometimes no gain at all, so that for the
present I left the work, until I shall obtain a water at a lesser price, or
shall be able to maturate metals in a shorter time for the getting of a greater
quantity of gold and silver, being that which experience will teach.

Although I never attain to the fruitful perfection of this maturity, yet I
would not have it be contemned, as being most profitable in other Chemical
operations, and confirming me in my conceived opinion of perfecting metals by
nature, and maturating imperfect minerals and metals (nothing withstanding) as
well by art, as by nature in the bowels of the earth, and in converting them
into gold: of which thing more at large in my book of the generation of metals.

PARAG. XXXIII.
A separation of gold and silver out of Arsenick, Auripigmentum and Antimony.

THese volatile minerals have in them commonly volatile gold and silver,
especially those that come from the mines of gold and silver, leaving nothing
in the cuple. But he that knows how to fix a little of them, and to add to them
a metal in which those volatile may hide themselves, shall certainly see a
possibility of drawing good gold and silver out of those volatile and
contemptible minerals yet not out of all Antimony, Arsenick, and Auripigmentum.

PARAG. XXXIV.
A separatoon of extrinsecal sulphur of Venus for the production of her son
Cupid.

COpper (and also iron) is next in nature to gold by reason of a great mutual
affinity, as experience testifies.

Very probable it is therefore that it may be so purged, if so be the art of
which Paracelsus in his book Vexationum speaks, were known to any that it may
leave behind it gold and silver in the cuple; that which cannot be done by the
ignorant. My secret respects chiefly that mine of copper which is found near
the mines of gold, and not every sort. If that superfluous combustible sulphur
be separated by water, there is found pure gold. But this art cannot be
practiced in a greater quantity, demonstrating only the possibility of the art,
but not promising riches; out of which happily some profit may come, if it be
made with the true Venus after a right manner; but this shall be demonstrated
more at large elsewhere, but not in this place. But this I would here have you
know that the superfluous sulphur of the mine of copper is not to be taken away
with the burning of common fire, according to the manner of them that deal in
minerals, but spiritualized with a certain secret fire, by which its proper
body may be amended, and exalted as to become partaker of a golden nature. For
such copper mines being melted and purged after the common way yield not gold
but silver only: whence it appears that they attain to perfection, not but by
that secret fire of lotion or gradation. For skilful Chemists have not only
that common fire, but also another, by the help whereof metals are tried and
melted; without the knowledge whereof metals cannot be rightly handled. As for
example; in the common melting, and burning of minerals, which is done by a
common fire, the volatile part of the metal, which is the spirit and vegetable
life thereof is driven away by the force of that fire, the more fixed and thick
part being left. But if the more impure parts only be by any peculiar fire
separated, the gradatorious spirit being left with the body, there is found a
better and more excellent body then that which is melted in a violent common
fire. The greatest secrets lie in fire as being the strongest element, but of
these nothing is manifest to the vulgar Philosophers and Chemists. In the dross
that is cast away, undergoing a greater force of fire there lies something of
what is perfect, which is drawn from thence, if they be melted again after a
peculiar manner, which last operation is not but by a common fire. But this
amending of copper proceeds from a certain fire that washes, purifieth, and
exaleth. I have often tried the mine of copper by both fires, and I never found
any thing but silver to be melted thence by that common fire, as well after as
before fixation and not gold but by that secret fire only gold and no silver.
As also tin tried by the common way yields only silver; but being reduced into
ashes and dross, yields not silver but gold, as having passed the greater force
of fire. This therefore is to be ascribed to fire, operating diversely according
to the diversity of the regiment thereof. Wherefore the differences of fires is
to be known, for one destroys and the other digests, and maturates metals; one
mundifies and washes; another penetrates, heats, exalts, and transmutes metals
into a better kind, so that it may be truly said: In gold and salt are all
things.

Besides the hot and dry fires, there are also found those that are cold and
moist, having no affinity with those, by the help whereof nature does as well
in the bowels of the earth, as out of the earth, like an artist destroy, and
regenerate metals; of which you shall see more amongst the Philosophers, and I
could say more if it were needful. But why? Mention made of unknown secrets
begets envy. Out of old cloth I will not make a new garment; because there are
some Authors of new books, that know nothing but what they have read or heard.
As for my part, I had rather be silent, then publish secrets, or write or
repeat things already written. For its all one to write secrees, or common writ
things, viz. in this age. Wherefore I thought it better to give others an
opportunity of searching out secrets, then to publish and communicate them to
all indifferently. Let it suffice therefore what has been spoken of the
difference of hot and cold fires, by the help whereof metals are as well within
as out of the earth, generated, and destroyed: Of which I have decred more at
large to treat in my book of the Original of Metals, where what is here wanting
shall not be omitted.

PARAG. XXXV.
The separation of silver from the tests, which entered into them in time of
trying without melting, and without labor and costs.

THis is for those that want conveniences of melting their tests, for the
separating of silver, which together with the lead entered into them in the
time of trying. And it is a very easy secret, without costs and labor.

PARAG. XXXVI.
A cheap preparation or making of most fine earthen vessels, like to the
porcellane, retaining spirits, resisting the fire, and to be made in any place
of the world.

WE can scarce be without those earthen vessels, as in household affairs, so
in a Chemical elaboratory, and Apothecaryes shops, wherefore mention is made of
them not without cause. For the household affairs, there may be made basins,
dishes, cups, pots, etc. For an elaboratory, alembicks, cucurbits, retorts,
platters and other necessaries. For Apothecaryes shops, pots, greater or lesser
for syrups, conserves, electuaries, and for waters of herbs in defect of those
of glass. And such vessels may well be preferred before those of glass, because
they are not so soon broken, and retain any subtle, and sharp humidities.
They are also to be preferred before pewter basins and dishes, because they do
as well in winter, as smmer retain their cleaness; and more easily made clean
without washing.

PARAG. XXXVII.
A confection of Allome exalting, and fixing any colors: especially requisite
for scarlet and other precious colors; As also a preparation of a cauldron
that shall be cheap, and not alter colors.

THis allome is not to be sold, because it is made by art of some certain
minerals, having this virtue, as to be able to fix, and exalt colors of any
kind that they suffer no injury from the sun, air, water, which do otherwise
alter colors, to which business is required also a certain peculiar cauldron.

For diers of scarlet know that the scarlet die which is the best, and most
precious of all colors, is altered in copper cauldrons, wherefore they are
wont to cover them over with tin, or to make them of tin. But this our allome
and our cauldron are far to be preferred before those vulgar, although they are
sold at a cheaper price; wherefore this art is not to be slighted, because much
profit may redound to the possessours thereof.

PARAG. XXXVIII.
A certain cheap preparation of colors for painting, as of purple,
ultramarine, vermillian, etc. but especially of a certain most fine white,
never yet seen, most like the finest pearls; also of a silver, and golden
color.

THe aforesaid colors were yet never common, nor could be made so plentifully,
and with so great profit as now, etc. whilst therefore these serve for the art
of painting, whereby for memories sake as well sacred, as profane histories are
painted, it will not be amiss if they be taught; because we can hardly want
them: And although it seem a mean, yet it is a most useful art, and also
profitable, because those colors are much used in many places, whence much
profit must of necessity redound to the possessours thereof.

The conclusion.
LET no man doubt of the truth of what has been said in these Annotations. For
nature and art can do many things, but our art is little in vegetables, and
almost nothing in metals, and this is the reason, that things never seen or
heard, seem incredible and monstrous to the ignorant. Wherefore I protest, and
protest again that these my writings are neither dreams nor trifles, but true
natural secrets. For nature is rich, and the earth is full of hid treasures;
that which is believed by few. And not only within, but also without in the
circumference, the treasures of the earth are to be found in abundance,
although we know not the manner of finding of them out. I will now say nothing
of the finest clay, sand, and stones, nor of the baser and abject minerals, out
of which gold and silver may be separated, being easily to be found in any part
of the earth without costs. Moreover in what places there have been metals
melted many years since, and still are melted, there are great mountains of
dross, out of which according to are, gold, and silver (left in them) may be
melted. It seems as if God had by his divine providence reserved something for
our good for us his disobedient children in Europe, and especially in Germany,
(being chastised and deprived of outward comforts by strange Nations for the
impiety of our lives) which formerly we could not in time of peace, but now in
time of war our enemies might use. As we also by nature being corrupt use
providence for the sakes of our disobedient sons, consuming a patrimony ill,
which has been gotten well; laying up money for a certain time of extreme need,
that they do not altogether despair to the infamy of their parents, and may
return to a better thriftiness, and be reclaimed.

And why may not that most high and wise God, our merciful Father, seeing our
penitency provoke us by his reserved treasure to a due gratitude and repentance
and obedience. God does nothing in vain, being not ignorant of what he has to
do, and what may profit us; who without doubt seeing our filial obedience will
provide for us with his divine blessing both temporal and eternal.

And truly it seems as if upon this account the whole Provinces may rise
again, for after that some have gotten riches, they may be able to help others
either by lending, or giving them wages for working and doing businesses for
them. But let no man wonder that I said that somegood might lie in abjected
dross, saying, If there be any good in them, why was it not melted by our
Ancestors? I answer, though it be granted that at that time nothing more could
be drawn out by the violence of the fire, yet it does not follow that there can
no good be drawn from thence now.

For, first of all refiners, as well those of former years as latter are not
ignorant that the dross that has been cast away and left for some years in the
air, has oftentimes been again impregnated by reason of a magnetic power,
and has afterward yielded more and better metals then before (of which thing
let the ignorant see the books of them that treat of Minerals and Metals) for
in this art there is not used any singular art, but that which is common and
used in all places.

Secondly, there may also from the dross of some metals (whether impregnated
from the elements or no) by a certain secret may be drawn forth, and melted
gold and silver, when as before there could be none found in them. But thou will say, How could that be, that in the first fusion imperfect metals could be
produced, but in a repeated liquefaction, viz. of the dross, gold and silver is
produced. But I answer that all imperfect metals contain in them something of
what is perfect, which by the trial of cupels cannot be drawn forth, unless
they be destroyed and converted into dross (of which thing elsewhere) for
imperfect metals contain much incombustible sulphur, which does not suffer a
sufficient purification of them in the examining of them by cupels, but causing
a combustion of the good together, and a conversion of it into litharge,
entering into the substance of the cupels: but the remainders of the metal,
which could not be melted by that most vehement fire of the first liquefaction
being by combustion turned into dross, has sustained a greater violence of the
fire, then that which was melted the first time, wherefore being more purified
is made more near to gold and silver then that metal, from which it was
separated. He therefore that knows how to melt that dross, in which oftentimes
there is much left, especially the dross of tin, and that with a fit addition,
shall without doubt find better metals, then those which were melted by the
diggers of the minerals the first time. Now I do not say that there is so great
a power in common fire to puririfie and perfect baser metals.

Fire indeed has a greater power to purify and maturate metals, but it is too
violent for those that are volatile. Without doubt there are also other things
that can help the fire, which being known we may easily be able to do great
things. And because it has been said in the foregoing Paragraphs, that some
metals cannot yield that gold and silver that is hid in them, unless they be
first destroyed, and reduced to dross, it is not needful to destroy those
metals for profit sake, seeing there are found in great quantity metals
destroyed, and brought to dross already, out of which thou may draw forth
gold and silver for to maintain thee. But especially some certain dross of tin
is commended, that comes out of a certain mine thereof by reason of the
abundance of gold, as I can witness by my one experience, and that indeed not
without cause; and although all tin be of a golden nature, yet that (which is
called in Germany Saiffen Zinn from soap) is doubly golden; and that indeed
first by reason of the gold that is accidental to it, where also commonly
grains of gold are found, which whilst the mine of tin is washed, because
they cannot be separated by the help of washing, are mixed with the tin in the
infusion, which oftentimes refiners know, but of the manner of separation they
are ignorant. For oftentimes there is found tin, of which a hundred pound
weight is sold for the price of twenty, or twenty four ryals, which contains
gold of a greater price in it. But what is your advise worth if it cannot be
(...) without loss, for all that which is separated by lead after the common
way cannot have so much in it, because the greater part thereof is turned to
dross; and if it were granted that it were not turned to dross, yet the charges
expended for the separation of tin by lead would exceed the price of the gold
contained therein. Now thus much information being given, let no man doubt but
that some at last will find out this secret, whom also I shall assist as much
as I can with my counsel.

And that which has been said of the dross of tin is also to be understood of
the dross of other imperfect metals, yet not so as if all without any
difference had gold in them, and truly the dross of iron, which has undergone
a great force of fire being converted into green or blew glass (out of which
some have extracted gold, by common Aqua regis but without profit, for the
costs that have been expended have exceeded the price of the gold that has
been brought forth) are to be preferred before others that have not undergone
so great a force of fire. But there be some, that do affirm that a true
tincture may be made out of that dross, transmuting imperfect metals into gold;
but this I leave as being not experienced therein, treating only of those
things which experience has taught me, giving my testimony of the treasure
that lies in iron, which you cannot draw forth from thence by the separation of
Antimony, of which above, so easy, or by other ways and mediums, expecting
your self the stronger, so as to be the victor taking away the spoil thereof:
for there is no one that shall not at some time find himself the stronger, so
as to be able to dispense to that as he has been dispensed to by others. That
old Saturn of a most vile aspect is the highest in the firmament, and can do
many things in metallicks, without which we can do nothing that is of any
moment; wherefore deservedly is he to be honored above the rest. But this
separation may be practiced not only about the abjected dross of metals; but
also about metals themselves, if they may be procured at an easy rate, as now
in the time of war, where in the space of thirty years such abundance of copper
and tin has been transported from elsewhere into great cities and sold of a
low rate, that the owners thereof have been co^^ained to transport it with
their ships to other places. Now if any one had known this separation, might
not he have got great riches from thence as well as by the culture of the
mines, and withal reserve the metals, and being preserved in separation to
dispose of them for metallic uses, viz. Ecclesiastical and martial, as for the
making of bells and guns? by which means the greater part might have been keept
in his own country, which otherwise must be carried into other Provinces with
great loss, by reason of the want of those that are skilled in metallic
affairs. But no wonder that so little is now done in Alchymy, seeing most
Chemists have no knowledge of metals, which being wanting, the Chemist is also
wanting, whether learned as unlearned: for this knowledge is not got in the
universities, consisting in a profound speculation, and daily practice.
Formerly amongst the Chaldeans, Persians, Arabians, and Egyptians, arts were
more honored, then now amongst Christians* choosing a magistrate out from
amongst the wise men, whose Kings brought up their sons in Philosophy.
Chemistry especially was very famous amongst the Egyptians, by which they did
get wealth and great riches; so that Diocletianus the Emperor could not
overcome them till he had burnt all their books. In which time arts were had in
great esteem as it appears by that annual salary of Alexander the great, which
he gave to Aristotle, viz. four hundred and eighty thousand crowns, and by
those 3000* associates which he joined to him for the searching out of nature.
But now Thrasoes, Sycophants, and Morions, wise men being neglected, are
honored, whence this present calamity of so many countries and cities, etc. In
brief, arts, and sciences are now so rare, as is snow in hotter countries in
the middle of summer. For pride does not permit honest tutoring and education,
seeking nothing but wealth and riches, which if any one have he is honored
without respect of his worth and virtues. Some have persuaded themselves that
it derogates from their honor to bread up their sons in honest arts, being
content with a patrimony for the conservation of their condition. But it often
appears how a patrimony suffices, when riches and wealth that have been ill
gotten are taken away by some mishap at sea and land; are; for then they stand
like butter against the sun, when their riches is lost, nothing remains for
the support of their lives, who therefore are not in a little danger. I wish
the time would once hasten, when virtues shall be embraced in stead of vices,
and children shall be educated in good arts, for then so many calamities would
not abound in the world, nor spoils or man-slaughters, but men would live in
peace, and get their bread with the sweat of their brows without wronging their
neighbor. And this thou have heard concerning the remaining honest mediums
that conduce to the honest maintenance of a family without usury, or fraud, or
the violence of the sword. For those things which have been gotten by fraud,
and deceit, or by war, do for the most part perish as being contrary to the
Scripture and the good of our neighbor. It is better therefore to leave to
every one his own, and to get in the sweat of the brows, according to the will
of God, an honest living, that which may well be done by the way that I have
now demonstrated: although hitherto no profit has come to me from these most
secret arts, for certain causes, neither (God willing) shall I hope that
hereafter there will, yet I am contented with the knowledge of nature. In the
interim I hope I shall once again by the blessing of God see my most desired
country, where I may be able to labor, and maintain my household affairs
honestly: and then indeed I shall be able to set forth and publish something
more, and that more boldly. For I am resolved to write a book the like to which
was never seen; very profitable for many men for the sustaining of life: For as
a woman with child desires nothing more then to be freed of her burden: so also
I, that I may as a divine instrument be helpful to my neighbor, according to
the talent that God has trusted me withal. Now I lack nothing so much as time:
For every wise man may easily conjecture what great pains I have been at (I
will not say costs) in this place where all things are most dear in searching
out the secrets of nature only, setting aside greater labors. I will say yet
one thing more, and that sincerely, I am consumed by serving others. If I were
given to covetousness I would practice but only one secret, which I knew long
since, and I could thereby get great riches: that which I will not do, for my
genius has not suffered me to exercise things that are perfectly found out, or
any mechanic art, like an ass that daily carries hither and thither so many
sacks, but would that one secret being found out I should find out another,
and indeed from another secret being found out already, for always one opens
the gate to another. That which hitherto I have done without ceasing, and
without any consideration of costs, or labor for the good of my neighbor;
neither shall I cease (God permiting) until I come unto my desired way. In the
mean while I am resolved to serve my neighbor by things found out and tried;
hoping that those that are honest will take my studies in good part, not
regarding the wonted contumelies of cavillers (from whence there is no profit)
betraying at length their great ass-like ignorance.

I will conclude therefore, and refer the Courteous Reader unto the residue of
my books, that treat of those secrets more plainly, which I am resolved shortly
to put forth. Farewell therefore Reader, I recommend thee to God the Father of
lights.

To the Malicious.
Whosoever thou art, O malicious carper, mark what I say, Do not despise
things unknown, for there is no man in the earth can please all. Be therefore
cautious in thy actions. Do not judge without judgment, lest thou thy self be
at last judged. Truth shall remain, when haters of truth shall perish. And if
thou have companions of iniquity, yet thou shall not stand, nor escape
punishment. Wherefore do not touch the innocent, that seeks nothing but thy
good; and shows the right way to get wealth and honor. If thou have any thing
better communicate it; there is no body will hinder thee: if not, bridle thy
tongue, and do not carp at him that is through the blessing of God, eminent in
arts; or else thou will not escape the vengeance that hangs over thee; from
which the Zoiles were never free, from the creation of the world, and let these
things being heartily spoken be for thy admonition.

FINIS.
OF THE TINCTVRE OF GOLD, Or the true AVRVM POTABILE; What it is, and how it
differs from the false and sophisticated AVRVM POTABILE, How it is to be
Spagirically prepared and how to be used in MEDICINE.

By JOHN RUDOLPH Glauber.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, for Tho: Williams at the sign of the Bible
in Little-Britain. 1652.

OF AVRVM POTABILE.
THere is no man that can deny, that the true and ancient Philosophers did
study long life, and the conservation of their health. Whence it came to pass
that they did diligently seek out the subject of preserving health, and
prolonging life: wherefore by the help of fire they did practice the
separations, and proofs of all vegetables, animals, and minerals, seeking out
their powers and virtues: Who found out the greatest harmony of all things as
well in the heavens, as on earth betwixt the Sun and Gold, Man and wine. For it
cannot be denied, that the life of all things proceeds from the heat of the
Sun; wherefore they sought to unite gold, the terrestrial sunor body fixed and
perfect, caused by the rays of the Sun, with man by the help of spirit of wine.

But happily there will be some, whom this my narration may offend denying that
gold is the Son of the Sun, or a metallic body fixed and perfect* proceeding
from the rays of the Sun; asking how the Solary immateriall rays can be made
material and corporeal? But they are very ignorant of the generation of
metals, and minerals. And although I am not now resolved to write of the
generation, and original of metals, yet endeavoring to demonstrate that there
is a vivifying power of the Sun to be found in gold (destroyed and
volatilizated) and to be prepared into a most wholesome medicine for man, I
will not omit for the sake of the ignorant and incredulous, to demonstrate the
truth by one or two examples, which although I could demonstrate by most
certain and firm reasons, yet for brevities sake I am now resolved to omit
them, recommending to the searcher of the Nature, and propriety of metals, my
treatise De Generatione Metallorum, which without doubt will take away all
scruple from him; objecting only against him that opposes the truth, two
questions and reasons which are to be confuted: and the first is, whence comes
that increase of both the quantity and quality of any viscous, mineral liquor,
that has been exposed long to the Sun in an open glass vessel? Whether from
the Sun or elsewhere? But thou say that that increase comes from the air, the
vehicle of all things. I answer, if from the air, whether was not that air
impregnated by the Sun? and whether there be any thing in the air, which it
received not from the stars? But place this liquor in a cold cellar in a moist
air, and thou shall by experience know that no weight is added thereto, even as
in the Sun, or (in his stead) fire: that liquor will draw some phlegmatic
moisture which will be easily separated by heat, the weight of the former
liquor being left. This may be showed by this example: dissolve some
sulphurous metal, as Iron, Copper, or Zinck, with any acid spirit, and at
length take away the spirit, make the remainder red hot; yet not too much, but
as much as suffices to take away the spirits, which afterward (its weight
being observed) put in a crucible on the fire, but take heed lest the metal
run over, but at length let it darkly glow with the crucible, for the space of
three or four weeks, which done, take it away again, and weigh again the
metal, and thou shall find the evident increase of the metal, which thou
shall perceive more evidently by this way, as follows; put copper, or some
sulphurous metal with 16 or 18 parts of lead in a well burnt cupel; made of
the ashes of wood, or bones in a tried furnace (the weight of the cupel; copper
and lead first exactly observed) and cause the copper to evaporate by fire with
the lead, which done take the cupel when it shall be cold, and again weigh it,
and thou shall find it far more weightly, so that its weight (though much of the
lead goes into air in the cupellating) not only exceeds its former weight, but
also of the copper and Lead by the said cupellation; therefore it is justly
demanded whence this increase proceeds, whether the heat of the fire was not
coagulated into a metallic body by means of that melted metal? Therefore it
is probable that if you knew the metallic matrixes in the surface of the earth
in which the beams of the Sun and the heat of fire being received may be
coagulated, metals may as well be generated in them as in the bowels of the
earth.

But thou reply it is probable the heat of vulgar fire to have some thing
metallic in it, which comes by attraction of the melted metal in the Corbill,
but not in the Sunbeams.

He that will thus try the truth, let him put the cupel very well burnt in the
beams of the Sun, together with copper and lead, to which let him add a hollow
looking-glass, so that it may be operated upon by the Sunbeams gathered into a
center and may thence be made hot: But thou must continually hold the
Looking-glass in thy hand that thou may turn or direct it to the Sun
according to the course thereof, lest the cupel wax cold, the beams of the Sun
being turned away, but if it be rightly observed, a work shall be done no less
than in a furnace of fire with glowing heat.

You must have a looking-glass at least in diameter two feet, nor must it be
too deep; but be in depth the 18 or 20 part of the globe, that so it may the
further cast beams: it must be very artificially smoothed, that it may more
exactly gather beams to the center. Now the preparation of these
Looking-glasses is not of this place, but shall be in the fourth part of our
Furnaces, where we shall teach not only how it is to be made of metals, but
also of glass, and how polisht and used.

This demonstration which may be otherwise omitted is therefore set down that
it may be known how Gold proceeds from the Sun, and is secretly endued with
its proper strength and proprieties by Chemistry, reducible into that which it
was before its coagulation, namely into a heating and living spirit,
communicating its strength and faculties to man's body. Therefore the Ancients
used great diligence in the melting of gold, in which nothing is found more
excellent then the purest and finest spirit of wine made by distillation, and
they did not use common gold melted out of stones or washed out of sand, but
purged by benefit of fire, and Philosophically quickened and unlocked, not by
help of corrosive spirits, the usual way of vulgar Chemists, but by some water
which Nature freely gives without help of violent distillation; by which they
manifest that which is hid in gold, and they have hid what is manifest, and
therefore they have made it fit for the separation of its tincture from a gross
and black superfluous body. For they knew that the compact body of gold has no
affinity with vital spirits, therefore they have chosen only the finest part
of gold to their Elixir, viz. its tincture which they have radically joined
with the spirit of wine, and being joined have made them spiritual or volatile,
so that neither can be separated from each other in the fire, and being in the
fire are sublimed or fixed with a longer digestion, and coagulated into a fixed
stone, which they count for the greatest treasure in this world. Therefore the
ancient Philosophers affirming that there is not a better medicine under the
Sun than it, which is made from the Philosophical union of wine and gold, both
by an inseparable recoagulation and fixation; nor without gold can spirit of
wine, nor this without it be made a medicine, because gold without spirit of
wine cannot be made volatile, nor this be coagulated and fixed without it. We
therefore their posterity justly follow the opinions of the most famous men,
not for their authorities sake, but for ocular demonstration which is the
truest trial.

Therefore the knowledge of the preparation of this medicine being bestowed on
me from the highest, I have intended, because a man is not born for himself,
briefly to deliver its preparation and use: but I will not cast pearls before
swine; but I Will only show the way to the studious searchers of the work of God
and Nature, who doubtless will understand my writing, but not the ignorant and
unskilful; let therefore the brevity of the preparation offend no man, because
I mean not to prostitute this Art (divinely obtained, not with idleness, but
with much watching, labors and pains) nor give to the unworthy a bit before
chawed but only to communicate it to the pious, who shall see with open eyes
that the thing is so. I desire therefore the simplicity of my style offend no
man being not adorned with rhetorical figures after the wonted manner, for
truth wants not many and elegant words, being contented with simplicity and
brevity, with which it is easier and better demonstrated, then with those
intricate and sophistick discourses

Before I will begin the preparation, I will briefly describe the qualities of
a true spagirick undertaking so great a work, that every one may examine
himself, that takes this task upon him. For it does not suffice to know to make
fire, or to distill vegetable waters, but the true knowledge as well of the
fruits of the superior as inferior elements is required, and especially piety.

Not prating, but much knowledge makes a Chemist, there is no man, who can
deny, that the Art is long since sought by diverse for many years, even until
this day, with much labor and charges; but found by very few. I do not wonder
that so great a gift of God has hitherto been communicated to very few; for
all modern Chemists (very few excepted) have gone a wrong way. For some trusted
to their riches, thinking violently to get the Art, because they were able to
make a fair elaboratory, maintain many journey men and get store of vessels,
minerals, and coals, not considering the saying of the Apostle, It Is not of him
that wills, or him that runs, but of God only that shows mercy.

Others whose learning consisted in diverse tongues were honored for their
elegancy of prating, attributing skill only to themselves, and persuading
themselves that they had all the elements at their beck, for their supposed
wisdom and learning, not considering the work of Christ, thou have revealed it
to little ones, and have hid i^ from the great and wise. Who persuade
themselves, that they see grass grow not knowing the earth its mother, to whom
if all things suceed not according to their pleasure, they fear not to slander
the most pious Philosophers, and to impeach them of falsehood, and to palliate
their ignorance with the nullity of their art; who would judge that the thing
is far otherwise if they knew the mystical meaning of the Philosophers, but
because they are blinded with pride; no marvel if they take the shell in stead
of the kernel, and so come not to the wished end.

The third sort is of covetous slothful men, seeking wealth of those
mountebanks, being as ignorant of Chymistery and Nature, as those they teach,
having neither knowledge of minerals nor metals, nor understanding the works of
the Philosophers, with whom if one dispute of the nature and proprieties of
metals, they have nothing to answer, but what they read and hear, viz. it is so
writ, and so we have proceeded, and thus we must proceed, and such a matter and
no other is required, keeping close to the letter, not considering whether the
Author of his proceedings be skillful or not, whether he has borrowed his
writings from the experience or readings of other books, to whom although a
true and genious information of the nature and the knowledge of minerals and
metals, and Chymick secrets should be delivered, yet they would not believe,
despising plain truth as folly in her simple labors, which are, not chargeable
nor tedious. Wealth is sought by such like covetous fellows, spending in some
process of no worth some hundreds or thousand crowns, supposing the art to be
venall, not considering that the Merchant will keep a good and sure art to
himself, and not seek money of others.

I do not deny that some Artist may be the possessor of some secret, or thing
found by his own experience, or disclosed to him by some friend, which for
poverty he cannot effect, and therefore has need to crave the help of others,
for not always wealth and skill meet together, which deservedly are helped by
the rich, trusting to Gods blessing.

But this caution is to be taken, lest there be a half-pennyworth of profit in
time of harvest from a crowns worth of corn, both of wealth and credit. Who is
so blind, though but with one eye, who does not observe the trifles of such
like covetous boasters? although the Sun by Gods mercy does shine on both good
and bad, yet it was never heard that ever any true Philosopher handling secrets
secretly was a prating trifler. And it is much to be wondered at, that the
learned of this age have been so blinded, that they would be gulled by such
vagabond knaves.

The fourth kind of seekers are men of a different condition, not seeking
wealth and honor but Gods glory and their neighbors profit, contented with
mean food and apparel, not proud and vainglorious, but pious and honest,
handling coals in stead of gold rings, not the companions of many men, silent
knowers of natural secrets, seeking and finding by Gods assisting grace, not
trusting to the writings of the Ancient Philosophers, but to God the prime
teacher of all things, whose mercy is the same now, as it was in the time of
those Philosophers, which obtained their Art with earnest prayers from God.
Unto these came Arts beyond hope and expectation, and the use and method of
using them.

Therefore all that undertake this Art, let them diligently examine themselves,
for none of this last number will be furthered by their wealth and conceited
learning, because this skill is the gift of God alone, and not man. Therefore
the proprieties of a true Chemist, reaping the fruit of the Golden tree being
known: I will now begin the preparation of the tincture of Gold, by the hand of
a skillful and excercised workman, and will show the difference of the true and
false tincture, and the physical use of the true gold, to expel many
diseases, as follows.

of living gold one part, and three parts of quick Mercury, not of the vulgar,
but the Philosophical every where to be found without charges and labor (thou
may also add living silver of equal weight with the gold, and indeed better
then only gold for the greater variety of colors proceeding from the mixture
of male and female: but one persuaded that better tincture proceeds from gold
alone may mix gold only, not so, one skillful of metals, who knows the power
of the cordial union of gold and silver dissolved in one and the same
menstruum) put them mixed in a Philosophical vessel to dissolve, and in the
space of one quarter of an hour, those mixed metals will be radically dissolved
by Mercury, and will give a purple color; after increase the fire by degrees,
and it will be changed into a very fine green, to which taken out, pour the
water of dew to dissolve, which may be done in half an hour, filtre the
solution, and abstract the water, through a glass alembick in B. which pour
out again fresh, and abstract, which do three times, in the mean time that
greenness will be turned into a black color like ink stinking like a carkase,
and therefore odious: and it behooves sometimes to take away the water reaffused
and digested, and that blackness and stink will depart in the space of forty
hours, and will produce a pure milky whiteness, which appearing take away all
the moisture till it be dry, which will be a white mass and in few hours of a
pleasant color, diverse colors first appearing it is turned into a fine
greenness better then the former, to which you must affuse the spirit of wine
well rectified to the depth of two or three fingers, and that green gold
dissolved will draw that spirit of wine for the great amity like a dry sponge
drawing water^, and will communicate to it a quintessence as red as blood, by
which means the greenness is deprived of its quickening tincture, the
superfluous ashy body being left.

You must decant and filtrate the tinged spirit, and in a B. by a glass
alembick, abstract it from the red tincture, attracting the fiery essence of
spirit of wine, so that they may be very close and inseparably conjoined, for
which an unsavory water only distills, the virtue of the spirit of wine left
with the tincture of gold like a red fiery salt, fusile and volatile; of which
grain 1. can tinge i. of spirit of wine, or any other liquor, with a blood red
color, for it is soluble in any moisture; and therefore may be kept in a
liquid form for the Panacea of most desperate diseases. Now I will communicate
the proprieties of the true tincture by which true potable gold is known. This
tincture next the stone is the best of all medicines, between which and that
there is but this difference, the soul of gold is volatile nor has entrance
into imperfect metals, and therefore cannot transmute into pure fine gold,
which virtue is attributed to the Philosophers Stone. The soul of gold though
it be the best part, yet it is not fixed in fire but volatile; but the
Philosophers Stone is fixed in fire and remains by reason of a longer digestion.
But whether that soul or volatile tincture, and red Lion may be fixed by help of
fire, may be turned into the Universal medicine, and tinging stone, that I know
not; because hitherto I have not tried, etc. therefore he may who extracts the
soul of gold make further trial, whether he can find any thing better. For
this work treats of nothing but the best medicine of gold, but other things I
know not.

Therefore the deceit of the Distillers of wine, and other vegetable waters,
selling potable gold, is not unknown, being not ashamed to sell any water
colored yellow or red to the ignorant, for a great price. And the error of
others, dissolving the body of gold in aqua Regia, or spirit of salt, which
again they abstract to a dry remainder, to which for extraction they affuse the
spirit of wine: which is not an extraction, but some particular solution of
gold, made by help of corrosive spirits left in the gold, tinging the spirit of
wine with a yellow color, which so colored they call their potable gold,
which notwithstanding is reduced into gold, the spirit of wine abstracted,
which can do more then any other Calx of gold, which the Archeus cannot
digest, but separates being indigested, with the excrements. And also it is the
error of others, ignorantly deceiving themselves and others, extracting the
calx of gold with peculiar menstruums and spirits, knowing not that the
menstruum affused to gold to be red of it self by a long digestion, which
decanted, they administer instead of potable gold, who if they weighed the
remaining calx, would by experience see that nothing departed from the gold;
which you may try by setting the spirit or menstruum in a remiss heat, or
longer in cold, which of it self does wax red, as it had been affused to the
Calx of Sol. But the cause of this redness is (unknown to them) nothing but a
certain nitrous salt and volatile, as of Antimony, Urine, Tartar, Hartshorn,
Hair, etc. exalting the color of any Sulphur.

Wherefore it necessarily follows if Artists, mingle with the spirit of wine in
which is a sulphur, such exalting salts, that it will thence be exalted in
color, and wax red! which also happens to them, who use to extract a tincture
with distilled oils having a volatile salt, as are oil of juice of Lemmons,
Cloves, of Soot, etc.

For such like tincture or potable gold is ineffications, as experience
witnesses But I would not say there is no other tincture to be prepared out of
gold, beside this tincture: for being dissolved in sweet menstruums, that it
cannot be separated by precipitation, it can do wonderful things in many
grievous diseases; but always the living metal is to be chosen in stead of
dead.

But true potable gold is not so only in name and show (as are diverse waters
tinged with a yellow or red color) but also endued with golden faculties and
virtues, so that it may actually appear to be made of gold, but irreducible by
fire into gold, spiritual and penetrative strengthening the vital spirits,
that they may overcome their enemies. But it must also be endued with this
virtue that it may change imperfect metals, chiefly Mercury, Lead, and Silver
into pure Gold; not truly like a fixed tincture, tinging with profit baser
metals in flux; but only perfecting particularly in a moist way by digestion,
where some part of the metal alone is turned into better. For this tincture or
salt of gold is very volatile, so that it cannot resist the fire; but with a
gentle heat it melts like wax, and is sublimed like red salt, soluble in
spirit of wine that it may be fit for Physical uses.

Also true potable gold being tasted, is neither corrosive, nor astringent like
other solutions of gold: neither does it pollute the hands, the nails and hair
with black or yellow color; but rather makes them more fine; neither does it
infect copper, iron, tin, lead, with rust or a black color, but rather makes
them more clear; neither is it a body of gold reducible by extraction, nor into
white gold, which may recover its former color by Antimony and Aqua Regia, but
it is like an earthen wax, and sublimable in a gentle heat like Arsenic, not
enduring the trial of the cuple, which virtues if it have it may be called the
true tincture of gold: but if not, not so but rather a sophisticated potable
gold, not to be meddled withal.

Of the medicinal use of this golden Medicine.
WE have before demonstrated, the Sun to be the original of gold, or endued
with the incredible virtues of the terrestrial Sun. For the strength and
virtues of all vegetables, animals, and minerals lie hid in it; which cannot be
manifested but by a Philosopher, and that by separation, to wit, of the
intrinsecall and pure parts, from the impure.

This speech will happily seem to thee incredible, or not very likely, to say
that gold is reducible into a spiritual essence, agreeable to humane nature,
endued with the strength of all animals, vegetables and minerals. Surely thou
shall hardly persuade him whom Vulcan has not made a Philosopher, to believe
it. But who will trouble himself so much as with sure reasons to decide all
controversies; which if possible, yet for many reasons is here omitted; but for
sureties sake I will send back the Reader to the second part of our Furnaces,
where he shall find how out of Antimony and Sulphur, by a good chemist with
the help of fire may be drawn not only the force and faculty of diverse
vegetables, but also their natural odor; which yet did not appear in them
before they were radically disolved, which if it may be done by any imperfect
and fetid mineral, why not also by a perfect and mature mineral?

If we were good naturalists, and very diligent Chemists, then we need not to
fill Elaboratories with so many pots and boxes, nor spend so much cost in
fetching in so many foreign medicinal species, because without question the
strength and properties of all vegetables animals and minerals by an easier
way, may be found in some few subjects. And as the true tincture of Sol well
fixed is endued with all the virtues of all vegetables, animals and minerals;
so also deservedly is ascribed to it the force of curing all diseases; but with
a difference. For there are diverse kinds of the Gout in hands and feet, as also
of the Stone, and Leprosy; which sometimes are inveterate and uncurable
diseases, sometimes n ew nd curable. Who therefore not mad would promise to
cure all and every disease indifferently, by any certain Medicine? Certainly
no man although he had the very Stone of the Philosophers.

For oft-times the Stone of the bladder is purged away or broken being most
hard and insoluble by Aqua Fortis, which not any medicine not corrosive could
dissolve; which strength although they ascribe to their medicine, yet they
cannot perform it. Promises therefore do not suffice, which none can perform:
for promises become debts, which is observed by few; wherefore by the haters of
the Art the truth suffers and the hope of good success of Chemical Medicines
dies. It is best therefore to perform more then promise, and the work shall
praise the workman. How can a medicine penetrate to the extreme parts of the
body; to wit, the hands and feet, and dissolve the coagulated matter waxing
hard, which out of the body no corrosive Medicine can dissolve? It is
sufficient if a medicine finding a viscous tartareous and salt matter, not yet
coagulated, do dissolve and expel it. The like is to be understood of the
stone in the reins and bladder. In this manner I will ascribe the curing of the
Gout in the hands and feet, the stone in the kidneys and bladder, to my
tincture of Sol, as well in old as young; but so that if need be specifical
catharticks may be administered, and extrinsecally Bathes for promoting the
cure, whereby Nature may the sooner do its office. But above all things we
must not slight Divine Providence: For ofttimes God smites us with a disease
incurable by Art, unless Divine wrath be first appeased by humhle repentance,
which is the best medicine of all. As also the cure of all diseases coming of
the corruption of the blood, as the Leprosy, the French disease, and other
impurities; which are taken away by this Tincture, if withal Catharticks and
Diaphoreticks are administered, cleansing and renewing the blood above all other
medicines. This Tincture also takes away all the obstructions of the Liver,
Spleen, Kidneys, and other parts, because it warms, attenuates, weakens, and
evacuates, the original of diverse diseases. It also cures all violent and
acute diseases, as the Epilepsie, Plague, Fevers, etc.

It provokes the Menstrues of old and young, chiefly if also extrinsecally it
be rightly administered: which way many are well cured, who otherwise are like
to perish miserably; it warms and cleanses the Matrix above all other
Medicines, and renders it fit to perform its office: It preserves it also from
all accidents of Sterility, and other very grievous diseases, causing death. It
expels the water of the Dropsy by urine it rarifieth and* dries up the
superfluous moistures of the internal and external parts, like the Sun drying
and consuming waters, by which means the body recovers its prinstine sanitude:
of other diseases to write in particular it is not need, because in all and
every one without difference it may be used, as a general medicine, in old as
well as young. This medicine does not only restore, but also conserve health
till the predestined time.

The Dose is from 3 grains or drop s to twelve or more, but to children 1, 2,
or 3, with its appropriated vehicle, or in wine or beer to be administered
daily, which Dose may be oftener in a day took, respect being had to the sick
party.

Thou may not be offended with the reproaches of the calumniator of this book
(of which the Devil with his filthy lies is always the Author) believing
steadfastly that the time is near, when at length by the Divine wrath these
Goats will be consumed like chafe, the sheep being not hurt, for their meat
recompensing their Master with milk and wool.

And so I make an end, hoping to have pleased my Neighbor: for without doubt,
who uses this golden medicine well, shall do well, chiefly lifting up his
heart, (acknowleding his sins) to God the Giver and Creator of all good, in
filial humility, imploring his help and blessing; which Omnipotent God and
merciful Father, that he would bestow on us his temporal blessing in this life
with sound health, and hereafter life eternal, of his free grace, Let us pray,

Amen.
FINIS.
OF THE Mineral Work, THE FIRST PART, Wherein is taught the separation OF GOLD
Out of Flints, Sand, Clay, and other Fossiles by the Spirit of Salt, which
otherwise cannot be purged. ALSO, A Panacea or Universal Antimoniall Medicine,
and the use thereof. Invented and published in favor of the studious in the
Chymick Art.

By JOHN RUDOLPH Glauber.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, for Tho: Williams at the sign of the Bible
in Little-Britain. 1652.

A Preface to the Reader.
THere will be some without doubt, because the Edition of other pieces (of
which I made mention in some former tractates a few years past) has been
hitherto by reason of diverse journeys and other various impediments, neglected,
who will think (having no knowledge of me) that I am unable to perform my
promise; and there are others, who knowing my condition, and the contumelies of
my enemies, will fear that I being diverted from my purpose by these
reproaches, will make void my secret promises. But I have resolved to stand to
my promise, that these men may see that I am neither moved nor altered with the
taunts of the envious; but that they may be convinced by real demonstration of
my secrets, some of which, I shall now for the public good endeavor to
communicate. And although the ingratitude of the world be cause enough for my
silence, yet the uprightness of my heart would not permit me to conceal those
things, notwithstanding the malevolent and ungrateful. Beside also the
following reason moved me, because there are some ambitious men, who falsely
boast of the knowledge of diverse of my secrets; wherefore some have been moved
to think that mine are not mine own, but the works and writings of others; by
which means I have been deprived of my due praise, being attributed to another.
And this I have often found, that one or other having by entreaties obtained a
secret from me, have afterward through ostentation ascribed it to themselves.

There are others also who fear not to reproach me, and my writings, as though
they were trifles, not attaining their desired end, who (rather then I who have
written plain enough) are themselves to be blamed, for being ignorant how to
work. Such and other things might deter me, but I would not omit the publishing
of these writings for those men's sake who are pious and honest. Wherefore I
openly affirm, that these things published by me are not only no trifles, but
most true, and also my own and not the invention of another; And I call him a
liar, who shall boast himself the Author without any of my help. But of these
enough! Yet I would have the Reader know, that for the meannesse of the style,
I am not like many writers, who more look after the flourish of words then the
thing it self; I rather seek that my neighbor may profit by me. Whereforefor
his better understanding I had rather be prolixe in words, tedious to delicate
ears, then obscure brevity adorned with rhetorical figures. For I know that
the studious in the Art do affect a prolixe, plain, and distinct information
or instruction, rather then a Ciceronian or obscure. And now in the Name of God
I will begin my work, which is most profitable to all, and will faithfully
communicate and publish the same in that manner as it was found by me in my
travel, under the title of The Mineral Work, divided into three parts. In the
first of which shall be taught how out of sand and golden flints, corporeal
golden may be drawn by the help of Spirit of Salt. Which secret although it may
seem small, yet it is that whereby (a knowledge of the true stones and true
sand being obtained) life may be sustained, and also the cost laid out may be
recompensed as shall be proved in the following parts.

In the second part shall be treated of the original and generation of metals,
and also of the destruction of Minerals and Metals.

In the third part shall be demonstrated the possibility of metallicall
transmutation by Nature and Art, and that with diverse reasons: which
demonstration is not (unless I am deceived) performed yet by any, being the
foundation of all metallic Philosophy and the Golden Crown of all my writings.
Which God grant I may perfect to the glory of his Divine name, and the good of
my neighbor.

Amen.
The first Part of the Mineral Work.
A most profitable process of the separation of gold, out of flints, sand,
clay, red and black Talck and other Fossiles, containing very subtle Gold,
thin and spongeous, which otherwise cannot be separated either for its scarcity
or the obstinacy of the Mineral by reason of the great cost to be bestowed;
viz. very easily with the spirit of salt.
KNow first (good Reader) that not all sand, clay, nor all flints, and other
Fossibles do contain gold, but only some, without the knowledge of which this
secret avails nothing. And because the knowledge of these are very necessary
for the Artist, I will show how they are to be proved whether they contain gold
or not, that he labor not in vain, but that it may prove to his commodity or
profit.

The madness of men, searching after uncertain things is wonderful, but
neglecting certain, although exposed to every ones view: For many seeking the
perfection of metals to gain riches, are busied about an uncertain thing,
because of a thousand scarce one obtaines his end: although they may be
perfected and purified, I mean imperfect and impure metals, so that good gold
and silver may thence be extracted, but this Art is given to few, neither is
every one fit to perform the business, because it requires an ingenious and
experienced Artist. But the thing which is certain may be performed with small
cost and labor by any vulgar Chemist, having any knowledge of the Art of
fusion and separation, being an ingenious man, and not seeking things too high
or too gainful at the first trial. Be cautious therefore in the extraction of
the aforesaid stones, for if thou should with the spirit of salt extract
many of them, having no gold, without doubt thou shall find no gold there: And
if thou should extract some contained in them, and if thou be ignorant of the
separation of it by Antimony, thou can thence hope for no profit.

First then, the knowledge, viz. of those stones is necessary afterward of that
separation by Antimony. Impute therefore the fault if thou errest, not to me
but to thine own ignorance, if thou know not to extract the gold, for I have
written clearly, though thou should not know any thing that were omitted. And
I before admonish thee to be cautious in thy work; least thou labor for
naught. For it is certain, and no fiction, that in many places there are found
golden flints, and golden clay, and sand, oft-times abounding with gold. And if
they do not abound with it, yet may they be extracted with profit: but the
flints abounding with it are extracted with greater gain. There are also found
whole Rocks and Mountains of Gold, and great mountains filled with golden sand
and clay, not returning the charge of washing, either for its too great
rarefaction or spungiosity and levity by reason of which it is washed away with
the sand; all which how poor soever, may be extracted by the spirit of salt
with gain, and by antimony fixed and purified In brief, this is such a secret
by which no man can be an impediment to another, as in other mechanical
operations, whereof no man may be ashamed, for God did therefore create gold in
the earth and stones that we might thence extract it to the glory of his name
and the benefit of our neighbor, neither has he forbidden the true and
genuine use of it. I say therefore in truth that I have here described this
Art, how ever despised by the ignorant, yet of greatest moment and almost
incomprehensible. Now consider the thing a little farther, thou shall find
every where in the earth great treasures to be hidden, which only through
ignorance are not discovered. Truly it is known to all, that there is found
golden sand and clay in diverse places, which for the aforesaid reasons are left
unlaboured, but by this our Art may easily be worked upon.

There are found also silver mountains, out of which silver cannot be
extracted for the little weight it yields; there is also found in many places a
certain yellow or reddish earth, or such like clay, which though it contain
store of silver, yet it cannot be extracted with profit by this way, yet
separable, with gain, but not by the spirit of salt which leaves it untoucht,
but by some other thing, every where to be found in plenty, of which for some
reasons we shall speak nothing here.

And this way of separation makes much for the poor mineral of copper, which
with profit cannot be worked upon by the vulgar way, to be separated from the
Copper, afterward by ripening it into a better metal, or turning it into
verdygrease for want of a better art, which business also may well and honestly
more then maintain a family. This way also may the rejected dross of the gold,
silver, and copper be with profit separated. But because I have decreed to
handle here only the extraction of gold out of stones, therefore these
menstrues which are used in the extraction of copper and silver, are deservedly
omitted, and reserved for another place, where sometime they shall be
delivered, to wit, if I shall see that this demonstration shall be accepted in
men's eyes, which more very excellent shall follow. As now I have undertaken a
more excellent matter in love to my country, by which it may appear, that
Germany however reduced to want, is yet rich enough, if it would but at last
look upon its hidden treasures. There is no need to offer a fore-chewed bit,
for demonstration is sufficient, neither will we obtrude a good upon the
negligent; for to the ungrateful the best things are unacceptable. These
therefore being waved in short we will give the demonstration and extraction of
those flints, not doubting but the expert, and experienced, though the sluggish
may not, will thence reap profit, and give God the praise.

What belongs then to the aforesaid stones, out of which gold may be extracted,
thus the matter stands. All kind of flints for the most part have invisible
gold, sometimes visible and invisible, volatile and corporeal together; but
many commonly contain impure iron-like volatile gold, and also mature, and a
few sulphurous and copper-like.

Stones which the Germans call Quartzen and Horstein, containing pure and
corporeal gold, although mixed with silver and copper, may be burnt and ground,
and extracted with Mercury, and if they abound with gold, be purged by flux;
which labors are usual with diggers and dealers in metals, of which I do not
intend to write, because others have heretofore writ of them. But those flints
Quartzen and Hornstein every where almost to be found, containing but a mean
quantity of dispersed iron-like Gold, Marcasite-like, and that either fixed or
volatile, cannot be separated with gain, to wit, neither by Mercury nor by
Flux, wherefore they are neglected by the Miners, either out of ignorance or
for the intolerable costs. But I having tried those base stones, that how
little gold soever they possess; yet may it be separated with great gain, I
would not intermit to publish this knowledge for my Christian neighbors sake,
not doubting but this publication will be profitable to very many. For I am not
ignorant that there are as well learned as unlearned, noble as ignoble, secular
as spiritual, either by war or otherwise exposed to poverty, so that they are
hardly able to maintain their family, etc. and for their sakes and others in
want. I have published this secret, which rightly handled may bring no small
gain yearly, but especially where those stones are plentiful, and also that
spirit of salt, whereof the description is given in the 1 part of the
Philosophical Furnaces, and hereafter there shall be given a better, if nothing
hinder; in the mean while use and enjoy these. And if it happen so that thou
can not rightly perform all things of the aforesaid tractate, blush not to
learn the manual [Operations] which cannot be so exactly described from those
that are experienced, lest you hereafter unprofitably spend your labor and
costs. As for those stones know that very many of them are found in several
places, chiefly in those that are sandy and mountainous, but in some more and
better than in others: for there is seldom seen sand without flints, and
oft-times the sand it self, though very little does not want Gold. But they
are very likely to be found on the shoars of Rivers, where the water washing
away the sand from the flints they are found in great abundance, though they
are not so easily known by their outside, as those which were found clean in
the sand, because they are covered with slime. Wherefore they must be broken
with a hammer, that that may be seen which is in them, what may better appear
if they be burnt, and quenched in cold water. For the stone retaining its
whiteness where it is burnt and quenched does contain nothing; but acquiring a
redness it shows there is something in it, and the more red it is the better
token it is.

N. B. But this is not to be understood of sandy stones, waxing red in some
part in the fire, containing no gold, but of flints out of which by a mutual
percussion fire is brought forth, which the more pure they are the purer gold
do yield. There are also flints out of which fire is forced by percussion being
red in the fire, which contain no gold but Iron; which you may know by that
clear redness before the burning, which being burnt is changed into an obscure
redness, not shining and crude: but the flints containing Gold, being burnt do
acquire fair golden yellowness, or reddish color, as if they were covered
gold, and that through the whole substance if they be broken in pieces. And
these give a pure gold, but those other yield a red extraction like blood,
yielding not gold, but the purest and malleable iron, good in Chymick uses,
(but chiefly for silver to be cemented and exalted) for gold is seldom to be
found in them; that which is well to be observed lest thou draw out iron in
stead of gold, and so loose thy labor.

Also the best stones containing gold, are those which are white and shining,
here and there throughout having in the whole substance green spots and lines,
red, yellow, skie-colored and brown. There are also black flints out of which
fire is forced by percussion, having gold and iron, which may be separated with
profit, yielding sometimes plenty of ironish Gold, which may in like manner, be
separated of which afterward.

They are very good flints also which being burnt retain a whiteness, with
veins green, skie-coloured, and such like, neither are they dis-esteemed which
burnt, have black spots, and not veins.

But the stones (Quartzen and Hornstein) although they in burning are not
altered, yet if there be seen before gold volatile and spiritual, they by
separation of themselves yield gold.

Gross and subtle sand having light and yellow gold, yields in the burning a
skie-coloured smoke, and is exalted in color, viz. brownish: but that has
nothing which is not altered.

Subtle earth, yellow or red, passing through sand or a mountain like a vein
contains also gold, which is for the most part volatile, and not mature, flying
away in reduction, having ingress into silver and other metals, and therefore
for this reason conservable.

For thy better knowledge thou may prove the stones, with white fusile glass,
which thing is treated of in the fourth part of the Philosophical Furnaces,
that thou may not have cause to impute the fault of thy error to me;
therefore I would have thee understand, viz. that all stones contain not gold,
neither in all is it separable by the spirit of salt: they are therefore to be
known before they be applied to the work.

Now follows the preparation of flints, and the extraction of the gold
contained in them, by the spirit of salt.
FIrst the flints being made red hot in the fire, they must be quenched in cold
water, after taken out and cooled, be finely powdered.

N. B. When they are broken in a Mortar the better parts may easily be
separated from the baser; for while they are finely powdered, always the best
part goes into red powder first, the worser part thicker and harder, containing
little or nothing, being left: And if they be coursly powdered and sifted
through a fine sieve the more subtle part like red powder goes through the
sieve, the unuseful part being left in the sieve like white dust, which may be
cast away: and if yet some redness appears, it must again be powdered in a
Mortar, and the better part shall go into a red powder, the baser part being
left in the sieve hard and white which is to be cast away, but you must observe
that not all and every of these flints are thus separable by powdering; for
some being beaten do every where retain the same color, without any
separation of the better parts, which you must finely powder and extract in the
whole substance: But they (viz. those separable) are more easily extracted,
because all the gold contained in one pound for the most part may be gathered
out of 3 or 4 ounces finely powdered and separated in the aforesaid manner; so
that it is not need to extract the whole stone, nor to spend so much spirit of
salt. But sand and clay need not such a preparation, but without a preparation
being made before, are extracted by the affusion of the spirit of salt.

then of the flints as aforesaid prepared and separated 2, 3, 4, 6 pound, to
which being put into a cucurbit of glass whole (undivided) power of the spirit
of Salt to the depth of 3 or 4 fingers breadth, and place it in hot sand or
Balneo, that there the spirit of salt may be hot, and may extract the Gold, and
so let it continue for 5* 6 or more hours space, until the spirit tinged with
a deep redness, can extract no more. And perchance at the first time (though
seldom) it may not be tinged with so great a redness, then must you decant
that same imperfectly tinged spirit, and power to other flints after the manner
expressed, prepared in another cucurbit, and place it with the flints in a
moderate heat for to extract the gold; which done pour it off again, and pour
it to fresh flints, and do so often until it has drawn to it a sufficient
quantity of gold; which afterward thou must keep, until thou have gotten a
greater quantity, and all the Gold may be separated at one time from it, as
afterward shall be said.

Which done pour to the reserved flints in the first cucurbit, a fresh spirit
of salt, and leave that so long in heat, until it be colored, and extract the
gold that is left in the flints, and was not at the first time extracted; which
spirit being afterward decanted, pour it to the flints reserved in the second
and third cucurbit, to extract the residue of the gold which was left at the
first time; and so consequently to the others reserved, until the spirit be
sufficiently colored, and can attract no more; which afterward pour off and
put it to the first, which was reserved. You must also pour a fresh spirit to
the remainder of the extraction for the extracting of all the gold. At length
pour to it also common water to wash away the tinged spirit of gold remaining
in the flints, that none of the Gold may be lost.

And this labor is so long and often to be repeated till there remain neither
flints nor spirits; in the mean while you should cast away the flints
extracted and washed, that the cucurbits may be filled with fresh flints, and
so continue the work; and if there be no more spirit left to continue the
extraction, you may then separate the extracted gold from the spirit, which is
done as follows: but first you must have plenty of glass vessels or retorts
of the best earth, which may retain the spirits; which you may so far fill with
the impregnated spirit, that the spirit in the abstraction run not over, which
done it is to be extracted in a dry Balneo by little and little from the Gold,
which spirit ye may use again in the aforesaid work. And the Gold which is left
in the bottom of the vessels, is to be separated from the vessels with a
crooked iron wier and (kept being very like to red earth) for its use, until
thou have gotten a good quantity, viz. so much as suffices for separation and
purgation (of which afterward) to be made by Antimony.

N. B. But when thou shall extract red Talc with spirit of salt, red or black
granates, Smiris, or Lapis Calaminaris, and other Fossiles, which beside fixed
Gold contain much immature and volatile Gold; you must in the abstraction cast
in a little iron, viz. to the solution, which retains and fixes the gold which
otherwise flies away in fusion. Wherefore those solutions and extractions of
Talc and other things containing volatile gold are better extracted out of iron
Cucurbits by earthen alembicks than out of glass and earthen retorts, because
then that volatile gold does attract only so much thence as is sufficient for
its fixation; which iron is aster easily separated by the Antimony from the
gold, as shall after be taught. And this is to be noted, that not the whole
granate is soluble in the spirit of salt, although it be long left in
digestion, always retaining its former color; wherefore there is a difference
to be made, or a preparation to be learned, requisite for the solution of the
gold contained in them.

And you must extract Talc not with too much or excessive heat, lest its
substance be totally dissolved in the spirit and be a hinderance to the work;
because there is little profit then, for it is therefore appointed, that a
little gold dispersed in a great quantity of Talc may be reduced into a little
compass that it need not that all the quantity of Talc be made fusile, because
it will thereby procure loss. But there is no danger in flints, because the
spirit of salt does not dissolve them as it does T lc, but only extracts gold
from thence, the stony body being l^f^. The lapis calaminaris may also
otherwise be handled in the extraction and fixation than granates, flints and
Talc, because it is almost wholly soluble in the spirit of salt; which work is
not here to be handled, because the extraction and fixation is taught in a p
culiar way in another place, neither do I mean to treat of it here, but only
of the extraction of gold out of flints every where to be found. And this is
the way of extraction of Gold out of flints and sand in heat by the spirit of
salt, to be done in glass vessels. But there is another way too, which is done
in cold without glass vessels which I thought worth the setting down, that in
the aforesaid work you may choose which you please, this or that, and it is
done as follows. We must have in this way store of earthen funnels well
burnt, and not sucking up the spirits; for want of which we must have such as
be of strong glass: there must also be a form with many holes in it to receive
the aforesaid funnels, under which must be placed glass dishes or basins to
receive the strained spirit.

Here follows the work to be performed by Funnels.
FUnnels being put in the holes of the form, you must first put a big piece of
flint in the straighter part of the funnel, to which after put lesser pieces,
and on these again less, viz. as much as serves to fill the straight part of
the Funnel, of which the larger part is after to be filled with powdered flints,
but so that there be left a depth of three or four fingers breadth for the
spirit of salt. By this means those greater pieces in the lower part will
hinder the passage of the fine powder in the affusion of the spirit of salt.

Which being done as it ought pour to the flints contained in the funnels the
spirit of salt, to two or three fingers breadth in deepness which forthwith
shall work on the flints and attract their gold, and then run into the dish or
basin set underneath: and because for the most part at the first time some of
the powder passes through with the spirit, you must so often pour the same
spirit on the flints until there be a stoppage and the spirit come clear;
afterward pour this spirit into the second funnel with flints; and then into
the third, and so consequently until it be strained through the flints of every
funnel; or til the spirit be sufficiently colored, which you must keep until
you have gotten a sufficient quantity to be distilled by retort for the
separating the spirit from the gold. Then that first spirit being strained
through* the flints of each funnel according to order and colored, pour a
fresh spirit to the flints of all the funnels according to order beginning at
the first till you come to the last* until that be sufficiently colored,
which being done pour a fresh spirit of salt to the flints (according to their
order) contained in every funnel. And when you see the strained spirit not to
receive a tincture, it is a sign that all the gold is extracted; and then pour
on no more spirit but common water that it may be strained, and the water will
attract the spirit of-salt lest in the flints that none shall be lost, which
acidish water save by it self to the same and the like uses: which being done,
take out the extracted flints and fill the funnels with fresh as before, viz.
to be extracted; and do this so long as you have flints and spirit. But you
must not pour a spirit not sufficiently tinged into the spirits that are well
colored and impregnated with gold, but keep it a part, and pour it still to
fresh prepared flints according to order contained in diverse funnels, viz.
until it be sufficiently colored, and being colored, separate it by the
glass retorts with the rest, extracting it from the gold by abstraction; and
being abstracted again use it to a new work like the former. And by this means
with 100 pound of spirit of salt may be extracted some thousand pounds of
flints prepared and separate the gold contained in them, which otherwise by
fusion cannot be done. But the chief point consists in the extraction (the
spirit of salt being well and rightly first administered) viz. that the spirit
may not be wasted, whereby many stones may be abstracted with a very little
spirit. But this caution is to be observed in this extraction which is done in
cold, that it requires a stronger spirit of salt than that, which is done in
heat by the cucurbits, or else the business goes on slower: but with a
stronger spirit by this (the cold) way they are extracted sooner and easier
than by that which is done in heat; and neither so dangerous, laborious or
costly: this extraction then, viz. the cold, requires a stronger spirit of salt
(which is worth nothing) than the hot.

And this is that way by which those golden flints, and other golden fossiles
are prepared, and with the spirit of salt are extracted, and by which it is
again separated from them: Now shall follow the manner of purification, viz. of
the Gold left in the Retort.

N. B. The pure gold being extracted out of the flints, not the iron-like,
there needs no great business of purification, for thou may purify it by
fusion with borace, or with the flux made with the equal weight of Nitre and
Tartar: but if the gold extracted out of the flints be mixed with iron, as for
the most part it is, then you must not fuse it with flux, because it is not
thereby purified or rendered malleable Gold, but separate it by lead by which
way it is purged and made malleable. And if such gold have any sulphurous
impurities mixed besides, it is not to be separated with lead, because it is
then partly turned to dross and other impurities by the Iron with loss;
wherefore it is to be purged with three parts of Antimony and separated, by
which means nothing is lost; which is the best way of separation and
purification of Gold; viz. the ferreous, without which it cannot otherwise be
separated without loss.

How impure Gold may be separated and purged by Antimony.
THis work is necessary to be known if you think to have any benefit by the
aforesaid extraction of flints by the spirit of Salt, which without this
separation and reduction is of no moment: and what profit I pray is there by
the extraction of immature Gold which by the common way cannot be purged,
requiring the industry of the Artist in fusion, whereby it may be separated
from its sulphurous faeces and fixed? For it is easy to conjecture, that such
spiritual and volatile gold mixed with Iron, by that common flux is not
reducible into a body, but rather into dross: for experience testifies that
gold dissolved with the spirit of salt* and also iron, or any other sulphurous
thing, the spirit of salt being abstracted cannot be reduced whole by the
^ulgar flux made of Nitre and Tartar, going into dross: which if it happen to
corporeal, pure and fixed gold, how shall it be otherwise with that which is
incorporeall, unclean and volatile? for the Gold being ironish commonly, which
is extracted out of stones, and iron having great affinity with gold (by reason
of which being nearly united, it is difficulty separated, so that it easier
goes with iron into dross than parted from it) you must of necessity make a
flux not only attracting that impure gold, but also purifying and cleansing it;
that which antimony alone does, which with its combustible fusible Sulphur
works upon that ferreous Gold, or iron easily mixed: But by its Mercury it
attracteth the pure corporeal gold, and cleanses it, and separates it from
all dross without any loss: wherefore there cannot be a better flux, but
requiring industry, or an ingenious separation of the Antimony from the gold,
without wasting the gold; which is done as follows.

And first your ferreous gold, that is left in the abstraction of the spirit of
salt, must be finely powdered in iron retors or pots, and mingled with it two
or three parts of Antimony powdered, and mixed in a very strong crucible filled
and covered, and then fused in our fourth furnace, until that flow like water;
which soon appearing pour them together in a heated Cone, smeered within with
wax, and when they be cold separate from the dross the Regulus (having most of
the gold) with a hammer, and keep it by it self. Which done you must again
melt the drossie Antimony (as yet containing much gold) that was left, in the
crucible, and add to it a little filing of iron, mixing them with a crooked
wier, and that antimoniall combustible sulphnr will be mortified by addiug iron
and will yield a Regulus containing the rest of the gold, which as a regard is
had to the quantity of iron added, will be more or less, and for the most part
will answer weight to the weight of iron; then cast the mass (well flowing)
into a Cone heated and smeered on the inside with wax, which being cold
separate again the Regulus from the dross with a hammer, which also is to be
kept by it self; melt the dross again as before, and precipitate it with iron,
and extract the Regulus thence, which keep by its self, for it contains gold
and silver mixed. For the best gold is precipitated the first time, but
afterward the baser sort, and at last only silver. Wherefore every Regulus is
to be kept by it self, that the purest gold may be a part, and the silvered
gold by it self.

N. B. And if the antimony by the the addition of iron do loose its
fusibility, and therefore can yield no Regulus, it is required that you at every
time when precipitation is made, by adding iron, that you do also cast in some
Misy, to make the mass to melt in the crucible and precipitate the Regulus. All
the gold and silver being reduced into three or four Regulus's you must keep
the drossie parts by themselves that were left, of which we shall speak
hereafter.

Now follows the way of separating gold silver from Antimony.
THe aforesaid antimoniall Regulus's may many ways be purged, and first by
help of bellows on a plain earthen test, as the custom is with Goldsmiths when
they make gold fusile by antimony, which labor is tedious and dangerous; which
cannot be done often without the loss of health, nor in great quantity:
wherefore when a better way is known it is a folly to do it so. The Regulus's
also may be purified by lead on a test, which work may be done in a great
quantity, but it requires abundance of coals and lead, where the antimony
cannot be preserved: but it may be done with gain, and is to be preferred
before the former ways: Thou may if thou please calcine the aforesaid
Regulus's and then fuse them; which way gold and silver may easily be drawn
out. Thou may also fuse them in a crucible, and by the addition of some salts
separate the antimony from the gold and silver, turning the antimony into
dross, which being separated those are found purified and mallcable, which
though it be the easiest way, it is yet also very dangerous, for the salts
often, if you do not warily proceed do spoil much gold and and silver, and
sometimes leave gold immalleable, and so double the pains.

But he who knows how to do this by Nitre only, he may with great gain and in
a short time purify a great quantity of the aforesaid Regulus's with out loss
of gold, silver, or antimony. There are also other means for the doing of it
which to relate were tedious and indeed impossible. Wherefore I will set
down, the best of all, most profitable in the separations of great quantities
of Regulus's. Where first is required some peculiar little Furnace with a fire
almost like to that in our first part of Philosophical Furnaces, built for the
subliming of flowers; it wants indeed a grate, but it has little vents for to
make the coals burn that thy antimony separated from the gold may be sublimated
or elevated into sublimatory vessels. Which being rightly built and heated, let
so much of the Regulus be cast in with a spoon as the fire can bear, which
wilquickly melt and elevated the air being attracted by the vents, without any
trouble: which being sublimed you may cast in more, if you have more until all
the Regulus be separated and sublimated from the gold and silver, which are
left in the fire pure and malleable; the furnace being cold you may take out
the flowers, and keep them (of which afterward) for uses, which way you may
not only separate a great number of Regulus's from gold and silver in a small
time, but also keep all the antimony which may many ways be used in Alchymy and
Medicine with great profit. Which sure is an excellent knowledge, for not only
hereby may any one get abundantly without wronging his neighbor, but also
help many sick people, viz. by that excellent medicine made of the flowers:
which is a special gift of God, for which we owe immortal thanks. And this is
of all others that I know the best way of separation of gold from antimony,
which is not only done in great quantity, in a short time, and with small
charge, but also without loss of the antimony.

Here follows the use of Antimoniall Flowers.
FIrst you may take the whitest of the Flowers out of the lower hole and keep
them for a Universal Medicine; but reduce the rest (being less pure) into
Regulus by the salt of Tartar, for diverse uses; as shall be said afterward; or
you may mingle them with an equal weight of common sulphur, or antimony, which
being mixed in a covered crucible, melt them, and they will yield an antimony
like to a natural, good to purify gold: or thou may mingle themwith other
metals, or minerals that by this means they may be made beter; or thou may
use them in Surgery, for they of all sliptick plasters make the best. In
brief the aforesaid flowers may many ways be used with good gain and success.

The aforesaid antimoniall dross may also be reduced into flowers and used in
the same manner; which indeed are endowed with as excellent properties, as they
which are made out of Regulus's; because inthat fusion and separation of gold
extracted out of flints and talc; the gold only that was fixed and mature was
separated from the Regulus's; (the immature and volatile being left in the
dross) and elevated with the flowers: it follows thence that these are better
as well in medicine as in the transmutation of metals.

Or if thou will, add to the antimony, (as aforesaid used) old iron to reduce
it in a furnace, and take the Regulus, having gold and silver, which may
therefore be used in other operations of Chymistery, where there is need of
Regulus as we may show hereafter. But the dross does yield a Regulus, viz. in a
very strong fire, and a furnace with a peculiar separatory by abstraction,
which although it contain not gold, yet it may be used not without gain, as if
it be mingled with Tin in fusion, it procures to it a hardness and sound,
useful for fashioning diverse sort of household stuff, which is not so easily
darkened as the common Tin, or if thou will not, thou may make weights of it.

Hitherto we have treated of the extraction of gold out of flints, and of its
purification by antimony; now we will teach you how to use the rest of the
antimony as well in the perfection of base metals as in medicine, as well for
the preserving of Health as the curing of Diseases.

But seeing we have made mention of an Universal Medicine, to he made out of
antimony aforesaid, I would not have thee think that that is such as can take
away all distempers, in general, without distinction, which virtue is only
ascribed to the Philosophers Stone, but not by me to this medicine; to which I
attribute no more then I have tried: But this in truth I dare affirm, that
there is besides the stone scarce any comparable to it; for it does not only
preserve the body from diverse diseases, but also happily frees it from the
present, so that it may deservedly be termed a Universal Medicine.

The preparation follows.
of the flowers purified from the dross a pound, viz. of Antimony, by which
the extracted gold was purified, which for the most part are of a yellow color
having gold volatile and immature: in defect of which take the flowers made out
of the golden Regulus's being for the most part white, to which power in a
glass Phiall strong and long necked, of spirit of wine tartarised three or
four pound, mingle and stir them well together, and put on it another crooked
pipe (within which let there be some ounces of quicksilver as is described in
the fifth Part of our Philosophical Furnaces) and make strong the joints with
a bullocks bladder thrice folded, made wet, which dried, place the glass in
Balneum, and give fire by degrees that the spirit of wine with antimony may
digest, in which leave it for 24 hours space, and so soon as the fire is out,
take out the glass, when it is cold, pour off the spirit tinged red from the
flowers, and pour on fresh; and place it as before in Balneum to digest 24
hours space, till it be red, and do this the third time, or so often till the
spirit be no more colored, for then no more is to be poured on, and that which
is colored is to be filtred with Cap-paper. The rest of the flowers after the
extraction, as not requisite to this business, are to be either kept by
themselves or thrown away. But the tinged spirit is to be abstracted out of a
glass cucurbit by an alembick to the half, from the tincture, which distilled
spirit may again be used in the same work: but the tincture left in the
cucurbit is the medicine, of which mention has been made.

Now mention being made also of tartarised spirit of wine, that I may satisfy
the doubtful concerning that I will here also give its description which is as
follows.

of tartar 20 or 30 pound, put it in a large coated retort, and place it in
sand, and distill the spirit off with a soft heat.

N. B. This work may better and sooner be performed by that instrument of our
second Furnace, and because it requires great and large receivers as being very
penetrative, thou may first apply a tin or copper serpent to the neck of the
retort instead of a receiver, which is placed in a tub filled with cold water,
that the spirits being thereby cooled may be retained which afterward you must
abstract to the half out of a glass cucurbit by an alembick: for the other
half with black oil is unprofitable in this work, and therefore to be taken
away. After that mingle the more subtle part distilled with half of the Caput
Mortuum of the aforesaid spirit calcined to a whiteness, and abstract it half
again in a gentle Balneum out of a glass cucurbit by an alembick, the joints
whereof are every where to be well closed, and the calcined Tartar shall
receive with it self the stench together with the phlegm, only the purer part
of the spirit and more subtle distilling forth, which is again to be mingled
with the other half of the Tartar calcined to a whiteness, and to be
rectified by another alembick, the Caput Mortuum may again be calcined to take
away the fetidnesse, that it may be used again. And this is that tartarised
spirit of wine, with which the aforesaid tincture and essence is extracted, and
truly not only this, but of all other metals, which no other can do. And if it
were lawful, I would write something more of its wonderful force and virtue,
which it has in purifying baser metals, with which it has a great affinity;
for it can separate the pure from the impure, of which more in another place.
But when it is to be used in mending of metals, it needs not so much
rectification, as is required in the extraction of metallic medicines; where
you may draw it in plenty out of the dry lees of wine. But there is also
another tartarised spirit of wine, which may also be used in this same work,
which is made after the following way, Dissolve in a pound of the spirit of
wine six ounces of crystal of Tartar; which solution use in the aforesaid
extraction in the same manner.

An Admonition.
I Desire thee not to be offended at the plainness of the preparation, viz. of
this medicine, made out of a very mean thing, and without much acuteness of
understanding, say not to thy self, if this be true, that such a famous and
excellent medicine can be gotten by such easy means, what need we so many
various decoctions both precious and nauseous be prepared; why is not this
substituted in their places? Certainly this should rather be used. But who is
so audacious as to dare to displease the multitude defending those kinds of
decoction? Surely none; and there are few who are able to turn from their old
custom. An ancient custom therefore whatsoever need it has of being amended,
yet prevails. Would to God the time would come when Physicians would practice
not out of avarice, but out of charity which we owe to our neighbor, which is
desired by, and full of comfort to the sick.

But for the virtue of so great a medicine, I shall open to those that are
younger and less skilful than my self, not it to those who in years and
learning do go before me, but let every man enjoy his own judgment.

Of the virtues of this Medicine.
THis antimoniall tincture does above all other medicines evacuate vicious
humors, and insensibly purges impure blood; opens any obstructions of the
liver, Spleen, Reins, and the other vessels, attracting to it all malignities,
and leaving no impurities behind it. And because it cleanses the blood it
cures the Leprosy, French pox, and itch, and other diseases proceeding from
the impurity of the blood. By its penetrative and attenuative virtue, it
resolves all tartareous humors and evacuateth them, viz. which ing^nder the
gout, the Stone of the Bladder and Reins; but not the Stone perfectly
coagulated, only it mitigateth its pain, and hinders its increase; but being
not hardened or coagulated it attracteth and evacuateth it totally and
fundamentally out of all parts, it takes away also all Fevers and other
diseases coming from the superfluity of humors. It gently evacuateth the
water between the skin, by siege and urine. In brief it strengthens and purges
the principal parts, and preserves them from all preternaturall accidents. It
is a most excellent preservative in the time of Pestilence, and other
contagious diseases; and of them being caught it is a most absolute remedy,
expelling the disease suddenly from the heart and evacuating it. In few words;
it is of all others a most excellent Universal Medicine, very profitable to
both old and young, and also very safe; but warily to be ministered by reason of
its strength with which it is endued, which is most powerful, for it is as a
great fire which extinguisheth the lesser. Truly a better Medicine cannot be
desired than this which is extracted of a very mean thing, in a short space of
time, and with very small cost and pains. I ingenuously confess I never saw
its like, which I doubt not to be the best in the world. Wherefore then do we
seek any other but this, viz. which excels in those things which are desired
from the real medicine? But as it is most excellent, yet I am certain, that
many deluded people will be offended at it, being prepared out of Antimony, a
mean and despised thing, and after a plain way. But it is no matter, For the
world will be deceived, looking after gay things, disrespecting and despising
mean things; when all good things, yea even when God himself does rejoice in
simplicity, for which by wicked and proud men he is not sought unto. But this
is the effect of sin by which man is so blinded, that though he know not
good, when set before his eyes, yet he is studious of evil.

Of the use and dose of this Medicine.
SEEing of all Medicines it is the most powerful; it had need be warily used,
for a smaller dose is always safer then a greater; which therefore may after
be given; that which is to be observed in all diseases of young and old. To
children of 2, 3, 4, or 6 months old, against the Worms, Scabs, Fevers and
Epilepsie, you need not give above half a drop with a proper vehicle, which you
may repeat three or four times a day: it kills the Worms, it emptyeth the
stomach of evil humors; it refreshes them, and preserves them from
scabbinesse; and because it evacuateth evil and corrupt humors, it preserves
them from the small pox and measels, viz. if it be used every month, but to
children of 1, 2, or 3 years old you may give a drop, and to children of 4 or
5 years old a drop and a half: to young people between 15 and 24 years may be
given 2, 3, or 4 drops. To stronger bodies from 25 to 50 years 4, 5, 6, or 7
drops. But the dose must be greater or less with a regard had to the sickness
of the patient. And in the Stone and Gout may be daily administered in some
drops of wine or beer, viz. in the morning fasting, unless the patient be very
weak; for then you may give it twice or thrice in a day, and continue this till
the cure be perfected; where is to be observed that he must keep a temperate
diet.

In the Leprosy, French Pox, and Scurvy, every morning may a dose be given and
the disease shall totally be rooted out. Otherwise, viz. the strength being
too much wasted and weakened, you may give only every other day, viz. so long
as shall be need.

In the Epilepsie it may be given daily; and also in the Dropsy. In all
Fevers two or three hours before the fit. In the Plague it is to be given
presently, and every day to be repeated: but for a preservative to be drunk
every week once. In all other internal affects it must be given daily, until
the declining of the disease; but afterward by little and little the medicine
is to be used till the disease be fully cured.

In external, as in fresh wounds by a blow, thrust, or shot; broken bones,
etc. every day once; with a necessary extrinsecall application of a plaster.
In old Fistula's and Cancers, it may be used once every day intrinsecally, and
extrinsecally, the place affected may be cleansed with Mineral ointments, For
by this means every inveterate evil how desperate soever, is thoroughly cured,
and pleasantly without all pain.

But although this be most precious of all Medicines, yet there is a menstruum,
not corrosive, with which not only more easily than with the spirit of wine
tartarised, a Universal Medicine may be extracted out of Antimony and endued
with better then the aforesaid virtues so that for the charge of one royal, in
three days time, so much may be gotten as may serve to cure some thousands of
men, but also all vegetables, animals, and minerals and metals are radically
dissolved and reduced into their first matter: by which means not only very
great poisons are changed into most wholesome medicines; but also bitter things
are deprived of their bitterness: for by it things are so corrected, that they
do no more provoke stool and vomit, viz. which are very vehement Catharticks
(by Nature) being changed into most excellent restoratives. Also fetid things
being corrected by it do acquire a sweet odor. And it does not only (which
seems a wonder) dissolve vegetables, animalls, and minerals with those things
which come of them, but also the very Glasses; wherefore you must always choose
the strongest glasses for digestion and solution, or in the defect of such the
weaker are to be changed every 6 hours. And yet it is not at all altered by
those things that it does reduce and turn into their first matter medicinal,
neither in virtue nor color; for it always keeps the middle place between
pure and impure, of which this falls to the bottom, but that swims on the top
of the menstruum, which may again be used. In brief its virtues in preparing
medicines cannot be enough praised. But it may be compared with the
Mercuriall water of Basilus Valentinus; and the Alcahest of Paracelsus and
Helmont, which I judge to be the Fire of the Ma^cabe^s turned into a thick
water underground. It is a perpetual fire but not always burning visibly; it
is a water permament not wetting the hands, the Soap of the Wise, the
Philosophers Azoth, and the Royall-bath.

Which Menstrue though I have known some years, and have often used it with
metallicks, and by it have found out many secrets, yet I never thought of its
use in Physic, until being asked of one who was a great student of Helmont,
whether I knew the preparation of the liquor Alcahast of Paracelsus; and naming
some of the virtues of this liquor in preparing Medicines; I began to be think
my self, and I observed that it was my secret Balneum that purifies minerals.
Wherefore I presently made trial with vegetables and animals (for I knew the
virtues thereof in metallicks) and I found wonderful and astonishing things in
it which before were incredible to me. I affirm and confess therefore
sincerely, that all and every the invented medicines published by others and my
self how rare and costly soever, are most mean things in my estimation. For
this Universal Key was wanting to us. For our vegetables and minerals hour by
art macerated cannot be perfectly resolved, and therefore we hitherto have had
but part of their virtues. But now we need not much art, labor and cost to
reduce a whole body without corrosives, into the first matter, like in shape to
some clear and excellent water, of its own accord casting forth its superfluous
terrestreity, and becoming a most wholesome medicine, consisting of the three
purest principles; that which cannot be done without this menstruum. For what
else could Physicians extract out of herbs than syrups, Electuaries, Conserves
and Waters? with which preparations they were not amended but only qualified
with the addition of Sugar or Honey; because there is no separation made of the
pure from the impure or good from bad. For all are left mixed together in the
Electuaries and Conserves, but in the syrups and waters distilled there is only
some part. Extracts indeed by the spirit of wine are not to be disesteemed if
rightly prepared, but they are no better than their simples; and besides want
that which the spirit of wine cannotdraw out, which remainder though being
calcined for the drawing out the salt, which is mingled with the extract yet
that is not of much moment, for fire destroys the virtue of herbs, so that
fixed salts, as crystallised, do perform nothing in medicine, those excepted
which without combustion are made out of the juice of herbs, of which in the
third part of our furnaces Philosophical. But none dares extract the most
strange or efficacious sort of herbs for medicine, because they in preparation
are not corrected or amended.

But by this means the most strong herbs, which without this preparation are
poisons, are matured and purified by the liquor Alcahest, so that they may
safely be taken against most grievous diseases. For God did not create these
herbs in vain, as some think, which he purposely created that his wonderful
works might appear, and that it is possible to take away the curse from them by
a man, being freed from the malediction by the regeneration through Christ. See
Opium, Mandrake, Henbane, Hemlock and other stupifying things, how deadly they
are being cautiously used? which corrected by this Menstrue become most safe
and excellent medicines. How dangerous is spurge, scamony, hellebor, gambugium
and other strong purgers (being administered unwarily) no man is ignorant: all
which are by this way corrected, and changed into most wholesome medicaments.
Who I pray dares eat wolfesbane, and poisonous toad-stooles and other venomous
vegetables? which are all so corrected by the liquor Alkahest as that not only
they are not poisonous, but are also turned into most safe and wholesome
medicines of many diseases, Nux vomica, Levant berries, and other things that
disturb the brain are by this means made wholesome, also poisonous Animals, as
Spiders, Toads, serpents, vipers, etc. are by it corrected, as that not only
they are not poisonous but do resist and expel poison.

N. B. Consider the spiders signed with the cross, who change their skin every
month and renew themselves, which the serpents and halcyon do but once in a
year. How great may the virtue of worms earthy and crude, etc. in resolving
tartareous humors and the French disease is, many know, what then will they do
being corrected with this Menstrue? The Cantharides and Millipedes are also so
corrected that they may more safely be used in provoking urine. And if that
most venomous Basilisk, of which there are so man fables, whose sight only kills
men (which according to the letter is false) could be had, he might be changed
into medicine by the liquor Alkahest; as that mineral Basilisk, Gunpowder may
be, which in a moment kills innumerable men; also Arsenick, Orpiment, Kobolt and
the like; so that they be deprived of their malignity and be reduced into very
excellent medicines. In brief, its excellent virtues which it manifests in
correcting of venomous simples cannot be sufficiently described. Wherefore its
worth our pains to search it with all our power, that we may prepare admirable
medicines, that the sick may not for the future be so vexed with those tedious
and bitter cups. Truly I cannot enough admire its great virtues which have been
hid so long. It is not a corrosive thing and yet dissolves every thing, but
some things sooner then others. It changes and amendeth their natural virtues;
wherefore it may b^ the comfort of Spagirists, having a long time sought for
rare medicines, viz. being that by which vegetables are separated and
corrected, and also animals and minerals. Wherefore al conscientious Physicians
may have commended to them the preparation of this universal menstrue by the
help whereof to prepare their medicines; of which the orginal and preparation
is vile, but its virtues most efficacious, the finding out and uses abstruse.
Wherefore it is not obtained, but from God from whom proceeds every good gift.
Do not think then that gluttony and drunkenness, idleness, pride and lying,
the contempt of thy neighbor, malice, avarice with an impious life, to be the
means by which it is to be obtained, for it is only the gift of the merciful
God, viz. this menstrue, the gate and key of which is only divine mercy. But
that thou may know what is to be determined concerning medicines prepared out
of poisonous simples, I will in brief expound that by example: for all
vegetables, animals, and minerals, called poisons, making war with humane
nature being intrinsecally used, and therefore not undeservedly shunnd of al,
are like some powerful unvanquishable enemy, with all his power seeking the
oppression and destruction of his contrary, who being checked by a mediator of
no less strength, and reconciled with his contrary, does no more (being unable
before the reconciliation to resi^ h s powerful enemies) fear the contrariety
of his enemy, which now is made his friend bringing aid for the exstirpating
and vanquishing of all such like (otherwise) invincible enemies. Even so is it
with venomous vegetables, animals and minerals, destructive to humane nature:
which by the liquor Alkahest (a checker and reconciler) are so corrected and
reduced, that they hurt not, being deprived of their malignity and made friends
with men: whereby they are not longer poisonous enemies but very safe and
wholesome remedies, agreeing to humane nature overcoming and expelling other
the like enemies otherwise poisonous, and invincible, for by bow much the more
enemy before reconciliation it was, by so much the more help is brought by it,
the reconciliation being made. There is not the like found in nature; which can
so suddenly correct poisons, and reduce them into their first matter and bring
them into very wholesome essences. Let religious Physicians then that can, get
this. And so I end this declaration (not without cause set down) which will
move those hearts which are not as yet hardened. This certainly is a true
Philosophical correction, with which that which is malign is turned into a
wholesome substance. What profits that correction, I pray, which is made by the
admixtion ofother things, as in the mixture of Catharticks and cordials? Truly
nothing, neither can the cordials do any thing but debilitate the Catharticks;
for nature is not at once able to expel a purging poison, and attract a thing
confortative and corroborative: For a purge being given, forthwith that shows
its strength in the body, whose malignity nature resisting desires to expel
it; before that it can attract the confortative; wherefore that friend is
expelled together with the disease. The same happens in the mixture of sugar,
honey, and other sweet things with bitter, sharp, and tart, etc. whose
unpleasantness is not corrected by sweet things, but only dulled, thereby
acquiring another smell and taste, without any other essential alteration. Which
correction is like to that, which is made in Taverns amending the air with
sweet fumes, which before was infected with the spittings, spuings, and stinks
of rustic drunkards, which is to rusticks, an excellent corrrection,
attracting the ill as well as the good aromatic odor being by drunkenness
deprived of their judgment, but not so to sober men enjoying the use of
understanding^, to whom that seems a rustic correction. In this manner (not to
be commended) are at this day simples corrected. But a true and Philosophical
correction is done by it self without the addition of other things, by benefit
of the fire only as well actual as potentially moist, by ripening, mending and
separating the malignity; which is done by the liquor Alkahest, as it is called
by Paracelsus and Helmont.

But whether this my liquor be the same Alkahest of Paracelsus and Helmont, it
matters not if it perform the same things.

Fire and a fiery virtue may do much, but not by burning and destroying, but by
maturation and nutrition; and feeding and moistening. Of which moist fire see
Artephiuus, Bernhardus, Basilius, Paracelsus, etc. for maturation is not done
with cold things but hot, promoting germination. And what ever nature has left
imperfect in the vegetable kingdom, mineral and animal, viz. accidentally;
that may be amended by art with the liquor Alkahest, which is the best way of
correction, until by benefit of art and the help of nature some better thing
be found out, etc.

And these are the virtues of that wonderful liquor Alkahest which is made use
of in the preparation of medicines: And because it is said before that it shows
its virtues on metallicks also, I could not conceal them from the studious.
But all its virtues shall not here be related, for it is endued with so many
that no mortal is able to number them. As for me, although by divine favor, and
the instruction of the excellent man Paracelsus (excellently in a certain
place, but observed in few words; describing it, speaking of it briefly, but
very plainly and clearly naming it) I did obtain the knowledge thereof which
afterward daily I did more and more increase, so that I could hardly believe
that any ever had spent so much money and pains in the searching of its
virtues, for the trying of metals: yet I must needs confess although happily I
have made more trial therein than any other; that many of its virtues are as
yet unknown to me* Seeing then that its virtues and strength cannot all be
tried by any man by reason of his short life, although searching a hundred
years; and that by our merciful father only to a few, and but part of the
knowledge of its wonderful and incredible force, is granted, to the glory of
his divine name, in favor of the poor sick, which none how learned soever, with
his ambitious learning and craft could ever obtain. Therefore some excellent
gifts being given from the father of lights the omnipotent God, to some of his
children, gratis and out of mere mercy, viz. for some causes, I easily believe,
that it is not his will that it shall long be kept close, but be revealed to
the world to the glory of his name, and the benefit of our poor neighbor.
Wherefore I could not longer hold my peace, hiding my talent which I received
gratis though small, but communicate it gratis to my neighbor; but so that the
divine mystery may not be gotten by those ungodly abusers, but only by the
worthy through divine favor. I affirm therefore expressly that in whole nature
such a thing may not be found, for not only by its help all animals,
vegetables, and minerals may be reduced into very excellent and safe medicines;
but also be brought into the first matter, minerals and metals may be purified,
washed and fixed, and so changed into better bodies. That which is worthy
admiration, that in so vile and mean a subject should ly hid so great virtues,
by which alone without any other art, may be acquired riches and honors, and
lost health. Then which thing what does mortal man more need in his misery,
besides the divine word, the comfort of the soul, the for necessary
sustentation of life, soundness of body and honest report before God and men?
All these things may be had with this subject, so that one need not to involve
himself into any other troublesome art or vanity of this world, having this
secret, whereby all necessaries may in abundance be proccured: of which gift
that this unclean world is unworthy, I do affirm sincerely, because it swells
with ambition and avarice; for which we are not able to give God the donor
sufficient thanks in our whole life, wherefore I would have all what state or
order soever earnestly admonished, that they do not use this gift from heaven
to the destruction of their souls, but in thankfulness to him that gave it, and
every way to the good of their Christian neighbor.

Now follow the virtues which it manifests in metallicks.
FIrst it, viz. the Philosophical menstrue, does radically dissolve all
minerals and metals without noise, and reduces them into very safe and
wholesome medicines. Out of gold it makes potable gold; out of silver potable
silver, and so consequently of other metals potable metals; so that it may well
be called the universal Mercury.

Secondly this secret menstrue purges, washes and transmuteth minerals, and
metals to a more noble species, wherefore it may well be called Sapo Sapientum,
by which the saying of the Philosophers is confirmed: Ignis and Azoth abluunt
Latonem.

Thirdly, by it all minerals and metals are matured and fixed, so as that
afterward immature gold or silver incorporated with it, may by cupellation be
drawn out with gain; wherefore it is deservedly compared to Hermes seal.

Fourthly, it makes metals volatile and radically conjoynes them that they
abide together, and one act on the other in the fire; it distroyes and revivs,
kills and renews, wherefore it is compared to the Phoenix.

Fifthly, it separates metals without any loss and that speedily: but after
another manner then corrosives, so that each of them may be had by themselves.
For example, being about to separate gold, silver, copper, iron, tin, lead
mixed; one or two three or four of them mixed that they may appear each by
themselves, without the loss of any, you need not cupellate the mixture with
tin, which way only gold and silver are gotten out with the loss of all the
rest: but by this way they are all preserved, where by turns one after another
they are extracted wonderfully and swiftly, in half an hours time by this
sharp vinegar of the Philosophers, etc.

Sixthly, By it metals may suddenly be mortified and reduced into transparent
glass, irreducible and like Amausa, but reserving the propriety and nature of
every metal: which in the reduction of gold, do give perfect silver: whereby is
confirmed that saying of the Philosophers; the corruption of one thing is the
generation of another, and that of Paracelsus: Ex aliquo fiat nihilum, and ex
nihilo aliquid. But this incombustible water or permanent water shows the truth
of the Philosophers writings generally mentioning it; in it the solution,
putrefaction, distillation, sublimation, circulation, ascension, descension,
cohobation, receration, calcination, coagulation, fixation and fermentation,
etc. in their work to be done at one time and one way: in which only operation
all the colors appear of which the Philosopherrs make mention; As the head of
the crow, virgins milk, dragons blood, peacocks tails, green and red lion,
etc. There is also by it demonstrated the truth (by the liquor Alkahest) of
that Hermetical saying, That which is above, is as that which is beneath, etc.
and many other things are performed by its help, as making that secret
Sandivogian Chalybs; also that long sought for oil of Talc.

So far (Courteous Reader) has come my experience; neither doubt I but by it
to obtain that universal Salamander which lives in the fire.

These things which I write are true and no fallacies. And though this secret
be incredible to the ignorant for the wonderful virtues it shows in the
preparation of medicines, I would willingly publish it to the world for public
good, but on consideration I held it not meet to communicate it for certain
causes. But only lest the knowledge of it should perish, and that the true (and
almost extinct) medicine for the curing of diseases vulgarly incurable might
flourish, I have revealed this secret menstruum to two friends, viz. its
preparation and use.

But do thou not think because I write of these high things, that I do intend
to make common the secret to all in general; not so, but I endeavor to confirm
him that seeks, and give him occasion to search this secret deeper; which
being found he shall not only find the truth of my words, but he shall daily
by exercise obtain far greater things then these.

And because I have never aspired after vain riches and honors, nor never
desire them; I might well be persuaded, to leave to others as yet not hating
the wicked world, my troublesome labors; because in this my painful age such
tedious labors are very burdensome, besides Philosophy has pointed me another
way, so that what I am able I have determined to abstain from these vanities,
and to seek a perpetual good, the life of rest, but my counsel shall not be
wanting to those that seek it: for besides moved with the former reasons, also
seeing innumerable many vain Philosophers, as well learned as unlearned,
uncessantly working, and losing rheir time and labor, and at last despairing,
are persuaded that there is no truth in the Philosophers writings but to be all
filled with lies and d^cits; whence royal Chemistry is disgraced.

But seeing and marking the infallible truth of ancient writings, suffering
injury by unskilful Zoilus's; I could not but defend their worth and vindicate
them from injuries, viz. in a few words demonstrating the possibility of
metallical transmutation. But I do not affirm that by the art which I have
many years exercised and the possibility of which I defend I have gotten much
wealth; because hitherto I could not make trial but in small quantity for
finding out the possibility without any gain, and only particularly; for I
have never tried any thing in the universal work, reserving it to a more
convenient time and place. But I will not deny such a universal medicine:
because I have seen the principles of it, and foundations of the art, wherefore
household cares being removed, I intend to make trial of it. For who will longer
doubt of the possibility of it being proved by most excellent men, yea Kings
and Princes? which godly and honest men have not written for gain; some of
whom though they lived with Ethnicks, yet were they not Heathens, who had more
knowledge of Christ by the light of nature then those foolish detractors of
Christian truth, as they appear to be by their writings. But thou will urge
that if those things were true which they write, then it might be found in
them: but it is not, because all and every one miss of it in their practice, so
that their time, labor and charges are spent in vain. I answer, Their writings
are not to be understood according to the letter, but according to the hidden
sense, according to which they have written the naked truth which to the
illuminated is conspicuous.

And this menstruum suffices to defend the writings of the Philosophers
without the metallic transmutations* so that I verily believe the time to be
near, when the omnipotent God before he judge the world in fire, will show his
omnipotency to the nations by the revelation of the wonderful and incredible
things of nature; of which, transmutation of metals is not the least, which in
the third part of this mineral work I shall deliver to the last age (being
acceptable to God) to the profit of my neighbor, and for demonstration sake.
Wherefore I now pass over such things, with a firm hope, that this faithful
admonition shall be received as an undoubted and infallible truth.

How the aforesaid Regulus, of the flowerss and dross of Antimony, is to be
used in the bettering of course metals, shall be shown, that art may not be
abused.
THe Antimonial Regulus a radical metallic humor may help to perform wonderful
things, for being reduced to a water without a corrosive, it resolves all
metals, cleanses, washes and purifieth them, and turns them into a better
species, so that particularly not a small gain may be from thence received. But
how it may be redueed into water, and how by its help metals may be resolved,
volatized and again fixed, has been demonstrated by Artephius, Basilius and
Paracelsus; wherefore we need not here repeat their writings, but refer the
readers to their works.

But not only the Regulus, but also all Antimony may many ways be used in the
separation of metals, viz. For the extraction of hidden gold, which cannot be
done without Antimony; as shall appear by the following example. When you find
a marcasit or other ironish fossile, that will not yield to the trial by lead,
add to it three parts of Antimony, and being well mixed, melt them in a covered
crucible, and being melted power it into a cone; and when all is cold, separate
the Regulus, which purge again by fire as before, and thou shall find gold
contained in the aforesaid fossile: And if it be endued with more plenty of
gold, for it is not all drawn out at one time, viz. with the first Regulus,
another Regulus is to be melted by adding more iron and saltpeter which is
also of a nature near to Sol. And if these marcasit fossiles are not ferreous,
you must in the first fusion, add iron and nitre to them, or else they yield
no Regulus. By the adding more scals, of iron more Regulus is made, and for the
same use as that is of which above in the fusion and separation of extracted
gold; weights also may be made out of the dross. And thus are lapis
calaminaris, marcasit, kobolt, zinck, talc, and other fossiles separated, viz.
containing gold.

But all gold containing iron (as that of Stiria, Carinthia, the Gran^cia and
of Transylvania, etc.) may this way be easily separated with profit by the help
of iron. And if the iron have no gold, yet if the Antimony have it, it may
thence be separated by fusion with iron, viz. if it be brought to a Regulus.
The rest of the Antimony may again be fused with new iron and new glass of more
weight then it, but less then this, and be reduced into a Regulus fit for the
following uses. Out of the dross let weights (that nothing may be lost) be
made, that thou may have the more gain as may appear from the following
example.

When you have the Antimony, a hundred of which contains two ducats, if you
will separate the gold; take a hundred [weight] divided into three or four
parts, fuse it according to art adding a little iron and salt of ashes and
reduce them into small Regulus weighing a pound or two. Then use the dross with
half the weights of the iron in a large and strong crucible, and thou shall
have more Regulus's about fifty pound or more, dross 40. lib. which make
weights of, or else guns, etc. the rest, about eight or nine pounds will vanish
into smoke. And so thou have reduced the gold contained in a hundred weight
into one or two pounds, which thou may sublime by fire into flowers (leaving
the gold in the fire) for its uses, but those 50 or 60. pounds of the Regulus's
prepared by adding much iron, they having little or no gold, you may mingle
with tin for its beauty, hardness and sounding, to make diverse sorts of
household stuff, as platters, dishes, etc. For tin mixed with the Regulus looks
like silver for whiteness and ha^dness, and sounds like it, nor is it so easily
dulled, as unmixt.

Now let us weigh what gain may come from the separation of the meanest
Antimony. Put case that a hundred weight of Antimony be sold for three Royals
(for so for the most part the Polonian is sold, than which although that of
Hungaria and Transylvania be deerer, yet this has more gol) to which add 60.
pound of iron, which is sold for half a royal, and the charge of coals and
crucibles requisite be half a royal more: the total of the expenses is four
royals, for which take two ducats in gold, sixty pound of Regulus, eighty
pound of dross, and one or two pound of flowers. Those 60. lib. of Regulus may
be sold at the price of tin, whereof a pound is sold for a quarter of a royal,
and then their whole price is fifteen royals. Then the eighty pound of refuse
made into weights may be sold at forty shillings, or at least twenty four
shillings, or half a royal; And all things being considered and abhracted as
they ought there may remain the value of ten royals.

And though the Antimony should yield but one duckat; and a pound of Regulus
should be sold at the eighth part of a royal, yet the remainder would be above
six royals: And in a day there may easily be two hundred weight separated by
two men, And then suppose it should contain no gold (as some Antimony does
not) yet may four or five royals be gotten daily

But when you have Antimony one hundred a lb. whereof contains three four or
five ducats, and iron requisite to the separation containing one or two
ducats, then there is so much more gained. Then let him that undertakes this
business seek for the best copper and iron, and he may well gain in a day
twenty, thirty, and sometimes sixty royals.

N. B. And if you should have so much Regulus that you could not mix all of it
with tin, for want thereof, then it may be sold in parcels, so that one lb may
go at a fourth part of a royal; by which means the daily gain may not be
diminished, but may be rather increased as may be seen by what follows. The
Regulus of copper is the masculine species of lead; whose first being is gold
impure and mature: but the first being of common lead impure and immature is
silver as experience witnesses, for copper purged and fixed yields gold, but the
common lead only silver. And because Antimony which is better than common lead
is called the Philosophers lead, or their secret lead; of many so named but
known of few; not that the thing is unknown or of an unknown original, but by
reason of its hidden properties; therefore I say that its virtues are not all
to be known by any mortal though he should have a hundred years to search into
wonderful nature for it is unsearchable and the Creator of all wonders, let him
injoyne himself silence, neither let him glory in the knowledge of it who has
not made trial of it, for in it, through it and by it nature and art do strive
for perfection: of which more else where.

Now follows its use.
HAving mentioned Antimonial Regulus, which is lead, and better then the
common, It must also purify impure metals, wash them, separate the occult gold
and silver in them; that which common can do, to which if those be added, it
attracteth the more impure part in the cupel, which it converteth into dross,
and draws down with it into the porous ashes, leaving the purer gold and
silver in the cupel: but from some tin and copper not yielding to the lead nor
willing tone washed by it, it cannot extract their gold and silver; neither
has any one written the way of separation by it. Lazarus Erker indeed has
described (and others also) the way of separating silver from tin and iron,
which is not to be disesteemed if it be accidentally mixed with silver, which
is separable that way, but not so being generated in, and radically mixed with
them, requiring other lead willingly embracing tin and iron, which nothing but
Regulus can perform.

But seeing tin and iron do for the most part contain much gold and iron (but
chiefly tin) viz. inseparable by the common way, it will be worth our pains to
seek another lead and way of separation; as it is apparent to refiners, proving
tin and iron by the common way on a test; whilst tin and iron melted in the
lead, do forthwith show their stubbornness by inate proprieties and forsake it,
viz. as a contrary rising to the top like dross or ashes, without any
separation, gold and silver being excepted if accidentally mixed together, which
are left with the lead; but not so being hid in their middle or center. But
that the truth hereof may appear I will demonstrate it by example, Place on a
test under a tyle 16. parts of lead and one of tin, after the manner of
proofs, give a fusing fire for to separate the dross; and all the tin almost
flying away will at the bottom be burnt, and separated like ashes, being
sublimated on the top of the lead; not deprived of its gold and silver
incorporated together, which afterward I shall demonstrate when all the tin is
sublimated from the lead, and calcined, and the tyle taken from under the test,
and the rest of the lead powered off, and you shall find after cupellation no
more silver than the sixteen parts of lead did contain before, if they had
been cupelled without tin; sometimes less, some part being taking away by tin
in the examination: the same is done with iron, although thou should add
copper with glass of lead to retain the tin and iron thereby to separate their
gold and silver, you would effect nothing: for although some more silver may
hereby be extracted, yet that would not come from tin or iron but copper: it
may therefore be extracted another may of which hereafter.

In the mean while I will prove clearly that the separation of tin and iron by
common lead, thereby to get their gold and silver, is of no value, which being
left in them are turned into ashes and dross.

Take any Tin and reduce it into ashes by lead, or agitation on a smooth
earthen vessel (tried before by the common way for distinction sake, which
calcine well, that the corporeal tin powdered may be calcined, or being melted
may be separated from the ashes. Then take of these ashes one part, and of the
following flux, or of that a little after six parts or more, being mixed fuse
them in a strong crucible with a strong fire; until the flux have consumed or
drunk up all the calx of the Tin, and of them both shall be made one, viz.
yellow or red glass, which may be tried with a crooked wier put in: which if
it seem not clear the crucible must be covered again, and a greater fire be
given, until the fire be perfect; which labor in one half hour is finished:
which done pour it into a brass mortar, afterward to be covered until it be
a cold that it leap not out and be lost.

Afterward powder it, to which mingle to the calx of Tin, the weight of filings
of Iron; being mixed put them into a strong crucible (because the flux is very
penetrative) covered, and give a strong fir for fusion half an hour: which
done pour it out for Tin has made separation, and reduced some part of lead
out, of the flux, sinking to the bottom to be separated when it is cold, to be
reduced into dross on a test, and then to be cupelled, and you shall find
grain gold drawn from Tin without silver. And if before you weigh the calx of
Tin less than 100 weight, and after that the grains of Gold, you mayeasily
conjecture how much Gold is contained in the whole hundred weight of Tin ashes,
viz. at the least 3, 4, 5 or 6 lotones if thou work aright.

See then the fault is not to be imputed to the metals, but us, being ignorant
of the separation of the Gold and Silver.

You should not persuade your self by this means to get much wealth out of
Tin; for I have not written this for that end, but only to demonstrate the
possibility. And if thou think that gold will come out of iron by the flux,
mingle then filings of iron with the flux, before thou put in calx of Tin, and
thou shall find in so doing that Gold does come neither from the flux or iron
but out of tin, then being hereby assured that it is the tin which contains
gold, thou may consider how, most conveniently that may be extracted, viz.
with other Lead, and another way, as shall be hereafter taught. Neither think
that tin contains no more Gold then you have heard; for more there is if you
can wisely extract it. Neither do I deny that more Gold may be extracted out
of the tin; but more care then this is to be given, if you desire more plenty.
But Gold may thence be extracted not only by flux but diverse other ways, in
diverse weights; for what is written is only for demonstration of the
possibility, of Gold being contained in imperfect may to be extracted by a
secret separation.

The flux requisite to this work.
one part of very pure and white sand or flints, having no Gold fusible; to
which add three parts of Litharge of Lead; being mixed suse in a very strong
fire, that thereof a transparent glass may be made of it, which pour out that
it may be cold, and reduce it to powder, which use in the aforesaid manner. But
you may ask why sand and flints are mingled seeing they are not of a metallic
nature: to which I say; the calx of tin, cannot, as also other fossiles, be
examined by lead alone, for the following reasons, viz. because in the
calcination of tin, its metallic nature is hidden, but the impure and earthy
parts are manifest, wherefore it has no longer affinity with Lead and other
metals; unless the hidden parts of the lead be manifest and also other metals
and the manifest be hidden, for then they easily embrace one the other, and are
again mingled wel^, and not altered.

What belongs to the alteration of other metals does not belong hither; for to
this place only pertain Lead and Tin, the alteration of which is demonstrated
by this trial; whereby it appears to be thus.

Lead reduced into ashes by it self or into Lithargie, and deprived of its
metallic form, cannot so in this work be used without the flints or sand, for
the following reason* The lead and glass thereof made by it self is very
fusible and volatile; but the calx of tin is very difficulty fused: which two
calx's although they should be mingled to fuse in a crucible, yet would not be
mingled, nor being fused embrace one the other for the difference of their
fusibility; because the calx of lead alone being fused by a small fire will
perforate and penetrate the crucible the calx of Tin being left in the
crucible: wherefore you must add sand or flints to the lead, viz. to hinder
its fusibility, that it may endure the same degree of heat with those that are
difficultly fused and further their flux. For like things do mutually affect
and embrace each other; as water does water, oil oil, and glass glass; and
metals other metals; but water is not mingled with oil; neither are glasses
mingled with metals, but metals with metals, and glass with glass, whether it
be made of metals or out of sand. Wherefore they greatly err who mingle the
calx of metals difficultly miscible, or other hard things with lead to prove or
examine, not considering that corporeal lead has no affinity with them: who
remaining in their error and not weighing the thing further, consequently can
find nothing of any moment.

But when the calx of metals united with lead by a medium as flints or sand,
are brought together into transparent glass; then the lead being precipitated
and separated from the mixture, it cannot be but that the gold and silver
contained in them must be carried away with it. This is a true and
philosophical trial and not to be contemned, for many things may by it be
performed.

N. B. But this is not to be passed by, that in the mutual mixture and fusion
of the glass of lead and the calx of tin, and other hard metals, one may
easily err, viz. in the precipitation (which is done with the mixture of iron)
of the gold with the lead into Regulus, by either the excess or defect so that
nothing may be gotten, which is committed in precipitation. For if the mixture
stand long in the fire not fused, it is burnt, so that it cannot well be
separated, and if it stand too long fused in the fire, the gold is attracted by
the dross, by reason of the mixture of the iron, having great affinity with
the gold, so that by this means nothing can be gotten: wherefore the work is
to be done warily, and with wisdom and industry. You must have a care you
burn not the Regulus of lead with too much fire, when you reduce it into
dross; for fear of attracting the gold from the iron and turning it into
dross. And although this may by art be prevented, yet we must not presently
create every one Master of Arts, it requiring diligence and daily exercise,
besides the reading of Books. But this secret shall other where be
communicated.

This admonition then I give that thou do not impute thy error (if thou do
err) to me, but to thy self, for what I have written is true: and do not
thence infer an impossibility of attracting gold by iron out of lead, and of
turning it into dross, which is no wonder to me though it may so seem to thee.
Which he who has the knowledge of metals will himself easily perceive. But that
thou may be certain, try the certainty after the following manner: take two
hundred lib. of lead of the lesser weight of the refiners, put it on a test
under a tyle; add eight or ten lotons of pure gold, of tin two or three l. six
or eight of iron, viz. of the lesser weight: make them flow together an hour
to make dross; as examiners use to do: then pour it out and separate the
lead from the dross, viz. to cupell that which is eparated, then weigh the
grains of gold left, and thou shall find half of it consumed by the dross. If
this happen to corporeal gold and fixed, how will it be with that which is
newly extracted out of an imperfect metal? therefore you must diligently
search out the natures of metals and then such cases shall not seem incredible.

From hence then and other examples mentioned it appears, that that separation
which is done by tests and cupels is not true and legitimate; and consequently
that another profitable separation of metals is to be sought; because by this
the greater part of gold and silver burns into dross, witness experience, for
which cause the former example was alleged; whither belongs the proof, viz.
how much gold the dross has attracted, which is done as follows: the
remaining black dross; to which add a double weight of salt of tartar, put in
it a crucible filled but to the half (for fear of boiling out) and covered that
nothing fall in, under a tyle or among live coals, one or two hours space to
digest; and a new Regulus of lead shall be precipitated, which separated from
the dross you may cupel, and you shall find new grains of gold attracted by
the iron to the dross, but now separated by the salt of tartar, overcoming the
rage of the iron. And so you have heard from two examples, how in the coction
of the separation gold may be drawn out of the lead by tin and iron, and that
therefore there is need, that gold be separated by the Antimonial Regulus out
of the aforesaid metals, and not by lead, if you would extract the true
substance with gain.

N. B. Gold may likewise be separated out of the glass of lead (being first
dissolved with the ashes of tin) with coal dust, adding it in the flux and
stirring it with an iron wier; and also with common sulphur, by burning it on
it: but the aforesaid way with iron, is to be preferred before those two which
spoil the gold, etc. wherefore the remaining dross is to be gathered, which by
some abstracting furnace by other means may be tried for to recover the spoiled
or lost gold and silver.

And all these are alleged to demonstrate that the gold in tin and iron is to
be separated by the Antimonial Regulus and not by*lead. But how this separation
may be perfected, you shall here in that third part where we will treat of lead
explained by Paracelsus in his book called Caelum Philosopherum, and other
artificial Chemical labors: wherefore here we omit it being superfluous to
handle one thing in diverse places. In the mean while exercise thy self in
lesser things, that thou may be more fit for greater when they shall be set
forth. But wonder not at my liberality in publishing so great secrets, for I
have reasons for it. Such a burden is too much for me alone, neither does it
profit the covetous to sell his goods to them which keep not their words, nor
pay the money, after they have obtained their art, which has happened to me.
Wherefore I have determined to communicate some secrets to all the world
indifferently that the poor may receive some profit by them; knowing that
though I write plainly, yet that al will not at the first view obtain their
desires. For some are so dull that they cannot imitate a work though often
seen. For some have often visited me to see my new manner of distilling, which
though it was sufficiently demonstrated to the eye, yet they could not imitate
it, till with often perusals at length they have found the right path. Others
have left it as too hard a work when it would not presently succeed, which if
it happened to those who had an occular demonstration, how much more difficult
will it be and hard to them who have nothing but what they have heard or read.
Wherefore I am certain that though I should publish every one of my secrets,
yet could they not be performed by all men, my coals and materials being left
sufficing for my necessity. Wherefore I fear not to publish, the next
opportunity offered, diverse profitable and exeellent secrets, viz. in favor of
all and every one.

As for that spirit of salt necessary to this work, you may find it in the
first part of my Philosophical Furnaces corrected and amended; but the way of
separation in the fourth part.

And so I find this work published in favor of those who by war (though honest
men) are reduced to poverty. But what things are deficient in this little tract
shall (God willing) be delivered in the next (which shall follow in a short
time) largely and clearly without fraud.

FINIS.
The Contents of the first Part.
OF the structure of the first Furnace 1 Of the receiver. 2 The manner of
distilling 4 How the spirit of salt is to be distilled 9 Of the use of the
spirit of salt 12 A distillation of vegetable oils, whereby a greater quantity
is acquired, then by that common way by a gourd still 13 The clear oil of
Mastick and Frankincense 15 The quintessence of vegetables 18 The quintessence
of metals and minerals. ibid. A sweet and red oil of metals and minerals 19
The oil or liquor of gold ibid. Oil of Mars 20 Oil of Venus 21 Oil of
Jupiter and Saturn ibid. Oil of Mercury 22 Oil of Antimony ibid. The flowers
of Antimony white and voltill 24 The flowers of Antimony diaphoretical 25 Of
the external use of the corrosive oil of Antimony ibid. The oil of Arsenick
and Auripigmentum 26 Oil of lapis calaminaris ibid. The use of the oil of
lapis calaminaris. 27 Of the extrinsecal use of the spirit of salt in the
Kitchen 29 How an acid spirit or vinegar may be distilled out of all
vegetables, as herbs, roots, woods, seeds, etc. 31 The spirit of paper and
linen clothes 32 The spirit of silk 33 The spirit of man's hair and of other
animals, and also of horns ibid. The spirit of vinegar, honey and sugar ibid.
How the spirits may be made out of the salt of tartar, vitriolatedtartar, the
spirit of salt tart arised, and of other such like fixed salts 34 Lac virginis,
and the Philosophic al sanguis* draconis 35 The spirits, flowers, and salts of
minerals and stones 36 How minerals and metals, may be reduced into flowers,
and their virtues 36 Of gold and silver 37 Flowers of iron and copper 38
Flowers of lead and tin 39 Flowers of Mercury ibid. Flowers of Zinck ibid. The
use 40 Flowers of Antimony 41
The Contents of the second Part.
THe structure of the second furnace 51 The way or the manner to perform the
distillation 52 How to make the acid oil and the volatile* spirit of vitriol
55 Of Vitriol ibid. The use and dose of the narcotick sulphur of vitriol 57 Of
the use and virtue of the volatile spirit of vitriol 58 Of the virtue and oil
of the corrosive oil of vitriol 59 How to make the vitriol of Mars and Venus
ibid. The way to make a fair blue vitriol out of Luna, that is silver 60 Of
the sweet oil of vitriol 67 The preparation of the sweet oil of vitriol 70
The use and the dose of the sweet oil of vitriol 72 Of the sulphurous volatile
and acid spirit of common salt and of Allome 74 The manner of preparing 74 Of
the sulphurious volatile spirit of minerals and of their preparation 75 The
preparation of the volatile spirit of metals 75 The preparation of the volatile
spirit of minerals ibid. Another way ibid The spirit of Zinck 76 The volatile
spirit of the dross of Regulus Martis ibid. How to make a white acid and red
volatile spirit out of salt nitre ibid. Of the use of the red volatile spirit
77 The use of the white acid spirit of salt nitre ibid Aqua Regis 78 The
preparation of Aurum Fulminans ibid. The use of Aurum Fulminans 83 The use of
the tincture of gold 85 Of the flowers of silver and of its medicine 86 Of the
use of the crystals of silver 87 How to sublime the crystals of silver into
flowers, and then to make a good medicine of the flowers 88 How to make a green
oil out of silver 89 The use of the green oil in Alchymie and for Mechanical
uses 90 A medicine out of copper externally to be used 91 A medicine out of
iron or steel 92 Of tin or lead ibid. The use of the crystals of lead and tin
ibid. Of Mercury 93 Of Aqua fortis 96 Of the sulphurised spirit of salt nitre
98 Of the Clissus. ibid. Of the tartarised spirit of nitre 99 Of the tartarised
spirit of Antimony 100 Of stone coals 101 Of the sulphurious spirit of salt
nitre or Aqua fortis 101 Of the nitrous spirit of Arsenick 102 To make a spirit
of sulphurous crude tartar and salt nitre ibid. To make a spirit out of salt of
tartar, sulphur and salt nitre ibid. How to make a spirit of saw dust, sulphur
and salt nitre 103 To make metallical spirits and flores by the help of salt
nitre and linen cloth 104 Of gunpowder ibid. How to make a spirit of gunpowder
107 Of the use of the medicine or tincture made of gunpowder 109 To make
spirits and flowers of nitre and coals 110 To make flowers and spirits of
flints, crystal, or sand, by adding of coals and spirit of salt nitre to them
110 To make a spirit and oil out of talck and salt nitre 111 To make a spirit,
flowers and an oil out of tin 112 To make a spirit, flowers and a liquor out of
Zinck ibid. To make a spirit flowers, and a oil of lapis calaminaris 113 To
make spirit of salt nitre, sulphur and common salt 114 To make a spirit,
flowers and oil out of salt nitre and Regulus Martis 114 To distill Butyrum out
of Antimony, salt and vitriol, like unto that which is made out of Antimony and
Mercury sublimate 118 To distill butyrum of Arsenick and orpiment ibid. To make
a rare spirit of vitriol 119 To make a subtle spirit and pleasant oil of Zinck
120 To distill a spirit and oil out of lead 121 To distill a subtle spirit and
oil out of crude tartar 122 The preparation and use of the spirit of tartar
123 How to make precious spirits and oils out of tartar joined with some
minerals and metals 126 The use of the metallised spirit and tartar ibid. The
other way to make a metallised spirit of tartar 130 To distill the spirit and
oil of lead and tin How to make a tartarised spirit and oil out of iron and
steel or copper 133 How to make a tartarised spirit of Mercury 137 How to make
a tartarised spirit of gold and silver ibid. To make a tartarised spirit of
antimony 139 How to make good spirits and oils out of pearls, corals, and
crabs eyes, and other light soluble stones of beasts and fishes 146 To distill a
spirit out of salt of tartar, and crude tartar 147 How to get a powerful spirit
out of the salt of tartar by the help of sand or peble stones ibid. How to
extract a blood red tincture with spirit of wine out of peble stones 150 The
use of the tincture of pebles or flints in physic 151 How by the help of this
liquor out of gold its red color may be extracted so that it remains white
153 Another way to extract a tincture out of gold by the help of the liquor of
sand or pebles 159 What further may be done with the liquor of pebles 160 How
by the help of this liquor to make trees to grow out of metals, with their
colors ibid. Of the spirit of urine and of the vo latile spirit of salt
Armoniack 162 The process or manner of making it is this 163 Of the use or
virtue of the spirit of salt Armoniack 166 To distill a blood red oil of
vitriol by the help of the spirit of urine 167 The tincture of vegetables 168
Vitriol of copper ibid. The tincture of crude tartar ibid. To make the oils or
liquors of salts ibid. To precipitate all metals with it ibid. The oil and
vitriol of silver 169 To extract a red oil ont of Antimony or common sulphur
ibid. How to ripen Antimony and common sulphur, so that several sorts of such
like sm^ls, as vegetables have arise from thence 171 Of the spirit and oil of
harts-home 171 To make the spirit of man's hair an excellent medicine 172 Of
the oil of Ambar 173 Of the oil of soot 174 How to make a good oil out of
soot without distilling ibid. Of the spirit and oil of honey ibid. Of the oil
and spirit of sugar 175 To distill an excellent spirit and blood red tincture of
coals and sugar 176 Of the spirit of Must or new wine ibid. Of oil olive 177
The use of the blessed oil 179 Of the oil of wax ibid. A good spirit for the
stone ibid. Of the spirit or acid oil of sulphur 180 To the Courteous Reader
181
The Contents of the third Part.
A Preface of the copper instrument and furnace 185 Of wooden instruments that
are to be used in stead of stils, baths and cauldrons 189 The preparation of
the vessel 192 The making of a wooden vessel for a Balneum, which is to be used
in stead of copper and leaden cauldron for digestion and distillation by glass
vessels 193 A wooden vessel serving for boiling of Beer, Metheglin, Vinegar,
etc. as well as copper, iron, and tin vessels ibid. A wooden vessel for a bath,
for sweet or mineral waters which may be according as you please kept warm for
the preservation of health 194 Of the use of wooden vessels in distilling,
boiling, bathing, etc. and first of the wooden vessel ibid. Of the preparation
of the lees of wine, boer, hydromel and other drink ibi. Of the preparation of
all kind of corn as wheat, oats, barley, etc. which must go before the
distilling of the spirit 195 Of the difference of malting 196 Of the
fermentation of malt 197 Of the Fermentation of honey 198 Of the preparation of
herbs, flowers, seeds, etc. ibid. An Annotation 199 The manner of distilling
in general follows 202 The manner of distilling spices, seeds, flowers,
herbs, roots, woods, etc. 203 How oils are to be coagulated into balsoms 204
The manner of preparing follows 206 There follows now the use of the second
wooden vessel which is to be used in stead of those of copper or lead serving
for distillations, digestions, extractions and fixations 208 And first of a
volatile extract ibid. A purging extract 210 A diaphoretical extract 211 A
diuretical extrast 212 A Somniferous extract ibid. A cordial extract 213 Of an
odoriferous extract 214 Of baths 215 Of a bath of sweet or common water 216 Of
the nature and property of natural baths ibid. And first of sulphurous bathes
that have a subtle acidity 218 The mixture of those subtle mineral,
sulphurous and salt spirits with water 220 Of sulphur baths 221 The use of the
copper globe in dry bathes, which are more excellent then the moist in many
cases 222 Now follows a wooden vessel which is to be used in stead of a
cauldron in boiling of beer, vinegar, metheglin, etc. 226
The Contents of the fourth Part.
OF making the Furnace 233 How minerals are to betryed 238 Of the melting of
mines and metals 243 Of the separation of metal ibid. Of separating courser
metals 247 What is to be held concerning the perfection of metals 248 Another
demonstration by a dry way 255 Of the Philosophers stone 262 Whether minerals,
as antimony, arsenick, orpin, cobolt, zinck, sulphur, etc. may be transmuted
into metals, and into what 265 Another way of separating the superfluous
Antimonial sulphur 268 Of the tincture of Sol* and Antimony 269 Another
tincture and medicine of gold 272 Of looking glasses 273 Metallic mixaure for
the matter of the glasses 276 Of the smoothing and polishing looking glasses
278 Of mettallick glasses 280 The coloring of the foresaid vessel follows in
which it is made most like to Venice 284 Of the preparation of the colors for
the coloring the mass of flints and crystals 285
The Contents of the fifth Part.
OF the preparation of the furnace 293 Of the preparation of the furnaces 297 A
lute for the errecting of furnaces 298 Of the closing of the joints hindering
the evaporation of subtle spirits 299 Another lute for broken glasses 300 How
those subtle spirits when they are made may be kept that they evaporate not 301
How glass stoples are to be smoothed grinding for the retaining of subtle
spirit in their glass vessels 303 Of the making of the best crucibles 313 Of
the vitrisication of earthen vessels belonging to the first and second furnace
320 Of the use of the foresaid cups 324 An Appendix 328
Annotations upon the Appendix of the fifth Book.
A Preparation of corn, wheat, barley, oats, etc. also of pears, apples,
cherries, and other tree fruits, to be performed by the help of fermentation,
when thorough the help of distillation they yield a very good and most pure
spirit, very like that which is made of the lees of wine without great costs,
where also from the Remainders of the corn (the burning spirit being drawn off)
may be made a very good beer or vinegar; and of the remains of the fruit a
very good drink like to wine, whence there is a double benefit, so that any one
may not only have from thence wherewith to live, but also to lay up 338 The
making of wine not unlike to Rhenish, French, or Spanish, that shall endure for
many years, out of corn or fruits 340 A making of a burning spirit, out of the
baser sort of things, which are commonly known, like to that made out of
Rhenish and French wine, and at an easy rate 343 The making of sugar (like to
that of the India) and of tartar (like to that of the Rhenish) out of honey*
not costly, so that the price of one pound of sugar does not exceed eight or
ten stivers, and a pound of tartar exceed not the price of two stivers ibid. A
peculiar purification of vulgar impure tartar, without any loss, and the
crystallizing or reduction of it into great crystals, a pound whereof being
purified does not exceed the price of six stivers 347 The taking away of the
ungrateful odor avd taste of honey which being taken away, there is drawn forth
out of honey a very good burning spirit which savours not of the qualities of
honey, and also a hydromel like to natural wine in taste and other virtues, etc.
ibid. The making of a hydromel, very good and clear out of raisins both greater
and smaller, resembling the best Spanish wine out of which also is made a very
good and clear vinegar ibid. How good wines, and good vinegars may be made in
those places, where grapes grow in unmanuered places, and are acid 349 Also the
preparation of wholesome drinks out of goose-berries, barberries, mul-berries
and other wild fruits 351 The correction of troubled viscous wines and such as
begin to be red, musty and sour ibid. A very easy making of vinegar in great
quantity out of certain vetables that are every where to be had, viz. very
good clear and durable like to French vinegar, etc. 352 A production of wines
in cold places, which oth^rwise by reason of the cold air do not bring forth
wines (the cold^st places of all only excepted) viz. of the best, sweetest,
odoriferous, and durable, not giving place for goodness, clearness, etc. to
those that are made in Germany, France, Italy and Spain 352 A certain secret,
by the help whereof wines are easily tran^ported from mountainous places,
remote from rivers and distitute of other conveniences of carriage, so that the
carrying of ten vessels is of a cheaper price then otherwise the carrying of
one 353 A very easy preparation of verdygrease out of copper, of which a pound
does not exceed the price of six stivers 355 A new and unheard of distillation
of vinegar, of which two runlets of nine gallons exceed not the price of half a
royal, with which many excellent things may be done, especially the
crystallizing of verdygrease, of which one pound does not exceed the price of
half a royal 355 A very easy distillation of the most strong spirit of urine
very speedy not costly nor tedious, where twenty or thirty pints maybe made for
a royal whereby many excellent things may be done in physic, alchymie and
mechanical affairs, but especially with it vitriol is made out of copper, very
beautiful, blue and most excellent in medicine and alchymy with which silver is
made so fusile that by the help thereof glass vessels, may as well inwardly as
outwardly be gilded so as to appear like silver 356 Amost easy and not costly
way of the distilling of the spirit of salt, of which one pound may be sold for
six stivers, and it is very profitable in medicine, alchymie, etc. 357 The
separation of gold from silver without hurt to the jewels, also the solution
and separation of gold, that contains silver and copper, and the precipitation
of gold from the water without any hurt to the water so as that it may serve
for the same uses again, etc. The separation of gold from pure fat clay, sand,
flints* etc. which other ways could not be separated either by the help of ^
ashing or white Mercury or by melting 359 A new and unheard of proving of tough
and stubborn minerals, viz. of all and each, whereby their nature and and form
is found out, the which cannot be done otherwise by any vulgar way 366 A new
compendious way, whereby minerals are speedily in a great quantity melted, and
that not without great profit 367 A better way to separate things melted: A
better separation of silver from lead 362 How minerals in defect of coals made
of wood may be melted by the help of pit coals 364 The fixations of
sulphurous, Arsenical, Antimonial and other volatile poisonous minerals 365 A
profitable separation of sparkling, spongious and thin gold and silver from
sand, pure clay and flints, etc. 366 A profitable and secret melting of gold
contained in baser metals and minerals, which cannot be done by any common way
367 A speedy separation of gold and silver by the help of fusion, with less
cost and labor then by Aqua fortis or cements 368 A speedy reduction of wrought
gold to the higbest degree, also an easy separtion of gold from gilt silver
ibid. The separation of silver in a greater quantity out of lead then by the
use of cu^les 369 The melting of good gold out of old iron 370 A separation of
gold and silver from any tin or copper 373 A maturation of mines that they may
give more gold and silver in the fusion 375 A separation of gold and silver out
of Arsenick, Auripigmentum and Antimony 377 A separation of extrinsecal sulphur
of Venus for the production of her son Cupid ibid. The separation of silver
from the tests which entered into them in time of trying without melting and
without labor and costs 379 A cheap making of fine earthen vessels like to
the porccelane retaining spirit^, resisting the fire, and to be made in any
place of the world ibid. A confection of allome exalting and fixing any
colors, especially requisite for scarlet and other precious colors, as also a
preparation of a cauldron, that shall be cheap and not alter color 380 A cheap
preparation of colors for painting, as of purple, etc. but especially of a
most fine white never yet seen most like the finest pearls, also of a silver
and golden color 381 The conclusion 383 To the Malicious 389 Of Avrum potabile
393 Of the medicinal use of this gold medicine 403
The Contents of the first part of the Mineral Work.
A Preface to the Reader 409 A most profitable separation of gold out of
flints, sand, clay, red and black talck and other fossiles, containing very
subtle gold, thin and spongious, which otherwise cannot be separated either for
its scarcity, or the obstinency of the mineral by the reason of the great cost
to be bestowed, viz. very easily with the spirit of salt 411 The preparation of
flints and the extraction of the gold contained in them by the spirit of salt
417 The work to be performed by funels 420 How impure gold may be separated and
purged by Antimony 422 The way of separating gold and silver from Antimony 424
The use of Antimonial Flowers 425 The preparation ibid. An admonition 427 Of
the virtues of this medicine 429 Of the use and dose of this medicine 431 Now
follows the virtues which it manifests in metallicks 439 How the Regulus of
the flowers and dross of Antimony is to be used in the bettering of course
metals 442 Its use 445 The flux requisite to this work 448
FINIS.
REader, Impute the multiplicity of Errata's partly to my absence whilst this
^reatise was under the press, considering also that the second part thereof was
translated by a German, who (though otherwise very learned) yet might not happily
be exactly skilled in all the proprieties of our English tongue, whence
sometimes the singular number is put for the plural, his for its, he for it and
on the contrary: and such like petty mistakes; considering also that the fourth
part was translated by another, who might not be acquainted sufficiently with
terms of art, and a smooth English style; besides the Printers aptness
sometimes to mistake the copy being writ with diversity of hands and some bad.
If thou please with thy pen to correct what here I have observed thou will
hardly meet with any more that may pervert thy judgment or occasion thy
mistake, unless in a cursory survey I might omit some few, for the mending of
which thy ingenury and candor, which is craved, will be sufficient.

PAge 1. line 3. p. 2. l. 1. l. 9. l. 18. p. 4. l. 19 p. 5. l. 25. p. 6. l. 31.
l. 37. p. 7. l. 22. l. 33. p 36. l. 30. for water read matter. Page 1. l. 12.
r. neerness p* 2. l. 5. r. furnace l. 7. r. by which l. 26. r. luteing p 3. l.
33. r. neck p. 5. l. 22. r humidity l. 23. r. metals p. 7. l. 15. r luteing p.
8 l. 3. r. repeat p. 9. l. 19. r. in a p. 20. l. 6. r. humors l. 34. r.
humors p. 28. l. 24. r. will not p. 29. l. 22. r. will p. 45 l. 2. r. scoriae
p. 52. l. 6. r. in an l. 12. r. with a copple p. 53. l. 4 r. cast l. 29. or
they p. 54 l. 30. r. any time p. 58. l 4. blot out it p. 60. l. 1. blot out
green p. 66. l. 23. blot out they p. 57. l. 18. r. spoiled p. 69. l. 26. r.
also the p. 73. l. 11. r. saying l. 28. r. air is p. 78. l. 16. blot out now
p. 84. l. 17. r. set upon the warm bottom l. 28. r. is taken out p. 87. l. 5.
r. and in p. 100. l. 22. r. sulphur au^atum p. 108. l. 36. blot out it p. 117.
l. 25. r. concerning the p. 123. l. 3. blot out they p. 227. l. 22. blot out it
p. 134. l. 3. r. heat p. 135. l. 15. r. but use four p. 144. l. 15. but if he
be not wary p. 148. l. 37. r. fine p. 149 l. 27. r. who scour p. 162. l. 7. r.
be fixed p. 169. l. 3 r. and mix it with p. 171. l. 26. cast in l. 34. read,
will pass. page 17. 8. l 5. read, cast ^page 18^. line 14. r. cast p. ^87* l.
3. r. bars l. 4. r. neck p. 191. l 32. r. write p. 192. l. 11. r. set p. 193.
l. 3. r. or f^wn^ss l. 19* r* wider p. 196. l. 1. r. those l. 14. faul^ p. 202.
l. 16* r. or fil^d p. 203. l. 7. r. distillation p. 206. l. 34. r. reunited p.
217. l. 25. r. heat l. 25. know p. 221. l. 32. blot out is p* 222. l. 26. blot
out which p. 223. l. 6. r. inwardly p. 241. l. 23. r. hematitis l. 28. r.
aforesaid manner p. 243. l. 7. super p. 247. l. 30. r. s^ll p 248. l. 31. r.
seduce p. 250. l. 6. r. God has p. 251. l. 1. r. set it in digestion and the
oils will attract out of the spirit of salt, salt enough l. 2 acquires l. 1^.
r. and as by these two examples the perfection of metals is proved, so also l.
28. r^fined p. 252. l. 7. r. separated by its contrary, and bettered l. 20. not
appear p. 254. l. 33. r. which was mixed with l. 35. r. in a l. 37. r. long
ground p 255. l. 21. r. augmenting the weight of gold l. 30. blot out, of gold
p. 256. l. 2. r. imperfect, perfect l. 24. r. wh^nce p* 257. l. 2. r. for the
earth l. 11. r. operation l. 13. r. his gifts will not should be common l. 14.
being an l. 17. many fear. l. 28. r. for the p. 258. l. 27. r. into p. 259. l.
2. r. coming l. 12. r. the power of the sun, and fire being discovered. l. 23.
r. from iron l. 27. r. retain the mixed l. 31. to be under stood of metals
where p. 260. l. 28. r. gi^ing credit to these p. 261. l. 27. r. concerning the
p. 262. l. 15. have been rather p. 263. l. 37. r. gift p. 265. l. 11. r. nature
say they l. 21. r. again quickly perishing p. 266. l. 1. r. be denied l. 8. r.
^mbrionated l. 23. r. as from l. 27. blot out to l. 33. r. conceive l. 37. r.
hidden in the air p. 267. l. 10. r. minerals l. 21. blot out though l. 25. r.
being afterward melted p. 268. l. 8. r. regulus* ^. 10. r. of minerals l. 18.
r. then that which is sul* hureous, with which being mixed it fo^saketh 269. l.
10. r. old Saturn l* 29. r. grind very l. 33. r. and that antimonial nitre
will assume p. 270. l. 2. r. leave in l. 10. r. for taking l. 3^. r. in
destroying, perfecting and transmuting metals by fusion p. 271. l. 17 r. not
but by l. 30 r. and drawed off p 272. l. 19. being surn^sht with the gold of
covetous men p. 273. l. 7. out a l. 20. conceive p. 274. l. 6. r. a pair of
compasses l. 15. lime or the l. 21. the bottom l. 24. smoother parts: if the
l. 31. r. and to smooth l. 36* r. put an earthen tunnel, and the mould into dry
sand to the top p. 275. l. 17. impressed ^n sand or the l. 34. blot out let p.
276. l. 14. r. acquired l. 26. linseed oil p. 282. l. 10. r. without minium l.
32. lot out equal parts p. 284. l. 4. r. smooth and light iron l. 13. r. by
which 285 l. 1. r. the re will be made thence a stone p. 286. l. 12. r. form
l. 14. take out p. 287. l. 10. r. afterward is poured into it p. 295. l. 9.
blot out is p. 296. l. 10. r. can not p. 302 l. 27. r. stopples p 310. l. 6.
blot out that p. 314. l. 17. r. glasses p. 315. l. 14. r. satness of p. 321. l.
31. r. pour p. 322. l. 37. r. and not to p. 331. l. 30. r. spared p. 352. l 27.
r. yet by art p. 354. l. 1. r. consistency p. 359. l. 5. r. pure clay: p. 403.
l. r. wax-like earth. Page 388. The copper globes are nere through mistake left
out, but the manner thereof you may see in the foregoing page. Part 4. for
pattern, and types read moulds.

Books Printed, and are to be sold by Thomas Williams at his shop in
Little-Brittaine.
THe new light of Alchymy, by Michael Sandevogius, with nine books of
Paracelsus of the nature of things; with a Chemical Dictionary. The Art of
Distillation. Vade Mecum, or a companion for a Surgeon, fitted for times of
peace or war: By Tho: Brugis Doctor in Physic.

