A Funeral Sermon Preached at Deptford June 3. 1688. Upon the occasion of the
Death of Mrs. Elizabeth Kilbury, Late Wife of Mr. John Kilbury.

By Henry Godman, Minister of the Gospel.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside,
1688.

TO THE READER.
THat thou may profit by thy hearing or reading of Sermons: There is a
necessity of more Pastors and Teachers, to open and apply the Word, than one:
Thou must act the part of a Pastor and Teacher unto thy self, and thine own
Soul. The Ministers Application without thine own, will be to little or no
purpose. When there is the Application of the Word to the heart by preaching;
and the Application of the heart to the Word preached, by serious Meditation;
when (I say) both these meet and strike one upon the other, there will, by the
help of the spirit, (who is always ready to promote his work) be some sire
struck, and a kindling of some good things in our Souls toward the Lord our
God; meditate on these things, says the Apostle, that thy profiting may
appear. Reader, if thou would meditate well on this plain Sermon, and ponder
with thy Heart and Soul on these plain truths that are here laid down; thou
would doubtless find them to be blessed for thy Spiritual and Eternal
advantage: but without this, all will prove but empty words, and the whole
Discourse, but as so much water spilt upon the ground. This Sermon was
calculated for a plain Country Auditory; such as it is, I mean rude, rough and
unpolisht as it is, I let it go: Being importuned by the earnest desires of
several persons, especially those concerned for the preaching of it, to send it
forth. And indeed, to tell you the truth, if I had never so many polished
shafts in my Quiver (as I have none) I should not care to draw them out in my
Ministerial work: being convinced in my Soul and Conscience, that there is very
little work done for God or Men's Souls this way. I don't at all affect to
tickle means ears with pleasing Eloquence, or to humor their fancies: Though
the flashy Professors of our Age (whose Religion lies all in their fancies,
memories or minds, for there is little or nothing of it in their hearts) like
nothing else; I am sure that God in the Scripture does not labor to please
men's ears, nor to adorn his matter with a curious garment of words; but
represents the matter it self to the Souls of men, as that which is worthy of
all acceptance. The things of God need no humane Eloquence to commend them:
Painting spoils Native Beauty, and external Ornaments would disfigure some
things that are of themselves Proportioned and Lovely. It Is that preaching
which the world counts foolish, and which men being vain in their imaginations
are ready to despise; that is made mighty through God for the casting down the
Devils Kingdom, and the setting up the Kingdom of Christ in the Souls of men.
If God would please to bless these plain things for the good of any poor Souls,
then I should easily despise all the exceptions of the Curious, and slight all
the cavils of the Captious. That the Lord may water these Seeds with his
Blessing, shall be my Prayer.

Farewell.
Psalm 73. 25, 26. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none upon Earth
that I desire besides thee. My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the
strength of my heart, and my Portion for ever.
My Beloved,
THIS Text was bequeathed unto me and you (as I may say) by the last Will and
Testament of a Deceased Friend, both mine and yours; which the Lord can make
more profitable to us, than thousands of Gold and Silver: And I am sure it was
the earnest desire of her that left it, that it might be blessed to us all for
our everlasting benefit.

In the first verse of the Psalm, the sweet Singer of Israel lays down a
Consolatory Proposition for the whole Israel of God, to cheer up and refresh
their Souls withal in their darkest and most cloudy seasons of trouble and
affliction -- Truly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean
heart: As if he should say, though God may seem by his Providence to neglect
the ways of men, and the worst in the view and judgment of sense may seem to
prosper most, and the best be of all men the most miserable; yet for all this,
I am sure that this is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, That
God is good to his Israel, and will do them good. Then to come near to the
Text, he tells us that God will guide them, v. 24. by his counsel, and
hereafter will receive them to his glory. He speaks indeed in the singular
number as of himself, but you are to understand him in what he says, as
personating all the People of God: Therefore it must needs be well with the
People of God here, since Infinite Wisdom does guide and direct them; and it
shall certainly go well with them hereafter, since Infinite Glory then shall
crown them: Which blessed Estate the Psalmist esteemed above all that this
world can afford, because God in that estate will be all in all, in the faith,
hope, and expectation of the enjoyment of him for ever, knowing that in him he
shall inherit all things, he incourages and comforts his Soul in his present
troubles; verse 25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And what is there upon
Earth that I desire besides thee? The words, you see, are an Interrogation,
which here has the force of a Negation: Thus, there is nothing, Lord, in my
Judgment, either in Heaven above, or on the Earth beneath, that is of any real
worth and value to me, or affords any comfort to my Soul besides thy self. Now
the doctrinal Observation which I shall draw from hence is this,

Doct. That God is the All of a gracious and godly Soul. Other things to him
are but as Ciphers, that signify nothing, are but as shadows, which are
something in show, but nothing in substance; the things that the men of the
world court and adore, the Trinity which the world does worship, which are
earthly pelf, sleshly pleasure, and airy honor, Haec tria pro trino numine
mundus habet
are nothing, less than nothing, and vanity in compaparison to him, unto such a
Soul. Take this in two or three particulars.

1. This gracious Soul sees all things in God: I am God All-sussicient, says
God to Abraham, and I see thou art so, says this Soul to God. In thy breasts
are all things (as the Hebrew word imports) out of which we may draw, and suck
every thing that we need, either for the vile Body, or the precious Soul; he
sees by an Eye of Faith, and the Vision of an enlightened mind, that all things
are in God comprehensively, eminently, virtually, superlatively; according to
what we read, Rev. 21. 7. He that overcomes shall inherit all things, and I
will be his God. The carnal heart makes nothing of God, Psalm. 10. 4. He is not
in all his thoughts; God is not worth his thinking of; he Idolizes God, as if
he were nothing in the world, and he Deifies the Creature, making that a God:
He sees nothing in him, no excellency at all why he should desire him; He
prefers the dung and dross of the world before him, and is a lover of these
things more than God; these broken Cisterns that hold no water, he prefers
before the Fountain of living waters. But the gracious Soul sees all things in
him, and that all things which we can desire are not to be compared to him.

2. He accounts nothing misery but to be separated from God. There is no
sorrow, says this Soul, to this sorrow; all other sorrows laid in the balance
he sinds but light. He had rather choose to beg with God, than to reign without
him: He had rather die with God, that is, in the Arms of his Mercy, and in the
Bosom of his Love, than live without him, in the affluence and confluence of
all creature comforts, enjoyments and delights. Hic ure hic seca, says this
Soul, Burn me Lord, wound me, rend and tear me with the Briers and Thorns of
the most grievous afflictions, for this do I choose, and this is infinitely more
eligible unto me, with the enjoyment of thy self, than to live without God in
the world, in the Sunshine of all its favors, and to bathe my self all my
days in the River of its pleasures and delights. Much rather would this Soul be
with Job upon the Dunghill, groaning under the burden of all his sorrows; or
with Lazarus at the Rich man's door, covered all over with Sores and Ulcers
from the crown of the head to the soles of his feet, than to be without God.

But you may say, Are not these things miseries? Surely they are; for a Poor
creature to have no soundness in his flesh, and to have no rest in his bones,
to be chastned with pains, to be feeding on Wormwood, and drinking the waters
of Gall all the day, and all the night long to be pinched with Poverty, to lie
upon the wrack of continual pains, to be always under griefs and groans; are
not these miseries?

Ans. Yes, they are mala and miseriae in se, but not ad hominem istum; I mean,
that they are evils and miseries in themselves, and so they are to all others,
but not to that man that has the Lord for his God: Therefore says the
Apostle, Romans 5. 1, 2. We glory in tribulations, having peace with God:
Tribulations are to us no tribulations; all our maladies are now turned into
medicines, our crosses into comforts; all these things shall work together for
our good. God's People shall gather Grapes of all their Thorns, and Figs of all
their Thistles: All their bitter Waters of Marah shall be turned into sweet
Wine unto them: God will comfort them in all their sorrows, for he will not
leave them comfortless, John 10. 18.
but will come unto them: The fruit of all shall be the taking away their sin,
and the making them partakers of his holiness: When they fall into the Waters
of Affliction, it is that they may be washed there; when they fall into the Fire
of Tribulation, it is, that they may be purged there: With these God proves
them that he may do them good in the latter end: All shall work for the
increasing their Grace, and preparing them for Glory, and the adding more
weight of Glory to their Eternal Crown. These are restraints to them from doing
evil; (...), and Spurs to them, to provoke and excite them to good. In a word,
there is no evil befalls any one that has an interest in God, but what shall be
turned to a far greater good, than that is an evil; therefore under all, they
should with Habakkuk, joy in the Lord, and rejoice in the God of their
salvation.

3. He accounts nothing blessedness and happiness but to be united to him; to
be one with him, and to live in the enjoyment of him: Psalm. 144. 2, last: Happy
are the people that are in such a case, even the people that have the Lord for
their God. Nihil bonum sine summo bono; There can be no good without the
chiefest and best good: Therefore those terrae filii, those men of the world,
that you read of, Amos 6. 5, 6, 7. that did lie upon their Beds of Ivory, and
stretch themselves upon their Couches, and did eat the Lambs out of the Flock,
and the Calves out of the midst of the Stall, that did chaunt to the sound of
the Viol, and invent to themselves Instruments of Music, like David, that did
drink Wine in Bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief Ointments, are said,
verse 13. to rejoice in a thing of naught: Intimating to us, that they did put
a value upon nothing, and made themselves glad with Dreams and Fancies, as
Madmen use to do: We must derive our joy from the Eternal Spring, which is God
himself, else our joy will quickly be turned into sorrow, because that Well out
of which we did draw our Water, will be dried up. In 1 John 1. 4, 5. These
things write I unto you, that your joy may be full; and what he was writing
about, we read before, about fellowship with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ: That you may have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with
the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ: And truly unless we attain to that
blessed fellowship, we can never have verum aut plenum gaudium, that is, true
or full joy.

Qu. But you may say, Is not this happiness, to have what heart can wish? For a
man to have his desires attend him all the days of his life, and to have all
the sDreams of the Creature to concur together to bring him satisfaction; to be
like the Rich man in the Gospel, to be clothed with Purple, and to sare
delicicusly every day?

Ans. This is indeed no happiness, no blessedness without God at all; because
without him there is nothing blessed, but every thing cursed which we do enjoy,
Psalm. 69. 22. Their Table becomes a snare, how well furnished soever it may
seem to be, and that which should otherwise have been for their welfare, is
turned into a trap, by which they are taken and snared unto their destruction,
Job 29. 18. Their Portion is cursed in the Earth: It may be a large, a very
plentiful and stately Portion, and men may bless them because of it, but the
Lord abhors them, and the Curse of the Lord is upon them and their Portion:
They were better indeed ten thousand times have no meat, than such sauce.
Solomon tells us, that the prosperity of fools does destroy them, and is as
Prove. 1. 32.
a Sword in their bowels to them: Their Cups of pleasure and delight, are but
sweetened draughts of mortal Poison: This the godly man sees by Faith, and that
this Poison will work in a little time in a visible way, and they will be
brought into desolation even in a moment.

USE I.
Examine your selves whether God be your All; Can you say, Whom have we in
Heaven but thee, and that there is nothing on Earth that we desire besides him:
Prove your own selves by this Touchstone; try your selves by this Weight and
Balance of the Sanctuary: If you do not attain to this, you are reprobate
Silver, and the Lord will reject you. We have reason to examine our selves
about this matter.

1. Because there are but few that make God their All: Many give him glorious
Titles, and challenge an interest in him; they call him their Lord, their God,
and their King, yet in their serious and practical thoughts have higher
estimations of lying vanities, than of God blessed for ever. Many there are
that hear the Word of the Lord; they come before him as his people use to do,
and sit before him as his people use to sit, but amongst these how few are to
be found that make him their All, that look for no happiness, no comfort, no
good but in the enjoyment of him?

2. We have reason to examine, because of the necessity of it, it must be done:
Woe unto us if it be not done; we are no Christians without it; we are not in
the state of Grace, if this be not: We are no more Saints whatever our
Profession may be, than the picture or carcass of a man is a man. Oh! if we do
not make God our All, though we may seem to be something, and may deceive our
selves and others, yet in God's account we are nothing, and God will make
nothing of us, i. e. will have no regard of us, or respect unto us another day.
To help us now a little in our enquiry about this matter, I shall give you a
few Characteristical Marks of such a Soul as makes God his All.

1. This Soul will love to draw near to God: To draw near to him by Faith, by
Prayer, and in all the Duties and Ordinances of his Worship: you read in the
last verse of this 73 Psalm: It is good for me to draw near to God: So says
every one that makes God his All: Oh I love to draw near to God, One day in the
Courts of the Lord is better Psalm 84. 10.
to me than a thousand elsewhere. I was Psalm 122. 1
glad when they said unto me, Come let us go into the house of the Lord: Whilst
others say unto God, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways,
Job 21. 14. And again, chap. 22. 17. They said unto God, Depart from us, and
what can the Almighty do for us? We shall get no good by Gods drawing near to
us, nor by our drawing near to him; and in the 15th verse of the 21 chap. of
Job, What is the Almighty that we should serve him? and what profit should we
have if we pray unto him? This is the language of the men of the world, their
words are indeed stout against the Lord; but says the Soul that Mal. 3. 13.
makes God his All, it is good for me; whatsoever the sentiments and
apprehensions of carnal ones are, this I am sure of, it is good for me; I
believe it to be good, and I have found it to be good; all the people of God
say it is good for them, and I will say it is good for me, to draw near to God:
Lord, says Peter, Whither should I go but unto thee? Thou have the words of
eternal life: Lord, says this Soul, Whither should I go but unto thee? I love,
I love to come to thee, for thou art my All, and all my Springs are in thee,
and slow from thee.

2. He is one that fears to sin against God: He fears indeed nothing more; his
Motto is, Nil nisi peccatum timeo: There is nothing in all the world that I
fear more than sin, because this is the only thing that can separate between
him and his God; and that can make a partition wall between him and his great
All. He fears sin more than suffering, and will choose it rather than iniquity;
because suffering does not separate between the Soul and God. He fears sin more
than poverty, than sickness, than death it self, for none of these can separate
between the Soul and God. He knows what is expressed, Romans 8. ver. 35, etc. That
tribulation, distress, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril or sword; neither
height nor depth, death or life, i. e. The pains of death, or the afflictions
and sorrows of life, can separate from the love of God in Christ Jesus;
therefore he fears sin more than all. Sin is against God, suffering is only
afflictive to the Creature. It Is sin only that causes God to hide his Face from
us, and to set his Face against us.

3. When other things come into Competition with God, this Soul that accounts
God his All, will leave them, and cleave to God. If he cannot enjoy Father and
Mother, Brethren and Sisters, Houses and Lands with God, he will leave them
all, because they are not his All, and will cleave to God. As Rath left her
Kindred, and her Fathers house, and joined her self to Naomi: And as it is said,
a man shall leave his Father and Mother, and shall cleave to his Wife; in like
manner will that Soul do, whose All the Lord is: As Mephibosheth said, Let Ziba
take all, since the King is returned in peace, 2 Samuel 19. 29 So says he, Let
all go, I am willing to forgo them all; if God will return to me in peace, and
abide with me, I shall say, My lines are fallen in a fruitful place, and truly
I have a goodly heritage. Sometimes we may see a Servant following two
Gentlemen, but unto which of these the Servant belongs, we cannot tell, until
they part asunder, and then the Servant will go with the one, and leave the
other. While we can have God and the world both, it is hard to say which is our
All, and which is our Master that we desire to serve; but when they come to
part asunder, and we can no longer enjoy God and the world together, that Soul
whose All the Lord is, will resolve with Joshua, that he will serve the Lord;
and as the Needle in the Compass leaves all the other points and stands to the
North, so will he leave all his other enjoyments, and join himself to the Lord
in an everlasting Covenant to love the name of the Lord, to fear him, and serve
him for ever.

4. Such as these will not be envious at the foolish when they see the
prosperity of the wicked. I mean, this temptation will not abide in and upon
them* they will not remain under the power of it, though they may be surprised
with it, but they will soon get out of it. He that makes God his All, cannot
but see, that though they seem to possess all things, yet indeed they have
nothing; that they are more to be pitied than to be envyed; and that they have
greater cause to weep and howl even in the fullness of their sufficiency, than
they have to rejoice and be glad. It Is said of Jehoshaphat, that he had Silver
and Gold in abundance, Riches and Honor in abundance, 2 Chronicles. 17. 5, 6. but
his heart was lift up to God in the ways of God: He valued not himself by his
Riches and Honor, but by his relation to God, and interest in him; without
whom all other things had been but low-priz'd Commodities, and of very little
account with him. The wicked man's Riches, Honors and good things are his All;
for what has he more? God pays them their Portion in the World's Coin, and in
a little while will say unto them, You have received your Consolation: And then
they will wish that they had begged their Bread with Lazarus on Earth, rather
than their Water with Dives in Hell. Oh! pity these miserable Souls; they have
nothing within them or without them, that can do them any good: They have
nothing but Sin within them, and that will damn them; they have nothing but the
World without them, and that cannot save them; no, it will prove a heavy
Millstone about their necks, which will sink them down deeper into the Gulf of
Eternal Woe and Misery.

I now pass on to the next, which is the 26th verse: My flesh and my heart
fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. Where
you have the Psalmists Complaint; And secondly, the Psalmists Comfort. In the
former part of the verse, you find him going forth weeping, My flesh and my
heart fails; but because he had within him precious seed; (For light is sown
for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart: This seed is already
sown in their Hearts and Souls;) Therefore in the latter part of the verse, we
find him returning again rejoicing with his Sheaves in his bosom: But God is
the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. We will first consider his
Complaint; My flesh and my heart fails, (...) will fail; my flesh will fail,
my heart will fail in a little time: He speaks in the present tense, to notify
the certainty of the failure: Such forms of speech are frequently used in
Scripture: Babylon is fallen, is fallen -- i. e. Babylon shallas surely fall as
if it were fallen already. The Scripture speaks often of things that will be
done, as if they were at present done, Romans 8. Whom he justified, them he
glorified; that is, they shall as certainly be glorified, as if they were
already in the Kingdom of Glory. Thus here, My flesh and my heart fails, that
is, it is sure and certain that it will be so: My flesh, my heart; we are not to
understand it exclusive, as if it were only appropriate to himself, and were
not the case of others as we^l as his; no, but you are to understand it
inclusive, as meant of all that dwell in these fleshly Tabernacles and Houses
of Clay: This is a common case; there is no exemption from this general
Calamity and Affliction The Doctrine from hence, (which I shall but briefly
insist on) is this:

Doct. That the flesh and the heart of every man will certainly fail. Though at
present this flesh of ours may flourish as the Grass; and may be in its beauty
as the Flower in the field; yet as the Grass soon withers, and the Flower
soon fades, so will it be with our flesh. Though at present, these hearts of
ours may be sound and strong, though they are every moment moving and beating
in our bosoms, always opening or shutting. Still busy either in a way of
contraction or dilatation; but e're long all this work will fail, this motion
will cease, the heart will faint and succumb, and the strings of it will be
broken in pieces. Man's slesh and heart will surely fail: I shall in a few words
animadvert, 1. Upon the failing of man's Flesh. 2. On the failing of man's Heart:
And then, 3. Show whence this failing proceeds and does arise: And, 4. Make
some brief Application.


1. Man's Flesh that will fail: Flesh sometimes is taken in Scripture, Sensu
morali, or rather, immorali and corrupto; in a moral, or immoral and corrupt
sense; for the depraved Nature, for the unregenerate Part in man: As in Gal. 5.
17. The flesh lusts against the spirit. Romans 7. 18. In my flesh there
dwells no good thing. So in Gal. 5. 19. The works of the flesh are manifest,
etc. But this is not the meaning of it here. Though this flesh shall fail, and
does fail, for in every regenerate Soul, it is dying daily. Sin in the Godly
has lost its Sword. So that it cannot kill; it has lost its Scepter, so that
it cannot rule, and in a few days it shall lose its Being, its Habitation and
Residence. The death of the Body shall be the destruction of the body of death.
Now sin is dying in them; it has received a deadly wound, but then it shall
breathe out its last, and live no longer, to be a Thorn in their Eyes, or a
Goad in their Sides, to vex and disquiet their righteous Souls, as now it does
from day to day: Then this cursed Inmate shall be turned out of doors, and
Grace shall dwell alone in the Soul for ever. This body of death is now under a
Curse, and then the Curse of the barren Fig Tree shall fall upon it, and no
fruit shall ever grow on it more.

But secondly; Flesh is taken and to be understood sensu naturali and physico,
in a natural and physical sense; and thus we are to take it here: For the
fleshly part of man, that fleshly substance that our bones are covered withal;
that fleshly Tabernacle in which the Soul of man does dwell: This flesh will
fail, Isa 40. 6, 7. All flesh is grass, and the goodliness thereof as the
flower of the field; the grass withers, and the flower fades, so will the
flesh: All the goodliness of it, its comeliness, strength and beauty, all will
fail: A blast will come upon all, which will cause it to wither and decay,
which will turn it into rottenness, and make it become like a Moth-eaten
garment, Job 13. 28. How beautiful soever you may now be, in a few days your
beauty shall be turned into deformity: And how strong soever you at present be,
it will not be long but this flesh of yours will become so weak, that it will
not be able any longer to hold the spirit. The Lord has determined a
Consumption to come upon all flesh, Isa. 28. 22. and he has many ways and
methods to bring it about: As in Deuteronomy. 28. 21, 22. Either by the pestilence, or
a fever, or an inflammation, or an extreme burning, or the sword, etc. How many
hundred diseases and distempers are there up and down in the world, effecting
this determined consumption: If God give any one of them a Commission to come
to us, and to effect the same (as surely at one time or other he will) then
will our Beauty consume away as a moth, and this blow of his hand will make our
flesh to fail.

2. Man's heart will fail. This heart of man, which is that part that is primum
vivens, and ultimum moriens in him, which is first alive, and dies last; this
heart will fail, grow cold and die away: It dies last, but die it must. This
strong hold in man will be assaulted, and forced, nolens volens, whether it
will or no, to surrender to the power of sickness and death: Sickness will come
and closely besiege it; one Disease and Distemper or another will give it a
Summons; then Death will come, that Mighty Conqueror, and break the very
strings of it, and so quite subdue it. Thus, as you read Eccles. 12. ver. 6.
This golden bowl will be broken, and the pitcher will be broken at the
fountain, and the wheel will he broken at the cistern; that is, the heart of
man, with all the instrumental and subservient parts, whereby supplies of Blood
and Spirits are conveyed from it, into the several parts of the Body, will
break and fail, and the Offices of these parts will cease, and be performed no
more.

3. We are to show from whence this failing does proceed. The answer to this
Question, has occasioned many serious thoughts amongst the Wise men of this
world; I mean, amongst many Sage Heathens and Profound Philosophers; these
evils and miseries they were sensible of, and complained of them; but the rise
and original of them they could not come to the knowledge and understanding of:
This wisdom and understanding was too deep for them to sound with their line of
reason, and too difficult for them to attain unto: Therefore they looked upon
death, and all the failings and tendences thereunto to be a common Tribute,
laid upon every Creature to pay; to be an Universal Law that all Mankind must
obey* and submit to: And to have the same reason that other mutations and
changes have, which they did see in the course of nature every day: And they
could render no other reason, but the same which they gave when they saw other
things dissolved into their Elements: This is a common fate, Sic fata volunt:
It Is so appointed by the Higher Powers; but the reason of the appointment they
could not find out. And because they did apprehend no farther, it is no great
wonder why they did fear death and dissolution no more than they did; but
rather expected or desired it, as a rest from their labors, and an end of all
their sorrows and miseries.

But God has shown in his Word unto us the true cause of all our woe, and the
original of our failing and dying; that all proceeds from man's sin; Hinc illae
lachrymae; from this cursed root of bitterness does spring and arise all our
Wormwood and Gall. Romans 5. 12. By one man's disobedience sin entered into the
world, and death by sin: Death with all its appurtenances, with all that
leads to it, and all the miseries that follow after it; all are the issues
and products of sin: There had been no sickness, no death, no failing of heart
or flesh, had there been no sin. Man has sown unto the flesh, and therefore of
the flesh must reap corruption, Gal. 6. 8. Sin as naturally produces these
evils, as every Seed does produce and send forth its own Herb: It Is this that
has opened the Sluice, and let in that Inundation of miseries, that we poor
Creatures are assaulted and overwhelmed withal. It Is storied, Of a Person
traveling in Germany, and beholding the ruins and desolations which the Wars
had made there; that he said, Haec sunt peccata Germanorum; that is, these
ruins and desolations are the Germans sins; meaning, that their sins and
provocations were the procuring causes of all their mischiefs and miseries.
James 4. ver. 1. The Apostle proposes a question, and gives the resolution of
it: From whence (says he) come wars and fightings, with all their mischievous
and destructive attendances? He tells us, they come from the lusts of men that
war in their members against the Lord, and against their own peace, comfort and
tranquillity. There had been nothing but good Seed in the whole Creation, which
would have brought forth good fruit, had not man by his sin sowed tares: There
had been no pricking bryar, nor grieving thorn, there had been nothing to hurt
or destroy in the whole Universe, had it not been for man's sin: Man has sowed
the wind, and reaps the whirlwind.

We will now make some brief Application, and so dispatch this point.

USE I.
Let Us all look to this, that all be well within with our Souls and Spirits,
because these failings and failures will certainly come upon our slesh and our
hearts: Oh look to your Souls, and ask them often how they do? And whither they
are not in danger of failing too? I mean of being lost and undone for ever. Oh
it is sad to have a failing Body, and a perishing Soul; to have a pained and
languishing Body, and to have a pained and dying Soul; troubles without and
terrors within; this must needs be doleful and dismal: The spirit of a man will
bear the infirmities and failings of the Body, if that be but sound, and in a
good condition; but if that be wounded and galled with the guilt of sin and
apprehensions of wrath, what is there then to help us to bear?

USE II.
Let Us think seriously of this failing: Make me to know how frail I am, Psalm
39. 4. Help me to ap^rehend and consider what a poor failing Creature I am,
says David; those of you that have Bones full of Marrow, and Breasts of Milk,
that are in your Health and Strength, and seem to slourish like the green
Bay Tree; Oh consider this and lay it to heart, that your Flesh and your Hearts
must fail before it be long. The Lord help us so to consider it, that we may
apply our hearts to Wisdom; Oh that there were such an Heart within us! Eccles.
11. 8. If a man live many years, and rejoice in them all; yet let him remember
the days of darkness, for they will be many. Oh don't let us forget the days of
darkness; let us not put away from us the evil days of failing, of trouble and
affliction, because they will assuredly come upon us. Some Heathens accounted
it true Wisdom and sound Philosophy to meditate often of Death: To be sure this
would be of excellent use, and would much conduce to the promotion of Piety and
true Religion, if we would be much in meditation on this Subject. Let it be
much in your thoughts in your lying down, and in your rising up, in your going
out, and in your coming in, at home and abroad; Oh consider that your Flesh and
your Heart must fail in a little time. This frequently considered on, and often
revolved in our minds, would (by the assistance and operation of the Spirit of
grace) doubtless better us to a far higher degree than yet we have attained
unto.

1. We should verily be less earthly than we are, did we ponder this more in
our hearts than we do. We should not be so much concerned about the Body and
the things thereof as we are, did we seriously consider this: Certainly men
would not spend their days, waste their lives, prostitute their Consciences, in
making provision for their Flesh, and in getting supplies for their Bodies; did
they seriously consider that this Fabric of the Body, this Tabernacle of dust,
this House of clay, is falling down about their ears, and then what profit will
they have of all that they cared for, and labored after under the Sun? Were
this well considered, we should not be so like the Serpent as we are, which
goes on its Belly and seeds on Dust. Men's Souls cleave unto the dust as David
speaks, though in another sense, Psalm. 119. 25. Adhaerent pavimento: They are
as if they were all Flesh, and had no Spirit to mind at all, as if they were
all Body, and had no Soul, which would not be, if this were well considered by
us.

2. We should be surely more heavenly than we are, if we did meditate more on
the failing of our Flesh and our Heart. We should be more heavenly in our
Conversations, in our Communications, in our Hearts and Affections, in our
Labors and Endeavors. This would cause us to groan to be delivered out of
this failing Tabernacle, and to be clothed upon with our House which is from
Heaven. Here we have no continuing City, says the Apostle, Heb. 12. 14. There
is not a House in it, but what is failing, decaying, and even ready to drop
down: Therefore we seek one to come; even a City that has Foundations, and
will never fail, whose Builder and Maker is God.

USE III.
Let Us from hence learn to hate sin to a greater degree than yet we do. This is
the evil of evils; the greatest evil of all evils; and the evil that is the
cause of all our other evils: It Is this that does us all the mischief: All our
Consumptions, our Pains, Diseases, Distempers, Failings come from this cause.
It Is strange indeed, that men should be in love with their deadly Enemy; that
they should entertain it in their Bosoms, that they should lodge it so near
their Hearts: That they should nourish this Viper which will gnaw out their
very Bowels, and will assuredly feed upon the slaughters and ruins of its
dearest lovers. Oh if we love our sins we are cruel unto our own Souls. If any
man among our selves, should take away our Money, should fall upon us, and
beat, and wound us, or deprive us of any worldly accommodation; how easily can
we hate such a Person; and how hardly be reconciled to him? Oh learn to hate
sin; all ye that love the Lord hate evil; all ye that love your selves, that
love your Souls, hate sin: There Is nothing more prejudicial and destructive to
us. This is the Enemy that robs and wounds us; this weakens and debilitates our
Bodies, and ruins our Souls: This is the Enemy that separates the Soul from the
Body, and God from the Soul.

Thus we have done with the Psalmists complaint, My Flesh and my Heart fails,
there is the dark side of the Cloud: We pass on now to the bright side thereof;
which is the Psalmists comfort, But God is the strength of my Heart, and my
portion for ever. Thus, as in 1 Samuel 30. 6. he encouraged himself in the Lord
his God; and in the view and apprehension of the failing of his flesh and his
heart, these consolations did refresh and delight his Soul.

Here I shall only glance a little upon these three particulars, which may
serve for so many Doctrinal Observations.

1. That God is the Believers strength. 2. That God is the Believers portion.
3. That God is the Believers everlasting portion.
Every one of these is a Well of Salvation, out of which with the Bucket of
Faith, we may draw out abundance of the Waters of Consolation to cheer our
Hearts withal in our greatest troubles.

1. God is the Believers strength: From God he has strength, 1. To bear his
burdens. Alas! without the strength of God, we should faint in the day of
adversity, because our strength is small: God puts underneath his everlasting
arms, and enables them to bear: He strengthens them with all might by his
Spirit in the inward man; and helps to undergo the miseries, infirmities and
burdens, that are upon the outward man, therefore by Faith we should cast all
our burdens upon him, for he has promised to sustain us, Psalm. 55. 22. He will
give us shoulders suitable to our burdens, or else suite our burdens to our
shoulders.

2. From God he has strength to do his Duties: As he gives shoulders for every
burden, he has for us to bear, so he gives hands for every piece of work he
has for us to do: Alas! Without him we can do nothing, as the Hand can do
nothing without the Head, the Body can do nothing without the Soul; no more can
we do, without the strength of God: Therefore where ever there is a command
that finds us work, there is always a suitable promise to find us strength: I
will cause you (says God) to walk in my ways, my grace shall be made
sufficient for you: God does not deal with us as the Egyptian Taskmasters did
with the Israelites, who required Brick, but would give them no Straw: God does
not require Duty and Service of us, and leave us to get strength to do it,
where we can; no, but is pleased graciously to promise, that he will give what
he does command, and that his Spirit shall help our infirmities, and that he
will strengthen us unto the performance of every good work.

3. From God he has strength to overcome his corruptions. Were it not for the
power of God resting on them, and working in them, these Sons of Zerviah would
be too hard for them; these mighty Philistines would certainly vanquish and
overcome them. Therefore he goes out against them in the Name of the Lord, as
David did against that Philistine Giant, 1 Samuel 17. 45 knowing, that in his own
strength he cannot prevail; therefore he begs of God to teach his hands to war,
and to strengthen his fingers to fight, that he may be avenged on the Enemies
of God, and of his Soul, and be made more than a Conqueror in and through the
strength and power of Christ Jesus: It Is from the Spirit and strength of
Christ, that any Soul is enabled to mortify the deeds of the flesh; without
this strength, instead of mortifying our lusts, our lusts, to be sure, would
mortify us, and lead us captive as it were bound hands and and feet, and
triumph over us.

4. In God is his strength to stand it out against, to resist and to overcome
Satan's Temptations. The Tempter is strong, and we are weak; he did overcome
Man when he had no sin, and gave him a sad fall; even then, when he was in the
rectitude of his Nature, when there was nothing within to take the Tempter's
part: But now he has much more power over us, because we have a party within
us, that upon every occasion and temptation, is ready to betray us, and to
deliver us up unto him. So that if we be not kept by the power of God through
Faith in Christ Jesus, unto salvation, we shall undoubtedly come short of the
Kingdom of God: We have not only flesh and blood, but principalities and powers
to wrestle withal. How shall we quench the fiery Darts of the Devil? How shall
we resist his strong Temptations, when we are weak as Water, if we be not
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, and be not strengthened by
the hand of the mighty God of Jacob? But God tells us, that we have more with
us, than we have against us, though the Gates of Hell, and all the Power and
Policy of that Kingdom of Darkness be engaged against us. He has assured us
that he will be with us, and strengthen us, and that the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail against us.

USE I.
Learn from hence, That such as are without God are without strength: You are
in the midst of Enemies, and have no strength to resist them; in the midst of
dangers, and have no strength to fly or make an escape, and so to deliver your
own Souls. You are without strength for active Obedience, you can do nothing as
you ought to do it, you are without strength for passive Obedience, you can
bear and suffer nothing as you ought to bear it; in a word, you have strength
for nothing but to fight and rebel against God, and in so doing you do but kick
against the pricks, you wound your own Souls, and add coals of fire to your
Eternal Flames.

USE II.
Let the people of God have frequent recourse unto their strength. The name of
the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous fly unto it, and they are safe; all
is well with them then.

Let me tell you, that you are but a feeble people of your selves, every blast
of Temptation will blow you down; every gust of the wind of Affliction, every
wave and billow, will overcome and overwhelm you; every duty and service will
be too mighty for you; therefore have recourse to your strength, keep close to
your strength. You read Prove. 30. 26. That the Coneys are but a feeble Folk,
therefore they dwell in the Rocks. Oh! go to the Rock that is higher than you,
dwell in the Rock, and build upon the Rock; and this Rock will be a
hiding place from the wind, a covert from the storm, and afford a shadow unto
you in a weary Land: You will find Honey in this Rock to delight you, Water in
this Rock to refresh you, Strength in this Rock to support and bear you up,
when your flesh and your heart will fail you. This Rock will follow you whither
soever you go, it will never leave you nor forsake you: When you go through the
Fire, and the Water, you will find it present with you; as Isa. 43. 2. When
thou passest through the Waters, I will be with thee, and through the Rivers,
they shall not overflow thee: When thou walk through the Fire, thou shall not
be burnt, neither shall the Flame kindle upon thee. None have such a Rock as is
our Rock; we may appeal to the very Enemies of God themselves to be Judges, if
they would speak arbitrio sano, and judge according to evidence. Let us then
fly to our Rock by Faith and Prayer; let us get into the clefts of it; if we
build upon this Rock, and put our confidence in it, we shall never be moved.

2. God is the Believer's Portion. The people of God are the Lord's Portion,
and Jacob is the Lot of his Inheritance -- And the Lord calls them his pleasant
Portion, Deuteronomy. 32. 9. God indeed would be very poor in the World, and would
have no pleasure in the works of his hands, were it not for them: So God is
their Portion, he has made over himself by a deed of gift, to be their God,
and their exceeding great Reward: And here I might show you: 1. What an
enriching Portion God is. 2. What a Soul satisfying Portion God is. And 3. What
a Soul-saving Portion God is.


But I have no time to enlarge upon these things: If you know God, you know it
all, and abundantly more than I am able with words to express. I shall
therefore only show you, first, how they came to have this Portion; and then
secondly, make some brief Application.

First, How they came to have this goodly Portion, and to be instated in such
an Inheritance, which is incorruptible, undesiled, and that fades not away.
For answer,

First, Negatively, 1. They were not born to it. Some among men are born to
great Portions, and large Inheritances; these are their birthright, and
intailed upon them as being the lawful Heirs of such and such persons: But the
Lord knows, that we are all baseborn, because born in sin: Our Father was an
Amorite, and our Mother an Hittite; and so we are become an accursed
generation, and are Heirs of nothing but Wrath and Hell: We did no sooner live,
but we deserved to die; and no sooner did we see the Light, but we deserved
that God should give us our Portion among Devils and damned ones, in the
Kingdom of Darkness: In the Womb we were like the Cockatrice Egg, filled with
deadly Poison, and since we came thence, we have been like the troubled Sea,
casting forth mire, filth and dirt. As we are Adam's Children, if God should
pay us our Portion that belongs unto us, it would undo us for ever.

Secondly, They did not get this Portion by their own industry, labor and
diligence. Sometimes among men the diligent hand makes rich; and persons born
to nothing come to acquire great things, and to purchase for themselves large
Revenues. But so it is not here; this Portion was not acquired by us in this
way. Alas! what were we able to do in order to this, whose hearts are deceitful
and desperately wicked above all things? as God, who knows us infinitely better
than we know our selves, witnesses of us. We have nothing within us to
principle any one good action: If the Tree be bad, so must the Fruit of
necessity be. If we would attain to this of our selves, we must first pay the
debt which we owe to Justice for our sin; and then we must perform that sinless
and unspotted obedience which the Law demands. Both which all the men on Earth,
and I may add, all the Saints and Angels in Heaven, are not able to do. Thus
negatively.

2. And Positively. We are born again to it, by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 3. Who has begotten us again unto a lively hope by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ: The meaning is, that being born again, we sly to
Jesus Christ by Faith, and by his Resurrection are assured, that God is
reconciled, and that our Peace is made, our Debt is paid (for otherwise he
having been arrested and laid in the Prison of the Grave, he had not risen
again and come forth from thence, if full satisfaction had not been given) and
thus we come to a lively hope, that now we are upon good terms with God, and
that he is become our Father, and will be the portion of our Souls for ever.

USE I.
Hence we may be informed, That none are so rich as the people of God: None so
rich in possession, none so rich in reversion: Many of them seem to have
nothing, yet they possess all things: None can tell how rich they are, but they
that can tell how rich God is, for the riches of God are all theirs.

USE II.
Let the people of God make use of their portion; is men do, for the supply of
those things they need; they go to their portion, and with that procure those
necessaries and conveniences which they want. Oh, let the people of God, go to
their portion every day, and make use of it, for all they want for their
Bodies, or for their Souls, for their inward, and for their outward man, for
Time and for Eternity: There are some men of the world that do not use their
portion, Eccles. 6. ver. 2. There is a man to whom God has given Riches,
Wealth, and Honor, so that he wants nothing for his Soul of all that he
desires; yet he has not power to eat thereof. By reason of inordinate Love,
distrustful Providence, and the encumbrances of earthly employments, they
hinder themselves of the enjoyment of what they have; and so they are Poor in
the midst of their Riches, and Beggars in the midst of their Abundance. There
is as it were a Spell set upon their Estates, so that their Wealth says to
them, Touch not, taste not, handle not. They are like the Dog in the wheel, that
toils all the day to Roast meat for others eating. Truly many of Gods own
people live exceedingly below their allowance, they live, as if they had
nothing, were worth nothing, when they have a rich Portion; they have it, but
they do not use it: What comfort, what joy, what peace which passes all
understanding, might they find in it, if they would live by Faith upon it?

USE III.
Let all be exhorted to get this Portion: What will you do when your Flesh and
your Heart fails, if God be not your Portion? What will you do when Death and
Judgment comes, if God be not your Portion? Oh Death will be deadly to you, if
God be not your Portion; Judgment will be terrible and amazing, and you will be
ready to cry to the Rocks, to the Hills and Mountains to fall upon you, and to
hide you from the wrath of the Lamb that sits upon the Throne, if God be not
your Portion. Oh get this portion! I told you before, that it is not procured
by our endeavor, we cannot purchase it by all that we are able to do; but this
is procured by another; there is a near Kinsman of ours, that has redeemed
this morgaged or lost Inheritance, that is, Jesus Christ; the right of
Redemption did belong to him, and he has done the part of a Kinsman for us.
Now if we will come to him as poor, miserable and undone Creatures, and take
this Inheritance thankfully out of his hands; if we will receive it, in his
right, and submit to his terms, which are as reasonable as can be desired; then
this Inheritance is our own, and God will become our Portion again. Oh, get
this Portion, or you get nothing; get this Portion, and you get all; this
Portion will make you happy in Life and Death.

If God be your Portion, if your Possessions are lower he will heighten the
Fruition: He can crowd in abundance of comfort in a little of the Creature. He
can make a single Dish out-vye a Feast, and the meanest fare, suppose a Dinner
of green Herbs, to be sweeter and better than a stalled Ox. With God a small
Stock, will be more comfortable and satisfying than a large Revenue. Or if he
susser us to be bereaved of all, he himself will be instead of all. He has
taken to himself the names of all things needful and comfortable, to intimate
to us, that he alone stands for all they signify or are worth. Therefore he is
called a Portion, an Inheritance, an Habitation, high Tower, Shade, Strength,
Deliverer, Friend, Father, Husband, etc. To let us know that all these are
nothing without him, and that he can be all without these*

Without this portion, when you come to die, not Angels but Devils will receive
your Souls: and eternity will not be the measure of your joys but of your woes:
Oh think of your dying day, and how near you may be to that day, and be
awakened to make sure of this portion. Death is riding its Circuit, up and down
every day, it will not be long but it will come to us: it will come with its
Sithe, and Mow us down, it will come and take down the Glass, and stop our
breath, and tell us that we have lived our last! Oh then, make sure of this
portion: and he will be your God in Life, in Death, and after Death to all
Eternity. Make sure of this portion, or you will have the wicked man's portion,
Psalm. 11. 6. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an
horrible tempest; this shall be the portion of their cup.

3. God is their everlasting portion. A portion that they shall never leave, a
portion that they shall never lose. For we must have a better and a more
enduring substance, than can be had and enjoyed here: we shall outlive all
these things. A portion in this world will not serve our turns, because we are
hastening away out of this world into an everlasting state; and therefore must
get an everlasting portion: Alas, A month may devour us and all our portion
that we have here, Hos. 5. 7. yea a week, a day, a night, may devour all; but
the Godly man's portion is everlasting. God, says the Psalmist in the Text, is
my portion for ever. There Is nothing but God that suits the Souls nature;
nothing but God that can fill the Souls Capacities, nothing but God that can
equal the* Souls duration. Here is a Portion indeed that is Coaetaneous with
the immortal Soul of man. As for all the perfection that is here below we shall
soon see an end of it: As David said, I have seen an end of all perfection,
Psalm. 119. 96. he speaks not of every kind of perfection, but of all the
perfections of one kind: as for divine perfections and enjoyments they have no
end; therefore an end of them cannot be seen; but all humane perfections and
enjoyments they must and will end. By the sight of his eye, he had seen an end
of many humane perfections; and by the sight of his mind he had seen an end of
them all; some he had seen already ending, and he saw of necessity that all
must end. But the Godly man has an everlasting Portion, a Portion that shall
survive all the Vicissitudes, and changes of time: in fatal period shall ever
come to put an end to their enjoyment of this Portion, to denude or rob them of
this precious treasure.

To the enjoyment of this blessed and everlasting Portion, our Friend (whose
death was the occasion of this discourse) is gone; and now all tears are wiped
from her eyes, and she is bathing her self in those rivers of pleasures that
are at Gods right hand for evermore. Though she be dead, she yet speaks; she
speaks to her yoak-fellow and children that she has left behind, to live
godly, righteously, and soberly in this present world, as she did; to mind
their precious and immortal Souls, to provide for Eterity and to lay a good
foundation against the time to come, (...) she did. She speaks to us all, to be
followers of them, (...) through Faith and patience inherit the Kingdom: Such a
one she was, under her long affliction though she di^ groan, she never
grumbled; though she mourned, (...) she never murmured; her earnest desire was
rather to be^^ her affliction sanctified to her, than removed from (...). As to
life or death, she left it wholly to Gods choice choosing infinitely rather to
be at his dispose than her own. I verily believe that if life and death had
been put in a Pair of Balances, she would not willingly have (...) in one dram,
to turn the Balance any way. The Kingdom of Heaven had already entered into her,
and she had a longing desire (if her time was come, and her work done) to enter
into it.

FINIS.

