God the Believer's best Strong-hold in the worst Times.

A SERMON PREACHED Upon the Preservation of His MAJESTY'S Person, AND THE
Discovery of the late Plot of the Intended Invasion.

By EDMUND GODWIN, Rector of Cowley.

Deo confisi nunquam confusi. LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson at the
Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1696.

To the Right Worshipful Sir JONATHAN KEATE, Knight and Baronet.
WHereas formerly there has been some promise of my coming into your parts to
preach, and to pay my Respects to your Worship for Kindnesses of old; when you,
and others with you, did largely declare your Desire of having me your Minister
at Paul's Walden: I should readily have accepted of your Kindnesses, but that
the Vicaridge-House was so ruinous, and a Promise being past of my being
elsewhere; yet I must needs confess my self to be indebted since to come, and
give you a Sermon: So that I am so long indebted upon that account, Usque dum
usura superat sortem; That the very Interest does far exceed the Principal.
However, I would have you know, that I still bear an honest Mind, having a
Desire to pay according to my Ability; and though I cannot come and pay what I
owe in Person, yet I have sent my Substitute, this Paper Messenger to supply my
Place; and knowing how well you, and those about you, stand affected to the
Present Government, I have pitched upon Printing a Thanksgiving-Sermon for the
Discovery and Disappointment of the late Dangerous Plot of Assassinating His
Majesty, and the Invading this Kingdom with a design of rooting out our
Religion, under the notion of the Northern Heresy: And I knowing how steadfast
you have been, and others about you, to the Truth, and how ready you are to
assist its Favorers, and to resist its Opposers, I thought good to present you
with a taste of what I did deliver upon that Occasion, hoping it may fall into
the Hands of some of that worthy Family of the Hales, that formerly were my
Noble Benefactors. I hope there are some of that Race alive in those Parts,
though I hear, to my Grief, that Worthy Lady, the Lady Austin, is dead. God
has hitherto prolonged my Life, and it is much upon my Spirit to give you a
Visit in those Parts before I die. I do but present you with a taste of my
Labors, and wish they may be well relisht and received by you; it then may be
an Inducement to put out more of my Labors, yet before I die. I remember a
Passage of Bishop Latimer's, that he Preached in a Sermon before the King, of
one that had brought up his Son at the University, and a Gentleman not far off
from him, having a Living in his Gift newly fallen; that he might gain it for
his Son, presents him with a Dish of ten very fair Apples, and had put into
every one of the Apples 10 twenty Shilling Pieces, and sent his Man with them
to the Patron, and withal to desire him to present his Son to the Living of his
that was fallen. The Man having delivered them, and desiring him in his
Master's Name to remember his Son for the Living; the Gentleman seemed to be
angry, and bid him carry back his Master's Apples, he would have none of them.
Which the Man did, and told his Master that he would have none of his Apples.
Says his Master to him, Carry them again, and desire him but to taste one of
them, and as he likes that, to accept of the rest. Which the Man did, and tells
him, That his Master however did desire him but to taste one of them. Which he
did, and finding 10 twenty Shilling Pieces in it, cries out, I marry, if they be
all like this, thy Master's Son shall have the Living. I will assure you, says
the Man, they all came off of the same Tree: Though Symony was in use then, yet
not so openly practiced as now adays. The Use that I shall make of the Story,
is only to tempt you to a taste of my Labors in Print, and as this is relisht
it is possible the World may have more of them. So beseeching the Lord to bless
you, and the Worthy Families not far off from you, I must needs acknowledge
that I still remain,

Your very much obliged, To serve You, Edmund Godwin.

Nahum I. ver. 7. The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he
knows them that trust in him.
THE Apostle Paul has foretold how in the latter perilous times, (...), hard
times for Persons to keep Faith and a good Conscience; and indeed dangerous in
which to live, in regard of the abounding of Sin; and we seem to be fallen into
the same times that the Apostle Paul himself was fallen into, mentioned 2 Cor.
11. 26. as you may see there: He was in Journeying often as His Majesty K.
William has been, in Perils of Waters, in Perils of Robbers, in Perils by his
own Countrymen, in Perils by other Countrymen, in Perils in the City, in
Perils in the Country, in Perils amongst false Brethren, and in Perils amongst
pretended Friends; so that there has been threatened ubique naufragium.
However, God has been good, may his Majesty now say, and a Strong-hold, and a
sure Defense in all sorts of Troubles, and wonderfully delivered in every
Danger; hitherto he has been an Ebenezer.

In the foregoing part of the Chapter, you have first the Inscription of the
Prophesy in the first Verse, and then a Description of the Almighty, first in
his Power and Greatness in five of the foregoing Verses, and then in Goodness
and Mercy; having to deal with many and mighty Adversaries, as with Nineveh
that great City, the Men whereof were great Sinners before the Lord, and had
repented of their former Repentings in Jonah's time, and had returned with the
Dog to their former Vomit, and with the Sow to their wallowing again in the
Mire of Sin, so that their latter State was now worse than the former; for
which God threatens them with the greatest Plagues, and heaviest Judgments: But
God is never so angry, but in Wrath he can and will show Mercy, and knows his
Friends from his Foes, according to the Tenor of the Words of the Text, The
Lord is good.

So that the Words are like a Light shineing in a dark place, or as a Haven or
Harbor in time of a Storm, or a strong Fort or Tower in the day of Distress,
to which the Righteous may run and resort in the time of Danger, and be sure to
be safe. So that you have in the Words,

First, Something affirmed, That the Lord is good.

Secondly, You have the same confirmed by a twofold Argument; As,

1st. In that he is a strong hold in the day of trouble.

2dly. In that he knows those that trust in him.

That God is good, is such a Truth as we all have cause to set our Seals unto,
for he has not left himself without witness of doing of us good, especially of
late in defending and delivering of us; and so I shall come to take notice
first of the Time when it is that his Goodness does most appear, and that is in
the Time of Trouble; and then to whom it does appear, and that is to such as
know him, or rather are known of him, such as not barely know him, but trust in
him.

Now the Doctrines that I shall lay down from the Words, are these;

Doct. 1. That God's People here in this World meet with days of Trouble.

Doct. 2. That they never find times so bad, but still they find God to be good.

Doct. 3. That in times of Danger, God then more especially will be a strong
hold too.

Doct. 4. God knows such as trust in him in a more special manner to save.

On the first, namely, That God's People here in this World, meet with days of
Trouble.

Now we may take notice of this in all the faithful Servants of God: God had
one Son without Sin, but he never had any without Sorrow; his own Son that was
the head of the Church, was a Man of Sorrows; and the first Man that died, he
died for Religion, and so the Father of the Faithful, who ever had greater or
hotter Trials? And so Jacob, in whose Posterity the Church was settled, How
does he complain that few and evil were the days of his Pilgrimage; yet they
were full of Trouble, and the time of Trouble is called the day of Jacob 's
Trouble; and so Job, Who more troubled and afflicted than he? And so David,
that was a Man after God's own Heart, yet how does he cry out? Lord, Remember
David, and all his Troubles, Psalm. 132. 1.

Quest. But how comes it about that such as are so Godly, are so sorely
afflicted?

Answ. First, This comes from God himself. 2dly, From Satan, the God of this
World. 3dly, From Satan's Instruments, the Men of the World. Lastly, From
themselves, or their near Relations.

First, This comes from God himself: For Afflictions rise not out of the Dust,
but God sends them, first to punish Sin past. 2dly, To purge Sin present. 3dly,
To prevent Sin for the time to come.

First, to punish Sin past: I know indeed that the Antinomians will not allow
of such an Expression to be used in respect of God's own People and Children:
They say God only punishes from Sin, and not for Sin in them: But doubtless we
may speak as the Word of God speaks without offense; now says the Church, Lam.
3. 39. Wherefore does the living Man complain, is it not for the Punishment of
his Sin: And so Amos 3. 2. You only have I known of all the Families of the
Earth; therefore I will punish you for all your Iniquities. One would have
thought it should rather have run thus, You only have I known of all the
Families upon earth, therefore I will spare you for your Iniquities: No, but
therefore I will punish you for your Iniquities; you of all others shall be
sure to smart soonnest and sorest here in this World. I confess that in a
strict Sense they cannot so properly be called Punishments as Chastisements,
because Christ has born the Punishments of Believers Sins in his own Body upon
the Tree, and when his Soul likewise was made a Sacrifice to satisfy the
Justice of God for their Sin.

2dly, God sends Afflictions on his own People to purge Sin present: There are
the Remnants of Sin and Corruption in the best of God's Children and Princes.
Children if they be sick, they must be Physickt as well as others: By this
therefore, as it is Isa. 27. 9. shall the Iniquity of Jacob be purged; and now
there is a great difference between Physicians purging, and God's purging of
his People and Children: When Physicians purge their Patients, they many times
purge out the good Humors as well as the bad; but God when he purges his
Children, he only purges out the bad Humors, as in the place we named before;
and this is all the fruit, to take away his Sin; not to take the Sinner, but to
take away his Sin.

3dly, God sends Troubles and Afflictions on his own People and Children to
prevent Sin in them for the time to come, and to keep them within compass: You
know what David said of himself, Psalm. 119. Before I was afflicted I went
wrong, but now have I kept thy word, and kept in the right way: And therefore
God threatens his Apostatical Church, Hosea 2. 6. Therefore, behold, I will
hedge up thy way with Thorns. She was apt to break out into the Pastures of
forbidden Pleasures; therefore God would set Thorns in her paths, if she would
break over, she should prick and wound her self; and if that would not do, God
would make a Wall that she shall not find her paths; Hedges may be easily
trodden down, but Walls are not so easily climbed over. Thus God threatens to do
to his, when he intends to do them good; and Afflictions are not so properly
said to be threatened, as promised to God's own People and Children, as you may
see Psalm. 89 30, 31, 32. therefore it is added the 33d Verse, Neither will I
suffer my Faithfulness to fail; that is, in regard of fulfilling what before he
had promised.

4thly, Again, God orders it so that they shall have their days of Trouble
here, that they may not set up their rest in this World, as the other two
Tribes and an half did on this side Jordan, as People are too apt to do when
all things go well with them, and are apt to flow in upon them; then they are
ready to talk of building Tabernacles here, and never think of going hence: But
now that God may knock off their fingers from things below, and make them know
that this is not their Rest, God lets them meet with many Calamities and sore
Troubles, that so they may know that this is not their Rest, as God says to his
own People, Mich. 2. 10. Arise, and depart, this is not your Rest, it is
polluted; it is defiled with Sin, and can give you no more Rest than a Bed of
Thorns can do to a sick Person. O! it is polluted, and therefore it must not be
your Rest. Sin has polluted all things here in this World, therefore get you
hence; though they should combine altogether to do you good, yet they cannot give
you perfect Rest: When God made all things at first, he made them very good,
and there was that in them then that might give Satisfaction to the Heart of
Man; but now Sin has polluted the Creature, and filled it with nothing but
Dirt and Filthiness. Sin has not only put our Mouths out of taste that we can
take no Contentment, or find any Satisfaction in the Creature, but it has
emptied it of all that was truly good in it: So that now we have Carbones pro
Thesauro, Coals instead of golden Mines; so that God does this.

5thly, That they may be weaned from the World, and from all wordly things; For
the World passes away, [1 John 2. 17.] and we must pass away that are in it;
for we have here no abiding City, but yet the People of God are too apt to let
out their Hearts and Affections on the things of this present World: If they
have all sorts of Flowers in their Garden, they are too apt to make a Nose-gay
of them, and to hold them so fast till they wither in their hand: when a full
cup of Prosperity is filled out to them, God many times anoints the brim with
Aloes, or some bitter thing, that they may not drink too long of it, nor too
much: Sometimes God beats their Plow-shares into Swords, and turns their Rods
into a Serpent.

Again, God brings them into days of Trouble for the trial of their Graces,
both for the trial,

First, Of the Truth of them.

Secondly, Of the Strength of them.

First, The Truth of them; hang heavy Weights upon rotten Boughs, and they
break them; but upon green and sound Boughs, and they bear them; unsound fruit
will hang upon the Tree in a still and calm day, but if it be stormy then down
it falls. The building upon the Sand may make as fair a show in a Sunshine
day, as that built upon the Rock; but when the Floods come, and the Winds blow
hard, then down it falls, when the other stands. An unsound Foot may travel
pretty well in soft and green Way, but when it comes upon the hard Stones, then
it will be apt to boggle and halt. It was the Sword that did discover to whom
of right the Child did belong unto, 1 Kings 3. 24. There be many that think
their Graces are sound and good, but when a Storm, or any Hardship comes, how
full of Unbelief and Impatience, are they there. That God may try his People's
Graces, whether they are sound or no, he brings many stormy days over their
heads; if Afflictions bring us nearer to God, it is a great sign they are
sanctified to us; but if they drive us further from God, it is a great sign
that they are in Wrath, and not for our good. God speaks to a Believer when he
afflicts him, as Isaac did to Jacob when he came to him for the Blessing; Come
near me, my Son, that I may feel thee whether thou be my very Son Esau or
no? So if they bring us nearer to God, and we endure them with patient
submitting to the Will of God without any muttering or repining, it is a great
sign that we are indeed the Children of God.

Secondly, He does it also to try the Strength of their Graces: It must be a
strong Wing that must fly against the Wind, weak Grace will hardly bear up in a
strong day; If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy Strength is small, says
Solomon, Prove. 24. 10. To love God when he hears our Prayers, and answers our
Prayers presently, is no great matter; but to continue praying, when he shuts
out our Prayer, as he did the Churches, Lam* 3. 8. and appears as an Enemy,
this argues strength of Faith: It is an easy thing to love God when he smiles
upon you with his Favors and Blessings; but to love him when he has a Frown
in his Brow, and a Rod in his Hand, this argues strength: That fire of Love
burns hot, that many waters of Affliction cannot quench, or put it out. We read
in Matthew. 15. of a Woman that came to Christ with Words in her Mouth and Sorrow
in her Heart, and all to move him to pity. At first he gave her no answer;
afterward his Disciples are her Spokes-men in her behalf: After that Christ
calls her Dog, yet she will not give him over; a Cure she came for, for her
Daughter, and a Cure she must have before she goes away. She does in a manner
confess her self a Dog, and does but desire the Favor that Dogs are apt to
have at their Master's hands; a crum of his Charity. O Woman, says Christ,
great is thy Faith! O! it is Strength of Faith that will trust and rest in
Christ when he does not answer, nay when he does refuse and reject, and seem to
cast off.

Again, the Children of God have their days of Trouble: That by this means God
might humble them, and bring down the Pride of their Spirits, Pride and
Ambition; it is an ill Weed, and will not only grow in the vast howling
Wilderness, but often it springs up in the Garden of God: Not only wicked Men
are guilty of this Sin, but sometimes the Children of God are apt to be puffed up
with Pride, as we see it in Hezekiah; nay they are apt to be puffed up with their
very Graces, as the Devil was with his Excellencies; and whereas their Graces
should be a means to keep them humble, they will be apt to grow proud of them,
if they take not heed now to let out this bladder of Pride. Sometimes there is
sent a Thorn in the Flesh, as there was to Paul; and sometimes God thrusts in
the Sword of Affliction to let out the Corruption of this big-bellied Vicu: A
Sword was sent to pierce the Heart of the Blessed Virgin, that was so highly
exalted, in all probabilty to keep her humble. It is the Speech of Elihu, Job
33. 17. He chasteneth Man with pain, that he may hide Pride from Man: In the
14th Verse, God speaks once, yea twice. God speaks once by his Word, and
again by his Sword; once by his Word, and Man hears it not; and he speaks
again by his Rod, and all to hide Pride from Man, and that they may not think
poorly of others in regard of themselves.

Again, they meet with days of Trouble that they may be made conformable to
Jesus Christ, God's dearly beloved Son, so Romans 8. 29. They are the Apostle's
words there; That Christ and his Members may be all of a piece: The Children of
God are not made choice of, and appointed unto Glory only, but they are also
appointed unto Conformity to Jesus Christ: You know that whilst he was God, he
was in Glory; but when he became the Son of Man, he became a Man of Sorrows,
and we hid our faces from him, as it is Isa. 53. as if we were ashamed of him.
Trouble was as a Thread drawn through the whole course of his Life: Now that
God's Children may be conformable to Christ, they meet with days of Trouble;
they must be afflicted and misused; for if they have done so to the green Tree,
what will they not do to the dry, who is no better than fit Fuel to the
everlasting Fire?

Again, they meet with days of Trouble, that they may be the more put upon the
Duty of Prayer; for times of Affliction are more properly times of Supplication
and Prayer; Call upon me, says God, in the day of Trouble. Then God calls upon
us to call upon him; and then we are more apt to do it, than at other times, as
appears Isa. 26. 16. Lord, in Trouble have they visited thee, and have poured
out a Prayer when thy chastening was upon them. At other times Prayer came from
them but sparingly and droppingly; but when thy chastening was upon them, then
they poured out a Prayer; then they even poured out their Hearts before the
Lord.

They meet with days of Trouble, that they might more sweetly taste of Peace:
How sweet is an hour's Rest after many toilsome and troublesome Nights. That we
might relish Mercies the better, God does oftentimes sauce them with
troublesome Seasons. O! How comfortable will a Haven of Rest be after
troublesome and dangerous Tempests at Sea, and so doubtless Heaven will be
Heaven indeed to him that has met with many Troubles and Afflictions here in
this World. But yet here is our Comfort here in this Life; Though the days are
never so evil, yet God is always good, a strong hold, to whom we may always
resort, and knows all them that trust in him. And that is the next thing I
shall show you, how then God is good, though Men and the Times are never so bad.

1st. God is good essentially, yea God is Goodness it self; and God must needs
cease to be when he ceases to be good, he ceases to be God.

2dly. God is good efficiently; God is not only good, but he does good, Psalm.
119. 68. As the Sun does not keep in his Beams to himself, but he spreads them
abroad for the good of the Universe: So God is good to all, says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 145. 9. and his tender Mercies are over all his Works.

3dly. God is eminently good, and that to his own People. God is universally
good: There is not any Creature in the World, but he does partake of the
Goodness of God: In some measure he makes his Sun to rise upon the Just and the
Unjust, and he makes his Rain to fall upon wicked Men's Fields, as well as upon
the Fields of the Righteous. But God is in a more special manner good to them
that be good; Truly God is good to Israel, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 72. 1. to
all that are of a clean Heart.

Object. But is he not good to all? Did you not say he is good to all, may some
say? I, but not with the same Goodness, not with saving Goodness; so he is good
only to his Elect, and so he is eternally good to them, not only in this World,
but also in the World to come; God ceases to be good to wicked Men in the World
to come: Remember Son, says Abraham to Dives, thou had thy good things: I,
thou had them, but now thou have them not. But now God is good to his both in
this World, and in the World to come.

Here in this World he is a Strong-hold to them, when Enemies and Evils are
abroad, and a House of Defense to which they may always resort in the time of
Need and Distress: God being a universal and perpetual good God, is all in all
in every Condition: Bread is good to feed you, but it cannot clothe you. Again,
Clothes are good to warm you, but they cannot feed you; but God is good every
way: My God, says the Apostle, shall supply all your needs, according to his
riches in Glory by Christ Jesus, Phil. 4. 19. Not only some, but all your
Needs, and he does all after the best sort; he is a Father, and the best
Father; he is a Master, and the best Master; he is a Friend, and the best
Friend; he is a Strong-hold, and the best Strong-hold: and the Excellency of
this Strong-hold I shall endeavor to make out to you thus.

First, He is a high Strong-hold; so high indeed, that none can reach him that
is in this Strong-hold, or that has God for his Strong-hold to defend him; he
shall be so compast in with the Loving Kindness of God, that nothing shall do
him hurt: His Dwellings shall be on high, says the Prophet, his Place of
Defense shall be the Munitions of Rocks, Bread shall be given, his Waters shall
be sure, Isa. 33. 16. See how God does provide for the Safety and Welfare of
his, that he shall dwell on high, out of Gunshot, and so out of Danger, for
his place of defense shall be the Munitions of Rocks, or Rock within Rock: I,
but Rocks, though they be good for fence, yet they be naught for food; it was
the Devil that would have Stones turned into Bread. I, but rather than a
Believer shall starve, he shall have Bread given: I, but may he not perish
there for want of Water? No, his Waters shall be sure; so safe is he that has
God for his Strong-hold.

Secondly, God as he is a high Strong-hold, so he is a nigh Strong-hold; some
may be cut off before they can get to their Strong-hold; their Strong-hold may
be so far, that they may be never the better for their Strong-hold: But what
says the Psalmist concerning Almighty God, Psalm. 46. 1. God is our Refuge and
Strength, a very present help in Trouble; not only a help, but a present help,
yea a very present help in time of Trouble.

Thirdly, God is a capacious Strong-hold, ready to receive all that fly unto
him for Defense in the name of Christ; and as Christ says, He that comes unto
me, I will in no wise cast out, John 6. 37. So those that come unto God by
Christ, he will in no wise keep out, for there is Room and Entertainment enough
to be found in him; some Strongholds are so narrow and straight, that if many
fly unto them, they are fain to hang, many of them, like Bees about the Hive's
Mouth, and cannot get in: But whoever yet fled to God to hide him, and was not
received and defended by him?

Fourthly, God is an invisible Strong-hold, such a Strong-hold as all their
Enemies are not able to find out; and therefore all that flee unto him, and get
into him, must needs be safe: We know when the Sodomites would have offered
Violence to Lot, and to have pulled him out of his House, the Angels smote them
with Blindness that they could not so much as find the Door, much less pull him
out of his House: So when the Syrians came with a great Army to carry away the
Prophet Elisha, and had compassed the City round, so that one would have
thought there could have been no escaping, yet then Elisha had an invisible
Guard; and though his Man could not see it at the first, yet after the Prophet
had prayed to God to open his Eyes, then he could see the Mountain full of
Horses and Chariots of Fire round about his Master.

Lastly, To name no more Properties and Excellencies of this Strong-hold, God
is an invincible Strong-hold; other Strongholds are not able to hold out in
the day of God's Anger; the least puff or push of God's Displeasure will thrust
them down. Nineveh that stately City, that had Walls 100 foot high, and
beautified with 1300 Towers: All her Strongholds shall be like Fig Trees with
the first ripe Figs, which when they are shaken, shall fall into the Mouth of
the Eater: But who can overthrow such a Strong-hold as God is, that is
Almighty? Woe be to him that strives with his Maker.

Use I. If God be such an excellent Strong-hold, then see what a bosom you have
here to flee unto; that whatsoever evil days come, yet if you have recourse to
him for your Strong-hold, you may be sure to be safe; and take heed, I beseech
you, that you do not set up your Rest in any thing on this side God. When it is
a day of Trouble, as we are threatened with such a day at this time, Counsel and
Strength of Men and Horses, and Ships, cannot be a Strong-hold for us without
God. See what the Prophet says in the second Chapter of Isaiah, Cease from Man,
whose Breath is in his Nostrils; and if Man must be ceased from, much rather
must the things that Man has made be ceased from, as Ships and pleasant
Pictures, as the Prophet instances in that Chapter. Now there be these three
things that may rap off your Fingers from the Creature, or making any thing
your Strong-hold on this side God.

Now for this consider,

1. The Inutility or Unprofitableness of all Creature-help in the day of
Distress, in the day of God's Anger; for Riches profit nothing in the day of
God's Wrath, says Solomon, Prove. 11. 4. But they many times make the Owner the
more in danger, as the Gold Ring has made some to loose the Finger: And what
shall it profit a Man, says our Savior, to gain the whole World, and to loose
his own Soul. That were a Loss above all other Losses; thou have better lose
thy Wife, thy Children, thy House, thy Lands, nay, thy Life it self, than loose
thy Soul; and yet thus many do to gain the World: But what Profit when they
come to take away thy Soul? The things of this World have not so much Worth in
them as to deliver your Souls from Death or Hell, or Damnation; so that it cost
more to redeem one Soul than all the World comes to: They have not so much
worth in them as to satisfy one of your Debts; for no Man knows Love or Hatred
by all that is before him; they have no power to pacify Conscience in its
Distress.

The things of this World prove many times lothing Torments to dying
Christians* and they are many times dying Comforts to living Christians.

2. The Mutability of the Creature: There is a great deal of Mutability in the
Creature; you cannot say the Moon will shine two days together with the same
face; so the things of the World are likened to the Moon, Rev. 12. 1. The
Woman, that is the Church, is said to have the Moon under her Feet; i. e. All
worldly things.

Again, They are sometimes likened to the Wind, Dan. 7. 2. says the Prophet
there, I saw the four Winds striving upon the Sea. And what were those four
Winds, but the four Monarchies, striving upon the Sea of this World which
should be uppermost: And so as the Moon does not shine two days together with
the same face, no more are you sure the Wind will blow two hours together in
the same Quarter. The gratest Monarchies and Kingdoms are but so many stormy
and violent Winds; and will you make that your Strong-hold that is so subject
to Alteration and Change? In a stormy day will you go to a Shadow for your
Refuge or Shelter.

3. Besides all this, there is a Corruptibility in all these things; so the
Apostle speaks to this purpose, 1 Pet. 1. 19. He calls there Silver and Gold
corruptible things, which we are apt to account most durable: How may all the
Glory of the World, which we are apt to account most shining and excellent, be
wink't into Blackness and Darkness? All the Glory of Man is but as the Flower
of Grass: All Solomon's Glory was but that of the Lilly, of very short
Continuance; the Flower may fade whilst the Stalk yet stands, and yet that
within a short while will be cast into the Oven: The Flower may be nipt in the
Bub; but if it be let alone, it will fall of it self, such are Creature
Excellencies; and therefore I beseech you do not set up your Cities of Refuge
on this side God.

And for your further comfort, consider how God knows such as are in Trouble
and trust in him, and have Dependence upon him for Safety and Deliverance; if
God's People could be in Adversity, and God not know it, then their case would
be sad indeed; but God knows what all your Ailes and Troubles are, and will
certainly deliver you out of them all, if you depend upon him and trust in him.

Quest. But are there not many that are Believers, that are cut off in their
Troubles and Straits, as good Josiah and others?

Answ. There are seldom any that in the height of their Dependence upon God,
that have acted Faith, and fully relied upon him for Deliverance, that have
been cut off: For you must know that it is one thing to have Faith, and another
thing to act Faith; as it is one thing to have a Sword, and another thing to
use it: Many a one may be cut off for not using of his Sword; whereas if he had
used it, very like he might have escaped; and it is a Saying of the Psalmist
concerning the goldly Man, Psalm. 112. 7. He shall not be afraid of any evil
tidings: Why? His Heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. All the while he acts
his Faith on God, he has no cause to fear: So that this further informs us
that the Wicked shall never beat Believers out of heart, for in the worst times
they have a Strong-hold; a good God to run unto, and so shall they be saved
from all their Enemies: When they are in the greatest danger, still they have a
God that takes Cognizance of them, when it may be their Friends and near
Relations will take no notice of them: Thou have known my Soul in Adversities,
says David, Psalm. 31. 7. If they could be in Adversities, and God not know it,
it would then be a sad thing indeed; but God knows whatsoever Adversities you
are in, and will doubtless deliver his: I, but are not many of them cut off by
Death? I answer; God will be so good to them as to deliver them from Death or
by Death, and therefore the day of Death is better to them than the day of
their Birth; for when they are born, then they come into Trouble, but when they
die then they come out of Trouble; and it is better to come out of Trouble,
than to come into Trouble. This is the Comfort that they have that trust in
God: God knows them, and knows how to deliver them when they do not know how to
deliver themselves; We know not what to do, says Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12.
I, but God knows what to do, and how to deliver his, and to reserve the Wicked
for the day of Wrath: For this Knowledge of God, whereby he knows his, is not
a bare speculative Knowledge, as he knows all things, but as special Knowledge,
as if he knew none in the World beside; as God said concerning his own People,
Amos 3. 2. You have I known of all the Families upon Earth; and as God said to
Moses, Thee have I known by name: As if God knew none in the World besides
after such a sort; and therefore he has his Marks whereby he distinguishes
between his own People and others: So Ezekiel 9. a Mark is set upon them that
mourn; as if he did, and would know them from all the People on the Earth: So 2 Timothy 2. 19. The Lord knows who are his; for it is indeed a Knowledge that does
imply Love and Affection to the Party that he knows; and therefore, John 10.
10. Christ is said to know his Sheep. Why did he not know the Goats, wicked and
ungodly Men? Yes, doubtless he did; but he did not know them with that Love and
Care, and Affection, as he did his Sheep; and besides, it is such a Knowledge as
does imply Approbation; so Psalm. 1. and the last Verse, The Lord knows the
way of the Righteous. Why, does he not know the way of the Unrighteous too?
Yes, doubtless he does: Can they walk in such a secret Path, that God cannot
find them out? Nay, there is not a Way of their Feet, a Work of their Hands, a
Word of their Mouths, or a Thought of their Hearts, but it is better known to
God than to themselves; who is indeed the Father of Lights, and will doubtless
in his good time, bring to light all the hidden Works of Darkness, and
Dishonesty and Cruelty, though never so cunningly contrived, as he has done of
late, to the Shame and Confusion of the Plotters: But as they have conceived
Mischief, let us conceive Praise, and let us be often doing that Work upon
Earth which we shall be always doing in Heaven. And to encourage you to the
Duty, consider that it is a greater matter to praise God here upon Earth, in
the midst of Enemies, than to praise God in Heaven, where all Enemies are
subdued, and all Happiness enjoyed, and none but such as will help forward the
Work, and none that will hinder it, as here are too many here. And that you may
not be afraid of your Adversaries, or discouraged from trusting in God,
consider, though your Enemies carry it out for the present with a great deal of
Splendor and Bravery, yet they are but Men, and Men whose Breath is in their
Nostrils; and when God takes it away, they die and cannot withstand God's
stroke: Many thousands of them have been cut off in these Wars already, that
looked upon themselves as brave Fellows.

And besides, they are on that side that must fall: God has said it* that
Antichrist and his Adherents must be destroyed, and it shall certainly come to
pass; for has the Lord of Hosts said it, and shall he not do it, whose Word is
his Work? I will work says God, and who shall let it.

Besides, as Abijah told Jeroboam, With you are the Golden Calves; and so with
our Adversaries are graven Images, and they are such as have forsaken God, and
defiled his true Worship, and God has forsaken them; and let such be our
Enemies, as many, and as much as they will, if we have but God on our side, we
shall do well enough.

Again, Consider, that you may not be offended at their outward Bravery and
Splendor, how the triumphing of the Wicked is but short, but their end will be
that they shall perish for ever; and on the other side, though the Godly are
afflicted, yet they are not deserted as the Ungodly are; though they are cast
down, yet they are not cast off. Saul and David they were both afflicted, and
greatly distressed: Saul in his Distress he runs to a Witch; O! says Saul, I am
sorely distressed: Why so? Why the Philistines make War against me: Why so they
had done formerly, and yet Saul did then well enough. I, but says he, and God
is departed from me. I, there was the cause, there lay the Core of all his
Miseries; for this is like the dropping of the Eyes out of the Head, the
darkning of the Sun in the Firmament, the departing of the Soul out of the
Body: Now David likewise, he was greatly distressed for the City Ziglag, where
his Treasure was that was burnt, and his Wives they were carried away Captives,
and the People likewise they were ready to stone him; so that his Treasure was
gone, his Wives were gone, and the Hearts and Affections of his People were
gone off from him. What does he do now? Does he go to a Witch, or use any
unlawful means, as Saul did? No, he goes and encourages himself in the Lord his
God, and you see how bravely he comes off afterward.

Hence we may see the Excellency of Faith, and how Believers having such a
Strong-hold, shall never be beat quite out of heart, having so good a God to
rely upon; for though their Enemies threaten and rage never so much, yet
Believers have diverse Props to stay and uphold their Hearts in days of Trouble,
and to cause them not to be dismayed, but still have cause to trust in God: As,

1st. That the Devil and his Instruments, wicked Men, they are all in the hand
of God, and they can do no more against them than God gives them leave: It is
true, God sometimes lets out a Link or two of the Devil's Chain, but still he
keeps the Chain in his own hand, that he nor his cannot do so much Mischief as
otherwise they would.

2dly. When you are in any danger, you must act Faith upon God; so the Prophet
resolves to do, Psalm 56. 3. What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee: Now
that you may be able to act Faith aright,

1. You must labor to have a right Knowledge of God, and of what God is; for
you cannot stay your Minds, and trust in him whom you do not know, and have no
Acquaintance with him: As one said sometime to a Gentlemen that was walking in
Paul's, Pray lend me ten Pounds: Ten Pounds, says the Gentleman, why I do not
know you. Says the other, If you did, you would hardly lend me ten Shillings.
Some are better known than trusted, but so is not God; but the more you know
him, the more apt you will be to trust in him, so Psalm. 9. 10. especially if it
be an experimental Knowledge; so Psalm. 22. 4. Our Fathers trusted in thee; they
trusted, and thou did deliver them: And so if we, their Posterity, trust in
God, God will deliver us; They cried unto thee, says the Church, and were
delivered; they trusted in thee, and were not confounded: So doubtless if we
cry unto our Forefathers God, we shall be delivered; if we trust in him, and
have recourse to him, we shall not be confounded: But confounded shall they be
that worship carved Images; as it is plain our Adversaries do. Well, but what
is it that we must know of God more especially, that we may be brought to trust
in him, and depend upon him in a day of Distress?

1st. God's Power, that he is able to help and to defend his People, whatsoever
their Distresses and their Adversaries are; you must mightily work this upon
your Spirits, the Consideration of the Power and Greatness of God; therefore
you have the Greatness of God wonderfully set out in the foregoing part of this
Chapter, for God will not employ his Greatness against his People, but for his
People's good. As also you are to take notice of the All Sufficiency of God,
how he is able to save to the uttermost all such as put their trust in him.

When Abraham was as a poor Pilgrim, and went from one Kingdom to another
People, to support his Faith, God tells him, I am God; All-sufficient, walk
before me, and be thou perfect, and then he need not be afraid: We can never
stay our Minds, and trust in God so well as we should, unless we rely upon God
as a God All-sufficient, that is able to succor us in every Case and
Condition. See what supported the three Children, as they are commonly called,
against the Wrath of the great King, Dan 3. 17. they stay their Minds greatly
on God; Our God, say they, is able to deliver us: They did not fear the Wrath
of the great King, because, with Moses by an Eye of Faith, they saw him that
was invisible; they knew they had an invincible Stronghold to resort unto, a
good God that was able to deliver them, how, and as he pleased. Now when you
distrust God's Power, you do as it were tie up the hands of Omnipotency. It is
said, Mark 6. 5. our Savior could do no mighty Works there, because of their
Unbelief: God does therefore wonderfully tutor his Children about the
Consideration of his Power, as you may observe in Scripture. When God promises
to appear in the way of saving and delivering his People, he does very much
insist on this, what a powerful God he is, able to do above what they are able
to ask or think, that so their Faith might be well grounded upon a good
foundation; see for this a place or two, Isa. 40. 9, 10. There the Prophet
speaks by way of promise, that the Lord God would come; i. e. to comfort and
relieve his People: He tells them he would come with a strong hand, and as it
were with an outstretched arm, and his arm shall rule for him: And he further
insists upon this thing, and makes it the great Theme that he goes upon. If
you read the 12th Verse of this Chapter, you shall find that he had a strong
Hand indeed, and an Arm stretched out, in that he was able to hold all the
Waters of the Sea, and to measure out Heaven, which is, locus omnium
Spaciosissimus, with a Span, and that he was able to weigh the Mountains in
Scales, and the Hills in a Balance; Behold, says he, the Nations: By Nations
we are to understand great Countries and Kingdoms; What are they but as a drop
of the Bucket, and as a small dust of the Balance? Behold, he takes up the
Isles as a very little thing. As this Isle, which we call Great Britain, is a
very little thing in the hands of Almighty God; and when he comes to the 26th
Verse, there he calls upon them to lift up their eyes, and to behold him who
has created these things; so great and so many, that brings out their host
by number: He must needs be great himself, that has made so many, and such
great things. And thus he goes on to set forth the Power and Greatness of God,
to be a support to the Faith of his People: I have wondered, says a Godly and
Learned Man, that reading of Scripture in my younger years, there should be
such a sudden Digression to the Power of God, as there is; and now I see there
is a great deal of reason for it, to strengthen the Faith of his People, that
they firmly believe his Promises; as you may find, if you observe, in many
other places: So you have the Power of God set forth in this Chapter.

2dly. If you would trust in God, and depend upon him in the day of trouble and
distress; as you must be very well principled in the Power, so also in his
Willingness and Readiness to succor and to receive you, and so to save you in
the time of Danger and Distress. Some have Power to do good, but they have no
heart to do it; you must consider, as there is an Ability in God to do good, so
there is a Propensity to do good: There is a very great Inclination in God to
help and to save his afflicted Ones. observe, I pray, how the Scripture speaks
to this, Psalm. 46. 1. It was at such a time when there was great Dread upon the
face of the Earth. The Prophet seems to represent it so; as if the Earth should
totter and be removed, and the Mountains carried into the midst of the Sea, and
the Waters roar and make a hideous noise, and all things in a hurly-bury; yet
there was no cause for such as trust in God to fear, for God is our Refuge and
Strength, say they, our Strong-hold, a very present Help in trouble. He is not
only a Help, but a present Help; yea, a very present Help in trouble. The great
Willingness of God the Lord to appear for them, appears in his Readiness to
appear to them, if we do but call upon him and cry to him; and he can do but
little that cannot cry for help. Now Psalm the 86. 7. says the Prophet, In the
day of my Trouble I will call upon thee; for thou will answer me. The God of a
true Believer is not like the God of Baal's Priests, upon whom they called from
Morning even till Noon, saying, O Baal, hear us: But there was no Voice, nor
any that answered; no more there would have been if they had prayed never so
long; if he had prayed till Doomsday, it had been all one: But no sooner does
the true Prophet pray, but presently Fire comes down from Heaven, and consumes
the Sacrifice, for the Confusion of the Churches Adversaries. And how does the
Prophet promise to himself, in the forenamed place, how God would hear him?
Which he could not have done, but that he was assured of his Willingness so to
do; for he does not say, the Lord can hear me, but the Lord will hear me: And
he says nothing but what he has a Promise for upon the Performance of the
foresaid Duty. Nay further, to show his Readiness and Willingness to hear and
help, it is said in one place, That before they call, I will answer; and while
they are yet speaking, I will hear. So no sooner did the Leper say, Matthew. 8.
2. Lord, if thou will thou can make me clean; but presently Christ replies, I
will, be thou clean; as if he ecchoed back the same words; and immediately says
the Text, his Leprosy was cleansed: And that there is a great deal of
Readiness and Willingness in God to help, you must consider how God does take
special notice of the Trouble and Afflictions that his People lie under, and
how he is apt to lay it to heart; for in all their Afflictions he is afflicted;
I have surely seen, says God, the Affliction of my People, and have heard their
Cry, Exodus 3. 7. It is not with him, as it is with some that pass by such as
are in Misery, and take little or no notice of their Trouble, as the Priest and
Levite that saw the Man wounded and half dead, and there let him lie for all
them. But if God's People are never so little wronged, he is presently
concerned; if they are reproached, they are reproached in his sight: He takes
it as done to himself; He that touches you, says God, touches the Apple of
mine Eye, Zach. 2. 8. So he that persecuteth the People of God, it is as if he
did persecute Christ himself, Acts 9. 5. And all the Rage that they express
against the People of God, it is set down as done against God himself; I know,
says God, thy abode, and thy going out and thy coming in, and thy Rage against
me: It is all down in black and white, what the World does for, or against his
Children.

3dly. God does not only look on his Peoples Affliction, but it is the
lovingest Look, and with as much Compassion, as possible may be imagined; as
you may see Psalm. 103. 13. Like as a Father pitieth his Children, the like Pity
does the Lord show to those that are his: His Look shows his Love, as you may
see Exodus 2. 23, 25. It pierces his very Heart, to hear their Sighs, and to see
their Miseries: So their Sorrows came up when his People were afflicted in
Egypt; it is said in the place named before, that the Children of Israel sighed
by reason of their hard Bondage, and God heard their groaning, and remembered
his Covenant, which was to be a Friend to their Friends, and an Enemy to their
Enemies; and God looked upon the Children of Israel. How, I pray, did he look?
Why he had respect unto them, though their Enemies did nothing regard them, no
not so much as a Man would regard his Beast. Again, God declares his
Willingness in regard he commands his People to come to him, and call upon him
in the day of trouble; and tells them withal, that unless they do thus, they
are like to go without his help: For thus he tells his own People, Ezekiel. 36.
37. I will for this be enquired of by the house of Israel to do it for them;
for God would not have his People to seek his face in vain. And in another
place God complains, Thou have not called upon me, O Jacob, Isa. 43. 21. You
know if a Man be not willing to help, if he have power, yet if he have no mind
to help, a poor Creature cannot with any face go to him: but God is so far from
discouraging any from coming to him, that he invites them to come, and assures
them that if they come, he will in no wise cast them out: And indeed commands
them for to come, and commands Silence in Heaven till his People tell their
Tale; and does bow down his Ear to hear what his People can say for themselves,
and as a Parent to his Child, O! what would thou have?

If God were not willing to help, he would say, as he did to the Wicked, Psalm.
50. 16. What have thou to do? With my Word you shall not take my Name in your
Mouth; or if you do, it shall be in vain; if you make many Prayers, I will not
hear you. But he readily grants the Requests of his People: O! says the
Prophet, he will be very gracious to thee at the Voice of thy Cry; when he
shall hear it, he will answer thee, Isa. 30. 19. So no sooner did Daniel, 10.
12. set himself to seek God, but his words were heard: So when we seek God by
Prayer, as we ought to do, God will send Mercy post haste to his People: Now
would he does us, if he were not willing to help them, and to be a Sronghold to
them.

4thly. If you would trust in God aright, you must clear up your Interest in
God; That this God that is thus able and willing to help and defend, is your
God; That you can claim an Interest in him, and that you are his; That he knows
you to be his Friends and Acquaintance by your often coming to him, and that
you know him to be your Father in Christ: You will never come to close with God
with any Confidence, when you come to have need of him, unless you can clear up
your Interest in him; otherwise here will be apt to come in dismaying Thoughts.
I know indeed that God can save me, and can defend me; but can I say, upon good
grounds, as the Prophet did, I am thine, save me? I have so often sinned
against him, that I have great cause to question whether this God be my God;
this will turn back the Milk in the Breast of the Promise: The Scripture does
wonderfully declare this, as in the Psalm 48. ult. This God is our God: as if
no others had any interest in him: And so Psalm. 67. 6. God even our own God
shall bless us; and so Isa. 25. 9. Lo, this God is our God, we have waited for
him, and he will save us; we will rejoice, and be glad in his Salvation. This
was that stayed their Minds up, and kept them from despair; and so this was
that kept up the Spirits of those three Worthies, Dan. 3. 17. They first lay
claim to God, and clear up their Interest in him, and then they conclude, he
will save us out of thine hand, O King; and so he did. So when there was such a
mighty Army and great Multitude came out against Jehoshaphat, and against his
People, what do they then but clear up their Interest in God? Art not thou our
God, say they, 2 Chronicles. 20. ver. 7. and then ver. 12. O our God, will thou not
judge them. Which words are to be resolved affirmatively; Thou being, our God,
wilt certainly judge them, and avenge our cause; and so he did. So that when
you have cleared up your Interest in God in a day of trouble, then set Faith on
work without Fear; labor fully to rely upon God, and to trust in him: Be the
Troubles as many, and as great as may be, yet believe that you have a God that
is able to defend you, and to deliver you out of them all. Know this, that it
is the unreasonablest thing in the World, after thou have cleared up that thou
have a real Interest in God, to doubt that he will deliver thee, or take thy
part, or be gracious to thee, when thou have made out to thy self that thou
have an Interest in him. Would it not be an unnatural thing for a Child that
has had Experience of his Father's Kindness to him, and ready to relieve any
that has come to him when they have been in distress, now for this Child to
doubt of his Help? and to say, If I were in want, would my Father relieve? If I
were pursued by an Enemy to my Father's Door, would he receive me? Were I in
the Water ready to be drowned, would he help me out? Or were I fallen in the
Fire, would my Father pluck me out? Surely if thou can find upon good
grounds, that God is thy God, and thy Father in Christ, and taken possession of
thy Soul, would it be a seemly thing for thee to reason thus? If I were poor or
despised in the World, would God own me or know me? Yes, if you own and
acknowledge him to be your God Does not the Text say, that he knows them that
trust in him? be they never so poor or mean in the World. We read of Believers
in Heb. 11. 37. how they wandered about in sheeps-skins and goat skins, being
destitute, afflicted, tormented; and yet it is said in the same Chapter, at
ver. 16. God is not ashamed to be called their God: For they are the Poor
chiefly that put their Trust in God, that have nothing else to trust too; so
Zeph. 3. 12. I will leave in the midst of thee a poor People, and they shall
trust in the name of the Lord. And the Widow being desolate, says the Apostle,
1 Timothy 5. 5. trusts in God: Before, whilst she had a Husband, she relied on
him; but being desolate, and having none to regard her, or to provide for her,
she trusts in God, and God knows all them that trust in him, be they never so
poor; it is not Poverty shall part God and a Believer: As it is storied of Mr.
Fox, that wrote the Book of Martyrs; being asked, Whether he did not know such
as were but poor in Estate and mean in Person, but godly in their Lives and
Conversations? O! says he, I forgot Lords and Ladies to remember such: So God,
though he be High, yet has he respect to the Lowly; the most High has most
respect to the most Low, and overlooks the Proud and Stately; and though he
sits upon a most high Throne, yet does he look with a Look of Favor and Love
to him that is poor, and of a contrite Spirit, and that trembles at, and trusts
in his Word; and therefore away these Doubts: If I be poor, will God own me: Or
if I be in streights, will he relieve me? Or if I be in danger, will he be a
Strong-hold, or a Place of Refuge to me? Away with all these If's and Doubts;
set thy Faith on work, and fall flatly to believing. Thus did the Father of the
Faithful, setting Faith on work without Fear, and staying himself on God, as
making a Promise, and afterward as breaking a Promise; who first upon a
Promise gave him a Son, and afterward bids him go and offer up thy Son, Genesis
22. kill him, slay him with thine own hands. Now if you look into Genesis 17.
there is made out to Abraham the Interest that he had in God; and God tells him
there, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward. Well, now when God had
made out to Abraham his Interest, he puts him upon Streights and great Trials;
and this hottest Trial of all, the offering up of his only Son by Sarah, his
dearly beloved Wife: Well, thought Abraham, if I must do it, surely God will do
me good by it, as his Grandson Jacob said in another case. What did Abraham,
when his Interest that he had in God was made out to him, but falls to flat
believing? Says the Apostle, Romans 4. 20. He staggered not. For he that was able
to raise his Son from the dead, as well as he could make the barren Womb of
Sarah for to bear, and to bring him forth; O! is a Consideration of great
worth. If you can once find upon Scripture-grounds, that God is your God, (but
take heed, I pray you of false and deceitful grounds;) you may be sure God will
stay up your Hearts in any distress. If you are his, and rely wholly upon him,
you have both God's hand and seal to do you good. Consider David, how in his
Troubles he fell to believing; and you know what great Troubles he passed
through, greater than ever Saul had when he had his Interest cleared up in God:
And whatsoever his Troubles were, he set Faith on work; he bids Faith fall on,
and fear not: Though Troubles were on this side, and on that side, nay round
about, yet see how bluntly he falls on, Psalm. 25. 2. O, my God, I trust in
thee, I trust in thee: I know I have many and mighty Adversaries, but I rely
only upon thee, do thou consider which way thou will rid me of them, and bring
me out of my Trouble. He did not say, Will the Lord, or will God help me? and
will the Lord be found of me? He did not stagger thus, but he bids Faith fall
on; O, my God, I trust in thee, I will not fear what Man can do unto me.
Beloved, it is an excellent thing, not, when Troubles come, to stand as a
People amazed; but let Faith lay hold on God as a God All-sufficient. Tell God
with Reverence, you will commit all to him: As a Duke, being about to make War
with a Bishop, before he engaged in the War he sends out a Spy to take notice
what the Bishop said, and how he behaved himself. Who returning, the Duke asked
him, What the Bishop was doing, and how he behaved himself? Says he, the Bishop
seems to be very careless; he says, He will preach the Word, and seed his
Flock, and totius belli molem deo Ommittet. I, says the Duke, says he so, Tunc
ei bellum inferat Diabolus non Ego; Then let the Devil make War with him for
me. Thus Faith will direct all your Affairs to God; and having so done, hence
will arise abundance of sweet Peace and Quiet in your Minds. The reason of all
the Disquiet that is at any time on the Spirits of God's People, especially in
days of Trouble, is because they cannot trust God, and stay their Minds on him:
They cannot believe, and that makes the poor Soul to toss and tumble up and
down; they are afflicted with this fear and that fear. What says the Prophet,
Isa. 7. 9. If you will not believe, surely you shall not be established: God
will be found to be faithful if you would trust in him, and rely upon him:
Faith, it will set you upon the Rock that is higher than your selves, higher
than any, nay than all your Adversaries; so that when the Winds blow, and the
Storms beat, and the Waves roar and rage against a Rock that stands firm and
steadfast in the midst of the Sea, against which, as Adversaries, the Waves foam
and spit, and split themselves with rage; yet he on such a Rock sits and
laughs, and remains safe. A notable Instance we have in Matthew. 14. of the
Condition of such a one as does believe. Our Savior would there teach us by
Example what trusting in God will do, and how when our Faith fails, then we
shall fail our selves. In that Chapter you have how there, they were at Sea:
Now Christ that could trust his Father, and stay his Mind upon God, he needs no
Ship as the Disciples did, to keep him from drowning; he could walk on the Sea,
as you may see he did ver. 25. yet doubtless then the Waves did toss about
Christ, so that he must needs be, in appearance, in a dangerous Condition: Yet
Christ he could stay his Mind on God, his Faith kept him up that he could not
sink: But now they that were in the Ship not knowing who this was, cried out:
Why, says Christ to them, it is I, be not afraid. He set out before them a most
glorious Instance of what Faith could do, in his walking upon the Water. Now
Peter that had something of this Grace wrought in him by the Power of God, says
he to Christ, Lord, if it be thou, bid me to come to thee on the Water: Why
come, says Christ; so Peter came down, and walked on the Water to go to Christ,
but at length he began to sink. Mark, so long as his Faith kept firm, his Feet
kept firm, and he was able to walk upon the Water; the Water was as a Floor
under him; but now mark, his Trust began to fail on a sudden, as Faith will
many times ebb and flow in a moment. Now as his Faith began to sink, his Feet
began to sink, for he had some Faith, though it was but little: Mark therefore
how clearly this is made out; for when he saw the Wind boisterous, ver. 30. Why
did he not see it so when he was in the Ship? Yes, doubtless it was, as you may
find ver. 24. but then he had a believing sight of Christ; but now his Faith
that began to grow weak, and to sink within him; but immediately Christ put
forth his Hand, and caught him, and said, O, thou of little faith, wherefore
did thou doubt? So ready is Christ to succor such as have any, though but a
weak Faith: as if Christ had said, I confess thou were in a place of great
danger, the Sea wide, and the Winds high, and the Waves boisterous, but yet if
thou could have believed, thou should have done well enough; the
Littleness of thy Faith, it was that that made thee sink: So that you see how
ready God is to relieve Faith, though it be but little; for which I may give
you many Reasons, I will name but two.

First, Because this is a Grace that is so much despised by the Men of the
World, and are apt to upbraid those that place their Trust in God, as we have
an Instance of this in Christ himself; O, say they, Mat. 27. 43. he trusted in
God, let him deliver him now if he will have him: And so the Apostle Paul
speaks of himself, and others the Servants of God, 1 Timothy 4. 10. For therefore
we both labor and suffer reproach, because we trust in the living God; so
likewise Psalm. 14. 6.

Secondly, Because by trusting in God, the Poor commit themselves to God when
they have nothing else to trust to, as the Widow being desolate, says the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 5. 5. trusts in God; and so Zeph. 3. 12. I will leave in the
midst of thee a poor People, and they shall trust in the Name of the Lord:
Though they be poor, and never so mean, yet if they trust in God, he will never
leave them nor forsake them.

FINIS.

