THE DECLARATION OF Sir Thomas Glenham, Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and Sir Philip
Musgrave, in the North of ENGLAND Concerning the Counties of ESSEX and KENT AND
Their Resolution and proceedings thereupon; as also touching the ARMY. Likewise
a great Fight at Pontefract Castle in Yorkshire, betwixt the Parliaments Forces
and the Cavaliers, and the number that were slain and taken prisoners; as also,
the taking of the said Castle, with all the Ordinance, Arms, and Ammunition.
With a List of the chief Commanders belonging to the Parliaments Forces. Col.
Fairfax. Col. Roads. Col. Bethel. Col. Aldred. Col. Legere. Col. Cholmley. Col.
Lassels. Col. Wastell.


LONDON: Printed for R. W. 1648.

The Declaration and Proclamation of Colonel Bonivent, and the rest of his
Majesty's Commanders in the North, Wherein is declared, their Resolution and
Protestation, concerning their present Engagement for the King.
Honored Sir,
Diverse great Commanders (in these parts) begins to appear visible and active
for the King, and have declared the grounds and reasons of their taking up
Arms in this second Engagement, having taken an Oath and Protestation for the
prosecuting of this their present design to the utmost, and to take all
oportunities whatsoever for the promoting thereof: in pursuance whereof
Colonel Bonivent (formerly Groom of the stable to Sir Marmaduke Langdale) with
a party of Officers and Soldiers, to the number of one hundred, consulted
together for the surprizall of Pontefrast Castle, and at the last resolved to
put themselves into a disguised posture, and to act their design in the habit
of Countrymen, which they did, and upon Thursday last, being Market day, they
came from several parts, and met at the lower town, and the plot being laid
and the time and hour appoined, about 20 of them came up to the castle gate on
horseback, with sackes under them, and their arms unseen, and discoursed with
the Sentinels, and immediately their confederates in the castle, and their
associates at the lower town, made their appearance near them, who upon a
sudden cast down their sacks, and rushed in at the gates, Major Cotterell the
Governor receiving this allarm, with about 30. men charged them in the Castle
yard, but could not regain what was lost, the rest coming up so violently,
insomuch that the enemy has unhappily become Masters of this impregnable
Castle, and has taken about 60. prisoners, 3000. Arms, 80. Barrels of
Gunpowder, Match and Bullet proportionable, two Culverins, one Demic^lverin,
one Morterpiece, two Cullers, 600. weight of cheese; and great store of other
victualling.

But before they became sole masters thereof, they lost at the least 8 of their
men, for Major Cotterel fought gallantly, beating them back as far as the
outmost gate, but it was his hard chance there to receive a wound, which gave a
great advantage to the enemy, and his body was there seized on, the rest of his
men retreated to the Queens Tower, and ^eld the Enemy in dispute for the space
of one hour, killing some of them, but at the last were forced to yield upon
quarter.

From the North we hear* that our forces are very success^full against the
Enemy, and that Major Carter has possessed himself of Bainy castle, upon which
Sir Marmaduke Langdale took an allarm, and is retreated toward Carlisl^,
Westmerland being thereby freed of his Forces.

Colonel Harrisons Regiment of Foot, and Colonel Twisletons of Horse, are to
march toward Bainy Castle, and about ten days hence to engage Langdale, if
possible. We are now somewhat quiet about Helmsly, they are raising the trained
Bands in this county, and have nominated their Offic^^s. viz. for the West
Riding, Col. Roads, and Col. Fairfax. In the East Riding, Col Bethel, Col.
Aldred, and Col. Legere. In the North Riding, Col. Cholmley, Col. Lassels, and
Col. Wastel, they have also chosen their other Officers, which has caused
Langdale, Gle^ham, Musgrave, and the rest, to declare, That if the Essex and
Kentish men do not prevail against the Army in the South, they cannot proceed
on with their designs in the North, for if once the Southern and Northern Army
should join, they are not able to fight them in the field.

They have further declared, that what they now act is by the authority and
power of the Prince of Wales, but murmures very much against the Scots,
especially against Duke Hamiltons party,

York 5. May, 1648.
Propositions from Westmerland touchin the Kings Army in the North.
SIR,
THe enemies of God and this Kingdoms peace are now in arms in our county of
Westmerland; after their surprisall of Carlisle they marched into us, and
possessed themselves of Appleby, the Gentlemen of our country before their
General Sir Marmaduke Lang^ale his advance, summoned in our county for, and
after united wi^h them; their strength at first despicable, is now increased.
The Foot generally arrayed and forced Trained Bands of Westmerland and
Cumberland. Their Quarters are at Kendale, Kirkby, and the Frontiers of
Lancashire: their carriage as well as design full of malignancy which
sufficiently evidences the falslnesse of their special pretenses; they plunder
diverse persons (of whom many of us are examples) well affected to the Parl.
notorious malignant Ministers formerly ejected do thrust us from our
congregations, advance the Book of Common prayer, erect and use the condemned
ceremonies sometimes in fashion of cringing, bowing, etc. resolve to cut off
the Parl* and their Adherents, if God prevent not, having our hopes very much
enlightened by your advance, we are here humbly in reference to the premises to
beseech, That as your own tenderness of the Kingdoms peace we are confident
does and will oblige you, you will vouchsafe to send your assistance in this
distressed estate of the Kingdom, the more speedily the enemy is
discountenanced, the less danger being likely to fall upon us: the advance and
engagement of that Briggade of horse with you, as our only hopes to see the
honest party in the North relieved, and those public Enemies of God brought th
punishment: what way to do this, we dare not presume to advise, if your power
may extend to command the Foot of Lancashire, we conceive it would be much for
your advantage; if not so, your conjunction with Genesis Lamberts horse may be a
more facile and speedy way of deliverance, if it may be appoin^ed upon our
Borders, To this we have these encouragements, in respect of their small number
of Horse and forced Foot: the resolution of many Lancashire Horse to join with
you, if you can give them any order, the especial confidence we have of God to
acknowledge you in this undertaking, and our own resolution to serve the
Parliament and you, in our utmost endeavors.

For the right valiant Colonel Blackmore, Governor of Warrington.
Signed By diverse of the Gentry and Inhabitants in the County of Westemerland
. Postscript.
By Letters out of Lancashire, it is certified, that sir Marm. Langdale is in
Westmerland, and has with him there 16 troops of horse and 2000. Foot, the
report is, that he has taken the Magazine in that County, wherein was 4000.
arms* and great store of powder, many honest people are forced to fly hither
out of that county; yet are we no ways discouraged, but are resolved to march
toward Langdale to prevent his coming further into these parts, and we doubt
not but by the 1. of June Col. Harrisons Briggard of horse will in all consist
of about 4000 Horse and Foot.



The Copy of a Letter from the City of York.
SIR,
I Doubt not but a short time will produce fresh comforts, for the High Sheriff
of this County has declared his great forwardness and resolution to raise
Forces for the opposing of all that shall obstruct the peace thereof, which
has frustrated the designs of many, but with some taken effect; for Col.
Bonivont, the la^e Governor of Sandall, has most unhappily seized on the
strong castle of Pontefract, together with all the arms and ammunition, and
taken diverse prisoners* and wounded the Governor. It is a business of great
concernment, and if not timely reduced, will much retard the work in hand; But
we hear, that Maj. Genesis Lambert has designed a considerable number of horse
and foot for the blocking of them up, and hindering provisions from going into
them. Diverse of the adverse party flocks thithar apace, and they entertain all
that comes, having store of arms and provisions.

Tuesday. The Ordinance for indemnity for the Essex men in general, which are
in arms, and shall upon publication thereof, lay down past yesterday, and this
day was ordered to be published at Chelmsford* where the greatest part of the
Essex men do now recide, and there is some cause to believe that they will
presently depart to their own homes, especially if that report be true that the
L. Goring is gone away from Bow to unite himself with Langdale, but of that I
have not any certainty, for it was o^^erwise the last night. The L. Genesis
Fairfax was this morning at Rochester, and has sent col. Rich his Reg. of
horse, and some troops of Dragoons toward Canterbury and Dove^, for that
intelligence was brought, that some disturbances continued thereabouts. If the
Essex men lay not down, and do not take the benefit of that Ordinance, his
Excellency with the rest of his Army is expected to cross the River into that
county.

There are diverse ships designed to fetch in those five which are revolted;
they were sailing toward the Isle of Wight, and by a tempest* are said to be
carried near upon the coast of the Irish Seas, the men which are gone in them,
are much divided amongst themselves, when any other ships appear, it is
believed, that Lendall the Bostons Mate which took on him as Vice Admiral, will
by the rest that are with him, be brought to answer for his great and dangerous
presumption.

Imprimatur

G. M.



FINIS.

