A Glorious and Happy VICTORY Obtained by the Volluntiers of Buckingham,
Bedford, Hartford, Cambridge, Huntington, and Northamptonshire, being almost
seven thousand able soldiers

Against the Lord Wentworth, Son to the Earl of Strafford, with 8000. Horse
and Foot, nere Alesbury and Wickham, in Buckinghamshire, December 6. 1642.

Declaring the manner of the Bataile, which lasted five hours, and the number
that was slain on both sides, being the greatest Victory that has been
obtained since the beginning of these Wars.

LONDON, Printed for I. H. and J. Wright, December 8. 164^.

A glorious victory obtained against the Cavaliers, by the Volluntiers of the
County of Buckingham, etc.
THe Cavaliers having of late days plundered and pillaged many wealthy and
godly men's Houses, in several parts of this Kingdom, especially in
Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire.

But not being content, or satisfied with that which they have most wickedly
and barbarously taken, they begin to thirst after the County of Cambridge,
and had a great desire to visit the said County, and so they concluded to have
done, for about 3000. of their Horse and Foot, consented together, and marched
toward Cambridge, where they had thought to have enriched themselves very
much, but their hopes were quite frustrated, neither could their designs take
any effect.

For when the Jnhabitants of the said Shire had information, and saw that the
Cavaliers were resolved to come into their County, they with all expedition
raised the Trayned-Bands and all other Forces that possibly they could, and
also sent to all the other adjoining Counties to aid and assist them in this
Design against the Cavaliers, that were coming to ransacke and pillage them
of all they had, and for fear they should have a feeling of their miseries,
which they were like to undergo, if that the Design of the Cavaliers took
effect.

But before they could come to Cambridge, the Jnhabitants thereof had raised a
great Power, insomuch that they did not fear the Cavaliers, nor all their
threatening speeches, but at last about fifteen-hundred made their approach nere
to the said County, and began to put in execution their most damnable and
wicked projects, whereupon the Jnhabitants having raised a great strength, to
the number of two thouland, advanced toward the Cavaliers, but no sooner did
these wicked catiffs se the Forces of the said County coming, but they began
to retreat, and betake themselves to slight, not daring to give Battle to
the Parliaments Forces, whereupon the Volluntiers seeing that they begaune to
fly, set spurs to their Horses and hasted after them and in the overtaking of
them, they let fly their piercing messengers, and sent roaring bullets after
them, insomuch that they flew some three hundred of them, the rest were glad to
save themselves by flight,.

Jn Hartfordshire at VVatford, they made the like attemt, but their design
could not take effect, for the inhabitants of the said Town and County, arose
and mustered their Forces together, and advanced toward their Enemies and gave
them the same entertainment, that their confederates had about Cambridgeshire,
for when they thought that they were not able to encounter with them, they
likewise betook themselves to their Heels.

The Counties of Hartford and Cambridge, have joined themselves in a Covenant
of Association, with these following Counties, (viz) Buckingham, Bedford,
Huntington, and Northhampton,, and such is the forwardness of these Counties,
that they have already 8000. men, and every man contributes acording to his
estate, for the maintenance of the said Forces.

The Kings party having information of these proceedings, the Lord wentworth,
Son to the late deceased Earl of Straford, with about five thousand horse
advanced toward the said forces at Wickham and Alsbury in buckinghamshire,
where they lay billited, but out forces having information of their coming,
with all the speed that they possibly could make, they began to make
breast-workes, and made two half Moons where they had planted seven Pieces of
ordnance having received them from his Excellence, and upon the sixth of this
month the Lord Wentworth arived near the said forces at alsbury and Wickham
where he sounded his trumpets and made a glorious show upon the tops of two
great hills thinkeing the day to be his own, for he had information that the
forces which lay there about, did not amount to above, four or five thousand
and indeed well might he receive this news, for one Captain Hayes, which
commanded the greatest part of these forces, had drawn out near upon four
thousand of them and had set them in two vayllyes one the left side of
Wickham, carrying their Colors low, and every man trayling his Pike because
the enemy should not discry them, and gave them strict charge that every man
should be silent, when they see the enemy advance toward Wickham, they should
fall on so soon as they hard the ordnance fly, which command they very
diligently observed, no sooner had the ordnance dischrrged but they fell on
fighting with extrordinary courage and much policy which when the enemy seeing
were amassed to se such a company behind them and another before them, the
ordnance played very last, and the Commanders of the volunteers showed very much
discretion, so that for the space of four hours they fought very valiantly,
till at last the enemy retreated leaving behind them at least nine hundred of
their confederates slain and ma^med in the field, the young Lord Wentworth
being dangerously wounded all this was done with loss of three hundred men.

A Declaration of the Lords and Commons
Whereas diverse soldiers have in a tumultuous and violent manner broken into
diverse of the Kings Subjects Houses, pillaged and ransacked them, under color
that they are Papist-houses, or the houses of persons disaffected; The Lords
and Commons taking the premises into consideration, do declare and order,
that whatsoever Soldier, or Soldiers, shall without the command of the
Captains of their respective Companies, or the Officers of the Field, attempt
upon, or break open any houses whatsoever, or pillage ot ransacke any house,
shall be pursued and punished, according to the law as a fellon; And the Lords
and Commons do require all Officers of the Army, to employ their best
endeavors, for the bringing of any soldiers that shall commit any of the
insolences aforesaid, to condign punishment that they may be severely and
effectually proceeded against, according to Law. And the Lord General is
desired, that this may be duly published in the Army, in the head of each
particular Company.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

