To the Inhabitants of the Earth.
OH Earth, Earth, Earth, hear, fear, dread and tremble before the Lord God of
Power; for with Strength is he risen to make inquisition after his Seed which
is sown amongst you; and now turn in and see what an account you can give: for
of a truth every one of you in particular have received a talent of the Lord;
wherefore stand in awe, and commune with your own hearts, and see what use you
have made of your Lord's money, who are found beating and imprisoning of your
fellow servants, and are found in Pride, Drunkenness, Gluttony, Strife,
Envyings, Murmuring, Cursing, Swearing and Lying; Weep, howl, and roar all you,
who are found lovers of Pleasures more than lovers of God, and have put the Day
of the Lord afar off; who has visited you days without number, and would
often have gathered you, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings,
but ye would not; therefore, behold, Desolation is near unto all the
unprofitable servants: for utter darkness must be their portion, and weeping
and wailing and gnashing of teeth; because, when I called none did answer, and
when I spoke none would hear, says the Lord; therefore is the Day hastening
which shall burn as an oven, and all the evildoers shall be cast therein. And
as I was made sensible of these things, with my mind stayed upon the Lord out
of visible things, a Love sprang up in me to the precious Seed of God, which
lies hid in your earthen vessels; and in this Love was I constrained to lay pen
to paper, only to show you, how way may be made for the deliverance of this
Seed: And though many Warnings have been sent into the World by the Servants of
the Lord, yet notwithstanding, this does not clear me in his sight; for a
necessity being laid upon me concerning those who are yet sensible of the gift
of God, which is given to every one to profit withal: Therefore, to you that
are sensible of such a manifestation of God's Love, be faithful, and deal
faithfully with your own hearts concerning these things which are here
delivered; I say, turn in and consider what you are a doing, and how it stands
with you, that if the Lord should require your Lives at your hands, what an
account can you give before the Lord God? for if you do well, you shall be
accepted; but if not, sin lies at your doors; for the Vials of God's Wrath are
to be poured forth, and the last Trumpet is to be sounded; therefore you dead,
Arise, arise, and come to Judgment: for through the clouds is God coming, and
through the thick darkness is he breaking; that way may be made for his Light
to spring through all that arises contrary to it self, that his Work may be
carried on by his powerful and outstretched Arm of strength: for he will break
to pieces all that arises contrary to himself; for as Potters vessels will they
be before him, who refuse to let Him reign, whose right it is: for of a truth
our God is arisen to plead his righteous Cause with all the Inhabitants of the
Earth; for the Cause of the poor and needy is come before him: Therefore ye
high and lofty ones consider what you are a doing; for certainly, it is now
required of all, both high and low, rich and poor, to come away and bring their
deeds to the Light, for there you are to be tried, even by the touchstone of
his loving kindness, which has weighed you in the equal balance, and you are
found too light; therefore sink down to God's secret Witness, which cries daily
unto you to return: Repent, ye backsliders, and his free Love you will find, to
which if you take diligent heed, you will do well, and will come to be made
partakers of this same free Love which is laid up in store for those that fear
his Name, and walk uprightly before him: for I am constrained to beseech you in
tender bowels of love to your souls, that you would be reconciled to the Lord;
for that which is to be known of God is manifested within you, even as it is
written, a manifestation of the Spirit is given to every one to profit withal;
and this is his Love to you, which stands a Witness against all sin and evil in
your own Consciences; and as this is minded, obeyed and followed, it will lead
out of sin and evil, into Righteousness, Holiness and Purity of life; for that
which reproves you in secret, when no mortal eye sees you, for lying,
swearing, cheating and cozening, and all manner of sin and evil, is the Spirit
of God's Love, which as you keep your minds to it, it will teach you to live
godly, righteously and soberly in this present world: Therefore be awakened all
you who have a sensible feeling of God's gift, which will not deceive you, but
deal plainly with you, and instruct you in the path of Righteousness: come away
therefore and try this true Teacher; for God is at work for the glory of his
Name, and the Redemption of his Seed; (Let him that reads understand) I speak
this to those who have not lost their sensible state of the Love of God, which
is made known to mankind; and as your ears are open to this true Teacher, he
will tell you all that ever you have done, and then will it be given you to
know that this is he indeed, which is come to save his People from their sins:
Therefore come forth out of Babylon's sins, or else with her must you partake
of her plagues; for the Vials of God's Wrath are to be poured on Babylon, and
all those that with her in her sins are partakers, they must also partake with
her in her plagues, even ye Babylons Priests and People, blind leaders of the
blind; therefore into the ditch must ye fall together: for the great Whore it
is who has set her self like a Queen, and has said in her heart, Aha! I shall
feel no sorrow; who has made the Nations drunk with the Cup of her
Fornication, and has rode upon the Beast and false Prophets, and has made her
self drunk with the Blood of the Saints; with her is God's Controversy to be
known, and with her will he plead, who has carried a golden Cup in her hand,
and has deceived many therewith. Let them that read, understand: for Kings
will he bind in Chains, and their Nobles in fetters of Iron, for the Redemption
of his Seed: for the Refiner is come with his Fan in his hand, who will
thoroughly purge his floor, and the Dross and the Tin will our God thoroughly sweep
away; wherefore lift up your eyes and behold, for the Harvest is near, wherein
the Wheat is to be gathered into his garner, but the Tares must be burnt with
unquenchable fire. Lament, lament therefore all you that are senseless of these
things; for be it known unto you that the day is at hand, and on you shall it
come as a thief in the night, and for your unprofitableness your talents must
be taked from you, and into utter darkness must you be cast, and a night of
destruction must you feel, who refuse to walk as Children of the Day, but live
in wantonness as if there was no God: but, if his Mercies will not allure you,
his Judgments will affright you, and then will you call to the Mountains to
fall upon you, to cover you from the Wrath of Him which now calls unto you for
newness of life: For the day is far spent, and the night comes wherein no man
can work; therefore, repent, repent, and cease from the evil of your doings, or
else you shall surely perish; for Judgment is begun at the House of God; and if
the Righteous scarcely be saved, what will become of the Ungodly? and where
will the sinner appear, which turns God's grace into wantonness, and casts his
Law behind their backs, and will have none of his Counsel; but harden their
hearts, and stiffen their necks, and walk stubbornly before the Lord? Why, for
such does my soul mourn, and I could even take up a complaint for them before
the Lord all the day long, for the sake of the Seed of God, which lies in
bondage under your Egyptian nature; and because of these things the Curse of
Egypt and the Plagues of Pharaoh is to be your portion, and the portion of all
those who refuse to let the Seed of God go free. And be it known unto you all
who shall read these lines, That the powerful God of Jacob is arisen in
strength, as in the days of old, for the sakes of his Chosen Seed; therefore,
touch not his Anointed, do his Prophets no harm, ye stiff-necked and rebellious
generation, a seed of evildoers; for as your fathers did, so do ye, in whose
Courts are found all the righteous blood of the Saints and Martyrs in the days
of old, even from the blood of Abel until now, it is all to be required of this
Generation. And be it known unto you, O ye rebellious Children, that God's
Controversy is with you, and with you will he plead in Justice and
Righteousness, concerning your Destruction which you bring upon your selves;
for, this is the Cry that is gone through the Land, Why will you die, why will
you die you sinners, and why will you not come to him who is Life? therefore is
your destruction of your selves, for our God is clear of every man's blood,
their blood shall be upon their own heads; for God in his infinite Wisdom has
chosen us, who are as a poor despised people amongst you, to walk in a
blameless life before you faithfully; who, as we have received of the Lord, so
have our Lights shined before you; and as we have been kept in our measures, so
have we cleared our selves concerning this wicked and adultrous generation; for
long furrows have been plowed on our backs, because with your evils we could
not join; but the rod of the wicked shall not always rest upon the backs of
the Righteous: Therefore you Saints, lift up your heads and rejoice in the
Lord, who has chosen you out of this present evil world, and has redeemed you
to be a Peculiar People to himself; who in time past did run with them into the
same excess of riot, but now are redeemed by the blood of the Lamb; so that
there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after
the flesh but after the Spirit; for the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus, has made us free from the Law of Sin and Death; and here he helps our
infirmities, and does work all our works in us and for us through the Cross,
which by us is taken up and followed: And here we can leave all behind us, and
nothing is too dear for us to lay down for the Testimony of a good Conscience;
and our Faith has been tried amongst you concerning these things, and this
has been and is the Lord's large Love to us, who has not left us in our
trials, but has delivered us, and has been with us in six troubles, and in
seven has he given us courage and boldness, that under his Banner we should be
Noble Warriors, against all that arises contrary to the Lord, against whom (you
will be made to say) it is in vain to strive; you Unbelievers who cannot
believe our report, when to you we have been made to bring glad-tydings of the
Gospel of Peace; Oh you hard-hearted, you unbelievers, no marvel if you perish!
for you wonder at the works of our God, and yet you cannot believe in them;
for, the ax is laid to the root of the trees, and every tree that brings not
forth good fruit is to be hewn down and cast into the fire: Therefore consider
this, all you high and lofty ones, and lay it to heart; for these Warnings are
not come forth in vain. Ye generation of Vipers, how do you think to escape the
Wrath of God who neglect so great Salvation? who have itching ears that cannot
endure sound Doctrine, do you think to flee from the Wrath of God? I tell you,
Nay; If ye live after the flesh, you shall dye; but if ye through the Spirit do
mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live for to be carnally minded is
death, but to be spiritually minded is life and peace. Woe, woe unto all you who
are found eating and drinking, and rising up to play! and this is the reason
that Play Houses and Bear-baitings are appointed, where you daily meet together
on heaps to fulfill the lusts of the flesh; but those that fear the Lord are
kept out of their own hired-houses, and are made to stand in your open streets
to worship God, as they are persuaded in their own consciences. Lament, lament
for these sins, for God's Controversy is with all you who are found in this
state, and as Witnesses do we stand against you: For the candle of the wicked
is to be put out, and then a woeful day will be known unto all those who are
left in darkness; they will not know whither to go, and then no marvel if they
stumble and are offended: for, Behold, in Zion is laid a stumbling-stone and a
rock of offense unto all those that walk in darkness, on whom this stone will
fall and grind them to powder. Let them that have ears to hear, hear; for the
Earth is to be judged, and the Light is to shine. And so to God's pure Witness
in every conscience do I refer my Cause, which will seal to the truth of my
Lines; which are written for no other end but for the sake of the Seed of God,
which my soul longs (yea, and travels daily) for the deliverance of, that it
might be brought out of Captivity; who am one that is had in derision daily;
and by the name of Quaker am I known to scorners, but to sober people, known by
the name of

A. GILMAN.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1663.


