A LETTER From Sir Arthur Hesilrige To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire;
Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons, OF A GREAT VICTORY Obtained by the
Parliaments Forces in Northumberland, Where were taken Prisoners Colonel Gray,
Sir Richard Tempest, Commanders in chief, Sir Francis Ratcliff, Sir Gervas
Lucas, and diverse Lieutenant Colonels, and other Officers and Gentlemen of
quality, above Three hundred Soldiers, and between Five and Six hundred Horses,
and many Arms, as by the List bearing date 1. July, 1648, appears.

Together with Colonel Lilburn's Letter to Sir ARTHUR HESILRIGE.

5 Julii, 1648.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That these Letters and List be
forthwith printed and published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
July 7. 1648.

To the Honorable, William Lenthal Esquire; Speaker of the Honorable House of
COMMONS.
Mr. Speaker,
YOu have heard how Langdale retreated upon Major General Lamberts approaching,
and would not engage his Forces upon terms of advantage, resolving to preserve
his Body whole to join with the Scots; and upon his retreat to Carlisle, he
sent Colonel Tempest with Seven or Eight hundred of his Horse for to meet
Colonel Gray, that was before that time kept up in Berwick by our
Northumberland Horse, with the assistance of Major Sandersons two Troops: but
upon Colonel Tempests coming into Northumberland, ours drew toward Newcastle,
and Colonel Gray with his Forces from Berwick joined with Colonel Tempest about
Alnwick: I sent for the Bishopric Regiment of Horse under Colonel Wren, to
come into Northumberland to join with Colonel Fenwick (who commanded the
Northumberland new raised Regiment) and Major Sanderson; I also mounted about
One hundred of my Foot as Dragoons, and sent them to them: I writ also to Major
General Lambert, letting him understand that the Enemy was joined, and
entreated him to send some assistance immediately to our forces: Upon Friday
last, Col: Lilburn with three Troops of Horse, came to them to Chollerton, and
that evening they marched toward the Enemy that lay about Eslington, and
Whittingham, and all along Cocquet water; and having marched all night, the
next morning they fell into their quarters, the Enemy having no Scouts out, and
they fell so close in from Town to Town for about seven miles, that they
suffered the Enemy to take no Alarm: There are taken most of the considerable
Gentlemen of Northumberland and Bishopric, that were the very first beginers
of this War, and incouragers of the Scots to come into England, and at least
Three hundred private Soldiers, and between 5 and 600 Horses, and good store of
Arms, without the loss of one man of either side. I have enclosed a Letter sent
to me from Col: Lilburn, in which you will see the Enemies intention, and have
cause to give God the greater praise, That when the Enemy resolved, out of
policy, Not to fight, that God was pleased to give them up into our hands,
without striking a stroke, and that to their everlasting shame, I have also
sent you a List of the Commanders and Gentlemen that are taken: I beseech you
do not apprehend that the work in the North is done, God having bestowed this
great mercy upon us, for be assured the Scots are come very near the Borders,
and Langdale is joined with them, and their numbers will be far too great for
what we are able to withstand in these parts, only to God nothing is
impossible. Some of the foot Soldiers of this Garrison, and some of our new
raised Horse ran away to the Enemy, and we have taken diverse of them, and we
intend to try them by a Counsel of War, unless you please to dispose otherwise
of them; if so, we desire we may speedily know your pleasure; if not, they will
be suddenly knit up: Col: Gray compounded at Goldsmiths-Hall, and did take the
Covenant, and so have some others, and there is not a man in the North of
England that has done you more mischief then Col: Gray: I shall take the best
care I can to keep them safe in Tinmouth-Castle, till I know what your commands
are; and you have now in custody your chiefest Enemies in Northumberland and
Bishopric, for the beginning of this new War in the Northern parts, and the
taking of Berwick. I writ formerly to you, to entreat the House to take notice
of the diligence, pains, and faithfulness of your few friends in Northumberland
and Bishopric, that have raised the Horse, and now I hope you will be pleased
to grant it, for their service has been very real and beneficial, both to you
and the Kingdom: I have one more favor to beg, That you will be pleased to keep
Free Quarter out of the Garrison of Newcastle, and then it will be serviceable
to you upon all occasions. We know not what to do with the ordinary prisoners,
I wish that some Merchants had them for a Plantation, for we find by
experience, That very few that have fought against the Parliament do alter
their opinions.

Sir, Your humblest Servant, ART: HESILRIGE.
Newcastle, 2 Julii, 1648.
Honored Sir,
GOd having blessed us with greater success then we expected this day upon the
Enemy, I cannot but admire his goodness, and speak of it to others to the
praise of his Name. Having sent my man to acquaint you (in part) herewith, I
have in the enclosed sent you a more perfect Account of the quality and number
of Prisoners taken, having dissipated their whole Force in this County, that
there did not escape above Two hundred and fifty in a Body, besides those that
crept into hedges and hid themselves. This has struck a very great
astonishment into the Gentlemen that are Prisoners, and they confess it will
much distract their Affairs, and alter the designs of Langdale: He had sent
them Orders to march toward Dunfreise, to join with him and the Scots there;
and had we but staid but three hours longer, they had been gone, and we lost
our labor. I cannot enlarge, being very indisposed and weary at present, but
entreat you to send a Messenger speedily to Major General Lambert, to acquaint
him herewith, because our Horses are much wearied: I shall leave that to Col:
Fenwicks further Relation, and subscribe my self,

Morpeth, July 1. 1648. Your very humble Servant, ROBERT LILBURN.

PRISONERS taken in Northumberland, July 1. 1648.
COlonel Edw: Gray, Commander in chief of the Forces in Northumberland. Col:
Sir Richard Tempest Baronet, Commander in chief of the Forces for the County of
Duresm. Sir Francis Ratcliff. Baronet Ratcliffs Son. Sir Gervas Lucas. Mr. Geo:
Bellasis, Mr. Geo: Collingwood Reformadoes. Mr. John Collingwood Reformadoes.
Lieut: Col: John Salkield. Lieut: Col: Ralph Millet. Lieut: Col: John Thornton.
Major Tho: Salkield. Major Trollop. Capt. Francis Braudling. Capt. James
Shafto. Capt. Hugh James. Capt. Smith. Capt. Fetherstonhaugh. Capt. Francis
Carlton. Capt. Ascue. Capt. Ambrose Carlton. Mr. Gowen Ratcliff. Mr. Roger
Ratcliff. Mr. Ralph Bows. Mr. John Wright. Mr. Cholmley Wright. Mr. Jo:
Thornton. Mr. William Hodgson. Mr. Charles Selby. Mr. John Thurlwel. Mr. Will:
Lampton. Mr. Shaw. Mr. Lancelot Selby. Mr. Nicho: Woodhouse. Mr. Antho:
Trollop. Mr. John Fitzwilliams. Mr. John Sison. Mr. Tho: Hardy. Mr. John
Watson. Mr. Ralph Claxton.
And many other Gentlemen, Lieutenants, and other Officers, and above Three
hundred Soldiers, and between Five or Six hundred Horses, and many Arms.

The Enemy was about One thousand two hundred, and we about Nine hundred. Six
hundred Foot came out of Berwick this day, and was within eight miles of the
Horse, to have joined with them about Calilah.

FINIS.

