Doctor HILL's FUNERAL-SERMON. OR, A Nevv-yeers-Gift To all the CLERGY.

Daynus, the reviving feet of the Witnesses past and to come, To show the day
and year of the Lord, and his time accepted.

Printed at London, 1654. And are to be sold by Richard Moon at the seven Stars
in Paul's Churchyard.

His Epistle and Dedication to the Clergy.
THou sowest all life in the flesh, and thou reapest life to thy self, O Lord:
thou windest up life in the body of life; thou art the Center and orency of
quickening life: All Creatures move in the power of that life. That substance of
flesh by procreation is not that saving life, but thou art the quintessence of
all life in the Soul. The Soul in its natural condition is vayla, and
changeable by the instinct of Nature included in the flesh; varra, changeable
in it self; fayla, not able to stand, unless it be redeemed by an inclusive
power spiritual: and in that way God will be seen to deliver, by way of
imputation of life to the Soul: Reeda Alda, at every season Helpative Soona,
Plyant Dative, by a dividual dividing betwixt the Marrow and the Bones;
Circumference, Deus All-fulness, Unus varius, Allmagnus, God the full beauty
and life, in him all things are computed, comprised, and comprehended by him;
he is All meritus and translatirus, and does refine all things: he is the final
and fountain of all perfection, the life and death of all the Creatures: every
thing that moves lives in him. All solestial flesh is as a flower or grass
that withers away, and shall be no more in its natural perfection: for
nothing shall live but life, that shall not die, which is the principle of God
in thee, called that immortality, which is a spiritual reviving power that
shall return to God; although the flesh does not, yet the spirit shall return
to him that gave it. The Soul is the life of the Creation naturally in us,
prohibited and presented by him, which is our life so preserved. The Spirit is
an inclusive thing of union, and by an immortal marriage it has congruity with
the Soul: the Soul is a high mystery, it is the Virgin of the spirit, and the
spirit dwells in it, till the flesh dies, which makes a dissolution betwixt
flesh and soul. The spirit of grace is an high mystery, and dwells in some,
but not in all: every one may have life in them, yet not that spitual life,
which is the life of eternity: therefore none can live after the old Adam, but
shall die the death, until the quickening power of the second Adam come in, which
is Christ in thee and in me, to renew in us that which would die: for nothing
carnally can live. The soul is naturally sowed in the flesh, and is of it self
fleshly by four natural causes, by a Soveraingty from God; as Breath, blood,
Heat and Food, which keeps thy natural soul alive: there is a threefold life;
two of them be but natural life, as vegetive life, natural life, and spiritual
life, and all have their being from that eternal life: We see many times that
young flesh droppeth off from the Tree of life; the aged must do so, the King
must die as well as the Beggar, so must the high Doctor as well as the silly
poor man; then behold with me the period of man's life, and full of brevity,
fading changeable smoke, or as a vapor that soon passes away. So much for man's
mortality. The next thing is to enquire and speak something of this our late
deceased Brother Doctor Hill.

Doctor HILL'S Funeral-Sermon.
BY a singular providence of God I happened to be at the Town of Cambridge at
the very instant of Doctor Hill's departure: then at the same time the Lord
moved me to write, and he actually taught me what I should write, which he the
Lord preached to me. This Sermon preached to me was not my desire only, yet
the God of life put it upon me, and supported me with matter accordingly, that
I could not deny but write: for the Lord preached unto me the things I should
write, and now I declare unto you a new Sabbath, which I did write with much
niceness and fear of spirit; yet the Lord told me that the Sabbath-Ordinances
were changed by the Priests under the Law, and likewise by the Ministers of our
time. And therefore of necessity I did write as he commanded me, by way of a
Funeral-Sermon, or a final dissolution of the Clergellical power, whereof I
declare the life and death of the Creature, and the stability and endless power
of Christ's Ministry, with a description of them that call themselves Ministers
of God, and how they shall fall under the Worlds contempt, some degrees worse
then the Bishops. The Prophets complain; the clamation is, The Minister and
Priests have robbed Gods storehouse, taking to themselves those privileges
that are not their own; therefore they shall say no more, Know the Lord from
the greatest to the least; and shall be free from your mouth inherently taught
of God, and live by faith exemplary to Abraham, Noah, and Christ; which is to
live in righteousness, and not to need the teachings of men: for all our
teachers are failable now as well as they were under the Law; so that our
redemption is clearly by Christ, Heb. 7.24. Christ he continued ever
unchangeable as a Priest, whereof he is able to save them to the uttermost that
come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them: which
is a plain proof, without dispute, that he is the Minister of God, and Priest;
he will put an end to your Ministry, because you are failable, yet Christ is
infailable: and therefore we cast you off in the name of the Lord, and cry ye
down as no Ministers of God, but deceivers of the people. I would bave all live
up to Christ by a personal power, free from all the teachings of men, and that
no man shall ought to teach, whether he be a Minister or a layman; for one
man's tongue is no lawful testimony, for one may speak of Christ as well as
another, so that all may prophesy one by one, as they did in Christ's time: for
in the last days I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, for my servants and
handmaids shall prophecy. Then said he unto me, Prophecy, son of man: So I
prophesied as he commanded me, and the breath came into them, and they lived
and stood upon their feet, an exceeding great Army. Ezekiel 37. This Army
Giddon of the Lord shall cause the River Euphrates with seven streams to dry
up; and there shall be many voices heard, and witnesses on their Feet. Then
look to it Doctor; without all dispute, your trade of preaching will fall.

BEloved, this Doctor Hill was a man of good rank, an eminent man that I did
formerly know, though now he was very justitious; I was his Countryman about
sixteen or eighteen years past; he was a reasonable good professor called a
Puritan in those days; but what he was now, I cannot tell; I hear you say he
was Master of Trinity-Colledge. This Doctor Hill was very well known and
approved of through all the University of Cambridge; This Doctor Hill was a man
very well beloved in the Town, it rung passing-peals for him at five Churches,
which I have seldom heard so many Bells of Aaron ring for one Priest. You tell
me he had neither Son nor Daughter; what did he do with all his hundreds a
year? did he build Hospitals for the poor? Ye tell me he was a man of little
Hospitality; then I cannot speak much in his behoof.

The words that I shall treat upon are from the mouth of those four Prophets,
Ezekiel 37. Matthew 28. Zachariah 11. and Rev. 11. These four Scriptures are
the very groundwork of what we shall treat upon. We, even we the witnesses,
foreshow the mystery of those Evangelical Prophets, and one Angelical amongst
the rest, Christ the first, Ezekiel, Zachary, and John, by inference does
plainly type out the two Testaments of Law and Gospel, declaring of two
Scriptures, one before Christ came in the flesh, the other by a Testimony of
Christ and John, saying: I come not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill the Law.

Now we may find these Prophets were part of the Witnesses that were before
and after Christ: so that these four Scriptures make out one testimony, which
one Scripture cannot do so affirmatively, for one Scripture must prove another,
and so make out truth which is undeniable.

These four Prophets, though far distant in their times, yet declared out the
great things of God to come in our days, the one by a foolish Shephard that
God will raise, spoken of by Zachary long before; the other are the two
Witnesses that God will raise and put life into, and shall stand upon their
Feet: it is not one man's feet, but feet of Witnesses; it is one Priest one
Prophet alone which is Christ Jesus singular of himself, and not for man to
stand as Doctor Definator; and as one man cannot prove a truth, so two
Scriptures must of necessity make out one truth which is a vindicated truth,
and tolerated of God by Law and testimony.

But you high Doctors may question me in this thing, why one Scripture cannot
be tolerable as well as two.

My answer is, because the Mount Sion came between the Law and Gospel, and
changed the course of Sinai to Mount Sion, which is one to the Lord: for Christ
stands in power of himself to prove every Scripture, which is an allegory, or
an all-power of himself, which man cannot attain unto: he is the High Priest
that first entered into rest: he has trod the winepress alone; so that none can
stand chief of himself, but he alone, after the order of Melchizedeck a Priest
for ever ordained and sent of God: he is our Minister, and no other.

Doctor, I pray throw down your power; you are but as other men jointly to
plead among your Low equals, and not to stand Lord Priest above others,
preaching in your cause, to silence others. Therefore take to thy self the
instruments of a foolish Shepherd: Showing that God will deliver his mind to
some poor despised Shepherd, that shall declare his hand of judgment upon the
Shepherds, to tell them they are but as other men, and shall acknowledge
themselves as Sheep among others, and not think so high of themselves as to be
called by the name of Shepherds: for Christ is all our Shepherd, and we are his
Sheep, both Minister and People; neither shall you have power to tyrannize over
the consciences of the People, for all things shall be judged by the
Church-Community to make out the Prophecy of the Prophet Zachary by way of
allusion respondent or responsive to Christ; or under Christ, that some foolish
Shepherd should declare and stand up as a Fool amongst the learned, saying,
Take to thy self the instruments of a foolish Shepherd.

Now what be those instruments?

To answer, they be two, and of no less number: for one is not to be numbered,
but accounted as one instrument; it is one witness, and that is Christ's place
from God, and it not is tolerable for one man to preach and declare of himself
in his own tongue, to silence the people; if he does, his testimony is not
true: for I will give power to my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy;
meaning, that two or three may prophecy, preach, or disciply, and answer each
other in order: so that I find one alone, whether he be a Minister or a
layman, of himself, cannot be tolerable to speak; for the plural number shall
extinguish the singular, Christ excepted: for he says, By the mouth of two or
three witnesses every truth shall be established; Christ says, his own
testimony could not be true, except his Father bore witness with him. So that
he always appeared to two or more; the two Mary's sought him early in the
morning. It shows to us, that these women were two faithful witnesses, in
that he said, Go make known my resurrection, which was a calling of them by way
of ordination, which Calling all you Doctors and Senators cannot show. Again,
when he appeared to Mary and Elizabeth, the babe sprung in her womb for joy.
Again, he appears to the two that were going to Emmaus, which caused them to
say, Did not our hearts burn within us, when he talked with us? So that talking
of God is the best preaching, and will cause all you Ministers to come down
from your high places, I mean your Pulpits, and to plead among your low equals:
for it is not the partiality of one man's tongue that can be found lawful; for
Christ ever appeared to two, which were the least number; sometimes to three;
sometimes to the twelve, that they might make out the truth: for the witnesses
must prove a true testimony; two or three witnesses may make a true discovery,
but one cannot. He says, I will give power to two; that is not to one
Minister, he cannot fully disciply truth: for every divine truth is proved by
witnesses. That which one affirms in a Pulpit, another may deny; it is verily
so in our common Churches. The truth should be reasoned out by faithful
witnesses. Christ says, Where two or three be gathered in my name, I will be
in the midst of them; which is a great promise, or a calling forth of the
witnesses to stand up and plead against the approbation of one Ministers
tongue, which is unlawful, for one man to deffinate or define a truth of
himself, to sesserate or deceive the people, calling himself a Minister of God.

Ye Diviners, Flatterers, and Soothsayers, that carry the power in your own
tongues, and yet no faithful witnesses, which of you will lose all for the
testimony of Christ, to vindicate thy life, to sacrifice thy liberty or thy
parsonage for the truth of Christ? Alas you carry on the truth of God by
flattery, and so deceive the hearers; you stand deffinating and temporing,
sowing Pillows under great Men's Elbows: you will speak a little of
Covetousness, but much less of blood and oppression, and little or nothing of
devouring one another; for that will touch my self, or my parsonage.

O draw the Curtain there, see that God is angry with you, and tells you by
his Prophet Micah 3. that ye shall move out of your holes; and Ezekiel the
Prophet says, The people shall be taken from your mouth; and Zachary says, I
heard a howling of the Shepherds, for their glory was spoiled: and Malachy
says, Ye rob my Storehouse, therefore the land is cursed with a curse.

If ye Ministers should preach against all Impropriations, as that ye dare not
do, for losing your Parsonages, lose them and lose all; for then preaching will
cease, and there will be many that will remove our Feet from the Pulpit; when
every truth shall be defined by two or three witnesses, what will become of us
Pulpittians? it will be to us as the mourning of Hadadrimmon: indeed that is
the way to bring down the pride of Palestina, and Capernaum exalted so high:
you Pulpitsayons are set so high, as Lord speaker, who shall control you? yet
your power must come down; when your Pulpits shall have never a leg, yet the
two witnesses shall be upon their Feet, to plead for equity and justice, which
ye do not; ye preach for your own ends, and cannot satisfy truth; always full
of repetition, but nothing of any new work that God will do in the earth. If a
layman should speak higher things then those you declare, you would say as
Festus said to Paul, that he was mad. Ye have slandered many good Christians
that have been faithful witnesses to Christ, and learned the language from the
Heavenly University, far passing Oxford and Cambridge.

Truly we have many Doctors in Oxford and Cambridge, that enjoy so much, that
it is intolerable: These blind Doctors, Doctor up the Commonwealth, and deceive
the people; impropriating to themselves more then Food and Raiment, which is
contrary to Christ's example; they be more in show then in substance, getting to
themselves high tolerations which are not of Christ; whereof you shall lie
under his wrath, saying, How hard a thing is it for a rich man to enter into
the Kingdom?

Yet take to thy self the instruments of a foolish Shepherd.

Doctor, I am as a fool amongst the Doctors; I cannot but tell you the truth:
for God has raised my spirit, he has encouraged me to speak of your shame,
and not to be daunted. Some Ministers now of late have made themselves Doctors,
hoping for some of these great places in Oxford and Cambridge, which will prove
but veynal, or a vein uncurable, that runs it self out by many obstructions
or clashings one against another, Minister against Minister: there is not that
Antipathy nor that Universality, for some shall preach up their power, and some
shall preach it down. This Eclipse or terrible shaking will hold until the
power of your Priesthood fall: at the power of the eternal Priest, you must
throw down your power at Christ's Feet; for the Holy Ghost shall be all our
teacher. Ministers, your mouths shall be stopped, Micah 3. you shall not
divine, you shall no more say to the people, Know the Lord for they shall all
know me from the greatest to the least; and that is by spiritual revelation, or
by an inward knowing, which far passes your learned places; your Colleges are
filled with many scandalous Ruffinous Fellows and of a ranting Crew, very
litteral, and not knowing the truth; translators, and usurping the word of the
letter to their own turns, setting themselves higher then the teachings of
God, thinking laymen inferior to themselves; as if God could not raise up
Children to Abraham out of those Stones.

To be taught of God, is the best University: for all your wit, and skill, and
univesality of tongues, cannot make one godly person: for every gift and
perfect giving is from above. God ministers grace to whom he pleases; he is
the Minister; then how can thou be a Minister? for God ministers to all
things; then yield up thy Priesthood to him; he is the Fountain, and all the
Streams must go to that Fountain. You Doctors are set so high, and shall
become low, more contemptible then the Bishops were: for God will set you as a
mark to shoot at, or as a lost Jerusalem, for the Bittern or Owl to sit in;
for you have kept all things at a distance, blinding the people, and keeping
them under the letter by the hearing of Faith, without inward Faith; as if
salvation were by the letter, and full freedom by the speaker. They will not
let to say they have begotten souls; as if salvation were simply from their
teachings. And thus they silence the people under their bands.

Ah go, go, and tell them so, that they silence the people, and cannot give
them spiritual life, but keep them at a distance, as a Horse in a Mill always
going round, teaching them repetition and repetition; learning, and yet not
come to the knowledge of truth: but Paul says, Prove all things, yet hold fast
that which is good. Then lay your heads together, and ye shall find the
Ministers of our time very faulty; They call themselves the Ministers of God,
and sit in Christ's place; In the name of the Lord we cast you forth, and we
discarge your false power, for Christ is Adminstrator, and you are fleshly and
litteral, and have no more power to preach then another man: for Christ is the
Minister of God, and gives us spiritual life to heal our infirmities, and he
is our example to walk by: then lay by your covetousness and pride, and follow
his example; set your selves to know God, and then you shall find great
comfort; for it shall stir up the gift, which is the best teaching. Ministers
cannot live themselves, and how should they give life to others? they are full
of guilt and scandal, and yet they account themselves high Doctors or Ministers
of God, when indeed ye are not so, but deceivers of the people; for there is no
Minister but Christ alone: though ye stand so high in the Pulpits, you must
come down at the appearing of Christ in his power, when all flesh shall bend,
both things in Heaven, and things on the Earth, and things under the Earth
shall all be dispowered and dis-throned, when nothing shall stand but
ordination, and that is Christ ordained a Priest and a Minister for ever: he
alone is our spiritual teacher, and you Ministers are worse then Laymen for
taking upon you that title of Ministry, and cannot live free from covetousness
which is Idolatry; and you are idolatrous Priests, which deceive the simple.

Methinks I could stand an hour or two in your idolatrous places to preach as
you do, but my conscience informs me otherwise. Therefore I lay the Ax to the
root of your one-legged Pulpits, to cut them down: for you Pulpitsayons must
come down, and set upon your low equals. Why should ye stand higher then Christ
and his Apostles, that went from place to place discipling and teaching? But
for shame, some of you Doctors could say your Authority is jure Divino, which
is a base degree hatched in Oxford and Cambridge, and maintained by a
prelatical power, that one alone may be suprem to preach of himself in his own
tongue, and all the people give audience to hear one infamous man speak by a
primus or supreme Authority, whereof none may speak but be silenced, whether it
be right or wrong; while they declare forth their own Authority, which is the
first degree of a lying testimony: for one tongue cannot fully make a lawful
testimony. If one Lawyer plead two men's causes, he cannot but use partiality;
neither can any Minister plead Gods cause and man's cause together; it must be
Christ the Mediator, as a Minister between God and us. The truths of God ought
to be proved by twelve, or by two or three faithful witnesses, and that is a
truth vindicated and proved according to divine justice, and not by one man's
tongue preaching in a Pulpit, which shall suddenly be cut down, and Mr.
Presbitian shall stand low among his Fellow-equals, Babylon placed so high
shall come down to the Dust.

High Doctor, thou countest me a foolish Shepherd, yet the Lord is with me, to
show thee thy folly; for that is truth which is proved by witnesses, and by the
approbation of the Church; for your own tongue is a lie; though speak in a
Pulpit, yet ye cannot silence the people; for Saint John says he heard the
sound of many voices, and his witnesses shall have power; which are they that
are within the Covenant, or such as shall enter into Covenant to the great
Jehovah.

Ye Doctors of Divinity, as ye call your selves, ye have preached long in your
own tongue, to keep the World at a distance, you have not been builders but
destroyers of the House of God: and know ye not the offering of his Temple, but
have set your selves higher then others, exalting your selves by your own
tongue, as if none could talk of God but Priestbitian or Presbitiry, Priests,
Dictators, raised from Oxford and Cambridge? but without all question,
Priestinion must down.

Doctor, I acccmpt my self a fool, for I am no good Scribe, neither have I been
at University to learn the stammering tongue, and for that we need not much
care, unless we were to go to Jerusalem to call in the Jews, which shall be
some of every Nation that shall be the elect gathered from the four Winds, when
the Harvest shall appear which is now at hand, when the Sheep shall divide
themselves from the Goats, meaning, the procreation of the Jews shall come
forth, and stand upon their Feet, then the World shall be at an end, meaning,
it can work its own end no longer; therefore it may be said it is at an end,
when they can no longer tread over the two witnesses, but the Saints on earth
shall judge and govern them.

Doctor, I am but a Fool, or a foolish Shepherd clothed in sackcloth 42 Months,
from the year 1650. when the sixth Seal opened the mystery, to the end of 42
Months, which may be properly taken three years and a half, about 54 or 55.
God has given me to look for great deliverance to the Kingdom of the Church,
and that Christ shall reign in power here in England, which shall be very
Oriential to behold, far beyond your learned power; and you shall not be Doctor
speaker alone, and cannot know any true way, nor live in any stable
righteousness: for Christ the Minister of God does administer life and all
quickening power, which is the substance of all, and you cannot do the same:
therefore lay down your Ministerial power, and account your selves as other
men; let others speak, and ye speak to them and so judge the truth among your
selves; and throw down the error of one man's tongue. There has been many
Scholars raised from Oxford and Cambridge; swearing, voluptuous persons, and
yet tolerated by your degrees, and so become Pulpitsayons: another sort have
been civil men, though not sanctified, yet raised by the degrees of learning
without any Heavenly substance; others have been raised very dunces, neither
good Scholars, nor spiritually of God and yet have worn long Canonical Gowns,
Lawyer-like, whose folly was raised from those two Fountains, and much typeth
out the Scribes and Pharisees, very proud and sumptuous, as the Raven that
sets her Nest high, to be seen and heard afar off; then think they, we are
secure: and yet their Nest must come down: for the Pulpit-tree having but one
Leg, and set so high, will have a great downfall.

Why should disciplying be kept in a Corner so high, by one tongue, as one Mr.
Speaker?

Ye Doctors Diffinators, know this, that disciplying must come down among your
Fellow-equals, and shall be carried by the Feet of the Witnesses from Sea to
Sea, and from one end of the Earth to another. Therefore Christ denied himself,
and would not be Mr. Speaker, saying, If I speak my own words, my testimony is
not true; there is one that bears witness with me: and that is tolerable.

O man, why should thy tongue bear down all, and silence all the people, and
cannot prove thy self a Minister of God, but sits as Scribe in Moses Chair?

Doctor Pulpittian, four things I strike at: Thy Pride, thy Power, thy Calling,
and thy Pulpit.

First for thy Pride, which is unseemly for a Disciple of Christ to be proud by
such carnal policy.

Secondly, Thy Power if it be spiritual it is of God; but if a carnal power, it
cannot stand: for he will give power to his two faithful Witnesses and not to
one, though he be never so wise. Doctor, it is not that Latin tongue that can
be good English, Isa. 33. calls it the stammering tongue: but ye high Priests
and Lawyers take any course to hold up your power. The Universities and Innes
of Court are fine places for the stammering tongue; they be not for the
simple-hearted; Fools shall not come therein; and I am the Fool to tell you so.
The Prophet Zachary says, Behold, thy King comes riding upon an Ass. Now in
the time Christ's power is appearing, a man was better to be a Fool or an Ass
then a high Doctor, when their power is shaking, and ready to fall, with the
rest of their Pulpittians.

Doctor, the third thing I strike at, is thy calling. Art thou called of God?
then show thy assent: if it be of God, it is not from those two high places,
but from a heavenly assent, Divinalligy of it is from Christ, and that is a
true calling. But I find your calling is from men, which cannot be a Divine
calling but hatched by the learned Dictators, which is not from the Divine
nature, neither does it savor of Canaan, but is derived from learned Art and
Skill, very traditional; and when it goes down, we shall have a new Government
on the earth, which I suppose will be betwixt 50. or 57. or sooner that your
pulpits will down.

Farther, To vindicate thy Calling, thou say thou art the Minister of God,
so wise, who may gainsay it? but Solomon says. There is more hope of a fool,
then of him that is wise in his own conceit. If thou be the Minister of God,
then Christ must lose his place, or thou shall lose thine; for none can say I
am a Minister of God, without he be sent of him, saying, Go or go tell them of
my resurrection. I doubt you will hardly prove any such calling; yet we find
Christ was sent; God he sent his Son in the similitude of sinful flesh once for
all, as the Minister of eternal life: then why should men hang upon Doctor
Speakers, that have learned their skill from Oxford and Cambridge?

Ye Pulpitsayans must down; one witness cannot be tolerated, for he appeared to
the twelve Apostles: and David calls us, the Ends of the Earth that God will
appear to; Where two or three are met in my name, I will be in the midst of
them: which does debar one man's speakal tongue: for Christ is Divine of
himself, and man is to be jointly as one of the Brethren, and shall plead for
righteousness among the rest, and to live by the teachings of the Holy Ghost,
without Dictators or cunning deceivers. And let all the Doctors, high Priests,
and Prelates know, they are but as other men, and have the same infirmities,
not able to stand; then no high Priest or Minister, but faylable. Then let us
all talk together of the goodness of the Lord, and what he has done for our
Souls, acknowledging our sins one to another, and pray for one another, and
give to one another the right hand of Fellowship, which will be a sweet savor
of goodness, to laud the Lord together.

Doctor, I know none but Christ's Disciples that were tolerated to preach, and
not any but such as he said unto, Go and learn all the Nations, baptizing them
in the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, Mat. 28. he appeared to the two
Mary's, saying, Go; which was a lawfuller calling then any you can show: and he
gave some of his Disciples gifts of healing, which you have not received.

Doctor, one man's tongue cannot comparmise nor comprehend the full truth of
God: as the Church may do by many voices and witnesses: if Christ himself the
eternal Priest denied himself from his own power of speaking, how ought you to
be cautelous of speaking your own words, though in a Pulpit?

I marvel how Pulpits first came up; they be much a kin to your Fonts, where ye
disciple Babes in Clouts, which is as a Monster that shall never come to
perfection.

There be many things more that I may tell you of; Malachy 3. says, Bring the
Tithes into my storehouse: as if by an illusion he should say, For the Blind,
the Lame, the Fatherless, the Widow, and the Aged, to relieve the Oppressed,
that men might be eased of Collection to the Poor in every Parish, and for all
such as want: And you Pulpit-men work with your hands as others do, for you are
almost at the end of your period, having so much of the Letter, and so much
example of Christ, that I wonder with Paul, when he said, Who has bewitched
you, that you do not obey the truth?

Ye Doctors are carried away from Christ by Self Ends and personal interest, as
great Tithes, which is utterly unlawful for them that call themselves Ministers
of God, and yet rob his Storehouse, and commit Sacrilege against God.

Under the Law, the order of Gods House was changed by the Priests, and the
Prophets reproved them for it: under whose reproach ye Doctors and Ministers
lie to this day, in that ye rob God of his interest. Bring the Tithes into my
Storehouse: for now I reprove you under the testimony of Christ.

There was a Treasury in the time of the Apostles and Christ, which the people
ministered unto, and brought in their gifts, consecrating their love to Gods
house, as Joanah and Susanna ministered of their substance to the Treasury, and
the Widow brought in her mite, which was received with great acceptance: which
way of Gods worship you and the Bishops have strangled Gods House, and got
those privileges into your own hands.

Again, I must tell you both Minister and People, impropriations would make the
poor of such places merry, if they might or could have their right given them:
but we have so many devouring Foxes have stolen them away, and you have not
pleaded for them in the Pulpits, but you falsely keep those benefits to your
selves; ye blind guides of the people, that make clean the outside, and the
inside is full of putrification.

These Pulpitians have spoiled the Commonwealth of Israel; you have been one of
the Horns of Oppression: otherwise we might have had the Government of Christ
set up before now; which is by Four and Twenty, as we may call Governallity,
which is Governation, A Parliament of Four and Twenty, which should be for
commonality: but you have stood so high in your Pulpits, that the silly World
believes that your Pulpits were ordained of Christ; which were nothing so, but
arose from Bishops Deanes, Chancellors, Deacons, or Doctors of Divinity as ye
call them, men of low descent, yet raised from those two Fountains Oxford and
Cambridge, pethy places for learning of the stammering tongue.

Christ gave gifts of learning, which was not to one, but to more then one; as
if he should say, Let no man silence the people, as he said, John was a burning
and a shining Light; but I have greater witnesses then that of John, for the
work to finish: so that one man's tongue shall not stand, but the talking of
witnesses shall manifest every truth; for, Pulpittian, Christ questioneth thy
Authority: thy People shall speak and thou must answer, otherwise the truth
cannot be established without much trouble, and many witnesses; which produces
the grand voice of the Church.

And therefore ye Taskmasters, down with your Hour-glasses; many words in your
own tongue cannot satisfy the people, neither can you make out truth by your
own tongue.

Noah was a Preacher of righteousness, but not in a Pulpit; and Abraham
preached forth Faith; he believed, and it was counted for him for
righteousness. The good life of those two Fathers preached righteousness to the
people, and so should yours be to act in righteousness without partiality of
the tongue.

It is not the hearing nor the preaching, but the doing of righteousness: for
to enquire the way and not to walk in it, is a vain thing,

We ought all to live up to God in truth, and that is the best teaching; To
disciply and distinguish truths is good learning, and the best preaching to
answer the things of conscience by the grand power of the Church, and not to
rest upon the mouth of one teacher: neither do I know any Minister after the
flesh, but like Minister, like People, all full of frailty; then how can thou
be a teacher, and art but equal to other men in sin and sensuallity? it is the
Sheerds of Gods free mercy, that redeemeth thee as well as others.

What is the University more then any other place? your Latin tongue is is but
an empty thing; it must be only the Divine power that keeps thy soul alive,
and causes thee and me to live; which is above any external power: neither can
godliness be learned; it is from the Ministerial power of Christ, and from the
gift of God, and not by the hearing of faith: but thou must have a personal
faith of thine own, and to prove thy self, and lay open thy self to the Church,
and let thy moderation be known to God, and openly to the people, and pray for
one another to Christ thy Minister, for by him we have boldness to the Throne
of grace, and are made capable of his Ministry; which cannot be done by any
fleshly Priest, which is but as all other men, though he may smooth up the
people as if he were the Minister of God, and so commit Blasphemy against the
holy Ghost, taking away Christ's Authority, making themselves Pulpittians, to
tie up the consciences of such as follow them, as if they had full power given
them of God.

Ye Doctors and Ministers, ye must fall some degrees worse then your Fathers
the Bishops; the light of the Lord shall so clearly usher in, that you shall be
discovered, and Christ shall be chief Speaker to his flock; one Priest, one
People; one Shepherd, one Sheep of the elect; Abraham called and sanctified by
Christ, and not by men's teaching.

For Mr. Speaker, Doctor of tongues, you may say, What, do we stand for a
Cipher? Yes: for Christ is all our teacher, and you Ministers lie under the
vail as well as others.

Therefore (Minister) lay down thy false power, and deceive the people no
longer, and know thy self as low as others, and much inferior to Christ. Oh
take not away his Divine Authority, which properly belongs to the Son of God.
Christ he preaches continually to them that are near, and to them afar off: he
preaches to every Kindred, Tongue, Language, and Nation; he says, My Sheep
hear my voice; not your Sheep; he says, My Disciples keep my sayings, not your
sayings.

For my part, I account all you Pulpittians to be but false Christ's; yet I
disparage not the gift of godliness in you, but I adhere to any thing that is
good in you. Christ says, They shall come in my Name, and decieve the People.
And truly ye Ministers and high Doctors must needs be the men, for you call
your selves the Ministers of God standing in the high place, and alas ye are no
more then laymen that never were at Oxford and Cambridge: you be men of
infirmity as others be, and therefore your power will fall, and cannot stand.

O General, O Parliament, O People, why do you commit error against God and his
Christ, to follow after fained lovers, which are but Ministers of the letter,
and have not the gifts of healing, neither are they sent? for it is Christ that
ministers the gift to all, and keeps all alive by a power from above; and
every person that is godly, shall have a personal power in himself from Christ
to stand upon his Feet, without a Pulpit-preacher: for man cannot preach of
himself, except he was sent of Christ, saying, Go, or go forth, as he said to
his Disciples. But now in our days God has appeared to us by his Son, and
no other: and Christ says, If I go from you, I will send you the Comforter,
that shall teach you in all truth.

Object. What shall he teach the Parsons?

Answ. Yes, as well as the People: for Minister and People shall be but Sheep
in his Fold; for Christ is the high Priest; his Lips shall preserve knowledge;
ye shall all know me from the greatest to the least; there must be a personal
knowing of God by faith, as Abraham and Noah lived and walked with God, and it
was accounted to them for righteousness; every degree, from the Doctor to the
People, shall know God, and stand upon their Feet, without a Preacher, whose
breath is in their Nostrils: silly Guides, not able to stand of themselves,
neither can they Doctor up others, but may go teach our Children of seven years
old.

I am but a Fool to speak that which no man has declared; but I can have no
rest for Sions sake, nor give my self any rest, until I see the work of God
accomplished in the Earth, which is the procreation of the Jews, that shall
come forth and stand upon their Feet.

Army, Army, O Arm of the Lord Almighty, Army shall stand upon their Feet,
Ezekiel 37. which I suppose will be within four or five years after 1650. to
the admiration of the World.

Ye Ministers and Doctors Definators, ye would fain hold up your high places,
but truly your Temple must fall; for Christ says, There shall not be one Stone
left upon another, that shall not be thrown down: for your Worldly power will
be at an end, when Christ the great Shepherd shall call forth his Flock to
stand upon their Feet, and live without your Declarations; when all men shall
declare out of the gift, and not by the letter, to speak the things they have
received of God, and shall refuse your teachers that are not sent of God, but
be End-workers and Mony-merchants, that shall be dissolved and cast out of the
Temple as Mony-changers; for God will set up a disciplying, when your power
lies low as Doctor Hill's Bones, and we may say with the Prophet Ezekiel, Blow
Wind, and shake the four quarters of the Earth, to raise those dry Bones, that
have been very dry so long, that they come up in the Valley of Jesus Christ:
for he shall sit to judge the Heathen round about. Put in the Sickle, the
Harvest is ripe, the Wine Press overfloweth; multitudes, multitudes shall usher
in, they shall be a willing People in the day of Gods power: but all ye Doctors
are so high and justitious, that ye keep Christ off from his regal power and
Authority; therefore ye shall fall with reproach under Armegiddon. Oh Arm,
Arm, Arm of the Lord.

Finally, Doctor, you stand in Christ's place. Man may speak out his judgment,
that another may answer, and Christ he ministers to all: every truth must be
proved affirmatively, but not by one man's tongue; and you shall be called to
account by the grand Church: for the Prophet John says, There shall be
Lightning, Thundering, Voices and Witnesses.

First, the Light of the Lord appears, and shall break down the Constellations.

Secondly, he will Thunder forth Justice, Judgment, and Equity in the Earth,
by a personal power of Saints under him. The Apostle Peter tells you so, that
the Saints must judge the World, and you the Angels of the Churches too.

Thirdly, he will appear by many Voices, that shall give sentence and decide
every truth.

Fourthly, he will appear by Witnesses, which shall extinguish one man's tongue:
for the mouth of two or three witnesses shall be an establishment, and the many
Voices shall swallow up your Ministerial Voice.

These two witnesses shall have power in the days of their Prophecy to turn
the waters into blood so often as they will; that is, to declare forth the
bloody condition of blood-thirsty persons; which you dare not do, for losing
your impropriated Parsonages.

These Witnesses shall have power to shut Heaven gates so often as they will,
that it rain not. It is not meant the imperial Heaven of Heavens; but it is
meant, they shall shut the gates of the heavenly and visible Kingdom here
below, that none shall enter in to reign in that pure State, but such as shall
be approved Members of that glorious Jerusalem above.

These Witnesses shall have power to shut Heaven that i^ rain not, that is,
twelve; it shall not reign in the days of their power, but shall be finally
swallowed up in the Victory of Christ: it shall not reign, it and it, it and
it, it and it, it and it, it and it, it and it: That is, no outward power shall
reign in the time of Christ's power.

The first the first thing that shall not reign, is Earthly King and Grace.

The second thing that shall not reign, is Lord and Protector.

The third thing that shall not reign, is Power and Excellency of Man.

The fourth thing that shall not reign, is Worship and Honor.

The fifth thing that shall not reign, is Highness and Greatness of Men.

The sixth thing that shall not reign, is Priest and Lawyer: for Christ will
sit upon the backs of all those, and be exalted by the multitude of the people:
multitudes, multitudes shall stand upon Angella: Christ must reign by his
Saints till he has put all Authority and power under his Feet, 2 Cor. 15.

The Feet of the two Witnesses shall tread in pieces the Dragons tail; as
Christ broke his head, so they shall bruise his heel: for the Antitype of
Satan's Kingdom must fall and perish under the power of Army Giddon.

O Army, Army, Arm of the Lord, he will create a defense upon thy Walls and
Bulworks: They shall have power to shut Heaven that it rain not, that is, they
shall silence all the powers, and the Angels of your Churches, that is, by a
new disciplying power that shall put down the reigning power of such as have
reigned over his power: though they may make an attempt against the holy City,
yet fire must come down from Heaven and destroy them.

Any instrument framed against the power of Jerusalem, shall not prosper; none
shall reign in this Kingdom but the faithful Witnesses of Christ called and
chosen.

These Witnesses are said to be two, though many in number; yet two is the
least number, which makes one man's testimony void, and of none effect.

Ye great and high Doctors, and all ye Legators, what will become of your
Courts and infamous Colleges? I suppose in short time they will stand like old
Paul's, or the Barn of Westminster, without any trading; very infamous, yet
borne up with Crutches, whose constellations will fail, and all your Priestly
powers which have reigned so long over the people: for there is one King, one
Lord, one High Priest, and one Prophet, that shall put down every power.

High and lofty Doctors, that have got so many hundreds a year in your hands,
and yet are commanded to bring your Tithes into Gods Storehouse, and not into
your own houses; you have kept the people under bondage, which God will now set
at liberty, when your Ministry is down: yet the people shall bring the tenth
of their substance into Gods Storehouse, as their Father Abraham did, which
shall shame your doings that are not good. He says, You go to your Cieled
Houses, but my House lies desolate: and ye rob Gods House of the benefits, and
come not in at the Door, but clime up some other way, which is unlawful. And
Christ says, I am the Door, the Truth, the Life, and ye enjoy all things of my
Father; and those benefits of Tithes you cannot enjoy to your selves, for they
be proper to the Widow, the Fatherless, the Stranger, the Blind, and the Lame,
and to be brought into the Storehouse; for Collection and hospitality to those
that want. But in this I find the Priests do omit, and commit Sacrilege,
against the Order of Gods house.

Ye Doctors, see and wonder, the Lord has appeared in me, that I should be to
you as a foolish Shepherd, to tell you of folly; sometimes in the night, when
my Body slept, yet my spirit was awake, and heard as it had been Voices, both
in the night and also on the day; which caused me to write, when he declared
unto me the things that should shortly come to pass, by so many dark and
spiritual appearances: which are hideous to men, yet known to me, as one born
in due time.

Doctor High Priest, you must stoop at ordination, Christ was an ordained
Minister, so was not you; he was sent of his Father. Now if you can prove your
selves ordained Minsters, then you may put Christ out of his place.

You are of the Stepmother or Bondwoman, and came not in at the Door, which is
not according to ordination, but by way of impropriation, or a taking Christ's
place upon your selves; and set your selves in high places, as Ministers of
God, though not ordained, yet you take upon you the place of Christ, and
declare your selves Pastors to the People, and yet not able to feed your selves.

O silly Shepherds, know assuredly, there is but one Pastor, and that is Christ
alone; he is Pastor unus, Pastor varius, Pastor magnus, and Pastor function: he
is the great Shepherd and Bishop of our souls; he is our book of remembrance;
he is the eternal word, without any Letter-teachers.

It Is a great shame that men live more by the teachings of men, then they do by
the teachings of the Son of God, which teaches us in all things.

Then down with all your Letter-teachers, that are as Lawyers, that study
wisdom by art by policy, by learning and skill to deceive them of weak
understanding Mal 3. says, There was a Book of Remembrance opened, and they
talked often together; which was the best teaching. So that, Voices and
Witnesses shall be heard in the room of the Priests: for ye must lay down your
Priestly power; ye must deny your selves, and declare Christ to be all in all,
that he may be Priest and King over all: but ye have stood so long as
Vice Admiral over all in your Pulpits, domineering over the People, to keep
them under your rule.

Doctor, thou can not truly preach Christ, till thou throwest all down at his
Feet: and whatever thou be, thou must throw down thy own self-power.

Object. What a Minister, and throw-down his power?

Answ. Yes, why not? for how can thou royally preach Christ and declare thy
self a Minister of God, and yet walk after the custom of the World? I say, If
thou live not after the example of Christ, thou art a Minister of sin, and
thy life does not teach others; then thou may preach to others, and be a
castaway thy self.

Alas poor fleshly man, thou teach the Letter, and yet art ignorant of the
truth; thou have set thy self high in a say-Pulpit, to speak great things in a
seenal way of repetitions, speaking many things to please the people.

Ye be subtle Sophisters, men-pleasers, and self-seekers, that can derive
themselves into many forms, contrary to the truth of God, by setting up
Sub-ordination in the place of Ordination, to set themselves higher then
Christ: And in that they are made equal with him; for he was made a little
lower then the Angel, meaning the Angels of your Churches, that still keep him
upon the Cross, and crucify his power.

Christ was ordained Minister of God, but ye ordained your selves.

I can give a relation of one within the County of Lincoln, a Minster called
Mr. Male, as I understand, does ordain Ministers, and that some petty
Ministers have come many Miles to be ordained of him: which is intolerable: I
wonder his heels are not pictured upwards.

Thus they may do, though not by Lawful means. But be you sure, all sub-powers
must down, as things in Heaven, and things on Earth, and things under the
Earth, must bow at the name of Jesus. He is the Prince of Peace, and Prince of
Power: the Lord shall be exalted in all the Earth, and your powers shall come
down as low as dry Bones.

Ye high Priests, know this, that your state is failable for as you have cried
down the Bishop and his Surplis, so now the Witnesses shall cry down with your
Pulpits and your Fonts: you are spiritual high in your own conceit, full of
pride, sedition, and covetousness, self-seeking, full of envy and bitterness;
in that ye differ not from the general world, and yet you can say you are the
Ministers of God, and yet not walk after the example of Christ.

This that I declare, is called your Funeral-Sermon, or wind-up, for ye shall
be eclipsed by the bright appearings of the Lord.

This eclipse took its first entrance in the year 1650. which shall cause the
greatest earthquake that ever was since the creation; and the power of it
shall decline toward the fourth or fifth year after 50. here in England.

Doctors, what will ye do when your Tithes fail, and your Ministry fails, and
your New Mons and Sabbaths fail? then it shall be to you as the mourning of
Hadadrimmon, or a destructive time, when ye shall have no audience or
accommodation of the people; for every one shall have a personal power put in
them, to stand alone, without Preachers. They shall be so inherently taught of
God, that the Minister shall say no more to them, Know the Lord; for they shall
all be Prophets inwardly, and shall stand by a personal faith, as Abraham and
Noah did in fullness of Spirit: for the Lord says, In the last days I will
pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, and my servants and handmaids shall
prophecy; When ye Ministers may say, We are Vine-dressers and Husbandmen, to
till the waste Commons; for our weekly Sabbaths are changed into one Sabbath;
once a year we shall go up to worship the Lord, and to keep a Feast of
Tabernacles, which is a true Sabbath according to Christ's Resurrection, to keep
a good conscience, which is a Feast in the heart of the Creature, and that is
the best Sabbath, to live in all righteousness every day, which is a Sabbath.

And though the Jew have have lost his New Mood, and thou O Gentile thy
New Mood, yet thou shall remember the Lord, and once a year consecrate thy gift
to him, and keep a new Sabbath by an offering to God in his new Covenant, to
worship him with all thy substance: and then it will appear that thou art one
of the new Sabbath. Thou must deny thy self ends, and all sinister engagements,
and so betroth thy self unto God in righteousness, to covenant with him
according to the new-Sabbath.

Though the Constellations may fail, yet his Sabbath-Ordinance shall stand, it
shall not be disannulled: Heaven and Earth may pass away, but not one jot or
tittle of his word shall fail. For Christ is the word of the Sabbath; and in
him we shall have rest, if we enter into Covenant, and that is to acknowledge
him by a new Sabbath: for in those days, and at that time, says the Lord, I
will make with them a new Covenant, not according to the old; for this shall be
the Covenant that I will make, never to turn from them, or take away the
Ordinance of Sabbath from them,

Yet the Lord says, I hate your Sabbaths, because your hands are full of
blood. As if he should say, Ye keep Sabbaths to your selves, and transgress my
holy day. Once a year thou shall come up to keep a Feast of Tabernacles; and
all that will not come to the worship of Jerusalem, shall have no rain, or
reigning power in this new Sabbath of rest.

Silly Priest, I question not, though thy Sabbath be taken away: for Christ is
thy eternal Sabbath, and thou shall worship him according to the order of
Jerusalem: for all your subordinances shall stoop at ordination: your Sabbaths
shall change into one Sabbath. If thou will walk in my ways, and do that I
command thee this day, then thou shall ride upon the high places of the Earth;
that is, whoever shall Covenant to this new Sabbath, shall enjoy all the
promises, the Lord says, I will dwell in you, and ye in me.

Ministers, your Sabbaths are failable, therefore they be called your Sabbaths
by illusion, as if he should say, If ye keep a day, keep it to me: for you
observe days, and do no righteousness; therefore your new Moons and Sabbaths
shall change and be taken away: for I will make a new Covenant with them, says
the Lord, not according to the old; but this shall be my Covenant, never to
turn from them that truly Covenant to me: saying, I will betroth thee unto me
in mercy and loving kindness, and thou shall know the Lord: for my counsel
shall stand.

Doctor, the taking away your Sabbath shall cause the Lords Sabbath to shine
out more clear; for ye have changed my Ordinances, Mal. 3. Therefore the Land
is cursed with a curse; and your moonorital Sabbaths shall change: if ye keep
one day, keep it to me, says the Lord. So that we ought to keep every day as a
Sabbath once a year, to make out our accounts, which is Easter Day, and the six
days before it: for every year shall be called as a Sabbath Day, and so from
year to year ye shall keep my Sabbath Ordinances, and live in them that is,
from year to year ye must come to Jerusalems worship, Zachary 14. Christ
preached every where, and made every day a Sabbath.

It is not for thee and me to keep a day once a Week, and walk contrary to God
in all the rest. If ye keep a day, keep it to me; and keep every day as a
Sabbath.

One reason is, ye make the seventh day a Cloak for your sin, to use holiness
for your own turn; so did the Jews under the Law, and Christ cut off their
Sabbath, and so he will yours, so that you shall not insult over them, nor they
over you: for, says he, I hate your new Moons, and your Sabbaths. The Lords
day should be a rest betwixt God and thy Conscience; if Christ dwell in thee,
thy soul is full of light. If ye keep Covenant with me, I will be your
resting place: and that is a Sabbath in thy Conscience.

Paul says, ye observe days, and months; I wonder who has bewitched you.
Your way of holiness is as the witcharft of Endor, subtly to beguile men, and
cause them to swim in vain conceits, and so to hold up your abominations by
keeping so many Sabbath days once a week for your own turns, as the Jews did
their seventh day, and yet persecute Christ: and therefore it is not for them
nor us to observe days, for there is but one Sabbath, and that is the Lord, in
whom we shall have rest; and that is to reform our lives, and live in all good
conscience, to walk in righteousness; and that is the best Sabbath, showing the
day of his resurrection by a newness of life.

And at the appearing of the Lords power, the Jew and Gentiles Sabbath are out,
by a wonderful dividing of time, called once a year; so that I find the whole
year is the Lords Sabbath: All the year, you in me, and I in you. Thou shall
consecrate thy substance to the Lord, which is the seventh from the creation,
called the seventh vial or valley of Jehosaphat, under which the World shall
come under judgment, called the Sabbaths Vial, which is that we now live
under, called the separate time that God will set apart and take to himself the
great glory of Monarchy, that now shall resume that name to themselves: and
therefore, Priest, thou must fall with the King and Lord of dishonor, that the
prophecy may be made out, that you may say, I am no more a Prophet, but an
Herds-man, or keeper of Cattle; I am but as other men, no Priest, no Minister;
no Minister, then silence not the People.

FINIS.
The second PART OF D. Hills Funeral-Sermon, WITH His Apellation to Priests and
People.
By me Henry Hasselwood.
THere be four sorts of Definators, that may be called the Witch of the world,
very seenal and subtle. I call them not the Witch of Jezebel, neither do I call
them the Witch of Endor; yet I call them the Witch of the earth, in that they
use their own authority, and pretend fair things, though foul in effect;
promoting themselves by skill and art, making out the authority of the beast,
and so deceive the people. Those are four in number, yet not any of them shall
remain in authority, for the Witch shall be cut off out of the earth, and all
that make a lie, and every abominable branch shall be found out. The Witch of
the world is very subtle, and much deceives by flatteries and seenal Juglings,
to steal away the peoples appetite, as to delude them with smoke, or to puff
them up with some vain ostentation: subtle Sophisters, winding themselves into
the form of Christ, deceiving the people, denying the power of his
resurrection, preaching up themselves, bewitching the world, and deceive the
people. So much for the first Definators, that call themselves Ministers of
God, and are not. Brethren, I would have every one live up to the teachings of
God, without second-hand-teachers; and to walk up to that principle of grace
put into them: for spiritually we live under the divine power of the Son of
God; he is all our teacher, to guide us in the way of truth; it is not for man
to do it. David says, Renew in me a right spirit: Psalm. 1^. Who knows the
error of his life? Who can teach, but Christ alone* Then let us stand in that
liberty wherein he has made us free. And James says, Walk so, that you may be
judged by the law of liberty. And Paul says, Prove every truth; that is, by
witnesses. So that no man can preach of himself, but Christ does preach all,
both near and afar off, by a singular power from God to teach us all things: he
says, I am the way, walk in it, follow my example, but not the examples of
men. The Doctrine is from thence, That all men and ministers are but learners,
and cannot teach any further then they walk by a good example. The first Reason
is, It is not words, but works of faith and piety, which is a good example: It
is not for a man to say, I am a Minister, and yet but all words. Look upon the
good life, and not upon the profession. The second Reason is, Men or Ministers
have no lawful authority to teach: for Christ and the holy Ghost inwardly
teaches; and they are the two Witnesses by a law inserted in the conscience.
The third Reason is, They cannot teach, in that they cannot prove Ordination.
The fourth Reason is, That every petty Priesthood must fall, and stoop at
Christ's Ministry. But some silly people may object, Shall we lose our
teachers? better lose our Christ. And so they dote upon a Ministry of flesh.
Was not Christ the Messiah a Minister ordained of God? He teaches, and shall
sit upon twelve thrones by a power, and all men and Ministers must come under
his teaching, and lay down their Crowns; and the honorable men must stoop at
his Scepter: for he is the Minister of God, and no other: for we have had many
Teachers, yet none can lead us in the true way. And having so great an
High Priest, that is able to lead us in all truth, he has once entered into the
Priestly Office, and makes intercession to God for us continually. Then why
should we lean upon the pettifogging Priests, which must come down from their
Pulpit-Thrones, and set up Christ upon his throne? For while your Power
reigns, Christ's power is crucified upon the cross, and his truth suffers
violence. But now he shall sit upon your thrones, and judge the Whorish power
by a seat of justice, so ordained. And until you all throw down, and make
Christ the full end and scope of all teaching, your Temple will be divided: for
you must come all to the Law and Testimony, which is Christ and the Spirit writ
as a Law and Testimony in our consciences, which are the two witness-bearers to
prove every true Christian: for this is a time dividing time; I speak of a new
Sabbath, Christ in the conscience, every day, once a year continually: I speak
of a new Sabbath; old things must pass away, and the things that are old must
change. Brethren, ye ought not to look so much upon feigned Teachers of the
second hand, feigned lovers, and so defile the Christian Marriage, and break
your Sabbath-union with Christ, to follow Teachers whose breath is in their
nostrils, and shall down at the testimony and feet of the two Witnesses, when
all things shall be brought upon record, and great Babylon shall come in
remembrance, and power shall be given to the Saints, as Daniel, John, and Peter
declares. Then Doctor look to it, for thou shall be censured by the Church:
then Kings shall throw down, and Lords throw down, and Honors throw down, and
Priests throw down; we must all throw down our Crowns and Dignities, and stoop
to the first dominion. Thy kingdom come, whose Scepter shall not fade away:
every pretended Power framed against him, shall not prosper. If thou call
thy self King, it is high conspiracy against the King of heaven, so to pollute
his holy name: for he is that one Lord of the whole earth. Now if he be Lord,
then thy name Lord must down of necessity: for God will have his Name known
through all the earth, and before him every knee shall bow. Then set not up thy
self: the greatest climb may have the greatest fall. If thy place be never so
high amongst men, yet it may be but a left-hand-mercy, or such a privilege as
will decline: and whoever stands as Lord or King, shall fall at the appearing
of Christ's power. And the Prophet Daniel says, They shall fall too that hold
them up; that is, he that gives the name Lord to a man, he shall fall by
dishonor: for there shall be but one Lord over the earth, and his Name one:
for the name of Baal, Monarchy shall be cut out of the earth, that assume to
themselves such high honor, and pollute his holy Name: it is an intolerable
Witchcraft that shall be cut out of the earth, that has so long deceived the
people, calling fleshly man Lord, and so pollute the name of the holy One of
Israel, taking his name in vain. He is the Lord of the Creation, therefore
stand up for him, and thy liberty: O Army, Army, arm of the Lord, stand up; for
it is given thee, That every Power shall perish under thee. Army-giddon, valley
of destruction, or a destructive sword shall rise, that God will fourbish
against all the powers, none excepted: but his Divine power shall stand, that
shall govern under him: his power shall reign in all places; and so far as they
keep up the Lords honor, they shall stand with prosperity. But your
honourable-men must fall: though they set their names as high as heaven, yet
they shall come down: for the Lord will set on fire the four elements; which
are not the skies, as silly men teach, but it is that heavenly power that has
reigned so long, and shall now burn at his bright appearing, and shall expel
all the Witchcraft of the world. Secondly, the general world must change its
course, by a more sweet comply of Government, and to lay by their outward
Idolatry. The third element that shall burn, is the proud waters Euphrates,
seven streams of powers shall dry up: all the Egyptian powers shall be
dissolved; and no power shall stand, but that of the Son of God. The fourth
element that shall burn, is the Moon and Stars. Christ says, Matthew. 24. When
the light shines from the east to the west, then the power of the Son of man
is nigh at hand. You know, when the Sun appears in its brightness, the Moon
and Stars must give place to that light, and it only reigns over them: so
Doctors, Ministers, and Churches, your lights shall go out at his appearing,
and all your Moonorical powers shall be extinguished, and all the Stars called
Ministers shall lose their borrowed lights; when every one shall acknowledge
Christ to be their Minister, and live under their own vine. So much for the
four Elements, called the four Constellations, which is the Church Power, or
otherwise called Moon and Stars, that shall fail at his bright appearing, that
the glory of the Son of God may appear from on high, and that all may be
reconciled to his light, declaring him to be King, Lord, Priest, and Prophet,
the only called Minister of God, before whom every Ministry shall cease;
only pleading for truth shall hold, with prayer and mourning among all
Christians, called the great mourning of all the families of the earth, every
family apart: when the brightness of the Son of God appears, it shall be as
the mourning in Hadadrimmon, when there shall be trembling and quaking, as the
Prophets did in their times of danger; when there shall be a great shaking,
that men shall shake, and Ministers shake, and every power shake, truly then
it behooves every one to quake and tremble: for the Lord will terribly shake
the earth: the mighty men shall fall, and the honorable men shall throw down
their Honors, and shall deny their high Titles of Grace and Worship: for all
their seenal Witchcrafts shall be cut out of the earth, and every Witch that
deceives the people: every Soothsayer shall be found out, and every Sorcerer
that deceives: for all things shall be proved upon the Sanctuary: thou shall
not worship any graven image, which is but an earthly man, to fall down and
worship before him: thou shall worship God, and him alone, and not man, whose
breath is in his nostrils, though living in honor, yet shall perish as the
beasts from his presence, as contemptible.

IT has always been, that wicked Hamans have ruled over the people of God:
they be called Gog, or Haman-Gog, that shall be brought under; and so low, that
they shall not act as they have formerly done. What have your Pulpittians been
all along, but as a Gallows to hang up Mordecai's. Though I do not say all
Ministers are Hamans, yet some of that strain have been cruel men called
Bishops: and for the most part you Priests are much like the generation that
fell before Adam, so proud, that God in his jealousy threw them down. They
were called the Angels that fell, and Royally petype out Ministers, that John
calls the Angels of the Churches, or the Stars that must fall, that have
stood so long in the holy place of Christ, and now shall be bound down with the
world, under the name and notion of the worldly kingdom, that shall suddenly be
bound down for one thousand years. When Christ's power shall reign, then Satan
and his kingdom shall be bound, said to be Haman-Gog, that shall have no more
power to assail and afflict the people of Christ; when the persecuting power is
taken off, when the Saints shall sit and judge the Ministers which hold up the
power of the Beast, which stand so high as Lord Speaker, to silence the people.
Ye Ministers are called the abomination sitting in the holy place, as Mediators
betwixt God and men: so high, in the place of Christ, and therefore Capernaum
exalted so high shall come down as low as dry bones: for Gog and Haman-Gog's
bones shall be gathered together, and so be buried by the number of seven
years, that their weapons and power shall have an end. Now to accomplish this
prophecy, look in Ezekiel. 38. he speaks of burning their weapons, burying of
their bones; which we hope will be in some short time after 1650. or before
1657. in our Nation. We cannot predict the full accomplishment, or make out a
full discovery of the great design he has to do, or when it shall fully end:
yet I hope the time is at hand: for a short work will the Lord make upon earth,
to redeem those dry bones that have been very dry, poor Witnesses of Christ
killed and trodden down by your Priestly power: false Christ's, second-hand
Teachers of the letter, but can give no spiritual life, and yet call your
selves Ministers of God, you shall fall with great rebuke; one witness of
Christ shall chase a thousand of you, and two witnesses shall put ten thousand
of you to flight. O down with your false power: for Christ Jesus will redeem
Israel out of your hands. The two Witnesses plead shall bring down your power
as low as Doctor Hill's bones: for the Witnesses shall live without your
teachings, and shall stand upon their feet a mighty Army. O Arm of the Lord,
every Power shall perish under thee. Object. Does Christ need Ministers? then
where is his power, or divine light, or spiritual appearances? Does he not
appear in all, and teach all by a spiritual teaching, which is far higher then
all fleshly teachers can do? I am ashamed to hear your Sorceries, to say ye are
his Ministers: then ye may go and teach him what to do. The Heavens preach, the
Stars preach, and the Creatures preach, in Psalm. 14. but what is this to the
preaching of God in his power? Christ Jesus is in the mount, and preaches to
all things. John says he is the Angel fleeing in the midst of heaven, and
preaching the everlasting Gospel to every kindred, language, and nation: then
what need we have so many Preachers? When Christ preaches to all, he silenceth
the tongues of men and Angels. Christ is upon the mount, and it cleft asunder,
showing that every preaching power shall break and dissolve. Now the Angel he
preaches in power: Christ Jesus is the Angel of the Covenant, therefore let
all the earth be silent: he will make all quiet before him: it is he alone that
shall still the rage of the sea, and will quiet men's spirits, when they shall
yield the power of preaching into his hand, when Ministers shall strive no more
for their own power. He is the only preacher. When he stood upon mount Olivet,
it cleft in sunder: so shall every preaching power dissolve before him. He is
the preacher of light and life: but ye Diviners, Soothsayers, and Flatterers,
ye call your selves preachers: what need that? There is but one preacher; he
stands on the mount. Christ he shall put all rule and all authority under his
feet: he leads us by his holy Spirit, that shall guide us in all truth. The
Creatures may preach, yet not declare forth the invisible power of God, for
that is proper to Christ alone, to preach forth the everlasting Gospel, Rev.
14. Therefore stop your mouths, ye Priests: for every one shall be taught of
God, from the greteast to the least; even ye high Doctors must come under the
teachings of the Son of God: he is the Day Star that dawneth from on high. If
ever thou will see life, that spiritual life must be from him, to transform
thee into the likeness of him: for the way of all men's teachings shall burn up
with their wood and straw, and every untempered thing which holds up the
abomination that makes desolation. And truly Ministers are to blame in this
thing of discipline. Paul says, Ephesians. 3.10. that principalities and powers in
high places ought to be approved by the Church, that is, to put forth Queries
of Scripture, and to quire out every truth by witnesses: for every vision shall
fail at the beatifical vision. Ye sons of Ai must down: it is not any visible
power that can stand before the invisible; nor any created power stand before
the Ordained and Created Minister of God. Ye sons of Levi must throw down:
though you have been Legators so long, yet now there is an Alligator that
teaches us all things, by his bright appearing, far higher then you can
elevate. It is not your literal teachings, but it is the invisible teachings of
the Son of God, that makes wise to salvation. Call not thy self a Minister of
Christ, for he is a Minister of himself. Therefore lay down thy power: for he
teaches us in all truth. We and our predecessors have been taught by you, and
such as have called themselves Lord Bishops: horrible names, and intolerable,
to call themselves Lords. And you Priests call your selves Ministers of Christ,
yet you are but of that spawn of Euphrates, that shall dry up, with thy Lord
Bishop, Lord of folly. Those, and such as you be, have nuzled up the people to
thie day. But now God will teach his people to stand and live without your
Lordly power. Your Bishops are fallen, and you must fall under contempt, for
sitting in the holy place as Ministers or false Christ's, to deceive and seduce
the people. Some of you have gone under the notion of Lord Priests, great
Impropriators of Tithes and Donatives, and could license authority, and give
gifts to men, as spiritual Peter's, that had the keys of Purgatory, but not the
keys of heaven-gates: they could lock and unlock: they had all in their own
hands, as if they had been spiritual Lords of heaven and earth. And truly what
are ye Ministers and high Doctors? If the Bishops were the cedars, you are the
shrubs that must be plucked up: for your power is like to burn, as one of the
four Constellations: for your heavenly power shall go down with your earthly
power, and shall be consumed by invisible fire from above. The universality of
God shall so appear in flesh, that men shall refuse your teachings, and shall
repair to the house of the Lord, saying, He will teach us of his ways: which
will put an end to your divided Ministry. When God teaches, all shall be
silenced; Ministers silenced, and people silenced, and every power silenced in
heaven and in earth. John says, There was silence in heaven for the space of
half an hour: which declares Gods wonderful works. When Medeum is in the midst
of his power, in the top of the mountains, your elevated powers shall cleave in
sunder, and every power shall shake and fall at the presence of Christ the
great King. Oh faithless generation, can ye not stand and live in faithfulness
to Christ? he teaches thee and me all things, how to live: he does inherently
teach every one that will savingly come to God; and none can come to the Father
but by him: all other Teachers are but vain ostentation, and failable, but God
inwardly teaches. Ye high Doctors, petty Priests, Legators, and Merit-mongers,
you that can teach the holy Ghost, saying ye have begotten souls, and have
power to convert souls: truly in that ye are the greatest deceivers in the
world. Conversion is not from the letter of history; it is a work of great
mystery, beyond men's prating. Yet some of you will say, you have begotten many
souls to Christ: which if ye can do so, ye may set up Meriting-houses to please
the people. It is not your much teaching that can do it: you be but Historians,
all upon the literal history, not discerning the mystery of Gods work, which is
called Conversion: It is Gods work: let no dirt-danber meddle with converting
of souls. But some of you Historian Priests will say, Did not Paul the great
Doctor of the Gentiles convert souls? I answer, No. But did not Peter convert
3000 at one Sermon? Yes, he did so: but it was but to an outward conformity of
Religion, as you train the people up to; and all is but in the outward, that ye
can do: for ye are not the very Christ to do it. Then lay down: for renovation
is a work of God, and not of man to do: and Ministers stand for a cipher, and
the men of Galilee stand gazing upon them. I am but a fool, yet not the son of
folly: if I err, I err for Christ. He that gives honor to m^n, can never
truly honor God. Silly people, have your Ministers persuaded you all this
while, saying they can convert souls, and cannot? O down with their power as
low as Doctor Hills bones. Let their power be utterly dissolved: for in Gods
account they be no more then other men, and shall fall more contemptibly then
the Bishops: for they have hid the mystery of iniquity, and kept it as a sweet
morsel under their tongues, and seduced the people. These Merit-mongers,
Legators, that keep the people under their bonds, meriting, Christ's mediators
betwixt God and the people, as if the history of the Bible could convert souls.
Alas, no, it is not done by the history of men's works, neither can it be done
by the example of Historian Fatherly Authors: it is not a work of history, but
Gods work of mystery to convert to salvation. Therefore, Priest, lay down thy
power, and let the people speak from the heavenly University, and as they be
taught of God, so let them speak from the All-speaker, that shall teach both
Minister and People. Ye Mediators, Ministers, as ye call your selves, ye seduce
many souls, and keep them under your yoke, from that freedom they have or might
have in God; being free, and yet not free, by your bonds. O down with all such
yoke-Ministers: if Christ has made thee free, thou art free indeed: come no
more under their yoke, but walk so, as thou may be judged by the law of
liberty. John bids thee buy eye salve, but not of men, which is an outward and
vain ostentation: it is not an outward knowing that can do it: it is by a
spiritual inward knowing that we live. You say that we receive faith by
hearing, or the preaching of faith. I confess outward faith may come by the
letter preached; but saving faith is of the gift from above. Then salvation is
only of God, and not from the letter. Then how hard a thing is it for a Priest
to convert souls? Even as to create the whole creation. Therefore, Doctor
Priest, thou must surely lay down thy power: for thou have taken upon thee a
work of renovation, which is beyond Ministers art and skill: for Christ is the
souls solempnicy, and the first moving cause of our salvation: he is our
Minister and solicitor, and ye dissembling Christ's that say ye have been means
of men's salvation, and have begotten souls to God; and call your selves
soul-saving Ministers. Ye false tongues, stop your mouths for shame: ye
Wisemen, Counselors, Priests and Legators, Definators, Merit-mongers, that
call your selves the Seers in Israel, or Watchmen over poor souls. Alas,
Doctors, your sorrow is at hand. Mic. 3. says, The seer shall be ashamed, and
the diviner confounded; they shall cover their mouth: for there is no answer of
God. You call your selves soul-savers, but we may call you Wisemen that
beguile the people, whose counsel shall stand but a while: for the Prophet
Isaih says, Your counselors shall be as at the first; taught of God, as
Abraham and Noah were. Christ and the Spirit of God is our great Counselor,
and shall be as Law and Testimony in us, that shall lead us in all truth: and
those be the two Witnesses of the great Jehovah dwelling in us, which will
confound every Ministerial power, and every ordained power of man. For now is
the time of the Elijah, and the Witnesses prophecy. If ye be soul-saving
Ministers, then change the course of the rain if you can. You say you can and
have converted souls; then you may as well change the course of drought, which
is now a judgment upon the earth for three years and a half. But the Lord will
make the heavens as brass, and the clouds as iron. And under this three years
and a half, the Witnesses shall prophecy in sackcloth, though not utterly
killed, as they have been before the Law, and under the Law, and since Christ
came in the flesh, until now the opening of the sixth Seal, which produces
life to the two Witnesses, though by prisonment and sackcloth, under this
seventh Vial. Noble Pulpittian, thou must lay down four high titles, and give
them up to Christ: Thy Ministry, Thy Priesthood, Thy Power, and thy Teaching:
for all this belongs to Christ. But thou say thou art an instrument. I doubt
not but ye are some of those instruments spoken of by the Prophet Zechariah,
saying, What are those instruments in thy hand? he said to me, These were they
that wounded me in the house of my friends. And the Lord says he was wounded
by such instruments. You Ministers may be outward Ministers, and yet come short
of converting souls to God, but what ye can do outwardly by a conformity, and
no more. Thou art an instrument, but not instrumental; that is too high for
man, seeing thou art but a creature: so I find that there is no power in thy
hand: thy instrument cannot do it; for he is instrumental, and not thou. Thou
art haven, but he is havencial. Thou art a petty Priest, but he is an eternal
Priest. Then become a fool, as I am, and throw down, that thou may be made
wise. For he is the Priesthood-power; and glory renovation is of God, and not
of men. Doctor, thou tellest me thou art instrumental; and so far thou speak
an untruth: for it is proper only to God. And thou art but star, but he is
starrestial. He is unmovable, and thou art changeable. He is Minister, and
thou but Star. Thou art an Angel, but he is Angelical. Thou art Man, but he is
God. Christ is the Minister and Mediator of our souls; and therefore lay down
thy care and charge of men's souls, and look to thy own soul, and say no more I
am in Christ's stead. Doctor, know that thine is an earthly authority, but
Christ is a Minister by an heavenly authority. Then lay down thy false power.
You say you are Ministers of God, and yet can minister but the outward letter;
and the letter shall nonresidence you, and suspend your authority: for you are
but false Christ's. Therefore, Priest, thou must lay down: Christ is all thy
Lectury: he is eggal, tyal, and substantial. You are but egg, but he is eggal.
Therefore lay down, and say, We are no teachers, but pleaders for
righteousness, mercy, and justice, and cannot teach the holy Ghost. Christ is
the altar: then go no more to the Scribe, nor to any earthly teacher. If Christ
be truly formed in thee, go no more to the Wiseman or the Scribe, which be
inwardly ravening wolves; and yet they come in Christ's name: which enjoy the
tenth part of our Nation, called the Tithes and Impropriations, which might
outwardly redeem the poor, the blind, and the lame, the fatherless and widow.
People, you look for an outward speaking; but the inward speaking is of God: It
is the holy Ghost that speaks in thee, and me; and that is the surest
teaching, and ten thousand times more good it will do thee, then all thy
second-hand-teachers, that cannot declare a true testimony. Then, all ye blind
guides that lead the blind, the Lord does rightly teach. Ministers dare not
express themselves, men dare not express themselves: therefore the truth of
Christ must needs suffer violence. And I find that these Wisemen and
Counselors are but the Witch of the world. Ye Pulpittians, there can be no
election of Ministers but by Christ, in whom he said Go: it was in those days a
work of election only of Christ, and from Christ, an Ordination tolerated by
the Son of God: but now that power of election is of none effect: and let him
be what he will, if a Minister or Layman, if he take upon him to ordain or
elect any to be Ministers of God, or to give any such authority, he falsely
standerh in Christ's place, and comes not in at the door, but take Christ's
Office in their hand, and they are not called to it. The work of man's
Priesthood failed long since: for Christ is our high priest once for all, and
he stands a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchizedek. He shall purge
the sons of Levi, that they may bring an offering in righteousness, which is to
throw down their power at the eternal power, and live up to the endless
Ministry of Christ; and shall say, I am no more a Minister of God, I am but as
other men. Men's Priesthoods have been ever held up with money, and outward
territories: but Christ teaches freely, and so did all they that he tolerated
and sent. All his disciples were without resting-places, so are not ye: he
said, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests: but the Son of
man has nowhere to hide his head. Which of all the disciples of Christ held up
personal proprieties to themselves? I am sure amongst them it was not a common
thing, as it is amongst you; for some of our Priests have large inheritances,
and will rather lose Christ, then lose their Parsonages or great possessions of
land. But Christ did not ordain such disciples, but such as were to carry
neither scrip nor staff to trust to; showing, that proprieties were not given
them. Learn of me, says Christ: if I have nothing, what can you expect? if I
be your example, be as I am. I tell thee, if thou be never so high a Doctor,
and eminent for gifts, and yet do buy and sell the creation, thou art no
Minister of God. Therefore lay down thy authority, for it is false. At the
first, the Creation was not bought and sold for money; it was to stand in its
own original, and not to be traduced or engrossed by money, and so to be
changed from its original. None of the Apostles bought or sold the Creation for
money, as some of our Doctors have done, which is utterly unlawful. Heaven is
the Lords throne, and the earth his footstool. Now, ye abominable Priests, that
buy and ingross the earth into your hands, and tolerate all others so to do;
can a man buy the Lords throne for money? No: for it his place of rest: neither
can ye buy the earth, which is his footstool. Therefore ye Ministers are buyers
and sellers, and as money changers in the Temple of God: and for this cause of
buying and selling the Creation, your Temple is broken in pieces, and there
shall not be one stone lest upon another, that shall not be thrown down. So
that I clearly find, that Ordination of Priests and Ministers ceased at buying
and selling the Creation: for then Christ came and put an end to their
Ministry; and God appears chiefly to us by his Son, having him dwelling in us
by the gift of the holy Ghost, that is the Law and Testimony in us: And God
has left power to his two Witnesses to plead for righteousness, because there
was no truth in the Priests: therefore he has given the two Witnesses power
that shall hold to the end.

DOctor, I see nothing but an end of all Traditional preaching: for Mediumal
preaches in the mount of his power, and requires setting up thrones, and to
bring all things before the seat of justice. Christ must sit upon his seat, and
judge the ends of the earth. He is said to sit upon twelve thrones, that is, by
an audiencee of twelve voices, to vindicate and make out the full truth by
Witnesses. Then where is your preaching power? your grinding in a Mill will
cease. Ye stand beating the Pulpit, but all is in vain: for the honorable seat
of Justice will exclude all your seenal Witcherasts. You have preached long,
yet no justice, mercy, nor truth is in our borders. But the Prophet Z^chariah
says, In those days, and at that time, many shall be joined to the Lord: which
shows they shall throw off the Ministeries of men. And the Prophet Hosea
says, They shall be sowed to the Lord in truth, in merc^, and loving kindness,
says the Lord: I will betroth thee unto me. That shows that every one should
understand and know their Marriage union with Christ, and come out from Priest
and People. It is not enough to say thou art a Christian, but thou must prove
thy self by an inward Law and testimony, with the approbation of the grand
Church, that is, by an inward and outward testimony, that shall make them free.
Heb. 4.9. There remains a rest to the people of God: and in verse. 10. He that
is entered into that rest, has ceased from his own works, as God did from his.
This Christian rest is perfection of parts, without toil and legal cate, having
inward sanctity in the soul, which is a sweet Sabbath-rest; and I know no other
Sabbath. You observe days called Sundays outwardly, and do not look to the
inward Sabbath, to rest in God. I wonder who has bewitched you from the
eternal rest, Doctors and Ministers. Once in that settled rest made free in
Christ, then free indeed. The household of faith are no more under your
Legalities: once free in Christ, free indeed: he is our true vine, and
ministers to us the Holy Ghost, and sets us at liberty from all the earthly
Christ's, to live by the spirit of life; and Christ preaching in us, that makes
us inwardly and outwardly free from the traditional and literal teachings of
men. Once in covenant with Christ, and for ever sallowmorted in the fellowship
of the Son of God, by a solempnisie or settled union with the Lord, as Abraham
and Noah did free from the teachings of men that came in his name, and are not
the very Christ, but deceive the people, using many words, yet Christ never did
so; he spoke few words, and the people answered him. And likewise the Apostles
did so, by disciplying and answering Disputations. Every Christian ought to be
in a married union with Christ, and so throw off the Priests, and cry, Abraham,
Abraham our father, after the order of Melchizedek, a Priest for ever. Christ a
Prophet, a Priest, a Teacher, a Forerunner, and so throw off all Legators that
stand as Lawyers in their Pulpits, pleading Mediators betwixt God and many men's
souls. But Melchizedek was a Priest long before Aaron the Priest, or any high
Priest of you all. Christ was and is a Priest unchangeable, but you are
instruments in his hand. I do not call you Ministers: because you destroy the
Offering of Gods Temple, so you shall be destroyed, and your change it is nigh
at hand. God had an house before any Priest of Levi was, whereof Gods extent
was first extended by an Ordinance ordained to Abraham, which was the Tenth of
all his substance, that should go to the house of God; whereof Abraham brought
in the Tenth of his substance unto the house of God, after the order of
Melchizedek, after Gods order. And because you have denied these things,
therefore your Priestdom shall cease, and your power shall go down. You
S^onets, Ministers of God, as you call your selves, though but outward
instruments, such as have wounded the Lord in the house of his friends. The
Prophet Z^chariah much complains against all such ministering instruments, as
Pulpittians, men of conformity, as if their conformity was the way to
salvation. Those are instruments indeed that teach salvation, and yet not the
very Christ, yet come in his Name, and deceive many, and will not lose one days
teaching of the people by no means, but will get one Sionet or another to learn
the people salvation, and will give the man that stands in their absence twenty
shillings for his Sabbath Days work of preaching conformity to the people night
and morning, as if the way of conformity was the very way to salvation: and
thus one Priest gratifieth another for money, as if salvation could be bought
with money. O out with all money changers of the Temple: for the Lord will cut
off the name of Baal out of the earth, that stand bawling with their own
tongues for money. And are not these money changers of the seenal Witchcrafts
very subtle and crafty, yet call themselves the Ministers of God? simple
instruments in his hand. We may call a spade a spade in ones hand: for what is
one man more then another? When God is instrumental, and teaches us all, by
his Son, a Priest for ever: he is instrumental, and not man. Foolish man may
take upon him Christ's office, and set himself high as Scribe over the people,
yet he shall come down to plead among his low equals. Woe to you Scribes,
Pharisees, and Hypocrites, ye outside Preachers of the letter, and cannot
minister the spirit; for God inwardly teaches, and so will do, when all your
forms are down: for Christ says, Ye shall all be taught of God, from the least
to the greatest; which is a far higher teaching then that of men. The next
thing that I shall treat upon, is my desire to see the people come out from
those false Christ's, and be married to Christ Jesus in the new Covenant, which
is a glorious and spiritual marriage, made free in him, and come no more under
Legators yoke. To be taught of God, is to live by the Son of God, without the
teachings of men: and that is to stand in the liberty wherewith Christ has
made us free, and come no more under their yoke of bondage, but live up to
Ordination, which is above the teachings of men. Though they call themselves
Ministers of God, believe them not: for our Lord says they be false Christ's
that come in his name. And truly those be the men that call themselves
Converters, and soul-savers of the people, or the feet that bring glad tidings
of salvation, and so nuzzle up the poor ignorant people. O come out from those
false Christ's, and see your freedom and liberty in Jesus Christ: come out, and
stand upon your feet, as faithful, Witnesses raised of the dry bones, redeemed
from the spawn of Euphrates; I mean, from the Priests, that preach up their own
self-honour, and cunningly keep to themselves the heritage of Gods house by a
carnal and usurped authority, that call themselves instrumental, when indeed
they are but formed instruments in his hand, and as low as others, and have
wounded him in the house of his friends. The Lord is ministerial and
instrumental, without the help of men, or any such Merit-mongers that have
stood so long in their Pulpits as Mediators betwixt God and so many thousand
poor souls. These satisfactorious Priests, not ordained of God, nor sent of
Christ, yet they run, and call themselves Curates of men's souls, and Ministers
of God, as if the work of God were in their hands. Miserable blind guides that
deceive the people; feigned Christ's; Ambassadors, as they call themselves, as
if Christ were not in all places to preach salvation without them. Doctor, what
will you do when your Churches stand forlorn, and your people withdraw
themselves; when the Lord will be worshipped in every place? then what will
become of your Jerusalems, when God will be known in every place, and the
people not tied to your formed Churches? Your forms must cease and go down. I
cannot see but Gods people that have enjoyed the clearest light from above,
have ever bin persecuted by your Ministers and Clergical power; if not by
Bishops, yet by secret counselors that call themselves Ministers of God.
Though they may set themselves high, and seem to take away some of the power of
Christ, yet God will blast their seenal Witchcrafts and cunning sophistry.
Though they may call themselves by those great names, yet the Witch shall be
cut out of the earth. I cannot tell, but I am sure ye have made your selves rich
and great, justitious and high, by robbing Gods house of Tithes and common
rights, and yet can set nothing in order, but preach on in the old road: but
what is that to the setting up of thrones, that all clear justice may proceed?
I can behold nothing but discovery, discovery. The Scripture says, The moon
and stars shall be as the sun; showing a seeming brightness in them all, or
some equality with the sun: which petypeth and prefigureth a great discovery of
Christ and his Saints, by some new disciplying way Ecclesiastical and Civil. We
must come to a higher beholding of God, which shall be marvelous in the eyes of
the remnant, when they shall throw off your old customs and forms: your
Sacraments will be changeable. Christ says, That ye do, do in remembrance of
me till I come. And truly that is when he comes by a new light: then all your
old forms shall be taken away; and to that purpose, he speaks of a new Covenant
that he will make with the people, not according to the old: he says, All
things shall become new. That declares that old forms must be taken away by a
more excellent power that shall stand for the ordering of spiritual affairs and
civil affairs, brought all into one, called The law of Sion, that shall be
governed by twelve or by four and twenty, according to Ordination; and so to
cut off all forms that have been erected by Bishops and Priests. The Lord has
raised me by the degrees of light, and still one light has frustrated another,
so that the Lord has followed me with new lights, and caused me to throw off
the old: for the Sacrament and Baptism is declared to me as an outward thing,
and cannot stand when the Lord comes in power by a new light. He says to his
disciples, Do as I have commanded you, and lo I will be with you to the end. It
implies, that he will be with his people in the Old and new work: but the new
light shall do away the old. Doctor Presbytian, thou cryest, Down with
water baptism: then why do thou baptize babes in clouts? Paul says, Neither
circumcision nor Baptism avails, but a new creature. Christ went into the
water: and I think that to be more tolerable, then to baptize babes that cannot
understand or speak. This difference of Baptism will not be ended, until we lay
down both the forms of outward discipline. And if ye deny it to them of
understanding, then for shame leave off discipling of babes that have no
understanding, and let every one chiefly see himself to be a new creature,
baptized in Christ Jesus by a new Covenant, for throwing off old forms and
authors of men, that be so failable and superfluous: so that I find every form
must come to the formal power of Christ; for he is that all power to settle our
differences, and to make known the living Gospel to every creature: it is far
higher then the letter: it is the power of Christ that is our true testimony by
an inward law of conscience, called The two Testimonies, called The two
Witnesses, without which none can savingly prove themselves Christians: so that
every one ought not to live by the teaching of others, but effectually to see
something of God in themselves, otherwise outward teaching will but intoxicate
the brain, and cannot restollize thy soul. Then look not so much upon outward
forms, which have no substance in them. It is not your Sacraments or Sabbaths,
or Baptisms or Preachings: it is only something of God within us, that moves
us to work righteousness: Outward ostentations or customs cannot do it; for
they are failable. When Christ comes to us by true faith, those forms must be
done away by an higher light, called his bright appearing, that shall abolish
all the Antichristian forms, when men shall know God in spirit and in truth,
without old Popery. The Papists look upon Christ by their Crucifix, and you
look upon Christ by your Forms, so that all of you look upon the sepulcher, or
upon something below Christ, giving your selves content and rest in outward
shadows.

THe honorable seat of Justice, or two Olive Trees, the two branches standing
on both sides the bank of the river, called the conduit-pipes, that receive the
Oil, and declare it forth, the sweet Odours, these two Olive Trees are called
the bowls on both sides of the Altar, or the two Candlesticks, or two Anointed
ones standing before the great God of the earth; which indeed are the two
Witnesses that shall faithfully plead for all truth at the right hand, three on
the one hand, and three on the other: those six shall attend one witness; the
other witness shall be attended with other six in the same order, twelve on one
side, and twelve on the other, four and twenty in number, with two Witnesses
standing on both sides, which may be called the seat of Justice, for Christ to
sit and rule upon his throne: he is the Sanctuary in the midst of them, said to
be the Altar of gold, that shall sit upon the throne of Justice, called David's
throne, sitting upon twelve thrones, which is the ends of the earth, or remnant
of the tribes. Those two faithful Witnesses that shall stand before the seat of
Justice, shall plead for equity in all considerable places and nations; and all
such thrones shall be called the seat of Justice: they shall put forth Queries
and answer: as the one declares, the other shall answer in due order: so that
twelve Senators shall judge and declare their sentence, to prove every truth,
which shall be excellent, sweet, and amiable, so that people shall abominate
their earthly Christ's that have deluded them so long, and look upwards to the
minister of God, the highest teacher. Our Priests are not like the Prophets of
old, that quaked and trembled when they saw danger at hand: there has been a
great deal of difference between the Priests and the Prophets. The Priests have
ever been proud, and high, and much sought themselves by self-greatness; which
does not prove themselves Ministers of God, but stand in a Ministers place, as
if they were the very Christ; which go in sheeps clothing, yet ravenous and
cruel as the Bishops, if they had the same power. But for all their Presbytian
sting, the pricking brier must be taken away, that troubles the Israel of God.
Christ is the fountain and finisher of the work: he sets his foot on mount
Olivet, and it cleaves in sunder: so shall your Ministerial power be dashed in
sunder; and happy shall he be called that dasheth your power in pieces, for
the raising up the dry bone of Israel. Christ sent his disciples or by two and
two: he called fishermen, not one man. One Priest ought not to stand so high,
to elevate his own tongue: he will not have one speaker; but by the mouth of
two or three faithful witnesses truth shall be proved, from one end of the
earth to another, though our blind guides see it not. Therefore their tongues
shall be no more an Allegator; it must be two, called the two Olive Trees, that
shall stand before the great God of the earth to prove the truth. Two
candlesticks and two lights before the people, when one man's tongue speaking
shall be a lie: every singular power shall be dissolved, only Christ shall
stand singular over all. He set his foot upon the hinder sea, and his other
foot upon the far sea: he cleaves the mount of Olivet in sunder, and will
diselevate all your historical power, which shall be the beginning of the
downfall of your Priestly power: for Christ will sit upon it by twelve thrones,
and will dis-throne all that stand so high in the place of ostentation, they
must come down and plead for truth among their low equals: for their mount is
cleft in sunder, from the hinder sea to the far sea. There shall no power stand
before Christ, the new Jerusalem; for none shall stand singular in place of
speaking, but Christ alone, and his two anointed ones. Therefore Alphaba, it
must down with thy all power of preaching in thine own tongue. Now Christ does
appear, your mount Elevate is cleft in sunder: there shall not be one stone
left upon another, that shall not be thrown down. And happy shall be that man
that shall take your power and dash it against the wall. Zech. 11. 10. I took
my staff Beauty and brake it in sunder, and it was broke in that day: so the
sheep that waited upon me knew that I was the word of the Lord. And truly he
that brake the staff Beauty, will surely break the staff Bands, that your
elevated power may fall. Christ is the Middinal Sainter or Mediator betwixt
two: he stands as a tree of Mustard Seed, little in show, yet great and
orient in substance, and splendorious to all: and his name is Branch, that is,
beautiful, and shall grow up in the earth. He is the tree of life standing in
the garden of God; and whoever eats of it, shall live for ever. He is life
eternal to all that thirst after him. He is a Medium of comfort to all the
oppressed: he will in some measure still the rage of the sea. Christ the Lord
he is all righteousness. You may definate, but Christ is the definer of truth.
He is the Center, and stable medium of all things in heaven and in earth. He is
the fountain that fills the two conduit-pipes with oil, called The two
anointed ones, that stand before the God of the whole earth. He fills every
Lamp with oil. Every high hill shall cleave asunder at his presence. Who art
thou, O mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shall become a plain. For every power
shall be cleft in sunder before Almiddium the Lord: he shall stand upon the sea
with his face toward the hinder sea: he and his two Witnesses shall stand in
power, to destroy the Red Dragon and his fury. The faithful Witnesses of God
shall stand by many two's, yet one shall stand in the midst of them, which is
the tree of life Angelical. And if any shall attempt or hurt them, fire comes
down from heaven, and shall destroy them. This Angelical power of Christ with
his Saints Evangelical, shall strike the hinder parts of Leviathan, which is
the Dragons tail; so that fire from heaven shall burn up his fury: for the
jealousy of the Lord is gone forth, and shall not return, till it has wrought
the full work of God: for lo, says the Lord, the stone that I have laid before
Joshua, upon it shall be seven eyes; which shows the glory of Christ, that
takes away the iniquity of the land in one day; and that shall be when we make
the Lord our Minister: then he shall take away our reproach. Christ the
heavenly Branch shall silence all flesh. Men may preach all their days, and
cannot remove our reproach; yet Christ can make our Gospel peace. Man's
preaching is but carnal policy. But Christ is raised out of his place; let men
and Ministers be silent: he has the key of the bottomless pit; he took the
dragon and bound him, Rev. 20. he set a seal upon him, that he should deceive
the nations no more, tell certain years expired. The time when he was first
bound, was about 1600 years ago, or thereabout. And God has showed himself the
more merciful, in keeping us from his personal visage; for so long since God
has shut him up under chains of darkness; and from thence to this day his
common appearance has been hideous to man.

YE Assyrian Priests, it is not your way to save souls, it is proper to God
alone; ye may counsel them, or inform them, that is all ye can do: for God alone
teaches, I will write my Law in their inward parts. He spiritually teaches
and infuseth grace in the soul. Priests and Levites, it was to you for a time,
but our Ministers for a shorter time: if men's Priesthood failed under the Law,
how much more shall yours be under Christ? and as the Priests were cried down
under the Law by the Prophets, how much more failable are you, under the
eternal Priesthood of Christ? for all Tithes, and Levitical forms of Tithes
have ceased since Christ came in the flesh. If Aaron the Priest could have no
inheritance amongst Israel, what benefits can ye expect under the everlasting
Gospel? Tithes were given at the first by a legal power of men, and therefore
it was called Legal, or Levitical, pretending td Gods house, or to the
righteousness of God, till Christ came in the flesh, which cut off old
Levitical forms by a new Covenant, nor according to the old, saying, I will
make a new Covenant with them, and write my Law in their inward parts: as an
eternal Sabbath in the conscience, that shall burn up every outward form. When
Christ appeared in the flesh, all Tithes and forms of slavery sure ceased.
Truly Doctor thou may say what thou will, yet I cannot believe thee; though
thou say, Thou art Christ's Disciple; yet I say thou art not, except thou
deniest thy self by a cessation of Tythe-forms, for they must all cease, there
cannot a bit of Levitical Priesthood stand before Christ Jesus the eternal
Priest: every Priesthood must down, for that made the Law a Law, and the Devil
a Devil: Christ Jesus is a free Pastor to all that come unto him: and all ye
Doctors and Ministers are a generation of Angels must fall, calling your selves
Ministers of Christ for the Tithe, and for the Fleece for money and Glebe-land;
ye sit as little Bishops gaping under a sunny bank, so fat and so proud, and no
Disciples of Christ in his poverty. Therefore Bishop-black shall array himself
in Sheeps-clothing among others that be his low equals: Christ is the royal
Shepherd in the Mount. Al-medium preaches in the Mount, and your Ministerial
power shall go down: he set his foot upon Mount Olivet, and it cleft in sunder;
so shall your elevated power divide in sunder.

Now Al-medium preaches in the Mount, your Ministerial preaching shall go
down, your Olivet will cleave in sunder: you go to your mercenary mediating
houses; but Christ is all in all to me, he is a Mediator, and a Minister
without your deffinating. It is not your Church going, or all your preaching
that can do me any good; but what I have received inwardly of God, that keepers
my life. Christ says, He that hears me, hears him that sent me; and he
that believes me, believes him that sent me; so that we ought to believe
Christ, and be taught of him alone, for teachings of men are not the spirit of
truth. He says, If I go away, I will send you the Comforter, that shall teach
you in all truth: so that we must prove every spirit, and hear the voice of
Christ only: once in the Lord, and ever in him; once a year, and ever from
year to year to keep a Sabbath on Earth as it is in Heaven: and so stand free
and effectual, to stand and live, and live and stand fast in the liberty
wherein Christ has made us free, and be no more entangled under the yoke of
bondage of Priests, that are in so many minds, and know not the truth. Twenty
Ministers, twenty minds, and yet Mediators of the letter, and tie themselves
to observe days and new mons, beggarly rudiments, full of legality, and
superfluity of words. I wonder the world is so miserably seduced by them, as if
they could teach Heaven in the Mass-houses or Churches, as ye call them, which
if men could teach Heaven, what need we then to look upon Christ, having so
many merit-mongers, or soul-saving Ministers? Oh but say they, We declare the
mind of God and Christ to the people, as if God were not present in all
places, or as if he were afar off and must have Ambassadors to satisfy his
elect. Oh ye blind guides, does not God keep up the full creation by a
providence? then much more by his power; for Almedium teaches in the Mount of
his power, which is far above your teachings: and truly it is for you to leave
off teaching, that have stood singularly in Christ's place so long, and done
little good: it is time now to call an assembly to sit, and set up thrones for
Justice. Oh people, ye men of Galilee that stand gazing, I believe I shall see
you abhor your earthly gods, and look upwards: I mean, you shall abominate all
those leaders of silly women, that bewitch the world in their own forms. Can we
think God is tied to the outward means once a week? Is not he the same every
day, yesterday, to day, and for ever? Ye endworkers, that object and say, Ye be
the means that God has ordained: ye false Christ's, Mediators, that stand so
high to limit that holy one of Israel; Is not God and his Son wise enough, but
they must have your help? Had not we Abraham, Moses, and the Prophets, and the
Son of God after them, to confirm all that are once entered into the glorious
liberty of the Sons of God, which is a free state, free from the teaching power
of a man, and being set at liberty by Jesus Christ? Then let us be no more
entangled under their Priestly yoke. Ye silly simple Priests, you must come
under the teachings of God, as all other men must do: when Justice, Divine
Thrones of Justice are set up, then God will purge all you sons of Levi.

But methinks I hear some high Priests say, Why do you not quote Scripture to
prove what you write?

My answer is, Christ is the end of legal Scriptures, and you have quoted
Scriptures long enough, and could never make out truth: Christ is the word, and
the end of all Scriptures, and stands in his place, when all Scriptures shall
be failable, and every vision shall be unfolded at the beatifical vision of
Christ Jesus: and truly Scriptures are good, but Christ is the principal; then
let us hold fast to the principal, and wave the letter, Christ is the
foundation, and every man's work ought to be built upon him. Men and Prophets in
the old time spoke as they were moved by inspiration, and yet it was but by the
by, or by the moving power of the holy Ghost; so being written by the
inspiration of Christ, shows that he is the Word far beyond all Scripture
written by men that stand but by Christ, and are failable when he comes in
power. He is the chief medium and principal Senator, and we must throw off our
earthly gods, I mean, all our Priests, only to rest upon him; for until then
we shall have no true Sabbath. He is our Sabbath: if we come out from the
Priests, then he will give us true rest: he is our Vine to live under:
therefore my bowels yearne over the people to see them led off from Christ, by
legating Priests, as wisemen and Lawyers, standing in Pulpits, when grave
Christians shall be taught by some young boys standing in their Priestly
Office, so high in Pulpits: it is a great shame that godly men and women do not
come out from them, and stand upon their feet, and say, Christ alone is my
Teacher, I have been much deluded by proud Priests, by covetous Priests, by
scandalous Priests, by young Priests, by ruffinly Priests, by swearing Priests,
by literal Priests, by historical Priests, and by deceiving Priests, that have
kept us from the power of Christ, and freedom of Sabbath, tying the people to
their set-forms, or what they call a Sabbath. Their mass and dirge shall down,
for every form shall cease but one, and that is the Government of Christ that
shall stand, when all your Priestly power shall lie as low as Doctor Hill's
bones. Doctor, thou can prove but one calling, and that was a Law to Adam,
That thou should work and labor by the sweat of thy brows, as others do,
none excepted, and no other calling of Ministry can thou prove. Therefore
thou must without dispute throw down thy trade of preaching at Christ's feet of
two Witnesses called the Law and Testimony writ in thy conscience.

People, I can but controverse with you: ye say ye know God, and love God, and
fear God. I say, No, ye know the Priests ye fear the Priests, and ye love the
Priests, otherwise ye would renounce their ways contrary to Christ's. The
Priests are dissemblers, but Christ is our true Minister. They tell thee a fair
tale, that Christ is simply good, he is full of pure simplicity, an high
attribute, so low, yet above all the Priests: how are ye married to Christ, and
yet follow after fained lovers? If Christ has redeemed you, think it enough:
follow not after those that deceive silly men and women, and lead them captive
from Christ, as if we could not enjoy Christ without the teachings of men:
having the Spirit of God and the Scripture, with the example of Christ and the
Prophets, and having so much Apostolical divine light, methinks they might
guide us in the true way. Methinks I see the Priests grow shamed the light
discovers their veil cast over the people, and the people begin to see them
so black, and Christ in his brightness so pure, in a heavenly shape: but the
Priests are as Locusts that shall fall under Armegiddon: Euphrates shall dry
up. Oh Army, Army, Arm of the Lord, their power shall fall under thee.

Priest, thou say thy power is a spiritual power, yet it is but a civil
power; and therefore it must down and fall before Sion. The overthrow of the
Bishops was for calling it a spiritual, and for their spiritual courts
audacious to think upon, full of blasphemies, set up by an Antichristial power,
which now is thrown down as contemptible: therefore all your civil Christ's must
down, as your Spiritual Fathers the Bishops have done; if you call your power
Ecclesiastial, it is equal with Christ's; if you call it Ecclesiastical, you
must prove it from Christ's saying Go teach, whose ordination ceased after the
Apostles; so that your Authority of Oxford and Cambridge is void and cannot
stand.

Ephesians. 1.4 and 5. He has chosen us in himself, before the foundation of the
world was laid: he predestined us to the adoption of children by Christ
Jesus; but not by your Ministry. You see the Saints, were first chosen,
predestined and called before, your Ministry stood up: and yet you say you
are called to convert souls in the Pulpit. You Priests must have a hand in the
work of renovation, though you are not called yet ye run, and are not sent to
do such works of wonder; for it is he alone that does abound to us in love, in
wisdom, and in prudency, Having made known to us the mystery of his will, verse.
6. according to his good pleasure, which he had purposed in himself, and not by
your means, Ephesians. 3.4. and 5. God who is rich in all mercy has quickened us,
which shows that it is not your teaching that can do it: and elsewhere he
says, By his grace you are saved, and not of works. Then down with these
working teaching Christ's, that can learn the people salvation: for it is the
gift of God: not of works left any man should boast, Ephesians. 2.9. and 10. For we
are his workmanship created to good works, which God has foreordained:
therefore it is properly and fully the work of God freely to our souls: but let
no durt-dawbing Priest have any hand in thy conversion; for it is Gods work.
Let no swineherd meddle with such a pearl, as if they were outward means of
men's salvation. He alone is our peace, who has broke down the mid-wall of our
reproach having abolished the enmity, even the Law of Commandments contained in
Ordinances, by making in himself of twain, one new man for peace, that he might
reconcile both into one body by his cross, having slain the enmity thereby,
Ephesians. 2.17. He preached peace to you afar off, and to them that are nigh: so
that by him we have access to the Father, and not by the Priests of the second
hand, which have little skill in the creation of salvation, it is a secret work
of God. Let no man say he can teach: but let us all be taught of God, Minister
and People, from the least to the greatest: let us all covenant to him with one
consent, and betroth our selves to him, that he may take pleasure in his
Spouse, and his beloved ones may have pleasure in him the All-teacher, and come
out from their fained Priests the gods of their Temples, that call themselves
Ministers of God, saying, The people must reverence them as Ambassadors, for
the works sake: as if God had not power on earth as well as in heaven: he is
present in all places by his omnipotency and omnipresence, and by his
immensity, and by his all-seeing eye, and by his providence that governs the
whole creation, and by his inspiration and foreknowing what shall come to pass,
he spiritually beholds all things, he alone has created the earth; then does
he not see and teach all, and will bring all rule and power under himself? Then
lay down, ye high Priests, and say, Ye are all taught of God; for he will teach
us of his ways, The Law shall go out of Sion, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem, which shall be Christ preaching from the Mount, when the people
shall give audience to him, and cast off their fained Priests, which are but as
wood and straw, whose stubble shall burn before the fire of his jealousy;
wangeable shall their power be, when God shall give power to his two Witnesses,
and the Law shall preach out of Sion, Revel. 14. The everlasting Gospel shall
preach to every language and nation, when all your wrangling Priests shall be
forced to lay down, because they can establish nothing in order correspondent
to his bright appearing: therefore they must lay down and say, We have spent
our time in vain too long, and besotted the simple people; and yet we have
said, We were the ordained Ministers of God, though we were destroyers and no
builders: historians that have preached this or that; but what of the new work
can we do? it is not our talking of Peter and Paul that will serve the turn:
for God will make a new heaven and a new earth, by a new discipline
Ecclesiastical and Civil, he will make all new, to do away your carnal forms,
every form shall cease to a new formality, God will make his latter temple more
glorious then all the former. All earthly builders shall not be found fit for
the work of Gods house, every flatterer shall be nonresidensed, and cast out
according to Gods extent, and laid open to the sight of the grand Church, to be
excluded from the common community, shut out of fellowship and society with the
unsociable and rebukeable. When God shall try Sion, and search Jerusalem with
lights, when he shall purge the Sons of Levi, and break the constellations that
stand so high, and remove the stars out of their places, when the moon shall
blush and be ashamed, and all the stars come under his feet, when this
discipline that now stands upon crutches shall be taken away, then you may
declare the great things of God, saying, He has formed a new temple, wherein
all righteousness shall dwell. Old things are become new, and all fashions and
forms are passed away, but only one, which is called the formal Power and
Government of Jerusalem: and God, and our Lord Jesus Christ is our Temple. The
Lord is our light within us, he is our Sabbath: the Sun shall not burn us by
day, neither shall the dark Night overshade thee: thou shall continually walk
in the light of the City of the great King; when thou shall throw off thy
fained lovers, I mean thy Priests that err in darkness, and know not the true
way; for God will surely consume the smoke of Babylon, and burn up all darkness
before himself, that he may dissolve the great blindeness and ignorance of the
Priests, that there may be light in the City, that has lain so long under
darkness, suspended from the truth, lying under thick darkness.

Therefore we must all come under the teachings of God, which will be a stable
peaceable Government; when we shall strive no more for disciplying Ministers.
Your power that you hold up, is full of many horns of the beasts pushing and
persecuting in your thought, such as will not come under your bow: but God will
have a peaceable dominion, when your power lies as low as Doctor Hill's bones.

This is a hard doctrine to you, which you have not learned at Oxford and
Cambridge, yet you must stoop to his dominion. Christians and People, how have
you been deluded in your way, and solely conceited in earthly Priests? Is not
Christ all in all? Ye look upon mortal man to teach, yet God has a providence
that teaches and rules all things in heaven and in earth. Does he not guide
Winter and Summer? and every season declares his wisdom: and by his power dark
things declare forth the light; that the people may know, there is an higher
Ministry then that of men.

Doctor Pulpitian know this the more you tie men to your audience, the more
they shall break off from your tyecal ties, and your hearers shall be few in
number.

Further know this, When they turn their backs upon you, there will be a great
consumption of your power, as we may call a consumption of the lungs, or an
endless consuming, so that you shall be a hopeless Ministry, for Christ is the
beginning and end of every work, and all truth is from the Father and the Son.
Christ never resisted the powers, but said, Give tribute to whom tribute
belongs: he further said, Give Caesar his due. He was circumcised, he read
the Law, he went into the water and was baptized; yet all things are failable
when he comes in power: then all such customs and forms must be done away,
though he suffered all after the flesh; yet he redeemed all by a spiritual
power, and shall controverse for every wrong done in the flesh contrary to the
will of God.

Doctor, there must be a falling away, but not from God; but shall bring them
nearer to God. It shall not be a falling from their Sabbath rest, which is the
endless Ministry of Christ; but it shall be a falling away from your power,
that the mystery of iniquity may be dissolved or discovered; for there must be
a great falling away, and then you Stars, or Ministers called, shall fall from
your high perfection, and shall dissolve before Sion.

Ministers, you shall be much disconsolate at this great falling away, when
your sheep shall seek a new Shepherd, and go to the right Shepherd Christ
Jesus, when the kingdoms and powers shall be all given into his hand: when no
man shall say, I am a Priest or a Minister of God, then you high Doctors may
say, How are the mighty fallen? How be our weapons of spiritual warfare
perished, and we are counted as low as other men?

Babylon, thy honor is going down, thy Temple is rent: for there will be a
falling away from thee: two parts of the people shall fall away, and the other
two shall be tried in the fire of his jealousy, for God will bring all things
upon trial to prove who are sincere, and who are not; and who will lay down
life and all for him and who will not. This falling away from you will be a
redeeming of the people to Christ, by bringing them out from your adulterous
power of Ministry, which is not of Christ, but of men, and cannot stand, for
yours is the Gospel of men and not from above; your power is literal, and you
as so many decoy-ducks, that deceive and ensnare many others, so do you
captivate all those that follow you, and neglect the principal of all, which is
Christ.

Isai. 20. and 23. The Lord says, He will make a consumption in the midst of
the Land: which is now to be observed by this great falling away, as by a
shaking or quaking of the people of God; which shows they must fall from your
Ministry, and be restored to Christ their great Conqueror.

This Tribe of Christ, called the North-Tribe, shall grow and prosper until it
come to be an invincible Tribe of the Lion of Judah. This Lion of the North
shall cause all the beasts of the field to quake, and a terrible shaking shall
be that have disobeyed him. This great Conqueror Christ Jesus of the new
covenant, first appears to the Messenger of the covenant, and so to the
North-country, by an alusion to Jeremiah, saying, As I have scattered them, so
will I gather them from the North country, and from all the countries where
they have been scattered. Christ alone he shall gather the people, he is King
of the North-country, and of all the countries: when his power does arise it
shall be as water in the bowels of the world; he shall gather the people, he
shall sit and rule upon his Throne, he is the Lion of the North-sk^t of the
Jews, whose power shall go forth.

This Tribe of the North is the Tribe of Judah, to whom every Tribe shall stoop
and fall, Genesis 49.8. Judah thou art as a Lion, thy hand shall he upon the neck
of thy enemies. Judah thou art as a Lion from the prey, and shall stand up for
the Scepter shall not depart from thee, nor a lawgiver from between thy feet,
until Shiloh come, and unto thee shall the gathering of the people be. So that
I find this Lion of the Tribe of Judah shall gather in all the lost Sheep of
Israel to their fold, that Christ may separate the Sheep from the Goats, which
will be a great shaking and falling away from your Ministry. When God shall
divide your Sichem, and deliver his people out of your hands to be taught of
Christ, and taken from your mouth; Then they may joyfully say, Our Moon is set,
and no darkness appears. The Lord is the light of our Temple.

The seventh and last part of this Sermon is set forth to declare the peaceable
dominion of the Son of righteousness.

We have fasted, we have prayed, we have sighed and mourned for the people.
All this may be, yet Christ has done so before thee, for he has laid his
life down, and done the work thoroughly, for all that can believe.

Then Oh Priest, look to thine own soul, and take no charge of other men's
souls; though Noah, Daniel and Job should pray for others, yet they can have an
answer but for their own souls: for Christ is the end of all happiness and
salvation, he is the end of war: look upon Sion the City of solemnisie to see
Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a peaceable dominion. When the people see, the
Ministiners shall be ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall reign in Mount
Sion, and sit before his ancient glory to judge, when Christ shall sit upon his
throne by a Government called Mount Sion, by an Auditory of twenty four, or
some twelves in other places to declare and effect condign justice to all,
according as God shall ordain and appoint without the help of man. Let no man
say, He can teach: for no man can teach life and salvation.

Then down with all teachers, that we may live under a peaceable Government,
our own Vine Christ Jesus, for he will teach us of his ways without all
differing disputations. Those that call themselves teachers, they live as
drone-bees, by the sweat of other men's brows. Therefore let them stop their
mouths; for the people will not give ear to them, but will live under their own
vine by a new Sabbath Covenantial: and you shall bewitch the people no longer:
when fullness comes, God will teach, and the people shall declare what God has
done for their souls. Then all these Dromidaries of Midian, must break off your
heavenly teaching, and come under the peaceable Dominion of Christ. You high
Doctors, blame me not for speaking; where life is, it will branch it self
forth. Who shall hinder my speaking the truth? the silly Worm, to the cold
Earth; the Sallamander to the Fire; so all things to their proper use, to the
honor of God.

Oh that these rotten Priests would lay down their power, and make Christ all
in all. Fat Priests that live as Drones, belly-godded persons, proud and
delicious, God is angry with you, because no power will throw you down: God
will give his people wisdom to come out from you, and to live by a higher
teaching, which is from the holy Ghost; for there will be a great falling away,
that the iniquity of the Priests may be discovered. I have tried all your
Ministeryes, and can have no rest in them, my spirit is so universally taken up
with the appearings of Christ, that I unfailably see an absolute doing away of
your Forms, your Sabbaths, your Sacraments, your Baptism, your common-Churches,
your separate-Churches, your Anabaptist-Churches, your Papist Churches, all
your set forms must return to the ancient Church of the Jews, which is the
stable perfection of Christ; for now he apeareth all your forms must be done
away. Christ at the first came under a state of imperfection yiedling to the
laws of men; but now he comes in perfection, and will do away all your forms
and shadows; for when that which is perfect is come, the unperfect must be done
away.

My desire is to see the Priests thrown down, and let the Lord preach alone,
for all the Ministers under the cope of heaven, are not able to define or make
out the truth; neither can they speak truth, till they give up their Ministry
to Christ; for all teaching belongs to him, and I know not any as can teach,
but shall run themselves into errors; for it is God that teaches, and not
fleshly man; for by man's teaching the curse has continued on the earth to this
day: neither shall it be till Christ has the full pre-eminency, and all powers
yielded up to him by an endless Covenant; saying, When that which is perfect is
come, then that which is not shall be done away; when he comes in power, your
illegal forms and relecks shall be done away; for his formal power shall throw
off your shadows, as all the creatures declare the glory of God, and preach
forth his excellency; but not as a Priest to Minister in Christ's place, but to
show what the Lord has done for the creation, and to acknowledge Christ alone
to teach life. He preaches forth peaceable dominion to them that are nigh, and
to them that are afar off: from him righteousness does arise, which is the end
of all preaching; Christ is the stability of the Church, I do not say, of named
Churches, but of one Church, without difference or dividual dividing; he is the
husband of one spouse, his perfection shall guide us unto all truth: and for
want of setting up Christ in his oriency of power, men set themselves up, and
destroy his heritage; but the chosen people of God must act against every thing
that is opposite to Christ; for he is Prince of peace, and Prince of power, and
for his cause sacrifice thy life, otherwise thou art no Christian: for we must
look no more upon the Ark of the Covenant, it must not be once named amongst us.

The letter of the Scripture shall be failable: when the testimony truly,
dwells in us by faith, then all our outward shadows shall be done away;
Christ has redeemed us from all typical shadows, and from the curse of the
letter, being once made a curse for us, that the blessing may come upon the
people by faith, and not by literal forms and shadows, Gal. 3.13. Cursed is
every one that hangs upon a tree; Showing the miserable condition of all
such, that hold so much by the tree of the Law, and deny the freedom of the
Spirit they might have in the Son of God; for as many as rely upon works, are
men-workers, lie still under the curse; for Christ is the free Abraham, he has
done all the work of renovation, and we are free in him without works, and
saved in him without men's works: if once in Christ, then free indeed from all
men's traditional teaching; while we are justified in Christ, we acknowledge our
selves sinners, in that we see nothing in our selves, and Christ to be just in
all. It is the believing Abraham that shall be justified, and not the working
Abraham, For grace is of faith, and not by works, lest any man should boast:
for if the inheritance be of the letter, it cannot be of faith. God gave it to
Abraham as he believed, so the Lord promised to him and to his seed for ever
according to the Covenant of faith, which is the Law and Testimony written in
the conscience, called two Witnesses within, which do Christian a creature, and
baptize him into the promised Covenant of Abraham and Christ, which is far
above all your teaching forms and shadows.

I speak to the people, saying, Stand fast in the liberty wherein Christ has
made you free, and be no more entangled with the yoke of bondage; but know your
selves at liberty, as children of the day, and rejoice with Jerusalem, all that
love her be glad and rejoice, for the amplitude and stability of the Church;
when all the Churches shall be married to Christ in the new Covenant, that they
may suck and be satisfied with the breast of consolation; for the Lord will
extend peace to his Church as a river and to the people as a flowing stream,
from a fountain of teaching from above.

GOod men may sometimes deny Christ, not knowing the end of disciplying.

This Doctor Hill was an eminent man, (and without all question declared forth
many good things in his time, yet subject to err as we be) by relation of some
of the Soldiers, that quartered in the town of Cambridge as they told me. I
cannot tell, but as they related, a sad story of this Doctor Hill; by relation
he was intended to persecute with the tongue; whether right or wrong, his
spirit knows it best, I cannot prove it; yet it was certified me. About some
short time before his end he was appointed to preach as he had formerly done,
and went up into the Pulpit, and God gave him time to declare forth his text;
and being enraged against some good people that were not of his judgment,
fitted himself with words against those that were not of his belief; and
suddenly after he had mentioned the words of his text, something as it were
twinged him, as if he had been stung. Lamented, saying, He was stricken; and so
left off his preaching-discousre; a sad thing to think upon. I doubt many of
your Priests are so taken with discontent, now God appears unto all flesh:
yet they think no flesh like their flesh, as when God gives gifts to men below
them they envy them, and preach against them, calling them opinionus-men, as if
none be of the heavenly privy-counsel but they of the black guard, I mean
Priests and Legators. Literal historian Priests, I must tell the truth, I am
inwardly called and sent to do it, I fear no flesh, nor the person of any man;
I must do my message from God, though I die.

SInce the time of Adams fall, the world has been quartered out by the name of
four beasts, as a time, and times, and half a time lying under the rage of
Antichristian power, contrary to the everlasting Gospel three times past, that
the sinful kingdom has ruled over the kingdom of the Gospel, by a beastlike
power: and now is the fourth Monarchy, which we lie under, a dispensation,
called the fourth beast or Monarchy, wherein the beast and false Priest shall
be taken together, and shall uphold their power together by a comply, as if
they cure the wound, and make the world to wonder; but they shall be taken by
an extent from God, for in this fourth Monarchy, the time shall divide within
the time, though they may ware out the Saints for a time, yet God will give the
power of Monarchy into their hands; though God may suffer for a time and times,
yet Daniel says, Judgment shall sit to take away and consume their power,
Dan. 7.26. So that this fourth beast shall magnify himself above other gods of
the earth, and shall lift himself up in honors by blood, and shall extol his
name, as high as the God of Gods; but time shall divide within his time, and
judgment shall sit, and he shall be taken with the Priests and the false
Christ's, and shall be censured for blasphemy against the God of Gods, taking to
themselves such high titles, as Lord and King. Isa. 2. The Lord shall be King
of the earth, and shall rule many strong Nations. Isa. 2.17. The haughtiness of
man shall be bowed down, and the Lord alone shall be exalted. Isa. 4.18. In
that day the Lord will take away the bravery of their tinckling ornaments. Isa.
9. Behold the children that the Lord has given me are for signs and wonders
in Israel: when they shall say, Seek unto them that have familar spirits. The
Lord says, Shall not a people seek to their God? they have changed the
Ordinances, trangressed and broke the everlasting Covenant.

Therefore the Priests shall fall by heaps, and their power will lie as low as
Doctor Hill's bones; for the fifth Monarchial power shall put down their power
and Priesthood. I cannot fully declare my self in this great mystery of God
preaching in flesh. Therefore I confine my self to end with much grief and
sorrow, desiring to see truth magnified and all error trod down, that the Lord
may be all our fort.

ALl that love the appearing of Christ's power, come out from the subtle
delusions destructive to Christ, and betroth your selves to him, that ye may be
free from the seducings of men so miserable and sottish by their great
conspiracy against Christ, by their whitchcrafts and whoredoms. God will judge
them that seek to wise men and counselors, and not to the Lord, which is the
principal; and so make men their teachers; but all Christian propriety is
called of the Israel of God. And I can call none Christians till they fall off
from beastion, and covenant to Christ in the new Covenant, and that is utterly
to fall from their beastly power: he is a Christian that lives up to Christ,
without going to wisemen for council.

The counsel of the Priests have always seduced the people, Solomon speaking
of the wisdom of Christ, questioneth all things, saying, Where is wisdom? It is
not in me: it cannot be found in the creature: wisdom was before the creation.
The sea and the deeps give up, saying, It is not in me. So that we may
pertinently find, that Christ teaches all wisdom by the power of God, and he
that wants wisdom, let him ask of God that shall give him all things.

Then throw off thy beastion wise men and counselors, that keep thee from the
Covenant of peace, and cause thee to deny thy marriage-union with Christ.
Christ is the Husband of the Church, then why do you seek to fained lovers?
Beastion durt-dawbers, that seek all wit, art and skill, to hold up their trade
to secerate the people from the way of Christ, and see the blind lead the
blind. Thou must be a great professor, yet be thou what thou will, I cannot
call thee a Christian, until thou do quake and fall from all thy wise men and
seducing counselors, I mean from all thy Pulpitian Priests, fully to come unto
Christ; for there must be a falling away from the Priests, that the mystery of
iniquity may be discovered, and every beastly power dissolved. Some of your
Presbyterian Priests are so fat and yet full of frailty, very unconstant and
unstable for the truth, but Christ is our never fading hopes. Then look not so
low upon men below Christ, having little or no percility in them, not living
power in themselves, then how shall they teach others to live: Let us go out to
the fountain; for Christ is our immortality, he is the beginning and end of
wisdom, he teaches in heaven and in earth. Then stop your mouths you
beastians, that ye may may become Christians, laying down all your bewitched
forms, that contradict the truth of Christ.

MAn is not born to live to himself, neither can he cross providence, The
wind blows where it will; so God guides the stern of all things, by a
living providence, surmounting every pretended thing. My cross is my outward
loss, if God will have it so. I am unfortunate to the world, God raised me up,
and immediately cast me down, which caused my soul not to look upon any outward
interest, or self-seeking hopes below Christ my Protector; for God is all in
all to me, his intent has been all along to drive me out of all earthly
freedom, which proved hard and difficult to my thoughts, That I of necessity
must throw up all worldly interest, to be least in the world, if I did not, I
could not be a faithful Disciple, or a witness to Christ. Nature considered
what a hard thing it would be to forsake wife and children, and calling too;
yet I must do it, and that is my cross, to follow my Savior in his example,
and not to be led by false Christ's, or such as you call Ministers of God. And
for that, I stand up, which does anatomize my life. And as John lost his life
for Christ, so I lay down my life for him daily. I know my self truly called to
it: night and day I can have no rest, the Lord is with me continually moving me
in the work of the new Creation, and to go out a Disciple in the power of
Eliah, a Messenger to call in the Jews. If any one would take up my place, he
cannot perform it; neither can I deny it, or put it off. Therefore let all
godly souls mourn with me, for I shall be sure of a solitary life, as an
Anatomy shall I die, and the end of my pilgrimage is not known: and thus I give
up all; yet I advise not every one to do so; but to walk up to that calling,
that God has called them to. I say, Judgment must sit, and the Saints must
judge the ends of the earth, for God is the beginning and the end of every
work. I speak as killed, and yet alive; and though I die daily, yet I live, and
my cross does anatomize my life, when I see the unstableness and brevity of
life, so changeable are all things under Christ, his brightness puts out
every light, he appears as the Sun. Let all be silenced.

BAbylon shall down, with all her merchandises: Gods people are commanded to
depart out of her, the world does lament her miserable condition, saying, Alas,
alas, and cannot help her; and being thus taken in the same snare with her,
that they can do no less but mourn with her, saying, How is our condition
changed, and we brought low, that were so high exalted?

The clamation is, saying, It is not your greatness, but your goodness that God
esteems, which causes her to mourn, seeing her wants, saying, How art thou
fallen from God in the world, and art become odious in his sight? destitute,
and art become the habitation of Devils, and all unclean spirits, saying, We
have recreated our selves in the world, and sent gifts one to another in vain,
for in a moment our condition is changed, and we left miserable and desolate,
cut off in our hopes: our iniquities have reached to heaven, and God is angry.
Alas poor Babylon, how are we fallen? our Idolatry, it is all disclosed. And
thus Babylon must fall in all her practices of oppression and covetousness, and
from every unlawful act, when all scoffers and jeerers shall be brought under
this sad calumny of hell in the world, which may then cause them to say, We be
ashamed of our smoke, that ascends up to heaven, and we justly see our
burning, saying, Alas, alas, for in a moment it is come upon us, when all
profane persons shall be laid out in the open view of Gods Church under the
judgment of a community, barred out from the inward temple, being left under a
dark and a fearful dispensation, How may this terrify the hearts of all
unbelievers? when judgment is inflicted upon them, when they shall be shut out
from the holy community of Saints, burning under the fire of Gods jealousy and
contempt, hopeless and helpless. I pity your condition, all ye Merchants of the
world; for your earthly treasures shall burn, and your sorrows shall come
unawares, and ye must fall at his appearing, and all the dark corners of the
earth shall be made manifest and discovered by his kingdom. Alas poor Babylon,
we cannot hide our decays, upon Gods discovery, it is not our curiosity that
can keep us; but if we be wicked, we must fall; for God will search Jerusalem
with torches, and much more you that disobey him; he will prove all your works,
and what is within us, and whether we be Hypocrites or Christians, to know
whether we be royal for him or no, otherwise we must burn and fall in her
idolatry, and so be shut out of the land of the living, and lie in eternal
despair. This Babylon shall fall first at the preaching of the kingdom.
Secondly, it shall penetrate and fall at the discovery of the outward court.
Thirdly, it must fall at the building of the inward temple. Fourthly, it shall
finally fall after the little book is opened, and the everlasting Gospel
preached to shake both heaven and earth; meaning the godly and the wicked.
There is a threefold shaking; first, of nations, to bring them all into one,
which is to his kingdom; for all the kingdoms of the earth must become the
kingdom of our Lord, and yield to his golden scepter. Secondly, there must be a
great shaking of heaven or the heavenly people, Ministers, and others, to drive
them of their own bottoms, so that every Christian way shall be broken to
pieces, and this burning from above shall cashire all your opinions, that
godliness may be one, and all differences cease, that Christ may be one, and
his name one, and his nation one to him. That unity may swallow up all
differences, that they may serve him with one heart in love, and under one
consent. The third shaking, is, the earth or earthly minds of men thus carried
away from God. And therefore they be called Babylon, which shall endure a
terrible shaking, when the third part of the earth shall fall, which is Sodom,
when God shall give up all her doings of cruelty to his holy ones. This shaking
shall shake down all her power and pride, and all her domineering fashions;
which shall cause her to say, Alas, whither are we fallen, now our condition is
changed, and we brought under our underlings? when our pomp shall be turned
into emptiness, and our wordly joy into mourning, it shall then show
apparently, that thou art fallen, and so soon as God calls out his own people
from out of thee, in that very moment and hour thou shall burn and consume till
thou shall be found no more. O Babylon, how soon will thy judgment come? What
city was like this? and cry when they see her burning with spiritual fire; for
in a moment our great riches are come to nothing: they that were made rich by
her shall stand afar off, and see her burning, and dare not controverse for
her, nor hold up their hand to defend her; but shall cry, Alas, alas, such is
our condition, hopeless and helpless. This shall be her condition, when Sion
reigns, and God shall sever the one from the other, by a refining power. Here
is a use of trial to all your consciences, to know and try your selves whether
ye be of Canaan or not: if thou be not, thou must burn with Babylon; for God
will burn up all idolatry, he will consume the wicked from off the earth.
Therefore rejoice over her ye holy ones, come to the feast of the Lord to eat
her flesh, and burn her with fire; for in her was found the blood of the
martyrs. Come, may the Church say, Let us eat her up, for God has given her
into our hands; and Christ shall reign, and shall put all authority under his
feet.

IT shall be a peaceable Dominion, when Christ shall reign over the Earth by a
personal power of Saints, that shall fully hold forth the Scepter. He shall
come to reign in power over the earth, till all rule and authority is put under
his feet. Kings must throw down and stoop to his peaceable Dominion, he shall
make straight every crooked way, his endless Priesthood shall teach, when every
mouth shall be stopped, he gives peace, which the world cannot give; he says,
Walk in my way, I will be your Sun, and your light, when every form and written
declaration shall cease and be no more. I would have all men live above the
flesh, by a heavenly procreation or inclination of doing good, and that is
perfection indeed; for by doing well thou shall have joy unspeakable, which
will be as a whole kingdom in thy soul.

I would have Gods people preach forth restoration, and desire to see a full
manifestation of things made out, as the Lord alone to be all our teacher, he
is our Protector and not man; his Priestly power shall be a peaceable Dominion,
when Monarchy is put down, though Kings and Lord stands in his place, and
Protectors stand in his place; yet who shall stand when he appears by a more
brighter shining light, when all shall be forced to give up their dignities,
and stoop to his peaceable Dominion? Isa. 66. I will send them to declare my
glory among the Gentiles; showing the great day of Jehovah, when men shall
finally throw down their high titles, and then peaceable Dominions shall reign.
What Priest will plead for my name? says the Lord, against them that set
themselves so high, as Lord and King, and set themselves up by earthly
enjoyments.

Therefore God has raised my Spirit to plead against all the Priests, and to
lay open their folly that call themselves Seers in Israel, and yet keep all
things as they were, ye have not yet preached the Gospel; but denied the Son of
God, and the power of his resurrection; for ye have given his glory to men.

Therefore as yet ye have not preached the Gospel, nor laid your life down as
yet for the truth. You have declared the History of the Prophets, and of Peter
and Paul; but we have had enough of it, without you would preach them out of
their Graves. But which of you Priests will vindicate life for the eternal
Gospel? to set Christ upon his throne, to say he is King alone, and Lord alone,
and so deny outward honor, and acknowledge nothing honorable but the Lord,
and that is true Gospel, thou must tread down all for Christ, thou shall tread
upon Scorpions and Serpents, and they shall not hurt thee, it is the words of
our Savior; thou must tread upon Kings, Lords, and Princes, and Nobles, and
Rulers, if thou be true for Christ, he is the everlasting Gospel, thou shall
cease from man whose breath is in his nostrils, it is the Lord that preaches
peace, and keeps all alive, fear not man, or any power of men formed against
the Gospel, it shall not prosper: when he appears, Kings must lay down,
Princes must lay down, Protectors must lay down, Lords must lay down,
Magistrates must lay down, Priests must lay down, thou must lay down, and I
must lay down, the Stars and Constellations shall fail at his appearing, the
negative voice shall not stand; for he will give power to his two witnesses to
plead for all truth, before a Judgment Seat of the Saints, when this
Government shall be taken away and changed at his bright appearing, when all
formed Gospels of men shall be changed to a new Sabbath, when men shall be
forced to lay down for the Gospel, when they shall ascribe to him kingdom,
power and glory, and that is the full end of preaching, to set God upon his
throne; he is the everlasting Gospel of peace, and I know no other Gospel, but
that he should rule above every man in dignity and honor. And that Lord, man
should not pollute his holy name.

Ye high Doctors may Object, saying, What is the power of Christ you speak so
much of?

I answer, It is the power of God, that shall silence the great men's spirits,
when it shall apear, it shall take away their sting, as from King, and Lord,
and Bishop, that have formerly persecuted the Saints. Christ says, All power
is given me in heaven and earth; and God says Vengeance is mine. I wonder how
men dare do as they have formerly done, to put an end to some of Gods chosen
people, by taking away life and free-creation, and by silencing some others in
prison, which is a type of hell, and dare not kill them, lest heaven and earth
should cry out against them, as that it has done long since.

Ye Ministers go with your hands full of blood, by flattering men in their
blood-thirsty-way, by sowing pillows and cushions under their elbows, very loath
to tell them the truth from God, saying, Why do you take away life and
free-creation from the creatures of God? seeing life and death is in the hands
of the Lord, then what has man to do to take away life from any of the
creatures of God? it is an intolerable thing: which of you Priests will engage
for Christ in this cause? saying, Oh great men, I doubt you will sink in the
lake of Gods irrecoverable vengeance; for vengeance is the Lords, and he will
give it them to drink; for the Soul that sins it shall die. Let men take
heed how they act, and see that they act in righteousness: better they had
never been born, then to be bloody persecutors, to offend any of those little
ones of Christ, either by death or imprisonment.

GOd teaches us by his Son, he is the sure word of prophecy, and our
everlasting Gospel which may reprove the literal teachers, that call the
Scriptures the Gospel, when indeed they are but the writings of men put
together as a History, but Christ is the eternal mystery, Christ Jesus alone is
our eternal peace, free from failable mixture, it is God from the beginning; he
is the word of life beyond the written word of man, so is the eternal decree in
paradise, and as by a further manifestion of his Son to preach and declare
forth all truth, far above the writings of men, which is not the word of God,
but man's word spoken in part, nd prophesied in part, as Paul declares.

Therefore the Scripture cannot fully be called, the word of God, but men's
traditions, and part of the mind of God, they prophesied in part, they writ in
part, they believed in part of the mystery of God; but Christ he comes in the
volume of the book, he is our sure word of prophecy, far higher then any
Scripture, and for that cause Scripture cannot be fully called the word of God,
except God has writ it, Christ never penned down the mystery, he is the final
end of perfection. The promise was made in him 400 years before the local
Scripture; the promise was before the Law, and righteousness came by faith, and
not by local Scriptures, Christ opened the seals in order, He is the word from
the beginning, John 1. The word was at the beginning, before the traditions of
men were written, and shall stand till fullness come, which shall then be
failable, perfection shall put an end to imperfection, when man's writing is
done away, the Son of God is that wisdom from the decree of God, to make out
his full work, and shall stand when all men's Scriptures shall be failable,
David cries out in the 19 Psalm, saying, Who knows the errors of his life? so
that men and Prophets may be unstable in their judgment.

All Scriptures were written by the permission of God, and men declared of
things a far off, and could not fully speak of things to come, but as they
spoke in part. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but not one tittle of Gods
word, which was his ancient decree from the beginning; before men writ the
Scriptures, his decrees were, and his council shall stand; he spoke the word,
and it was done: if Scriptures could be the word of God, then common Christians
might write by inspiration, and call it the word of God; which that they cannot
do; for it is but men's declaration; and yet the Priests say, They preach the
word of God, though they deceive the poor people with the letter, men may be
very plyant and prophetical as the Prophets were, and write many sweet truths;
yet the decree of God shall stand, when written words are failable, though they
write after their judgments they shall be failable being yet in the flesh; for
Christ is our sure word of prophecy, far above Scripture, to declare what the
word is, first, it is God. Secondly, it is perfection. Thirdly, it is his
council and decree. Fourthly, it is spiritual light from above. Fifthly, it is
a word of life that preaches out from the mouth of God. Therefore the written
letter is not the word of God, but put into them from a spiritual ingenuity, or
received of God by a spiritual power from above, being writ by failable man,
that has received in part of that full perfection. Christ is the full end of
all mystery, he preaches upon the mount, hear him, with a laudable voice, he
inwardly teaches, his wisdom is excellent, past finding out; men's writings and
teachings are subject to change, but the word of God is the same from the
beginning, not any thing of God shall fail, Mount Sion shall ever stand stable
and firm, the Lord is unchangeable, though men's teachings fail, and Scriptures
fail, and Prophets fail, and Priests fail, and all outward forms and ceremonies
fail, though outward Sabbaths fail, yet the two witnesses shall not fail, the
two anointed ones shall stand before the God of the whole earth; if Christ and
the Spirit dwell in us, they shall teach us how to live in all truth, though
man in his ignorance lies under the letter, and lives altogether by line and
verse, the Law being a Schoolmaster or Teacher to him, yet when he is redeemed
by the Spirit, he walks above the letter, knowing himself free, incorporated,
and brought within the precincts of the glorious liberty of the Son of God.
Christ is the sure word of prophecy, far higher then the Scriptures which the
Doctors call the word of God, and is not, but part of the truth; but Christ
shall endure when all men's writings be as low as Doctor Hill's bones, and shall
be failable before the great manifestation of the light that shall appear when
all shall bend at the Scepter; his wisdom teaches all truth, men teach for
envy, some for pride, and some for money, and some teach other men's works, and
yet call it, the word of God, though they can declare nothing out of the gift,
but what they have received by learned phrases, and much slight the word of the
eternal Covenant, by adoring the writing and preaching of men, which are
outward, literal, and not the word of God, but Scriptures of men, as Chronicles
and Histories, and shall be failable. I do not deny the good as is in the
Scriptures, but I adhere to it, so far as it answers to the righteousness of
God, and so far we ought to walk plyant to the Scriptures, as by the example of
Christ, his rule ought not to be compounded with other men's works, but that his
fame should be seen alone; for by that means the Priests do preach men's praises
more then the honor and authority of Christ.

Now in all your learning, I desire you would learn to know Christ the sure
word of prophecy, which is God alone, above the Scriptures; and so the
Scriptures are but men's traditions laid together, chronicled up, what good men
had declared by history for a memorial or example for us that come after, and
not to look for spiritual life by the Scriptures; for that is the free gift
from above by his grace; but to look on them for an exhoraation. Christ says,
In the Scriptures ye think to have eternal life; yet he does not say, In them
there is eternal life; for he is life eternal, and he has done all things
well. Prophets, and Priests, and Men may write, yet of themselves can establish
no truth, for Christ is the stable center of all, he is Almedium that preaches
in the Mount, he is our sure word of prophecy, yet he writ no Scripture, nor
declared himself by letter, yet many Scriptures have testified of him, he was
and is exemplary to all.

Therefore I would have all men live to the Lord, above that which is written
of men; for what is written but shall be failable? or what light can keep its
full oriency, before the Sun? every borrowed light shall be failable. I desire
men would not hang so much upon the letter, Christ Jesus is unfailable; he is
yesterday, to day, and for ever. Let us set Christ above all literal
Scriptures, which shall contingently fail: when he comes in power he shall put
an end to every work, Christ is the prime reality of all true integrity, he is
the eternal word of life, all things live by the decree of God finished in us,
his promise was above 400 years before any Scripture was writ, given to Abraham
by faith, and not by Scripture, in that we ought to know something above the
letter, which is the word of faith, a sure prophecy, it is not the word
preached, that can redeem us, except we have personal holiness in us, by a
right knowing of God by inspiration, otherwise it is unpossible to please God;
for men may hear Scripture preached, and yet not be happilized, and Priests may
preach, and yet cannot save souls.

Therefore ye high Priests lay down your authority, God teaches from above,
and will order his affairs above your art and policy, who shall learn him
knowledge? shall Oxford and Cambridge instruct his way? their places are
inferior to him, for Christ is our true word of prophecy, far above all art
or pretended skill, God is the best University, he will teach his people in all
truth by an inward renewing the mind: if God teaches, then let men lay down,
and say, We cannot savingly teach; we preach the letter, but salvation is from
above, he ministers the gift of healing, and man cannot do it: Ordination is
ceased with the Apostles, and God does appear to us by his Son, and under the
name of two witnesses, which is the Law and Testimony within, that teaches us
better then all the Priests. Therefore I desire we may all see and live under
the teachings of God, for he teaches us the mystery of truth: let God be true,
and every man a liar: you Assyrian Priests may prognosticate the people, but
Christ is the sure word of prophecy, we will hear him with a laudable voice.
The Priests say, Hear us, we will not be silenced: but for all this thou must
be silenced Oh Priest, for Kings, and Lords, and Nobles, and Magistrates shall
be silenced, at his bright appearing, There shall be silence in heaven for the
space of half an hour, Rev. 8.1. Who shall stand when he appears by a
dividing of time? I say, all you Ministers have not yet preached the Gospel,
neither can any man preach the Gospel at all, until he throws down his own
power of preaching, and make Christ your Priest and Teacher, and say you are no
more a teacher of salvation, but a keeper of cattle from your fathers, and to
work by the sweat of your brows, for knowledge shall run to and fro, and meet
by voices and witnesses, that shall throw off and extinguish all your negative
voices, that stand deffinating so high in Pulpits: one witness of the Minister,
or Priest of himself, is a negative untruth, and is centred upon meesum, which
is by a singular vote, and cannot stand; for it is Christ alone that shall
stand to preach; for he is ordained and sent as a Mediator of himself between
God and man.

Priests, I believe in short time your people will be few in number; for then
and at that time, the people shall betroth themselves unto the Lord, and will
refuse your teachings; when they are inwardly taught of God, they shall remove
from you Pulpits, and ye shall no more say to the people, Know the Lord, for
they shall all know me; that is, they shall all know Christ to be the Minister,
and shall return to their first Love, from whence they were fallen, saying,
Come, do thy first work; as if Christ should say, Christians, come enter into
your rest: once in him, and ever: he is our Sabbath and Gospel of peace, he is
unchangeable to the end, and that is a Sabbath indeed, it is not your keeping a
day once a week, that can make a true rest, it is the Sabbath within, having
Christ dwelling in thee by a true faith, that is a Sabbath and a rest that
cannot be taken away, the receivings of Christ in thee quickens thee every
moment from day to day, which shows forth in thee a continual Sabbath, From
year to year thou shall worship the Lord, and keep the feast of Tabernacles,
when a Christian walks in all outward righteousness, that is a feast of one
Tabernacle, and to walk by inward righteousness, that is the other feast of
Tabernacles, Ye shall once a year come up to keep the feast of tabernacles,
Zach. 14. These two Tabernacles, the one for an inward, the other for an
outward, are called first and second Tables, which shall be the worship that
shall be set up from day to day, and year to year, until Shilo come.

Priests, it is not for you to keep a day once a week, and be as evious as
ever; it is not to keep a day, and be as covetous as ever; that is not a true
Sabbath, Christ is the Sabbath, and he is our eternal rest. And Minister, thou
must deny thy self, if ever thou would enter into his rest; for Christ
sweetneth all things to a Christian, every doubt is comprehended and
comprimized in him, he is the end of trouble, of war, and of every conflict, he
is our Gospel-peace to still the rage of all obstruction, and for want of
making Christ our teacher, it causes us to follow false Christ's, I mean
Priests and Jesuits, that teach their own Gospel, and set themselves up by fat
parsonages, feigned lovers to deceive the people, as if they had the mind of
God at their will; Humble-bee-Priests, fat belly-goded-Parsons, to declare to
the people once a week, as if God were tied to their set times: so as the Jews
did, so do you, keep a day once a week, and yet crucify the Lord, and so do
ye, not knowing his eternal Sabbath.

Ye silly people, I much condole your weakness, in that you so much idolize the
Priests, and neglect your only true rest. The Lord appears to us every day,
as well as on that day, which thou call the Lords day, and truly ye are as
legal as ever the Jews were, though cunningly you call your Sabbath the Lords
day, yet cannot take away your observed forms: the Lords day is every day.

Therefore Priest throw down thy observation, Christ is the Sabbath of rest,
his day is every day, from year to year. Ye Doctors and Priestical Ministers,
you are very censurous.

I cannot but further relate a Pulpit-story of this Doctor Hill, by some godly
persons of near relation to him, having some discourse with them, they did not
comply with his element, but were a little contrary to his judgment, not
pleasing to his allegation, which to affront them in their judgment, he
thought to met with them in the Pulpit, took a text of Scripture to cross them;
but as I understood God met him in the way, and frustrated him in his first
text; whereof he took another text, and in the same manner God met him again,
and blasted him upon his third subject, so that he judged himself stricken, and
came down from the Pulpit, and related a sad story to some, that God justly
punished him, by reason of his inveterated spirit of bitterness, so that I
find God met him by way of etilliation, as we have an example in Jacob and
Esau, the Lord punished Jacob for taking his brother Esau by the heel.
Therefore let no man think so low of his brother, but that God can spiritually
raise men to higher knowledge, then Cambridge can do. And let not Ministers and
Doctors be so high, now God appears to the weak things of the world, to
confound the haughtiness of the proud; for we have a sure word of prophecy,
far higher then you can teach. Doctors and Ministers, ye preach of a Prince
that rules in the Air: I pray you, what is that? if you were as far from that,
as you are from right disciplying, you would have but little to do with it.

Doctor, I must tell you what it is that rules in the Air, it is money, which
is the King of all the creatures, that rules in the Air, it buys, and sells,
and captivates all things under it; silver and gold bewitcheth the world, and
you would spend your lives in the Pulpit for it, and it is called but the
Prince that rules in the Air, and beguileth the Priests that preach for hire;
Christ's is a free-Ministery, and an endless Priesthood; yours is failable.

I can give relation of a Priest, that removed himself from about 40. l. a
year, for a place of 300. or 400. l. a year. This Priest cunningly bewitched
his people of the new place where he came, and in the midst of his Sermon,
related to them, That God had brought him thither in a cloud from the substance
of 40. l. a year, to 300. l. a year. And was not this a cunning dawber to
delude the people by a dark cloud?

Numbers, Leviticus and Deuteronomy, declares, That the Priests shall have no
inheritances: therefore I find they that have bought Tithes and
Impropriations, have bought and sold that, which was none of their own. Lord
Protector, I desire you would give Tithes and impropriations to the widows, the
fatherless, the blind, and the lame, and to the poor: as Christ would have it
done, so let it be, that every Parish be eased of collection; and praise God
for the great good you have done for them. A poor messenger, a disciple
separate for the kingdom of Christ.

I could have added much more to this work; but in short I have declared some
of the mind of God.

Daynus, A messenger of the new Covenant, under the Ark-angel of the Covenant.
As John was sent a messenger to the Jews, to declare the kingdom of heaven at
hand, so I Daynus am sent to the whole Israel of God, to show the kingdom of
heaven is come in power to me, and I am the first upon the feet, restored of
the dry-bones of Israel. Daynus, to show the day and year of the Lord, and his
year excepted.

FINIS.

