Heads of the CHARGE AGAINST THE KING, Drawn up by The General Council of the
ARMY. ALSO His Majesty's Speech to Major Rolph, and Col. Ewers, concerning the
present condition of himself, and his three Kingdoms, and certain Rules set
down by Him for settlement thereof. An Ordinance of Parliament concerning the
City of London: And the Lord Mayors Proclamation concerning those who have
engaged in the first or second War, or had a hand in obtaining the late
Treaty with the King. Taken out of the original Papers, and published for
general Satisfaction.

London: Printed for T. R. 1648.

The Heads of the Charge against the King, drawn up by the General Council of
the Army, and the way that is propounded for his trial.
THe King is much daunted at his removal from Hurst-Castle, although he had no
great cause to joy in coming thither at all, he wishes that he had not spent
so much time in the Treaty, but had without question granted all that was
required at once, yet does in several Speeches by way of discourse, urge how
far he condescended in the Treaty, saying further, that he can propound a way
to prevent the decay of Trade, recover Ireland, and to do much more to that
purpose.

His Majesty seems to rely much upon the hopes he has of the Prince, and
expected the mouldring away of the revolted Ships for want of money, the Prince
is yet at the Hague, but is shortly to return to his Queen Mother in France.
Having thus far showed how the case stands with the King and the Prince in
relation to their own ways and apprehensions, it is necessary that there
should be somewhat said on the other part, and how the Parliament and Army act
and move for a speedy settlement of the Kingdom either against the King, or
without him.

In doing whereof it is first observable, that there is a Declaration brought
in and will shortly pass the House, with many grounds and reasons to show that
His Majesty's Concessions in the Treaty are unsatisfactory, and no grounds for
a settled peace in this Kingdom: And to prevent delays in what shall follow,
and that the House may be unanimous, and proceed with one joint consent, none
are to be admitted to sit in the House, but such as do attest this Declaration;
and as it is necessary for the carrying on of this great work, that there
should be no sidings in Parliament, so is it likewise in all other Counsels,
and amongst public Officers in Cities and Corporations: and forasmuch as this
is a time of the year for electing several Officers, the Parliament set forth
this ensuing Ordinance.

Die Mercurii, 20. December. 1648.
Whereas there is an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, bearing date the 18. December, 1648. for the choosing of Common
Councell-men, and other Officers within the City of London and Liberties
thereof for the year ensuing, the said Lords and Commons do further declare and
ordain, and be it hereby ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that no
person whatsoever that subscribed, promoted, or abetted any engagement in the
year 1648. relating to a personal Treaty with the King at London, shall be
elected, chosen, or put into any of the Offices or places expressed in the
aforesaid Ordinance under the penalty contained in the same, upon the other
excepted persons, and to be levied according to the provision of the said
Ordinance, and the Lord Mayor for the time being is hereby required, that this
Ordinance with the other be published at all Elections, and strictly and
punctually observed, according to the true intent and meaning hereof.

Jo. Brown Cleric Parliamentorum.


Upon the Receipt of this Ordinance the Lord Mayor caused to be published this
Proclamation or Edict.

THese are to require you to publish this Ordinance with the other, dated the
18. of this instant month at your Elections, and that the same be strictly and
punctually observed, according to the true intent and meaning of the same, this
20. day of December, 1648.

To the Alderman, or Deputy of the Ward of Michel.
Having already given you truly and briefly the present condition of the King,
the actions of the Parliament, and the consent of, the City, it remains that I
should conclude with the proceedings of the General Council of the Army in
relation to his Majesty, and settling the Kingdom, the said Council being
drawing up a charge against him, consisting of several heads, wherein these
following are chiefly insisted on.

Matters charged against the Kings Majesty by the General Council of the Army.
1. That his Majesty being trusted with a limited power to rule according to
Law, and by express Covenant and Oath obliged to preserve and protect the
Rights and Liberties of the People, for and by whom he was entrusted, has
perverted that trust and abused that power, to the hurt and prejudice of the
generality, and to the oppression (if not destruction) of many of them, and
has raised and assumed that hurtful power which was never committed to him, to
the taking away all those foundations of Right and Liberty, which the people
had reserved from him, and to swallow up all into his own will and power, to
impose or take away, yea to destroy at pleasure, and declining all appeal
herein to the establishment of equal judgment, raised force upon his trusting
people, and attempted by it to uphold and establish himself in that absolute
tyrannical power so assumed over them, and exercising thereof at pleasure:
which evils being acted against the public interest, have been adjudged
capital in several of his Predecessors.

2. That the King has granted Commissions to the Prince, as also to ORMOND and
his associate Irish Rebels, which are not recalled to this day.

3. That this capital and grand offender and author of our troubles the person
of the King, by whose Commissions, Commands, or procurement, and in whose
behalf, and for whose interest only of will and power all our wars and
troubles have been, with all the miseries attending them, is guilty of all the
trouble, loss, hazard, and expense of the blood and mischiefs that have
happened by the late wars in this Kingdom.

4. That the King raised several Arms to the spoil and near desolation of
the Kingdom: and in the raising and having raised that force, he did by it
assume and exercise all kind of absolute and arbitrary power at his own will
alone without Parliament.

These being the grand matters in charge against the King, (amongst others)
they are to be put into form, and then if if they proceed to trial, it will
be in a Parliamentary way, and the Army are to manage the proofs.

FINIS.

