The Heads of PROPOSALS, Agreed on by his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, AND
The Council of the ARMY. Tendered to the Commissioners of Parliament residing
with the Army, to be by them presented to the PARLIAMENT.

CONTAINING Their particular Desires (in pursuance of their former Declarations
and Papers) in order to the clearing and securing the Rights and Liberties of
this Kingdom, in the settling of a just and lasting peace therein; leaving the
terms of peace for the Kingdom of Scotland, to stand as in the late
Propositions of both Kingdoms, unless that Kingdom have agreed, or shall
agree to any alteration.

To which Proposalls are added the explanations upon several particulars
therein agreed upon at the late general Council of the Army at Putney, on
Thursday September. 16. 1647.

In Answer to certain Queres thereupon made by the Commissioners of Parliament
residing with the Army.

BY the Appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the General
Council of his Army.

Signed, Io. Rushworth, Secretary.

London: Printed for George Whittington, at the blew Anchor in Cornhill, near
the Royal Exchange. 1647.

The Heads of PROPOSALLS, Agreed on by his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, And
the Council of the Army.
THAT (the things hereafter proposed being provided for by this Parliament) a
certain period may (by Act of Parliament) be set for the ending of this
Parliament, (such Period to be within a year at most,) and in the same Act
Provision to be made for the Succession and Constitution of Parliaments in
future, as follows;

1 That Parliaments may Biennially be called, and meet at a certain day, with
such provision for the certainty thereof, as in the late Act was made for
Trienniall Parliaments, and what further or other provision shall be found
needful by the Parliament, to reduce it to more certainty; and upon passing of
this, the said Act for Trienniall Parliaments to be repealed.

2 Each Bienniall Parliament to sit 120 days certain, (unless adjourned, or
dissolved sooner by their own consent) afterward to be adjournable or
dissolveable by the King; and no Parliament to sit past 240 days from their
first meeting, or some other number of days to be agreed on: upon the
expiration whereof, each Parliament to dissolve of course, if not otherwise
dissolved sooner.

3 The King upon the advice of the Council of State in the Intervals betwixt
Biennial Parliaments to call a Parliament extraordinary, Provided it meet above
Seventy days before the next Biennial day, and be dissolved at least Sixty
days before the same, so as the course of Bienniall-Elections may never be
interrupted.

4 That this Parliament and each succeeding Bienniall Parliament at, or before
adjournment, or dissolution thereof, may appoint Committees to continue during
the Intervall, for such purposes as are in any of these Proposals referred to
such Committees.

5 That the Elections of the Commons for succeeding Parliaments, may be
distributed to all Counties, or other parts or devisions of the Kingdom,
according to some rule of equality or proportion, so as all Countries may have
a number of Parliament Members allowed to their choice, proportionable to the
respective rates they bear in the common charges and burdens of the Kingdom,
or according to some other rule of equality or proportion to render the House
of Commons as near as may be, an equal Representative of the whole; and in
order thereunto that a present consideration be had to take off the Elections
of Burgesses, for poor decayed, or inconsiderable Towns, and to give some
present addition to the number of Parliament Members for great Counties, that
have no less then their due proportion, to bring all (at present) as near as
may be, to such a rule of proportion as aforesaid.

6 That effectual provision be made for future freedom of Elections, and
certainty of due Returns.

7 That the House of Commons alone, have the power from time to time, to set
down further Orders and Rules for the ends expressed in the two last preceding
Articles, so as to reduce the Elections of Members for that House, to more and
more perfection of equality in the distribution, freedom in the Election,
order in the proceeding thereto, and certainty in the Returns, which Orders
and Rules in that case to be as Laws.

8 That there be a liberty for entering Dissents in the House of Commons, with
provision, That no Member be Censureable for ought said or Voted in the House,
further then to Exclusion from his present Trust in the House, and that only by
the judgment of the House it self.

9. That the Judicial power, or power of final Judgment in the Lords and
Commons (and their power of Exposition and Application of Law) (without further
appeal) may be cleared: And that no Officer of Justice, Minister of State, or
other person adjudged by them, may be capable of Protection, or Pardon from the
King, without their advice and consent.

10. That the Right and Liberty of the Commons of England may be cleared and
vindicated, as to a due exemption from any judgment, trial, or other
proceeding against them by the House of Peers, without the concurring
judgment of the House of Commons, as also from any other judgment, sentence,
or proceeding against them, other then by their equals, or according to the
Law of the Land.

11. The same Act to provide that Grand Jurymen may be chosen by and for
several parts or Divisions of each County respectively, in some equal way,
and not remain (as now) at the discretion of an Under-Sheriffe to be put on or
off: and that such Grand Jurie-men, for their respective Counties, may at each
Assize present the names of persons to be made Justices of the peace from time
to time, as the Country has need for any to be added to the Commission, and
at the Summer Assize to present the names of three persons, out of whom the
King may prick one to be Sheriff for the next year.

2. For future security to Parliaments and the Militia in general in order
thereunto, that it be provided by Act of Parliament:

1. That the power of the Militia by Sea and Land, during the space of ten
years next ensuing, shall be ordered and disposed by the Lords and Commons
Assembled, and to be Assembled in the Parliament of England, or by such persons
as they shall nominate and appoint for that purpose, from time to time, during
the said space.

2. That the said power shall not be ordered, disposed, or exercised by the
King, or by any person or persons by any authority derived from him, during
the said space, or at any time hereafter by his Majesty that now is, without
the advice and consent of the said Lords and Commons, or of such Committees or
Counsel in the Intervalls of Parliament* as they shall appoint.

3. That during the same space of ten years, the said Lords and Commons may by
Bill or Ordinance raise and dispose of what moneys, and for what Forces they
shall from time to time find necessary, as also for the payment of the public
debts and damages, and for all other the public uses of the Kingdom.

4. And to the end the temporary security intended by the three particulars
last precedent, may be the better assured, it may therefore be provided,

That no Subjects that have been in hostility against the Parliament in the
late war shall be capable of bearing any office of power or public trust in
the Commonwealth, during the space of five years, without consent of
Parliament, or the Counsel of State, or to sit as Members or Assistants of
either House of Parliament, until the second Bienmall Parliament be past.

3. For the present form of disposing the Militia in order to the peace and
safety of this Kingdom, and the service of Ireland.

1. That there be Commissioners for the Admiraltie, with a Vice Admiral and
Rere-Admirall, now to be agreed on, with power for the forming, regulating,
appointing of Officers, and providing for the Navy, and for ordering the same
to and in the ordinary service of the Kingdom, and that there be a sufficient
provision and establishment for pay and maintenance thereof.

2. That there be a General for Command of the Landforces that are to be in
pay both in England, Ireland and Wales, both for Field and Garrison.

3. That there be Commissioners in the several Counties for the standing
Militia of the respective Counties, consiststing of Trained Bands, and
Auxiliaries not in pay, with power for the proportioning, forming, regulating,
training and disciplining of them.

4. That there be a Council of State, with power to superintend and direct the
several and particular powers of the Militia last mentioned, for the peace and
safety of this Kingdom, and of Ireland.

5. That the same Council may have power as the Kings Privy Council, for, and
in all Foreign Negotiations; Provided, That the making of War or Peace with
any other Kingdom or State, shall not be without the advice and consent of
Parliament.

That the said power of the Council of State be put into the hands of Trustees
and able Persons now to be agreed on, and the same persons to continue in that
power si been se gesserint for a certain term not exceeding seven years.

6 That there be a sufficient establishment now provided for the salarie forces
both in England and Ireland, the establishment to continue until two months
after the meeting of the first Bienniall Parliament.

That an act be passed for disposing the great offices for ten years by the
Lords and Commons in Parliament, or by such Committees as they shall appoint
for that purpose in the Intervals, with submission to the approbation of the
next Parliament, and after ten years, they to nominate three, and the King out
of that number to appoint one for the succession, upon any vacancie.

5. That an act be passed for restraining of any Peers made since the 21. of
May 1642. or to be hereafter made from having any power to sit or vote in
Parliament without consent of both Houses.

6. That an act be passed for recalling and making void all Declarations and
other Proceedings against the Parliament, or against any that have acted by, or
under their authority in the late war, or in relation to it; And that the
Ordinances for indemnity may be confirmed.

7. That an Act be passed for making void all Grants, etc. under the Great
Seal, that was conveyed away from the Parliament since the time that it was so
conveyed away (except as in the Propositions of both Kingdoms,) and for making
those valid, that have been or shall be passed under the Great Seal, made by
the authority of both Houses of Parliament.

8. That an act be passed for confirmation of the Treaties between the two
Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and for appointing Conservators of the Peace
betwixt them.

9. That the Ordinance for taking away the Courts of Wards and Liveries be
confirmed by act of Parliament, Provided his Majesty's Revenues be not
damnified therein, nor those that last held offices in the same, left without
reparation some other way.

10 An act to declare void the cessation of Ireland, etc. And to leave the
Prosecution of that war to the Lords and Commons in the Parliament of England.

11 An act to be passed to take away all Power, authority and jurisdiction of
Bishops, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers whatsoever extending to any
Civil penalties upon any; And to repeal all Laws whereby the Civil
Magistracy has been, or is bound, upon any Ecclesiastical Censure to proceed
(Exofficio) unto any Civil penalties against any person so censured.

12. That there be a repeal of all Acts, or clauses in any Act enjoining the
use of the book of Common Prayer, and imposing any penalties for neglect
thereof, as also of all acts or clauses in any act imposing any penalty for
not coming to Church, or for meetings elsewhere, for Prayer, or other
Religious duties, Exercises or Ordinances, and some other Provision to be made
for discovering of Papists and Popish Recusants, and for ditabling of them, and
of all Jesuits, and Priests, from disturbing the State.

13 That the taking of the Covenant be not enforced upon any, nor any penalties
imposed upon the refusers, whereby men might be constrained to take it against
their Judgments or consciences, but all Orders or Ordinances to that purpose
to be repealed.

14. That (the things here before purposed, being provided for settling and
securing the Rights, Liberties, Peace and safety of the Kingdom) his Majesty's
Person, his Queen, and Royal issue, may be restored to a condition of safety,
honor and freedom in this Nation, without diminution to their personal
Rights, or further limitation to the Exercise of the Regal power, then
according to the Particulars afore-going.

15. For the matter of Compositions.

1 That a less number out of the persons excepted in the two first
qualifications, in the propositions of both Kingdoms, not exceeding five for
the English being nominated particularly by the Parliament, who together with
the persons in the Irish rebellion included in the third qualification, may be
reserved to the further judgment of the Parliament as they shall find cause,
all other excepted persons may be remitted from the Exception and admitted to
Composition.

2 That the rates for future Compositions may be lessened and limited not to
exceed the several proportions hereafter expressed respectively; that is to say,

1. For all persons formerly excepted, not above a third part.

2. For the late members of Parliament under the first Branch of the fourth
Qualification, in the Proposition a fourth part.

3. For other Members of Parliament in the second and third Branches of the
same Qualification, a sixth part.

4. For the persons nominated in the said fourth Qualification, and those
included in the tenth Qualification an eight part.

5. For all others included in the sixth qualification a tenth part

2. And that real debts either upon Record, or proved by witnesses be
considered and abated in the valuation of their estates in all the cases
aforesaid.

3. That those who shall hereafter come to compound, may not have the Covenant
put upon them, as a condition without which they may not compound, but in case
they shall not willingly take it they may pass their composition without it.

4. That the persons and estates of all English, not worth 200 li. in Lands or
Goods be at Liberty and discharged. And that the Kings meniall servants that
never took up Arms, but only attended his person according to their Offices,
may be freed from composition, or to pay at most but the proportion of one
years revenue, or a twentieth part.

5. That in order to the making and perfecting of Compositions at the rates
aforesaid, the rents, revenues, and other dues, and profits of all sequestered
estates whatsoever (except the estates of such persons who shall be continued
under exception as before) be from henceforth suspended and detained in the
hands of the respective Tenants, Occupants, and others from whom they are due,
for the space of six months following.

6 That the faith of the Army, or other forces of the Parliament, given in
Articles upon surrenders to any of the Kings Party may be fully made good, and
where any breach thereof shall appear to have been made, full reparation and
satisfaction may be given to the parties injured; and the persons offending
(being found out) may be compelled thereto.

That there may be a general act of Oblivion to extend unto all (except the
Persons to be continued in Exception as before) to absolve from all Trespasses,
misdemeanors, etc done in prosecution of the war, and from all trouble or
prejudice for or concerning the same, (after their compositions past,) and to
restore them to all Privileges, etc. belonging to other subjects provided as
in the fourth particular, under the second general Head aforegoing concerning
security.

Putney, 16. Sept. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax
and the general Council of the Army. John Rushworth Secret.

The Explanation or Declarations of the sense of his Excellency and the
general Council of the Army upon several particulars in the Proposals
aforegoing, in answer to certain Queres thereupon made by the Commissioners of
Parliament residing with the Army, agreed upon at the general Council held at
Putney on Thursday, Sept. 16. 1647.
1. Upon the first general Head.
TO the Quere concerning the time of Commencement of the year within which a
period to this Parliament is desired.

The Explanation was thought fit to be suspended until it should appear what
expedition will be made in the settlement of the things proposed.

2. Upon the first particular under the first general Head.
To the Quere [Whether not rather Trienniall Parliaments and the Act for that
purpose to be continued with supplemental additions according to the effect of
the particulars contained under this general Head.

Resol.
That as to the circumstance of time we are satisfied with either Biennial or
Triennial Parliaments, provided, That (in case Triennials be preferred) there
be a proportionable addition to the time for the certainty of their sitting to,
viz. to be (at least) for six or eight months.

3. Upon the second particular under the first general Head.
To the Quere concerning the prejudice of laying a limitation upon Parliaments
not to sit past 240. days.

Resolved.
That that limitation is to be understood with this exception, viz. unless any
Parliament shall find it necessary for the safety of the Kingdom to sit
longer, but still with this proviso, That each Parliament shall dissolve of
course at least 80. days before the next Biennial or Triennial if not
otherwise dissolved sooner, so as that course of New Elections may never be
interrupted.

4. Upon the eighth particular under the first general Head.
To the Quere concerning the prejudice to Parliament freedom which this
particular might induce.

Resolved.
That the liberty of entering dissents is not desired but in case where the
major vote may be to the destruction or prejudice of the Common Right or
Liberty of the Subject.

5 Upon the first particular under the second general Head, viz. concerning the
Militia.
To the Quere concerning what is meant by the power of the Militia.

Resolved.
That by these words [the power of the Militia] is meant the power of raising,
arming, etc. according to the expressions used in the Proposition of both
Kingdoms concerning the Militia.

6. Upon the third particular under the same Head.
To the Quere concerning the expressing of that power of raising and disposing
moneys by both Houses.

Resolved.
That we are well satisfied in the expressions thereof used in the Propositions
of both Kingdoms concerning that matter.

7 Upon the fourth general Head.
To the Quere, what great Officers are meant.

Resolved.
The same that are named in the Proposition of both Kingdoms, together with the
office of High-Admiral, or Commissioners for the Admiral.

8. Upon the 14 Head concerning the King.
To the first Quere concerning the extent of these words [without diminution to
their personal rights.]

Resolved.
That those words were not intended to extend to any part of the Revenues that
have come or shall become due before the settlement so as to invalid or
question any disposure thereof made by the Houses of Parliament, or by
authority derived from them.

To the second Quere upon the same head concerning the extent of these words
[without further limitation to the exercise of the Royal power]

Resolved.
That these words are intended only as exclusive to any farther new limitations
(not to any that have been made heretofore by the Laws of the Land.

Putney, 16. Sept. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, and the general Council of the Army.

FINIS.

