JUDAS EXCOMMVNICATED, OR A VINDICATION OF THE Communion of Saints: BEING A
brief Examination and clear Refutation of Mr Peter Lightfoots Arguments for
proof of JUDAS his receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, (which, could
he prove, makes nothing at all for a mixed Communion.)

By JOSEPH HEMING, a Servant to all men in the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

(...)

Clemens. (...)

Maximus. LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the black Spread-Eagle near the
West end of Paul's, 1649.

To all the SAINTS OF THE Most High God In and about VTTOXITER: Salvation by
JESUS.
Precious Hearts,
I Confess I am engaged in low and fruitless Contreversies, against which I
find a reluctance in my spirit, because they tend not so much to edification as
could be Wished: but as I am bound to vindicate the lowess truth from the find
aspersions. and false calumniations of Satan and his instruments; so I daily,
God that low things are most beneficial for believers of lowest seize:
And what I have done in this, is for their sakes, who came out of Egypt, out
of Babylon but the other day; I am unwilling they should be carried captives
back again, or that those who dearly see the doors opened to them, should be
any longer kept in bondage. Many weak ones have stumbled at what Mr Lightfoot
has spoken and written, though there be neither Divinity nor Reason^^ it.

I never intended this Answer of mine should have come to a p^^lick censure,
had not Mr Lightfoot and his unholy Communic^^^ dealt deceifully (that I say
not, dishonestly) with me, in breaking some sentences, and taking up such
pieces of them, as they conc^^^^ might bring the truth and my person into
contempt and disgrace, possessing people at home and abroad, that I wrong and
abuse him, whilst be shame fully conceals my whole Answer, together with the
true intent and meaning of those innocent expressions he and they so much cry
out upon. Wrong be shall have none, if shame, he may thank himself.

Most of you sufficiently know how patiently I have born wish him hither to,
and my own conscience tells me, the truth has suffered too much through my
forbearance and long-suffering. He has had his time to insult over,
caluminiate, reproach, and belie it, reporting whatsoever be pleased touching
my Answer to his Paper, insomuch that no any ungodly ones ^ell immediately to
blaspheming, cur^ng, railing, and trampling upon the Truth, as though it had
been quite conquered. And although Rabshekeh's railings make no breaches in
Je^usal^ms Walls, yet many weak Christains (seeing only a few unchristianly
wrested-expressions in small bits of Paper, and not knowning how little Judas
his receiving or not receiving does either advantage or disadvartage a
Communion of Saints) Were abundantly discouraged, and bunded downs their necks,
that the Whore which sits on many warers might go over. And now I hope it is
high time for me to speak in vindication of the truth, and for satisfaction of
such as are so easily serupled by false reports, and ready upon every summons
from Satan to deliver up their strong holds, not knowing they have, on every
side, Salvation for Walls and Bulwarks; and to publish my Answer, most
unfaithfully dealt withal by Mr Lightfoot, that ye may see it, and then judge
righteously between me (or rather the truth) and him. And I would entreat those
into whose hands this may come, to turn unto the Scriptures quoted (Which I
hope will not be wis-printed) and strictly to examine them, and then to judge
impartially: I crave no savor at the hands of any man; hough this piece Was
never cut out for the public vion^^^; let me see my Errata's, and I shall
endeavor to correct and amind them.

My Antagonist takes great exceptions at a plain-dealing Epistle, intended only
for himself and some few Friends, for I had no thoughts of printing then, and
is conceited that I have exceedingly wronged him in it; all the right I can do
him, is, not to insert it here, and (though I am able to make good every jot
and tittle of it) for the future to bury it in the abiss of Oblivion, if so be
I am not enforced by his unjust clamours, and exotic constructions put upon
it, to send it, With a large Comment upon it, after this.

All the exceptions he makes (so far forth as I can learn either from himself
or others) against the particulars of my Answer, are so frivolous and
groundless, that he durst not give them under his own hand, much less publish
them to the World, and therefore I may very well pass them by; but yet I must
needs vindicate the last particular (in the close of all,) against which he
has draws up a Charge of high Crimis and Misdemeanors: Good Friends and
Readers turn to it; is begins thus, That I should super-abundantly wrong him,
if I should not rank him amongst the vilest in the Kingdom, for with them, etc.
for this I must pay dearly, says he, and his profane fellow Members: But were
not I a mad man, and might I not deservedly incur the name or title of a
Schismatic, should I make a breach in his Church, in his Communion? and for
this he calls me twenty Fools, and mad man, etc. But work, a while, and you
shall see the Food, the mad man, as well as the Whetstone, Will fall to his
share. He would persuade people (or some others for him) that there in that
place I make him a Drunkard, a Thief, a Murderer, etc. and why may be not as
well persuade them I make him a Whore? The business is in deed and in truth
thus; All that are in Church Fellowship or Communion With him, are, in a
Scripture sense, his Brethren and Sisters. And this I dare say, I can prove
against all the devils in hell by almost (if not all out or above) an hundred
Scriptures: No man that has not a forehead of Brass or Iron can deny it. I
have beside the Scripture Reason, and the consent of most Divines, whether
Episcopal, Presbyterial Independent, or by what nicknames soever they are
called or distinguished, on my side; if any shall deny it, they must disclaim
their own principles or tenets. The very Book of Common Prayer called all the
men in all Parishes throughout England and Wales, Dearly beloved Brethren, etc.
I know all men of dis-engaged judgments all the Kingdom over Will vote it in
the Affirmative, but I am content the matter should be tried at the tri^^^^^ of
his own conscience, if yet is be not seared with a hot iron.

So then as long as be will walk in fellowship or Communion with profane,
wicked, loose men and women, as Members of the saw external visible body of
Chirst (the Church) with himself, they must and shall be his brethren and
sisters: for to say, I will wal^ in Church fellowship or Communion with such
and such men and women, etc. and yet they shall not be my brethren and sisters,
is an absierd, idle, vain, foclish, irrational, contradictory assertion it is to
say and unsay, and in plain English, to say just nothing at all.

And for those that have been hanged at Tyburn, etc. unless b^ can prove that
they were not by Raptism admitted into his Church, nor be into theirs; or that
they were first excommunicated, (which be shall never do: and besides, let him
but once mention Exce^^munication with Approbation and his cause is utterly
lost,) or (...) less he will eat his own words, deny a National Church in so
gross a sense as ^e ^ol^s one, or join with us in order to a Reformation, let
him fret and fu^^e huff and puss^rage and storm, call and miss^^^^ while ^e
will, they must and shall be his brethren, etc it is he (...) made them so, not,
therefore let none he offended with me: W^^ he ^is^la^ms that Communion he
plead^ for, the bonds of this brotherhood will be loosed, and not before. I
confess, I was once of this brotherhood my self, but now I abhor and loath it;
And yet I look upon all men whatsoever as my brethren in this sense, viz. as we
are the off spring of, and have dependency upon the same eternal Being, Acts
17.28, 29.

He is willing such at Judas was should be his Brethren-Co^nicants; and do
Drunkards, Th^eves, Murderers, Liars, etc. ex^^ed Judas in Wickedness? He is
called a Devil, John 6.70. and we such worse then Devils? Behold then a
Communion of w^se then Devils. What are the ends of the man's arguings? I wish
be would declare them to us. But to hasten to a period, the viles^ men in
England (professing Faith in Christ) shall be his brethren, but it vexes him
to the heart they should be called so.

Whereas he bla^oneth abroad, That I grant Judas received, etc. as though he
had obtained his end: As I doubt not but all ^^antions men will smile at his
folly, so for satisfaction of the lowest capacities amongst u^, I am willing to
say again, it is not (...) ^ath proved it, or ever will whilst he lives, bu^
because he shall not say, what I contend for (viz a Communion of Saints) (...)
upon Judas his receiving or not receiving, Admit he did, sh^^os^ in ^e granted,
I say, yet that does not in the least measure advantege his, or prejudice my
cause: Let him draw his inferences.

When he gives ou^, be could quickly be re^^^^led to unto, he acknowledges the
difference in affection is only on his part, and be speaks most truly, for I am
willing to have the love of all man, and to live peaceably with them, so far as
possibly I may; ^a^^ I (...) compliancy with any man to the prejudice and
dis-advantage of the truth. My very adversarious must needs confess I have b^^n
so ^ar from preaching Contention, Strife and Division amongst godly man of
dissenting judgments in matters of Worship, that I have ^nd^^vored to make up
all branche^, and to ^ust all names and (...) of distinction behind my back.

Now, good Friends and Readers, do not say I have spoken any thing in passion
or bitterness of spirit, for (if I may uso Po^^ls Asterveration, 3 Cor. 1.23.)
I call God to record upon my soul, I have not. I find my very bowels are moved
for him; and ob^ th^^^ ^e would smite upon his thigh, and say, What have I
done? I am so far from hating his person, or seeking revenge for any injury
done to me, that I profess I will lay my very hands under his fies to do him
good.

Here is one thing that I would have you, and all men, to take special notice
of, namely, That Mr Light^oo^ Communion D^^metrically opposes,

1. The Scriptures, the plain Letter, 1 Cor. 5.9, 10, 11. 2 Cor. 6.14.15, 16,
17, 18.

2. His Creed, or at least this Article of it, viz. The Communion of Saints;
for I suppose he believes in God, etc. and in Jesus Christ, etc, and in the
Holy Ghost, etc. the holy Catholic Church, but his Communion must be of
ungodly, s^o^ndal^^ and no^^rious sinners, and not of Saints.

3. The Covenant, by which we are bound to endeavor a Reformation according to
the Word of God, and the best Reformed Churches, who abbor such Communions.

4. The Directory, which says, The ignorant and the scandalous are not fit to
receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, page^^. Yea, the Common Prayer Book
it self, which shuts the doors against and keeps out open and notorious evil
livers, till they have manifested repentance for the satisfaction of the
Congregation, etc. It seems his Reformation it to bring us into a far worse
condition then ever we were in, under Prelacy and Common Prayer Book.

5. And lastly. The Principles, Hopes, Expectations, and joy^^ Endeavors of all
godly Ministers, both of the Independent (so called) and more purely
Presbyterial way; who, that it not wilfully blind, will be of a Communion that
thus sets it self in opposition to all that is called God, or holy in every
dispentsation and form of Worship^ I shall trouble you with no more at present,
but carnestly entreat you seriously to consider of these things, and the Lord
give you understanding in every thing, and lead you forth into the ways of
Righteousness, that you may walk blameless before him in Love.

Uttoxiter in Staffordshire, June 2. 1649. Yours as ye are Christ's; Jos.
Heming.

JVDAS Excommunicated; OR A VINDICATION Of the Communion of Saints, etc.
TO prove that Judas received the Sacrament, Mr Light-foot deals with two
Suppers; the one at B^thany in the house of Simon the Leper, Math. 26.6. Mark
14.3. The other at Jerusalem the Passover night. The Supper at Bethany (says
he) was before the feast of the Passover, Luke 22.1. namely two days before,
etc. Mat. 26.2. Mark 14.1.

Answer.

1. I wonder a wise man should bring Luke 22.1. to prove the Supper at Bethany
was before the Passover, (though I confess it was so,) in which there is not
the least mention of that Supper. Just as if I should quote Math. 2.1. to
prove, that when Christ was born, his mother laid him in a manger, because
there was no room for them in the Inn.

2. The following Scriptures, viz. Math. 26.2. Mark 14.1 do not at all prove
the Supper at Bethany to have been just two days before the Passover; but that
two days before the Passover, the chief Priests and Scribes fought how they
might take Gh^ist by craft and subtilty, etc. and at last concluded it must not
be on the Feast day ( viz. the feast of the Passover) lest there should be an
uproat, etc. Mark 14 1, 2.

3. The Supper at Bethany is as likely to have been six days before the
Passover, as two. Then Jesus, six days before the Passover, came to Bethany,
etc. There they made him a Supper, Joh. 12.1, 2.

Now here arises a great question between Mr Lightfoot and my self: namely,

Which was the Supper at Bethany, That mentioned Joh. ^2.1, 2, 3, etc. Or That
John 13.1, 2, 3?

He says That in Joh. 13. and upon that mistaken place has built his wood,
hay and stubble. Boys and Girls, if ye can but tead English, come forth and
shame this great master in Isreal's Read both the Chapters, and then tell him
which speaks of the Supper at Bethany. But I answer,

That in John 12. was the Supper at 'Bethany, and not that in John 13. For,

1. In John 13. Bethany is not so much as once named, but in in Chap. 12. it
is, as also in Math. 26. Mark 14.

2. In John 13. there is no mention made of the woman's pouring oil upon Christ,
for which very act the Supper is remarkable, and ever shall be, Math. 26.13.
Mark 14.9. not yet of Indas his indignation; not of Christ's reproving him: all
which we find in John 1^. as also in the places before quoted.

3. In John 13.1. Now before the Feast etc. is not meant two days before, as he
would have it; the words are, (...), meaning immediately before, etc, as Luke
1^.38. (...), The Pharisee wondered he washed not before dinner, that is,
immediately before dinner.

4. At that Supper, John 13. Christ's hour was come. Ver^^^^^ so that he was
betrayed the very fame night, as it is evident, comparing, Ioh. 13.37 38, with
Ioh. 18. 1, 2, 3. and Math. 26.34. Mark 14 30. This discourse passed betwixt
Christ and Pe^^^^ the very night in which he was betrayed. Now,

5. (And lastly; though much more shall be added if there be occasion,) If any
man of common capacity will but compare John 12. from Verse. 1. to 8. with Math.
26.6. to Verst 13. and Mark 14.3-9. he shall find they all three speak of the
same Supper at Bethany. And for what John differs from the other two
Evangelists in naming Martha and La^^artes, and in saying she anointed his
feet, whereas the others say, she poured it on his head, That shall be easily
reconciled whensover Mr Light-foot please; yea, and as great (that I say not
greater) differences clearly manifested between Marthew and Mark in their
relations of other passages, perhaps of the same Supper; but at present I refer
him to Calvin, Diodat, (or almost any, other Expositor upon the place.

I conclude, against all he has said, or can say, yet, against whatsoever all
the friends he shall make in this controversy can say for him.

1. That there was no sop given in the Supper at Bethany let him find it me in
Mat. 26. Mark 14. or John 12.

2. That the discourse between Christ and his Disciples concerning the traitor
passed that very night he eat the P^sseover at Jerusalem, Mat. 26.19, 20, 21,
22-26. Mark 14.16-22. and not at Bethany two days before. For had Ind^^ been
discovered at Bethany, how could the Disciples ( John as well as the rest)
begin to be sorrowful (wondering to hear Christ say, One of you shall betray
me, Joh. 13.21, 22.) and enquire who it was, saying, Is it I? Is it I? two days
after? Mat. 26.22. Mark 14.19. Luke 22.23.

3. That Christ washed not his Disciplea feet at Bethany, but at the Supper at
ferusalem, the same night he was betrayed, Ioh. 13.

4. That the sop was given at an ordinary or common Supper, (which Christ had
the same night before he eat the Passover, as Calvin, Beza, Parem, Fulk, Car^
wright, Pelargus, Toff^^^, Tolet, Maldonat, and diverse others do affir^^ in
their Exposition^ of se^veral Scriptures and which the Corin^hiant imitated 1
Cor. (...) and immediately after the sop, Satan enered into him. Joh. 13.17.
and immediately after that he (Judas) went forth, Joh. 13.30. And that he came
in again, is no where to be found neither can it be proved; therefore he eat
not so much as of the Passover, but only the common Supper, much less received
the Sacrament.

The reason why Mr Lightfeor has gone against so manifest Light of Truth, the
whole current or stream of orthodox, godly and learned Expositors, common
sense, etc. is to me as clear as the Sun at noon days; and it is thus: He
thought, if ever he proved Indas received the Sacrament, he must first prove
the sop was given two days before at Bethany, (which could he prove, would help
his cause little or nothing,) and because those Scriptures that do indeed
mention the Supper, viz. Matthew. 26. Mark 14. John 12. would not serve such a
malignant design he wickedly, and ('it is to be feared) contra-conscientiously
wrests and wrings in John 13. a place, so far from proof of his purpose, that
who so has but half an eye, may easily see it never touches it. The man has
not yet perfectly learned the trade of wresting and abusing Scriptures
(subtly) for the the advancement of his Masters Kingdom.

Thus the very foundation on which he builds, being found nototiously false,
and rotten, and utterly rased, I might very well break off here; but I shall
bestow a little pains in viewing his reasons alleged for father confirmation
of his proundless assertions.

I. It is probable (says he) nor can be conceived that Indas should receive
the sop, and so the D^vil with it, and go to the high P^^eds, and bargain with
them, receive a band of men Joh. 18.3. and betray his master, and all upon one
night: for beside the unlikeliness of it, the text is plain, that from the
t^^^e of the receiving the sop he sought o^ portinity to betray him Mat 26.16.
or how he might conveniently, etc. Mark 14.11. Luke 22.6. And how improper it
is to say, a man seeks convenency or opportunity, when he runs upon a thing,
and does it on a sudden, I refer to any one of common capacity.

Answer.

1. It Is probable all this might be done in one night; for Indas was not so far
from the high Priest, the band of men not so far to seek, (see Diodat on John
18.3.) the Devil, Indas, and the Jews not so backward in driving on this
damnable design, as be would insinuate, I my self have known in this betraying
age five times more than this amounts unto brought about in (...) short a
night. But by the way take notice, that by Satan in Scripture is to be
understood the Devil by Mr Lightfoots own confession) and not a disease, as he
idly and falsely affirmed formerly in my hearing: The bare naming of this is
a sufficient refutation of it, and as clear a demonstration of a Physicians
folly.

2. He (following the old trade) most shamefully abuses Mat 26.16. Mark 14 11.
when he says it is plain from those Texts, That from the tune of the receiving
the sop Judas sought opportunity to betray Christ: Read the Verses before and
after and then tell me it you can see but the print or footsters of any such
thing. Is it not plain in those places, that from that time Christ reproved
Indas for his coverous indignation at the spending of the ointment, he sought
opportunity, and from that reproof took occasion to betray him? It Is evident he
sought how he might conveniently betray Christ before he received the sop. But,

3. A man may properly be said to seek opportunity or convenience to do that
which he yet does the same night. Now let any one of common capacity (even Mr
Lightfoot himself) judge in this case.

II. Is is plain (says he) that Indas began his treason at Bothany, Mat.
26.14. Mark 14.10.

Answer.

Be it so; but did he receive the sop there? Nothing else passed at the Supper
at Bothany, concerning Indas, but Christ's rebuking him for his indignation at
the spending of the alabaster box of precious ointment, for which he took
occasion to begin his treason.

III. The Devil (says he) entered into Indas at Bethany, Luk 22.3. and Verse. 7.
then came the Feast: and all the Evangelists set the treason conspiracy before
the feast of the Passover.

Answer.

1. Luke 22.3. speaks nothing at all of the Supper at Bethony, nor of any thing
done there.

2. Though all the Evangelists place the Conspiracy before the Passover, yet
they place not the giving of the sop at Bothany; Read Mat. 26. Mark 14. John
12, and see if you can find any such thing there. The Conspiracy is as clearly
placed before the Sop, as before the Passover.

3. The Original (which Mr Lightfoot bids me observe) in John 13.2.
(...)(others (...)) however translated, whether a great part of the Supper
being done, or when they were at Supper, or Supper being begun, or Supper being
prepared and ready, and set on table, helps not his cause one Jot. I will give
him treb leave (so he offer no violence to the Text) to translate it for his
best advantage when he writes next.

IV. It is plain (says he) be received the sop before the Feast. John 13.27,
28, 29.

Answer.

1. Perhaps Christ did not eat the Paschal Limb upon the same day the Jews did
according to the judgment of Sealign, Causabon, and others, as I have found
them quored. Moreover see Diodat on Mat. 26 17. and then the Feast the
Disciples dreamed of might very well be the Jews Passover kept a day after I
could speak more for proof of this from John 18.28. and 19.(...) ever Mr
Lightfoot will be able to answer; but at present I refer him and the Reader to
the places themselves.

2. Observe how he would dawb over his own mistake with the untempered mortar
of the Disciples ignorance, what so^^ of them thought proceeded from their
ignorance, John 13.28.^^ If from this Scripture he will conclude, that there
was another thing to the poor? The Diciples knew not (as probably they might
have conjectured from the discovery of Judas two days before, and his abrupt
departure then immediately upon receipt of the sop) that he was to be betrayed
that night as it fell out, and will manifestly appear to any indifferent man
that will but ^gently read, and seriously consider the whole story, and then
judge impartially: For all the Disciples ignorance, and Mr Lightfoot grounded
upon theirs, Christ had no more Feasts.

3. Whereas he says, that we know the Lords Supper was given the Passover day
at night, viz. the first Sabbath of the Feast, whereon the Jews eat the Paschal
Lamb. I am afraid he understands neither what he says, nor whereof he
affirms, (...)be it so, and then,

1. How was Christ upon the Cross on the preparation day, the day before the
Sabbath, according to these Scriptures, Mat. ^^. 62 Mark 15.43. Luke 23.54.
John 18.28 and 19.14.31, and 4^ Verses?

2. How could he arise the day after the Sabbath, namely the first day of the
week, Mark 16.2. Mat. 28.^. since he lay three days in the grave? Does the man
believe (think you) that Christ eat the Passover a day or two after he was
dead! Or that he did rise the next day after he had eaten it? Spectatum ad^
risum teneatis amici? What day thinks he Christ was betrayed and taken on? Or
how long was it between his taking and crucifying? I wish the man be not found
tardy here.

Thus Mr Lightfoots premises being weighed in the balance of Verity, and found
lighter then Vanity, what shall become of his conclusion? But to trace my
Gentleman a little further?

And it is plain, says he, the premises considered, at the Supper at Jerusalem
he sat down with the twelve, of which Judas was one, Mat. 26 20. Mark 14.17.
Luke 22.14. He taxes Judas for Treas^, Mark 24.18. Luke 22.2^.

Answer. I. It Is true, he sat down at Jerusalem with that twelve, of whom
Judas was one, in the common or ordinary Supper: And.

2. It Is as true, that there (as Mr Lightfoot does most righteously affirm for
the truth, to the deeper wounding of his cuase) lie t^^ed Judas for Treason,
gave him the sop, and discovered (...) and not at Bethany two days before.

Mr Lightfoot. He delivered the S^or^mont to all; Mat. 26. 26. Mark 14.23. Luke
22 19. and they all drank of it, Mark 14.23.

Answer, II. The (...) does nor say, he delivered it to th^^ worse, but to all,
namely, to all present, for Indas had gotten the s^^p, and was goes forth.

2. It is had been said, he gave it to the twelve, yet that would prove
nothing; for in 1 Cor. 15.5. it is said, He [Christ] was seen of Cophus, and
them of the twelve, though he was ^^on only of theelaven, Mat. 28.16, 17. Mark
16.14.

II Mr Lightfoot shall be so vain as to say (behind my bick, ^^cording to his
usund custom) Matthes was then (...) in the room of Indas, and therefore there
were twelve.

I answer That is notoriously salts, for Christ's app^^ting was before his
asce^tion, and not after: but Matthias; was no^ (...) till after his aseention,
Acts 1.9, 10, 21, and 25, Verses, to the end of the Chapter, how then could he
be chosen when Christ uppeared?

3. Whereas he affirms, that Christ gave the Sacrament to Judas, I fear he
does him more injury then ever he will be able to account for at his tribunal.
Did not he usually except Judas? Have I not chosen twelve, and one of you it a
Devil? (Joh. 6.70) Ye are clean, but not all, Joh. 1.10, 11. And again Verse.
1^. I speak not of you all, I know whom I have chosen, etc. But to those he
gave the Sacrament, he says without exception,

1. This is my body which is given for You. This is the ^^ly of the New
Testument in my blood which is send for You? Luke 12.19.20. Surely Christ could
not safely say so to Judas whom he (...) to be a Devil, eternaly lost.

2. I will not drink hence forth of this fruit of the vine, nu^^l that day I
drink is new with you in my Fathers Kingdom, Mat. 16.19. Had Christ means Indas
as well as the rest (as be (...) has been present, since he excepts him not) he
had been ^ly ^ken, for he was never like to come there, understand the Fathers
Kingdom how you will.

3. Luke 22.28, 29 30. Ye are they which have continued with me in my
temptations: And I appoint to You a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed to me:
That ye may eat and drink at ^y table in my Kingdom, and sit on twelve Thrones
judging the twelve tribes of Israel. But,

1. Judas had not continued with him in his temptation. Neither,

2. Could Christ appoint to him any other Kingdom, but that of wrath and
darkness. Nor,

3. Was he ever like to sit at Christ's table in his Kingdom; much less sit on a
throne in the judgment of the twelve tribes, who is himself to be judged as a
devil.

4. Math. 26.31. All ye shall be offended because of me this night. This is the
same All to whom the Sacrament was delivered. Let Mr Lightfoot take heed how he
traduce Christ himself, by affirming Judas was one of that All he administered
the seal and spoke these words to. And let him not think to evade any of these
Scriptures by saying Judas has received the Sacrament and was gone forth,
unless he be able to prove it.

Mr Lightfoot. I cannot conceive how any shadow can be to gainsay his receiving.

Ans. He does well to blame the dullness of his own conception. The cause he
sees not, is that darkness which dwells in him.

Mr Lightfoot. -- only to vapor out another business --

Ans. The business he means depends not upon Judas his receiving or not
receiving; and that he, and others, may believe it does not, I will here grant
that Judas did receive the Sacrament, now let Mr Lightfoot do his worst.

Mr Lightfoot. -- which will be as soon blown over as this.

Ans. I believe him; for this business is not yet blown over. He that does it,
must have a stronger breath then Mr Po^r Lightfoot.

Mr Lightfoot.

For the fancy is to make a noise of only the Saints receiving --

Answer.

Hear O Heavens, and give ear O Earth, how reproachfully the man calls that a
fancy all the Scriptures bear witness to the most precious truth. Come, let us
reason together a little, Mr Lightfoot: Do you believe there is a Communion of
Saints? If so, how dare you call it a fancy? If you know no such Communion,
(but Oh that you knew it, or rather were known of God in it) may I not justly
number you amongst those Iu^^ 10. who speak evil of things they know not? What?
Is your Communion of Christ and Belial, light and darkness, precious and vile,
Saints and Devils? Can two walk, together, except they be agreed? ( Amos 3.3.)
And do you think there will ever be any concord or agreement between these? Why
would you have the dirt and filth of the Nation bound up in the same bundle
with the precious Sons of Sion? Why will you not allow Jesus Christ the most
precious materials living stones, to build him a house, a temple withal? Come,
deal faithfully with your own soul, and tell me whether the Communion of Saints
be a fancy or not and give me leave to open my heart as freely to you, and in
so doing tell you, that I am afraid your Fellowship is in and with Darkness;
but assure your self the light will find you out at length, if not to your
conversion (but oh that it might be to that) yet to your utter shame and
confusion of face, in the presence of those Saints you daily reproach and
wound, yea, and Christ through their sides. Oh that I could hear you say, this
expression dropped from your pen before you were aware of it, and that in truth
not in hypocrisy; or that you would smite upon your thigh, and say, What have
I done?

Mr Lightfoot. Which if we could prove, then we might gather particular
Churches.

Answer.

So then by his own confession, if we can but prove none but Saints (i.e. such
as have upon them visible or external sanctity) should receive the Sacrament,
we may lawfully gather together into a particular (he means Independent)
Congregation. Will the man stand to this think you? I fear, not. If he will, I
dare say that shall hereafter be proved an abundanti, both from the Scriptures,
the constitution and practice of the primitive Churches, the Confessions of
Faith of the most Churches in Christendom, and the universal consent of such
godly Divines both ancient and modern, as he himself durst not but judge sound
and orthodox. And the lawfulness of gathering particular Congregations (though
I am not gathering any) I shall defend against all Mr Lightfoot has to say on
the contrary: I wish be may (...) in the mean time forget what he has spoken;
but if be he should I shall relieve his memory.

Mr Lightfoot. And so make a gain of that godliness --

Ans. Who gains most, man? those that gather such Churches, or such as get sat
parsonages of two or 300 l. per annu^^, and leave them when they can get
better, as having a clearer call, or a better air, etc. Take heed how you go
about to stamp an odium upon the ways of God, you may pay dearly for it one day.

Mr Lightfoot. Which by steps would set us in such an opposition to the wicked
--

Ans. Whom M^ Lightfoot never intends to oppose, but countenance, associate,
and have communion with, as appears by what he has written, and daily speaks
on their behalf.

Mr Lightfoot. As that we would leave them neither wealth, life, not liberty.
Look of the actions, beginning and ending of Muncer and his holy crew, set down
by Sleidan.

Ans. 1. This is but the man's old trade of calumniating, lying, and belying, I
wish he would leave it; But in the mean time I dare pawn my life, that
generation of men he intends shall not, touch so much as one hair of his head,
much less his wealth, life or liberty. I am afraid some of his unholy crew (for
why should I separate him from those with whom he will have communion? he must
and shall go with them; '^is for fellowship with unholy ones he contends, let
him deny it if he can,) would touch theirs, if ever it lay within their reach.
But by the way take notice, Mr Lightfoot is an Independent, and knows not of
it; be but now condemned L^berty of conscience in matters of worship, and yet
here he pleads for Liberty, even for the Wicked, Liberty in the grossest fence,
Liberty with the Mischief: But what a miserable condition are those poor men
(commonly known by the nickname of Independents) in? one while they are cried
out upon us the only men that would have Liberty, ye^ a Toleration of
Wickedness, Blasphemy, Her^sie, Sects, Schisms, etc. another while they are set
in such an opposition to the wicked, as that they would leave them neither
wealth, life nor liberty. I am unwilling to put a strange interpretation upon
Mr Lightfoot's Liberty, I would therefore have him to unriddle himself, and
then happily he and I may agree. In the mean time I propound this quer^^ to his
consideration; viz. Whether there be not a world (as I may say) in England as
well as a Church? and whether such ( viz. Independents, Anabaptists, Seekers.
Presbyterians; for by such names he knows may godly men:) may not be tolerated
in that world to enjoy their consciences in relation to the Ordinances of
Christ (security being given in point of civil subjection) who may not be
tolerated in the Church? and whether we have not better grounds in the Word of
God to walk in Church Fellowship with godly men and women, though of different
judgments, than with those wicked ones he so hotly contends for?

2. To that of Muncer, and his holy crew, I answer, as I may not take upon me
to justify the actions, beginnings and endings of all men of this or that form
of worship; so it becomes not Mr Lightfoot (did he rightly understand himself)
to judge of this or that form or way, by the carriage of, or Gods dealing with
the corrupter sort that profess it: For at that rate of judging what would
become of Christian Religion, set on foot by Christ and the twelve, amongst
whom there was one Devil? (for Communion with which he pleads.) Must the Gospel
it self be condemned, because many men of corrupt minds have dishonored it? Or
the old legal Administration, because of the rebellion of Korah, Dathan and
Abiram? Or will Mr Lightfoot undertake for all of his own way, be it Episcopacy
or Presbytery? If so, I presume I shall find him work enough. This may satisfy
any sober spirited man; yet I add moreover, That I have as little ground to
believe Sleidan in all he reports of those men (he himself being an Adversary
to them and their way) as I have to believe wh^; Mr Edwards wrote in his book
of Lies (commonly called Gangrana) against such as were not of the same
judgment with himself: or what the Papists write of us who live not in their
abominations. But,

3. Whilst he is condemning one wicked and unholy crew, he is pleading for
Communion with another; let special notice be taken of this. It seems that way
wherein (to the great grief of the Saints) there have been, are, and will be
found many ungodly ones, must be utterly condemned, whilst that wherein all the
unclean beasts in a Nation live, is vindicated. But for Mu^c^r, and his holy
crew (is Mr Lightfoot ironic^lly calls them) they might very well have been of
his own Church.

Mr Light^^ot^ But more of this shortly.

Answer. As much as you will, and as shortly as you e^^^ (...) ever it come to
my hands, you shall not stoy long for an Answer, though I need say no more; but
that as fast (...) any of (...) Churches of Jesus Christ purge our the old
leaven out off and east out corrupt Members, as Adulterers, Fornicators,
Drunkards, covetous, etc. you may take them into your fruternity, there is none
will be offended with you, I think; for my part, I will not.

Now before Mr Lightfoot and I part, let me tell him,

1. That he shall never whilst he live be able to prove Indas ^^ceived the
Sacrament, scarcely the Passover; and yet I can and do, grant him both,
without the least prejudice to that righteous cause I maintain, (...) shall be
more full manifelled hereafter, if the Lord give me time and strength.

2. That I should super-abundantly wrong him, If I should not rank him amongst
the vilest in the Kingdom, for with them no will have Communion, us a Member of
the same external visible body, by virtue of which relation they are all his
brethren and sisters, so that he has his brother Dru^^ard, brother Thief,
brother Murderer, brother Liar, etc. sister Whore, sister Witch, etc. yea, all
that have been hanged at Tyburn, and all other B^llow^ in England ever since he
was born and baptized into that fellowship he pleads for, have been his
brethren and sisters, lot him, or any man else, upon good grounds, deny it if
he can. Precious Hearts, ye that live godly in Christ Jesus, being in him dead
to sin, and begotten unto good works, if ye will be of this fraternity, Mr
Lightfoot, and his unholy crew, will be friends with you: but the Lord keep you
from such an unsanctified fellowship, and gather you up into that Union and
Communion with himself and his Christ, that can make you one spiritual Body,
even the Body of Christ, Romans 12, 4, 5.1 Cor. 12.12. Then shall ye be called
trees of Righteousness, the planting of the Lord, and he shall be glorified in
you, by you, and amongst you,

A POSTSCRIPT.
Mr Lightfoot gave out, that he would print this Answer of mine as though that
had been an invincible Reply; I confess, if he had done to, he might have put
himself to some cost, and I might have sustained much wrong; but now I have
grevented both, and I know no cause he has to be offended with me.

FINIS,

