ARTICLES PROPOSED
To the Catholics of England, whereunto it was required they should subscribe
their negative answers, whereby it might be understood, they profess that
there is nothing contained in these three Articles which does necessarily
belong to the Catholic Faith and Religion; insomuch, that they may and will
abjure (if it be thought needful) the practice and execution of them all.
1. THat the Pope or Church has power to absolve any person or persons from
their obedience, to the civil and po^iticall Government, established, or to be
established in this Nation, in civil and political affairs.

2. That by the command or dispensation of the Pope or Church it is lawful to
kill, destroy, or do any injury to any person or persons living within the
Kings Dominions; because, that such a person or persons are accused, condemned,
censured, or excommunicated for error schism, or herefie.

3. That it is lawful in it self, or by dispensation from the Pope, to break
promise or oath made to any of the a^oresaid persons, under pretense that they
are Heretics.

Fifty English Catholic Gentlemen have subscribed negative answers to these
three Articles, upon certain conditions secretly agreed upon for the good and
freer exercise of the Catholic Religion, they being assured by diverse
Priests, both Seculars and Regulars, under their hand writings, that it was
lawful for them so to do. Which since a Congregation in Rome, has ordained
and decreed, was not, nor is not lawful. Whereupon a Priest writes out of
England to his friend, a Doctor of Divinity of Paris, and sends him a copy of
this Congregationall Decree, earnestly desiring him that he will let him freely
know his sentiment and opinion in this business, which Doctors answer to the
question ^ere follows.

Most dear Brother in Christ,
HAving seriously considered the three Articles you sent me, with their little
Preface (which you say contains in brief the substance of what was intended
both by the proposers and your selves) I cannot refuse, neither in charity nor
friendship, to give you my opinion concerning your subs^ription thereunto. Yet
being unwilling you should rely upon my private and particular judgment, in a
matter of such moment, I have consulted with several great and learned men of
our Nation, but especially some of the most ancient and learned Doctors of
Divinity of our faculty here, whose constant sentiments are, that not only in
their opinions your Act is lawful, just and true, but that it is also the
general and universal belie^e of all the learned and judicious men of this
Kingdom. So that I see not upon what grounds you need sear or apprehend the
cen^ures which the Decree of the Congregation in Rome pretends you have
incurred. Were your Kingdom or State settled, and that your liberty depended
only upon your giving assurance of your fidelity, I should easily procure you
such Sovereign Antydotes against your timorous apprehensions, and such public
Declarations of your duty in this kind, as that none but either weakly
scrupulous, or busily factious, would be any whit moved at the interressed
proceedings of the Court of Rome. Me thinks you should not be ignorant how such
Decrees of those Congregations are slighted and rejected in the supreme Courts
of this Kingdom, by the most learned and most virtuous secular Judges of the
Christian World. Even those who bear the most dutiful respect to his Holiness,
as well Seculars as Regulars will openly profess, that the cabals and interests
of the Court of Rome are now so generally known, that the Decrees of their
Congregations are scarcely taken notice of out of the Popes Territories. We had
no^ many months ag^e such a Decree sent hither from Rome to the Pope's Nun^o,
against a late book called L^s granaeurs de L'^gise Roman, which because the
Pope^ Nun^io would have published and dispersed throughout the Kingdom (having
obtained license from the King to it.) The Kings Advocate General Mr. Talon (a
man worthy of his place) made a learn speech in open Parliament (without any
relation or interest to the doctrine of the book) against the admittance of
such decrees, wherein he remarked very well the different nature and quality
of these con^r^gauonall Decrees (which were never received nor acknowledged as
legal and authentical in France) from the Bulls of his Holiness as head of
the Church. And this speech was immediately confirmed and ratified by a judgment
given by this renowned Senate; and so the publication of the decree was
hindered and suppressed. There was likewise in the year 1625. a seditious book
written by one Garasse a Jesuit, but bearing no name, entitled Admonitio ad
Regem, secretly dispersed up and down in this City, which was condemned by a
genera Synod of the Clergy of this Kingdom, then assembled in this town,
wherein the indispensable duty and obedience of Catholic Subjects to an
heretical, and even to a persecuting King or State, was particularly declared
and avouched. You may see the words themselves, page 12. quare id ipsum, etc.
Given ut Paris in the General Assembly of the Clergy the 13. of December. 1625.
Whereupon one Sanctarellus an Italian Jesuit, was caused to write a book in
approbation of the Pope's temporal authority to depose Kings and Princes, and
to absolve their Subjects from their obedience, which was presently censured by
our faculty of Divinity, and the affirmative doctrine of your first article
(which is your chief difficulty) and other such like positions were improved
and condemned as new, false, erroneous, contrary to the Word of God, etc. Given
in the Sor^on the 1. of April, 1626. Hereupon four of the most famous Jesuits
of France then residing superiou^s in their Colleges here, were sent to the
Parliament, and being demanded their opinions in this point, they confirmed and
ratified this censure under their hands; professing farther, that they did and
would consent and adneer to what the Sorbon had or should declare in this or
any other matter of Doctrine. I could send you the particulars of these and
many such like proceedings here, being partly in print, partly upon public
record; but I conceive it need esse, at least for the present. However, the
Court of Rome's pretentions to secular and temporal power over Kings and
Commonwealths, are now grown out of date, nor was it ever authorized, but by
the execution of it. The origin of the Pope's authority in temporal affairs
is well enough known, the great piety ahd respect to the Sea of Rome of diverse
ancient Emperors, Kings, and Princes have made them receive their Crowns and
Diadems from his sacred hands, and cast their Swords and Scepters at his
Saintly feet: Others have made use of the Pope's swaying power to settle
themselves in their usurped Monarchies and Princedomes; not any versed in
Ecclesiastical History, but knows the particulars of these truths. But to come
back to your Decree, I perceive, that the Authors of it looking only upon the
negative answers to the bare Articles, without the preface, or separated
instrument, whereunto you Priests and Religious did subscribe (which was
purposely made to secure the Lay-Gentlemen, that supposing they might enjoy the
freedom of their Religion, they might lawfully renounce the practice of these
Articles, which makes the case far different both to the one and the other)
they conceived you intended to d^ny and destroy the probability of that opinion
which they think it necessary for their ends to maintain; And therefore, to
keep their hold, and conserve their pretended right, they framed this Decree in
hugger mugger, and kept it private. Their chief motive is acknowledged in the
Decree it self, Least it should be said herea^^er, that his Holiness did
approve or connive at the subscription to such Articles, as were prejudicial
to his pontificiall Greatness. The same was also expressly intimated to the
Popes Nuntio here, it being signified unto him, there should be no legal
publication of it, no more then there had been at Rome, nor consequently sure
did they intend it should oblige. Nay, even they themselves would esteem him a
very fool, that would loose his estate, or venture his life for the maintenance
of this opinion or decree. Your negative answers to these Articles, are to be
understood according to your and the proposers intentions, that is, to renounce
the practice of them, and profeste them to be no part of your Faith and
Religion, which I believe the very Court of Rome does not pretend, witness
Cardinal Peron, who after he had often averred in his Oration to the Nobles of
France, in the year 1615. that the Doctrine of the Pope's power to depose
heretical Kings, and absolve their subjects from their obedience, was only
problematicall. And in particular, that the Catholics of England were obliged
to obey K. James then reigning. In his other Oration to the third State (who
urged and pressed to have the contrary Doctrine received, as a fundamental Law
of the Kingdom, and as holy, true, and conformable to the Word of God) having
used all possible arguments to dissuade them from this design, and learnedly
laboring to show a greater probability for the affirmative part. He concludes
toward the end of his speech, That the Pope does tolerate and suffer the
contrary opinion to be held, so it be only maintained as problematicall in
matter of Faith, that is, says he, so it be not proposed as necessary to
Faith, nor the opposite declared, as contrary to the Word of God, impious and
de^estable. Besides, this Decree is given against the negative subscribers to
unpublished Articles, without any information or knowledge of the original
instrument, whereunto you Priests did subscribe, naywithout calling any of you
to acount; but only in the air against the negative subscription, supposed to
be done they know not where nor how, contrary to the ordinary forms of our Law
and Justice. But every man who has negociated in the Court of Rome can tell
you, that these Congregational Decrees are generally made by a few Cardinals
and Prelates, who (to speak modestly) little know upon what grounds and
principles the abstruse sequels of Faith are to be resolved. They say in this,
they have consulted Divines, that is, perhaps some few foreign Regulars, whose
interests lie wholly in that Court, depending immediately of it, and exempted by
his Holiness from the ordinary and divine Hierarchichal Government of the
Church; who knowing nothing of the affairs, nor of the circumstances of the
question, were not like to deliver any other opinion then what their great
Patrons would have them. I wish with all my heart, that with the loss of my
blood I could blot out the be^^efe of all experienced men, that notning but
interest and ^^^tion are prevalent in the Court of Rome. It is now in every
man's mouth that understands the affairs of the World, that they seek their own
ends, not the public good. Finally, I remark, that they chiefly direct their
Decree to the superiors of their exempted Emissaries, no mention made of the
Bishop or Clergy, who are the only lawful and canonical publishers (with the
permission and consent of the State or civil Magistrates) of any true and
authentical spiritual command. Tiuly, if such a Decree had been sent hither,
and so illegally proclaimed, it would have bin presently condemned to be burnt
by the hands of the Hangman. In a word, I see nothing capable to beget a
scruple, nor that ought to hinder any Catholic from subscribing to the
Articles as you have done: Nor shall I easily persuade my self, that any wise
and experienced man will shrink from so just an Act. If your State, King, or
Parliament will suffer and tolerate you to live quietly under them (which I
wonder such able men should boggle at) I shall quickly provide and help you with
such advise from the most learned and most virtuous Divines of Europe, as will
make your Ecclesia stical Government an example to all other States and
Kingdoms your Ne^ghbours, And still conserving all due respect and spiritual
obedience to the Sea of Rome, you shall free your selves from all unnecessary
and unfit dependence of the Roman Court, wherein I shall furnish you with the
resolutions of such questions as will open the eyes of all your unexperienced
and tender conscienced Countrymen, who have not had perhaps the means to
discern and distinguish their due and necessary obedience from a superfluous
and unjust obsequiousness: And which shall withal make appear to all the
Christian World the now well near fourscore years hard and unfatherly dealing.
of the Court of Rome over the poor persecuted and distressed Catholics of
England. Let it therefore be your constant endeavor, to give the King, State,
or Parliament full satisfaction and assurance of your fidelity, to the civil
and political government of your Kingdom, whatsoever it shall be, which may
most certainly stand with the integrity of your Religion and Consciences, for
the rest fear nothing, trust to the justice of your cause, which you may
assuredly believe will not want support. For my particular, according to my
poor ability, you shall ever find me,

Your most loving Brother in Christ, and obedient Servant, T. H.
From Paris this 2. of April, 1648.
FINIS.

