THE Heart Opened TO Christ Jesus. Translated out of High Dutch, for the good
of all Men.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock. MDCLIII.

THE PREFACE.
ALL Men seek naturally their own Happiness, and wish heartily well unto
themselves; Hence do all the varieties and multitude of humane Inventions
proceed for the obtaining and maintaining of the said Happiness, which some
imagine to consist in Riches, some in Highness, Honor and Pleasure; others in
sharp Wits, Arts and Sciences, according as every man's several fancy is and
leads him: But whatsoever vanishes and passes away, makes no man truly
happy: But that which is unvisible, being set and found above time and place,
the same is the root of true and saving Happiness; the other is but deceit and
illusion, which casts down into the Abyss, whereby Adam was brought to fall.
Therefore it is necessary for every one to return back again from the Plurality
to Unity, which is the only true and infinite Good, if he means to obtain the
true and saving Happiness; for the everlasting and joyful possession of our
Soul, is its true Salvation and Happiness, consisting only in God its Creator.
Whosoever therefore yields himself up to God, and becomes one and united with
Him, has found the true and blessed Happiness: But who seeks it in the
Creatures, and in his going and traveling from Eternity to Temporality, such a
one seeks in vain, or vanity it self, and loses his own self, in turning
himself from God his Creator to the Creature; for all created things are
nothing in comparison with God, and shall in the fullness of time return again
into their Chaos, and lose their corporal clothing, or else, according to their
desert, become an Everlasting Reproach. And this is the Subject where we in
these following Chapters intend God willing briefly to speak and handle.

THE OPEN HEART TO CHRIST JESUS.
CHAP. I. What is that which a man ought to labor for in this life.
MAN is convinced in his Conscience, and has it written in his heart as an
eternal, sure and immutable word, that he always ought to strive and endeavor
after that, wherein his Souls everlasting Property and Happiness consists, to
the end that he, of whom he draws his original and offspring, may thereby
have his Praise, Honor and Joy. When he considers this duly, two ways
presently offer themselves; the one leading to Good, the other to Evil: The
Evil (as Evil) he desires not, therefore he ought and must of necessity follow
and stick close to the Good. Here the Ens and seed of the Serpent works
strange and subtle disturbances in Man, and would fain sell Evil for Good,
seeing that the Evil always mingleth it self with the Good, and thereby causes
horrible Deceits and Seducements: All the World stands open and ready to
embrace the Evil, and yet will not endure it to be called Evil, but always
hides it self under the color of Good, so that the Good is not easily to be
found out and discerned, unless a Man look very narrowly into it: Therefore
these two ways ought very well to be discerned and distinguished, lest a Man
should lose himself therein, and be seduced and led away by the Devil or blind
Reason. The Holy Scripture it self places one on the right hand, and the other
on the left hand: That on the right hand is narrow, but is the way of God,
whereby Man attaineth to the true in ward Rest and Peace, therein lives and is
saved: That on the left hand is the way of the World, wherein a man with
greatest trouble and unquietness posteth and hasteneth to Damnation. All which
very excellently is prefigured and represented unto us in the deliverance and
going of the Children of Israel out of Egypt.

CHAP. II. An excellent Type of Love toward God, and Love toward the World.
WHosoever is desirous to choose the way leading to God aright, he must by no
means pervert any thing, nor receive any thing that is perverted, but look well
to himself, that he may walk aright in this life, being that the two ways are
so easily mixed and changed one for the other, as we may very well observe by
the Children of Israel, when they were brought out of Egypt. Wherefore by the
way toward Egypt again, we do understand the World; But by the way of God, we
understand the true Conversion and turning to the Land of Canaan, that is, the
Kingdom of Heaven and Kingdom of Christ.

Now there be three things which hinder and disturb the Man in his true
Conversion, which are here to be observed; Namely, First, Love of this temporal
Life; Secondly, Delight and desire after temporal things; Thirdly, Lust of
fleshly Pride and wanton Pleasure, wherein Man is desirous to bathe and swim up
to his very ears: Hence it is, that all those that are blinded and possessed
with Jewish and self-love, cannot be drawn from the highness and honor of the
World, but give themselves over to Covetousness, and bend all their love and
labor, with all their thoughts and imaginations, to this scope, to wit, how to
gain these temporary things, to the end that they may fulfill their lust of the
flesh; so that the poor Soul in the heart must be smothered and forgot, yea
robbed and deprived of the Everlasting Good, for the pride and wanton pleasures
sake of the flesh and of the Astral spirit. Now those that continue in this
course of life, they fall in time into a senselessness or insensibility and
hardness of heart, so that they rather suffer all manner of pains, then
themselves to be drawn off from thence, seeing that they rather undergo and
endure all dangers and tribulations, then themselves to be deprived or
dismissed of their lust, whereunto they are inclined and given; in so much that
all fellow-travellers addicted to this way had always rather to return back
again into Egypt to the flesh pots, which notwithstanding they ate with
cumberness and servitude, then to eat and enjoy the spiritual and heavenly
Bread in the Wilderness, and to follow Moses, whither he, by the Command of
God, was to guide them. This People was with a mighty hand, with signs and
wonders, brought out of Egypts house of Bondage to Canaan the Land of Promise,
and in the way was fed with bread of Angels, tasting to them according to their
own wish and desire, so that with great Joy they might have obtained the Land
of Promise; But seeing they were drowned in the Love of their own self, of the
flesh and of the world, denying and renouncing all obedience to the Spirit of
God, they would rather turn back again to Egypt to the flesh pots of their
misery and calamity, then with peace and comfort forget that way, and suffer
themselves to be led by Moses quietness and patience through the Wilderness.
Therefore whosoever is too much possessed and captivated with deceitful lusts
of the world, he evermore longs after his former sinful qualities and doings,
whereunto he is addicted. But to prevent this, and to turn himself to the right
way of God, to walk in the paths of Holiness, Man must order and behave himself
aright after the conduct and instruction of Moses, who is Christ in the new
Birth and Conversion, Him always in the way we must carefully observe and look
upon at his right hand, and never set our eyes from him whatsoever he does and
takes in hand in this life. Therefore he must also leave the old Adam in
Egypt, that is, hate and deny himself, and on the contrary turn all his love to
God in Christ, and wholly yield and submit himself in an humble resignation to
the Spirit of God and his good Government.

Now if he thus both within and without with a wholly converted Heart be yielded
up and resigned unto God according to his Will, and in his Love is desirous of
nothing more then God; then he walks in the way at the right hand, being no
more his own self, or an adherent of base and wicked Egypt, but having quite
left and abandoned the flesh pots, is desirous through Christ to become one
Spirit with God, according to the desire of the Soul, and likewise longs with
delight for Perfection, that he may enter again into the first Image, after
which in the Beginning he was created of God.

CHAP. III. Even as God is the Being of all Beings, and the Life of all living;
so also must every one, that means to inherit Salvation, become like unto him
in Christ.
ALL the care and matter is, how Man, according to the Image of God, may be
transplanted again out of this temporary into the Eternal Kingdom of Joy.
Therefore, according as the Man does form and figure himself in this life under
the government and domiminion, of the Starry or Sydereal Spirit, in such form
and figure he also transplanteth and presents himself after this life unto
Eternity; Namely, either into one principle of the Abyss, or else into the
other of the Divine Love and eternal Joy with God and his holy Angels.

Originally, and in the Creation, Man was created like unto God, and became his
Image, that he according to that should be a Lord and Sovereign over the world:
which that he might better perform, he was placed and ordained in Paradise with
such an Heavenly and uniform body, as was wanting in nothing that any way could
be necessary to this excellent and glorious Performance. Yea, as a father and a
son are one with another, so was Man like unto God, and had the perfect wisdom
to govern all things aright according to the Will of God in his Image both
within and without himself, viz. all things, so far as it belonged to him, and
was subject to temporary nature. He had not gotten any frail body, unless
purposely he had thrown himself into this fragillity: thus he was uniform with
God according to his Image. In which uniformity yet this difference is to be
observed: viz. God is, and abides the Creator and the Father; Man is the
Creature and child: God has no time, but is Eternal, having nothing either
before or after himself: But Man has a Beginning, and is comprehended by the
Incomprehensible God: There is nothing that God has received, but he has and
is all in Himself; But man has received all things from God, and has nothing
of his own: God needs neither Angel, nor Heaven, nor world, nor place, nor
time; But Man can neither live nor be without God. These differences show
plainly and sufficiently, How man ought to live aright according to the
properties of the Image, both in this time and hereafter in Eternity, viz. we
must be his only, with Will, Heart, Soul, Understanding and Being, and no
others besides, neither our own; but look merely and only upon Him, by whom we
are created, and after our fall so dearly bought and redeemed, besides whom we
must choose or desire nothing, seeing without him we be nothing, and can do
nothing, as Christ says. But who so takes delight in himself, loves himself,
seeks and finds himself, he commits two great and horrible Evils: For
first, He thereby becomes a proud Thief, in seeking the preeminence in Gods
Being and Dominion, arrogating it unto himself, as if he were of Himself, as
God is, which he likewise in secret esteems himself to be, and will needs be
equal with God. Secondly, He becomes also thereby a Murderer, in killing
himself so miserably, by falling off from God upon himself, that is, falling
off from the Being upon his own nothing, and making himself a reproach to him,
of whom he has received his Being and Breath, seeing that God had also
therefore formed him after his won Image, that he should not eat of the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil: for God is the right hand, and he himself the left
hand, viz. the Creature, which before was nothing. Man should keep the
Properties of the Image, suffering the Will of God to work and do all things in
him: Man should be the Tool, wherewith God should do all things; But the desire
to know Good and Evil, is that horrible Fall whereby he is cast out of the
Image of God, and that is the right Serpent of Sin which so extremely has
deceived us, persuading us to eat of this forbidden fruit.

O what a lamentable state and condition is it, that we thereby are fallen so
deep and far from the Image of God, and the holy life of Paradise, into the
uttermost bestial Kingdom and Government of the Starry or Sydereal Spirit! Yet
it is an infinite and unspeakable Mercy, that the Son of God, Christ Jesus, our
Lord, would not leave nor forsake us in this extreme both temporal and eternal
Perdition of our Soul, but with his deep Humiliation, etc. brought back again
his beloved Creature into its Principium and Heavenly Kingdom, into Paradise,
opening the Blessed Gate to the former Image, lest we in any thing should be
wanting. Therefore if so be we will enter again into the first and blessed
estate of our Souls, viz. of Eternal Image and Salvation, then we must return
back again from and out of the base and bestial Life of our sinful flesh, and
enter into the living and Heavenly Birth, becoming like to Christ in all thins,
according to his love wherewith he has loved us, and thus with Christ wholly
yielding our selves up to God in a perfect and humble resignation, forgetting
and denying our selves, and hating our own life, seeing that we our selves are
our chiefest and worst enemies; and all this to the end, that we may attain to
Christ Perfection, according to the restored Image of his Love, Psalm. 17.15.
Not suffering our selves to be drawn back or hindered by any thing in the world.

CHAP. IV. Of Man's true Perfection in Christ and in the Love.
IT is a most dangerous and pernicious Doctrine (whereby true Christianity most
mightily is hindered,) when many give forth and teach against God, Christ Jesus
himself, and his Holy word and Gospel, that it is Impossible for a Man to keep
the Word of God. Should God through his Son impose us things Impossible? What
an absurd speech is this? Shall a Man think to make the most gracious and most
merciful God a Tyrant? O abominable Error to the greatest hinderance of the
true Birth! When Peter gave Christ hindersom and offensive counsel, dissuading
him that he with his suffering should not fulfill the Will of his Father, Christ
reproved Peter, calling his words, the speech of Satan, saying, Get thee behind
me Satan, thou art an offense unto me, for thou savorest not the things that be
of God, but those that be of men, Mat. 16.23. Mark 8.33. Even so may a man
likewise say to those that rather speak to please and nourish the security of
the flesh, and quench the Spirit, then to help and set forth the Word of God by
men; and yet notwithstanding will be held and called good Christians: therefore
says Christ, Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 7.21. but he that does the Will of my Father which
is in Heaven. Christ will have his Word kept in deed (and not only with
opinion, tongue, or oral faith) comparing such a one with a wise man which
built his house upon a rock, Mat. 7.25. The true faith makes indeed up the
house, but good works of Love lays the foundation, as Christ says, Joh. 14.23.
If a man love me he will keep my words, which consists properly in our life
and conversation, viz. to walk in his steps even as he has walked, 1 John 2.6.
Therefore Christ neither regarded nor required in his followers any prating
wit, but obedient works of Love and charitable Deeds proceeding from a free
heart; and he says further, Whosoever will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross and follow me, Mark. 8.34. Neither may any man
boast of Christ, as if he knew him unless he keeps his Commandments, for
otherwise he is a Liar, in whom there is no truth; But whosoever keeps his
Word, in him verily is the love of God perfected: Hereby know we that we are in
him, 1 John 4.5. Also, every one that does righteousness is born of him, 1 John
2.29. Yea, he that does righteousness, is righteous, even as he is righteous, 1 John 3.7. Now what want or Impossibility is here? Are the Commandments of
christ too too grievous? Says not John, that the Commandments of Christ are
not grievous? 1 John 5.3. And Christ himself wishes us, and all others, to
come freely and confidently unto him, and take his yoke upon us, being that his
yoke is easy, and his burden light, Matthew. 11.30. Now by whom, I pray, is the
truth? by Christ, or by Antichrist? But here lies all the difficulty, viz.
Antichrist and the Child of this World will not turn in and enter to the Love
of God fully and aright, leaving the cursed love of the world and of the flesh,
which has taken so deep roots in his heart. Therefore he had rather make God
to be unjust, and with the Excuse of Impossibility justify himself, leaving
the whole Burden upon the neck of Christ only, that he himself may go free, and
in the security of his wicked spirit and flesh, according to his own bestial
desire and disposition, jump as it were into the Kingdom of God, as if he need
to do nothing and take no care for his Salvation, but only to live freely forth
on in pleasures and carnal lust of his Heart, proceeding from the false and
venomous seed of the wicked Serpent, and yet would merit Heaven thereby, though
he never put on again the Heavenly Image of Christ, changing his Bestial and
Diabolical Malice into Love. But what does a Men else, but show forth that he
has an abomination to the Childship of God which is in Christ Jesus? For St
John says in his 1 Epistle, cap. 5.2. By this we know that we love the
Children of God, when we love God and keep his Commandments; for this is the
love of God, viz. that we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not
grievous. To whom therefore Love is hard and grievous, he is as yet far from
God and his Image, being as fast and deep in Lies, Darkness and Death, 1 John
2.9, 21. and cap. 3.14. Yea he is an Antichrist, christ, bearing the Mark of
the Beast and of the Whore in his Heart and in his forehead, Apoc. 19. etc. For
God Himself is Love, and Love is God, and he that loves not, knows not God,
1 John 4.7. Whosoever therefore will be, and be called a right true Christian,
and attain to perfection, desiring to be one Spirit with God, and obtain his
Image again, he must make haste and strive to this Gate, where the Love of
Christ stands open, continually and diligently exercising himself therein,
especially in the inward Image and Likeness of the sufferings of our Lord Jesus
Christ, esteeming it above all Creatures, and then nothing will be hard and
grievous for him; for what can be grievous to him that rightly loves? Now to
learn this aright, we must look and consider well what is to be observed in
christ.

CHAP. V. What are those seven thins in Christ, which ought to be well and
especially considered: And how we may attain to the perfection of Love.
THere are summarily seven principal Points in our Lord God and Savior Jesus
Christ well and especially to be considered: Viz. 1. His wondrous Humiliation
and Conception. 2. His Birth of a Virgin. 3. His whole Life in his Infancy,
Youth, and Man's Age, 4. His bitter Passion and Death. 5. His Descending into
Hell Resurrection, Apparition, and Clarification. 6. His Ascension and Entrance
into his Glory again. 7. His Glorious Manifestation or Revelation, and coming
again to Judgment and to his Kingdom. In these seven Points all the Mysteries
of God are comprehended, without which no Man can be a true Teacher in the
Church of God and of christ according to the Gifts of the Holy Spirit, which
are ordained by God to such Ministry, although they are not absolutely
necessary for every Child of God: for it is not Knowledge and Science that
saves and makes us happy in Christ Jesus, but the true Faith being effectual
by Love. Therefore the knowledge, wisdom and understanding of children is one
thing, and another thing that of the young Men, and another thing that of
Fathers and old Men; for every one has his own peculiar Gift of Grace of the
Spirit of God, as Paul teaches, 1 Cor. 14. For it is not a mere Outward
Literal or Habitual work of Reason, borrowed from the Heathens, as now adays is
taught in the Schools, where the Spirit of God with his true Gifts is extruded
and rejected: But the Spirit of God and of Christ imparteth in to every one as
much as it pleases, and according as the holy Souls do order and behave
themselves in praying aright, that they may be fully and fundamentally
Partakers of the Divine Gifts, and taught by God Himself (as Christ speaks,)
wherein the vocation and calling of every one to the Ministry of Preaching
properly consists, and thereby is distinguished and discerned from Hirelings,
having nothing but outward self-forged Arts and Inventions.

These three Degrees of several Gifts, Christ also Himself went through; for
being a Child he increased in Age, Nature, Wisdom and Favor with God and Man,
and with the twelfth year of his Age he concluded his Infancy or Childship, and
begun his Youth; but what he did in this Youth until the thirtieth year of his
Age, is not recorded, seeing it has not pleased the Spirit of God to reveal
more unto us, but what was requisite and necessary to the Performance of his
proper Office; doubtless to the end, that we the more diligently and earnestly
should ruminate and observe his Precepts, Commandments, Miracles, Testimonies,
and Sufferings, not mixing there-amongst any other impertinent and unnecessary
things, seeing the wanton outward Reason always rather flattereth the flesh in
its wickedness, then obeys the Spirit of Christ. In the thirtieth year of his
Age, his right Office of Redemption and Man's Age begun, of which the four
Evangelists sufficiently do witness, yet far more was done then recorded, as
John says in the end of his Gospel: But what is written, is abundantly
sufficient, if we would but order and rule our selves accordingly, and not with
Babels foolish Reason account it Impossible, as we have said before.

Now as these three Degrees have their three several times, so also have they
their several knowledge: Hence it is that the Apostle says, When I was a Child
I spoke as a Child, I understood as a Child, I thought as a Child; But when I
became a Man, I Put away childish things. Also, We know in part, and we
prophecy in part. And he says to his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3.1. Brethren, I
could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, but as unto
Babes in Christ: I have fed you with Milk, and not with Meat, etc. But when
that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away.
This we may also in truth and without folly apply to the several times and ages
of Christians, saying, that they be threefold, and that in respect of knowledge,
wisdom, and understanding, we have been but Children hitherto in all our deep
learned Men and great Scholars (as the world thinks them to be, and they
themselves all one and other love to be called) having nothing but some
Ethnical literal Learning, confusedly heaped and hoarded up according to the
outward carnal Reason, whereof they have made a self-forged Art, without the
power and virtue of the Spirit, to deceive the world, to their own heavy
Judgment in that great day. And it is still so at this very day, in so much
that is goes with us now, as some hundred years ago, when people lay in
Blindness and Darkness, so that it is very hard for a man to rid himself out
from them, until Satan be bound, Apoc. 20. The same happened in the time of the
Apostles with the Corinthians, where one called himself of Apollo, another of
Cephas, another of Paul: But were not they herein fleshly-minded? yet
notwithstanding they were Christians, though but little Children in Christ; and
not spiritual, though yet spiritual (in another respect:) for Paul could not
speak to them of Christ and his Mysteries, as he fain would, seeing they could
not yet bear such solid food; for to new wine we must have new bottels; And the
very Disciples themselves were even so in the beginning, that they understood
nothing of what was told them, being unsensible of it, and the words were
hidden to them. So is it with the Christians at this very day in deed and in
truth: for what is it but blindness and Ignorance, proceeding from the
Heathenish carnal understanding according to the outward Reason, wherewith Men
so pitifully torment both themselves and others, that they purposely, of mere
abominable pride arising from the vain wisdom of the wicked flesh, curse and
condemn one another, and that against the express Word of God? One is and will
be called after this Sect, another after that Sect and its Author; and
oftentimes for a slight and frivolous Opinions sake, concerning this or that
Point, they give one another Nick names, therewith to exasperate the Hatred,
conspiracy and confederation of one party against the other, for that purpose
plotting and inventing diverse tricks and stratagems for the undermining and
supplanting of each other; and yet nevertheless all these without the ground of
true Love will be called Christians; in so much that now adays all chambers and
Chapels are full of those that cry out, Lo, here is Christ, not there; those
be Heretics, etc. But are not these humane and carnal, as Paul says? Yes
verily, as bad as the Corinthians formerly, if not worse. Now what should we
say and think of these Men, if we our selves were strong and spiritual? Nothing
else but what we would have and wish them to judge of us, if we were Children,
and they strong; to wit, from Christians we should expect and look for nothing
else but Love, as Christ himself in diverse places repeats this his earnest
Commandment, viz. that we should love one another, as he hath-loved us, John
15.17. By this only mark his Disciples or true Christians, yea all true
Christianity, is known and discerned: For Love is above all Faith, Knowledge and
Mysteries: It also can bear, suffer and endure all things; it vaunteth not it
self, nor is it puffed up, though it were never so strong, wise and wealthy;
but rather the stronger, wiser and richer it is, the more and easier it bears
the weak, silly and poor, otherwise it cannot be the Love: As it now further
more plainly shall appear.

CHAP. VI. Of the difference betwixt the unfeigned true Love and false Love,
and how the false Love always mingleth it self with the true.
NOw adays a Man may justly make moan and complain, that there is so little
true Wisdom to be found amongst Men, and that all men run on in their
Blindness, as the Prophet says. Many men boast of Love, and think that to be
sufficient, though it be but for our own end, or else if they do but thereby
show some Hospitality, or other liberality in relieving the necessity of their
Neighbor: This indeed, according to the outward show, is somewhat, yet very
unclean, in so much it scarce is to be accounted a sign or mark of Love: And
though it be somewhat, yet notwithstanding it is far inferior to the Love
prescribed and enjoined in the Law, which says, Thou shall love thy Neighbor
as thy self: Therefore there is a very great difference between Love and Love,
namely, as great as there is between the threefold World. For first, the
Creature-like Love proceeds from the Elementary Sydereal or Astral Spirit,
and from its Inclinations and Aspects, and is caused and engendered by a
concreated goodness of disposition, whereby one man is better beloved then
another; and of this nature is the Love toward Father and Mother, between Man
and Wife, and good Friends. And here sometimes slippeth in also the Love which
is stirred by Fairness, Riches, Promotions, and other outward things, and
commonly suppresseth the former Love, as being now adays most usual and bearing
the sway, in so much that Men will neither know nor hear of any other kind of
Love. This Elementary Love is also to be seen in the Animals and Beasts: But
the Children of God make no account of this unclean and impure Love, unless it
be for the Lords sake, so that Animalish Love be fanctified by the Spirit of
Faith, for otherwise it is sin: Therefore in the Creature-like Love their Love
is thus, that they also can hate what they love, let it be father, mother,
child, friend, etc. namely, for Christ's sake, though they hate it not, but
rather love it more and better then any Creature-like Love either does or can
do; which soon alters, and easily is cast down, namely, being deprived of
that she loves; as we may daily see by those that lose any thing in Nature,
which they have loved and set their Heart on, how they use to moan and grieve
for the loss of it: But the Children of God are not sorry when they lose any
Creature, but leave it wholly to God and his good will and pleasure; the reason
is thus, because they do not love the Creature in and according to the old
Creation, or in the vanity of the Creatureship; but in the new Creation, yea in
and with Christ, and the same Spirit that is in all things: Therefore they
cannot mourn nor grieve according to the inward man when they have any loss of
transitory things, being they know, that they can never lose it in Christ, in
whom they love all things. Thus Job was not moved or altered when he lost his
Children, and afterward also his Health; neither regarded he his life, as he
says, Chap. 13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in Him. And David
says, Psalm. 73. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth
that I desire besides thee: Or thus; When I have but thee, I care neither for
Heaven nor Earth: And this is the difference betwixt the World and the Children
of God even in Natural Love.

Secondly, The Love of the Law proceeds from the spirit of the mind, being
from and out of the Angelical World, and is caused by a good Mind or upright
Heart, having apprehended and understood well Nosce teipsum, or the true
knowledge of ones self, whereby a man esteems his Neighbor as good as Himself,
seeing that the Souls of all men spring from one Stock, and the one Branch has
no reason to hate the other: or else it is caused and stirred by command of the
Law; or else it is moved and raised by the pure Affection and Angelical
Inclination of the Inward Soul, when I intend to do my Neighbor, without any
desert of his, or hope of gain to my self, such kindness and assistance as the
Angel Raphael did to Tobias. Now in this Love the Children of God do also
differ from the Vulgar; for there be many that do good, but not to a good and
right end, but only they may be seen; but being they do it for their own praise
of vainglory, they cannot thereby attain to the communion of the Children of
God, but remain unprofitable servants, as the Apostle says, and perform not
their Duty, seeing they do not rightly employ their Housekeeping and
Stewardship, trusted to their dispensation and Administration: Wherefore also
those that would justify themselves with their good works, were rejected by
Christ, Mat. 25. and such are all those that for their charity and well doing
seek a reward, which the Children of God do not do; for they for all their well
doing do esteem themselves far unworthy of the grace and mercy of God:
Wherefore also the Love that in them arises and proceeds from the Law, is
sanctified in them by the Spirit of Faith, being they seek not themselves in
any thing, but are unwilling that the left hand should know what the right hand
does, and all for this end, that they in their transgression may find mercy:
Therefore they never think on Reward, as the rest, who having transgressed the
bounds of Love, find afterward no Grace (nor Mercy,) being they looked only
upon the Reward: Therefore says the Apostle, Though I bestow all my goods to
feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not Love, it
profits me nothing, (or I am unprofitable.) What is therefore the Condition
of Love? and what is Love? Love seeks not its own, as the Love of the Law
which desires its Reward; But this Love, viz. It has nothing, (for it is not
the Owner and Possessor of its own self, but yields and gives it self with
Christ for its Neighbor, and suffers God to be all in all in it:) It gives
nothing, (for it suffers it self to be given over to another, namely, for
Christ's sake, by the Spirit of Love, which is shed abroad in our hearts:) It
takes nothing, but Christ himself receives it in her; and therefore Christ
said, What you have done to one of the least of these, that you have done to
me. And this is the true Property of this Love, namely, It is not Self-loved,
Self-conceited, Self-willed, and seeks not its own; But it is all things in
Christ: Therefore whosoever will be its own, or have any thing of his own, or
means to do any thing of his own Self, is altogether of the Devil, who alone
will be his own Self, and belongs to no Man.

Thirdly: Now this is the Love of the Spirit of God from the Divine World, and
is caused by it self, and not by any object: Even as God is moved of Himself,
by Himself, with Himself, and in Himself to love us, seeing he could not be
moved thereto by us being sinners; Therefore is this Love stirred by it self,
beholding it self, in an unspeakable Light: And how can that be comprehended in
the Love which yields it self to death, that it might purchase life to us? No
man therefore has greater Love, then to give his life, as Christ did; and this
Love cannot be expressed, seeing there is no word equal to it, and the Eternal
Word it self is dead in the flesh. O what a great Mystery is this! In the Word
was Life, and the Life is Light, and came into the World, Loving Sinners: O
what a Principle of all Principles, viz. Light, Life and Love! Therefore it is
the Love proceeding from the Divine World, of which the Apostle speaks, which
surpasses all Angelical tongues, seeing it cannot be expressed by Angelical
tongues; for the Angelical World, from which the Law proceeds, enjoyneth us
to love our Friend, but hate our Enemy, Matthew. 5. v. 43. neither can it judge
otherwise, being this Law and Commandment proceeds from the Angelical World,
and is ordained by the disposition of Angels, Galat. 3.19. Acts 7.53. spoken
and expressed by Angels, Heb. 2.2. which word few men do understand, viz. that
the Law is from the Angelical, and not from the Divine World, seeing the Divine
World is and abides clean without Law: Therefore the Filiation or Childship
proceeds only from the Divine World, the Servantship from the Angelical, and
the Creatureship from the Elementary World: Further Love surpasses all
Mysteries, all Knowledge and Faith, being no Man is able to search out the
Mysteries of this Depth or Abyss: Yea, no man can rightly believe that God so
loves sinners, unless he finds in himself the upright Love, for without Love
all is in vain, but through Love all things are sanctified, and without it
nothing is profitable: Whosoever therefore has this Love dwelling in himself;
he has rightly the Spirit of God, and can search and know all things, even
above Angels; for he can see clearly and evidently how God loves the fallen
Man, and not the fall of the Devil. O what a deep Mystery is this? which with
no tongues can be expressed, unless a man truly had known Mysterium magnum
Creationis (the great Mystery of Creation,) which therefore is so unknown to
Man, because they know nothing of the threefold World, wherein the Key of David
is comprised, namely, the Testimony of God, of those three that bear witness in
Heaven and Earth. Now if we intend to edify one another in Love, then we must
first know the Love, speak of it, and search for it. Many are ready enough to
talk of Love, but what Love properly is in its self, thereof they are
altogether ignorant; yea, they abhor it, when a man rightly names it; and yet
fiercer they grow when a man with truth will lead them to it. Thus far they are
gone from the Spirit of God and his Wisdom, that they carry nothing about them
but the lust of wrath: Wherefore God can neither have his Mansion and
Habitation by them, but they abide in Death; for Love only has all promises in
it, and is profitable to all things, being the Mother of Godliness, and by it
all things are clean unto the clean: Good works also by Love obtains the
promise of Eternal Life. Thus (by Love) a man both prays, fasteth, and eats
aright; otherwise all is in vain, though a man suffer himself to be burned.

CHAP. VII. Wherein does the daily Practice of Love toward our Neighbor truly
consist.
SEeing Love is a thing of so great consequence, that the new Creature in Man
consists in it, therefore has Christ so earnestly commanded us the serious
and daily practice of it, in so much that we should love our very Enemies, for
therein Perfection consists; It is necessary therefore that we lay hold on
Love, even enter into it, if we mean to draw near to God, and obtain
everlasting Happiness: It is not in man's own free will, to choose whether he
will do it or no, but there is a necessity for it, if we will be called
Christians in truth: And moreover, what can be said to be better graceful, I
pray, then to grow and increase in this Love toward all men? which Love must
be without any respect of persons, so far forth as concerns the common Love. If
we therefore be found to be in this Love, it is Impossible that we should
despise, judge or condemn one another, much less envy, persecute, destroy and
kill one another: for we have all of us one Father, and one and the same God
has created us All; wherefore then should we despise one another,
transgressing the covenant of our fathers, which is Love? Therefore I cannot
see how he that calls himself of Paul, should be better then he that calls
himself of Apollo and Cephas; are not they all Christians, and believe in
Christ? Therefore they amongst themselves, being compared one with another, are
humane; glorying in men they are carnal, being they do not judge according to
the Spirit, but according to the flesh; But in respect of God, they are his
Children, as the very Apostles, strong and spiritual men themselves; and in
this respect none is better then another in the sight of God. For as it is
amongst the members of the body, viz. the feet cannot see, the eyes do, neither
be they so clear and pure as the eyes are; but are not they for all this
members of the body? The feet have no such light, perspection and discerning
faculty as the eyes have, yet notwithstanding the eye does not despise the
feet, for they are fellow members of one and the same body; they are not
envious one against the other, though the feet now and then should be unsavory:
for God Almighty has so ordered and disposed the members of the body, that one
should not exalt and raise it self up against the other, seeing the feet are
not only members of the body, but fellow members with the eye; and how could
the eye be exalted and seen in its state and beauty, if it were not raised up,
and supported up, and supported by the feet? Is it not so, that one member must
praise and set forth the other? The feet likewise cannot despise the eyes, much
less judge and censure them, for they cannot see nor go aright without the eyes,
and if the eyes did not lead and guide them, they would soon go into the ditch,
and together with them the whole body also; therefore as the feet do see by the
eyes, and yet notwithstanding they are not eyes, so likewise the eyes go by the
feet, though they themselves be not feet, but eyes. Now as it is with the
members of the body, so it is with Christians: For as the members of the body
are different, yet not disagreeing nor divided, otherwise the whole body would
go to ruin: So also Loving Christians, I say, the Loving Christians, who are
endued with Love, and do love another, whether he be friend or foe, Jew or
Turk, Heathen or Christian; for this we owe one to another, as the Scripture
exhorts us, saying, Owe no man any thing, but to love one another. Thus by
Love all Christians are rightly and easily known, though according to the
outward Letter they be Heathens, Jews and Turks, and in humane censure and
opinion, Infidels, as knowing nothing of Christ according to the literal faith,
yet notwithstanding they are Christians in deed and in truth, even because they
love their Neighbor, and do good to him.

And thus it appears plainly what a Christian is, what it is that makes a
Christian, or whereby a man comes to be a Christian, is and abides so,
according to Christ's own word and saying, viz. Hereby it shall be known that ye
are my Disciples, if ye love one another: In a word; This is both the old and
new Commandments, on which both the Law and the Gospel, even the everlasting
Gospel, depends, by which all Heathens, Jews, Turks, and all that are not
Christians, shall be converted to Christ: And even this is the Eternal Gospel,
viz. that God has loved us in Christ from Eternity; and he himself is Love:
and this is the Evangelium or good tidings which we have heard from him, viz.
that he has loved the whole world, and therefore given his Son, that we might
live through him, for he is not willing that one should be lost. This is the
Eternal Commandment, and the Tidings which we have heard from him, viz. that he
is Love it self, and has sent his best Beloved, through him commanding us to
love one another: Hereby we know the Children of God, for he that loves is
Born of God, let him be according to the outward man a Heathen, Turk, Jew, or
Infidel, yet by this he is a true Christian, and known by the Spirit in his
Christianity, though according to the letter and the flesh, or according to the
outward man, he be neither baptized, nor circumcised, nor acknowledged: For as
the Circumcision in the flesh is not accounted for the right and true
Circumcision, availing in the sight of God unto Salvation; neither the Baptism
of and in the flesh, nor Faith consisting in a literal and historical knowledge:
So is neither this true and saving Faith, which is according to the literal
knowledge and history, but according to the Spirit, the Power, and the Deed,
which is Love: therefore says the Scripture very well, In Christ neither
Circumcision nor uncircumcision avails any thing (nor Baptism neither,) but
Faith which works and is effectual by Love.

CHAP. VIII. That Love is the true and only means whereby a man may attain the
true Christianity.
SEeing that the Body of Christians is by discord so divided, yea wholly rent
and turn asunder, that there is nothing but Envy, Hatred, Strife and Contention
among them, in so much that one Member in hostile manner sets upon the other,
kills and destroys it, whereby the right and true Christianity wholly goes to
ruin, and Christ himself, according to the Prophecy of Daniel, seems to be
rooted out, being here is no unity, nor does Christ find true Faith upon Earth:
It is plain therefore and manifest, that of Necessity they must all return to
be of one Mind, one Faith and Knowledge, one Religion and Worship of God, lest
the Lord come and smite the Earth with a curse, and they all perish together.
This General and Universal Conversion will not be done by any carnal, humane
literal mind, but by the mind of the Spirit of God, which is not Paul's, Cephas
and Apollos, according to the self-willed Imagination of literal and carnal
Christians; but the mind of Peter, Paul, and Apollo, is the mind of the Spirit,
of whom they received it: Now although Paul planteth, Apollo waters, Peter
dresseth and cleanses, yet they are not divided though different. If therefore
the mind of the Sects be also the mind of the Spirit, and if they have received
it from the Spirit, then it is right and good, and then they are the children
of the Spirit. And although one man has labored more then another, and one
has planted Christianity amongst the Heathens, another watered it, the third
cleansed and refined it, yet they must not hate one another, much less command
their Disciples and Followers to kill one another; or although they now and
then, yea for the most part, find but false Apostles, yea many Wolfs amongst
the sheep, yet notwithstanding the whole Apostleship and the whole Herd is not
to be rejected therefore; but rather know this, that the Church and
Congregation of God is amongst all sorts of people, offices, sorts and degrees,
and has this seal, viz. the Lord knows who are his, and no man else: And
this is the true mark of Christians, viz. Love out of a pure Heart of a good
Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned. In every Nation he that fears God, and
works Righteousness, is accepted with him, Act. 10. This is the most precious
and blessed way to Salvation, viz. Love, being the chiefest of all graces; 1
Cor. 13. Therefore how can the torn Body of the Christians become whole and
happy again? Verily not otherwise then by Love. Here all the great and learned
Scholars among all sorts of Sects must lay down their great Wisdom, Arts and
Sciences, and must turn and become Children, laying hold on Love, otherwise
they shall never come to unity, nor enter into the Kingdom of Heaven and
eternal Salvation: Therefore says the Scripture, 1 Cor. 1.20. etc. Where is the
wise? where is the Scribe? where is the disputer of this world? has not God
made foolish the wisdom of this world? For it is written, I will destroy the
wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent.
If any man among you seems to be wise in this world, let him become a fool,
that he may be wise, for the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God: for
it is written, He takes the wise in their own Craftiness. And again, The Lord
knows the thoughts of the wise, that they are vain. Therefore woe be to those
that pack and heap up so many Articles of Faith, and pass over Judgment, and
the Love of God, Luke 11.42. If we were wise, we should know that there is but
one Article of Faith, that is, but one Commandment of Faith, which we ought to
learn, confess and practice, viz. Love toward God and All men, even toward
our very Enemies: This is such an Article as all men can believe, apprehend and
understand, let them be called Heathens, Turks, Jews or Christians, whether
they be children, young men or old men, man or woman, whosoever has but a
rational mind; and indeed every man can easily find and know it of himself in
his own Heart and Conscience, neither can nor dare he contradict it; and even
in this only thing the whole Law, and all Laws and Commandments, yea the Gospel
it self, is comprehended.

This is called and is also the Everlasting Gospel, which shall and must be
preached to those that sit and dwell upon the Earth, viz. to all Heathens,
Generations, Tongues and Nations, and thereby shortly shall all Heathens, Jews,
Turks and unchristian men be converted to God: Therefore this only Article is
above all others that are forged by humane wit and Imagination: It is the first
and the last, and the only Article, which is above all Faith, Prophecy, Mystery
and Knowledge, yea above all Treasures and precious things, and above all
Tongues both of Men and Angels, having so sure a ground of truth, that it never
can be found fault withal, much less judged or rejected. And it is such a
permanency as shall endure for ever and ever: All Faith, Hope, Prophecy,
Tongues, Knowledge, etc. shall cease; But this only Article of all true
Christians shall never cease in all Eternity. This is our Everlasting Gospel
which we do preach: This is both our Law and our Gospel which we have received:
This is our Faith, our Prophecy, our Wisdom, our Knowledge, and our Mystery; yea
this is the most precious Way and Means of Salvation, which now toward the End
shall be shown to all Men in the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, which shall be
preached in all the world for a witness, and then shall the End come, Mat.
24.14. Finally, this is our only true and saving Religion, Faith and Confession
before God and all the Elect Angels and Men, according to which we are
Children, viz. Children of God, fellow-children with the only begotten Son of
God, and Children of the Spirit. Our glory is not in Paul, Cephas or Apollo;
no: We are Children, and not Men; Fools in this world, and not wise men; Babes,
and not great and deep-learned Masters, Doctors and Rabbis; to such the
Promise is given, and not unto the prudent, wise and learned of this world: No,
but it is hid from them, and revealed unto Babes, viz. who the Father and the
Son is. Ye humane learned among all Sects do nor know Christ, for ye know not
Love; for unto him that loves he will reveal himself: Therefore whosoever
among you seems to be wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he may
be wise. We must all turn back again, and become Children, otherwise the
Kingdom of God comes not nor appears in us, nor we come into it. Ye can
convert no man to Christ, unless ye your selves first turn back, and become
like Children. We must begin from below, and not from above, otherwise we shall
fall: Therefore it is the lowly and humble which the Lord looks upon both in
Heaven and on Earth. And thus let us humble our selves in our selves, submiting
our selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt us in due time,
leaving all other things to him, for he will order all things for the Best.

CHAP. IX. Wherein Man's true Conversion consists, and which way to attain it.
NOw what shall we say further, Beloved Brethren in the Lord, seeing there is a
very great Alteration at hand? Is there any Sect at all that can serve our
turn, or avail us any thing at all? No; for all such mind is humane and carnal,
and not the mind of the Spirit, and therefore not known of God. How then?
Whatsoever is of humane mind must fall of and in it self; for it is not the
mind of the Spirit, nor is it the mind of Christ, that we be of Paul, Cephas
and Apollo; but that we be divine: This is both the mind of Christ and of his
Apostles, of which the Apostles themselves witness and say, We have the mind of
Christ. But what is that mind of Christ? To speak thereof simply as Children,
It is to be at unity in Love, of one mind in knowledge, and of one spirit in
Christ. Moreover, what is our belief and opinion of this Mind? This, viz. that
if all shall become Christians, whether they be Heathens, Turks, or Jews, etc.
let them be called in humane mind and manner what they will; I say, if we all
shall turn and be converted to God, and become one Flock, and have one
Shepherd; then all these Superstitious, Idolatrous and old Adamical names, must
down, be forgotten, and rooted out, that the Name of the Lord only may be
named, known and confessed by every mouth, tongue and heart of Man; for it is
written, Unto me all knees shall bow, says the Lord, and not unto Baal, for I
will root out the names of Baalim; and unto me every tongue and mouth shall
confess, that I am the Lord; and I will not give mine Honor to any other, nor
my praise unto Idols. True it is, that the time is coming and at hand, that all
the world shall be converted to the Lord; for when the Lord has accomplished
his Determination, and poured forth his fierce Anger and Indignation upon all
the world, then he shall turn to the people a pure language, and cause to be
preached to them with amiable lips, that they may all call on the Name of the
Lord, to serve him with one consent, Zeph. 3.8, 9. Therefore God punishes one
Sect by another and with another; so that they amongst themselves know not what
they do, being ignorant of the Council of the Lord, not observing that the Lord
has gathered them together as upon a threshing floor, that he may thresh them
with all manner of plagues; and then shall he satisfy his Anger, and cool the
fire of his Jealousy, Zeph. 3.8. And when the time of the Gentiles is thus
accomplished, and their fullness come in, then the Lord shall have mercy upon
the whole House of Israel again, and call them by an Everlasting Gospel: He
shall gather them and bring them back again out of all Countries, and bring
them home into the Land, which he has sworn unto their fathers, with an
everlasting Oath and Covenant; and together with the whole seed of Abraham he
shall convert all Gentiles unto Himself; and thus restore the Kingdom of Israel
to Everlasting Glory. Then the Lord shall appear glorious in his coming, and
renew and regenerate the whole Creation; and then we shall know the exceeding
Virtue of the blessed Birth of our Savior and great God Jesus Christ, which
hitherto in his Mystery has been hid from the wise, learned and prudent of
this world, until this day of the Revelation, in which the whole World and
Creation receives its Conception from above, through the Revelation of Jesus
Christ the Son of the Man in Heaven, in his day, by the preaching of the
Everlasting Gospel; After which Conception the whole World shall then also
bring forth the Child of Righteousness in the Regeneration and Renovation of
all things in a new Creation and Creature, where all that is old shall fade
like an old garment, and be clothed with Salvation and Righteousness for the
Wedding of the Lamb in the Paradise of God. Therefore all ye that love the
Mystical Wisdom, be assured that the time is come, in which all things must be
made manifest, reproved and judged by the Light: The time of the seventh
Trumpet is come, in which the Temple of the Lord shall rightly be known, opened
and seen, and in it the Ark of his Covenant: The Kingdoms of this World shall
all, all, all be destroyed, and shall belong peculiarly to Christ and to his
Saints; Satan the Dragon and wicked one, together with the Beast (which
hitherto and as yet no man knows, but those that have the Spirit of Prophecy)
shall be cast down, shut and sealed up in the Pit, or Abyss, for ever:
Hallelujah.

Now when the time of the Manifestation comes, being also now already, then we
shall plainly discern and acknowledge, that hitherto we have been but children
in knowledge, even carnally minded in the knowledge of Christ, in all our wit,
wisdom, learning and Scholership; we shall then hear spoken and preached far,
far otherwise of the aforementioned seven Points, then hitherto we have heard; for
then verily Men shall speak with new tongues of the great Mystery of God the
Father and of Christ: Hitherto we could not; for the whole world is full of
fleshly-minded men, and the spiritual men are so few among the children of men;
for men speak one with another unprofitable, carnal, vain and wicked words,
being void and ignorant of the mind of Christ: yet notwithstanding a man may
find now and then some few that have already received a Glimpse or Spark from
the Father of Lights, waiting together with us for the Glorious Manifestation
of the Children of God, who among all Nations as yet are hid; for far be it,
and false it is, that all Sects should be reprobate and rejected: for, God
shall yet both call and gather many of and amongst them, and use them as
precious Stones for the Building of his great glorious third and last Temple.
False and idolatrous it is, to think, according to the Roman Catholics
self-love and conceit, that all Protestants are damned Heretics; for the Lord
has chosen not a few of them, whom he shall make his Evangelists, and send
them in Troops to preach his Salvation. A great mistake and blindness it is,
that one Sect imagines the other to be an Abomination before God, not knowing
the Lord will call of them many chosen Instruments to work upon his Temple, and
to convert his People Israel to Himself through his Spirit, which shall be shed
abroad upon all of us; and so forth de Paribus idem Judicium: for God neither
sees nor judges according to the judgment of man; but he looks to the
Heart, and deals with us in great forbearance; He governs us with great
Patience, and has mercy upon us without Intermission: Wherefore then should
not we also have pity and compassion toward our fellow servants (let them be
according to the letter what they will) and love them from our very heart,
thereby praising our Father which is in Heaven? If we be stronger, wiser and
more righteous then our fellow servants is, well and good, let us bear his
weakness, folly and sin, as Christ did, that we may fulfill his Law; If he
erreth, then let us instruct him in Love, according to the simplicity of
Children, not with many Articles, whereby he will be but more disturbed and
confounded: If he be fallen, let us help to raise him up again, not with
reproaches, reviles and expostulations, but with a meek spirit; for he that
thinks himself to stand, let him take heed lest he fall not: If he be obstinate
and refractory, then let us bear and carry him; for it is neither strength nor
art to carry one that is light and willing, but him that is heavy, hard and
froward, that the strength and virtue of God may be seen and known to dwell
with us, together with the patience of Christ, and the meekness of his Spirit:
If he be altogether a weed, yet we are willing to suffer him to grow until the
time of the Harvest, and not root him out, lest we in so doing should also hurt
the Wheat.

Now what a folly is it, that we hitherto so unchristianlike have despised,
reproached, judged and condemned one another? I my self was also once among the
Scornful, Fools, Blasphemers and untimely Judges, whereof I am now justly
ashamed: Therefore beloved Man, whosoever thou art, boast not against another;
for who has set thee before another? or what have thou beyond him or above
him, which thou have not received? or wherefore do thou judge another
servant, and thereby curse his Master? whether he stands or falls, he stands or
falls to his own Lord and Master. We must all of us appear before the Judgment
Seat of Christ, and every one must give an account for his own self; and every
one must also bear his own burden, and have his own honor or dishonor by
himself and for himself, and not by any other. Wherefore do thou vaunt and
boast thy self being puffed up against another? who has Justified thee before
thy Neighbor? if thou perswadest thy self that thou understandest things
better, and to be of greater ability in they wisdom. My Beloved, boast not your
selves one against another, but rather love one another; for the Spirit of
Wisdom and Truth comes, is come, and shall come, and pass one sentence upon
all your Sectarians; to wit, that ye know neither Christ, nor your own selves,
nor one another, if so be that you imagine your selves to be wiser, more
understanding and learned, and more righteous then another: But if ye be
simple, then abide ye in the Love of Christ, not judging, nor despising, nor
condemning one another; and so ye shall neither be despised, judged nor
condemned, but mercy shall be unto you from the Lord. Now when the Spirit of
Judgment comes, then shall we plainly see, how grievously we all of us have
erred, one as well as another, not one of us excepted. Therefore, O Man,
examine thy self well, and consider that we are not able to answer for one of a
thousand: Therefore let us in serious Repentance and contrition of heart lay
hold on Love toward one another, that we may also be apprehended by the Love,
and preserved to Eternal Mercy. If thou think it strange when we say, that all
of us have erred and gone astray, and thou thereby conceivest as if we should
have been excluded from Salvation, seeing we have not had the perfect Wisdom;
then know and understand, that no Article of Faith, no Prophecy, no Knowledge,
no Wisdom, no Mystery, yea no Faith neither, according to thy knowing (as thou
conceivest it in the letter,) nor Baptism, nor Absolution, nor Communion, shall
nor can save thee, but only the Spirit; the Spirit, the Spirit, I say, it is,
which quickens and saves; where that is, there is all the rest also, be it
what it will, and call it what you will; therefore things must be judged
spiritually, and not animally, humanely and carnally: And whosoever has not
the Spirit of Christ belongs not to Him, though he boast, profess and protest
never so much; therefore in the time of their Ignorance God has winked at all
Sects (call them what Sect you will,) seeing it has been the time of
Desolation, whereby Christ is rooted out, and the Man of Sin set up in the holy
place, and has given out concerning himself that he is God; to the end that he
now might manifest the exceeding Riches, and the great hidden Depths of his
Wisdom and Knowledge, and convert to himself, not only the Christians, being so
confused and distracted among themselves, but also all Jews, Turks and
Heathens, yea all the World; and therefore he will show his exceeding great
Mercy unto all Men in the whole World, yea unto all Creatures.

CHAP. X. How in the End here we shall enter into the Kingdom of Christ, and
how we may beware of Hindrances.
SEeing he has concluded All under the Error of Folly, and confusion of great
Babel; so now he will also have Mercy upon all, not only upon the distracted
and perplexed Christians, but also upon the erring Jews and lost sheep of the
house of Israel, yea upon all Heathens and Nations, which have gone astray from
the Beginning, because none should boast against another, but rather be
ashamed, every one acknowledging and confessing his own fault, and all of us
boast only in the Lord, and not in Paul, Peter or Apollo, much less in any
Sect, but only of and in the Lord, to wit, that we of him, in him, and through
him have Mercy, Justice and Righteousness upon Earth. Therefore all this while
we have neither converted Jews, nor Turks, nor Heathens to Christ: First,
Because of our confused and entangled Faith, wherein we our selves have found
neither Ground, nor Order, nor Harmony, nor Unity amongst our selves; much less
were it possible for any other to find it: at which Scandal they have been
justly offended, and their Conversion hindered. The second Cause was and is
still our mischievous and desperate Hope, by which we our selves judge and
censure, yea wholly banish one another to Death, Hell and Damnation: for which
abomination Jews, Turks and Gentiles have justly been amazed and astonished,
and so have remained in their own former ways. The third Cause was and is still
our accursed Love, that is, our Diabolical Hatred and Envy, together with all
our wicked works, by which we have denied, trodden under feet and blasphemed the
true God, the Love of Christ, and the Unity of the Spirit both in Heart and
Deed; whom notwithstanding we confess with our mouth, saying, singing and
protesting, that we all believe in one God; and in the mean time both defraud,
persecute, banish, destroy and kill one another, far worse and more fiercely
then wild Beasts, and yet we will be called Christians: and therefore Jews,
Turks and Heathens may well say, Can a Man gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of
Thistles? therefore by their fruits you shall know them: Or do you think that
all those that say, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven? No; we
must do the Will of God, which is, that we must love one another, as he has
loved us. Therefore many Jews, Turks and Heathens shall stand up in that day,
and condemn us that are so unchristian: for they have been far more serious,
diligent and devout in their Superstition, Idolatry and Religion, then we have
been, yea richer in good works and deeds then we; in so much we have no reason
to brag and boast against them, but far rather to be ashamed.

Now where is our Christian Faith, whereof we boast so much against Jews, Turks
and Heathens? has not Babel confounded it, Baal spoiled it, and Belial blotted
it out? In so much that Beelzebub, alas, alas, has more of his Flies and Swarms
amongst the falsely so named Christians, then amongst Jews, Turks and Heathens.
Where is our hope? do not we amongst our selves judge it lost? and those that
should enter life, them we judge and censure to death: Where is our Love
according to the Commandment of Christ, that we should love our Enemies? Do we
not hate our very Friends, yea betray and sell them, even the Professors of our
own Faith and Religion, and give the sword into the hands of those that strive
to take their lives? Now where is our Glory, whereof we can boast before
another? Is it not Abomination upon Abomination, and Abomination of all
Abominations, and even the same Abomination whereof Christ, his Apostles and
Prophets have foretold? But what Course shall we take against all these
Abominations of Babylon? We must go out from Babel, and bring forth fruits
worthy and meet for Repentance, leaving off to sin, if happily the Lord will
have mercy upon us, and not wholly root us out, that we together with Israel
might find grace, and be converted to the Lord. Therefore thou Heathenish
Christian, be no more so proud and puffed up in thy vain and frivolous Faith,
and boast not against the Stock of Israel, for thou bear not it, but it
bears thee; thou art but an ingrafted Twig and Branch, the Ax is ready there,
and shall hew thee off in an Instant, and shall ingraft the natural Olive tree
with its Branches, cutting off the wild Branch: The King of Israel shall
demolish all Kingdoms, and restore again the Kingdom of Israel, for they have
spoiled and destroyed the whole Earth with their Bestial, Tyrannical and
Irrational Doings, and have made Israel in their sins seem righteous: Therefore
he shall be their Savior, and with a strong Hand and a mighty Arm bring them
back again from the Sea, and from the Islands, and from the Ends of Heaven, and
from the End of the Earth; for strong is the Lord of Hoasts their Redeemer, and
mighty is the God of Jacob, and sweet is the comfort of Israel: His Promise
deceives not, and his Prophecy fails not; for what he promises he
performs; and he shall not break his Covenant, but keep his Oath for ever and
ever. He shall bring Jacob back again, convert his Tribe to him, and redeem
Israel from all their sins: He shall work Wonders upon Earth, Wonders in the
Sea, and Wonders in Heaven; In the Skies Men shall see his Glory, and the Stars
shall shout for Joy before the Lord, when Jacobs Star rises again: Sun and
Moon shall kiss one another, when the Virgin Israel shall return: Lebanon shall
rejoice and be green again, and its Cedars shall boast, and together sing
praise to the God of Jacob: The Mountains of Israel shall be joyful and leap
for Joy: The Hill of Jerusalem shall skip for Joy like a young Lamb, and
rejoice comfortably that its wall shall be taken away at the time of the
wedding of the Lamb; they shall All return again to Sion, and there their Glory
shall arise from the Lord, for ever and ever; Hallelujah. O who shall live and
see it, and praise the Lord?

Now who is wise that can order and behave himself aright for the time? Who
knows how great an Alteration there is at hand? and who will turn back with us,
and become a Child? Many shall be cleansed and purified, and some wholly spued
out and thrown away, to wit, those that care not whether a man sing pleasantly
or unpleasantly, whether a man laments them or laughs at them in their misery,
whether a man exhorts them mildly or severely; for they imagine themselves to
be far wiser, and will not endure to hear Truth and Right spoken of, but say,
they know them already sufficiently: And whosoever preaches to them of true
Righteousness, he must be to them an Heretic: If a man pipeth, they will not
dance, nor rejoice with us for that which is to come: If we bewail them, they
will not deplore their sins with us, for they are righteous in the Imagination
of their own Heart: If we preach of the Kingdom of Christ in the thousand
Years, a man must immediately be to them a Millenary, Revelatist, and
Fantastical Fellow: In a word; they will not endure to hear either of Good or
Evil.

But beloved Friend, that think thy self to be wise, turn, turn, and become
a Child with us, a Fool in the fight of the world, and a Disciple or Scholar of
Wisdom; then thy heart shall first be quick to seek, and thou shall know and
discern thy folly, and become wise with the simple. Think not with thy self, I
am a great Doctor or Master, etc. Not so, for all these are words of an
Hypocrite, and not of Christ; and unless thou humblest thy self, and becomest a
Fool with us before the world, thou shall never come to Honor: Think not we
instruct thee; No, there is but one that is the Master and the Lord over us
all; He will teach us all the right way to the Eternity in God, and even he
himself is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, both in his Conception and Birth,
(by which we must turn back from the old Adam, and become Children, otherwise
we shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,) in his Life and Suffering, etc.
Him we must and will follow; he regards not what is humane, but what is
divine: Therefore leave the great folly, with all thine ornaments, wherewith
thou have adorned thy self hitherto; for Christ in that day, when all of us
must give an account, shall not ask thee, whether thou have been addicted to
any Sect; how many Articles of Faith thou have had; what opinion thou have been
of in every particular Point; how thou have studied, proficed, taught and
preached; how diligent thou have been in hearing of Sermons, etc. No; the Modus
and Manner of Judgment is plainly enough set before thee by Christ himself;
viz. the Works of Love and Charity shall Judge and Censure us either to
Salvation or Damnation, and this is most true and Infallible. Christ shall
neither then ask thee, what thou have believed of him, or according to which
Sect thy Opinion has been; No: for the Science; Knowledge or Wisdom of the
Letter and of the outward Man condemns not: Therefore we Judge no Man
according to his Knowledge or Ignorance neither to Salvation nor Condemnation,
namely, among those that are Children of Love: All the rest do judge themselves,
and not we, be it either according to their Knowledge or Ignorance; for we judge
no Man: But the Lord it is that judges us all, who also comes with his
Judgment; whom we beseech for his Grace and Mercy, that he would be pleased not
to enter into Judgment with us, else we all would be lost; but that he would
grant us the Spirit of Judgment, that we by it may judge, exhort and reprove our
own selves amongst our selves in Love as loving Children, while it is called to
day, lest we be condemned with the world; but that we may through his Grace, in
Faith, Hope, and Love of Truth, obtain Eternal Righteousness and Salvation
through Jesus Christ. Amen.

THE CONTENTS Of the Preceding TREATISE.
CHAP. I. WHat is that which a man ought to labor for in this Life. Page 9.
CHAP. II. An excellent Type of Love toward God, and Love toward the World.
Page 12 CHAP. III. Even as God is the Being of all Beings, and the Life of all
Living; so also must every one, that means to inherit Salvation, become like
unto him in Christ. Page 18 CHAP. IV. Of Man's true Perfection in Christ and in
the Love. Page 26 CHAP. V. What are those seven things in Christ, which ought
to be well and especially considered: And how we may attain to the Perfection
of Love. Page 33 CHAP. VI. Of the difference betwixt the unfeigned true Love
and false Love, and how the false Love always mingleth it self with the true.
Page 44 CHAP. VII. Wherein does the daily Practice of Love toward our Neighbor
truly consist. Page 58 CHAP. VIII. That Love is the true and only means whereby
a man may attain the true Christianity. Page 66 CHAP. IX. Wherein Man's true
Conversion consists, and which way to attain it. Page 76 CHAP. X. How in the
End here we shall enter into the Kingdom of Christ, and how we may beware of
Hindrances. Page 92
FINIS.

