THE ANSWER OF EDWARD HAYWARD, Clerk of the Survey at Chatham, (merely for his
own Vindication) to a most Abusive and Scandalous Pamphlet, lately publish-and
dispersed by George Kendall, M. A. (as he styles himself) and Clerk of the
Survey at Deptford, and Woolwich.

LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole, Printer, and Bookseller, at the sign of the
Printing-press in Cornhil, by the Exchange. 1656.

READER,
HAving lately seen, a most scandalous Pamphlet, written by Mr. Kendall of
Deptford, full of unworthy Reflections, which speaks more malice than
Christianity in him, though a high Pretender; I could do no less for my own
Vindication, than take notice of it, and make a Reply, wherein I shall not be
tedious.

But before I proceed to the matter in hand, it will be requisite to promise, as
a Truth, that one cause (though there be other ends) of Mr. Kendalls
Defamation, is grounded upon some late Differences between us, albeit, upon the
examination and determination of the things in Controversy, the Commissioners
of the Navy, were pleased to forbid all future animosities, and to give a
Command, that we should live in peace, and love, which was no ways violated on
my part.

And now, without more ado, I shall fall upon the Work, and answer to what I
conceive material in the Pamphlet.

1. As to the Naseby, there was no cause at al, that what I only mentioned in
the Contents of my Book, touching her Rigging, when she was but upon the
Stocks, should be brought in a parallel with the Resolution, after the lengths
of the Nasebyes Masts and Yards were known, and her Riggings precisely set out,
only it was a design in the Master of Arts, to do me a mischief, having studied
the Case.

2. As to the Swiftsure, it may easily be answered that the Difference was
great, between her first built, and her last alteration at Woolwich in respect
of Masts and Yards, which must needs vary the property of Riggings, therefore
no less than malice it self, could raise scruples from such an occasion, and if
that Ship was joined in the List of Riggings anciently allowed her, for Methods
sake, it does not follow that this must be a crime in me, or a ground of any
loss to the State (as is insinuated) neither need any to doubt, Charity prompts
good men to think others are as faithful and just as themselves.
who are not utterly void of Charity, but that I shall have so much discretion,
as to consider the Ship in the Condition she is, at her coming into Chatham
Harbor; and so likewise of other Ships, as I have hinted more at large, in the
Epistle of my Book to the Commissioners of the Navy, and I did it purposely to
avoid such an Objection, as is now started by learned Mr. Kendal.

And this last Point being cleared, it will manifest to all, that the weight of
Riggings does not hold alike to Ships of a Rank, which might have spared the
Conclusions drawn by Mr. Kendall most unworthily; for if there be no loss in
the particulars, there can be none in the general: and my setting of the weight
of Riggings, was intended for no other ends, but to make an estimate upon any
sudden occasion: therefore the new Surveyor might have spared the labor of
casting up the Riggings for such a purpose, only he loves to be meddling, and
cares not what dirt he casts in the face of honest men, to compass his own
designs: of which more hereafter.

However; to clear up mine own Innocence, both in the States Service, and as to
private men, as to any unjust, sinister, or unworthy dealings, thus much I
propose to the worst of mine Enemies (not in any boasting way, but because I am
forced) and leave them free to charge me if they can, as to any of the
following parciculars.

1. I challenge all the world to tax me with one dishonest Action, either to
the State, or to any particular person wilfully committed in twenty eight years
time, since I came first into the Navy.

2. I am free, and willing to give an account, how I have gotten that little
Estate which I have, to any who shall desire satisfaction in that particular,
and this I do the rather mention, because I am envyed by some for my
Prosperity; though it is not unknown to many, that in all my time I have
desired to live frugally, and have sometimes had the profit of other employments
(besides the Clerk of the Surveys Place) without which I had been so far from
adding to what I then had, that I could not have subsisted, my self and Family,
by the Sallery given me for executing that Trust, or Mystery (as Mr. Kendall
calls it) for many years together.

3. I appeal to all that live near me, whether I have not been faithful to the
Interest of this Commonwealth, in all the late times of trouble, and in
particular, hazarded my life, and all that was dear unto me, in the last
Kentish Insurrection, 1648. to adhere to their Interest, when also I had but
few leading Examples.

4. I appeal to the greatest of my Adversaries, whether I have not attended the
Duty of my place, and carried my self peaceably toward all men, and yet been
severe enough, to save the State what I could, whenever any business came
before me touching the Survey.

5. I appeal to all that know me, Whether I have not been a Friend to the Godly
Ministry, a constant Hearer of the Word, a careful Instructor of my Family, and
an Observer of Family Duties.

6. I appeal, Whether I have at any time frequented Taverns or Alehouses, with
all, or any of the Boat-swains, or Carpenters, of the States Ships, or have
otherwise had open, or secret compliance, or correspondence with them, futher,
or more inintimately, than my Trust did necessarily require.

7. I do appeal to the Judgments of all that know me, whether the State has
lost any thing considerable, for want of knowledge or experience in my Duty, and
whether they have not reaped the benefit of my Experience, and Diligence in my
Trust, beyond other men in the same Trust in other Places.

8. I challenge any man that can tax me with dissoluteness, nay, I can truly
say, with one act of Drunkenness, in my whole life time, blessed be God.

Though I am not ignorant how unable Mr. Kendall himself, is to endure the test
of these Appeals; yet, if in these, or any other particulars referring either
to my personal behavior toward all men, or any particular Trust in the States
Service, Mr. Kendall, or any other man, can justly tax me, as one unworthy of,
or to be continued in the Trust reposed in me from the State (granting me the
Allowance of the ordinary infirmities of a man) I shall willingly give Mr.
Kendall the Liberty of laying load upon me, without the least desire of favor,
but till then, he must not think, that all that he says of me, will stick upon
me because spoken by him, as a Master of Arts, which few men knew him to be
before, and many men yet doubt him to be; yea, I question not the Justice of
the State so far, as to Vindicate me from his close insinuations till matter of
fact be produced, and proof made thereof, in due form, and not suffer him by a
blank -- to traduce my good Name, which stands upon a better Foundation, than
to be over-turned, or weakened, by his undermining designs; not that I am so
fond of the Service, as that I cannot freely submit to the States Pleasure in
my Dismission from it, although Mr. Kendall himself should be my Successor,
which I easily perceive, and so may all indifferent Readers, is the design of
his Book; but that which I abhor is, the Bait laid to catch it, viz. to cry up
his own extraordinary Parts and Abilities, to vilify mine, by his Mathematical
Demonstrations, and learned Paralels, and then to render me false and unworthy
in my Trust, as if because, by his Parallel, so much Cordage was, or might have
been saved, of what was allowed in my Book, therefore the Boatswains and I had
shared it between us; Is this a Conclusion fit for a Master of Arts to deduce
from such Premises? The truth is, I have of late met with so many
Discouragements, after all my Faithful Service to the State, which makes me so
far from aspiring the Service, that I shall not much regard, how soon I were
discharged thereof, after a fair Vindication of those unjust Aspersions cast
upon me by Mr. Kendall, who as if he kend all things knowable in the Mystery of
the Survey business, undertakes (Dictator like) to impose upon all men his
upstart Experiences in the Navy, as if no man knew any thing thereof but
himself, not at all considering the great Damage the State has already
sustained by his ignorance in that very thing, wherein at present he would be
reputed so knowing; nor yet that the Duty of his, or my Place, is so much (if
at all) to say what Cordage, either for size or length, is fit for this or that
Ship, as to warrant the Store-keeper, to issue to the Boatswains, that, and no
more, both for size and length, without the concurrent Advice of the Master
Attendant, whose Directions are, and ought to be our Voucher; for what we do to
all Ships respectively, as ours is to the Store-keeper for the delivery
thereof; nor was it my design in my late Book, so to determine the sizes and
lengths of Cordage, to ships of each Rank, as to exclude the Master Attendants
Judgment in varying the same, as the manner of built of each ship of the same
Ranks, might necessarily require; nor yet to act without him, and his
Directions, according to the ancient Form of the Office, though he should
concur with me in the size and length, quantity and quality of each ships
Cordage. That which I drove at, was to let his Highness the Lord Protector,
and the Honorable Commissioners of the Admiralty, see the nearest Estimate that
I could make, of the quantity of Cordage spent upon each ship of each Rank, by
setting down the size and length of each Rope; and if therein, I did either
anticipate Mr. Kendals design for the same thing, or that my allowance has
been more than Mr. Kendalls Thrift thinks fit, the State is not so tied up to
my Opinion, that what I said out of good Affection to their Service, should
either be like the Laws of the Medes and Persians unalterable, or otherwise
construed any prejudice; only Mr. Kendall well hoping by this Pamphlet, and the
imaginary discoveries thereof, to have leap't into my Place, as the Reward of
his great, and good Service; which the better to compass, he would make the
State believe, that whatsoever is, or may be saved by his Parallel, is pursed by
me in the States wrong. Yea, I always was, and still am so far from being
positive in my Opinion, in that, or any other particular, that I shall not in
the least grudg Mr. Kendall the Honor of instructing me better, if the State
may any way reap the profit thereof, though I must clearly affirm, That when
both he and I have done our utmost endeavors for Regulation herein, it will be
the wisdom, and it must be the safety, both of him and me, to act by the old
Rule of the Master Attendants Directions, who if he sees cause to vary from our
Judgments, may give more or less both for length and size, than either my
Book, or his Parallel do allow; and if he pleases to cavel with them, as he
has done with me, I believe they are able to give an account of their Actions
to the State, without fear of his Discoveries; yea, they will tell him, That
whatsoever he, or I may fancy, as to the precise length and size of each
particular Rope of this or that ship, not only may, but must be varied in both,
in the Rigging of ships of the same Ranks, which however he laughs at as an
excuse of theirs, in Rhyme, at the end of his Book, yet I doubt not, but if he
had once obtained what he so greedily hunts after (my Place, or a good reward
in Moneys in lieu thereof) he would as readily acquiess in that Opinion as
rational, as they that now propose and practice it; for indeed, it is not
possible to Rig all Ships by one precise Rule, I mean, not all Ships of the
same Rank, not only with reference to the various manner of their built (hinted
before) but also with reference to the putting ships of lesser bulk into higher
Ranks, as has been usual heretofore; so that when al is said or done, that can
be said or done by us both, it must be left to the Judgment and Discretion of
the Master Attendant upon the place, to make his demand longer or shorter,
bigger or lesser, as the particular ship to be rigged with respect had to her
Built, Masts, Yards, etc. may require; all which is also confessed by himself
in the 11. page of his Pamphlet, to which I refer my Reader.

For his carping at my Book, with reference to Masts, Yards, Anchors, Cables,
etc. the same Answer may serve, that was given to the former, viz. That the
Masters Attendant, and Master Shipwrights, are respectively to determine the
number, size, length, breadth, and other circumstances, before either he at
Deptford, or I at Chatham, may, or ought to warrant the Store-keeper, their
delivery; and what was said as to them in my Book, was more to give the
Honorable the Commissioners of the Admiralty some light, or guess at the
particulars there mentioned, than any ways to satisfy mine own curiosity, or
otherwise to limit those Instruments (to whose Judgments I must, and will
subscribe) to my Opinion; and if Mr. Kendall can prevail with them to submit to
his, though different from mine (provided the State may be the Gainer) I am
satisfied; only I cannot believe either the one, or the other, till (if then)
Mr. Kendall has taken his Degrees in the Navy, as equally as at the
University; and in the interim, I hope his Charity will invite him to spare my
Book from the common Justice of the Hangman (a greater and more malicious
revenge being rare to be found) till a better than it, be presented by him, and
allowed of by the State, wherein I doubt not those in Authority for the
mannagement of the Navy, will do the State right, without any regard had to him
or me, further than as both of us shall design the Service, without ambitious
or envious ends of our own.

Edw. Hayward.
Chatham, Sept. 1656.

