Licensed and Entered according to Order.

Ma^thew 25. ve. 3^ Come ve Blessed of my Father inherit the Kingdom^ prepared
for you etc*
^^^thew 25. ver. 41 Depart from me ye Curse^ (...) Everlasting Fire prepared
for the Dev^^


HELL's Everlasting Flames AVOIDED, AND Heaven's Eternal Felicities ENJOYED.

The First Part.

Containing the Penitent Sinner's Sad Lamentation for the Deplorableness of his
impious Life. With a short View of the Terrors of the Damned in Hell; and his
Holy Resolutions to a thorough Reformation; with some Considerations upon the
Glory of the Saints in Heaven.

Also holy Preparations to a Worthy Receiving of the Lord's Supper: With Devout
Prayers, Praises, and Thanksgivings upon several Occasions; with Graces before
and after Meat.

To all which are Added

Hymns, and Spiritual Songs of Praises to Almighty God for our happy
Deliverance from Popery and the horrid Cruelty and Barbarity of Blood-thirsty
Men: With an excellent Prayer for King William.

By that eminent Divine, Mr. John Hayward.

The Tenth Edition.

London, Printed for Robert Gifford, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Old-Bedlam, without Bishopsgate. 1696. Price bound* 1s.

TO THE Christian READER.
AS you tender the Everlasting Welfare of your Precious and Immortal Souls,
cease from doing Evil, learn to do well; and with this humble Penitent, take a
view and look back upon what you have been a doing ever since you came in to
the World, to this day, and I doub^ not but that you will find you have been
too much like him, in doing the which you ought not, and leavin^ that undone
which you ought to do Therefore let him be your Pattern and take up with him in
his Resolutions, which is fully to leave h^ old course of Life, and to follow
on hard after the Lord; and to seek him while he may be found, and to call upon
him while he is near; and to press forward toward the Mark of the high Calling
of God in Christ Jesus our Lord, for which end this small Piece is Published.

And that you may reap this Benefit by it, of finding Acceptance with the Lord
Jesus, and by his Merits be received into Glory, is, and shall be the Constant
and Hearty Prayer of

Your Soul's Cordial Friend, JOHN HAYWARD.

THE PENITENT SINNER Bemoaning and Bewailing the DEPLORABLENESS OF HIS IMPIOUS
LIFE.
PART I.
Psalm. xi. 6. Upon the Wicked he shall rain Snares, Fir^ and Brimstone, and a
horrible Tempe^ This shall be the Portion of their Cup.


O Christ the Son of the most H^^ God, the Savior of most mi^rable Men! who
for us Men, a^ for our Salvation, left thy Glorious Ha^tation in the highest
Heavens, whose B^fed Body was buffetted with Fists, to with Whips, stretched
upon the Cropierced with Nails and Spears, and bath in the sweet Streams of thy
own preci^ Blood, for the Redemption of all (...) kind: O Father, O Restorer, O
Preserver of Life! to thy Majesty, to thy Mercy my sinful Soul, full of fresh
bleeding Wounds, full of old corrupted Sores, sick to the Death with the
surfeit of Sin, would willingly present it self, and send a few faint Groans
unto thy heavenly Ears.

But alas! the greatness of my Disease ha^^ almost taken away the sense
thereof: and so horrible is my corruption, that I fear I shall offend thy pure
Presence, and altogether turn thee from regarding me, thine Ear from attending
me; and thy Compassion from relieving me; for I have a sharp Testimony within
me, which accuses, which condemns; that although in words I have professed thy
Service, yet my Actions have charged my Tongue with Untruth: For I have never
subdued my own Will, and ^elinquisht the Prey whereon it has fed, which
Conquest is a necessary part of Christian Duty, to obey the Pleasure. But I
have remained Proud, Ambitious, Angry, Cruel, Rash, Vainglorious, Envious,
Covetous, Deceitful, Delicate, Sensual, Idle, Light; a great lover of my self,
of my Flesh, of my Estimation, of all wordly both Advantages and De^^ghts. I
have added Folly unto Blindness, Malice to Ignorance, and Obstinacy to Offense:
I have sinned with a high hand against thee, and more impudently should I have
sinned, if, as I had ended with my Conscience, I had ended also with my Shame.
In a word, all my Passions have been so lively and strong, that I cannot cast
my trembling thoughts into any corner of thy Commandments, but my Conscience
gives me a sharp conviction, and cries out guilty against me.

Adam did once taste of one forbidden Fruit, but I have often tasted of all; I
have broken every Branch of the Tree of Good, which thou have commanded, and of
the Tree of Evil which thou have forbidden: I have taken delight in all sorts
of sins, not always for pleasure, but either in mere Licentiousness or depraved
Custom* and many times not without great trouble and toil, even as the Prophet
said, Jer. 9. 5. They have taken great pains to do evil.

Behold, O gracious Lord! the Guides which I have followed, the Friends which I
have affected, the Counselors which (...) have credited, and the Masters which
I ha^ obeyed; with these have I lovingly liv^ with these have I loyally kept my
Fai^ even wi^h the Appetites of my filthy Fle^^ with the Transitory Treasures
of this World, bathing my unhappy Soul in the soul and foolish Pleasures of
this Life: These have been my Gods, these have been my Idols, but now they are
my Accusers, now Witnesses against me, now my Judges, now my Tormentors.

I am far more wretched than I can possibly imagine; and although I think that I
am at the very bottom of my Misery, yet do I find my self to sink daily more
deep in the Mire. I am one of the most poor and wretched Creatures in the
World, I am one that has most abused thy benefits, and if thou had wrought
so much both by secret Inspiration, and by outward means in them of Tire and
Sidon, even in other great Sinners, as thou have wrought in me, they would have
converted unto thee in Sackcloth and Ashes. I am unworthy of the service and
use of any of thy Creatures; I am unworthy to lift up mine Eyes toward Heaven,
and more unworthy to speak unto thee, but most of all to ^eceive from thee
those Comforts and Consolations wherewith thou usest to cherish thy Children.

O Sin, the very Bane and Death of my Soul, was it not enough for th^e to
infect a heedless Creature with thy Poison, bu^ thou must make it so ugly and
loathsom^ that the Eye of Mercy should not endu^^ to behold? Was it not enough
for thee ^^ crush it in pieces with thy weight but tho^ must also go to stop
the Ear of Pity wit^ Horror, and the Mouth of Praye^ (...) Shame? Was it not
enough for thee to draw me to destruction, but thou must all so take from me
both the sense of my Grief, and the sight of my Danger? an^ consequently the
Cure of the one and the Care of the other?

I was wounded and I felt it not; I w^^ wounded unto death, and I perceived ^^
not; I was bound, I was beaten, an^ (...) guarded it not; yea, my deadly (...)
were a delightful tickling unto (...) I took pleasure in satisfying the (...)
my Lusts, and like Solomon's Fool, I laug^ed when I was lashed; for I was not
m^self when I was without thee, neither desiring nor discerning that which was
good nor yet shunning, nor yet seeing tha^ which was evil.

I became in the Passage of all my Act^ons, not only foolish, but altogether
senseless; for thou are truth, and I was (...) out thee: and thou art Life* and
I was (...) out thee; and as one that always continues in places of unsavory
smells, perceives no annoyance, or as a brutish and savage Life seems civil to
him who has continually been brought up in the same, because Custom changes
into Nature, and one Contrary is not known but by the other; even so I did not
think my self in Misery, because I never knew what Felicity meant, and because
I never knew either the Beauty or Stability of a virtuous Life: I did not think
that vice had made me so unseemly, and so unsound; continual use confirmed
Impudency, and took from me the Opinion of Sin.

True it is, that I found a few Sparks of thine Image within me, but they were
few indeed, and of little force; which I did so continually quench or abuse,
that through them I can expect no profit at all, but rather to be made
inexcusable before thee.

Alas how am I deformed, how am I defiled! O Almighty God and Everlasting
Father! My fainting Soul groaneth and gaspeth for thy Grace, but it is abashed
at thy Glory; I would fain entreat thy Mercy to heal me, but I am loath to
offend thy Majesty in beholding me: I am ashamed to lay open my Iniquities, and
yet (woe is me) I cannot appear before thee without them. Ah these my sins! how
do they distress, how do they distract me? they desire to be seen, but they are
unwilling to be shown, lest they should be detested they are not healed without
Confession* and they are not heard without Confusi^^^* If they be covered they
cannot be cured and if they be opened they must needs be abhorred: In the mean
time their sharpness pierces, and their weight presset^ me, they torment me
with Grief, the astonish me with Fear, they confound m^ with Shame.

What shall I say, or what shall I do Wretch that I am! whither did I bend my
pace, and to what pass am I now come what have all my Pleasures been unto m^
but as Fruit eaten before it be ripe, which will set the Teeth on edge, and
posse^ the Body with dangerous Diseases? What have I been in all my Travels in
the Affairs of the World, but as a sick Man tumbling and tossing in his Bed, he
expecting ease in his change, and contentment, ye^ both of us deceived alike,
because whithe^ soever we turn our selves, the cause of ou^ disquiets remains
within us? O Christ I did not set thee before my Eyes, and (...) I dare not
appear in thy sight: I rejoiced but not in thee; I am troubled, but thou art
not with me. Alas, better it were to be nothing, than to be without thee,
without whom all things are nothing; better it were to be dead than to be
without thee, our Life.

Therefore, O my Soul! wicked, wretched Soul! shake off this death of Sin
wherein thou wallowest, and wherein thou wanderest; raise up, rouse up thy self
from this dangerous dullness, call to thy consideration, unhappy Creature, from
whence thou runnest, where thou art, and whereto thou hastenest; the favor
which thou forsakest, the horror wherein thou abidest, and the terror whereto
thou rendest.

Thou wast once washed clean with the Heavenly Fountain of Baptism, with the
pure Robe of Righteousness, endowed with the Joys of Heaven, and espoused to
thy Savior Christ; but now thou have by impurity of Life soiled thy self with
sin, defiled that glorious Garment, broken those sacred Bands, and made thy
loving Spouse both thy great Enemy and severe Judge.

O Christ, how can I forget thy Goodness? and yet, how dare I remember thy
Greatness? since I have denied thee with Peter, betrayed thee with Judas, and
run from thee with the rest of thy Disciples, nay more, with the cursed and
cruel Jew^ I have mocked, blasphemed, buffered and scourg^d thee, spit upon thy
glorious Fac^ and torn open thy tender Wounds: There since I have committed
their cruelty, what hope can I have to avoid their Curse that thy Blood be not
upon me and my Posterity.

Alas, miserable Wretch! in what Pat^ have I walked? In what Pollutions have
wallowed? and in what perplexities an now plunged? wherein the consideration
both of Good and Evil, tormenteth me a like: of Good, with grief of that which
have lost: of Evil, partly with sense o^ that which I sustain, and partly with
fea^ of that which I expect.

I have lost Glory, I feel Shame, I fea^ Punishment; the loss is by me
irreparable the shame inexcusable, the fear inconsolable: O miserable Estate! O
uncomfortable Condition! not only to be depriv* of unspeakable Joys, but also
to be aflicted with intolerable Pains.

O Sin! the defiler, the deformer, the destroyer of Souls! from how high a
pitch ^ Happiness have thou dejected me? (...) how deep a Gulf of Misery have
thou depressed me? with what a World of Woes have thou enclosed me? here Woe
and there Woe, and a very Hell of Woes is heaped upon me. Justly, Lord, justly
am I thus tormented; for I have been faint, yea, false in the charge thou have
committed unto me; I have thrown away my spiritual Weapons, I have forsaken the
Field of Christian Combat, and not only cowardly yielded, but Traitor-like, I
have turned to the Prince of Darkness, my greatest Enemy.

I have cast off my Savior, and cast away my self; I have forsaken the Society
of Saints, and joined my self to a company of the Damned. O Hellish Companions!
I have abandoned the Palaces of Heaven, and built me a Nest in the loathsome
Den of Hell: I am altogether become an Abject from God, and a Subject to the
Devil.

What have thou done? O mad Man! O mischievous! O monstrous Man! what have thou
done? what a woeful exchange have thou made? what a lamentable loss have thou
incurred? O perverse Will! O miracle of madness! How, O God, has Corruption
depraved me? How, O God, shall Satisfaction restore me?

Cast thy self, forlorn Wretch, into the uncomfortable Dungeons of Sorrow,
overwhelm thy self with Mountains of bitter Mourning; come Grief, come Horror,
come Anguish, come Fear, heap your selves upon me, wrap me in, weigh me down; I
have impudently contemned you, I have desperately provoked you, and now do
miserably call for you.

So, so it is just; afflict the Wicked, torment the Guilty, revenge the
Injuries, revenge the Perjuries, which I have committed against God; give me a
touch of the Tortures which I have deserved, give me a taste of the Banquet
which I have prepared; Comfort, Peace, Security, Joy, keep away, I will I have
none of you, except you bring a pardon with you: As to many that are sick all
things seem bitter, so all your pleasures are distasteful unto me. I account
you my deceitful and flattering Enemies; Disquiet shall be my Rest, Mourning my
Mirth, sour Sorrow my Comfort. Alas, how shall I present my self before the
Majesty of the most righteous and upright Judge? how shall my fearful Face
behold him? how terrible will he cast his Countenance upon me? his Eyes far
brighter than the Sun, have narrowly observed all my Actions, he has weighed
my Words he has examined my Thoughts, he hat^ fealed up all my Sins, he has
hitherto been silent, hither patient, but alas, he will one day cry out, and
call me to a reckon^ing for all.

O my heart! O poor heart! a heart fu^ of miseries, never able to sustain these
Fir^ brands of Conscience: alas, Wretch that ^ am! comfortless and forsaken
Wretch whither shall I go? to whom shall I see^ for succor? who shall have
pity and compassion upon me? If I behold the Heaven I am justly excluded,
because I have gri^vously sinned against them; If I look upon the Earth, it is
weary of me, because I ha^^ been noisome unto it: on the one side I s^ the Good
I have declined, on the other si^ the Evil which I have pursued; before ^^ is
Death ready to arrest me, behind me my wicked Life ready to accuse me; abo^ me
thy Justice ready to condemn me; b^neath me Hell fire ready to devour me. ^ am
altogether unworthy that the Ea^^ should bear me, that the Light and A^ should
refresh we, that any Creature shou^ serve me; my eyes are not worthy to lo^
toward thee; yea, they are most wort^ to be extinguished with Tears. If then I
^ ashamed to be seen, how shall I be assur'^ to be received? I have no Heart to
ask what hope can I have that I shall obtain?

Go to then, O sinful Soul! enter again into the Closet of thy Conscience, turn
over the Books of thy Accounts, cast up thy Reckoning, set down thy Sum, see
what thou have done, and what thou have deserved.

O Lord, I must confess I have been guilty of abusing many Creatures, in
desi^ing, seeking, and embracing them above and before thee: I have been guilty
of Blasphemy, guilty of Swearing, guilty of Lying, guilty of vain and foolish
Talking, guilty of Covetousness, guilty of Cruelty, guilty of Pride, guilty of
Ambition, guilty of Riot, guilty of Gluttony, guilty of Drunkenness, guilty of
Lightness, guilty of Looseness, guilty of Lust, guilty of Envy, guilty of
Hatred, guilty of Anger, guilty of Unquietness, guilty of Frowardness, guilty
of Obstinacy, guilty of Rashness, guilty of Violence, guilty of Idleness,
guilty of Sloth, guilty of Hypocrisy, guilty of Flattery, guilty of Curiosity,
guilty of Detraction, guilty of Oppression, guilty of Slander, and to sum up
all, guilty of breaking of all thy Commandments. The penalty is eternal
Banishment from thy presence, and intolerable and endless Pains in Hellfire.

Out upon me, Wretch! alas, what shall become of me? O my Lord! I know not what
to do, I cannot tell what answer to make; and being now in Extremity both of
danger and fear, my Cogitations trouble me, my Conscience tormenteth me, every
Thought is a Thorn unto me, insomuch as that I may conclude of my self with
that of Judas, It had been good for me that I had never been born. Nay, go on
then a little further, look down into Hell before thou leap into it; observe
there who expects thy coming, what shall be thy entertainment; look down into
Hell, I say, over which thou now hangest by the slender twined thread of Life,
which, if it should happen suddenly to break, thou art in danger therein to be
devoured; if it does no^ break, yet the turning of the Heaven is instead of a
Wheel, which continually windeth some part toward thee.

A short View of the Horrors and Terrors the Damned in Hell.
O Good God! what do I behold in the Infernal Lake? nothing but Horro^
Tumultuous and Eternal Horror, Fie^ Chains, Flaming Whips, Scorching Darness,
tormenting Devils, and burning Souls, howling, roaring and lamenting; Woe and
alas, with a mad Rage blaspheming God, in despair for ever to be received into
his Favor, and for despite, in being fettered by him in those Eternal Flames,
with a desperate Impenitency, cursing all Creatures, and especially themselves,
tearing in a manner their own Substance, and inviting the furious Fiends to
torment them.

All the Pains of this Life are singular, vexing some one sense or member of
the Body; or if many be affected at once, yet never all; but here every Pore
and Part of the condemned Prisoner, as well inward as outward, has both a full
and fit charge of Punishment, without either intermission or change: for as he
has offended God with every part of his Soul, and part of his Body, so must
every one of them receive his peculiar Punishment: the Memory is tormented with
Pleasures that are past, the Apprehension with Pains that are present, the
Understanding with Joys that are lost, and Miseries that are to come, the Will
with a malicious and envious Disposition at the Glory of God and his Elect, and
above all, the Conscience is griped with a bitter despite, and raging fruitless
Repentance for every particular Offense the Sinner has committed, which once
seemed ^oft and sweet, but then, like Serpents, cru^lly and restlesly gnaw upon
him; never ^^asing to rub into his remembrance how ^^ase were the Causes of his
Calamity, what Warning was given, what Means was pre^ented for the avoiding of
it, how effectu^lly he had been persuaded, how earnestly ^ntreated to change
his choice, and accept ^he offer of eternal Happiness; how easily ^e might, and
many times how nearly he ^ad apprehended the occasion, and yet ^ow negligently,
how foolishly, how mad^^ ^he continued in his careless course.

Further, the Sight is affected with fear^ul Darkness and ugly Devils, the
Hearing with terrible and hideous Cries, the Smell with poisonous Stink, the
taste with bit^erness far exceeding Gall, the Feeling ^ith intolerable Fire.

A Fire which as nothing does feed it, so ^t consumes nothing that it does
burn: a Fire which has no Light to comfort, but Heat to torment; no Light but
to show them their own Miseries, and the Miseries ^f those they did
inordinately affect: A (...) whose force shall never be spent or ^^^inguished,
or yet abated, but so long as ^d is God, so long it shall torment the ^cked,
and that with such vehement rage, at one drop of Water to be applied to ^^
scorched Tongue, will be of greater ^luation than a Thousand Worlds.

O unhappy Bodies! which are to be ba^ed in this burning Lake, speaking nothing
^t Curses, seeing nothing but Miseries, ^aring nothing but mourning and gnash^
of Teeth: O silly Souls! which passed ^ay the time of this Life either in
Idleness in Evil; what an endless Chain of Calaty have your short Joys linked
together? ^ur seven years of plenty are past, no menti^, no memory remains of
them; your ^^ry is vanished, your felicity is swallow-up in the Sea of Sorrow,
your Plea^es are turned into Serpents in your ^^es, into Bellows which blow up
the ^e to torment you.

And although this Fire be of one only sort, ^t does it not in one sort torment
the ^mned, but yields to every Sinner a de^ee of Punishment answerable to the
de^ee of his Transgression; even as when any stand under the scorching Sun, all
are ^t vexed with Heat alike, but as their Bo^es are differently disposed, so
does one ^mplain above another, and therefore that which is a property of our
material Fire, by reason of diversity of Bodies, is proper also to the Fire of
Hell, by reason of diversity of Sins; for as the same material Fire burns not
Straw, Wood, and Iron a like, so the same Hell fire perplexeth different
sinners, in a different sort; because not so much the Persons as the Sins of
Men, are the proper subject of this burning, the eternal Fuel of these Flames.

But this Pain of Sense is far surmounted as Divines hold Opinion, by another
Pain which they term the Pain of Loss; because that which the Damned do feel in
Hell, i^ nothing comparable to that which they forego, and that is to be
deprived both o^ the Society and Sight of God, wherein consists the Essential
Glory of the Saints for the more good a thing is, the greater Pain and Grief
does it cause in being either not attained or lost. And therefore seeing that
God is infinitely good, no^ only comprehending but exceeding the perfection of
all things, and therewith the last end of our desires, and the perfect Rest of
a reasonable Soul, it followed that all the other Torments of Hell do no^ so
much afflict the Soul, as to be deprived for ever of him.

It cannot be expressed, it cannot be conceived, as how excellent and glorious
is the ^ight and enjoyment of God, so what Punishment it is to be deprived
thereof! M^^y are so weak in judgment that they desire no more than to escape
Hell, but there ^s a far greater Torment than the Torment of Hell, it is a
greater Torment to be shut ^ut of Heaven, than to be perpetually imprisoned in
Hell: Hell is intolerable, but ^uch more intolerable than to be deprived ^f the
Glory of Heaven, than to be hated ^f Christ, than to have him turn away his
^oul-satisfying Countenance, than to shut is amiable Eyes, than to say unto us,
D^^art from me, ye cursed, I know ye not. O ^weet Jesus, suffer us not, I
beseech thee, ^ taste of these Torments, suffer us not, se^ure Souls, lightly
to esteem it, at least suf^er us not with a high pace to hasten unto ^. So much
as thy Glory and Beauty does ^^ceed the Torments of Hell, so much is ^e Torment
greater to be deprived of the ^^e, than to be possessed with the other.

And besides these common Torments, ^^ery Offender shall have his particular
^ains according to the difference of his ^ns, either in quality or kind.

The Proud shall be abased, and beaten under foot, the Covetous shall be
crushed with the weight of their want, the Gluttonous shall be devoured with
ravenous hunger, the Drunkard shall be dried up with scorching thirst, the
Lascivious and Unchaste shall be wrapped up in the Embrace of stinking, stinging*
and scorching Flames they that regarded not the Poor crying t^ them for a crumb
of Bread, shall becom^ there both endless and successless Begga^ for a drop of
Water; they that would no^ in this Lifeonce think on these Pains, ther^ by to
bridle their Affections, shall there, b^ reason of their extensive sense of
them, b^ able to think upon nothing else, and in li^^ manner the rest by weight
and measure so that according to the Glory and Pleasure they did enjoy, Misery
and Torme^ shall be proportioned to them, where^ as well the Beauty and Order
of God's ^stice, as also both the manner of their E^cess, and the measure of it
shall perfect^ appear.

All this does the Scripture in dive^ places declare, in that it says, In Hell
Hunger and Thirst, wailing and gnashi^ of Teeth, Two-edged Swords, Worn^
Serpents, Scorpions, Hammers, Wor^ wood, Water mingled with Gall, tempestuous
Spirits, and Spirits created for Revenge: By all which Expressions, as well the
greatness, as also the multitude and variety of Torments are signified, which
the damned shall for ever endure.

Finally, then shall be poured upon the damned the full Flood of God's Wrath,
which he has gathered together upon all the Sins that have been committed
since the beginning of the World, and all the Torments that possibly can be
imagined, shall then be heaped upon their Heads: Nay, all the Torments which in
this Life either have been invented, or can be imagined, do stand in no
comparison, whether for sharpness, or continuance, with the Torments of that
place, which although they shall be common to many, yet they shall be most heavy
upon those that have had the best Means and Opportunities to avoid them.

And not only all these Pains, but any one of them shall be so grievous, and so
intolerable, as that it is impossible for the Wit of Man either to express or
imagine; for so much as the least Torment of Hell that can be conceived, is
more than we can possibly conceive, and yet shall no Crea^ure be grieved for
them; and endure they must be without any hope, First, of Intermission: And
Secondly, of Abatement, Thirdly, of Change, without which things not only
painful and indifferent, but things pleasant (as appears by the Manna God
sent down to the Children of Israel) become insupportable. Fourthly, of the
poo^ Comfort of Calamity, Pity; but on the contrary, the Devils shall upbraid
them* the Damned curse them, and the Saint^ deride them. Lastly, of End, for
nothing is perfectly great which has an^ End.

If there might be any End of these Torments, although it should be after so many
millions of Years as there are drops of Water in the Sea, as there are Motes of
Du^ upon the Earth, as there has been Moments of time since time began, it
would be some comfort to those that do endu^ them; but Eternity is intolerable
unt^ them, infinite Eternity breaks the^ Hearts, Eternity is the very Hell of
Hel^ If all the Punishments in Hell were n^ greater than the stinging of Ants,
or ^^ Fleas, Eternity* is enough to make them in tolerable; the present sense
of Pain is no so grievous to the Damned, as it is grievo^^ to think that after
many Millions of Ag^ they shall be as far either from End or Ease, as they were
at the first day of their beginning.

It is certain that a thousand Pleasures make no satisfaction for one exquisite
torment, because the torment is without ease, and pleasures are not without
Composition and Allay; and if they do not make satisfaction for one Torment,
much less infinite; and if not for a small time, much less for Eternity; and if
not for the Torment of one part, much less of the whole.

And as one that floateth half choked and wearied in the Sea, cease no^ to
wrestle with the Waves, to cast forth his Hands every way, although he graspeth
nothing but thin and weak Water, which continually deceives his pains; so they
that both swim and sink in this depth of Death, shall always strive and
struggle therewith, although they neither find nor hope for any help. O deadly
Life! O immortal Death! what shall I term thee? Life, wherefore then do thou
kill Death, and wherefore do thou then endure? There is neither Life nor
Death, but there is some good in it, for in Life there is some Ease, and in
Death an End; but thou have neither Ease nor End. What then shall I term thee?
Even the bitterness of both: for of Death thou have the Torment without any
End, of Life thou have the Continuance without any Ease. God has taken away
both from Life and Death all that which is Good; the rest he has mixed
together, and therewith tempered the Torments of Hell.

O unsavory Composition of the Cup of God's wrath! a death always living, and
an end ever in beginning; a Death which shall not devour, but tear, and eat,
but not consume. And as this Death can never die, so shall it never be
satisfied, or weary in gnawing upon every part of his most miserable Prey. O
Intolerable Vengeance, and equal with Eternity! which no means can moderate, no
patience can endure, no time can end; but so long as God shall live, so long
shall the damned die; and when he shall cease to be happy, which can never be,
then shall they cease to be miserable.

A Star, which is far greater than the Earth, appears to be a small Spot in
comparison of the Heavens; much less shall the Age of Man seem, much less the
Age and Continuance of the World, in regard of these eternal Pains. The least
Moment of Time, if compared with Ten-Millions of Years, because both terms are
definite, and the one a part of the other, bears, alth^ a very small, yet
some Proportion; but this or any number of Years in respect to Eternity, is
nothing less than just nothing. All things that are finite, I may be compared
together; but between that which is finite, and that which is infinite, there
is no comparison.

Neither is it any piece of Injustice to inflict Eternal Punishment for sins
that were done but for a time; because the just and severe Judge does not weigh
the Actions only, but the Hearts of Men: For, therefore do the wicked sin for a
time, because they have but a time to live; but they are desirous to live for
ever, because they are desirous to offend for ever; being more desirous to sin
than to live, and not regarding life, but only to enjoy the Pleasures of sin;
and therefore it is just that they should never want punishment who ever had a
will to offend, that they should never find an end of Revenge, who would never
have made an end of sin. Again, as God is infinite both in Majesty and Mercy,
it follows that every Offense against that Majesty is also infinite, and
therefore worthy infinitely to be punished. And surely if a Man that is sharply
pinched with some one particular Pain, be it but the a king of one of his
Teeth, does think one Night exceeding long, though he lies in a soft Bed, well
applied and cared for; for if he tur'neth often, and tells the hours, and
thinks every one long till it be Day; how tedious can we think Eternity will
seem to those that shall be continually perplexed and torn with those Eternal
torments? not only the Body, but primarily the Soul, in a dark Babylonian
Furnace, foaming forth most horrible Heat: And if Forty Days Rain, driven with
the Tempest of God's Wrath, was sufficient to destroy the whole World, what
shall we conclude of the full Storm and Stream of his Rage, wherein the fiery
Darts of his Fury shall never cease to beat upon his Enemies? O dreadful Fire!
kindled by the breath of God's Eternal Wrath, more exceeding the fire of this
World than can be imagined: O ugly Darkness! cursed by the Mouth of God: O
Eternal Night both inward of the Soul, and outward of the Body, in regard
whereof the palpable Darkness of Egypt was scarce a Day which light Clouds
over cast: O long and loathsome Night! wherein the Morning will never appear,
wherein the hope of Light is no less desperate than the desire violent. Is
this, O Lord, the wages of Sin? is this the punishment of wicked Doers? of whom
I am one in so deep a degree, that it is no wonder if my Conscience tremble,
and my Soul cleave with Sighs, and my Eyes drowned with Tears.

The Penitent Sinner's Holy Resolutions to a thorough Reformation.
IS it so? is my Case so deplorable and desperate? must my sinful Life end in
the entering into those eternal Flames? must my Frolicks die into everlasting
Burnings? must my jolly Hours be turned into bitter Weepings and Wailings? must
my breaking of God's Holy Commandments cause me to be fettered in Chains, and
that forever in utter Darkness, where there is nothing but hideous and fearful
cryings and groanings? Is it so? Has God told me, that cannot lie, and shall I
not have the Faith to believe him? Yes, I will. If this be the Exit of a sinful
Life, tell me no more of those Dalilah's, of those Pleasures I have formerly
taken a delight in: There is no playing with Sin, I will get clear of it
whatever it cost me; I will give ear to its bewitching Enchantments no more, I
will not for a few merry hours hazard my eternal Safety: Heaven is not a thing
to be lightly esteemed, it is of more value than a thousand Worlds, and I
believe it to be so* and why should I be so foolish and careless as not to take
any care to fit my self for an Admittance into it? I know not how soon my
Change may come; and if it should come and I not prepared, I am undone, and
that for ever; therefore I will bid my old Friends farewell: farewell fine
Clothes, and farewell all delicious Living farewell Carding and Dicing, Hunting
and all manner of Revelling whatsoever that I have taken any delight in, for my
Delight shall be for the future in fearing and serving of God, and in keeping
of his Commandments, which was the chief End of my being made a rational
Creature: therefore away with your En^icements, your Traps and Snares, whereby
you would delude and deceive me, till you drag me into H^ll's Everlasting
Flames; for I see what all Lewdness will come to, which is dreadful to me;
therefore molest and trouble me not, I will run the pleasan^ ways of God's holy
Commandments, I will ascend God's holy Hill, I will make haste to Mount Sion, I
will be kept in the Tents of Wickedness no longer (therefore lift up your Head,
O ye Gates, and be ye lifted up ye Everlasting Doors; I will force my way
through, I will enter,) and all that ever Men or Devils can do unto me, shall not
hinder: shall Tribulation, or Distress, or Persecution, or Famine, or
Nakedness, Peril or Sword? these can but kill the Body, but I have an immortal
Soul, that is of greater value, if I save that I save all: and shall I fear
dangers in striving to be abundantly satisfied with the Fatness of God's House?
I see a City which has Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God: I see
a-far off a House made without Hands eternal in the Heavens: farewell deceitful
Heart, I will give Ear to your false Suggestions no more, I have a more sure
word of Prophecy, whereunto I resolve to take heed: how often have thou taught
me to hide my Sins, and call them by wrong Names, that I might excuse my self
for departing from them? But dare I presume to think to deceive the all-wise
God? No, God will not be blinded, he will not be mocked, he is not asleep like
Baal, or gone a Hunting: No, Can thou draw a Curtain before the Eyes of
Infinite Wisdom? No, he sits and sees, and observes all the Actions of Men,
therefore I am ashamed knowing what I have done. I have called my Pride,
Decency; my Covetousness, Frugality; my Drunkenness, Good-Fellowship; my
Lasciviousness, Impossibility of resisting the Dictates of Nature; my
slandering others, but saying what I hear; And thus I have deceived my self,
but I will for the future be deceived no more, but I will hearken unto what the
Lord will say unto me, and not to my base and deceitful Heart's Lust: I have
seen enough of Impiety, I will stay no longer in Sodom, these flowery Meadows,
these pleasant Fields shall make me lie down no more: I see there is Death in
the Pot, and the great Day of God's eternal Wrath is hastening; therefore I
come, Lord, I will stand off no longer: I have staid in the service of Sin and
of the Devil too long already, I will give ear to what thou shall be pleased to
say to me: I will turn my back no more upon thee, I will harden my heart no
more. It is the voice of my beloved that knocks, I will arise and let him in:
Awake up my Glory; Awake, I have slumbered too much: get up my drowsy
Affections, the Lord is at hand. O my God! will thou spread forth thy blessed
Arms, to embrace and receive such a wretched Creature as I am, filled with all
manner of wickedness and Deceit; and having known the Judgment of God; that
they who commit such things, are worthy of Death, have not only done the same,
but have had pleasure in them that do them? is there Mercy in store for such a
Rebel? then I heartily renounce the Devil and all his Works, therefore, arise,
O Lord, and let thy Enemies be scattered, and appear for me with thy Almighty
Power and out stretched Arm, and deliver me from this Slavery, this hard
Bondage that I am under: Deliver me from these my Enemies that seek my utter
Destruction.

Methinks I see them quaking and trembling before God's Tribunal, that thought
it below them, while upon Earth, to make Religion their business: Methinks I
see them, how they are ashamed of their Madness and Folly, and methinks I hear
them ca^l and cry to the Rocks and Mountains to fall upon them, to hide them
from the Face of him that sits upon the Throne. Direct me, O Lord, and teach me
by thy holy Spirit; draw me and I will run after thee; teach me to sing the
Song of Sion; guide me in the Path of Life; Leave not my Soul in Hell, pull it
out. I have made a solemn choice of God for my Portion, le^ me know how I must
love him; I will obey your Counsel, I will act according to your Directions, be
not afraid of me, I will not turn my back in the day of Battle, I have done
with these fading, deceitful Pleasures, I find no Comfort, no enjoyment in
them; they may please for a while but they cannot satisfy for ever: Nay, they
are destructive both to Soul and Body: Solomon took a trial of them all, and
found them so, and so all Men are forced to confess at last, and too often when
it is too late. I see most Men of another Mind when they come to die, to what
they are in the time of their strength, and health, and Liberty. (But, O my
Soul! come not then into their Secret, unto their Assembly, my Honor be thou
not united) Take warning by these sad Examples. There are many Snares laid, I
am beset with temptations, but I will hug those Monsters no more, but will
resist and overcome them by thy Power. Come my Soul, ascend to higher Thoughts,
Hopes and Labors, and away with thy soft Wishes and dull Endeavors are these
fit for seeking Eternal Joys? does a slow pace become a Man that is resolved
for Eternity? The Voice of the Lord is powerful, the voice of the Lord is full
of Majesty, the Voice of the Lord breaks the Cedars: and art thou the only
Creature he cannot shake? it is done, I am sensible, and I am resolved:
Resolution will go far, as I may see by these Examples: Resolution made David
run through a Troop, and leap over a Wall, Psalm. 18. 29. It was his Resolution
made him say thus, Psalm. 119. 46, 106. I have sworn and will perform it, that I
will keep thy righteous judgments: I will speak of thy Testimonies before
Kings, and will not be ashamed, and I will delight my self in thy Commandments.
My hands will I lift up unto thy Precepts, which I have loved: and I will
meditate in thy Statutes. It was Resolution, made Shadrach, Meshech, and
Abednego go voluntarily into the Fire; It was Resolution made St. Paul ready
not only to suffer, but to die at Jerusalem, for the Name of Jesus: Resolution
made David's Worthies draw Water out of the Well of Bethlehem: Resolution made
Ignatius despise Fire, Sword, and wild Beasts: Resolution made Empedocles give
himself to the Flames, and Artalus to sit down as one unconcerned in the fiery
Chair his Enemies had prepared for him; and Resolution made Job bear his great
Losses. Shall I be faint-hearted? shall I be a Coward? shall these and others
resolve to part with anything, so much as their very Lives for their Savior's
Sake? Lord I am resolved with these Worthies to undergo any thing for the
advancement of thy Honor and Glory; My heart is ready to obey all thy
Commands; therefore, Lord, make me clean* help me to put a way the evil of my
doing^, and learn me to do well, that so I may si^ no more against thee, or
grieve thy Holy Spirit: I am convinced that thy service i^ perfect freedom; he
that enters upon it is under the Government of a good and a lawful Prince; he
feels nothing that i^ burdensome unto him; thou visitest him with Everlasting
Loving kindness, an^ thou give thy Angels charge over him and thou will not
suffer any harm to come unto him: thou a^t with him in his distress, and when
he weeps, thou hold a Bottle under to catch his Tears: thou bindest up his
Wounds, and healest all his Sores; thou watchest over him, and thy Ears are
open to his Prayers, and his Groans are not hi^ from thee, his Peace is made
with thee; so here, they that truly fear and serve thee* are free from all
slavish fears, nothing but Love rules in their Hearts, which makes their Yoke
easy, and their Burden light, and the Narrow way full of delight and
satisfaction; they have peace of Consc^ence, a peace which passes all
understanding, so that the Devil can make no War against them, to do them any
harm; he may raise a Storm, and lay a Siege, but he cannot overthrow: for he
that is for them, is stronger than he that is against them: he may set their
House on fire, but he cannot consume them; and rain Brimstone upon them, but
they have a Tower to flee to, a Place of Refuge and Defense; Who is a strong
Tow^r in the day of distress, and the Righteous ^lee unto it, and are safe. Ah
Lord! these are great and glorious Privileges, that ^hy chosen ones are made
Partakers of: O Lord, make me one of these, and ^uide me by thy Counsel, until
thou shall ^ing me unto Glory.

^ome Considerations of the Glory of the Saints in Heaven.
THis Felicity is represented to us by many Names, but most especially Two,
taken from Two things in this World which we affect most, that is, Life and a
Kingdom.

First, Life, Luke 10. 15. Master, who shall I do to inherit eternal Life? And,

Secondly, A Kingdom; Matt. 22. 3^ Mark. 12. 28. Luke 2. 32. Fear not, litt^^
Flock; for it is your Father's pleasure to gi^^ you a Kingdom.

The Nature of Life is so sweet to all Me^ because naturally we desire to
preserve o^ Being even in this mortal Life; which (...) fast chained, not only
to infinite change o^ Calamities, but to many Dangers, and f^nally to Death it
self; but that Life which is the blessed State of those who have a fu^fruition
of God, is a true, lively, and perfect Life, a pure Life, a holy Life, a
secur^^ Life, a Life free from Molestation, fr^^ from Change, a most happy
Life, as we^ for the Glory thereof as for the Eternity.

In this Glory there may be degrees, (...) there can ^e no defect, although like
S^a^^ one Saint shall differ from another, yet a^ shall shine, although like
Vessels, one s^a^^^ hold more than another, yet all shall (...) full: Neither
shall this difference cause any to complain: First, Because in themselves they
shall find no want: And, ^^condly, Because the Glory of others sha^^ be as
their own.

And yet this Glory could not make Life ^appy, if it were not also perpetual:
The ^ore glorious it is to be enjoyed, the more ^^ievous it would be to
determine; the ^ery Thoughts of Ending would much ^bate the pleasures of
Enjoying; but Eter^ity adds so much to Contentment in ^his Glorious Life, as
it adds to conti^uance; it makes the Pleasures of this ^ife even like it
self, no less than infinite.

Likewise a Kingdom is of such Estima^^on among Men, that for it they will
ven^ure their Estates, their Lives, their Souls; ^ay they will surmount all
difficulties and ^angers; they will make their way through blood, through Wounds,
through Death (...) self to attain it, although it be but a small Corner-Kingdom
upon Earth, incident to ^numerable Casualties and Care: But his Kingdom is a
Heavenly Kingdom* (...) ^ternal Kingdom, a most blessed Kingd^^ (...) Tim. 4.
18. 2 Pet. 1. 11. Luke (...) ^at. 23. 34. a Heavenly Kingdom, (...) ^^ove the
tempestuous Troubles of this (...) ^^riour World, an eternal Kingdom, sub^^ct
neither to declination nor change; a ^lessed Kingdom, furnished with all
Feli^^ties, without any mixture of Misery or ^rief; the Excellency whereof may
be considered in two principal Points, Larg^ness and Magnificence, which may
not b^ obscurely conjectured.

For if it be true which all Authors a^firm, That many Stars do far exceed the
whole Body of the Earth in greatness seeing these Stars bear so small a
Proportion in regard of that Heaven whereo^ they are fixed, the Face whereof is
open to our View: how little is the compass ^ all the Kingdoms upon the Earth,
in comparison to the Celestial Kingdom which (...) above the Starry Heaven, and
in unknow^ dimensions exceeds that Sphere? Be astonished, O my Soul! and
altogether wrap from thy bodily Senses, upon consideration both of the
Greatness of this Kingdom, and the unspeakable Goodness ^^ the King thereof;
who has said unto the ^^ncerning the same, as once he said unt^ (...), of the
Land of Canaan, Lift ^ (...) ^yes now, and look from the Place wh^^ (...) art,
for all the Land which thou see ^^ ^ ^^ve unto thee for ever, Genesis 13. 14, 15.

Proceed also to consider the Beauty an^ Majesty of that Kingdom, even by the
Rule which the Apostle has taught, Ro^ 1. 20. In esteeming the invisible Works
^ God by those that are visible.

If then God has provided for these our base Bodies, and sinful Souls, such
excellent, such abundant Pleasures from the Service of all Creatures in this
World, ^ow excellent, how innumerable are those Pleasures which are prepared
for those glorified Bodies and Souls which shall behold him Face to Face? If
the Delights ^e so great and various which he imparteth to the Evil as well as
the Good, to his Enemies as to his Friends, what has he reserved for his good,
best, and choicest Friends? If our Prison yield such fair contentments what
will he do for us in his Royal Court? If we find such Comfort in this stormy
time of Tears, what may we expect in the sweet Sun shine of Joy? If this
corruptible World, which he set up for a small time, as a Cottage or Outhouse,
be so gorgeous, so magnificent, that many desire no other Heaven, what
Estimation shall we make of his princip^l and Princely Palace? His Eternal
Habitation prepared before all Worlds, to set forth his Majesty and Glory, and
for the uttermost declaration both of his Wisdom and Power? It is very like
that the Palace of Babylon was exceeding fair, whereof Nebu^hadnezzar so much
gloried; Is not this great Babel, which I have built for the Hou^ of the
Kingdom, for the Honor of my Majesty? But assuredly all this World of ou^
which holds a middle state between He^ven and Hell, and in some sort
participate^ of both; surpasses, and it surpasses n^ Hell so far in Beauty
and Glory, as it surpassed by the Royal Court of Heaven which being framed fit
for the Majesty, greeable to the Estate of Almighty God, no less gorgeous and
great than his Wi^dom could contrive, and his Power p^^form, and that is above
all compass of comparison, Infinite, Ps. 84. 11. O! how amial^ are thy
Dwellings, thou Lord of Hosts, ^^ Soul longs and pants even to enter i^ thy
Courts, even thy great City, Holy a^ Heavenly Jerusalem, Rev. 21. and 22. 1^
which shines with thy Glory as clear ^ Crystal; whose Buildings are of pu^
Gold, like glittering Glass, whose Wa^ and Foundations are of precious Stones
whose Gates are so many entire Pearls whose Streets are paved with pure Gold
glittering as Glass, where is no need ^^ any Sun, because the Lamb is the Lam^
that gives it a large, a glorious Light from whose Seat streams a River of
Wat^ of Life, clear as Crystal, and upon the Brooks is planted the Tree of
Life, which continually yields both Physic and Food; where is no Curse, no
Night, no unclean thing, but the Throne of God and of the Lamb; and his
Servants shall see his Face, and serve him, and Reign for evermore.

Matthew 8. 8. When thou were upon the Earth, O my Savior! in thy humbled
State, the Centurion professed himself unworthy; and so he was, that thou
should come under his Roof, although in probability neither framed nor
furnished in the meanest fashion: on the other side, how unworthy am I, base
wretched Worm! to enter into this thy Heavenly Habitation, prepared ^or thy
glorious estate? Psalm. 84. 1, 4. O! how amiable are thy dwellings, thou Lord of
^osts? Blessed are they that (thou shall make worthy to) dwell in thy House,
they shall ^lways be praising of thee.

But there is no place can afford true Fe^icity, if the Society be not suitable
to the ^ame A Country is much esteemed accor^ing to the Nature and Quality of
the In^abitants: if they be many, if of Noble Nature, if of a generous
Disposition, if ^ll aiming at one common End, who then ^re the Inhabitants of
this Celestial City? here is the full assembly of Angels, o^ whom in this World
we have the service^ but not in sight; in Number answerabl^ to the large
Capacity of that Place, mo^^ amiable, most admirable C^eatu^es i^ Beauty,
disposed in most excellent O^de^ here are the ancient Wo^thies, or rathe^
Wonders of this World, the Patriarch^ the Prophets, the Apostles, the
Evang^lists, the Marty^s, the Confessors, and g^nerally all the company of
Saints, in su^ multitude that they cannot be numbre^ for Nobility all the
Children of Go^ holding such Order for their Places, a^ Proportions for their
Glory, as it please^ the Divine Wisdom to dispose: And abo^ all, here is the
holy Humanity of our Sa^our Christ* seated in the height of Majes^ at the right
Hand of the Father, being t^ Head of that blessed Body of Saints.

O sweet Society! what shall I say (...) thee; it seems a Presumption to
desi^ thee, and yet without desire of thee I cannot live: Habakkuk 2. 4. For
the righ^ous Man does live by Faith; if then have the Faith to believe thee, I
cann^^ but have a desire to enjoy thee, Heb. ^* 38. Gal. 3. 11.

Romans 1. 17. 19. The true Life of a Christian is Faith: our Senses may be
deceived, and thereby possess our Opinion with Er^or; I cannot have this Life
of Christiani^y if my Faith is not more assured than any Sense.

Well, this is the Seat, this is the Soc^e^y which God out of his infinite
Goodness and Mercy has appointed for those that love him, and long for his
appearing, and that make it their chiefest business in his World to serve him,
and glorify his Name; those full and transcendent Feli^ities they shall enjoy,
endeavor not to ^xpress, O my Soul, thou art nothing near ^ble to understand
them; thou art so far ^om understand (...) them, as thou art ^om enjoying,
(...) more do under^^and them, but (...) do enjoy them: ^nly thou may a^ar
off look toward ^em, and (so clear as the Cloudiness of ^lesh and Blood will
permit) in distinct ^arts take a view of them, as they are ^iefly applicable
either to the Body or the ^ul: For this filthy Flesh, which is now ^ cumbersome
and offensive to the Soul, ^d subject to so many mutations, shall in ^e general
Resurrection be changed, and ^ade most glorious; it shall cast off a^l
Corruption, and therewith also all the Deformities and Calamities which
proceeded from the same, Isa. 35. 6. There shall not be one feeble, The Lame
shall leap as an Ha^^ and the Dumb shall sing; for if the Blind and Lame were
not permitted to enter into David's House, much less shall any Deformity or
Defect, either enter or approach unto the House of God; and as the So^ by
conforming it self to the Will of God so the Body by conforming it self
contrary to the Nature thereof, to the Will o^ the Soul, shall be made partaker
of the Perfection and Glory of the Soul, and be seated in a most flourishing
and never-fading State of high Perfections; it shall be adorned with most (...)
Beauty, even the wise Man says (...) ^7. In the time (...) their visitation
they shall shine.

Moses saw God but imperfectly, and while, and his Face did shine; how the^
shall they shine, who shall perfectly see (...) Face for ever? Our Savior did
in so^ measure describe this glorious Beaut^ when he said, Mat. 13. The Just
M^n s^^shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their F^ther: It shall be delivered
from the lu^pish Heaviness wherewith it is clogged a^ encumbered in this Life,
and be in Agil^ equal with Angels; for as they enjoy equal Glory, so shall
there be no difference in their Gifts: The thought of Man is not more swift:
when the Sun rises in the East, the Beams thereof are not more speedily darted
into the West, than that shall be both swift and sudden in performing motion,
Isaiah 40. 31. They shall mount up with Wings as Eagles, they shall run and not
be weary, they shall walk and not faint. Hereto shall be added a most large
Liberty, no Limits to include, no stop to restrain it from passing freely
whereit pleases; and also their strength shall be as the strength of Angels,
nothing shall resist it, eve^^ thing shall give it way, it shall strive with no
greater strain in effecting any thing, than we do in the motion of our Eyes.

Further, it shall be delivered from all Diseases and Pains of this Life, and
shall ^njoy a strong and perfect Constitution of Health: no Sickness shall
seize upon it, no ^nfirmity, no Debility, shall approach it, grow upon it,
prevail against it, because as ^he Psalmist says, Psalm. 37. 39. The Health ^^
the Righteous is from the Lord.

Above all, it shall be wholly filled with ^nspeakable Delight and
Satisfaction; that, do I say, it shall be filled? it shall be inebriated, not
having the sense of any other thing; what, do I say wholly? every part, every
faculty, and every sense shall be satiated with delight in its own proper
Object; not like the corruptible and sorrowful Pleasures of this Life, which
are a^ smoke in cold weather, whereof the Smoke is more noisome and offensive
than the hea^ is comfortable, but exceeding them as fa^ in Excellency as they
do in Cause and i^ Continuance, and so far in Plenty as the^ do in Place, Psalm.
36. 8. It shall be satisfied with the abundance of God's House, an^ he shall
give you drink of his Pleasures as o^ of a River.

Lastly, It shall be crowned with Immo^tality, whereby it shall be assured
never t^ dissolve, never to decline, but to endure ^ long in the same perfect
and blessed Esta^ as the Almighty and Everlasting God sha^ endure: for he that
causes the Heaven to continue without change, after so man thousand years
since they were created, ^ by the same Almighty Power, and Ou^ stretched Arm,
shall also cause the glorifi^ Bodies of the Saints always to flourish ^ ven as
the Bay Tree, or as the wise M^ says, The just shall live for ever, and t^
shall be the accomplishment of all the re for if the Prophet David thought one
Day in God's earthly House, better than a thousand in another Place, the
highest thoughts and greatest Imaginations we can conceive is infinitely short
of the Blessedness and Gloriousness of this Heavenly House, not made with
Hands, the unspeakable delightful habitation of Almighty God.

O! be astonished, O my Soul, at the wonderful Loving Kindness of Almighty God:
O thou lover of Man! O thou that love Man in sin! although thou love not sin
in Man; what has our filthy flesh worthy of this Honor? it should according
to its Deserts be tied rather in a Stable with Beasts, for feeding, following,
and satisfying of its most beastly Appetites, than sit in thy Sanctuary among
thy Angels. Dust should by Nature remain with Dust, and not be advanced above
the Heavens; but as thou did honor Ishmael the Son of a Bond woman, because
he belonged to Abraham, so thou art pleased likewise to afford such Favor to
this base and wretched brood of Corruption, for the dependency thereof upon thy
only Son; the Parts shall participate with the Head, and belike unto it: as he
had communicated with that in Nature, so shall that communicate with him in
Glory.

But how much the Soul is more noble than the Body, so much more capable it is
of greater Felicities: it shall be filled with perfect Wisdom, and behold it
Face to Face, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Now I see in part, says the Apostle, but then
shall I know even as I am known. Then shall it behold and know the invisible
Nature of the Blessed Trinity* the Power of the Father* the Wisdom of the Son,
the Goodness of the Holy Ghost, the bottomless Depths of God's Judgments, now
unsearchable and past finding out, shall then be seen, even as the Prophet
^^id, Psalm. 36. 9. In thy Light we shall see Light. And in beholding God, it
shall behold the Causes, Natures, and Ends of all things which God has made of
Nature to be known, because they are more clear and conspicuous in God than in
themselves. Then shall all Men be known of all, neither shall any, either
Quality or Action, be secret to any; and this is the end of all ou^ Endeavou^s,
John 17. 3. This is Everlasting Life, says our, Savior, to know thee the true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

Also it shall be ravished with perfect Love, both toward God, for the
infinite Causes of Love, which in him shall appear, and toward the Saints, for
that it shall perceive them to love, and to be beloved of God: Both so much as
it self, and for the same cause, it shall love God more than it self, because
it shall be sensible that God loves it more than it is able to love it self:
the Saints it shall love equal with it self, as being Members of one Body,
whereof Christ is Head: for if the Spirit of Man has Power to cause so great
Unity as we see between the Members of one Body, the Spirit of God, which is
the Soul of that Body of Saints, shall cause so much more perfect Union, by how
much it is a more noble and powerful Form, and gives a more noble and durable
Being. Hereupon it follows, First, That it shall conceive so many particular
Joys as it shall see causes of Love in God, which are infinite. Secondly, That
it shall equally rejoice at the Felicity of every one, as at that which is
proper to it self, whereby all the Saints shall partake of one another's
Excellencies; for in this Union, Love shall be in its full Perfection, the
Nature of which Virtue is to make all things common.

It shall also enjoy a most sweet Peace and Concord in it self; for the Body
and Soul of every just Man which in this Life are always in Combat, by reason
of the Contraries between them, the one being Spiritual, the other Carnal,
shall then enjoy a complete Peace by consent; there shall not be any
Distraction or Strife any more, but they shall be carried one Way, and be
guided by one Will, and that is the Will of God.

The Will of God shall be the Will of the Saints; as they shall give a full and
free Consent to the Will of God, so shall God in all things consent unto their
Will; for how can the Head disagree from the Members, how can one perfect
Spirit be contrary to it sel^?

Herewith it shall be advanced to a most high and happy degree of Honor; for
that which here was drowned in the Putrefaction of the Flesh, constantly in
Miseries, destitute both of Comfort and of Help, entangled with Infirmities,
laden with loathsome Sins; in a word, doing nothing but Sin, finding nothing
but Miseries, which are the Reward of Sin. God only, and alone moved by his
tender Mercy, will take it to himself, he will cleanse it, he will cure it, he
will cloth it with perfect Righteousness, he will adopt it for one of his
Sons, and make it a fellow heir of his most glorious Kingdom; he will
incorporate it with his only Son, who is in all things equal with himself; In
respect thereof, that of the Prophet David may be very fitly applied to those
Saints, Psalm. 82. 6. I have said that ye are Gods, and that ye are all the
Children of the most High.

To these shall be added great Ability; for whatsoever they shall have a will
to do, they shall have Power to perform; because he that is Omnipotent, shall
in all things consent to the Will thereof. To these also Security shall be
added; for as it shall enjoy all things it can desire, so shall it not fear to
lose any thing it shall enjoy; because neither it shall be willing to lose
them, or God deprive them of them against their Wills; neither can any Power
take that away which God wills they shall retain.

Lastly, it shall be filled with perfect and unspeakable Pleasure and Joy,
which no Understanding is able to apprehend; and this shall proceed from the
clear Vision of Almighty God, in beholding of him Face to Face. 1 Cor. 13. in
beholding of him as he is, wherein consists the Essential Glory of all the
Saints, and which is also the last End and Center of their desires. For the
Soul of Man cannot find any peace or rest in any thing short of this blessed
Vision, even as neither the hearing of God, nor conversing with him, could
satisfy the Mind of Moses, but rather edged and sharpened his Desire to behold
God's Face. The reason is, for that all the Pleasures and Contentments of this
World, being Beams of that Sun, Sparkles of that Fire, are most purely and
perfectly contained in God. The Perfection of all the Creation, and whatsoever
deserves Love or Admiration, are more full and complete in God than in
themselves: whence it follows, that whosoever enjoys the Presence of God,
enjoys the Perfections of all Creatures, which are able abundantly to delight
both Body and Soul.

And as the Sea receives all Streams, and yet has proper Waters in far
greater abundance, so in God there is a Confluence of all the Perfections of
all Creatures, yet his own Perfection does infinitely exceed them, with the
Presence whereof all the Powers of the Mind shall be filled, all the Senses of
the Body satiated; insomuch as they shall neither in desire seek, nor in hope
aspire, nor in imagination create any greater Pleasure: For therefore has God
made Man, that Man should receive by him internal happiness of the Soul, by
contemplation of his Divinity; and external of the Body, by view of his
Humanity.

The understanding shall rest in that Light of Knowledge, the Will shall rest
in Love of that Goodness, the Desire shall rest in the Fruition of that
Delight; Every Power of the Soul shall be always hungry, and always satisfied;
hungry without wanting, satisfied without loathing; the more it has, the more
it shall desire; the more it desires, the more it shall have; and the more it
has and desires, the more it shall see to be desired and had. The three
Disciples saw but a Glimpse of this Glory upon Mount Tabor, and were ravished
with such contentment, that they cried out with one consent, it is good for us
to be here. St. Paul being wrapped up in the third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12. 4. and Romans
8. 18. faw that which was not possible to be spoken of, yet thus much he spoke,
I account that the Afflictions of this time, are not worthy of the Glory that
shall be showed unto us. This also did that Kingly Prophet David say, Ps. 16.
11. In thy Presence is the fullness of Joy, and at thy right hand are Pleasures
for evermore. This did our Savior himself express in pronouncing Happiness to
the pure in Heart, Matthew. 5. 8. because they shall see God; and therefore he
formed this Request for those that his Father had given unto him. Joh. 17. 24.
^ather, I will that they be with me even (...) I am, that they may behold my
Glory which* thou have given me: Assuredly, (1 Kings 10) if the Queen of Sheba
esteemed them happy who stood in the presence of Sclomon, and heard his Wisdom
(Behold) a greater than Solomon is here.

Hereupon it follows; that all the Faculties of the Soul and Body shall
always praise God without either intermission or End: The Saints shall never be
weary of singing Praises to the most High God, and sing that Song which St.
John, Rev. 14. 3. called a New Song; for that although it be one common Praise,
answerable to one common Glory, which all the Society of Saints enjoy, yet with
respect to that Delight and Joy of Heart which will arise from the Glory and
Praise of it, it will be always fresh and new unto them; this Heavenly* Harmony
shall never be old: as the Glory, so the Praise of the Saints shall never
cease* but shall ever be new, and yet never alter or change. Psalm, 81. 1, 4. O
how amiable are thy Dwellings, thou Lord of Hosts; blessed are they that dwell
in thy House, they shall always be praising of thee.

Psalm. 87. 3. Very Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God. O
Glorious City, when shall I enter into thee, when shall I possess and enjoy
thee? to see my God, to converse with that blessed Society which dwells in
thee, in perfect Peace and Felicity, passing all Understanding.

O Eternal Kingdom! O Eternal Light! O Eternal Life! not so much to be spoken
as to be desired, and as by all Endeavors to be approached! O blessed State!
not to be expressed even by those who only enjoy thee, O only Purchase, worthy
of the precious Blood of Jesus Christ! how can I believe thee, and not admire
thee? how can I hope for thee, and not extol thee? how can I think of thee, and
not long for thee? O that this present state of Strife and Contention were at
an end! O that the time of my Travel, or rather my Banishment from thy heavenly
Kingdom were expired! who can be in love with this Life full of misery, that
has any hope, faith and confidence in thy Mercy? Tell me, O my Soul, what a
happy hour will that be, when Death shall knock at thy Gates, and put thee in
the way to life! Call thee from Prison to Liberty; from troublesome Travel to
joyful Rest; from a living Death to an Immortal Life: When others shall fear,
thou shall look up, Luke 21. 28. because thy Redemption draws near. Then
shall the glorious Company of Saints and Angels come to meet thee with
Congratulations of unspeakable Joy for thy delivery out of the great
Oppressions of Egypt. Then shall the Spouse meet thee, and say, Cant. 2. 10.
Arise my Love, my fair one, and come away, for behold the Winter is past, and
the Shower is over, the Flowers have appeared in our Land, and the singing of
Birds is come. Then shall the Angels-marvel, and say, (Cant. 8. 5.) Who is this
coming out of the Wilderness, leaning upon her Well beloved? What Honor will
it be unto thee, when they shall present thee before the Throne of the most
Blessed and Glorious Trinity, with a joyful Memorial of the Good which thou
have done, and of the Evil which thou have suffered for the Love of God; when
thy blessed Savior shall step forth unto thee and say, Well done good and
faithful Servant, welcome into thy Master's Joy: What Joy and Satisfaction
shall be ren^red unto thee for all the trials and afflictions of this Life! Of
what dignity, of what value shall Virtue then be adjudged.

How delightful will it be after safe Arrival, to lift up thy Eyes, and view
the dangerous Voyage thou have made; when thou shall see the Tempest wherewith
thou have been tossed, the Streights which thou have passed, the Dangers which
thou have avoided, how many Millions do daily perish, and with how few thou
did escape; then shall thou sing with the princely Prophet, Psalm. 94. 17. If
the Lord had not helped, it had not failed but my Soul should have been put to
silence.

What Joy is daily made when new Inhabitants do arrive to furnish the void
places of this Celestial City! for assuredly, if there be much Joy in Heaven at
the conversion of Sinners, much greater will the Joy be when they come to be
glorified. O how sweet will then be the Fruit of Virtue, whose Root in this
World is esteemed so bitter! how pleasant will that Peace be after this
troublesome Warfare; after great variety of Perils, that eternal Security;
after this Weariness, that sweet Rest. The Children of Israel went up armed out
of Egypt, Exodus 13. 13. but when they came into the Land of Promise, they laid
down their Weapons; they forgot their Fears, 1. Kings 4. 25. Every Man sat
securely under his own Vine, and under his own Fig Tree. Here we are set in the
State of Strife, there our War shall be at an end; there shall they sit secure
from so much as the Fear of the fiery Dart of the Enemy; There they shall not
dread his Stratagems or his Strength; thither the Sighs do not pierce; there
the hissing is not heard of the poisonous Basilisk, but the Glory of God does
enlighten that Region, and the soft and sweet Breath of the Holy Spirit does
refresh it.

O pleasant Peace! O sweet Security* what can be sufficiently said of thee?
Job. 4. I acknowledge with the Woman of Samaria, not only that this Well is
very deep, but that I want a Bucket to draw. Thou can not be understood of
those that enjoy thee not, thou can not be praised enough of those that enjoy
thee. O ye Sons of Adam, O blind and perverse Generation, miserable lost Sheep!
if this be your Country, whether do you range? if this be your Pasture, whither
do you stray? whither do you wander, if this be your home? What do you?
Wherefore stand ye looking about? wherefore will ye lose these Joys, the least
whereof are greater and more lasting than any this World can afford: Assuredly,
if we should endure the Torments of Hell for a long season, to enjoy these
Felicities but for a short time, our Pains would be abundantly satisfied with
this exceeding weight of Glory.

And if thou inquire, O Man, what thou must do to attain to the enjoyment of
these Everlasting Joys, give an attentive Ear to what thy blessed Savior has
said, Matt. 11. 11. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent
take it by force. If thou can violently break off with all thy beloved and
darlings sins, thy Dalilahs, which would ruin thy immortal Soul; and if thou
can but do justly, love Mercy, and walk humbly with thy God, and thou can
set thy whole desires after this Kingdom, thou shall certainly enjoy it, and
that for evermore. O weak Man, wherefore art thou troubled? Christ has taken
all the pains, and he has paid the Price, and a dear one too, no less than his
own precious Blood: hear what he says unto thee, Mat. 13. 41. The Kingdom of
Heaven is like unto a Treasure hid in a Field, which when a Man has found, he
goes and sells all that he has, and buyeth that Field. Lo here the Purchase
^s laid before thee, it is worth all that thou ^ast, it is valued to thee as
thou valuest thy self, therefore make away all thy desires in things of this
Life, and let all thy joy be fixed upon that Kingdom, and tho^ shall have it:
Christ has given himself to purchase this Kingdom for thee, therefore let not
sin reign in thy Body, but give up thy self in Love to him, and he will giv^
himself and his Father's Kingdom unto thee. But alas, O my Soul! where ar^
thou? what do thou? where is thy Joy ^ where is thy Love, wherewith thy
though^ should be inflamed? how art thou chain'^ with the Enchantments on this
ugly Earth^ How art thou drowned in drowsiness, O my Soul! that thou art so
careless and senseles^ of true Spiritual Pleasures, and so fon^ upon the
vanities and vexations of thi^ Life! Tell me, do thou believe there is ^
Kingdom of Heaven, wherein thou art enrolled a Citizen, whereto thou art
adopted an Heir; and have thou not a longing Love to be possessed of the same?
Alas* how faint is thy Faith, how unbelieving (...) thy belief! Tell me, I pray
thee, what Entertainment has entangled thee into the Love of this Life? What
do thou fin^ therein but wanting and wishing; from whence arises two
Tortures of the Mind Hope and Fear? how art thou busied there in, as the Spider
that consumes her ow^ Bowels in weaving curious Nets only to catch Flies? O my
Soul! it is not any true contentment or satisfaction that thou find in any
of the Pleasures of this Life, but ^t is thy own Heaviness that holds thee
down, it is thy own Dullness that does undo thee.

There is no difference between doubting of this Happiness, and not desiring of
it: If then thou have any Sparkles of Faith, shake off this sleepy Sloth, away
with this Unchearfulness, away with this dead Dullness, away with all the
profane Earthly Pleasures, those Lime twigs of the Devil, which cleaving to the
Feathers of thy Devotion, make thee unable to ^^ount upwards.

O my God! O that I could so free my Affection! O that I could so heave up my
heavy Heart unto thee! O that I were in desire as I am indeed, a Sojour^er, a
Traveller, a Stranger upon Earth. O that I could travail like a Woman in
Childbirth, to be delivered of this lum^ish Load of Sensuality, and to solace
my self only in Desire, Hope, and in Assu^ance of thee.

This do I desire, O Lord, or rather weakly wish for; I am so fettered with
Flesh and Blood, that I am so far from performing it, that I cannot desire it
i^ such sort as I should. It is Nature tha^ drowneth me in this dead Sea of
Worldliness: I cannot endure to think upon much less desire a Dissolution. If
th^^ Nature be not, O Lord, overruled, and chained down by thy Grace, I shall
b^ neither able to do, nor desire; but like Lot, I shall be loath to depart out
of Sodom; therefore, O Lord, let me grow i^ thy Grace, and in the Knowledge of
Jesus Christ my Lord; that I may live to thy Praise here, and be glorified with
thee hereafter in those Glorious Mansions have had a short View of.

SOME HOLY PREPARATIONS To a Worthy Receiving of the BLESSED SACRAMENT OF THE
LORD's SUPPER.
The Necessity of this Duty pressed from several Portions of Scripture.
FIrst, by the Express Commands of our Blessed Lord and Savior, who is the
Chief, nay, the Sum and Substance of what this blessed Ordinance represents
unto us; as in Matt. 26. 26. 27. And as they were eating, Jesus took Bread, and
blessed it, and brake it, and gave to the Disciples, saying, Take, eat, this is
my Body.

And he took the Cup and gave thanks, and gave to them, saying, drinkye all of
it: And for this good and beneficial Reason to all Mankind; as Ver. 28. This is
my blood of the New Testament which was shed for man for the remission of their
Sins. And St. Mar^ 14. 22, 23. And as they did eat, Jesus too^ Bread and
blessed it, and brake it, and gave t^ them, and said, Take eat; this is my
Body. An^ he took the Cup, and when he had given thanks he gave it to them, and
they all drank of it. Luk 22. 19, 20. And he took Bread, and gave thanks, and
brake it, and gave unto them, saying, This is my Body which is given for you*
do this in remembrance of me. Likewise also the Cup after Supper, saying, this
Cup is the New Testament of my Blood, which is she^ for you. And by St. Paul we
have a hint o^ it, 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25. For I have receiv'^ of the Lord that
which also I have delivere^ unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same night that
he was betrayed, the same night took Bread. And when he had given thanks, he
brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body which is broken for you: This do
in remembrance of me. And the reason that is given is, For as often as ye eat
of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, ye do show forth the Lord's Death till he
come.

How we ought to examine and resolve with our selves before we Communicate in
this great Ordinance.
WE are Exhorted to it by the Apostle St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 28. But let ^ Man
examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup. The
Apostle's reason is, Because he that eats and drinks Unworthily, eats and
drinks Damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's Body.

O Dreadful! that any should be so careless, so heedless and presumptuous, to
go to this Table of the Lord, and not be fitted and prepared for it! when they
that run may read the fatal Consequence of Unworthy Receiving.

Therefore that you may not come to this Ordinance, and go away in a far wo^se
Condition than you came, fit and prepare your self for it; First, by
examination, examine thy own Heart, which is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, who can know it? and try your own ways: see what you are
doing, whether serving of God, or the Devil, or your self: And if you have been
serving your self, or the Devil, do so no more, but turn from all your wicked
ways with a full resolution and purpose of heart, and cea^ from doing evil;
learn to do well.

Examine and see what God has sai^ concerning those that break his Statute^
that observe not his Commandments t^ keep them; that are stubbo^n, careless,
an^ unconverted Sinners, that will not have God for their Portion, nor none of
h^ ways, but will walk after the imagination of their own Hearts, striving, as
it were with all their might, to make sure of Eternal Burnings, which will be
the certai^ Portion of all the Workers of Iniquity, a God himself has
declared, that cannon Lie.

Ask thy self the Question, whether tho^ art one of those head strong Sinners
or no^ Why should thou be afraid to ask thi^ Question, when no less than
eternal Joy^ or eternal Woes depend upon it? I am not afraid to look over my
Estate, to se^ whether I am a rich Man or a poor; an^ why should I be afraid of
seeing whethe^ I am a wise Man or a Fool? a Friend ^^ an Enemy to God, and
whether the blesed Portion of the Righteous, or the cu^sed Portion of the
Wicked will fall to m^ Share.

What means my living in so many known Sins, and be contented to perform some
formal Ceremonies in the Service of God, and now and then put up a dead, ^ull,
heartless Prayer, and put him off with ^he world's leaving? O dreadful poor
de^uded Soul that I am! to think that the All-wise God, maker of Heaven and
Earth, and the Fountain of Waters, will be con^ented with these false
hypocritcal, and indifferent Actions! No God is not such a ^ne as my self, he
is of purer eyes than to behold such Wickedness with any approbation.

Therefore take heed, O my Soul, and ^heat not thy self any longer, but turn to
^he Lord with singleness and uprightness of Heart, and serve him with a ready
and ^ thankful Mind; and take as much, nay more pleasure in obeying his
Commandments, in doing his Will, in observing his ^tatutes and Judgments, as
ever thou did ^^ thy most darling Sin, in deceitful Dali^h's, which will
certainly bring thee to ^verlasting Ruin and Destruction, if thou ^ost not
leave them and forsake them, and ^eave to the Lord; and fear his dreadful ^ame,
and love him with all thy Heart, ^^d with all my Soul, and with all thy Mind,
^^d with all thy Strength, and thy Neighbors as thy self, and love mercy, and
do justly, and walk humbly with thy God, and then thou will be fit and prepared
for this Heavenly Banquet, whereby thy Soul will be infinitely refreshed, and
the Souls of all those that are Receivers in the true Faith, Fear and Love.

A Prayer to be used before the Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament.
MOst Holy Lord God and Everlasting Father, who out of thy infinite loving
kindness to Mankind, gave thy only begotten Son to make satisfaction to thy
Justice for the Sins of the whole World* O Lord, thy Mercy is very great
toward me and all Men, in that we have sinned, and thou have appointed thy
only Son to bear the Burden of the Punishment for them; O Lord, do thou fit
and prepar^ me by thy Heavenly Grace, for this thy great Ordinance, and so
grant me by thy Strength, as that I may perform my pa^ of it with that holy
Fear and Reveren^ as I ought. And Lord, Grant I may r^ceive that benefit by it
thou designest ^^ in it, which is that Soul-satisfying Cordi^ the fresh stream
of thy Everlasting Lov^ Lord, make me more and more sensible by it of thy great
Loving Kindness toward me. O Lord, grant this, and abundantly more than I am
able to ask or think, for thy dear Son's sake: to whom with thee, O Father, and
the blessed Spirit, be all Honor, Praise and Glory, from this time,
henceforth, and for ever.

At the time of Receiving, you may use these Ejaculations.
BLess the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy Name; for
his wonderful Mercy and Loving Kindness to me is very great. Magnify the Lord,
O my Soul, and sing Praises to the most high God; for he has visited and
redeem^d his People with his most precious Blood.

At the Receiving of the Bread, say,
THis is that Bread, which came down from Heaven, That whosoever eats
^hereof, shall never hunger. Thou have dealt ^^y Bread to the Hungry, O feed me
with ^is Bread of Life: O strengthen my Faith, and open my Mouth with fervent
desires, ^at I may eat, not to satisfy my Bodily ^unger, but Spiritual, and to
the refresh^ent of my Immortal Soul. O let my Soul feel the Efficacy of thy
Grace, that may not eat unworthily. O Lord, I beseech thee to direct me by thy
holy Spirit to receive it worthily, to my everlasting Comfort. Amen.

After the Bread, say,
Oever blessed Jesus, Son of the mo^ high God, sanctify this Bread to the
Soul, that it may enable me to overcom^ all Assaults of the World, the Flesh,
an^ the Devil; and that I may continue the faithful Servant to my Live's end.
Amen.

Before Receiving of the Cup, say,
THe Lord himself is the portion of ^^ Inheritance, and my Cup; thou she
maintain my Lot, my Let is fallen to ^^ in a fair Ground; yea, I have a good
Heritage, I have set God always bef^^ me: he is on my right hand, therefo^^
shall not fall: Gracious is the Lord, a^ Righteous, yea our God is merciful.
W^^ reward shall I give unto the Lord, for the benefits he has done for me? I
^^ receive the Cup of Salvation, and call^ on the Name of the Lord.

Devout Prayers, Praises, and Thanksgivings upon several Occasions.
A Short Collection of some of the Holy Resolutions of Holy DAVID, concerning
Prayer and Praises.
PSALM ix. Verse 1, 2. I Will praise thee O Lord with my whole heart: I will
show forth all thy mavelous works.

I will be glad and rejoice in thee, I will sing praises to thy Name, O thou
most High.

Verse 11. Sing praises to the Lord that dwells in Zion: declare among the
People his doings.

Psalm. xviii. 3. I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised: so
shall I be saved from my Enemies.

Psalm. xix. 12, 13. Who can understand his Errors? Cleanse thou me from secret
Faults.

Keep back thy Servant also from presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion
over me.

Psalm. xxviii. 1, 2. Unto thee, O Lord, will I cry; my Rock be not silent to me.

Hear the Voice of my Supplications, when I cry unto thee.

Psalm xxxiii. 1, 2, 3. Rejoice in the Lord, O ye Righteous, for Praise is
comely for the Upright.

Praise the Lord with Harp, sing unto him with the Psaltery, and an Instrument
of ten Strings.

Sing unto him a new Song, play skilfully with a loud Noise.

Psalm li. 1, 2. Have Merey upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness:
According to the multitude of thy tender Mercies, blot out my transgressions.

Wash me thoroughly from my Iniquity, and cleanse me from Sin.

Psalm lxvii. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. God be merciful unto us, and bless us: and
cause thy Face to shine upon us.

That thy way may be known upon the Earth, and thy saving health among all
Nations

Let the People praise thee, O God, let all the People praise thee.

O let the Nations be glad, and sing for joy: for thou shall judge the People
righteously, and govern the Nations upon the Earth.

Let the People praise thee, O God, let all the People praise thee.

Then shall the Earth yield her Increase, and God, even our God shall bless us.

God shall bless us, and all the ends of the Earth shall fear him.

Psalm c. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Make a joyful noise unto the Lord all ye Lands.

Serve the Lord with gladness, come before his presence with singing.

Know ye that the Lord he is God, it is he that has made us, and not we our
selves; we are his People, and the Sheep of his Pasture.

Enter into his Gates with thanksgiving, and into his Courts with Praise: Be
thankful unto him and bless his Name:

For the Lord is good, his mercy is everlasting, and his truth endures to all
Generations.

Some few of God's Promises to those that truly serve him, and call upon his
Name.
Psalm cxii. Verse 1, 2, 3. BLessed is the Man that fears the Lord, that
delights greatly in his Commandments.

His seed shall be mighly upon the Earth: the Generation of the Upright shall
be blessed.

Wealth and Riches shall be in his House: and his Righteousness shall endure for
ever.

Job li. 7. Thou shall make thy prayer unto ^im, and he shall hear thee: and if
thou seek ^im, he will be found.

Isa. lxv. 24. Before they call I will answer: and while they are yet speaking,
I will hear.

John xv. 7. Ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you.

John xvi. 24. Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be-full.

John xiv. 13, 14. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name I will do it.

Matthew xxi. 22. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing,
ye shall receive.

Matthew vi. 6. Pray to thy Father which sees in secret, and thy Father which
sees in secret shall reward thee openly.

Matt. vii. 7. Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and you shall find: knock,
and it shall be opened unto you.

A Morning Prayer for a Family.
MOst glorious and ever blessed Lord God, whose goodness and mercy is extended
to the very ends of the Earth, who do from thy Throne behold all the actions
of the Sons and Daughters of Men, whether they be good or evil, that thou
may reward them according to their doings. O Lord, we poor sinful Dust and
Ashes, are this Morning come before thee to beg Grace of thee, hoping in thy
Mercy, which is over all thy Works: Keep us, we humbly pray thee, this Day, as
thou have kept us the Night that is past and gone, keep us in thy Faith, Fear,
and Love, and forgive us all our Transgressions, by the Merits of thy dear Son.
Teach us to bewail them as we ought, and separate them from us that would
separate us from thee our God. O Lord, take away from our Minds, all Ignorance
and Blindness, and all hardness of heart, and make thy Word more precious to us
than the Gold of Ophir, and guide us by thy holy Spirit here, out of all that
is evil, into all that is good; that when our great change comes, we may
receive that Crown of Glory that is laid up for all those that run and are not
weary; that walk and are not faint; but that travel in thy strength, and by thy
gracious assistance, till they arrive to their Journeys end; which is to rest
in thy Bosom. O Lord do thou strengthen our Weakness, enlighten our
Understandings more and more, that in the greatest Temptation, we may have
knowledge of thee, and of thy ways that we may never be overtaken; but that for
the future we may press forward toward the mark of the high Calling in Christ
Jesus our Lord. Lord, do thou prosper all our Undertakings, and bless our
Goings out and Comings in, and give us Hearts to learn something of every
thing, and make a spiritual Use of our Actions and Occasions, till we come to
lodge with thee in thy Kingdom. Let our Affections grow one toward another
unfeignedly, and that we may love our Enemies, and bless them that curse us;
but especially the household of Faith, and that we may always pray for them, and
they for us, and both of us be heard of thee for our selves, and one for
another, and thy Son for us all. Bless, Lord, the Catholic Church with Truth,
Peace, soundness of Doctrine, and holy Discipline. Continue thy Favors upon
this Land of our Nativity, and with the choicest of thy blessings, bless the
King upon the Throne, and all the Royal Family; sanctify the Lives and the
Studies o^ thy Servants that labor in thy Word o^ Doctrine. Bless his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and all others i^ Authority with
necessary Favors. Bless the Nurseries of good Learning, all Grammarschools,
the famous Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and the Inns of Court. Bless
this City and Place wherein we live. Remove the Punishments due for the Sins
thereof, and give them Grace to repent in time, lest they be destroyed, Bless
all our Friends, Relations, and others, for whom thou have appointed us to make
Prayers and Supplications. Bless this Family with Grace and Peace, that they
all may know their several Duties toward thee, and one toward another. And
all we beg for Jesus Christ his sake; To whom with thee, O Father, and the
Blessed Spirit, be all Praise, Honor and Glory, ascribed by us here, and all
thine elsewhere, both now and for evermore.

An Evening Prayer for a Family.
O Lord God, Father of all Mercies, and God of all Consolations; we (...) come
this Evening by thy great Mercy, (...) to the Throne of Grace, to beg Grace o^
thee to help us in the time of Need, an^ also to return thee hearty thanks for
(...) multitude of thy great Mercies; but (...) especially for thy merciful
preservatin o^ us this Day, and all the Times and Days of our Lives, that thou
have by thy mighty Power and streched out Arm, brought us out of innumerable
Perils and Dangers* and have attended us both by Night and by Day, and poured
upon us contrary to our deserts, so many Excellent Blessings and Benefits, both
Spiritual and Temporal; Good Lord, we beseech thee keep us, as thou have done
hitherto, from Day to Day, and make us steadfast in the profession of thy Holy
Name, and keeping of thy Commandments, that neither the Wrath of Man, nor the
Malice of the Devel may turn us away from thee. Lord, turn thy back upon our
Iniquities, blot ou^ our Transgressions, and remember our Sins no^ more, in
which we have so much delighted; change our corrupt and polluted-Hearts, and
wash and cleanse us in the Blood of our dear Redeemer. Forgive us all that is
past, and grant us the assurance of that Forgiveness sealed up i^ ^ur
Consciences by thy Holy Spirit. Forgive us our intolerable Barenness in good
Works, our base Unthankfulness and the Abuse of thy Grace, and strike our stony
^earts with the Rod of thy Fear, that w^ may attain unto a due Thankfulneness
for (...) thy Favors, and a most unfeigned and ^rnest Repentance of our Sins.
O Lord, ^ess us all this Night, and after our Bo^ies have been refreshed, do
thou bring us ^^ the light of another day; wherein we ^ay praise thy great Name
in the Land ^f the Living. Sanctify us by thy Word ^^roughout Soul, Body, and
Spirit, for thy lord is Truth. Bless* this Nation, pre^erve the King, and all
that are in Au^hority, and all thy Children: Raise up ^^e Heavy-hearted that
mourn in Zion; Give them Beauty for Ashes, the Oil of ^oy for Mourning, and the
Garments of ^raise for the Spirit of Heaviness, Lord, ^e merciful unto them
whom thou have ^ade any way helpful unto us: Bless every one of us in our
proper station, that we ^ay serve thee with all our Hearts, fear ^hy Majesty,
and love thy Precepts. These things, O Lord, and what ever thou know^st is
needful for us, we humbly crave of ^hee in the Name and Merits of Jesus Christ,
our blessed Redeemer; saying as ^e has taught us, Our Father which art in
Heaven, etc.

A Prayer against the Temptations of the Worl^ the Flesh and the Devil.
O Most merciful Father, and might God of Jacob, a strong Tower (...) the
Faithful, a Rock of Defense an Refuge for all the Distressed; thou kno^est I am
set in the midst of many Dangers, my Weakness is very great, ins^much as that
without thy help I cannot ^void being ruined, and that for ever: beseech thee
preserve my Body and So^ from all Temptations, and Snares of the Devil, and
suffer not my Senses to ta^ that Pleasure and Delight in the things ^^ this
World as I used to do; but Lord, l^ me use them as if I used them not, an^ take
my Affections more and more off them, and settle them upon their rig^ Objects,
those things that are above Lord, do thou take from me all that (...) Deformed
and of a corrupt Nature, an^ work and establish that which thy Gra^^ has
wrought in me, that having on the Armor, I may be able to stand against a^ the
Besetments of the Enemy. Let m^ not be drawn away into any Sensuality (...) any
desire of the Flesh, but give me power to overcome it, that I may live soberly
righteously, and godly in this present evil World, and serve thee better, and
live ^ore in the Spirit. Lord, preserve me from the darkness, filthiness, and
deceit^ulness of this World, that I may not fa^hion my self like unto it, to
follow a Mul^itude; but being changed by the renew^ng of the Mind, I may walk
up^^ghtly before thee all the days of my appointed ^ime till my change comes. O
Lord, do ^hou be a present help unto me in the time ^f Trouble, for in thee I
do and will ^ut my trust and confidence; therefore ^ead me no further into
Temptations than ^hou art pleased to give me strength to o^ercome them. O Lord,
that I may with ^^rong Faith resist Satan, and help me to ^ull down his Kingdom
more and more, (...) Watching, Fasting and Praying, mor^fying the Deeds of the
Flesh; and let thy ^ighteous Law be my meditation Day and Night, and not the
foolish Vanity and ^nful Pleasures of this World. Let not ^rosperity make me
forget thee, nor Ad^ersity cast me into Despair, but let me ^ake all thy
dealing with me, whether on ^he one hand, or on the other, in love from ^ee,
which is that wherein thy Dispensa^ons are toward me. Lord, arm me with thy
Spirit, encourage me with thy Pr^sence, and let me always feel the effectu^^
working of thy Power, which is ever mad^ perfect through Weakness; even for
Christ Jesus his sake.

A Prayer for the Remission of Sins.
O Glorious Lord God and everlastin^ Father, I a wretched and an u^done Sinner
without thy Mercy, a^ come before thee to beg favor of thee for all my
Offenses; begging, praying, de^ring, and beseeching thy heavenly Majest^ that
thou would in Mercy look dow^ upon me; I cannot but confess, were not for
the hope I have of thy Mercy a^ the hold of thy Comfort, and the rene^ing
Graces I sometimes receive from the and that sweet relish I have of thy goo^
Gifts, and thy Heavenly Word, I sink in^^ Despair, for my sins are continually
before me; if I go, they follow me; if run, they fly after; if I look back, the
sta^e upon me; if I go forward, they me me; if I turn to the right hand, they
terifie me; if to the left hand, they torme^ me: If I look down into the Earth,
H^ is ready to devour me: Now I have ^ way but to look up to thee; help me,
good God, save me dear Father; succor me ^weet Redeemer; assist me, merciful
Crea^or, that my Prayers may be so servent, so ^ealous, so affectionate toward
thee, that ^hey may draw down thy Mercies upon me: Power down thy Blessings,
shower ^own thy Graces, open thy hand of Merry, and restore joy and consolation
to my ^eavy-laden Soul; wash away my Sins; ^ipe away my Iniquities, heal my
Infir^ities; purge my wicked Mind of all ill ^houghts; pardon all my Damnable
Deeds and detestable Dealings; take all hardness ^^ heart from me, and
according to thy ^ood promise, renew a right Spirit within ^e; send the Joys of
thy holy Comforts ^^on me: O Lord let me have some taste ^^d some sense of thy
most glorious and ^ost comfortable Presence; let me be re^ewed by thy Grace,
and established in ^y Service, that I may never back-slide ^om thee: But grant,
O most merciful ^ther, that my whole dependence may be ^on thee, so that in all
my Thoughts, ^ords and Actions, I may rejoice in ser^^g, fearing and obeying of
thee, that I ^y spend the residue of my Days in thy ^vice, seeking thy Honor
and Glory. And, most merciful Father; favorably govern, help, instruct, guide,
and teach me by thy Wisdom to magnify thy Name, and preserve me in all my Ways
and Work^ and all about me. Remember thy po^ Flock; build up thy Church in the
mo^ holy Faith; Comfort Sion; govern an^ assist all painful Pastors and
Teachers* teach them and us rightly to know thee* and truly to follow thee in
all the Paths o^ Righteousness and true Holiness. O Lord Rouse my sleepy Soul,
and defend it from evil Imaginations; keep me always in the good frame of
Spirit, which will caus^ me to meditate upon thy Law Day an^ Night. Grant that
I may not do an^ thing that is contrary to thy Command^ but that I may walk in
Piety and in Peace Give me a true and hearty Repentan^ for Sin, that I never
may repent of, that ^ may be truly sorrowful for spending of m^ time so much in
the Devils Service. ^ powerful preserver of Men, remember m^ and restore me to
Joy and Comfort, an^ hasten in time thy Salvation unto m^ Draw my lingering Soul
with the Co^ of thy Love, and it shall run after the Good Lord, declare thy
Mercy unto m^ that I may make known thy hand-^o^ Establish me in thy Grace;
excite me to Goodness; give me Grace, that I may grow stronger and stronger to
walk before thee, and weaker and weaker to sin against thee, and faithful and
steadfast in thy Service to my Life's End. Grant this, dear God, for thy Son'
sake, my blessed Redeemer. Amen.

A Prayer before a Sermon.
MOst gracious Father, give us Hearts to hear thy Word with that due Reverence
and Attention as we ought, knowing that it is the Word of God, and not of Man;
therefore we ought to hear what by thy Servant thou art pleased to command us,
that we may do it with all our Hearts, and with all our Souls. Lord, do thou
keep our Thoughts upon what we hear, and let them not be carried away with any
vain Illusions, and wicked Imaginations. Grant that we be not overcome with
Sleep and Drowsiness, but quicken, O Lord, we beseech thee, our Senses: open
our Ears to hear, and make us to understand how to observe thy heavenly Word;
for thy only Son's sake, our Savior. Amen.

A Prayer to be said after Sermon.
O Lord God, we beseech thee to le^ that Word which we have heard the Day with
our Ears, to be set home to o^^ Hearts, that we may not be only Heare^ of thy
Word, but Doers: that we may so learn to live to please thee, and make i^ our
Business to keep thy Commandments and spend the rest of our Lives, in the
Service, to the Honor and Glory of thy Great Name, and the Salvation of o^^
Immortal Souls, through Jesus Christ o^^ Lord. Amen.

A Prayer against wicked Thoughts.
MOst Glorious and Eternal God, I, one of the unworthiest of thy Creatures, am
come on my bended Knees, to implore the gracious Assistance of thy Holy Spirit,
against the Evil Thoughts that do arise in me, to the great Dishonor of thy
Holy Name, and the great Trouble of my own Conscience: When I have Thought^ to
be fervent with thee in Prayer, either the Devil, the World, or the Flesh, do
disappoint me, and I cannot do as I would for those things that I do, I would
no^ do, and those that I would, I do not: ^n follows me, Shame is ready to
over^ke me: Confusion is like to lay hold on ^e; Destruction attends me, and
Horrors ^d Fear affright me: I have none to ^ake my Supplications to, but to
thee, my ^viour, my Rock and Salvation. Help, ^ God; save me, merciful Father;
de^nd me dear Creator, a Poor worthless ^orm as I am; draw me from my Sins; ^e,
succor, pardon, and forgive me; ^ash me, and I shall be clean; help me to ^t
away the Evil of my Doings, and ^arn me, O God, to do well. Give me ^iritual
Thoughts to renew all good pur^oses within me; help me to put away ^^r from me
all vain and lustful Thoughts ^f the Flesh, and all malicious reproach^^l and
froward Thoughts, that proceed ^^om the Devil, or any worldly Occasions; ^o
that I may live purely, and have no Thoughts but what are innocent and ^haste,
always fearing to displease so gra^ous a God, and loving a Father as thou ^^t;
and walking circumspectly before ^hee, that I may be a good Example to (...) my
Neighbors round about me, that ^ey may see my good Works, and glorify ^ee,
the only and alone Author of them.

To whom I give Praise, Honor and Gl^ry, at this time, henceforth and for
evermore.

A Prayer in Prosperity.
MOst bountiful Father, as thou ha^ been pleased to bless me with a large
Portion of this World's Wealth give me an humble, thankful and charitable
Heart, that I may be a good Steward^ that thou have been pleased to entrust m^
with, in bestowing of it upon those Objects of Pity and Compassion that are i^
great Straits and Necessity for it, and n^^ upon base and sordid Lusts, of
which should certainly have cause to repent o^ and that for ever. O Lord, grant
that the more earthly Blessings that thou give me, I may the more seek thy
Heaven^ Graces, that I may be the more humble^ in the due consideration of my
great u^ thankfulness and ungratefulness of Spi^^^ that I may live more piously
and religiou^ly; and that when I depart this sinful L^ I may be mindful to
leave some good a^^ godly Examples of Charity to those the follow. Grant that
this my Wealth man be no hindrance to my Salvation, but rather a furtherance to
me in all Pious, God^y and Charitable Action. Grant this, O Lord, and whatever
more thou see I stand in need of, for thy dear Son's sake; To whom with thee,
O Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Praise, Honor and Glory both now and for
evermore.

A Prayer for one that is going to Sea.
O Lord God Eternal, who made the Seas, and the Fountains of Waters, at whose
Commands the Winds are; I beg of thee to go along with me, and preserve me by
thy Power and Outstreched Arm, from the Perils of the ^reat Deep, and carry me
safe to my desired Haven; and Lord, forgive me all ^y Sins, heal all my
Backslidings, and ^e me freely; grant me thy Grace, that I may live in thy
Fear, and walk ^^rightly before thee with singleness of ^eart, that so I may
live to the Praise ^^d Glory of thy Great Name, and the ^verlasting Salvation
of my precious and ^^mortal Soul. And, Lord, as I have ^gged of thee to carry
me safe to my ^^sired Haven, so bring me home again, ^at so I may have an
occasion and op^ortunity with my Friends and Relati^ns, to sing Praises to thy
great and glorious Name for all thy Mercies; but more especially that thou have
kept me from the merciless Waters and the Raging of the great Deep. So begging
thy Protection for my Preservation, I resign up my self to thee, who art the
God of all Power and Glory, both now and for evermore.

A Prayer in distress of Weather at Sea, either by Storm or Tempest.
O Lord God Eternal, maker of Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that therein
is; We miserable Offenders, who have justly pulled down thy Vengeance upon our
Heads by the greatness of our Sins; we have provoked thy Wrath, we have
deserved to be swallowed up quick by these raging Waves; O Lord, the Floods
come over us, and even enter into our very Souls; O Lord, the Sea rages and
rises up against us; Here we see thy woundrous Judgments in the great Deep,
which unless thou preserve us, will swallow us up in a Moment. Lord, w^ cannot
but confess we have sinned again^ thee with a high hand, and therefore justl^
is thyfierce Anger kindled upon us, a^^ thy intolerable Judgments come up again
us, there is none to help us: Therefore O Lord, for thy tender Mercy sake
appear for us, and save us: Cease these Storms, and Tempest; Cease, we beseech
thee these swelling, raging Billows: Command these blustering Winds, and they
shall obey thee; for we are at the pit of Destruction, just ready to be
swallowed up: Save us, Master, or we perish. Lord, increase out faith. Merciful
Father, we beseech thee to take us into thy Protection; and if thou have
appointed Death for us, O Lord, be thou present, we beseech thee, to receive
our Souls into thy Bosom, till the general Resurrection of our Bodies, and then
receive our Souls and Bodies into thy Kingdom. If thou do design us for Life,
grant that these Afflictions may be so sanctified unto us, as to cause us for
the future to live a Godly, Righteous, and Sober Life, all our Days. Grant
this, O God, for thy dear Son's sake. Amen.

A Thanksgiving for a safe Return from Sea.
FAther of all Mercies, and God of all Consolations, I cannot but must confess,
that I am obliged to return thee hearty thanks for all thy Mercies: But more
especially at this time I am, and do return thee my humble and hearty Thanks
for thy great Mercy, in bringing me safe over the great Waters t^ rough^ many
Perils and Dangers, to my own Habitation, and to the Enjoyment of all my
Friends and Relations; for which singular Mercy, O Lord, do thou give me a
Heart to live answerable to it, that thou may est have the Praise, and I reap
the Everlasting Comfort of it, and I will sing Praises to thy Great Name, for
thou art my Salvation, my Rock, and strong Tower of Defense, and Praises wait
for thee, O God, in Sion; for thou art worthy to be praised, both now,
henceforth and for evermore.

A Prayer for one that is going a long, Journey
O Lord God, lead me in the Paths o^ Righte^^sness, and direct my Goings in the
^ay of Truth: We are bo^^ to Travel, and many have no certai^ place of abode;
our Days are like a Spa^ and our Laves pass away swifter than Post. O what is
Man that thou art (...) full of him, or the Son of Man that t^^ have any regard
for him? We are like to Bubble, a Blast, we go hence, and are seen no more.
Teach me, Lord, to number my days, that I may apply my heart unto Wisdom:
Direct my^steps in the way of truth, and guide and govern me in my Travel, that
I may go on with Comfort in this my: Journey. Be thou my God, my Help and
Guide, to direct me in my way and Business. Keep me from all danger of Thieves,
or other Mischief and Trouble, that I may have no disturbances in my Journey,
no lets or hindrances, nor sorrow, nor heaviness, b^^ for my Sins. O Lord, keep
and bless all my Friends and Relations, at home and abroad, in Health and
Peace. O Lord, let me have the comfortable enjoyment of thy holy Spirit upon
the way, that so it may assist me, that I may think, discourse, and act nothing
but what is well pleasing to thee. And all this I b^g for Jesus Christ his
sake. Amen.

A Prayer for a sick Person.
O God of all Comforts, who art a present help in time of Trouble, to them that
faithfully rely upon thee for thy help and assistance in their Troubles: Lord,
(...) have laid me upon a Bed of. Languishing and upon a rolling pillow, where
I cannot find relief, or ease, or comfort for my Body; Lord, do thou sanctify
this sore affliction unto me; I cannot but confess I have sinned and done
wickedly, and grieved thy holy Spirit from time to time; yet merciful Savior*
return unto me that I may have a feeling of thy good Spirit. Let not the sins
of my Youth, nor the iniquity of that time be upon me: But, Lord, as thou have
laid thy afflicting Hand upon me, arm me with ^^atience that I may endure this
Visitation patiently. If thou art pleased to dispose of me for another life,
then make me fit for thy Kingdom. Arm me and strengthen me to bear the But then
without mourning against thee, but make me to undergo this Affliction
willingly, and to fight it out manfully. What am I^ a poor worthles^ Worm ^ I
have no^ Comfort but from thee. Restore me ^^ Health and amendment of Life, or
else take me into thy Kingdom of Glory. Lord, cease my Pain, ease my Grief
Lord, I entreat thee to grant, that neither the Devil nor the World may ever
have power over me any more to make me disobey thee. Send thy good Angels both
to keep me in Sickness and in Health, and grant that I may be always fitted and
prepared for death, that I may not be afraid of it, if it be thy Will. Let me
recover a little strength. Spare me a little before I go hence and be no more.
O grant that I may find thy Grace work in me for my good, that if it be thy
Will to take me hence, receive me to thy self. Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly.
So I commit and commend my self to thee in that Prayer thou have taught me,
saying, Our Father which art, etc. Lord strengthen my Faith to the end. I
believe in God, etc.

A Prayer for a young Virgin.
MOst Glorious and Everlasting Father, look in Mercy, Pity and Compassion upon
thy poor Hand-Maiden, and grant me the for giveness of my Sins, and grant that
all thy Graces may flourish, in me, that I may be in favor both with God and
Man. Crown my Virginity with pious and chaste Thoughts, that I may be as
watchful to wait for thy coming, as the Wise Virgins, that I may enter with
thee and them into thy Blessed Kingdom, before the Door be shut. Give me such
good and heavenly Thoughts that a good Name is better than any thing that I can
enjoy; and let me not part with my Reputation for the greatest Offers this
World can afford, but help me to live a sober, meek, and chaste Life, by the
gracious assistance of thy most holy Spirit. O defend me from base and
slandrous Tongues, and all wicked Temptations. O Lord, make me faithful and
honest in all my actions in this Life, that whatsoever Charge is committed to
my Care, I may be so careful of it, that nothing may be wanting when I come to
resign it up. Marry me, O Lord, to thy self in Mercy and Righteousness, and if
thou shall be pleased to call me to the honorable Estate of Matrimony, let me
take Rachel, Rebecca and Sarah for my Examples, in Love, Wisdom, Faithfulness
and Obedience to my Wife, and toward all Persons with whom I have to do. Let
me behave my self in all things so as becomes one that is wholly devoted to
thy Service. Grant these things, O Lord, and whatever else thou know I stand
in need of for Jesus Christ his sake; To whom with thee O, Father, and the Holy
Spirit, be all Praise, Honor and Glory, both now, henceforth and for evermore.

The Wife's Prayer for her Husband.
O Lord God, as thou have joined me in thy Fear and Name, in thy great Mercy to
a loving and kind Husband, grant that I may be so loving, kind, and obedient to
him, as may conduce to thy Glory, and both our Comforts; so endue me with a
meek and quiet Spirit, and defend me and him from the power of all Temptation
that may attend us, that so thy Strength may be made perfect in our Weakness.
Grant us both the assistance of thy holy Spirit, that so it may teach us to
love and cherish each other; and give us the Gifts of Chastity and Sobriety,
that bothin body and mind we may live a pure Life, binging up our Children and
Servants in thy Fear and Dread. O Lord, forgive us all our Sins, and grant us
both Grace to love, fear, and serve thee our appointed time till our Change
come, that so (...) this Life we may reap the Comfort of (...) enjoy, and
receive the Fruit of (...) that is laid up in thy mercies. (...) all I beg upon
the account of thy ^ear Son: To whom, with thee and the ^oly Spirit be all
Praise, Honor and Glory ^oth now, henceforth and for Evermore.

The Widow's Prayer.
EVerlasting Lord God, a poor distressed and afflicted Servant of thine is come
before thee to beg the forgiveness of all her Sins, and to be a comfortable
Husband to me in this my desolate and forlorn condition. And, Lord, as thou
have been pleased to lay so great an Affliction upon me, as to take so loving
and kind a Husband from me, give me out of thy tender and everlasting Mercies,
some other blessings to ease the Sorrows of my poor afflicted Soul. Lord, do
thou give me Beauty for Ashes, the Oil of Joy for Mourning, and the Garment of
Praise for the Spirit of Heaviness; that so after this Night of Afflictions, I
may have some refreshing Comforts and Encouragements to sing Praise to thy
great and glorious Name in the land of the living; and tell my Friends,
Neighbors and Kinsfolk, how good thou the Lord have been to me, and what great
things thou have dwe^ for me, whereof I shall be glad. And, O sake^, bless* me
in all honest Endeavors, supply all my Wants, whether Spiritual or Temporal;
and let me have the comfortable Fellowship of thy most holy Spirit t^ direct me
in all my ways, that I may do nothing that tends to the dishonor of thy great
Name, or the disconsolation of my precious and immortal Soul. I pray thee order
my Children and Servants Hearts and Minds, as that they may love and fear thee
as they ought. Lord, do these things for me, and more abundantly than I am able
to ask or think, for Jesus Christ his sake? To whom with thee, O Father, and
the Blessed Spirit, be all Praise, Honor, and Glory, both now and for evermore.

A Prayer for a Woman with Child.
HEavenly Father, and God of all Power and Glory, who createdst the Heavens,
and the Foundations of the Earth, and all that in them is, who createdst Man in
thine own Image, but he has found out many Inventions. Lord, I am come to
supplicate thy Majesty, and to implore thy infinite Goodness to bless me in
this Condition I am now in of Childbearing, and grant that the Fruit of my
Womb may have all the Parts and Members that it ought to have, and in their
right places and stations; and whatever Weakness it may bring upon my Body, do
thou grant me patience to bear it with all the submission imaginable to thy
Will, and grant that all thou do for me, and to me, may be sanctified, that
so I may make a right use and improvement of it, to the Praise of thy glorious
Name, and to the everlasting Comfort of my immortal Soul. Lord, preserve me
from untimely Birth; grant through Faith, Prayer and Patience, I may escape all
sudden Fears. Lord, do thou stand by me when I draw near to my hard labor, and
let thy everlasting Arms be under me to bear me up under those intolerable
Pangs which attend that dreadful Hour; and grant that the fruit of my Womb, as
it grows up in bodily Strength, so let it grow also in spiritual Strength in
thy Faith, Fear and Love. And grant me, O Lord, a patient and quiet Spirit at
that Hour, and safe Deliverance in due Time, and make me a joyful Mother.
Forgive and forget all my past Offenses, and bless my poor Infant, and take it
into thy Covenant, and give me Wisdom and Strength to bring it up in thy Fear,
and to thy great Glory, and my further Joy, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A Thanks giving for safe Deliverance from the Perils of Childbearing.
O Lord God Eternal, accept of this Sacrifice of Thanks giving for thy great
Mercy in appearing so wonderfully for me, to my great Ease and Comfort in that
dreadful and painful Hour of Childbearing, that thou have been pleased safely
to deliver me from the Perils of it, and to lengthen out my Days in the Land of
the Living, and to see the Fruit, of my hard Labor and Travail. Lord, grant
that it may prosper and grow up in thy Fear, to thy Glory, and both our
Comforts. And grant, Lord, that I may live worthy of this Mercy, and make thee
some grateful Returns for all thy Mercies. Pardon and forgive me all my Sins,
and preserve me from sining against thee any more. And all I beg upon the
account of thy dear Son. To whom with the, O Father, and with the blessed
Spirit, be all Honor, Praise and Glory, both now and for evermore.

A Prayer for all Christian Virtues, as Love, Faith, Hope and Charity, etc.
O Lord, Father of all Mercies, and God of all Consolations; bless me with all
thy Spiritual Blessings, and Heavenly Graces, make me rich in Love, strong in
Faith, full in Assurance of Hope, and abound in all Charitable Actions,
according to that Sufficiency thou have been ple^sed to bless and entrust me
with, that I may have nothing to answer for at that great and terrible Day,
wherein the Secrets of all Hearts shall be opened, and every one rewarded
according to their Doings. Lord, grant that thy Graces may all flourish in me
as the Bay Tree, that so by my good Example, others may return to thee their
Lord and Savior, and so have cause to sing Praises to thy Great Name, for all
thy Wondrous Works. Lord, keep me from Insolence and Pride, and grant me true
Humility and Zealousness of Mind, and give me a true Consideration of my own
Vileness, that so I may tremble and stand in Awe before thee, as a sinful Man,
having always a better esteem of others than my self. Gracious Lord, when the
Devil shall accuse, my own Conscience bear Witness against me, and the whole
World forsake me for my Sins, do thou be my Strength, my Salvation, my Rock and
strong Tower of Defense against these potent Enemies of my Soul Inflame my Dead
Heart with the Heavenly Affection of an unseign'd Love, that I may love and
adore thee above all; and my Neighbor as my self* Grant me a good Mind to help
and succor all to my Ability; to forbear and forgive all that ever any did
against me; Let not the least Spark of Envy or Wrath lodge within my Breast,
nor never let the Sun go down upon my Anger, but let me be satisfied, that
Vengeance is thine; and that thou art so just, that thou will send it upon the
Heads of those that fear thee not, and call not upon thee, but that live in
Envy and Malice, and Implacableness of Spirit against thy Children. Give me
Grace, O Lord, to follow the Example of all good Men; and keep me from that
hateful Sin of Sloth and I^leness, which is the Highway to Want and Beggary.
Grant me a contented mind, and moderate my Des^res toward the Things of this
World; and, Lord, be with me at the Hour of Death; and when I go hence and be
no more seen, I may be admitted into thy Kingdom of Glory; that I may eternally
sing Hallelujah's to thy great Name. Grant this, O God, and whatever else I
stand in need of, for Jesus Christ his sake: To whom with thee and the Holy
Ghost, be all Honor, Praise and Glory, both now and for evermore.

A Prayer for all Earthly Blessings.
O Lord God Eternal, which causes the Sun to shine upon the Just and the
Unjust, satisfy the Desires of thy Servants with thy bountiful Goodness; we
cannot but must humbly acknowledge, that we are not worthy of the least of thy
Favors, but that it is of thy Eternal Goodness we are living Monuments of thy
mercy all this Day; Lord, do thou supply our daily Necessities, and give us
this Day, and every Day, our daily Bread. Bless the manuring of our Ground,
prosper (...) Corn, and bless the Seedtime with the Former and Latter Rain in
their due Seasons. Keep our Fruits while they be upon the Earth, from Ha^l and
Thunder, from excessive Droughts, over much Ra^o and Mildews, and send us a
joyful Harvest* O Lord, bless and increase our Cattle, and keep them from those
Casualties they are obnoxious to; amd bless our ^^ske^ and our Store, and keep
our Granaries, Barns and Store Houses from Fire and boisterous Winds, Thieves
and sudden Inundations. Prosper all our Undertaki^gs whether by Sea or Land* Be
thou a present H^lp in time of Trouble, and turn our Dear^^s into Cheapness,
and Scarcity into Plenty. And, Lord, open the Hearts of those to whom thou have
dealt liberally, that as thou have been to them, they may be to their poor
Fellow Creatures that are in Want. Help us, O Lord, in all our Straits, and
oppress us* not with too much Poverty; neither let us be puffed up in the Day
of Prosperity, but keep us in Evenness of Temper in either extreme, that we may
live in thy Fear and die in thy Favor. And all this we beg upon the Account of
thy dear Son and our blessed Redeemer: to whom with thee, O Father, and the
blessed Spirit, be all Praise, Honor, and Glory, both now and for evermore.

Graces before and after Meat.
Grace before Meat.
O Lord God, Maker of Heaven and Earth, who have created ^ll things for the use
and service of Men: Bless these thy Creatures which thou have provided for us,
and set before us at this time, that they may strengthen our Bodies, so that
thereby we may be the better able to live to thy Praise, Honor and Glory, both
now and for evermore.

Grace after Meat.
ALmighty God, and Everlasting Father, who out of thy infinite Goodness have
most plentifully fed us, for which and all other Mercies, we return thee hearty
Thanks; begging of thee so to direct and guide us, as that we may in some
measure live answerable to thy Goodness to us. All which we beg for Jesus
Christ his sake. To whom with thee, O Father, and the holy Spirit, be Praise,
Honor and Glory, henceforth, and for evermore.

Grace before Meat.
MOst Gracious Father, we crave thy Blessing upon these good Creatures, that
thou by thy good hand of Providence have bestowed upon us; grant that they may
give Nourishment to these our mortal Bodies, and sanctify them so unto us, as
that we may live to thy Praise, to thy Honor, and to thy Glory, both now,
henceforth and for evermore.

Grace after Meat
MOst Bountiful and Gracious Lord God, whose Goodness is extended to the
uttermost Parts of the Earth; what cause have we to praise and magnify thy
holy Name for this great and singular mercy of daily taking care for us, and
plentifully feeding of us with the best and choicest of thy Creatures. As thou
have filled our Bodies with them, so fill our Souls with the Graces of thy holy
Spirit. And all we beg upon the Account of thy dear Son: To whom with thee, O
Father and the blessed Spirit, be all Praise, Honor and Glory for ever and
ever.

Grace before Meat.
O Lord, it is by thy Goodness and Mercy, that we are here before thee this Day
to partake of thy great Mercy, in providing such a plentiful Table for us.
Grant, Lord, that what we eat at this time, may so refresh and strengthen us,
as thereby we may not only be able, but obliged by thy great Goodness toward
us, to serve thee with all our might, with all our strength, and with all our
Soul, unto our Live's End.

Grace after Meat.
GOD of all Blessings and Gonsolations, we return thee our humble and hearty
Thanks for thy satisfying our Bodies at this time, when Thousands of our
Fellow Creatures are in great want. Lord, grant that we may live up to this and
all other Mercies, for Jesus Christ his sake, our Lord.

Grace before Meat.
THou King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; Bless these thy Creatures that thou
have filled our Table with at this time. Bless the King upon the Throne, and
all the Royal Family, with the choice of thy Blessings. Bless the Christian
Churches i^ this Land of our Nativi^y. And all we beg for Jesus Christ his
sake: To whom with thee, O Father and the blessed Spirit, be all Praise, Honor
an^ Glory, both now and for evermore.

Grace after Meat.
THou Prince of Peace, and everlasting Father, who have filled our Bodies in a
most plentiful manner at this time, so fill the Souls of the ^ing, and all the
Royal Family, and ours, with the ^est of thy Servants every where, with the
Graces of thy most holy Spirit, whereby we may be con^ucted to thy Everlasting
Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

HYMNS and Spiritual SONGS of Praise to Almighty GOD, for our happy Deliverance
from Popery, and the horrid Cruelty and Barbarity of Blood-thirsty Men.
A HYMN.
O Lord, thou have been merciful
To thy beloved Land;
^or England thou have saved
By thy Almighty Hand,
From the Barbarous Cruelty
Of all those that have sought
With all their Power to destroy;
Their Plots are come to naught.
The Cruelty they did design,
O Lord, was very great;
Thy People all for to destroy,
This Land to ruinate.
But these our Enemies, O Lord,
Thou have caused to fall;
And from that Ruin they designed,
O Lord, thou have saved us all.
A SONG of Praise.
THerefore thy praises, Lord, we'll sing,
To the Honor of thy Name;
For this Salvation thou have wrought,
We'll magnify the same;
When thou appeard'st our Foes they fell,
And perished at thy Sight;
For thou did maintain our Cause,
And do the Thing that is right.
Our Enemies thou have cast down,
Their Counsels overthrown;
Thou have put out their Names that they
May never more be known.
O Lord, thou wast our Refuge then,
When we were sore oppressed;
A Refuge will he be in time
Of Trouble and Distress.
SONG II.
Let Us praise the Lord with all our Hearts;
Let Us praise God while we live:
While we have Beings, to our God
Let Us Songs of praises give.
Trust not in great Men, not at all,
In whom there is no stay;
Their Breath departs, to Earth they turn
That Day their Thoughts decay.
O! happy are all those and blessed,
Whom Israel's God does aid;
Whose hopes upon the Lord do rest,
And on that God are staid.
Who made the Earth and Heavens high,
Who made the Swellings deep,
And all that is within the same,
Who Truth does ever* keep.
Who righteous Judgment executes
For those oppressed that be;
Who to the Hungry gives Food,
And sets the Captive free.
Who gives to the Blind their Sight,
The bowed down does raise;
The Lord does dearly love all those
That walk in upright ways.
A Song of Praise.
TO render Thanks unto the Lord,
It is a comely thing;
And to thy Name, O thou most High,
Due Praise aloud to sing.
Thy Mercies great for to show forth,
When shines the Morning-Light;
And to declare thy Faithfulness
With Pleasure every Night.
How great, Lord, are thy Works! each Thought
Of thine, O deep it is:
A wicked Man he knows not,
Fools understand not this.
When those that lewd and brutish are,
Spring quickly up like Grass:
And Workers of Iniquity
Do flourish all apace.
It is that they for ever may
Destroyed be and slain:
But thou, O Lord, art the most high,
For ever to remain.
For all thine Enemies, O Lord,
Thine Enemies perish shall;
The workers of Iniquity,
Shall be dispersed all.
A Song of Praise.
O England, all with joyful Sounds
Up high your Voices raise;
Sing to the Honor of God's Name,
And Glorious make his Praise.
Say unto God how terrible
In all thy Works art thou?
Through thy great Power, thy Foes to thee
Shall all be forced to bow.
All on the Earth shall worship thee,
They shall thy praise proclaim,
Songs they shall sing most cheerfully
To thy most glorious Name.
For this great mercy thou have wrought
By thy Almighty power;
Poor England to redeem and save
From those that would devour.
Just at the Pit of Destruction,
O Lord, we all did stand;
And nothing could us save from it,
But thy Almighty Hand,
O blessed be thy Glorious Name
To all Eternity;
The whole Earth let thy Glory fill;
Amen, so let it be.
O Come let us sing to the Lord,
Come let us every one
^ joyful noise make to the Rock
Of our Salvation.
Let us before his gresence come,
With praise and thankful Voice;
Let us sing psalms to him with Grace,
and make a cheerful noise.
For God, a great God, and great King
Above all Gods he is;
^epths of the Earth are in his Hands
The strength of Hills are his.
To him the raging Sea belongs,
For he the same did make:
The dry Land also from his Hands
Its Form at first did take.
O come let us worship him therefore,
Let us bow down withal;
And on our Knees before the Lord
Our Maker let us fall.
For he is our God, the People we
Of his own pasture are;
And of his Hand the Sheep to day,
If ye his Voice will hear.
A Prayer for King William.
MOst Glorious and ever-blessed Lord God, Maker of Heaven and Earth; who do
from thy Throne behold all the Inhabitants of this lower World; we humbly pray
and beseech thee; for jesus Christ thy dear Son's sake, to bless with the
^hoicest of thy Blessings, our Gracious Sovereign ^ing William, who by thy
great and wonderful Pro(...) under thee, and thy Christ, is come (...) supreme
Head and Governor of ^^is Land and ^^tion wherein we live: Lord, do thou endow
hi^ with all thy heavenly Graces, and bless all his U^dertakings against his
and our implacable Enemie^ whether by Sea or Land: Lord, let his and our
Enemies fall before him; and carry him through this great Work thou have
brought him hither to manage; that he may settle this Nation in Peace, that
every one of ^^ may live and enjoy in Tr^nquility of mind all those Earthly
blessings thou have our of thine Infinite Goodness and Mercy bestowed upon us:
Lord, let thy Gospel flourish once more in thi^ Nation; that thy Name may be
glorified to (...) Ends of the Earth. O Lord, be our King's Defender and Keeper
in all His Battles; And, Lord, do thou fight them for him, and then he will be
crowned with Success; and let him see the End of all his Enemies; and finally,
after this Life, he may inheri^ those Eternal Joys thou have in store for those
tha^ love thee, and long for thy appearance: All this we beg for Jesus Christ
his sake; to whom with thee, O Father, and the holy Spirit, be all Praise,
Honor, and Glory, both now, henceforth, and for evermore.

FINIS.

