AN ADMONITION TO MY LORD PROTECTOR AND HIS COUNCIL, Of their present Danger,
WITH The means to secure him and his POSTERITY in the present Greatness: With
the general Applause and lasting Tranquillity of the NATION,

London, Printed in the Year 1654.

THE PREFACE.
MY LORD,
MY passionate inclinations to the lasting peace of my Country, have made me
so presumptuous, as to prescribe to your Highness and Council a more perfect
remedy for its ill healed wounds, than I have se^en yet applied: But I would
not be thought so impudent, as to offer at the instruction of so great Masters
in the Art of Government, but only to put you in mind of those things, that
the multiplicity of your greater Affairs have made you forget to consider. And
lest your Highness should want leisure to peruse the papers of an obscure and
unknown person, I thought fit to commit them to the Press, that some of your
Council or Friends (at least) may inform your Highness how much is pertinent in
them, not doubting but you will think those more your friends, that give you a
timely notice of your own and your Countries danger, than those, who by a
servile flattery, becalm you to your ruin; which none shall be more ambitious
to prevent, then

My Lord, Your most humble, and faithful Servant, J. H.

AN ADMONITION TO MY LORD PROTECTOR, and his Council, of their present danger,
etc.
TO begin such a business as this methodically, we are first to show the just
Exceptions the people and Soldiery have to this plausible elective form of
Government, so well intended by your Highness and Council; next those to your
persons, with the dangers ensuing thereupon to your selves and the Nation: And
lastly, the only means of a total and lasting prevention.

And I must ingenuously confess, that there is so much seeming reason to
prefer the continual Election of wise and gallant men, before the Succession
of Kings or Protectors, who may possibly prove Children, or Fools, or Tyrants
or Cowards, that it may seem a wonder that the experience of all Nations has
not driven them to the specious form of Elective Monarchies.

But the trials they have had, have beaten them to the contrary; for though the
renown of your Highness's many victories and great abilities, with your long
and prosperous prepossession of the Generalship, did silence the ambitious
pretenses of any Competitours in your Election, yet we must no more look for a
man that has no Equals after your Highness; for the most eminent sort of men,
are as near of a size in wit and courage, as they are in stature; and as they
are equals in virtue, so will they be in interest, at least their factions will
be so near an equality, that the weaker in an Army may by his cunning and
industry draw in other factions from amongst the people to increase his numbers
upon the common specious pretenses of a Reformation in Religion and Government
agreeable to those peoples humors whom he courts, and so prepare himself to
decide his pretentions by a Civil War, which I may justly call the great Sea of
calamities that swallows up all the streams of other petty tyrannies, as not
worth a name, in respect of the ruinous inundations of that many headed
Monster, which commonly ushers in a Forraigner with it to make our miseries
almost immortal.

And that this is like to be our sad fate upon the Election of every Protector,
is as certain, as that all men (whether honest, or dishonest) have naturally an
ambition to get as much power as they can to oblige or disoblige; and
considering how natural men overvalue themselves, I think the designs of
ambitious men to be commonly just in their own thoughts, out of the Confidence
they have of themselves, of excelling others in good Government. But that those
gallant men who run so many hazards to build up your Highness greatness,
should not adventure as far for themselves apart, after your Highness death,
were the greatest miracle that I have known.

And to confirm this by an ancient example or two, of the wisest and most
civillized people then in reputation in the world; we will begin with the great
Alexander, who at his death (it seems intending an Election amongst themselves)
told his great Officers, that he would leave his Empire to the worthiest; but
they could so ill agree who that was, that they divided that invincible Army,
and each seizing upon what he could, fought it out, till they were all
destroyed but Seleucu: and Ptolomy: And so after the death of Julus Caesar, was
the Roman Empire rent by the dissentions of Augustus, Anthony, and Lepidus,
till the fortune of Augustus prevailed. And in the declining of the Roman
Empire there were several times as many Emperors as the Legions in several
Provinces were pleased to set up, which were sometimes three or four together
for want of a due succession. And to come home to the present German Empire,
though it be in effect Hereditary to the House of Austria yet the very pretense
to a free election was the principal Cause of calling in the King of Sweden,
and reducing that strong and flourishing Empire to such a wilderness as now it
is. And doubtless, all Governments were to be rejected as pernicious
tyrannies, were it not for avoiding the tyranny of Confusion, which subjects
the Lives and Fortunes of every particular man to any small number of Rogues
that shall assemble at such a time of Liberty. If then the public peace be the
chief end of all Governments, those Forms must needs be the worst which are
most subject to decline to Factions, though they do not immediately do so; and
of Monarchies no doubt but the elective is most liable to this Confusion.

And though it may be objected, that the follies of a weak hereditary King may
introduce the same inconvenience, I shall first answer that there is seldom
such a King; for their extraordinary educations make them knowing men, if it
finds them not such. But if he be a fool, or coward, he has subjects under
him fit to command Armies, and no doubt a wise Council of his predecessors, who
knows how to Humor and govern him as well as any of his fellow fools; And if he
be a child, his minority most commonly proves peaceable, if his Title be
unquestionable. But it may be said he may prove a Tyrant, and that I must
confess, but so may an Elective Monarch, though he seem a lamb at his first
entry, I am sure he has more reason to be so, because he has more of his
equals or superiors in birth to fear. And if we look upon other differences of
these two kinds of Kings, we shall find the Elective King more necessitated to
exhaust the people, both in respect of the charge of gaining and securing his
present power, and leaving his posterity like the children of a Monarch, and so
the Treasury shall be always emptied into private purses, and the people a new
exhausted by the next hungry Prince with his necessitous kindred and
dependents. So that I must conclude that every Election does certainly threaten
the worst of evils, and that the inconveniences of a succession are far
less, and do very seldom happen by the concurrents of many ill accidents
together. And I think this may serve for demonstration of the peoples
exceptions, who judge by the pressures they feel. And now let us examine the
distasts of the soldiery and people together to your Highness person, and I
doubt we shall find that the greater their love and admiration once was, the
more is now their hatred and your Highness danger; for they both looked upon
you as a zealous reformer not only of Tyranny, but of the very causes of it;
and (though you acted beyond their reasons) they thought it was because you had
more reason then they, and so with an implicit faith they expected from your
Highness such a settlement, as should recompense their great expense of blood
and treasure. But after the spirir had moved you to break your Oaths of
allegiance and supremacy (which you took with all the Members at your first
entrance into Parliament) and after that your trust from the two houses upon
the score of the Covenant, and since again to destroy the King, weed the
Parliament, and at last ^ear it up by the roots, and they in the end see no
other fruits of blood and perjury, but the giving laws like a Conqueror, and
imposing that kind of Government upon the soldiery which they have fought
against, and indeed a worse: what can be feared from such a deluded Army and
people, but that they should as boldly draw their swords together against a
Protector, as the Presbyterians and all sorts of Independents did formerly
against the King notwithstanding their own differences in opinion. Certainly
they will be as little scrupulous of murdering Monarch by his own law, as one
by all the Laws of the Land established, and will think your Highness as guilty
of the bloodshed of the Nation, as they once thought the King, and there is no
question but the people who find their Taxes and Dangers perpetuated (which
were inconsiderable when they first quarrelled with them) will be as forward to
assist the soldiery, as they can wish them. And I think this general
disaffection of the people was so evident to your Highness, before they were
exasperated by the death of the King or Parliament, that you need not doubt
their unanimous insurrection, if they shall be prepared and countenanced in it,
when the people of single Counties ventured their lives and fortunes so freely
as they did before the Kings death; where it is remarkable, that a remnant of
the broken and discouraged people of Kent, with some small additions in Essex,
were able to divert my Lord Fairfax's Army at Colchester three months
together; if the Nation had been then prepared for a general insurrection in a
day, it is probable your Highness glories had been nipped in the bud,
notwithstanding your renowned victories against the Scots at that time. But it
may be asked, why the people did not show this readiness when the Scots with
their King came to Worcester, and the Answer is, that their coming was
unexpected, and in such haste, as showed they rather came to seek then give
protection, and the for-laid designs, if there were any, were (as was then
pretended) discovered: But howsoever, there was little more then was requisite
for dispersing of Orders between the day of their arrival at Worcester, and
that of their defeat.

But the grand Objection is, that the fear of the Common Enemy (the King) will
always keep the Soldiery at unity in their Obedience under your Highness; but
I answer, that if a few of them should but resolve to murder your Highness,
and one or two more of your principal Officers, which no doubt they may easily
and securely do, they would find time enough to settle any form of Government
they pleased, before the Common Enemy (who has neither Money, Shipping, Arms,
nor Friends abroad, nor any footing in this Nation) could give them any
disturbance. And how far zeal may prompt those who are religious, and the
ambition of sharing the Government those of no Religion, a wise man ought to
fear; but admit the King were landed, and considerable, the Soldiery very well
known by experience, how welcome even particular men are that revolt to an
enemy in a doubtful condition; much more great bodies, which may not only make
what advantageous conditions they please for themselves, But may impose upon
him stricter limitations of his power, than your Highness is now tied to by
your Protectorship, and no doubt may retain any places of benefit or strength
they shall then be possessed of, for security of performance of conditions. But
if the worst should happen, that he should come in a Conqueror without their
help, they know that a few of the great Ones will only be punished; for reason
will lead any conquering Tyrant (for his own security) to sweeten the multitude
with a general pardon and Act of Oblivion; and for any scruples they may have
of betraying your Highness Trust, I doubt they will be wiped away by their
apprehensions of your first breaking yours with King, Parliament, and Army, and
so they may probably render you a bloody requital for the destruction of their
Fellow soldiers, whom you call Levellers. Lastly, Consider the fondness of
the people to their Old Forms of Religion, as well as Government, which you
have abolished without giving the liberty to tender consciences they expected,
and your Highness will conclude with me, that the world affords you few others
than Enemies at home, and Emulators abroad: And if I have told you nothing but
truth. I doubt not but your generosity will think me more worthy of thanks then
any of your Flatterers, especially if I propose a just, safe, and honorable
remedy for the mischiefs that threaten your Highness and the Nation. And now
having sufficiently opened the wounds, I shall apply the promised Cure. And it
is not the lessening of your Highness in any thing, for I am one of those that
believe Monarchy to be the best form of Government, so as it be hereditary: for
admit a Monarch be a Tyrant, his Tyranny is mortal, and his care will be
greater not to offend, than of a multitude of Governors, who may lay faults
upon one another, and are as subject to cruelty and avarice as the single
person, so that it is better to be preyed upon by one Family with its
dependents, than by three or four hundred with theirs, and we may easier please
the one, and have justice of him, than of the slow and factious great Body, who
must most of them join to oblige, and yet any one can by his misinformation
disobliege, because the accused shall be branded with the Title of a Malignant,
when they have not so much as leisure to hear him. And since an arbitrary power
will be in all Governments in those that have the possession of the Militia, it
is better both for defense and offense, that the General and civil Magistrate
should be all one, than that a gallant Army and Nation should be ruined, as
Hannibal and his Carthaginians were by the delatory and malicious practices of
Hanno, a Senator with his faction.

But to return to our purpose for the satisfaction of all interests, and first
for the soldiery, because they have fought hard for it, I should propose to
your Highness to have all officers of the Army above the degree of Captains
to have votes in your Highness Council of State at those times that they are
free from their more urgent employments in the field. So will each soldier of
the Army be sure to endeavor by his extraordinary deserts to rise by degrees
to the State preferment he sees his officers so justly rewarded with.

Then for this next Parliament (though they should not have power to alter the
Government) I could wish your Highness and Council would consult with them
about your late establishment, and hear what objections they have against it.
And if the Parliament and Army should join in a petition to this purpose, I
presume you would not deny it. And it were better to offer at acts of Grace
before they were asked.

Lastly, if my reasons for an hereditary Monarchy be satisfactory, I most
humbly beseech your Highness and Council to consider whether the establishment
of the succession after your Highness in an usurping line, will not expose the
Nation to all the miseries I have mentioned in an elective government, and if
this be doubted, be pleased to look over our own Chronicles, and you shall find
variety of examples, without going further then the time of the conquest. For
first, Harrold by his usurpation encouraged and occasioned the Conquest of
England; then was there another deluge of blood occasioned by the usurpation of
Henry the first; and again what slaughters and rapines did this miserable
Nation endure by the unjust ambition of King Stephen in detaining the Crown
from Maud the Empress, which fire could not be quenched but by the succession
of her son the right heir, which was at last agreed to by King Stephen. But to
come nearer home, you shall find that Henry the fourth saw his country bleed in
his lifetime for his usurpation, though he came in with the general good
liking of the people, and thought he ha^ secured himself by the Kings murder.
But though his industry secured the Crown to his son, yet was his sons death
conspired by his principal friends just as he was setting out for the invasion
of France; but that conspiracy being detected, he by his unparallelled virtues
and successes and the weakness of the true heir, avoided during his short life
any storms at home. But they fell most heavily upon our flourishing Country in
his Successor Henry the sixths time who could never have lost the Crown by his
weakness if his title had been good; as appears by the notable contention
between him and Edward the fourth, but between them were many thousands of
Orphans and widows left weeping over their own and their Countries desolate and
bloody ruins; and at last the ambition of Henry the fourth was justly punished
in the ruin of his Grandchild, and a hateful memory for his unjust Ambition
and the sad consequences of it. But if these examples do not sufficiently
convince, the reason of the thing does, for there will always be a
conscientious and a necessitous party for the true heir in any Nation against
an Usurper; besides malcontents which are still the greatest number because
many must necessarily be injured, and more unrewarded that think they deserve
it, and even all men that are unconcerned will be for the true Heir, and be
pretended lovers of Justice, and with much reason must hate presidents of
wrong, least they should time other time suffer it. And so I may conclude we
are as certain of a civil war from an unjust succession as from an Elective
Government. And the incomparable miseries and ill consequences of that I have
already declared, though our own experience might partly have saved me the
labor. But your Highness may think an invincible Fleet a sufficient security
for an Island against a Foreign Nation that may interpose at such a time of
our destructions. But I answer, that if none of your shipping should revolt,
yet might our next neighbors the French (if they should then make peace with
their other enemies) take the opportunity of the same storm that shall force
your Fleet in the Winter into Harbors to blow them over the short passage into
England, if they have any party to secure their Landing here.

But if this be thought frivolous, I suppose I have said enough besides to make
it appear that the true interest of your Highness and your posterity with that
of this Kingdom to think of a treaty with Charles Stuart, if he will accept of
the Crown after your decease upon the same terms you now hold it, I mean the
same Council and limitation of power, with a competent maintenance for him in
the mean time, in some such remote place as you shall need less to fear him
then you do now, if he should incline to the breach of such an agreement, as
may be secured by Oaths, Hostages, and by the mediation of such States whose
interest it is (in respect of their greater neighbors) to be always friends
to the peace of England, and by stricter ties then are here necessary to be
mentioned; besides the honesty, discretion and temper of the young man, who
(notwithstanding his great courage) shows he inherits the mildness of his
Father and Grandfather on the one side, and of his Mother and Grandfather on
the other side, which great King Henry the fourth of France after he had
victoriously broken the heart of that great Rebellion called the Catholic
League, notwithstanding received the only head of it then living the Duke of
Main, into his protection and favor, and never took the least revenge of him
or any other of that Rebellious crew in all the time of his reign. But above
all things the Kings own interest and the good of his Country will oblige him
to bury his resentments, and both to accept and keep such conditions as redeem
him and his followers from misery at the present, and secure him and his
posterity in the end to the re-enjoyments of all their rights, without the
slaughter or destruction of any part of his Kingdoms, which he is most
tenderly sensible of; and what doubt can there be but that he will rather
expect quietly the decease of an old man (as your Highness is) then run an
improbable hazard of all his fortunes for a few years, which he must have
stayed for till his fathers death, if he had not been untimely cut off: and
that he was willing to do so, your Highness knows, by his pious and earnest
solicitation then to you and the rest of the officers then with you for the
saving of his life. And let me ad a very late trial of him, when Wiseman and
others proposed your murder to him, he refused to consent to it,
notwithstanding his interest, and the exasperation of his wants; how then
should he be feared when those motives are taken away?

But admit this were not so, you have, still all the power in your own hands,
and would have the affections of the people (which he now has) if he should be
perfidious to their disquiet anew. If then it be clear that you are secure on
the Kings side, where lies the danger of this accommodation? it is the
undoubted interest of the military men to be always governed by a Monarch,
especially if they be well provided of subordinate places under him, and the
people are so passionately affected to the old line, as their onley constant
security from rapine and bloodshed, that they will never be at rest till they
have an opportunity to destroy the rooter up of that three great fences, of
their Religion, Laws, and that unquestionable succession which would entirely
secure them from any more disputes; and even most of those who formerly
fancyed, better forms of Government, are now for falling into the old channel,
out of despair of drawing the peoples affections to their fancies, without
which they know the peace of the Nation can never be long preserved; if your
Highness should yet prove one of that number, your name would be as good as it
is great; for a man may be thought reasonably to undertake indirect courses for
a great and public good, so as he leave those courses when he sees his end is
not to be compassed: And if your Highness do so, your curses will be turned
into praises, and you may sleep again without any fear of your own guards, who
otherwise are not like to scruple the murdering of so unjust a master for a
greater reward than you can give them, if the present seizure of your treasure
were not sufficient for them: For men of no Religion will at any tine betray a
person as wicked as themselves for their interest, and those that are zealous
will do the same upon the score of Justice, and their Oaths and Covenants to
other forms or persons; so that your Highness can be secure of no body, nor any
thing, but the rewards of injustice with infamy, for the preferring your Sons
advancement before your Countries security, who if he were planted can never be
secured by any Decrees or Oaths, since both have been so commonly broken, and
ought to be so, if unjustly made or taken; and if his virtues be never so great
his mere youth shall make him be despised by those that have had the start of
him in successes, and the affections of the Army; and the seeming respect that
is now paid him upon your Highness score, shall vanish with your death, and all
your Family be destroyed (like that of the great Alexanders) by your own
friends and followers, if you your self should escape such a cup of poison as he
met with on such a dagger as finished the ambition of Julius Caesar: And now my
Lord, for a Conclusion, give me leave to wonder at the ambition of all ill men,
though they belive in no other world, since their ambition is to gain esteem,
and how they should be esteemed and hated at once for the same fact, I know
not, without a contradiction. If they did but consider how even wicked men hate
one another for fear of receiving the same injuries from their companions which
they have inflicted together upon others, they would prefer the love and
admiration of Mankind before the being admirably hated, which since your
Highness may so easily do, and cannot with justice, honor and safety do any
thing else, it shall no more be doubted from your generosity by

MY LORD.

