The KEY OF Scripture-Prophecies: OR, A Glass of some New Discoveries. Being An
ANSWER to a Book Published by Mr JOHN ELMESTONE.

Wherein is resolved, 1. Whether a true constituted Church, with true Office
and visible Membership, together with the Ordinances proper to such a
Gospel-stating, continued true by a line of Succession from the Primitive time
downward to our times: or whether it were not interrupted by the Apostacy.

2. If they did there intermit, when they return again to their first glory,
whether now, or hereafter; and what is the dispensation now approved by the
Spirit.

BY SIMON HENDEN.

LONDON, Printed by Ja. Cottrel, for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread-Eagle
at the West End of Paul's, 1652.

The EPISTLE To the Reader.
CHristian friends and Brethren in the Lord Jesus, who are purchased from the
rest of mankind by the precious blood of the Lamb of God, and begotten by the
incorruptbile seed of the Word to a life above nature; it is you I own by the
nearest relation, under what title soever styled; and to your wisdoms
principally I direct this Epistle, with the ensuing treatise. The true occasion
of this contending controversy, you shall find in the front of the book, to be
a combat with a Presbyterian Minister, by whom I was provoked to enter into
the list. The man (though clouded by ancient principles) I have esteemed to be
one of the sealed number redeemed from the earth. The Manuscript sent by him in
opposition to me, I received as the common mouth speaking the mind of many, who
are as much, nay more interessed in the cause pleaded for then himself: and
thus much I may(as I suppose) say of it, that if it were his alone, it
contains in effect the chiefest strength a whole party can produce in their
defense. We had rather receive the next return in the name of all, then to meet
with the forces of all under the title of one.

The subsequent Answer was a first by me written to be more private, and not in
the least intended to come forth into public view; it being a retired contest
in it self, and not clothed with the ordinary dress of elegancie suitable to the
gust of this curious age, nor so exactly polished, as might be required for the
Press.

But since, my Antagonist appearing in Print, in open oftentation, with the
common applause of the Presbyters, who vote his book to be unanswerable, and
many of my godly friends urging my be the most engaging ties of entire
affection, backed with this covincing argument, that the Lord gave me not a
talent to hide in a napkin, I am willing to satisfy them and mine own
conscience, and rejoice to meet him in the hight of his and his parties
confidence; as not fearing but the integrity of my cause, will bear me out
against all opposition. For truth seeks not to be concealed in obscure corners,
but delights to come forth into open light, and present her naked beauty to the
public view of Nations. I am not ignorant that the subject with some
searching reproofs (though drawn from Scripture-record) will be unpleasing unto
many at the first appearance; chiefly to such who are tied up, or much indeared
to their respective constitutions. Many are veiled by antiquity, the judgments
and interpretations of learned men in former or latter times, whom they almost
look upon as Oracles sounding out nothing but undoubted truths, and adjudge its
high presumption in themselves or other to swim against so full a stream. These
do not duly ponder in what a dark night our progenitors lived, nor how the
truths of God brake forth by several steps and degrees out of that deep
apostacy. My advice to such is, to beware, that under the derisive scorn of
new lights, they blaspheme not the discoveries of the Spirit streaming out to a
perfective alteration. Let them first examine before they censure. Others seem
to look with more eagle-eyes over many generations into the purest primitive
times; and erect new models of Churches, parallel (as they suppose) to their
first, and most accomplished pattern; and this I am persuaded the most do out
of the sincerity of their hearts. But they, not observing the Cessation and
departure of the glory of God from the ptimitive Government, nor how Antichrist
had full power in that outward Court not rightly discerning the next immediate
fountain whence a Gospel-marriage flows, nor marking the variety of Gods
dispensations in several seasons, embrace shadows for real substances, and set
up bestiall Idols instead of true Gospel-Churches. I shall desire them to
consider, that this manifest kingdom of God grounds not it self on visible
faith, nor comes with observations and buildings up visible forms, and then
bringing Christ unto them, so as to say Lohere or there is Christ, but comes
with power from above, being like lightning descending down from heaven, as
shall be proved in the following treatise. The greatest number being principled
and guided by others of more eminency, are so strongly affected to what they
have embraced and walked in, that they account it no less then fighting against
the ways of Christ, to disclose their practice, or acquaint them with their
misleadings. For affection is blind, and can hardly be persuaded to epsy real
deformities, in that object on which it reposeth its delights. The Lord only
can, and in short time will alter this eccentrick motion of his people, and
turn the wheel of the heart to move concentrick to himself.

But this is common to them all, that to what way soever they are addicted, the
whole face of Scripture seems to cast a direct and favorable aspect only
toward them; and to look upon others either more obliquely, or not at all.
That as to one who has the yellow Jaundise, the air it self, with every
object he beholds, seems yellowish, suitable to the distempered species in the
eye; or to him who looks through red or green glass, or any colored medium,
the same things show red, or green, or answerable to the color of the medium
which presents them to his sight: so those Scriptures that are in themselves
uniform, beating their genuine signification, being veiwed through false
glosses, or the deceiveable light of delusive principles, seem to men of
differing judgments to carry several repugnant senses corresponding their
misguided apprehensions. The intuitive action is then lurest, when the medium
is diaphanous, receiving that light of truth in its own purity, which
irradiates and manifests every color in its proper kind; and when the
understanding the eye of the soul, is like the crystalline humor, and the
visible species will complectioned in the bodily eye; to wit, clear,
perspicuous, and capable of all colors, but infected with the tincture of
none. Therefore the sea, ( Rev. 4.) by which the spiritual glory was discerned
in the primitive times, was of glass like to Crystal, pure, uncoloured and
shining, through which the several or contrariant colors were seen in their
own peculiar dies. Also in the new Jerusalem, her light (the glory of God then
sparkling forth in the bright luster of that high dispensation) is like most
precious Jasper, clear as Crystal, Rev. 21. which seems to be one of those
stones called by Pliny, Aerizula, resemling the clear air, darkened with no
color which might cause an aberration in the sight: likewise Isa. 42.12. her
windows (the mirror to let the same light into the heart) are of Agats; the
original word signifies as well Jasper, or Crystal, which is most consonant to
that of the Revelation; by which the Spirit would teach us, that there is the
same light within in the eye, that without is in the air; in both which there
is such an unmixed and lightsome purity, as discovers several objects in
their naked hue; and all issues forth more immanently from God, according to
that of the Psalmist, In thy light we shall see light, Psalm. 36.9. but this in
the splendour of it, is beyond our times. The separated people, who have gotten
victory over the beast, stand upon a sea of glass, in a more bright expanding
Scriptures then in the Antichristian stations, mingled with fire to burn up
rubbish. With all the wrong stated corporations, there are humane bestial
thrones interposed between them and the highest throne, which like opacous
bodies, cause an eclipse of the countenance of him that sits thereon; of which
there be some grosser, and occasion the greater darkness, as in Rome; others
more thin and rarefied, but yet being mixed, and of diverse natures, present
untrue and discording aspects to such who look through these delusive mediums.
When the 144000 sealed ones who are now scattered in the wilderness, and secret
chambers, shall like noble victors come off from the beast, and return with
their faces toward Sion, the veil will be removed, whereby the semblance of
Christ will shine more purely upon them; and they standing on the abovesaid
sea, behold his beauty through that glass with more open face: and I am sure
the senses of Scripture seen by that transparencie, cannot bear so many
opposite faces, as now they do, but will appear in their more native and
uniforme visage. For though the same text may have various significations and
prospects, yet the variety is such as meets in a unity, and is not destructive
to it self, as are the dissenting axioms of this our evil generation.

My desire is that the goldy Readers, who may now be severed one from another
in judgment and practice, would with a single eye sequestered from the former
glosses of their own and others, look into the inbrest of those prophecies
produced in the following treatise; and they may perhaps, by the conduct of the
Spirit of prophecy, find that truth, which may be as a spiritual clue to lead
them out of their labyrinths, and reduce them into one fold, to travel together
toward their desirable resting places.

Now suffer me a little to reflect, and give you a compendious survey of some
occurrences happening unto me. I confess my self to be one of the least of the
servants of Jesus Christ; and in this particular subject was heretofore as
blindfold as any. What I have since received, I acknowledge to the praise of his
free grace only, who has committed such treasure to a poor weak earthen
vessel; given indeed to further the destruction of Antichrist, but for your
true edification. If I glory in any thing, it shall be in mine infirmities,
that God may have all the honor. It was some nine years ago that the Lord in
part showed me the vanity of the national Presbytery (for against Episcopacy I
was ever since I came to years of understanding) with the unwarrantableness of
that compulsive power they at that time labored to obtain: and then did I
much affect and adhere to those bodies called Independents (whom I yet look on
as the more moderate, solid, and less rigid of all the stated companies:) and
though I never was incorporated amongst them, yet was I a stickler in their
behalf as I met with opportunity. I found that Gospel-Churches were not made up
with people of all sorts, but of such men only who were Saints at least in
visible appearance Iad. judged th office of the Presbytery derived from the
Bishops and so from the Pope, not to be legitimate: that Classical, Provincial
and National Synods assuming a power over particular congregations, are the
same Prelacy in the root with Episcopacy, and herein might be more dangerous
and destructive, that whereas there were before but few, now there would be a
multiplicity of Bishops: that this is to bring a medium and husband-like
authoriry betwixt Christ the husband and the Church the Spouse; and to conform
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ to the kingdoms of this world: that office by our
Saviors rule was subservient, It shall not be so amongst you, Mat. 20.25, 26,
27. Luke 22.25, 26. That it is the property of the Locusts, false officers, to
have crowns on their heads. Revel. 9.7. that Gospel-members must be a free
willing people enlightened and constrained by the attractive virtue of the
Spirit, and not compelled by humane Laws and Canons: that such a forcing is
against the nature of a marriage, which relative compaction ought to be
combined by the mutual consent of both parties, and not against the will
enjoined by another: that seeing no power of man can create a principle of
belief to this or that way, it were unreasonable to command the action: that
the spiritual life comes only from Christ, and no man can come to him except
the Father draw him: that the soul is the proper seat of God, and the Apostles
weapons were not carnal, but spiritual: that none are now infallible, nor can
substitute such unerring decrees which they dare affirm to be Jure divino,
which Law alone takes place upon the conscience: that this compulsion has been
the greatest offense to render consciences, the right hand of persecution both
in Rome under Episcopacy, and may be the like in Presbytery, many of whom are
over-rigid: that it may for the future, as well as in times past, stop the free
passage of new discoveries. These and such like arguments upon occasion I
produced, and proved at large against the national Presbytery; and thus far I
went heartily.

Now for the particular practice of Church-constitution, I began more narrowly
to pry into the primitive platform; and in this dissented from the rest, that
the Ordinance to receive into Church Fellowship, was not a Covenant and
subscription thereto, nor by giving the right hand of fellowship, but by laying
on of hands. I drew out my model as exactly as I could to its first exemplar,
and saw that many things could not be practiced in their genuine order; but
this I pieced up with the extreme law of necessity. I concluded visible faith
to be the next immediate groundwork of the whole building; and in this last was
my mistake such as overthrew all my former labor: and yet remained I for some
years in this misapprehension, though with secret struglings and reluctances in
the radix of my spirit. Till at last summoning up the strength of my
meditations upon that subject, I espied that all my model was but an outward
form, void of that Spirit of life, which breathed in the primitive order: that
the glory of God was departed from those ordinances I then plead for, and did
not anywhere accompany their execution. I viewed a wider dissimilitude from the
primitive then before, and began to inquire the reason, why the same could not
in many things be followed: why that was uniform, ours various; why that
contracted and gathered the Saints into a unity, ours distracted and set the
most precious men at a vast distance, who before were one in brotherly love:
that whatever scatters, gathers not with Christ, Math. 12.3. I considered
withal, that when Gospel-Churches were in a right order Christ by his
administration was so powerfully there, as to gather the Saints to him the dead
carcass, Matthew. 24.28. by which like Aarons rod, it swallowed up all those of
the Magicians and impostors; that to join to it, was to come to the general
assembly, and Church of the firstborn, Heb. 12.23. to separate from it, was a
manifest symptom of Apostacy, nay Reprobation, 1 John 2.19. Jude 19. to be
excluded and shut out of this society, was to be delivered over to Satan, 1
Cor. 5.5. and 1 Timothy 1.20. that were as an effectual name and power in these
external keys to bind and loose, to open and shut, which had clear effects on
the parties, either to ingratiate, comfort, and appease, or to terrify or
harden: that there was no administration of Christ in what was altogether
independent from it: And by comparing our new-built constitutions by this
Norma, I found them altogether deviated, nay contradictory to their first copy
to which they all pretend. I need not particularize in so evident a case; let
any man enlightened view, and judge.

On the other side, in the behalf of the Independent Order, I argued, that the
abovenamed necessity, arising by the interception of Antichristisme (the cause
why the Primitive could not in its native way be practiced) may dispense with,
nay in some cases be above the Law, according to the Proverb: that the deadness
of those stative Ordinances, and the other defects in the right, might arise
from the weakness of the dispensation now in the dawnings of light: which
perhaps would obtain greater virtue in future ages: that the sad differences
thereby ocasioned might be ex excidenti, from the carnality of men, and not
from any evil in stating of Churches: that the Church must be upheld by
Government; and for me to question all visible Constitutions, would be to
oppose my judgment against most of Gods people, nay the ablest men, and
condemn their practice; both which will be accounted presumptuous and
uncharitable.

Against this, my thoughts replied partly by way of Queries, that if the
interception of that great Defection took away all possibility of practicing
the Primitive in its native method, Whether it did not demonstrate a sink and
interruption of that Order, especially there being a mystical Babylon and a
spiritual Egypt coming between us and the same first day, in which all the
Saints seemed to be captivated, as Israel was in the outward of old, and all
our new-begun constitutions must necessarily imply such a cessation, as also
the call for separation alluding to that of ancient times: Whether that fail
might not occasion an alterable dispensation, seeing different times have
produced different changes in the outward body of Divinity, and the prophecies
seemed to look with diverse faces on the primitive times and ours: Neither found
I such eminent good in any of our new-built Church-models, which might
necessitate the changing of the Rule, nor any warrant for it in the Scripture,
either by Precept or Type; they seemed rather to be obstructive to the free
passage of the Gospel, and the causes of Rents among Brethren: Whether a
Gospel-marriage begun at all in weakness, or not rather with power to
distinguish it from the Legal, which was more formal, as also from the false
and Antichristian, and so fill it with spirit, whereby it might hold forth the
lively presence of the husband; that it did initiate with such majesty in the
Primitive, Acts 2, and the Prophets predict the like magnificent kingdom to
come in succeeding ages: Whether as there was a preparing by John, and after by
Christ's Ministry while on earth, and some space of waiting after his
ascension, to dispose the disciples for the receiving that powerful
dispensation, there might not now be the like preparatory work gradually to
purge away Antichristian filth, and fit the Saints for that glorious
administration to be revealed: Whether those lively breathings, operating in
the constitutive Ordinances of Confirmation, Ordination, Excommunication, etc.
in that first Gospel-day, came not from the effectual emission and blast of the
Spirit sent down by Christ; and whether the same wind was not the soul to
essenciate and animate the key before promised, but not till then given. Here I
began to question my former mistake, and enquire whether, if the Primitive
Order failed, the placing the same upon visible believers not possessed with
such power from on high to inspire the said keys with new breathings, was not
privative (as the want of light is the cause of darkness, and of life deadness)
the ground of that formality and emptiness which is experimentally known to be
in the abovesaid stative Ordinances: whether this be not to lay another
foundation, as bottoming that upon man, or any grace in man, that ought to lie
only upon Jesus Christ, and descends by a virtual influence from heaven:
Whether the contrary effects in ours from the primitive, do not symbol a
difference in the cause, as arising from another principle, and having a
different spirit, even that of Antichrist, which though in pretense is most
strongly for Christ, yet in reality is most opposite to him: And whether our
deplored divisions and dissentions amongst the godly, raised by our disunited
Church-forms, do not originally flow from that other root Man, and that spirit
of carnality, which rents and scatters: Whether the bright coming of Christ
will establish, or not rather abolish all these as Antichristian, and offenses
to his Kingdom. That a true Gospel-stated-Church cannot have the keys of the
Kingdom wanting, which have a name and power to accomplish all the abovesaid
ends: That the Church of the Elect was preserved by Christ, when all
Ecclesiastical Rule was her enemy; and this outward Government has, ever since
the Apostacy, been experienced to be lifeless, and not to contribute one mite
to the power of godliness, but has rather increased formality, debate, strife,
quenched the noble grace of Love to all the Saints, and has been averse to the
workings of the Spirit; and being thus prejudicial, ought to be detected, it
being the great design of God to anatomize the man of sin in all his specious
deceits, and thereby free his people from defilement and bondage: That the
tallest cedars for parts and piety have been much blinded by the mystery of
iniquity; the following of whom in a higher light, has procured the fall of
many: That Antichrist is not fully unmasked at once, but gradually by a
consumption; and hence there must be new and further discoveries of him, the
first breaking forth whereof will be dissonant to the maxims of the age
preceding.

Amidst these and suchlike distracting and dissenting motions, I was as a ship
betwixt two seas, sometimes tossed one way, sometimes another; my affections
inclined more to the Independent Church Order, the strength of argument seemed
rather to prevail against it; and could find no way out of this Meander, till
entering into a nearer communion with my God, I received answer by a light of
Spirit beyond mine own, that the way to be resolved in the case I desired, was
to abstract my thoughts from all former conjectures of my self and others and
look nakedly into the Prophecies speaking of the Antichristian times, the age
we live in, and that to come, compared with the primitive. In the managing of
which task, the same Spirit (who only knows the mind of God) directed and
seconded my labors with such success, as made facile and easy what seemed
before impossible; and revealed the sense of those Scriptures, which were till
then sealed up from my apprehension. If my opposers deride, the Lord lay it not
to their charge. However, to the ingenious, pious, and impartial reader I
speak. You may view the most and clearest of those Scriptures in the ensuing
manuscript. I shall advise you to take the counsel given to me, and you may
perhaps reap the fruits of your endeavors. I found upon diligent search, that
there was a sink and dissolution of the primitive Order; That Rome alone was
not the whole woman Babylon (as has been commmonly conceived) but that she
contained besides the grand one, many harlots distinct in their form as
daughters from the mother; and were after in time, and so younger, which must
be new modelled Churches one differing from the other, Rev. 17.5. that of all
these were many defiled women, chap. 14.4. that every one of these had for
their foundation a false Christ or Antichrist; and false Prophets, and so the
woman being many, the false Christ's and false Prophet are many accordingly,
Mat. 24.24. That this whole Babylon (both mother and daughters) boasting her
self that she sits a Queen in a visible married constituted order, is a plain
property, note, and mark of a false Church from the end of the primitive day,
till the true marriage descends from God out of heaven, Rev. 19.7.

Again, I considered, that the Scripture holds forth not a reformation of, but
a direct separation from those defiled women and false formed Churches: and
that the next path and way of Gods people after the 1260 years of tribulation,
specified in the following book, is to reduce themselves in their walk to the
imitation of these types and parables, Rev. 7.9. chap. 14.2.3, 4, 5. etc. chap.
15.2.3, 4. Math. 25.1, 7. Luke 15.20. which we have endeavored to the utmost
of our power. Moreover, I observed in minding the Scriptures, that there is in
the entrance of the time of separation a new returning Ministry, as a little
book opened, and a pure Gospel segregated from those Antichristian mixtures
published in the foregoing times of the Apostasy, proved, (besides many other
place) by these texts, Rev. 10.4. Isa. 29.9, 10 11 12, 18.19. Rev. 14.6, 7, 8,
9, 10. chap. 18.4. Math. 25.6. Isa. 28.23. chap. 30.29. etc. chap. 41.18, 19,
20. chap. 48. 20, 21. chap. 45.19, 20. Ier. 31.10. Hos. 14 5 7 9. and 2 Es.d
11. 38 39, etc. chap. 12.32.33.34. This is called, Zeph. 3.9. A returning to
the people a pure language, thereby implying an impure before: and is styled a
judging work. Psalm. 96.13. Rev. 15.4. Deuteronomy. 32.36. Isa. 26.8. chap. 4.4.
because of its discovery of righteousness, and declaring the judging wrath of
the vials: it is also termed a new song, Rev. 14.3. Psalm. 98.1, 2. Isa. 42.9,
10 11.12.13.14. and a song chap. 24.14, 16. chap. 30.29.30, 31. new, as it
answers to the new work then arising Isa. 43.19. and for that it is a pure
Gospel-song, which beats the glory of newness, in respect of the old waning
apostated ministry: and a song, because of its gladsome tidings, and the
melodious joy that it brings and works in the hearts of the hearers. I
gathered, that the sum and substance of this Ministry was, to reduce all to
God and Christ only, both in Doctrine, and Government, to cry down Babylon in
her utmost extent, to denounce the judgment written against the Beast, his
Image and Mark in its whole latitude, also to unmask the spiritual drunkenness,
fornication, blindness, slumbering and sleeping of the Babylonish Nations;
likewise to teach the coming and near approach of the bridegroom, and the going
forth to meet him by separation. And withal, to teach up the finishing of the
Mystery of God, as is evangelized (for so is the original) by his servants the
Prophets, Rev. 10.7. that is, to explicate the prophecies pertaining to our
times, and the fullness of the dispensation to come; and to expound the old
Testament by way of allegories and allusions, bringing all the outward and
historical narrations to a Gospel-unfolding, as looking into the mystery
contained within the veil of the letter: and so to know the distinct times of
the Prophets, both those of their proper literal fulfilling, and that of their
allusive sense and accomplishment, extracting the quintessence of all, and
applying it to our own age and that succeeding. For this Ministry in its
upshot, beholds the eyes of the old Scripture in its furthest extent, as if the
aspect of its Evangelizing did center in this last age; and therefore called
the finishing of the Mystery. That as the primitive Christians backed their
Ministry by the Prophets, and explained the old Testament by way of
Allegories; so these returners confirm their everlasting Gospel by the
Prophecies, and unfold the things of God in a figurative interpretation: and as
they then did thereby convince that of Judaisme, so these discover more largely
both it, and that of Antichristianisme too, wherein the deepest mystery of
deceit resideth. The dispensers of this last Ministry, must have the testimony
of Jesus which is the Spirit of Prophecy Rev. 19.10. whereby to understand the
mind of the Prophets, both for matter, and time; being herein like to the men
of Issachar, who by a secret dictate were taught to be skilful in the ^imes, to
know what Israel ought to do: which kind of people (though now despised by the
Formalists of our days) will, I believe, in few years be counted very precious
and of high esteem. This finishing of the mystery is now but in its entrance,
and will not have its compleature of dispensation, till the marriage come, Rev.
19. which was my next consideration.

I gathered what the meaning and mystery of this last marriage is, by the
stating of old Israel at mount Sinai, ( Gal. 4.) and by that of the Christians
in the primitive ( Matthew. 22.) and found the same in the visibility to belong
to external Church-constitution and disciplinal Order.

It is be demanded whether the Elect were before during the apostacy in the
estate of widowhood and non-marriage;

I answer, They are not simply* but respectively in regard of visibility, as
compared with the primitive marriage. For in this season Christ was as one gone
and long absent, and these elect ones were in their outward stand strangers in
a strange country, even in spiritual Babylon, and there were under the rule of
other lords: and therefore the Scripture seems to figure them out in the
condition of a forsaken widow, Luke 18.3. Isa. 54.4.

Also we are to mind, that the same thing is set forth in various Types and
Metaphors, as it has a bent to diverse respects: so the kingdom of heaven in
the rule of grace is expressed by many parables, Matthew. 13. that thereby God
may show himself complete in his word, and what is wanting in the one, is
supplied in the other, and so by this means there may be a fullness of
Ministry, knowledge and practice. Hereupon the godly in another regard, in the
time of tribulation (when they were but few, little, small and weak) are
denoted in another type and Metaphor, to wit, in the form minority and
youthhood, Isa. 54.4. and in the period of separation (they proceeding to a
higher growth and stature) are deciphered in the conditions of virgins, Matthew.
25.7. Revel. 14.4. and in the season of the wedding day (when they are come to
more maturity and ready) are represented in the state of a married wife, Matthew.
25.10. Rev. 19.8.9.

Finally, I took a survey of other interpreters on the Apocalypse and saw by
many reasons, that they very were defective and much mistaken in their senses
of the later Prophecies speaking of our times and that ensuing; and that the
later part of the said Book, when the little book is opened, Chap. 10. must
have a new interpretation both for time and matter: of which you may observe
something in the after-work, and concerning which, I may meet with occasion to
treat more amply in our next reply, if the Lord so dispose it.

But that I dwell not too long upon the Epistle, I shall only speak a few
words of the following Book, and so conclude. I confess the style is plain,
and something rude: plainness I endeavored, that it might be suitable to the
meanest capacity: the more unpolished it is, because the most are my first and
sudden conceptions. For constant exercise in spiritual employments, and
multitude of necessary worldly encumbrances, would not permit me times of
absolute repast and solitude, to recollect and reduce my thoughts into an
exquisite composure. Also some Scriptures are often repeated, occasioned partly
by necessity, it being but one case in the root; in prosecution whereof I
endeavored to use the clearest and most pertinent texts, partly by reason of
Master Elmestones multiplicity of Arguments meeting in the same base, together
with some repetitions of his in a manner the same in sundry places of his book:
and for the better resolving such knots where I met with them, I made use of
those Scriptures which were elsewhere proved more at large that the weak might
be thereby the better satisfied in particulars. Such who are more intelligent,
may dispense with what may be for the benefit of lower apprehensions. And I
doubt not but they that are spiritually prudent, will prize the naked and solid
Truths of God, delivered in the plain language of the Word, before the
adulterate shadows of carnal Reason, though glittering in the specious habit of
humane Eloquence.

Christian and sincerely pious Reader, though this subject may seem new and
strange, and the Scriptures dark and doubtful at a sudden glance; yet he that
will bring to pass his act, even his strange act, has promised to make dark
things lightsome, and crooked things strait: and upon a serious reflection, you
may find the accomplishment of the same promise blessing your endeavors, and
removing the veil to show you the inward beauty of those Prophecies aspecting
your own generation; which will direct you to embrace and walk in the right
path cast up by the Spirit, and to avoid those accursed things that will bring
a general deluge upon the secure world: that while darkness covers the earth,
and gross darkness the people, his light may arise upon you, till at last his
glory be seen upon you.

Now, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Father of glory, may give unto
you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of himself, is the
desire and uncessant prayer of him who is.

Your cordial friend and Brother in the Lord, Simon Henden.

Certain ANIMADVERSIONS upon Master Elmestone's Epistle to the Reader.
YOur Epistle comes galloping in upon the wooden story of the Trojan-horse,
built by the counsel of Pallas, and by subtle Sinons persuasion received into
Troy, to the ruin of that ancient and famous City; For from thence issued out
a warlike Troop of most valiant Greek Captains, who laid that City wast with
fire and sword. To this horse you compare the liberty granted for (tender)
consciences in Religion, procured (say you) by Satan's craft, and the
insinuation of some cunning Sinons, and may redcund to the great prejudice, if
not the ruin of your Troy, your Church and Gospel. For out of it have come
forth etc.

Answ. The native language of Canaan, is more suitable to the majesty of
Divinity, then the fabulous: fictions of heathen Poets: and did you conceive
your Church to be genuine, of a Celestial birth, you might be better advised,
then to Christian it by the name of an outcast stranger. Indeed (to follow you
in your own similitude) Rome being built partly by some roving Trojans, was
called a second Troy rising out of the ruins of the former: and what should
move you to style your Hierarchical Church a third, we cannot guess, unless
because you are an offspring arising from her ashes in England.

However, you may be pleased to consider, that the maine cause bringing
desolation to the first, was not the Trojan-horse, but the wilful retaining of
Helena, a defiled whorish woman amongst them: and if there be the like accursed
thing with you, it is that will procure your great prejudice, if not your
ruin. We use the more boldness, that these your works may burn, and your
persons be saved in the day of the Lord. Notwithstanding that liberty, which
you most unfitly yoke with the said wooden horse, is a precious jewel bought
by the invaluable ransom of Jesus Christ; who by the price of his dearest
blood, did at first redeem his Saints from vain traditions and humane
thraldoms, to be a free willing people to him their sole Sovereign in Religion:
but in the externality, was after surprised by Antichrist, that destroying
king, the better to establish his worldly kingdom, and captivate the godly in
fetters of Iron. And surely this was not again restored by Satan's craft, nor
the insinuation of some subtle Sinons (as you most abusively turn it) but by
the hand of Divine providence directing our noble partriots, to regain the
privilege of their birthright, whom Christ made kings and priests to God and
his Father: The Lord has crowned the undertakings of those, who were the
choicest instruments in procuring this freedom, with such prosperous success
in his and our public interest, as might teach you more modesty then so
reproachfully to defame them: and has with a mighty arm laid low the pride
of such, who sought to bring us back into bondage, both in England. Scotland
and Ireland: he reproved kings and nations for his peoples sake: all which
might force you write upon our liberty, This is the finger of God, if your eyes
were open to behold his wonders now appearing. It seems, it much grieves you to
see the tenth part of the great City falling in our dominions, and that our
States refuse to assume a Popedom over the conscience, the peculiar seat of
divine majesty. However you judge, it will be the honor of our Worthies in
future ages; and all neighbor-Commonwealths are amazed at the glory resting
upon our English nation.

But Sir Why should this toleration be more destructive to you, then to others?
You have as great a portion therein as any: you thereby enjoy a freedom for
your walk which was denied in the Bishops reign: and when so large a door is
opened in rising times, if your Church cannot stand, unless under-propped by
worldly power, it evidently demonstrates your kingdom to be of this world.

Be pleased to remember, that the primitive was not built by might nor power,
but by the Spirit, Zech. 4.6. and by the same Spirit Christ went forth
conquering and to conquer mulittudes. Rev. 6.2. Also the stone dashing all
opposers in these latter days, is cut out of the mountain without hands, Dan.
2.34. the kingly Prophet tells us, Gods people will be willing, or voluntaries
(as the Hebrew text carries it) in the day of his power, Psalm. 110.3 and 47.9.
The Gos^el-Saints are genuinely of a royal princely spirit, and never act nobly
but from a pure principle of love within constraining. 2 Cor. 5.14.

You argue, That out of this womb has issued, forth numerous heresies, errors,
sects and schisms.

Answ. Some of these named indeed are dangerous, some are nearer to the truth
then your selves: but to reply to yours, we assert,

1. That all those nominated in your Epistle (the Ranters excepted, who in
their blasphemies and beastly lusts are excluded) were brought forth many years
before this toleration was granted: and it is a strange Paradox, never heard of
in public till divulged by you that that can be the womb to conceive and bring
forth, which with as was not in retum natura, extant in the series of nature,
till so long time after their existence. Formerly it was an approved Aphorism,
Causa est prior effecto, The cause precedes the effect in order of nature, or
time, or both. But you produce a contrary example, which (if true) will put all
Logicians to an absolute nonplus. We conceive the rationalist, rather then be
silenced, will tell you, Contra principia negantem non est disputandum, no
disputation ought to be held with him that denies the principles. Surely, it is
heat of passion against the Sectaries (as you term them) has disturbed your
otherwise more solid intellectuals.

To proceed, suppose errors may arise, yet is it not carnal, but spiritual
weapons must beat down such spiritual wickedness, 2 Cor. 10.3, 4. The Lord
permits, and the Scripture presageth, that errors and offenses must come,
partly that those who are approved may be made manifest, partly that the
conquest of truth may appear the more glorious, which will at last dispel those
gloomy clouds, and shine forth with more perspicuous brightness. The mystery of
godliness rays out with most perfect beauty, by the clear discovery of the
deepest mystery of iniquity.

Besides, why may not truth in a free passage come in, as well as heresy?
Without doubt Christ, who has all power committed to his charge, is as potent
to prevail in light, as the Prince of darkness in delusions. Nay, why may not
truth be shut out by the contrary restraint? The compulsion you plead for, has
hither to proved a direct enemy to the pure Gospel of the Lord Jesus.

It may further be demanded, to what way you so eagerly labor to engage the
sword of the Magistrate, whether to your own, or to some other. Not to any
other; for when the Bishops held it in their custody, you did with the foremost
exclaim against it as Antichristian bestial, tyrannical etc. and here you
censure all others to be errors, Sects, Schisms, and what not?

If you challenge it to your selves we shall ask whether you, among all the
several bodies extant, sit in the chair of infallibility? For none but an
unerring law can warrantably claim a power over the conscience. 2. Suppose you
were infallible, and could not err (which you dare not affirm) then whether
you can create a belief the heart of those who are contrary minded.

The Apostles in Church-affaires, were directed by an undeceivable spirit: an
yet neither used nor laid claim to such a power, but invited and won men to
the faith simply by the cords of love. All that humane weapons can do, is only
to force the outward man, which is a violent and preternatural motion; and when
the constraint is over soon turns again to its own center. Whereas the Gospel
naturally begins within, and grounds its principles in the intimate chests of
reason. It first breaks as a light into the Understanding, the noblest faculty,
and there imprints the image of its integrity; thence it goes to the Will, the
great wheel of the soul, and turns it to a willing obedience to all its
precepts and commands; thence it passes to the inferior affections, and
compels them to embrace the beauties of holiness; and from these inward springs
proceed all the outward duties and services performed by the body. The sum of
the new Convenant is to write the laws in the heart, and in the mind. Heb.
8.10. This was exactly the method which the Apostles followed. 2 Cor. 3.2.3.
But you endeavor a preposterous course, and contrary to the order of the
Gospel, to wit, to constrain the body to what the heart opposes. If so, and
whatever be not of faith be sin then assuredly this your course is confusion;
and destructive to the souls of people. We read of none in all the New
Testament but only the beast, who commanded all, both small and great, to
worship, Revel. 13.

3. It is conceived that you in this are a part of the greatest and most
deceivable Schism that ever came into the world: and if Episcopacy be to be
plucked up root and branch (which you pleaded) then no relics of your
Classical government will be left remaining: much less will it be granted, that
you sit in the seat of judicature to adjudge all besides your selves to be
Heresies, Sects etc. or that you have any authority given from heaven by humane
force to captivate them to your wills and canons. The Independents are in many
respects in their way nearer to the Kingdom of Heaven, then the Classical men:
and if you would not willingly subjectly your consciences to the separation
(which power they defy to own) why should there be such high endeavors to
imbondage them? In this you are declared to be far beneath a legal spirit,
which teaches to do to others as you would be dealt withal by them. Are not
their consciences as tender as yours? Are they not as pious and dear to GOD, as
upright to their neighbor, as serviceable and faithful to the State, as
cordial and real to our public Cause? And why should they not with others
partake in that common privilege purchased by the expense of many of their
dear lives?

It was not long since your selves were under the Bishops rod, and then such a
liberty would have been sweet and gratefully accepted: but now nothing will
satisfy, unless you may in their steads lord it over your fellow-brethren. The
precept is ordinary, yet profitable, Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula
cautum. Let the ruins of other tyrants, teach you more wisdom and moderation.

In the next place you come unto me and our walk in particular, in which (to
pass by other phopperies opprobrious dealings and false suppositions, as not
worth spending ink, paper, and time upon) we shall only take notice of two
passages. The first is your calling it a Sect, and in the title of your Book a
Schism.

Answ. A Sect is a renting, a Schism a cutting off or dividing from the truth:
now whether we or you be renters, we leave to the trial of the Word. It has
been the usual policy of Satan to brand the new springings forth of truths by
such opprobrious titles. Thus dealt the Jews of old with the Gospel, Acts
28.22. Chap. 24.5, 14. and separation being now that which God calls his people
to walk in, we believe, this charge of yours will be found to be as untrue and
calumnious, as was theirs, and to come from the same spirit. We should have
expected no other language from the mouth of a Pope or Bishop: but wonder to
hear it from one who would rank himself amongst the godly. However, we regard
not the censure of your papal chair, as being neither discovered to be what
you style us, nor discouraged by such disgraceful Characters: for we are not
ashamed to bear the rebukes of Christ. Your endeavors this way, will prove but
bare Essays, whose births may be vanity and shame at conclusion.

Secondly, You come to our company, whom you call unstable souls, and defame
their assemblings by base scurrilous verses out of Ovid, the very language of
hell, and unfit to be written by a chaste pen, much more unmeet to be applied
to a godly or hopeful people. For my own particular, as I have freely received,
so I freely dispense the word, and deny none to hear who are freely drawn; as
being sensible of the power of God, who may choose the mean and base things in
the worlds esteem, to confound the noble. Notwithstanding were the same people
with you, many would be counted precious Saints, others very fair comers on,
though now from a root of bitterness they are so greatly vilified. Such
virulent invectives tend but to the fulfilling of the Prophecies, which
foretell, that the meetings of these returners shall bear a reproach and
burden, Ezekiel. 34.16. Mica. 4.76, 7. Zeph. 3.18. albeit in short time, they
shall have a praise and a fame in every land, where they have been put to
shame, their gathering or congregating being by the Lord Jesus ver. 19. I
cannot in charity think that these came simply from your self, but from the
instigation of some others whose spirits are compounded of gall and vinegar,
and have dipped your pen with the cruel venom of Asps. We are sure, such
ribaudry becomes not the gravity of gray hairs, much less of one esteemed an
ancient professor.

It seems their throne being touched their kingdom waxing dark, and people
leaving them they begin to accomplish what is spoken Revel. 16.10, 11. The Lord
open the eyes of their understandings, that they many no longer be found
fighters against God. Before we pass from hence, we shall mind you of a
seasonable observation. In the Primitive time there was an outward Jerusalem,
figured by Hagar the bondwoman, whose zealous children, under high pretenses
of holiness, were the most desperate enemies to such who by their free
Gospel-walk, declared themselves to be the offspring of Jerusalem from above:
So now there is an outward rejected court, Rev. 11.2, and thereupon another
inslaving motherhood; and those who are over-rigid in those externalities, and
stand most upon them, are like to prove the greatest enemies to such, who by
their practice of separation manifest themselves to be children of liberty, and
aim most at spirituality.

But leaving this, we shall speak something of our first Letter, after the
receipt whereof (as you affirm) it was noised, that I had thereby blown up etc.

Answ. If there were any such report, the sound of it was not loud enough to
come to my ears, till I read it in your Epistle. This I am sure of, it was a
private Letter, never intended by the writer to come publicly abroad in the
world, and comprised but a light and hasty draught of my apprehensions touching
the subject you requested; whose principal scope was to proffer you a fuller
discourse by word of mouth, upon the particulars therein barely hinted. But
since you being pleased to divulge it in your book without my knowledge or
approbation, I shall only remark two passages.

The first is a mistake in printing, in the second page and seventeenth line.
It is printed, We are in our journey to Sion visibly separated; whereas it
ought io be, To Sion visibly stated; and so it was written in my Letter; also
Revel. 8.34. for Revel. 8.5. in the third page.

The second is (as you assert) that I quoted Isa. 66.5. for Isa. 56.5, which
error you not finding out, said nothing on that place.

Answ. There were some such errors in yours ensuing, which when the words were
written, I rectified, and replied accordingly: and it is possible that amongst
many Scriptures, I might fail in the quotation of one: yet the words of the
text being named, your Concordance might soon have directed you to find out
the place; ar else within the compass of eight or nine months (for so long
space it was ere your returned me answer) you might have inquired of me, we
living so near one to another. You neither have, nor (I suppose) ever can in
your sense give a solid interpretation of that Scripture. There be some other
places rightly pointed out, which you pass over with utter silence, though very
material to this case: namely those produced to prove a new pouring out of the
Spirit when the marriage again comes, as Isa. 32.15. Ezekiel. 37.9. Mat. 24.27,
28. Psalm. 97.4. answerable to that in the primitive, Acts 2. Ezekiel. 1.4. 1
Timoth. 4.14.

We cannot omit another passage: Your book is not dated in the beginning,
according to the usual manner, but at the end of your Epistle, and there bears
date August 18. whereas it came not out till December, near four months after.
Whether this be double dealing, to make the Reader believe that we are tarde in
our reply, is best known to your own conscience. Thus far in answer to your
Epistle.

A Glass of some new DISCOVERIES.
SIR,
THe discoveries and new breakings forth of light, after great and epidemical
Apostacies, have always met with strong oppositions and sharp encounters: and
though Truth at first be still blamed with the names of Novelty, Error, and
what not? yet, as unashamed, it has been bold as a lion, to face against all
discouragements, and at conclusion carried with it the triumphant palm of
Victory. This is that Jewel we are now contending for: the original of which
contest was a Letter sent me by you, to request me to impart those points I had
newly taken up, and what my opinion was about your Presbyterian way. To
satisfy your desire, I returned you a brief account of what you required in
writing: and to avoid the long tediousness of the Pen, invited you to a more
full and ample discourse on the subject now in debate, by word of mouth. Your
Manuscript coming since, declares, that your leisure would not permit a Verbal
dispute, (which I conceive had been far easier, then to answer so largely in
writing.) You tell me withal, that you received my Letter, as a testimony of my
good opinion of, and good will toward you; but upon deliberate perusal
profess, that my Principles appear not so solid, as you can close with them.
Had it not been for the cause above expressed, I should have been more full,
methodical, and clear, in committing my Pen to Paper: but what I sent, (I
assure you) came from the right hand of true affection: and it may be, that
ancient and long fixed Principles, may reject as unsound the Orthodoxal Truth
of Jesus Christ. He that has drunk old wine, does not straightway desire new,
but thinks the old is better. However, the solidness of those tenants will
appear, when they come for trial to the Touchstone of the Word of God. I
desire that in combating for the Truth, we may keep the Royal law of love: and
shall endeavor, as to be free from bitterness and passion, so to avoid the
other extreme of Partiality and soothing; and in a medium betwixt these two
Rocks, faithfully dispense that talent the Master has given me.

The main Queries controverted betwixt us, are these two:

First, 1 Querie.
Whether a true constituted Church, with true Office and visible Membership,
together with the Ordinances proper to such a Gospel-stating, as Confirmation
or laying of hands on Members, Ordination or laying hands on Officers,
Suspension, Excommunication, Admission, Absolution, retaining of sins, etc.
continued true by a line of succession from the Primitive time downward to our
times: or whether it were not interrupted by the Romish Apostacy.

Secondly, 2 Quaerie.
If they did there intermit, when they return again to their first glory,
whether now, or hereafter; and what is the dispensation now approved by the
Spirit.

It will be requisite to clear up these two together, as a preparative and
ground work to our ensuing Discourse.

We will begin with the First, Cessation.
and evidence the Cessation of visible Church-constitution in mystical Babylon.
We shall lay down this for a sure Maxim, That every thing has its being and
continuance from the Word of God. Now whatever in Gospel Times if fore-declared
and promised in the Scripture for abiding, that did not fail, but was upheld by
the power of the Word through all the times of this Apostacy: as the
Ordinances of Ministry, Prayer and Praises, Baptism, the Communion, 1 Thessalonians.
5.16, 17, 18. Rev. 9.13. Chap. 11.1. Heb. 13.15. Isa. 55.13. Chap. 56.5. Matthew.
28.19, 20. 1 Cor. 11.26. as also a sealed elect number with their spiritual
union, Rev. 7.4 5, 6, 7, 8. Chap. 9.4. Chap 11.1. Chap. 14.1. likewise the
being and profession of faith, duties of charity, with all moral precepts, 1
Cor. 13.13. Matthew. 16.18. Rev. 11.3. Matthew. 5.17, 18. Heb. 13.1. with whatever
else is promised to continue. But what is not so perpetuated in the Word, (as
Confirmation, Ordination, Church Censures, with the primitive order or
Church-stating) was corrupted, and turned into confusion by the great
Antichrist, it wanting the same Word and Promise to uphold its abiding.

For proof whereof, we will begin with Isai. 56.5. which was a prophecy
beginning with the primitive Gospel Church, and the ingrafting of the Gentiles
thereinto; as appears, verse. 1. by the salvation coming, and the righteousness
(the Gospel-Ministery) then revealed: also the stranger then joining himself to
God, and the Eunuch, the dry tree before, then taking hold of the Covenant,
verse. 3, 4. must allude to the Gentiles, who in times past were dead, without
Christ and hope, aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the
Covenants of promise, Ephesians. 2.1, 12. and were then ingrafted into the true
Olive Tree, Romans 11.17, 19. the sons and daughters must be the jewish Church,
who before was a married wife, and her members children, Gal. 4.27. Isa. 54.1.
Matthew. 15.22, 24, 26. again, verse. 8. the gathering of others besides those who
were before gathered, shows them to be the primitive Gentile-Christians,
compared with Joh. 10.16. To this Eunuch, these Gentiles are fore-prophesied,
that they shall have [a place and a name better then the sons and daughters]
the Jews: the event declares that they had both in the primitive, according to
this prediction: but afterward, when the Spirit annexeth a perpetual
succession, it singles out the name by it self, leaving the place behind: [I
will give them an everlasting name, that shall not be cut off] The word
interpreted place, is in the Hebrew]? sad, which signifies a hand, as alluding
to Church Power. Now why should not the place be said to be everlasting, as
well as the name, especially being before both joined together, if the Spirit
had not seen the fail and interruption of the chain thereof? This also fell out
answerably: for the name Christian or Israel remained, but the visible
Church Order became Babylon; both which shall be proved in their place.

From thence, turn to Matthew. 16.18. where you may observe, that to the
profession of Peter's says, and Christ the Rock believed, is forespoken that
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it: but verse. 19. the keys of
binding and loosing, opening and shutting, are set after, as having no such
promise annexed to them: and why should this be, but to show that these keys in
the Churches hand, should receive a sink and loss of their efficacy for a
time? For certainly the Lord knowing the apostated times, if they had continued
through the Babylonish defection, would have added some word of remaining to
them, as well as to the profession.

To these we shall annex that, Zech. 4.2, 12. in which we may behold that
related as evidently, as the face is seen in the glass. The Angel, verse. 2.
sets before the eyes of Zechariah the image of the primitive Apostolical
Church; the like was also seen of John, Rev. 1.12, 20. only here was the
difference; the Prophet sees the type of one Candlestick, as representing the
Church in her unity; John beholds seven, he writing to the seven Churches: and
here in verse. 12. is pictured out a platform of the dispensation of the sealed
elect number, during the times of Antichristianism. That the Candlestick, verse.
2. did emblem the primitive Churches, we render these reasons. 1. From the
Angels answer, verse. 6. that this was not built by might or by power, as
outward Zerubbabel's temple was, but by the Spirit, as without hands, by Christ
the true Zerubbabel. 2. From the head-stone of this spiritual building, verse.
7. which was the Lord Jesus, 1 Pet. 2.6. Psalm. 118.22. Isai. 28.16. Matthew.
2^.42. Act. 4.11. 3. From the shout and cry, which was not, Works, works; but,
Grace, grace; the manifest difference betwixt the Law and the Gospel. 4. From
the despising of small things, the Jewish Ceremonies, and the sight of the
Plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel, Christ, verse. 10. which teaches the coming
off from Mosaical rudiments, to that of Christianity. 5. From the seven eyes,
opened to be the Lambs eyes; and for time in the primitive, Rev. 5.6. and the
seven Lamps, verse. 2. agreeable to Rev. 4.5. That the two Olive-branches and
the two golden pipes, verse. 12. pertain to the next following Antichristian
times, is apparent by the decrease of the former fullness, and the answer of the
Angel, verse. 14. which can aptly be applied to no other time, then that of the
elect in Babylon. From hence we shall evince this argument, That there was a
fullness of Ordinances in the primitive Age; there were seven pipes to the seven
Lamps, verse. 2. the number seven notes out a perfection; the Pipes signify
Ordinances, Luke 7.32. these being the organ by which the light and oil of
Ministry is displayed: whereas in the Antichristian season, there are seen but
two pipes that had golden oil, the least of numbers, and yet sufficient to
testify the truth of inward grace. Now why should there be seven at the first,
and but two at the last, but to set forth the cessation of the former five in
their efficacy and power, as being dead, empty, and without golden oil, viz.
Ordination, Confirmation, with the other stative Ordinances? and that
Ministry, Prayer, etc. being predicted of God for abiding, must as the two
golden pipes remain, and the two anointed ones by these empty themselves, as
the two Olive-branches.

In Rev. 7.1. the four open winds (which are causa procreans and conservans,
the begetting and preserving cause of these visible keys, Ezekiel. 1.4, 5. Act.
2.) were by reason of the falling away wholly withheld from their apparent
blast: and the cause failing, the effect must also cease: this Spirit of life
being restrained, they must needs be merely formal. That as in the Scriptures
before cited, they were not promised to abide; so the Spirit does here desert
and leave them empty of its lively influences.

In Chap. 9.1, 2, 3. the Angel (who had usurped all Church Power into his
custody) totally apostated from heaven to earth, becomes a mere earthly Angel,
by which that Church-policie that before was a kingdom of heaven, is become a
bottomless pit, or a false Church, without any bottom of Truth in her order;
and in stead of the keys of the celestial kingdom, was another contrary key of
the same bottomless pit, the key being the same with the Church: in the room of
that sweet recreating wind, or lightsome smoke, descending from Gods glory, to
beget the truth of Office, was the dark and delusive smoke or dispensation
ascending from this bottomless furnace, which ingenders none but locusts, a
degenerate brood of false Officers. Here we may take notice of the effects that
ensue upon the former withholding of the winds: God having forsaken and left
it void, Satan has full power, gives another key, with other smoke, whereby of
Christ, all is become Antichrist, and bottomless of Truth.

In Chap. 11.2. where, though the Temple was measured, of which we shall speak
anon, yet the onward court was excluded, and forbidden to be measured; for so
says the Spirit, The court without, (...), which signifies, cast out. That
this outward court must belong to the visibility of Church Government, may be
cleared by these Arguments. 1. Because this, as opposed to the Temple within,
must be the exterior outward part: and who knows not, that the Order of
Ecclesiastical Government, is the outside or visibility of the Church? 2.
Because this here excluded, was given to the Nations: the inward rooms of true
grace with Worship flowing from those internal springs, was never in the power
of man to intermeddle with: but the outward court of Church-Regiment was in the
hands of Nations for many generations, and nowhere else. 3. Because the Nations
by enjoying this outward court, did tread the holy City under foot. Now woeful
experience has taught the Saints, that that by which Antichrist has trampled
upon the godly, was by sitting in the externality of Ecclesiastical Discipline,
in Spiritual Courts and Classes. The four winds above restrained, must be from
this rejected Court; the bottomless key, pit and smoke in this unmeasured to
Truth.

In Chap. 12.6, 14. the same externality given to the Nations, and mixed with
worldly things, becomes a worldly wilderness into which the woman fled. That
this wilderness is the National Babylonish Church, is proved at large by
Scripture and the analogy, in Sect. 5. of the first Paragraph.

In Chap. 13. the Principality or chief of the power ruling here, is called
(...), a wilderness-beast, compared with Mark 1.13. answerable to those false
christ's and false prophets which our Savior foretold should be in the
wilderness, Matthew. 24.24. The second Beast is here called a false prophet,
inferring the first to be a false christ or Antichrist, as is showed in our
answer to him on Matthew. 24.

In Chap. 17. the Church born up by this Beast, is called Mystery Babylon, as
being another, and distinct from Sion in her very foundation, who also was seen
of John in this wilderness.

To sum up all, if we consider the Gospel Times aright, as they are pourtrayed
in the Prophecies, we shall find, that in the primitive, there was the smoke
of Gods glory preceding, Isai. 6.4, 9. compared with John 12.40. Acts 2.2. by
which, the visible keys of Church Power were given and sanctified: but after,
when the Angel fell, Rev. 9.1, 2, 3. another earthen hellish key with other
smoke arising from the pit, darkning and banishing the lightsome glory of the
former, as above; and at last a new smoking of the Temple from Gods glory,
Rev. 15.8. a new opening and entering, implying key and doors; all showing that
there was no opening nor entering, but a cessation and shutting of the true
visible betwixt these two days. Besides, there is a new open breathing of the
four winds of the Spirit, Ezekiel. 37.9. after the long restraint of the
primitive blast, Rev. 7.1. Act. 2.2. Ezekiel. 1.4. a new pouring of his Spirit,
Isai. 32.15. after the former hiding of his power: a new Marriage and
Marriage-call, Rev. 19.7, 9. besides the Marriage at the first, Matthew. 22. a
new lightning, Matthew. 24.27. besides the lightning at the primitive, Ezck. 1.4,
13, 14. all teaching a non-continuance of this glory. Again, there was an
invisible day between the bright shining day at the first, Luke 17.22. and the
like glorious day again at the last, verse. 24. an invisible kingdom, as that
within, verse. 21. passing between the open kingdom of the primitive, and the
manifest kingdom of God at the last, Chap. 21.31. Rev. 19.6. Chap. 11.17. all
clearing up this cessation. The visibilities, Lo here and there, were false and
delusive.

The event has made all this as perspicuous as the sun shines in the open
firmament, to those who will not obstinately and of set purpose shut their eyes
against it; to wit, That there was an apparent and general Apostacy darkning
and swallowing up all the bright Order of the primitive. For that Church (after
Constantine had sully subdued the heathen Emperors, and settled all in outward
tranquillity, about the year of our Lord 327, as the margin on Socrates has
it, lib. 1. cap. 3.) beginning to conform to and mix her self with National and
worldly things, degenerated and daily declined by the four first trumpets, Rev.
8. till at last by the fifth the star totally apostated from heaven to earth,
about 390; and then the key of external Rule became purely National, and was
only in the jurisdiction of Popes, Patriarchs, Bishops, and earthly
Hierarchies, who alone usurped all Church Power into their hands. In all our
Western Globe, there was no Church Government visible, but what was Romish, for
many ages: and our Antagonist M. Elmestone confesses, that their Office of the
Ministry (the principal pillar of the Church) came directly from Rome no
longer ago then Luther's time. Hereupon, that of Protestantism is not termed a
Separation, but a Reformation; their Office and Membership coming radically
from the Romish Synagogue: which seems to be hinted by the Prophet Jeremiah,
Chap. 51.9. We would have healed Babylon, and she was not healed.

Object. It has been objected by others, What shall we think of the Greek
Church, who never had to do with Rome, nor owned her power?

Answ. To whom we reply, 1. That the Church of Grecia may be no plea to such
who live in the Levant under the Turk; but concerns not in the least our
Protestant Churches, who derived not their power from the Greek, but from the
Romish Pontificality.

2. It is not true, that the Greek Church never had to do with Rome. For about
the year 390 after Christ, all the Eastern Bishops yielded the Primacie of seat
(the proper place of Christ) to the Roman Pope. And afterward, if the Bishop
of Rome obtained by Phocas the Emperor the title of Universal, then assuredly
the Bishop and Patriarch of Grecia must be subject unto him, and together with
the Church be within the limits of his territories.

Again, the Greek Empire was possessed by the Latins for sixty years together,
even from the year 1200 to the year 1260; and then Michael Paleologus recovered
their Empire, who about the year 1273 agreed with Pope Gregory the tenth at
Iyons in France, and promised that both himself and all his people hereafter
should yield all Sovereignty to the Latin Pope and Church.

3. The Greek Church was as well National, and had a terrene Hierarchy, even
the very same with Rome; and is so apostated, that she denies the holy Ghost to
proceed from the Father and the Son; prays for the dead; believes that the
Saints departed enjoy not the presence of God till the Resurrection; admits
children of seven years old to the Sacrament, because then (as they conceit)
they begin to sin; receives none into Orders, but such as are married; and
forbids marriage to those who are actually in Orders; rejects carved Images,
but admits the painted; with many the like Fopperies; and in many fandamentals
is as gross or grosser then Rome.

To conclude, Chap. 7, all the four winds of all quarters were restrained;
Chap. 11.2, the whole outward court of Discipline, as well East as West, was
cast out, as above; and the great City Babylon was not only at Rome, but at
Judea, where our Lord was slain, Chap. 11.8; and then certainly Grecia (lying
in the midst between) must needs be comprehended within the circumference
thereof.

It has by some (as the Dippers) been questioned, whether these National
Churches be within the Covenant.

To whom I answer, that though in their Church Order they were Babylon, or
confusion, yet are they not wholly excluded from the Covenant, as Heathens, but
are termed by the Spirit Israelites, who had a sealed number amongst their
tribes, Rev. 7. Here we may see how (though the place or hand failed) the name
was everlasting. And it is not safe to detract from the words of this
Prophecy, especially seeing the sequel has cleared, that there was some
profession of Christianity, and a godly people amongst them through every age
of this hiding of Gods power. You may find this further cleared in the
following Paragraph.

The next thing considerable under this first Querie, is touching the true
Church in this confusion. 1. What she was. 2. What was her condition. 3. How
she was fed. 4. The just time of this her captivity.


1. What she was. In Chap. 7, I find that there were one hundred and forty
four thousand sealed ones preserved, secured, and provided for: In Chap. 9,
that this number only was undestroyed by the Locusts: In Chap. 11, that the
Temple measured must be this sealed company, built up a spiritual house by the
mystical bond of the Spirit; it having no dimensions specified, and all the
externality being excluded, as shall be proved in Paragraph 1. Sect. 4. In
Chap. 14.1, that the mount Sion there expressed must be only the mount of true
grace footed on the counsel of God, which is called a sure and sealed
foundation, 2 Timothy 2.19. For,

1. All the sealed elect people, even the whole one hundred and forty four
thousand stand on this mountain, and that through all the apostated season:
which they did not do in any true visible, being mixed amongst the Nations.

2. Only they, and none else, had their stand thereon: all the rest of the
common Israelites were hurt by the withholding of the winds, Chap. 7. by the
Locust, Chap. 9.3. and were utterly supplanted by the Beast; Chap 13.8. Matthew.
24.24. Hence I deduced this consequence, that the Elect alone must make up this
Temple, Sion; and that all other Christians that had but the externality (bring
in a false visibility) had not so much as outward measurement, but were wholly
the patrimony of the Beast and Whore.

2. What was her condition here. In Chap. 7, that she was some of every tribe
distinguished from the rest only by the seal of true election, 2 Cor. 1.20,
21, 22. In Chap. 11.2, that all her outward court was taken from her, and it
being excommunicated, became another, even the possession of the Nations. In
Chap. 12.6, 14, that she (who, verse. 1. in the primitive day was in heaven,
there clothed with the sun, had the moon under her feet, and upon her head a
crown of twelve stars, all seen in open type, as being enriched, beautified and
completed with full power in her outward visibility;) afterward by this
apostacy fled into the wilderness, beneath her former visible orbs, where all
about her was dry, barren, and confused earth: the Kingdom of God was during
this time within, Luke 17.21. Her place, verse. 6, 14. must be the abovesaid
Temple, void of the externality of Order. Also the call for separation inters
as much; as Cant. 6.13. Return, return, O Shulamite: also, Isai. 35.10, The
ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Sion: the word ransomed imports
their being captive before; and their return, their absence from that Sion they
come unto: also, Chap. 51.14, The captive exile hastes to be delivered from
the pit; which implies their former being in: again, Rev. 18.4, come out of
her, my people, intimates that they were a company in Babylon before the time
of this departure, even in that city which is called Sodom, and Egypt, Chap.
11.8. by which the Spirit would teach us, that as Lot was in outward Sodom,
Israel in Egypt, Judah in Babylon; so the Lords people should be in such a
visible constitution, as spiritually was Sodom for beastly idolatry, Egypt for
bondage, Babylon, as being in a strange land from the native Canaan of a
Gospel Order, where they were strangers under other lords.

And in which Country there was another earth, sea, rivers and fountains, sun,
throne, rive, viz. Euplwates, and air, Chap. 16. They cannot properly be called
out to reward her in these, but they must be before within. In Chap. 11.3, 4,
The Witnesses (even those who were the chiefest administers of light to the
Temple) had their outward clothing, not with the sun as before, but with
sackcloth (their external investment into Membership and Office being
Antichristian) and their stand before the earthly god of humane Hierarchies
(even in the abovesaid wilderness or great city, verse. 8.) where the Beast,
those strange earthly lords, have power to do, and trample them under foot with
tyranny, verse. 2. Chap. 13.5, making their estate mournful. And in this dark
night of their desertion, they were as those asleep, as not altogether sensible
of their outward state, till God by his call awaken them out of this drowzie
Coma, Cant. 5.2. Matthew. 25.5, 6.

By these Scriptures me may gather, that this mystical Church, or sealed
number, was stripped of all the glory of his visible inheritance in Church Order;
and outwardly in a false Babylonish station, as in a foraigne country, under
strange Lords; where she was in a mixed estate; partly hurt, defiled, and
through blindness deluded; partly; untouched, undefiled, undeceived: they were
indamaged, dimmed and seduced in the externality; but in the radix of the
internal grace, could not be subverted, it being sustatined by the immediate
hand of heaven.

3. The next remarkable thing is, How the Church was fed in this desolation.

In Chap. 7.1, 2. we may deduce, that there was some secret virtue of the
Covenant to secure and perpetuate the sealed company: In Chap. 11.1. that, as
there were worshippers in the temple, and an altar, so their worship must flow
immediately from those internal closets that were measured, and not at all from
the outward court of order which was excluded: in verse. 3. that Christ himself
gave power to the witnesses by an immediate gift, when there was none outward
of office from man, and by that they fed the woman in her place, Chap. 12.14.
In Zech. 4.12. that though there were not seven pipes, a fullness of ordinances,
as was in the primitive day, verse. 2. yet there were two remaining to empty out
their golden oil, as before: that these must be such ordinances as are
promised in the word to continue, which is declared in this cessation above.
Hence we may draw two observations.

First, For the resolving of a grand paradox propounded by the Episcopalists
and Presbyterians against the separation, viz. How there can be conversion in a
false Church? Here we may take notice, that there was a temple within a woman,
Sion, and a feeding by the witnesses, where all the order was Babylonish.

Secondly, that this more intrinsecal dispensation is weak and sparing; and the
Saints under it in a low and almost famished condition, Amos 8.11, 12. Their
strength and perfection is then, when this more internal work dilates and
spreads its virtue to the superficies: therefore the way and journey of
separation is not a retiring in, but an outgoing both of Christ and his people,
Isa. 52.12. Revel. 14.4. Mat. 25.6. and is compared by the Lord Jesus to a
spring, Mal. 24.32, 33. as diffusing its vital sap more outwardly, and
blossoming: that magnificent kingdom of the marriage is likened to a summer,
Luke 21.29, 30, 31.

The not observing this, nor marking what ordinances were left of God to be
merely formal, and what remained with some degree of power, has occasioned
many to run into another extreme; and draw the work of the Spirit so within its
self, as might stop all the expirations or out-breakings thereof: and under the
notion of highness, bring men into a lower condition then that of the
Antichristian stand: that was a narrow and sparing breathing; theirs a stifling
and suffocating of the Spirit, as obstructing all its passages by which it
should reflow in its workings out.

4. The last consideration is the time of this great desertion and loss, when
it began, how long it abides, and the computation thereof.

This time cannot begin with the first trumper, as Master Brightman and others
carry it, but must receive its initiation with the fifth deciphered in Chap. 9.
For,

1. It cannot be with any clearness of sense begin, till the woman had taken
her full flight into the wilderness, chap. 12.6. In the former trumpets two
parts in three of the visibility remained true; and the star in fifth was in
heaven till he fell to the earth; and by that apostacy all the externality of
church-policy became an earthy bottomless and Babylonish wilderness. Now the
woman could not be in the wilderness, while her officers were in heaven; but
they must both fall together.

2. This mournful season emphatically styled by our Savior the time of
tribulation, Mark 13.24. must initiate with the first of those three grand
woes, sounded by the Angel flying in the midst of heaven; and that began with
the fifth trumpt, Chap. 8.13. The former four were gradual preparations, the
fifth the full accomplishment of that great defection.

The beginning of this time.
The same (as I conceive) took its exordium about the year 390 after Christ: at
the time the Bishop of Rome, by the general consent of the Asian, Affrican and
Europian Bishops, obtained the priority and Bishopric of the first seat, which
is the sole interest and proper center of Jesus Christ: And where this
universal primacy was granted to a bare creature, Christ would not give his
glory to another, but wholly departed, and left it empty, whereby it became
merely humane and bestial.

The Duration thereof
The duration of this time, is declared in the Revelations to be 1260 days or
forty two months, which taken according to the Egyptian and Jewish account
thirty days to a month, make up exactly the former number of days; the like
does time, times, and an half, Chap. 15.3. the beast had power given him to
make war or prevail (for so is the original) forty two months; also Chap.
11.2. the nations so long trod the holy City under foot: likewise verse. 3. the
witnesses prophesied clothed in sackcloth the same space of time: Chap. 12.6,
all this time the woman was in the wilderness, which in verse. 14. is described
to be time, times, and half a time, answerable to the former account; which
raken prophetically a day for a year (as this book is delivered in the highest
majesty of a prophecy) constitute 1260 years. The computation. 0390 1260 nbsp;
1650.
Now to reckon up the period of this season, if we add to 1260, the foregoing
time of 390, we may find the expiration thereof to be about 1650. Many
arguments may be produced to prove these days to be prophetically a day for a
year; but it has been done by others; and most that are judicious, by
pondering the hight and order of this prophecy, with the event successively
answering, will, proprio nisu, of their own voluntary consent agree with me and
them in this particular. What remarkable turnings and alterations of affairs
there were about 1650 in all our dominions, even in these ends of the earth,
with the subsequent success, is showed in Parag. 4.

2. The second material passage to be expostulated is, what is the dispensation
now approved of God in this next revolution after the former season of
adversity, Quaere 2.
whether by new erecting of visible Churches, or by separation without stating,
waiting till the Lord begin it; or thus, whether the time for the return of
visible marriage be now or hereafter.

For the resolving of this Gorgian knot, See Parag. 4.
we may propose to our selves a twofold rule. First, Whether there be a call to
foot any Church-constitution in our time, or in a time to come. Secondly, what
is the next immediate cause to give vital being to the same.

1. For the first, we observed, by searching the Scriptures, that every thing
belonging to Church Order, either at its first rise, or after a general, long
and total loss, was grounded on the written word of God, and manifested by the
spirit of Prophecy: Surely the Lord will do nothing in this, but he reveals
his secrets to his servants the Prophets, Amos 3.7. that the book of the
Revelations, compiling in a certain method the several changes and
administrations time after time, must as well inform us when this manifest
kingdom reverts, as it does teach us when and how the primitive was dissolved
and became Babylon: and upon strict inquiry, we could not epsy the least hint,
either by type or vocal expression, for any approved visible Church-marriage in
the age we live in; but that the Revelations together with the old Prophets,
agree with one accord, that the time for this noble work is to be fulfilled in
an after-age.

The signs to know this magnificent fabric to be to come, are these.

1. The destruction of the Antichristian enemies and removing obstacles out of
the way, as Hos. 2.18. The Lord will make a covenant for them with the
creatures, and will break the low, sword and battle ou^ of the earth, and make
them to lie down in safety; and then verse 19, 20, I will marry thee to me for
ever: also Mat. 13.30, 43, the tares are first cut down, before the wheat is
gathered into the barn: so Revel. 11.18, 19. Chap. 15.8, there is no visible
temple in heaven opened, till the were destroyed who destroyed the earth, even
till the destruction of the great City mentioned Chap. 16.19. and Chap. 18.
likewise Chap. 19.7, 8, 9. there is no marriage specified, till the Hallelujahs
be sung for the final ruin of Babylon, and the glorious reign of God
Almighty: and then, ( Zech. 14.9.) when the Lord only is king in all the earth,
the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife prepared for her husband: then
she has a new grant of his beautiful wedding-garments, whereby she shall be
outwardly Isa, 611, 10
covered with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself with
his ornaments, and a bride adorns her self with her jewels: then is there a new
call to the Marriage-supper of the Lamb.

Thus we may note, that this illustrious prophecy given by Christ to show to
his servants future events, leads us as by a hand-dyal to the time when the
primitive was cast out, and to the very season when it returns in its own
supernatural luster.

2. The next sign is the call of the Jews and those Eastern parts; as Psalm.
50.1, The Lord has called the earth from the rising of the sun unto the going
down thereof; and then God will shine out of Sion the perfection of beauty,
verse. 2. So Matthew. 24.27, 28, when there is a true manifest gathering to the
dead carcass Christ, noting a stating work, then he will manifest his shining
dispensation from east to west like lightning: and thus Romans 11.12, 15,
speaking of the Jews, concludes, What shall their receiving be but life from
the dead?

3. The last sign is the visible effusion of the Spirit; which being more
properly a cause then a sign, I shall refer the proof thereof to the Rule next
ensuing. The final subversion of-Antichrist, the call of the Jews and the
eastern parts, and the open pouring of the Spirit, are all as yet
unaccomplished.

2. The next rule of Trial is, what gives life and present existence to a
visible Gospel-constitution and the keys thereof. Under this notion we examined
the common received Maxim of all the lesser independent bodies, which is this,
That in times of Apostacy (as this of Antichristianism is) the keys of visible
Church-constitution, or Marriage-Ordinances, resolve themselves radically into
believers, or into the power of the people, who may at any time take them up,
erect and model visible Churches, open and shut the doors thereof to others.
This we reduced to the touchstone of the primitive, and found that they prayed,
preached, baptized, and at last brake bread while they were bare disciples, and
only Covenant-members: but in respect of Church constitution, they were
commanded to tarry and wait at Jerusalem, till the promise of the Father (to
wit, the keys of the Kingdom) was given, whereby the Kingdom of God came with
power, Acts 1.4, 8. Luke 24.49. This was a manifest transfusion of the Spirit,
that did not only increase the glory of the former, but also stated and
invested them with new Membership and Office, and inspired the stative
Ordinances of Ordination, Confirmation, Church Censures, with a new created
efficacy, whereby they received in, and shut out of that new-married Church.
The image of this is set forth in Acts 2. It is called a pouring out of the
Spirit, in regard of the abundant measure thereof visibly manifested, verse. 17;
also a mighty rushing wind filling the house, with cloven tongues of fire,
verse. 2, 3, as causing that breath of life and spiritual heat which operated in
that apparent Kingdom: Isaiah compares it to smoke filling the house, as
presenting the glory of Christ in his powerful administration, Chap. 6.3, 4. In
Ezekiel. 1.4, 5, the four Beasts or livings with each of them four faces (which
must typifie the Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, who had all gists and
tongues, by which they were distinguished from the four Beasts Rev. 4.6, 7, who
had each of them but one face) came out of the midst of that wind, cloud, and
fire: also in Ephesians. 4.8, 11, the Spirit tells us, that all the several degrees
of the Ministerial Office, to wit, together with the former three Pastors and
Teachers, were ingendered originally by that virtual efflux of the Spirit sent
down from heaven. Indeed the twelve were set apart for their Office by Christ
while he was on earth, and in that sense named Apostles (as Joseph is called
the husband of Mary, and she his wife while they were no more then espoused,
Matthew. 1.18, 19, 20. and a man may be termed an heir, when he is only designed
for the inheritance) but their real investment was not till after. For Ezekiel
in the place before quoted shows, that the four-faced beasts proceeded out of
the wind, cloud and fire expressed, Acts 2; and in Ephesians. 4, Christ first
ascended, then gave gifts; the gift sent down was the Office, Some Apostles,
etc. They had not till then that differential eminency of gift which gave being
to, and distinguished their Office from the rest, nor of extraordinary Prophets
or Evangelists, nor of ordinary Pastors and Teachers; no, nor yet of the same
which private members had after the Spirit was emitted. They were before
unfurnished with the gift of Tongues, Act. 2.2, looked on Christ as an earthly
king over a temporal kingdom, Luke 19.11. Matthew. 20.21; were ignorant of the
death, resurrection, and ascension of Christ, the common and main principles of
Christianity, Matthew. 16.22. Mark 16.11, 13. Luke 24.11, 21, 25. were not able
to bear many things, which after were easy to every believer, Job. 16.12.
Chap. 14.26. 1 Cor. 15.1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. And this M. Robinson and others, the
solidest men of the Separation, have maintained against the Presbyters and
Bishops.

Again, their first designation came not from man, but only from their Master;
which makes least for those who here will plead against us. Besides, the
disciples were not called a Church, nor did any lay on hands for Membership or
Office, nor use any Church Censures, till they received power from on high.
Hence we may safely conclude, that Gospel-stating at the first beginning, came
not from believers as believers, but from the powerful dispensation of Chirst
Jesus; and that when if sunk and the same open winds before animating were
withheld, it must return to him the fountain whence at first it flowed: for
every thing resolvs into its principle.

But leaving the primitive, we may search the Scriptures treating of this last
marriage to come, and we shall find the same pouring of the Spirit, that was in
that first Gospel-day, Rev. 11.2 Chap. 19.7.
Isa. 32.13, 14, 15. the joyous City shall lie desolate, until the Spirit be
poured out from on High, whereby the Wilderness shall be a fruitful field, and
the fruitful field counted for a Forest: also Zech. 17.10, I will pour upon
the house of David, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace, etc.
Which must be on Jews and Gentiles; for the mourners here poured on, are
interpreted by our Savior to be all the tribes of the earth, who by their sins
and Iedol-worship have pierced Christ, Matthew. 24.30. likewise, Ezekiel. 37.9,
thsame open winds (before bound up, Rev. 7.1.) shall be then loosed in their
manifest blast. So, Luke 17.24. and Psalm. 97.4, there will be the like fiery
flashing lightning to illuminate the world, which the earth shall see, to wit,
visibly, and tremble: also Psalm. 102.16, When the Lord shall build up Sion, he
will appear in glory; and Isai. 60.2, His glory shall be seen upon thee; both
which places show, that his most excellent dispensation shall be visible. Hence
we may gather, that as this by the apostasy resolved into Christ; so it must
again issue forth from him, before it can have its true existence. For this
glorious effusion of the Spirit in the first beginning of Church-constitution,
is the foundation of the keys thereto pertaining; it gives them their vital
being, their proper difference, and by its manifold work, causes those various
operations which proceed from and by them. Thus in the primitive marriage, they
received power from on high, whereby the Lord was to them for a crown of glory,
and a diadem of beauty, Isa. 28.5. by virtue whereof, they had the high keys of
the Kingdom: So in this last, the Lord will first marry them to himself, to
wit, pour out his Spirit upon them, whereby they shall be as a crown of glory,
and a royal diadem in his hand, Hos. 2.19. Isa. 63.2; and then verse. 5, they
as sons of the Church shall marry in others: the first is done by God
immediately, wherein man is merely passive; the second by man, as instrumental,
working by the power of his preceding. Into the first work of marriage acted
simply by Gods own finger, none save the Elect enter: and not all the Elect;
but only such elect ones who believe and wait for the same promise of pouring
the Spirit: for such choice singled ones were the hundred and twenty in the
primitive; though by the second done by the hand of the Church, hypocrites did
then intrude: So in this last matrimony, Isa. 60.21. Rev. 21.27
none but the virgins who expect and prepare for this later coming of the
Bridegroom by the pouring glory of his Spirit, shall go in with him to the
Marriage; and not all they, but properly the wise virgins shall be thus
immediately invested from heaven, See Parag. 4.
Matthew. 25.10: what may be afterward by the sons of the Church, we leave to
the times to manifest.

If you will bring all our new-stated Churches to this touchstone, you may
find them to be of a different metal from the true; and however so near the
primitive they seem to be in the outward shell, yet in reality to be grounded
upon another foundation, to wit, upon believers not possessed with such a power
visibly sent down from heaven. Now that faith, or the profession thereof,
without such a divine call and spiriting, cannot be a groundwork for stating
Churches, I shall further prove by these following Arguments.

1. Faith must foot on a call, as done in obedience to the heavenly voice: but
now there is no call for visible Church-marriage, as is declared in our first
Rule: and no call, no faith; nay it wanting that, must bottom upon our own
call, name and time; which is presumptuous disobedience.

2. God having promised to spirit this again, faith must rely upon the same
promise till fulfilled, and not upon its own power: the hundred and twenty were
believers, and yet begun not any constitution by virtue of that, but waited
till the keys were given.

3. Profession alone can no more give life unto Ordinances from which the glory
of God is departed, then it can infuse a living soul into a dead carcass. It is
God's sole prerogative to create their breath of life, which he will do in his
own season, according to what he has promised. Faith and profession are but
effects: and to attribute such a causal virtue to them, is to confound and turn
the causes upside down, and to set the creature in the place of his Creator.

4. This pretended says, void of the call and promise of God, and the vital
influence of its prime original cause, is but a mere work, a bare
creature-foundation, by far too weak to lay a Gospel-fabrick upon; and being
but humane, must in divine things be bottomless: and whether the smoke or
dispensation arising thence, be not then that of the bottomless pit, we leave
it to wise men seriously to consider. We are sure that this is the proper
distinguishing character, to difference the true from the false. The true
begins with the smoke or wind, Gods glory inspiring, the follow the keys,
opening and entering; and by that it becomes a spiritual building: the false
begins with the key, the smoke ensues, and thence is it a building made with
hands grounded on tradition, Rev. 9.1, 2. The true is as smoke descending from
heaven; the false as smoke ascending from an humane bottom.

I shall now speak a little to you of the Separation, who are modeled into the
form of stated Churches. I know there are many precious Saints amongst you, in
whom the character of Jesus Christ is printed: and confess that some of you
have been instruments to bring to light some solid Truths, and prepared way for
greater. You hold a Separation from all National Hierarchies, according to the
Scriptures; have in part cleared that the Beast reaches further then the Papal
Chair of Rome; have renounced prelacies and precedencies; have vindicated the
consciences of the godly from the Laws and Canons of Courts and Classes;
maintain the Gospel to come in the liberty and power of the Spirit; have
rightly pleaded that members of true Gospel-Churches must at least have a
visible Saintship; have to this day been real and cordial in that noble Cause
beginning in our ends of the earth. For these good things found amongst you, I
protest in the presence of the great Tribunal, I am obliged by the bond of
entire affection, and desire your spiritual welfare, as my own salvation. Yet I
must not, dare not flatter or dissemble in matters divine; but because I love,
I am compelled to deal plainly and faithfully; resting confident, that those
who are truly pious, will desire to see their combustible works burn by the
fiery trial of the Vials. What I shall expostulate with you, I have already
convinced in my self.

Consider seriously, whether consultations be not weak grounds to bottom
Gospel-Churches; or whether the primitive (the pattern you labor to model by)
was ever laid upon such sandy foundations, or whether these your actings do not
contradict many of your own tenants before named. Did the Kingdom of God in
that first day come by observations, or by the descending majesty of the
Spirit? Or will Christ (think you) be less glorious in this later Reformation,
then in the former? View (I beseech you) the Scriptures treating of the dignity
of this later marriage. Or if you cannot search primarily into the cause, look
into the effects that follow these your undertakings. For knowledge in the
ordinary way comes to us secundum posterius; so that by those signs or
symptoms which break out in manifestation, we are directed to look into the
fountains whence they issue forth. Why was there so great efficacy in the
outward order of the primitive Government, but because it proceeded originally
from the manifest blast of the Spirit? Why is there so little in your
externalities, if not because arising from weak humane principles? You that are
most discerning, do you not see too much of formality, too little of power?
Nay, why was that one and the same in every particular, drawing the flock of
Christ into a general unity, unless because it footed in the Spirit, which by
its illuminating glory, virtual operation, and persuasive attraction,
congregated the whole body of Sions sons unto it? Why are yours manifold,
disagreeing, and occasions of dividing the Saints, but because basing on
obscure carnal apprehensions? Experience informs us, that your various
constitutions have rent the Lords people in pieces, and are as so many walls to
keep them asunder: and that which divides is carnal. Tell us, To which of you
shall we join, to come to the general Assembly? Yea, to what form shall we
come, and not in the very act of sitting down sequester our selves from the
major part of the godly? By a narrow search, you may find your union to ground
in division, your gathering in scattering. View Ezekiel. 34.5, 6, and compare them
to your divisions. Peter, James, and John, chosen vessels, were like in their
minority to fall into the same relapse, Matthew. 17.4, Master, if thou will, let
us build tabernacles: but alas, they knew not what they said, understood not
that Gospel-tabernacles were not to be made with hands, but by the powerful
dispensation of the Spirit. Much like to this do you: Let us build temples, let
us erect Gospel-Churches. Well, if you must needs be doing the proper work of
your Master, observe what censure he gives of such designs; Matthew. 24.23, 24,
26. Iuke 17.20, 21, 22, 23. Mark rightly the secret chambers, their grounds,
their signs, their forms, their artificial structure, narrowness, secrecy,
multiplicity, their walls by which they are parted from the wilderness, and one
from another, and yet their conjunction in the whole, and tell me whom you can
apply them. But alas, you are herein asleep, and know not what you do, or
speak, or write; are ignorant how the Marriage must again descend from heaven.
The Lord awaken you, that you may go forth from these narrow rooms in the unity
of the Spirit, and the bond of peace, to meet the Bridegroom. Let not an
overweening affection to your own models, be any impediments: for Christ will
cashier all buildings of man, and break down the partition-walls by the light
of his discoveries. It will therefore be your wisdoms to deny your selves in
your several respective interesles, and count them as loss and dung in
comparison of the rising dispensation of the Lord Jesus: especially considering
that humility in self-denial is the highway to honor in the School of Christ.

And thus leaving you to the power and guidance of him that calls effectually,
I shall now come to M. Elmestone's book, and to remove those Objections framed
by him against what has been and hereafter will be delivered.

In the prosecution of this task, I shall not directly follow him, but rather
(for there Readers benefit, reducing what is immethodical into its proper place
of order) think fit to divide the whole Controversy into several members of
heads, which I call Paragraphs, and to distinguish the subdivisions of those
generals by Sections.

The first Paragraph answers to this Cessation.

The second Paragraph touches the book of the Revelation.

The third Paragraph shows wherein the foundation of the Beast described in
Rev. 13. consists.

The fourth Paragraph dictates the true way and walk now, to be Separation
without stating.

The Postscript is in the last place, as well as his.

Paragraph I.
IN this place we laid down a distinction of Ordinances; that the first sort
(as Ministry, Prayer, Baptism, the Lords Supper, Profession, etc. specified
above in the Cessation) footed more immediately on our spiritual union and the
Covenant of Grace: that the second sort (as Confirmation, Ordination,
Excommunication, Admission, Absolution, etc.) are based on Church-constitution,
and are essential to Officials (or a Church stated with Officers:) The first
sort of these remained successively, the second not.

This note of ours was but a hasty and overly work, as desiring in some sort
to answer your request for the present; but intended and offered a fuller
explanation of our selves by word of mouth; or else, I should have given you a
more exact and better digested account: however, we shall resolve those many
things you retort against it. The first whereof, touching a gifted Ministry,
we shall reply to in Sect. 2.

Object. Against this you first oppose, That to believe in Christ, profess him,
and private prayer, are Duties, not Ordinances: and that Ordinances are solemn
and public means, which Christ has appointed to communicate his grace unto
us, and to perform solemn service unto him, as public preaching, administering
the Sacraments, public prayer, etc.

Answ. I. The word Ordinance may be taken, either 1. more largely, for whatever
God has ordained; as the ordinances of the heavens, meat drink, etc. and as
limited to divine things, for what he has therein appointed and decreed; and
thus ordain and ordinance may be conjugates: or else 2. it is used more
strictly, for Ministry, Prayer, etc. In the later fence Faith and Profession
are not Ordinances; in the former, they are: for, Act. 13.48, As many as were
ordained to eternal life, believed: where faith being grounded on Gods
Ordination, must be his Ordinance.

2. We conceive private prayer to be an Ordinance in the strict acceptance of
the word, as well as public; it being that whereby we perform solemn service
unto God, and a means by which he communicates himself unto us.

Object. 2. But, say you, It is a Duty, not an Ordinance.

Answ. To which we reply, that as it is a service God requires us to perform
unto him, so is it our duty, we being bound to yield him homage and obedience:
and thus public prayer, and the rest acknowledged by you, are duties, as well
as private prayer: but as it is an organical instrument inspired from above,
and a means for our good, so is it an Ordinance.

Object. 3. You except against the word essential, and aver that Ordinances
cannot be essential to Officials: for nothing can be essential but the matter
and form: the matter of an Officer is gifts, the form an orderly placing him
into Office by such as have sower to do it.

Answ. 1. It is not true that nothing may be termed essential, but the matter
amd form: for there are some properties flowing from the nature of these
internal causes, that are inseparably annexed to their fountains, without which
the causes themselves cannot subsist: and the same, though they are not the
essence, yet may be, and are in terms of Art called essential.

2. By Officials we mean a visible constituted Church completed with Officers:
and such a Church has in it essentially the visible Keys of Church Power and
discipline; which your own words assert, in affirming, that the form of an
Officer is his orderly placing him into Office by such who have power to do it.

3. Not only the matter, but the whole being of the Office lies in gifts: the
matter is a generical and more common, the form a differential propriety of
gift, to give being to, and distinguish the Office: and this proper gift may be
administered either from Christ immediately in the first stating of Churches, as
Ephesians. 4.8, where the gift sent down was the Office; or else mediately in a
Church stated by the hand as an instrument, 2 Timothy 1.6. and 1 Timothy 4.14.

Object. Nothing can subsist wanting its essentials: but a Pastor or Teacher
may be l^tted by sickness or otherwise, that he cannot preach, etc. for many
weeks together.

Answ. 1. Preaching and administering the Sacraments are not of the later, but
the former sort of Ordinance, the exercise whereof is not proper to an Officer.

2. You here confound the faculty with the action: the action may cease, and
yet the faculty be essential and inseparable. A man cannot subsist without the
faculty of Laughter; yet when the action fails, he cease not to be a man.
So in Sleep the Senses are bound up from their exercise, yet their habit
remains entire. A Constable in the Commonwealth is a true Officer, when
employed in his private affairs, and not doing the work of his Office: but
without the power proper thereunto, he cannot be a Constable. So Official
Pastors or Teachers lay not down their Office when they are off from their
Ecclesiastical ministration; but without the potential faculty thereof, they
cannot be Officers.

Object. 4. You except further, that Ordinances are not grounded on our
spiritual union.

Answ. All true Ordinances are based on the union of the Spirit, which is their
breath of life, and represents them unto us, as the lively appearance of Jesus
Christ. And this may be called ours, it being part of our inheritance: when the
same Spirit is severed and departed from them, they remain as empty rudiments.

Object. But many partake of the Ordinances, that have not, nor ever shall have
union with Christ.

Answ. Those who do truly partake of the Ordinances, must in the participation
thereof have union with the Spirit of grace; because the same Spirit that is in
the Ordinances, is in the Saints: But to such as have in no kind the workings
of that Spirit, the Ordinances are both dead and empty, or rather a savor of
death; not that they are so in themselves, but by accident, because of their
spiritual blindness and unbelief. There may be a clear and bright light in the
air, yet for want of light in the eye, a blind man cannot see, nor enjoy the
comfort thereof. Thus the ministry of Christ's Gospel was a light shining in
darkness, but the darkness comprehended it not, Joh. 1.5. the Gospel was not
void of light, nor the Ordinances, being as pipes to the Lamps in the
dispensation of their luster; but the men wanted spiritual eyes to behold and
embrace its beauty.

Object. But the foundation of Ordinances is the institution of Christ.

Answ. We deny not the institution of Christ to be the foundation of
Ordinances; but withal affirm, that the next immediate principle, is the Spirit
of grace proceeding from Jesus Christ, which by its union gives them their life
and soul. There may be an institution before the Ordinance has its proper
existence: sometimes the command (as made known to us by Scripture-record) may
be a ratification of that which was in being and practice before, as we can
instance in both. However, if the institution be perpetuated in the Word, then
it continues, and the Spirit joins constantly with it when existing: if not,
then may the Spirit leave it, sometimes always, sometimes for a certain time
determined.

Object. The later are grounded on the Covenant of grace, and so are the
former; if by founded, you mean they are effects, etc.

Answ. 1. If they be effects, they must depend upon their cause as their base
and principle: Every cause is a principle.
for, Omnis causa est principium.

2. We deny not that the later are branches of this Covenant: but the former
have a more near relation and connection therewith then the later: for the
former were used while Christ was on the earth, before the keys of the later
were given: also the elect in mystical Babylon were Israelites, as those within
the Covenant, Rev. 7.3, 4. and (having their election sealed up) had some
breathing and nourishment by the former of these Ordinances: but the visible
Order in which they stood, is by the Spirit termed a wilderness and Babylon;
and the later Ordinances, coming from the false key of that Church, were
bottomless and bestial. In the like manner Israel in Egypt had ministry, the
Passover, etc. before the Legal Marriage was contracted: likewise the ten
apostated Tribes had Circumcision, where the visible stated Church was
idolatrous. Thus the former being before and without the later, have a more
immediate compliance with the Covenant; and the later with visible orderly
Church-constitution joined thereto: the one declares a Covenant member; the
other, together with it, a visible Church-constituted member.

To your sixth Objection, from Rev. 7.1, I shall hereafter answer in its proper
place, in Sect. 2.

Now we come to examine and remove your Objections brought against the
Cessation; which we will divide into five Sections.

Section 1.
Our first was, that Ministry, Prayer, the Sacraments, Faith, with Profession,
had the promise of the Word to uphold their successive abiding. But the later,
as Ordination, Confirmation, Church Censures, etc. wanted the said promise, and
so lie void and desolate for a time, as is proved in the Cessation.

I shall return to your two first Objections in the third Section next
following.

Object. 3. In the third, to prove the later sort to endure successively as
well as the former, you bring Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. and 1 Timothy 6.13, 14.

Answ. 1. To that of Ephesians. 4, we assent that all the Officers there exhibited,
were gifts sent down from Christ, after his ascension to his Father, verse.
8.11; as also, that they were differentially distinguished each from other,
both in the Office, its administration, and operation, verse. 7. and that all
these together exceedingly furthered the work of the Ministry, and tended
wonderfully to the edifying of the body of Christ, and the completing of the
growth and stature of the Saints: But yet we maintain, that this dispensation
of Office continued not to the end of the world (as you would insinuate:) for
it reached no further then the Primitive Apostolical times. For proof whereof,
we shall render these Arguments

1. Because all the Apostles were dead at the end of the first, or beginning of
the second Century; and in little time after, Evangelists and Prophets. You may
from this place as well argue the constant abiding of Apostles, Prophets, and
Evangelists, as of Pastors and Teachers; seeing the Spirit here speaks of a
complete and full dispensation of Official Ministry, consisting of all these
together, to bring this noble work to its perfection.

2. The whole primitive key of Office was lost in the Romish defection, and
returns not again till Babylon is destroyed. See the Cessation.

3. If Office had lineally descended from the primitive, then must Rome's
Officers and her officiating be good and true; and so she a true visible Church
in the deepest of her Apostacy, whom the Scripture, declares to be Babylon,
and cast out from true measurement, Rev. 11.2. Chap. 17.

4. If your sense be right, then apostated Rome must be a continued increasing
growing Church, higher then it was when Paul wrote this Epistle, or the highest
degree of the Apostolical Church. For the word until notes a continued act, and
all the tenor of the verses declares an increasing growing state; whereas Rome
was not a rising, but a falling away, 2 Thest. 23.4.

5. Because Christ in the time of this backsliding, promises a new gift, that
implies the failing of the former, Rev. 11.3.

6. The union of faith here specified as the period of this time, cannot be
applied to the resurrection: for then we walk by sense, not by faith, and enjoy
the thing now only beleft.

Therefore, Sir, (to give you the true sense of this Text in respect of time)
we conceive that this word until extends no further, then the end of the first,
or beginning of the second Century. For then when the book of the Revelations
was given, the whole Scriptures were completed, and so the work of the
Ministry made perfect: then was the highest rise, fullness, and unity of faith:
then was the scruple of Circumcision in greatest part, if not wholly removed,
the Temple being destroyed, which in Paul's time was the greatest cause of
rents: then was the primitive Church in her highest stature, being as the sun
in its full Meridian: then were all things here spoken of, fulfilled: then, and
but till then, was a growing rising time; and after that, was a gradual
declining: from that time, Heresies and Errors, the renters of union, crowded
in apace, Eusebius. lib. 3. chap. 29. In little time after, the three highest
spheres of the Ministerial Office were wholly resolved and expired; and that
remaining of Pastors and Teachers, grew in every succession more corrupt; and
so increased in pride and usurpation, till at length the Angel totally
apostated from heaven to earth, lost the true key of Office, and, instead
thereof, had the key of the bottomless pit, which brought a gloomy night on all.

Object. 2. Your second Scripture is 1 Timothy 6.13, 14, where (say you) is a
strait charge laid upon Timothy to keep that course of discipline prescribed to
him in that Epistle.

Answ. This solemn command of the Apostle does not comprehend the whole
Epistle, but only that immediately going before; which is, to fight the good
fight of faith, in following after righteousness, godliness, love, patience,
meekness, and avoiding covetousness, thereby to obtain eternal life: and this
is doctrinal, and to be observed till the last coming of Christ. Now that it is
thus, is clear from the text; for the Spirit faith not, Th^s., but [this] as
pointing at that immediately preceding; nor commandments in the plural (as
respecting all the several precepts of the whole book) but commandment in the
singular number, as respecting one. The Apostle in this Epistle gives other
charges by the particle [these] in the plural number, as Chap. 4.11, [These]
things charge and command; and Chap. 5.21, having before given rules about
discipline, enjoins him to do [these] things without partiality, and lay on
hands suddenly on no man. The phrase of abiding is not at all annexed to these
former charges (they containing many things that failed) but only to this
later singled out by it self; which (it well reviewed) will further clear up
our assertion, and by a direct diameter contradict the sense which you would
force it to.

To your fourth Objection, from Matthew. 28.19, 20, we shall reply to in the
conclusion of this Paragraph.

Section 2.
Our second is, that Ministry, Prayer, etc. being perpetuated in the Word,
have always the life and power of the same Word in some measure accompanying
them, whereby to preserve their vital being, Rev. 11.1.3. But the later
(wanting the same Word to uphold their abiding) had the wind of the Spirit
withheld from them, whereby they became as a carcass without a soul, Rev. 7.1.

We are to observe, that the outward matter of Ordinances are in themselves,
either barren empty elements, or at most, external formalities; a mere carcass,
or void cask: it is the Name and power of Jesus Christ, and the Spirit sent from
him, that is their internal and essential form: when the same Spirit of life
deserts them, they then remain as a dead body is, when the soul is severed from
it; or as an empty cabinet out of which the Jewel is taken. Now the former of
these (answerable to the Prophecies) are experimentally found to have some
degree of their vital faculty subsisting. There is the same light, power, and
virtue, in Ministry, Prayer, and Praisings, that was in the primitive age,
though not in the same degree: likewise for Baptism (the badge of the Covenant)
there was some secret virtue in the Covenant, to beget and preserve a sealed
company amongst the Israelites, which there was not amongst Turks and Heathens,
quat^nus sic: also the Communion received upon the ground of our spiritual
union with all the godly, may confer some influence of comfort and refreshing
flowing from the death of Christ. For as there was a mystical relation of the
scattered Saints, which knit them to Christ the head and one to another by a
spiritual bond; so was there a mystical communion and feeding together, with
respect to the same inseparable union.

But for the later, that are proper to a Church stated and invested with full
power (though in the first Gospel-day they held forth the glory and face of
Jesus Christ) yet afterward, when the external Government was taken from
Christ's shoulders, and placed upon Antichrist (as it was generally in the
hands of Popes, Patriarchs, and Archbishops thorowout the world, according to
what was prophesied that it should be given to the nations, Rev. 11.2.) then
was the wind of the Spirit withheld from breathing in them; then was the glory
of God departed from them; since which time, they have been but as an empty
shell, out of which the kernel of their ancient truth was taken: since then,
the lively efficacy and power of Christ is not found to accompany them,
wherever used.

Consider them as they are in the Romish Church, who alone in all our Horizon
can claim a succession from the primitive, and where (because your Office is
derived from thence) you are inevitably driven to hold their true being to
remain. What tender hearted Protestant (who holds the Pope to be Antichrist)
can cordially embrace, that his Holiness or his Clergy, by laying on of hands,
can confer a true spiritual gift? or that Christ accompanies their hand with so
much glory, as to make it the prime key on earth to beget the truth of
Membership and Office? Who would not blush to imagine, that the Popes
Excommunications or Bulls deliver over to Satan; and, by consequence, that the
Church of Rome (unto which by these keys and doors they are entered, and out of
which they are shut) is such a Church as may be named a kingdom of heaven? or
that what she binds on earth, is bound in heaven; or that what she looses on
earth, is loosed in heaven? or that she can forgive and retain sins? All which
powers she must have, if the really possess the keys of the Kingdom. For these
can no more be severed from the keys, while abiding true, then the soul from
the body while a living organ. But if Rome be fundamentally a false Church (as
she is held to be by the Protestant party) and stripped naked of that primitive
excellency in her external government; then what may be thought of you who
deduce your interest from her by descent? Experience has taught the Saints,
that there was as little efficacy of the true Spirit, if not as much of that
Antichristian spirit of Cruelty, Partiality, Covetousness, Enmity against the
power of godliness, in the Bishops Courts, as was before in Rome. And what the
Presbytery has been in Scotland, where they had the full and uncontrollable
command, we leave to such to determine, who have felt the rod. If it be true,
that Effectus sequitur virtutem causae, The effect follows the virtue of its
cause; then surely no good fruit is like to spring from an Antichristian root.
The lifelesness, formality, contentions, divisions, etc. that are in and caused
by our new-built models, are too well known in England: and how they ground
upon an humane bottom, is to be seen in the second Querie of the Cessation.

Object. Against this you quaerie, What means then has been left, for which
the Lord would make due provision for his people? from whence then came the
conversion of the one hundred and forty four thousand living under the
Apostaci^, and of multitudes in these later times? were they aborigines, a
people springing out of the earth, or let down from heaven?

Answ. 1. You cannot (I hope) think that the conversion or edification of any
soul under the Romish defection, came from the Ordination, Confirmation,
Admission, Absolution, etc. of the Pope, or any of his Hierarchy: nor has the
least good, but rather hurt, come from these as exercised by the Bishops or
you; for they have been utterly empty of any true spiritual breathings, as
before is cleared.

2. Gods ways of conversion are various; his Spirit works when, where, and
how it pleases: sometimes he calls from the womb, Isai. 49.1. Jer. 1.5. Luke
1.15. Romans 9.11. sometimes by the godly conversation of the Saints, by their
holy walk and seasonable admonition, Josh. 2.1. Ruth 1.16, 17. and 1 Pet. 3.1.
Thus godly men in our times, going into places where the Ministry has been
blind and formal, were instruments to work on and enlighten others; and by
this means many have been spiritualized in the Antichristian times. Sometimes
the Lord may sanctify great outward afflictions, and the sense of heinous
sins, as he did to Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33.12, 13. Sometimes by the sight of a
strange and fearful accident striking a terror on the man; as Waldus, the first
founder of the Waldenses, was, by seeing a man fall down dead before him; also
a kinsman of mine was first wrought upon by seeing a Fire-drake fall down
beside him. Sometimes by a divine light or vision; as Paul, Act. 9.3. also,
another precious Saint in our age, by his own acknowledgement to me and others.
Sometimes by reading of the Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.15. which many very godly men
in our days have affirmed to be the means God has used to turn them to
himself. Sometimes by a powerful officiated Ministry, as in the Primitive
times. Sometimes by a gifted Ministry, as shall be in the next place
manifested; and this gifted Ministry, together with the rest of the first sort
of Ordinances, as Prayer, etc. were the ordinary means to feed the woman in the
wilderness.

The variety of Gods ways in this noble work of Conversion, is beyond the
apprehension of any creature: and you much forget your self, in tying it up
only to an Antichristian Office. By what means the one hundred and forty four
thousand, and the standers at the glassie sea, were spiritually begotten and
brought forth, we leave it to the Lord: sure we are, they were not oborigines;
their birth came not from the earth, nor from the earthly key of your
Officials, but from a grace descending from heaven.

Object. 1. Against th^s gifted Ministry is affirmed, That it is only said,
not proved; and may be as castly denied as affirmed.

Answ. There was such a Ministry in the Primitive times, as is evident, Act.
8.4. Chap. 11.19, 20.1 Cor. 14.31. and 1 Pet. 4.10, 11; though then the
chiefest glory thereof was administered by way of Office: but in the
Antichristian season, the true Ministry was managed by a gift subordinate to,
and beneath that of a true Office: for,

1. There was no Office in all the West, but what was Romish, for many hundred
years after the first fall: and that it is there false and Antichristian, shall
be declared in the next Section.

2. When all Office came from Antichrist and his false key, then Christ himself
(to provide food for his Elect) gave power to his two Witnesses, not from the
hand of a Popish Ordination, but from his own immediate gift, Rev. 11.3, I will
give to my two Witnesses, and they shall prophecy: their prophecy came from
the immediate gift of Christ. This gift beginning at that time when the four
open winds were held from their blast, and the false key was given must be a
gift inferior to the former Office, and come not from any mediate power on
earth, but simply from heaven.

3. Experience has taught us in our generation, that there is not the least
degree of virtue in Ordination, that adds one scruple to the gift of the
Ministry, or tends to the furtherance of salvation; but rather that the Spirit
has breathed forth with with greatest efficacy, in such men, who either had
no Office at all, witness Dudly Venner of Cranebrook, M. George Frogmorton when
he preached at Benn^nden, with multitudes now in England, the truth of whose
Ministry is sealed by the conversion of thousands; or else by such
Non-conformists Ministers, who in the closets of their breast renounced, or at
least disliked their Office and subscription: and by these last when Office in
your sense was not refined, you may ghess how it was when more corrupt.

Object. 2. They always acted as Officers, and were so acknowledged.

Answ. This is not true; many neither were nor acted as Officers; many disliked
their Office, some renounced it, as is before declared: and if any did so act,
and were acknowledged, it was the blindness of the times so to account, which
the Lord in times of ignorance might connive at. Certain we are, that no good
came from their Office, (that being false) but only from their gifts: and the
blessings thereof were weak and low, in comparison of what they were in the
primitive times, (they being darkened and bemudded by their Office.) And this is
so far from being ungrateful, as that it is agreeable to the prophecies and the
event.

Object. 3. Paul produces the conversion of the Corinthians, not so much to
prove his gifts, as for a seal of his Apostleship.

Answ. We will first declare the occasion of this argument of Paul, and then
return to yours. The occasion was this: There were certain false Apostles, who
subtly persuaded the Churches (not that he was no Officer, but) that he was
only an ordinary Minister, or one at least inferior to an Apostle, and so not
to be looked on as infallible. In consutation of whom, Paul proves himself to
be an Apostle in the strictest sense; as is clear by this text, compared with
Chap. 10.16. Chap. 12.12. Gal. 1.1, 17, 18, 19. Chap. 2.7, 8.9. This premised,
we shall now reply to your chiefest Helena.

1. When Office was true, it had not only an ordinary grace common with
private Christians, but also an addition of a grace and life proper to the
Office. Thus Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, having
several degrees of order, were endowed with a propriety of gift peculiar to
each degree; and the success was answerable in the heaters. Thus Paul, being a
true Apostle, showed forth all the signs thereof with Apostolical power and
authority; and the same proper symboles accompanying his Ministry, and the
peculiar effects thereof wrought in the manner of the Corinthians conversion,
sealed his Apostleship, and not their bare conversion; as is apparent by
comparing this text with 2 Cor. 12.12, The signs of an Apostle were seen
amongst you in all patience, in signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds.

2. Bare conversion, without such singular gifts and fruits, argues not any
particular, no nor any Office at all. For men in every one of those five
degrees, nay such as had no Office, were instruments in this honorable
design; and a common effect proves not a particular cause. Paul's argument had
been weak and groundless, to demonstrate himself to be an Apostle by such a
sign as was common to all other Officers, nay to private Christians.

3. The Witnesses in mystical Babylon, whether in Rome or elsewhere, received a
gift from Christ tending to convert and edify. Now the conversion wrought by
those godly men, did not confirm the warrantableness of membership and orders
in the false Churches they lived in, (for their outward clothing was black
deformed sackcloth:) it only evidenced the truth of that inward grace and
power given by Jesus Christ. I hope you will not affirm, that those good fruits
issuing from the Ministry of Sylvester, Savanarola, Wickliff, Huss, Luther,
with others of the Romish Clergy, as also Latimer, Ridley, Hooper, with sundry
other Bishops, ratified the Office of Friars, Monks, Priests, and Diocesan
Bishops, as that of Paul did his Apostleship: we say, It sealed only their
gifts.

We shall here sift another argument of yours against this gifted Ministry,
instanced in page 23 of your Book.

Object. If such a gifted Ministry be current, and sufficiently authorized for
administering Word and Sacraments, then there was no need of an Official
Ministry; and Christ, it seems, ordained therein a superfluous Ordinance: for,
Frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora; It is a vain thing, and
not beseeming a wise man, to use many ways to do that, which may be done by
sewer.

Answ. This your Philosophical Maxim is not generally true in Divinity, but
must admit of many limitations. For God is a free agent, and may work by more,
or fewer, nay without mediums; and, in some seasons, administers a greater
variety and fullness for satiety and delight, Prove. 9 1, 2, 3. Cant. 5.1. Matthew.
22. Revel. 19.9. in other times he uses a more sparing dispensation, only to
maintain some being and life of grace.

When the Temple was destroyed, and the vessels thereof lay void, and were of
no use for Gods service, in the palace of Nebuchadnezzar; yet the Lord then was
to them a little Sanctuary, in the truth of Grace, Ministry, Prayer, etc. You
cannot from hence conclude, that the same Temple and vessels as were made,
consecrated, and used in Jerusalem, were superfluous Ordinances; neither is it
safe to charge Wisdom it self with vanity and indiscretion, for effecting that
by more, which he might have and did accomplish by fewer means. So when the
outward court of Church Government was given to the Nations, and in the
possession of Antichrist, Christ did and might in point of honor and justice
leave it, and distribute his grace by a more retired and inward way, as is at
large declared in the Cessation. Therefore this your assertion is both untrue
and dangerous, it intrenching upon the absolute and unlimited Royalty of the
great King.

Object. Lastly, if the holding of the four winds be understood of the holding
of the Spirit from breathing in Ordinances (for others carry it fairly in
another sense) then, 1. there is nothing said how long the restraint should
last, much less that it lasts during the apostacy.

Answ. 1. That the wind metaphorically signifies the breathing of the Spirit,
is apparent by these Scriptures, Joh. 3.8. Ezekiel. 1.4. Acts 2.2. Ezekiel. 37.9, 14.
and it cannot here be fairly applied to any other sense, it belonging to
Israelites, and the restraint being hurtful to their earth, sea, and trees:
that wind must needs be favorable and reviving, whose detaining is hurtful.

2. The text implicitly concludes the restraint to last during the time of the
hurt, which is the whole Antichristian age: and after that, the four winds
shall again be loosed, to animate what lay before spiritless, as is showed on
the second Querie in the Cessation.

Object. 2. Then it must be meant of a more sparing breathing in comparison of
the primitive times, not of an utter restraint. 3. If it be an utter restraint,
then take notice that the restraint is general, and cannot by any circumstance
of the text be confined only to Official preachers and preaching, but as fully
reaches to the gifted men as to them; and so does conclude an utter ceasing of
the Spirit now or then from breathing in or by any Ordinances.

Answ. To begin with the last of yours, 1. This withholding, and the hurt
thereby, may be gathered by a circumstance of the text not to be so general, as
utterly to debar the Elect from some more secret and inward inspirations: for,
verse. 2, 3, the four Angels are forbidden to hurt by this restriction, till the
Angel of the East had sealed the servants of God in their foreheads: which
infers a care, and some provision for the spiritual subsistence and breathings
in, upon, and by the elect: hereupon it reaches not to the gifted men: for
they had a power given immediately from Christ, which breathed forth in
Ministry, Rev. 11.3; and as there was an inward Temple and Altar, so there was
approved Worship therein, flowing from the truth of grace, verse. 1.

2. The restraint was total, in respect of outward Order and
Church-constitution. For, first, Therein succeeded another key, also, that was
cast out, and became Babylon, as shall be showed in the two next Sections: and
the Spirit cannot breathe in that which is wholly corrupted, and becomes
another, especially in what it excommunicates. Secondly, The wind here
expressed, was utterly detained from blowing on the earth, sea, or any tree;
which must imply it to be in some sense general. Thirdly, All save the Elect
were hurt thereby, and subverted, verse. 2. which dis-interesses other common
Israelites from those outward privileges they enjoyed while the visibility was
true.

From hence we gather, that the open winds deciphered Acts 2.2, which gave
being to the external keys of Church Government, were altogether bound up from
their manifest blast: but yet a still and secret influence, coming more
immediately from Jesus Christ, which never was wanting from Adam's time,
remained: and this was more sparing and narrow in comparison of the primitive,
both in its measure and degree, and the number of the Ordinances which it
occupied.

The winds here kept back are said to be four, in regard of the generality
thereof, reaching to the four quarters: also the winds of the earth, it being
an administration more visible here on earth: thus the power of binding and
loosing by these more external keys, is said to be on earth, Matthew. 16.19. And
as the natural winds bring a sweet influence of fertility to the earth, and of
purification both to sea and air, by their breathing in this lower Region, the
restraint whereof causes things to putrify: so this spiritual wind, blowing
here below on the Israelites earth, sea, and trees, caused the spices thereof
to flow out, and purified all, Cant. 4.16: but after it was withheld, then
ensued a common infection, Chap. 8. Chap. 9. Chap. 13. Chap. 11. Chap. 17.
which poisoned all except the sealed ones, who properly had some secret
inhalations from the Angel of the East.

These Angels we conceive to be evil spirits working by their principal
ministers, the four capital Patriarchs of the Christian world; to wit, the
Bishop of Alexandria for the South, of Antioch for the East, of Constantinople
for the North, and Rome for the West; who (usurping, and in a manner engrossing
all Ecclesiastical Government into their hands, and tugging amongst themselves
for Primacie) did by contention, pride, avarice, and heresy, gradually detain
the four winds from breathing in the external Regiment, till at the last the
Headship fell into Rome, where it became another. And this restraint was not
properly in them, as if any creature had power over the holy Ghost; but by
accident, in the same sense that the infection of Nature is said to resist and
quench the Spirit, Acts 7, 51. and 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.

Now because the Israelites here spoken of are thought by some to be the
natural seed of Abraham, I shall (for their satisfaction) evidence by some
arguments that they must be the Christian nations, or Gentile Israelites;
proved by these following Reasons.

1. This Book of the Revelations was not sent to the Jews, but to the Gentiles,
as principally belonging unto them; and, in various types, pourtrays the
several changes that should befall them, from the days of John, to the final
consummation.

2. The main body of this Vision, was after the days of John, as you may gather
by Chap. 4.1; and for time begins when the open breathing of the Spirit was
withheld, when the trumpets that brought in the apostacy were sounded, when
the outward court was cast out, even when the Jews were almost utterly fallen
away from any profession of Christ, from whom only comes salvation, and could
not then have one hundred and forty four thousand sealed ones amongst their
tribes.

3. The four Angels stand upon all quarters of the earth; and the withholding
is universal, The four winds; and the hurt thereby to all the unsealed
Israelites: which cannot agree with any one Nation.

4. This hurt was chiefly introduced by the locust, Chap. 9.4. and by the
Beast, which can in no sense be applied to the Jews, but to the Christian
nations, who were thus undermined by Antichrist.

5. By comparing this text with Chap. 11.2, we may clearly perceive that the
nations possessed the court without the temple, which was the stand of the
common Israelites. The common Israelites stand in the court without; the
nations stand in the court without: the nations then must be these common
Israelites; especially considering, that all the visions of this book are not
proper, but allegorical.

6. The number sealed from amongst them, was the same not hurt by the Locusts,
Chap. 9.4, nor utterly deceived by the Beast, Chap. 13.8. Matthew. 24.24. the
same standing on mount Sion, Chap. 14.1; which duly pondered with all the
circumstances, can be reduced to no time or condition, but that of the Elect in
Babylon. If the Romish and Antichristian defection be not deciphered by these
figures, and but the Jews only, then is it altogether omitted in this Book;
then must all from thence to the end of the Revelation be peculiar to the Jews;
neither of which can any man of wisdom assent to embrace.

The Spirit has so interlaced this Chapter, from verse. 1. to verse. 9, with all
the after-types expressing the state of the time of the tribulation; and from
verse. 9. to the end, with the next revolution and condition of the harpers, as
may sufficiently remove such trifling conjectures from the minds of all who
will observe the order of this Prophecy. Thus we shall leave the second
Section, and proceed to the third.

Section 3.
Our third ground why the visibility of Church-constitution and the keys
thereof, comprising the later sort of Ordinances, did sail, was, Because the
Lord deserting them when made void of their primitive truth, and purity, the
dragon had full power therein, and gave to the fallen star another key, even
the key of the bottomless pit, Rev. 9.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. Chap. 13.

Object. Against this you allege, that the Pope got into his hands all the
other Ordinances as well as these; as Prayer, Ministry, Baptism; and yet for
substance they remained true: why then may not the later, as Ordination? etc.

Answ. Because you here require us, we will give our Reasons together (though
most have been elsewhere written) why the former continued, and not the later.
Our Grounds why the former abode, shall be first in general, then in particular.

The Reasons in general are these two.

1. The former being promised in the Word to remain, the Lord so sustained them
by his Word, as no creature could abolish them.

2. Because, as Christ fore-declared that there should be a sealed number to
make up a mystical Church in Babylon; so he upheld the former, as being more
necessary to maintain the being of grace, some means of salvation, and the
badge of the Covenant.

Now a few words for the former Ordinances with faith and profession in
particular.

Those of Ministry, Prayer, and Praisings, arise from a grace in the soul,
faith in the heart, and a gift dispensed from Christ alone, even then when the
outward government was rejected: now his Spirit could never be radically
touched, as it works in the soul. Thus the desires of grace in the mind,
aspiring and fuming up to the Father of spirits in the Ordinances of Prayer and
Praisings, could not be restrained, much less razed by the great Antichrist.
Likewise the gift of the Witnesses prophecy, wrought in the inward man, with
the administration thereof breathing out teaching, is so given, inspired and
sustained by Jesus Christ, as the Beast could never take it into his full
possession: it this had been possible, he would not have suffered them to turn
his waters into blood ministerially, and smite his earth with plagues, and
that, not so often as the Beast, but as they listed, verse. 6. The Bishops with us
in England, when they had full command and jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical
regiment, could by no means wholly withhold or corrupt the desires and prayers
of the Saints, nor so take this inward gift into their custody, but that in
despite of their malice it brake forth in one corner or other of the Land, to
testify the truth in some measure, and disclose, nay cry down the corruptions
of the times. Also faith in the heart, and the effects thereof shining forth in
profession, were beyond the sphere of Satan. For the inward created principle
in the soul, breaking forth in and by these means and Ordinances, the Spirit in
and by the Word sustaining its perpetuity, and Christ supporting the same, are
all far above the reach of Antichrist: had these been in the power of that
destroyer, he would have utterly marred all the springs, yea the very fountain
of grace. In the same manner the communion taken on the ground work of the
spiritual union of all the godly wherever scattered, (when the corporated was
false) and Christ therein fed upon by faith, was not altogether subverted: for
the mystical relation betwixt Christ and the heart, and the godly with the
godly, was beyond the compass of Popes, Bishops, or any humane authority
whatsoever.

Also for Baptism, though the Antichristian Church was in her constitution and
order unmeasured to truth, and therein Babylon, yet she was not utterly shut
out from the Covenant, but had the call of Israelites, had the Name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, put on them, with a common grace to believe the
Covenant, and an elect sealed number in and amongst their tribes; none of which
properties can be attributed to those wholly without. Though Antichrist in some
things infected the externality of this Ordinance, yet could he not
fundamentally raze the Covenant, nor utterly abolish the name of Christ from
amongst Christians, nor make invalid the power of the Word perpetuating that
name, Isai. 56.5. In like sort the ten apostated tribes were in their
Church Order set up by Jeroboam radically false; and yet were Israelites,
within the Covenant, and had the sign of Circumcision. Thus also men
excommunicated are excluded from Church Fellowship, but not from their Baptism,
and the Covenant. Likewise Heretics, who fell from the Church, were received
again not by new Baptism, but by laying on of hands: Eusebius l. 7 cap. 2 and 3.

2. Our Reasons why the later sort, as Ordination, Confirmation, etc. abode
not, are these following.

1. They are not promised in the Word to continue, Isai. 56.5.

2. They wanting that promise, were forsaken by God when corrupted.

3. All the external Order became Antichristian, and so the Ordinances proper
thereto must be bestial: or else how could there have been a Babylon, wherein
the sealed number were captives?

4. Our last, taken from this text, Rev. 9, is, that these were wholly resolved
into the Pope, to whom was given another key, with other smoke and Officers.
These being altogether external, and Christ leaving them, Antichrist might have
and had absolute power therein to make them bottomless.

Object. Against this you assert, that though the Pope have another false key,
yet withal he has the keys of Christ's discipline, in Ordination,
Excommunication, Suspension, etc.

Answ. Though the Pope usurp the carcass of those Ordinances that were Christ's
before, yet their true essential form, which makes them to be Christ's, and true
Office and Membership, on which they depend, he and his whorish Church have
not. For confirmation whereof, these grounds do naturally arise from the text.

1. The first Reason is drawn from the nature of the Pope and Antichristian
Hierarchies, verse. 1. the Star or Angel fell from heaven (the orb in which he
was fixed before) unto the earth, or wilderness, Chap. 12.6. a total apostacy
from his former office and sphere: and was not in the least degree heavenly,
but terrene, earthly, and merely humane, or a wild beast, Rev. 13.1. and is
numbered not to God, but to man, verse. 18. It is a true Rule, Corruption optimi
est pessima, The corruption of the best things is always worst, and most
contrary to its former goodness: Satan who was the noblest, is by his fall the
basest of creatures, and most unlike to an angel of light, which he was before
he fell. So here that Angelical Office which shined as a fixed Star in the
bright firmament of the primitive purity, holding forth the liveliest glory of
Christ for the perfecting of the Saints, being once apostated from his former
sphere, became not only an humane Hierarchy, but a mere Antichrist, as most
opposite to Christ of any other; 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
and the man of sin, as that wherein the quintessence of evil and deceit is
epitomized and grown to its perfect maturity; and (...), one in office
altogether without and besides the Law, and likest to sin it self, which is
termed (...), 1 John 3.4. nay, he is the principal vicegerent of Satan on
earth, to whom he commits his chiefest power, Rev. 13.2.
throne, and authority, in the exercise whereof he is Abaddon or Apollyon,
Chap. 9.11
destruction it self in the abstract, recorded in the two most famous
Languages; and is most emphatically styled by Paul, The son of perdition, being
one who has caused the greatest ruin and desolation; and is termed by John,
the King of the bottomless pit. Thus we may see, that the Office of the Pope
and his Hierarchy, is most corrupted of any thing else, being that wherein the
being of Antichrist does subsist, who is not a particular person, but a
corporation. And this Official Hierarchy being stripped naked of its primitive
truth, and becoming merely Antichristian, cannot in the least degree beget a
lawful Office: for, N^l dat quod non habet: If the fountain be polluted, how
can the streams be pure? None can bring a clean thing out of an unclean, not
one, Job 14.3.

2. This Angel had another key different in nature from the former. And it is
impossible the keys of the kingdom of heaven can subsist with the key of the
bottomless pit, or the power of Jesus Christ be united with the power of Satan.
Contraries in their extremes cannot stand together, but the one must destroy
the other.

3. The Church opened by this key is a bottomless pit; bottomless, she being
void of the groundwork of Truth in her order; a pit or prison, being as a hell
on earth, in which men are captivated, Prove. 7.27. Chap. 9.18 Isai. 51.14.
Chap. 49.9. Zech. 9.11, 12. also a Church excommunicated of God, and Babylon,
Rev. 11.2. Chap. 17.5. and so cannot in her constitution have the keys of the
kingdom of heaven: for the key must be of the same nature with the Church.
Besides, if Confirmation, Ordination, Excommunication, etc. be true in Rome,
then must that Romish Church into which by these keys she enters, and out of
which she shuts, be a kingdom of heaven, and a Sion, and not a bottomless pit,
and Babylon, which (we conceive) you will be ashamed to affirm.

4. The smoke or dispensation of this pit or false Church, is hellish and
diabolical, eclipsing and darkning the whole Horizon, verse. 2. and how can the
smoke or wind of Gods glory spiriting these Ordinances, and making them
lightsome, dwell together with the darksome, false, and delusive smoke of the
bottomless pit? surely the Lord will not so much honor Antichrist his greatest
adversary. If the Pope have the true smoke or wind of the primitive Church,
then what he binds or looses on earth, is bound or loosed in heaven, Matthew.
16.19. as is further cleared in the second Section.

5. The Officers coming from hence are locusts, of a diverse kind from the
true, they proceeding from another key, king, pit, and smoke. If Office had
been true in Rome, then Membership must be the like, for he can be no true
Officer, that is not withal a Member: and if Office and Membership be both
right in that Catholic Synagogue, then must she be a true Church, being
radically right both in Ministers and people.

Sir, have you exclaimed against Rome as Babylon for so many years, and do you
now by this argument prove her to be Sion? However, we may from this text
observe, that as the pit is bottomless, so is the key, the smoke and the
locusts arising from it, and that fundamentally: so that your Ordination,
Excommunication, Suspension, coming from hence, cannot have any parcel of the
keys of the kingdom of heaven, but must pertain to this bottomless key.

Object. But (say you) these Ordinances may remain the Ordinances of Christ,
though in wrong hands, and abused: as the Great seal of the kingdom is still in
the right and true seal, though in the hand of an usurping Lord Keeper, etc.

Answ. If you should prove these constitutive Ordinances to be Seals, yet in
the Broad Seal there be two things requirable. 1. The Power and Authority from
whence the Seal proceeds. 2. The confirming of an act coming from that power by
the Seal.


When the writing sealed is derived from a lawful authority, then the Seal
carries the name and majesty of that true and rightful power, which makes it a
legal ratification: but if it issue forth from an usurped Primacy, though the
matter and print may be the same with the other, yet the act sealed bears the
substance of that usurpation, which puts another form upon it, and makes it
illegitimate, nay treasonable. So these Ordinances pertaining to Church Order,
in the primitive times arising from Christ and his Spirit working in the
Apostles, etc. were accompanied with the name and power of Christ, which made
them true, as representing the lively image of himself: but these coming from
other usurping lords, as Popes, Bishops, or the like, receive the character of
the same usurpation, which changes their essence, makes them unlawful, and to
carry the image of the Beast. And your Office flowing from this bestial and
exorbitant key, must be false in its foundation. The Key, the Church, the Smoke
is another, and thereof not Christ, but Antichrist, the king of the bottomless
pit.

We informed you how the truth of this was verified by the event; that there
was no other Office, but that of the Locusts kind, even in Luther's time, who
himself was a Monk.

In opposition to this, you reckon up some Bishops, Monks, Friars, Priests, or
of some such Popish Order, that for 1260 years stood up to witness the Truth,
who were not locusts.

Answ. These men whom you reckon up, with any other of the like sort of godly
men officiated by Antichrist, had no other Office, but that of the
locust-kinde. You your self acknowledge the Officers called Monks, Friars,
Priests, Abbots, Cardinals, and the Popish Clergy, to be of the series of the
locust, a little before in the same page of your book. And whatsoever
excellency and honor these men gained beyond others, arose simply from the
gift of Jesus Christ, not at all from their Popish function, that being but the
defiled rags with which the same Witnesses were clothed. No man not Popishly
minded, can imagine that their Frierhood, Monkery, Priesthood, or the like,
could confer any dignity to their piety; or that these men thus gifted by the
Lord Jesus, did attribute any esteem to their Popish Orders. It is observable,
that God should rear up such men who had no Office but what was merely
invented, to be such noble instruments to testify in some degree the Truth:
which may teach you, us, and all others, not to give any worth to such difiled
Offices, but only to their qualifications, which unless sanctified from
heaven, they had been locusts as well as the rest of their Orders; and to
conclude that this their grace, and the right to dispense the same, came not
from their officiating, but only from the gift and grant of the Lord of life.
So that herein we must distinguish their inward gift with its administration,
from their outward investment: the one, distilling from Christ, was radically
true and holy; the other, coming from Antichrist, was utterly false, and
polluted.

Object. You assert further, that Ockam, John of Gaunt, Dantes, John Wickliff,
Jerome of Prague, Luther, were men that amongst others made up the series of
the three Angels, Rev. 14. and yet lived in the Church of Rome, had their
external calling from that Church, were of some of the Popish Orders, etc.

Answ. Bare saying is no proving, and ipse dixit, he said so, will hardly pass
for current amongst men of judgment. We shall deny that the men you name, were
of the rank of the three Angels specified Rev. 14.6, 8, 9. much less that they
were called Angels by virtue of their Popish Office, which you would insinuate.
For they lived within the circuit of the one thousand two hundred and sixty
years of tribulation, wherein they were mourners; and being (as you confess)
men that lived in the Church of Rome, that had their external calling from that
Church, and of some of the Popish Orders, must be those Witnesses clothed in
sackcloth, Rev. 11.3. Whereas these three Angels were of the rejoicing Harpers,
who arose not till after the expiration of that sorrowful time, were clothed in
white Robes of joy and greater purity, and had gotten the victory over the
Beast, his image, mark, name, and the number of his name, Chap. 7.9. Chap.
15.2. Again, neither the Ministry nor Writings of those you mention, were so
pure and full, as might be termed an everlasting Gospel, which the first Angels
ministry was, verse. 6: neither did they, with the second, verse. 8, unmask the
root of Mystery Babylon, great part whereof was sealed up from their
understandings: neither did they discover the Beast, his image and mark, in its
whole latitude, with the third, who with a thundering voice cries against all
such defiled Offices with which they were outwardly arrayed, verse. 9.

2. These ministers or instruments of this threefold discovery, are not
entitled Angels by virtue of any outward call to an Office by the Pope,
Bishops, or any other authority on earth; but only by the privilege of a gift
dispensed immediately by the Angel of the Covenant, Rev. 10.8, 9, 10, 11. Here
their commission or sending forth [Go] comes simply from God; their furnishing
for this ministration, or their [taking and eating the book] from the Angel:
and being thus divinely empowered, [they must prophesie] though all the earth
oppose it: their engagement to prophecy arises from their taking and eating
the book. Besides, the word Angel signifies a Messenger, or one sent with a
prevailing administration; which may be either by the medium of a visible power
here below; or else simply from above, without any such mediums from man. All
this we shall be ready to evidence in our next Return.

Before we pass from hence, give us leave a little to go back, and reflect upon
the groundwork of your stand and dealings in this particular.

Truly, Sir, we conceive you are hardly driven, when (being sounded to the
bottom) you cannot justify your own Office, but withal you are enforced to
plead for that of Friars, Monks, Priests, Bishops, and the whole rabble of the
Popish Orders; nay, to maintain them to be the Angels of truth, by reason of
their outward investments from Rome: neither can you vindicate your interest in
your key of Church Government in Ordaining, Excommunicating, etc. but you must
therewith manage the Popes. Surely it is inevitable necessity drives you to
this extreme shift, that either you must hold the foundation of Church Order to
remain in Rome, and so make that mother of harlots to be radically the true
spouse; or else you must yield and renounce your own. We cannot but Isai. 29.9.
stay our selves, and wonder, that you who have been counted men of knowledge
and godliness, should so straightly tie up all the Ordinances of Jesus Christ to
such a corrupt and Antichristian function, as if you only were thereby called
and inrighted with a power to dispense the same, when as your Office in the
root thereof comes from the Pope (the angel of the bottomless pit) and his
false way. If your eyes were opened to see the nature and extent of that key,
you would quickly find, that your glorying herein were your greatest shame;
and so it will appear ere long. For though you should outwardly clothe this
your Office, and the Church built thereon, with the fairest Robes of the
primitive pattern, and could extract the quintessence of wit, policy, learning,
art, argument, to present it as impregnable, and had the tongues of men and
angels, to paint it out with more then humane eloquence, to make it seem, like
Ezekiel. 27.3.
Tyrus, to be of perfect beauty; yet (being in its principle earthly and
bottomless) your Office, with the power of its government, will unavoidably be
disclosed to be a false Christ, a false prophet, or Beast; the Church sustained
thereby to be a daughter of that great mother, Rev. 17. and her attire and
seeming beauty to be no other then the glittering ornaments and paintings of
the woman Babylon, the mystery of whose deceit will be anatomized and made
naked by the light of the Spirit. This lay concealed in times of ignorance, and
God did more connive: but now his call enlightens and discovers these
principles of delusion, and invites to a separation. Let us therefore advise
you, in the bowels of charity, to obey this voice of the Spirit in coming off
your selves, and to hasten your members the captive exuls, that they die not in
the pit, that you may be of the number of the rejoicing harpers, Rev. 15. and
not of those mourners, Chap. 18.

Section 4.
Our next ground was, that the visible Church it self (the foundation of these
later Ordinances) failed; and so the Ordinances proper to a constituted Church
must needs receive a loss of their efficacy.

Object: You except, That the visible Church is not the foundation, but the
institution of Christ.

Answ. The institution of Christ is a foundation; but yet that which affords
present being or existence, both to the constitution of visible Government it
self, and the Ordinances arising thence, is the Spirit of life sent from Jesus
Christ, as is elsewhere showed. And whether such a Church first married by God,
whereby to have the keys of this visible kingdom given them from above, and the
Spirit of Christ united to and operating in them, enjoy not, by virtue of that
union, a principle of power to use the same, and contribute a right Membership
and Office unto others, we leave it to you to consider. The iron conjoined to
the fire, has the same essence of heat and operation with the fire: and (I
suppose) you will grant, that a true Presbytery coferring an Office unto
another by Ordination, has the being and foundation of that Office. This word
foundation, taken simpliciter, simply and originally, is proper only to
Christ; but secundum quid, after some sort, may be attributed to the Church,
whether visibly corporated, or mystical.

You assent, that if it be made good, that the visibility of Church Order
failed, and became Babylon, it is enough to carry the cause.

Answ. This is proved in the Cessation, from Rev. 11.2, that when this outward
court was given to the Nations, it was then cast out by the Spirit. The words
properly translated, run thus: But the court which is without the temple, cast
out, and measure it not: for it is given to the Nations, and the holy city
shall they tread under foot forty and two months. When the Nations engrossed
the externalitie and outside of Ecclesiastical Government into their hands, and
joined in with National worldly Regiment, they made up national Churches. Here
we may behold, as in a spiritual Map, of what nature they are, and how they are
false and Antichristian in the original of their constitution, whether
considered as Papal, Episcopal, or Presbyterial; which these Reasons
syllogistically drawn from the native sense of the text, do demonstrate.

1. Those Churches which are altogether outward, and have nothing of the temple
and altar, and the virtue and life thereof in their constitutions, are merely
humane and spiritless.

But National Churches, whether Papal, Episcopal, or Presbyterial, are so:

Therefore, etc.

The Major you cannot deny: the Minor is cleared by the words of the text: for
no more was given them, but the outward court. See Sect. 2.

2. Those Church-Constitutions that are cast out of God, are disapproved and
forsaken of him.

But such National Church-constitutions are cast out of God: Ergo, etc.

The Major is undeniable: the Minor is confirmed by this Scripture: The court
without, (...), which properly signifies cast out, and not leave out, as it is
translated; hereupon ensued another key, Sect. 3.

3. Those Churches that have no measurement by the line of Truth, are false and
Antichristian.

But such National Churches have no measurement by the line of Truth: Ergo, etc.

The minor is evinced by the text, Measure it not; and so are bottomless.

4. Those Churches who are distinct and another from the holy City, are in
their groundwork of their Order strange and Babylonish. But such National
Churches are distinct and another from the holy city: Ergo, etc.

The Major is indubitable: The Minor is also evinced from the text, where
[they] the Christian nations, and the [holy city] are set in distinct and
opposite terms.

5. Those Churches who tread the holy City, the sealed number, under foot, are
tyrannical and bestial.

But such National Churches do so tread; as is further asserted, And the holy
city shall they tread under foot.

The truth of this has showed it self, not only in the cruelty of Rome, but
also by the like tyranny of the Bishops in England, and the rigor of the
Presbytery in Scotland: and that the same aspiring spirit is in many amongst
you (if the sword of the Magistrate would second and empower you) the
declarations of some, both in their writings, and in their open Pulpits (which
men look upon as the oracles of Truth) have sufficiently manifested to the
world: we hope they will be more wise and tender of the consciences of others
for the future.

These National Churches considered in one universal body, are the great city
Babylon, Chap. 17.15, 18. Chap. 11.8, 9, 10.

Now if the visibility of Church-constitution was only National for many
generations (as is cleared by all the evidences of former times) and these
National Churches Babylonish, then must there be a fail and cessation of the
truth of the same visibility. Compare this Scripture with the event, and you
may find, that as here the whole outward court was given to the Nations, and
then cast out by the Spirit; so the event is parallel to the prophecy, which
tells us, that the total Order of Ecclesiastical regiment became National, and
was for many hundred years Romish, in the full possession of the Pope, where by
the common grant of all Protestants it is held to be Babylon: and when the
visible Church became a stranger, and bottomless, the key of outward
Government, in Confirmation, Ordination, Excommunication, etc. must be of the
same nature with the Church, as is declared in the former Paragraph.

The truth of this is likewise confirmed by the state of the true Church in the
times of this apostacy, who was only a sealed elect number, which by an
invisible union made up a mystical temple, a Sion, a women, etc. whose visible
abode was in the wilderness of Babylon, as you may read in the Cessation. I
shall here demonstrate it by another Scripture, which was there omitted: The
text is Micah. 4.10, where the prophet speaking of the daughter of Sion, says,
that she shall go forth out of the city (her genuine and celestial Order) and
shall dwell in the field (answerable to the wilderness into which the woman
fled, Rev. 12.6.) and shall go even to Babylon (to such a field where is mere
confusion;) from whence the Lord will at last deliver her by separation, and
redeem her from the hands of her enemies. And that this alludes to the
condition of the Gospel Church in spiritual Babylon, is evinced by the
gathering of the nations against her, verse. 11; which agrees whith these last
combinations against the Saints, Zeph. 3.8. Isai. 54.15. Revel. 16.14, 16. by
her horns of iron, and hoofs of brass, to thresh and beat in pieces many
people; also after her complete victory, by her consecrating their gain to the
Lord; which never was fulfilled in the majesty here delivered, but must be
proper to the time of the vials, wherein the people coming out of Babylon,
reward her and her assistants with the like degree of punishment, Rev. 18.6.
Dan. 7.22.

The event does likewise comply with this Scripture, as face answers to face in
a glass. For the primitive Church, who was glorious in her visible
constitution, settled and beautified with Apostolical power, did after decline
from thence into the vast barren field of the Babylonish nations, where she was
scattered here and there a godly person, outwardly mixed with the rude
multitude, from whom she was not distinguished either in Membership or Office,
and where she was held in chains of thraldom by Popes, Bishops, and the like
beastly Hierarchies, who in this strange country monopolized the key of
Government into their sole tuition; and in this desolate estate, she must needs
be an exile in a foreign land. From this bondage also the Lord begins at last
to call her out, and deliver her from her enemies. From hence we may
necessarily conclude, that if this external station wherein the daughter of
Sion visiby stood, was a field, a wilderness, a Babylon, or foreign country of
strange confusion, then must all the beauty of her former outward Order be
dissolved, and turned into a rude Chaos: and that if her key of visible Rule
was taken solely into the usurpation of Antichrist the Beast, those alien
lords, Then must the Ordinances thereof lie void, as did the Temple-vessels in
the house of Nebuchadnezzar's idol-gods.

We will now, with God's assistance, proceed to answer your Objections made
against this.

Object. You allege, that to say the visible Church did fail, is as much as
to affirm that the pillars of the earth were broken down, the Church standing
as firm, by Gods ordinance, power, and faithfulness.

Answ. It is true, that the pillars of the earth are born up by the Word of
God, albeit the earthly governments thereof have the times of their shake and
dissolution, Psalm. 75.3. Isai. 2.19, 21. Hag. 2.21. And withal, it is as true,
that the Church in the being of election, inward grace, outward profession, and
the more intrinsecal rule of grace, is a kingdom that cannot be shaken, Heb.
12.28, it being promised to be perpetual, Matthew. 16.18.

But the visibility of Church Government was not so pillared in the Word for
its successive abiding; this is rather fore-prophesied that it should be
corrupted by Antichrist, and become Babylon.

To lay the groundwork of your after-discourse, you here distinguish a visible
Church.

M. Elmest. First, say you, by a visible Church may be meant a company of
Christians joined together in one place, set in true order of Worship, and
exercise of all Gods Ordinances: that such a Church has been in any one place,
or many successively, (you think) cannot castly be proved.

Answ. By such a Church (if we understand you aright) you mean a Church set in
a right order of Discipline, and furnished with true Officers. And if such a
Church cannot be proved to have been successively through the apostacy, then
must you yield that the primitive chain of Order was broken, and so justify
its cessation: for such an one it is that you have maintained to abide, and we
have proved to discontinue. This grant of yours duly pondered, does at one
breath unmount the whole fabric of this your Babel; and might soon put a
period to the major part of this Controversy.

M. Elmest. Secondly, by a visible Church may be meant a company of persons
professing true religion, abstaining from all false worship, and worshipping
God in a pure way, though for the most part in sundry places, and meeting in
small companies: such a Church has been perpetual.

Answ. 1. Such companies may thus assemble for Ministry, Prayer, (as did the
one hundred and twenty before they received powerfrom on high, and we do now)
and yet not be a visible Church invested with a full power to make Members and
Officers. This stating of your case (if we misapprehend you not) is a
digression from all your former and after writing, which tends to manage the
continuance of a Church in membership, office, and the keys thereof.

2. Such a Church as you here nominate, to wit, the Saints assembled in
distinct companies, who were externally pure from all the corruptions of the
times, cannot be shown to the extant through the whole season of the apostacy:
for both the Scripture and the event has manifested the contrary, that the
true was here and there a godly man outwardly mixed with the common Israelites.

Object. You allege, Such a church there was in Israel among the ten
apostated tribes.

Answ. 1. How that of the Israelites was through all the time of that
defection, is uncertain: this we are sure of, that there was then a true Church
in Judah and Benjamin, and the Temple at Jerusalem was the common center of
Worship for all the Israelites: and it is more then probable, that the godly of
Israel have had some relation to the Church of Judea, and went at times
appointed to Jerusalem. But without all doubt, none of the Order of Jeroboam's
Priests were true Officers, nor any succession derived from them: the like may
be said of the Pope, and of your investment coming from him.

2. It is untrue, that there were always such Assemblies: for in the days of
Ahab, Elijah the chiefest Prophet knew of no such congregatings, but testifies
that he only was left, 1 King. 19.18. So then the seven thousand reserved must
be a hidden number, known only to the all-seeing eyes of Eternity, and not
obvious in open Assemblies. Besides, this pertains not to the Antichristian
deluge, and does not at all prove your point. Neither does that of the Jews
captivity: for they being amongst Heathens and those wholly without, did not
involve themselves into their Paganism, but were entire within themselves in
the service of their God exercised in their own Synagogues, were distinct in
their Genealogies from the Babylonians; their Priestly Office came not in the
least from the Idol-priests of Bell, but descended without any such
interception from the Order of Aaron: on the other side, the Saints in the
mystical were amongst such, who though in their Order Babylon, yet were not
without the Covenant, but were Israelites, amongst whom they were visibly
incorporated, and not severed either in Membership or Office, which your self
confesses to be the condition of your first and choicest men, in the thirtieth
page of your book. That of the Israelites, and this of outward Babylon, though
in many regards it symbolizeth the Antichristian stand, yet not in all; there
being something more and proper to this later, which none of the former could
challenge.

Object. But (say you) such Assemblies there were through the Antichristian
defection.

Answ. This we utterly deny, and have manifested the contrary.

Object. But to confirm the constant succession of visible Churches, you
propound these Scriptures: Isai. 9.7. Dan. 2.44. Psalm. 110.2.

Answ. We have assented to and proved, that there was faith, and some degree of
its profession visible in the lowest ebb of Antichristianism: but it yet
remains for you to evince, that the true visible constituted Church had its
perpetual abiding. Your text Isai. 9.7, makes it good, that Christ rules in
the kingdom of grace; but not a syllable of his constant reigning in visible
Church Order is there specified. We conclude thus far with you, that Christ
sits on this throne to order and establish it with judgment: yet his ordering
is in its dispensations various: it was more open and full in the primitive
glory, more retired and sparing in the Babylonish desertion, it will again be
more manifest when the glory of the first returns. The first word of the verse
is diverse in the reading in the Hebrew copy, it being one thing in the line,
and another in the margin; The line is (...)
our Bibles take the margin: The margin (...)
The line (if beginning with the primitive times) is most concordant with the
other prophecies and the event: the margin (if applied to the Jews last
return, and the kingdom then rising) does best agree with the other Scriptures
speaking of the same time.

Object. But (say you) what is this throne and kingdom of David, but Christ's
visible Church, in which Christ is to sit and reign visibly, as David did in
his kingdom?

Answ. You here confound the effect with its cause, in making this throne to be
the visible Church. David's throne in a Gospel-sence, is the spiritual throne
of grace, which is the center of Divine Majesty, the common fountain from
whence all the influences of grace do flow, and that before which the Saints
approach; and Christ sits upon this throne of majesty in the heavens, where
neither he, nor his throne, are to be seen with bodily eyes, as David and his
throne were, but are only belieft by the piercing eyes of faith. Also the
kingdom is but an effect arising from that incomprehensible cause, not the
cause it self: and this may be more open or more hidden, according to the
various administration of him that sits upon the throne. Again, the throne of
David was not visible in the Babylonish captivity.

Your next text, Dan. 2.44, belongs to the victorious kingdom of Christ in
these last days, prevailing over Antichrist, and the whole Roman Monarchy.
For, 1. This Image comprehends all the beauty and strength of earthly Monarchs
from Daniel's days downward, the last whereof was the Romans. 2. The last of
Iron is distinct from the three foregoing of gold, silver, and brass. Now, as
the three former metals pictured out three several kingdoms, different both in
their rise, language and regiment from each other, to wit, the Babylonians,
Persians, and the Grecians: so this last of Iron, being of a distinct metal
from the other, must type out another Monarchy; even the next set apart from
the former three preceding: hereupon the Spirit, verse. 40, calls it a fourth
kingdom: now the fourth from the Babylonians, and the next following the
Grecians, was the Romans, who were differing from the rest, in their original,
people, and government: The Roman Monarchy, Dan. 7.23, is entitled the fourth
kingdom. Furthermore, the strength of the Iron exceeding, breaking in pieces,
treading down, subduing all the rest, and devouring the whole earth, can agree
with no other but the Romans. The Seleucians it cannot be: for that was but
part of the Grecians, and is described to be one wing, one head, one horn of
the third divided unto the four winds, and inferior to the first rise
thereof, Chap. 7.6. Chap. 8.8. Chap. 11.4. Again, the stone interpreted to be
the kingdom, not the king alone, breaks in pieces this of the Iron; and it was
not the Saints of the most High, but the Heathen Romans, that subdued the
Seleucians. Now this fourth kingdom of the Romans is dashed into shivers by
the Stone, the Saints, in the time when this prophecy is fulfilled: and that
it was not in the age of Christ's Incarnation: for then Augustus Caesar
reigned, under whom that Empire was in the highest degree of its glory and
strength. Florus reports of that time, Hic est Romani Imperii juven^s, and
quasi robusta maturitas: This age was the youthly state, and mature manhood of
the Empire. The destruction of this last kingdom is reserved for these last
days, to be accomplished by the Angel pourers, Rev. 16. Chap. 18. 3. The Stone,
having broken down and driven away all the former image, becomes a great
mountain, and fills the whole earth; and so must reign alone, answerable to
that magnificent kingdom, Rev. 19 6. Ze^h. 14.9. When the highest Saints take
and possess the kimgdom of the former Monarchies, Dan. 7.18, 22. This they did
not in the first Gospel-day, when all the power of the Civil Rule was in the
jurisdiction of those Romans, to whom the Church at that time was by the
Ordinance of God subservient. 4. This illustrious kingdom thus filling the
earth, is said to be everlasting, and ever to enjoy the same plenitude of
regiment, verse. 44. Chap 7.27. But even the Ecclesiastical Government of the
primitive, was seized on by Antichrist and the Nations, who had all the outward
court given them, and who trod the holy city under foot, in which time the
Church had a great sink and decrease.

Your next Scripture, Psalm. 1 10.2, speaks of the times of the vials, when the
Iron rod of Christ's strength shall be sent forth out of Sion to bruise his
enemies: and then Christ in his separated people rules as a conqueror over his
adversaries, who (though never so numerous) shall be brought in subjection, and
such as withstand shall be broken in pieces. Hereupon the Spirit by the Kingly
Prophet gives sweet and seasonable counsel, Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12. Be wise now
therefore, O ye kings, be learned, ye judges of the earth: kiss the Son, lest
he be angry, etc.

That we may avoid needless tautologies, we shall answer to the relation
betwixt Christ and his Church, as he is a Head, a King, a Husband; and she a
Body, a Kingdom, a Wife: as also to your supposed inference of our bringing a
notable alteration in Christ, in the fourth Paragraph, Sect. 6.

But here you bring three Reasons why this relation must be visible.

Object. 1. They are visible things by which this relation is typed out, and so
must point out a visible (you mean a constituted) Church.

Answ. It is usual in Scripture to figure out matters mystical and hidden, by
things visible and apparently known to us: that by objects natural and obvious
to our senses, our minds may be raised to the contemplation and comprehension
of things divine and supernatural. Thus the relative dependence between Christ
and a believer, is too too subtle and sublimate to be beheld with bodily eyes:
also Christ ascended as the Head, the King, and Husband, and the throne of
grace before which we make address, though typed out by visible subjects, yet
are all to us invisible: but the dispensation d^maning hence, is sometimes more
conspicuous, sometimes more internal, according to the pleasure of Gods own
working.

Object. 2. The Church invisible, as so, is unknown, and wholly unseen to men:
and Christ's invisible rule cannot by men be discerned: and what honor were
this to Christ, to reign only invisibly? etc.

Answ. We deny not that there was some degree of the profession of faith always
existing, but not a Church stated, and set in a true visible order. Indeed your
argument appears very plausible to flesh and blood, and makes most for the
Church of Rome, who only in all the Western world can challenge a continued
succession of such a visibility: of which she most boasts, and lays as the
chiefest pillar to bear up her Babylonish fabric. If then the glory of Christ
cannot be uphold, unless it be carried on with such an open regiment, this
deformed Whore is either the only beautiful Spouse, or else could have no
honor in the world. This Maxim of yours smells strong of a carnal spirit, and
tends to bring Christ to Lo here, or Lo there; even in that time, when neither
the first nor the last open days of the Son of man were to be seen, Luke,
17.22. If your eyes were further enlightened, you might discern, that the
strength of Christ is made perfect in weakness; and magnifies it self as well
in the lowest estate of his Church, as in its highest exaltation, though more
eclipsed from his peoples apprehension. And thus the Lord is magnified, that
though he suffered Antichrist to usurp all the external Order of Ecclesiastical
Regiment, and make it a desolate wilderness; yet in this earthly low stand of
the Saints captivity, he reserved to himself a sealed elect number, whom he
upheld by his own immediate power and gift, against whom the gates of hell
could not prevail; and will at last more abundantly manifest his power,
justice, mercy, and love, in the destruction of this man of sin, and returning
to his people more outward magnificence then ever they enjoyed before: it being
the wisdom of God, to make humility the way to honor, the darkest night of
misery, to bring in the brightest day of peace and happiness. Again, when
Antichrist (as you confess) had seized on all the outward court of Order, it
would have been no honor to the King of kings to dignifie this visibility in
the possession of another, with the lively breathings of his Spirit, but rather
very derogatory for him to give his glory to another; and thereupon he cast it
out.

Object. 3. Where faith is, there it will be visible.

Answ. Your self holds that infants may have the being of faith, yet the
manifestation thereof appears not unto us, Psalm. 22.9, 10. Romans 9.11, 12, 13.
but true it is, that when Christians are of years, faith will show it self in
the fruits of visible profession, in a godly and holy life, and exercise of the
duties of Piety. 2. Visible believers in the first initiation of visible
constitution, cannot state themselves, but must first be stated by Christ, by
the pouring out of his Spirit, as is at large cleared in the second Querie of
the Cessation.

Object. But to prove a visible constituted Church through the Antichristian
times, you instance first the two Witnesses, Rev. 11.3.

Answ. These Witnesses are not visible stated Churches, but such men as held
forth the light of Ministry for the feeding of the elect in the wilderness of
Babylon. For, 1. They have a true relation only to the hidden mystical temple,
without any reference to the outward court. 2. Their clothing, to wit, their
outward investment into membership and office, was with sackcloth, as is before
spoken. The Primitive clothing was with the Sun, even when the Dragon raged
against the woman in the height of cruel persecution. 3. Their visible stand
was in the wilderness, Chap. 12.6, 14, and in the streets of the great city
where their bodies lay when slain, and on which earth they stood for some space
after the Spirit of life re-entered, verse. 8, 11: and in this terrene station
they prophesied before or in the presence of earthly Hierarchies, who sat in
the temple, or rather the court without, as God. The most of these Witnesses
were in the Romish Church, who cried against the known corruptions, and
administered spiritual food to the elect scattered in that confusion.

Object. It has been frequently objected by others, that these are
Candlesticks, which never denote visible Churches.

Answ. Candlesticks are not always in Scripture figures of Churches, but
sometimes do signify the vessels holding forth the light of Ministry: in this
sense is it understood, Matthew. 5.15. Mark 4.21. Luke 8.16. Chap. 11.33. where
the light is the Ministry, the Candlestick the organ or man containing that
gift, the house with those truly entering therein, the Church. And that it is
so taken here, will plainly appear by an exquisite view of the text. For, 1.
The Church is in this place delineated by another figure, viz. the Temple,
verse. 1, and not by the Candlesticks; and that house is also an invisible
temple shut up from the outward court, verse. 2. 2. When Candlesticks do
resemble Churches, they are ^ver set first in figure, Zech. 4.2. Rev. 1.12: but
here they are placed last. 3. They must here belong to Ministry, because the
Prophets themselves who prophecy, are said to be Candlesticks: whereas when
the Candlesticks denote Churches, the Ministers are pictured by another
distinct figure, to wit, by stars, Chap. 1.16, 20. 4. These are placed after
the olive trees, as drawing the oil therefrom: and the first relates to their
qualifications, the last to their dispensation. The Prophets are called
olive trees and Candlesticks, as they are the instruments that bear, hold, and
dispense the grace and gift of prophecy.

Object. There were (say you) Saints so manifesting themselves, so discovered
by the Beast and whore, by their opposition which they made to their ways,
against whom the beast made war, overcame them, and were drunken in their
bloods.

Answ. The Saints for many hundred years in the West, even since the Apostacy,
were not at all visibly distinguished from the Romish Church, but lived there
without any open persecution. Indeed within these later Centuries, God raised
up more valiant champions, who upon some discovery, more manfully testified
against the great Beast of Rome, then before, who was then only extant known
to be so; and disclosed further the corrupt doctrine of that
grand-mother-whore; against whom that beast at last raged and prevailed by open
persecution. But the most of these also were here and there a man living and
dying visibly in that Church: witness the Martyrs here in England, which you
may read in. M. Fox his book of Martyrs. If some were at last distinguished
from that great Whore, tell us what distinction of Office they had descending
from the primitive Order, or upon what ground they were stated in
Church Discipline. Surely they living within the compass of the 1260 years,
must be clothed with sackcloth, and stand outwardly in that earthly confusion,
or wilderness, and some of late in the secret chambers. The saving and
incorrupt truths by them professed were chiefly in point of doctrine. They
unmasked only the Beast and Whore of Rome, but were blinded in
daughter-harlots arising then and after; and the Lord in times of ignorance
over-looks the weakness of his sincere servants. If the Lord had designed a
continued chain of true visible stated Churches (as you insinuate) through
every age of this defection severed and apart from Rome, then, without doubt,
he would have reserved a succession of office pure amongst the said Churches:
nay, if there had been true official Ministers all along in those Churches,
then no question but such a lineal descent is extant, whence the outward
function of the Ministry should be deduced without being beholding to the key
of Rome. But we know not of any investment coming from Christ and his Apostles
with us, but what is derived from the Popish Clergy; and you in effect confess
as much in the 30 Page of your book, that Luther and your choicest men had
their external calling thence: and so much must you grant of your own, unless
you renounce your genealogy. Now if the key, pit and smoke in Rome became
bottomless, as it did, Rev. 9. then no offspring issuing from her can be
grounded in the truth of order. Therefore were there the like beasts in the
Churches you plead for, who persecuted the godly by sword, banishment,
imprisonment, blood, when they were anatomized, as the Pope their forefather
did before.

We now come further to expostulate about the temple and the outward court.
Rev. 11.1, 2.
Master Elmestone holds the temple to be a true visible stated Church; and the
Court without to symbolize such a false Church state, which never was bottomed
in the truth.

On the other side, we maintain the temple to decipher the mystical union of
the one hundred and forty four thousand sealed or elect ones, whereby they are
built up a spiritual house: and the Court without to be the externality of
Ecclesiastical order, which was established by Christ in the primitive times,
and true; but after being corrupted by Antichrist, was rejected by the Spirit,
and false.

Object. You allege, That the temple is the visible, because measured.

Answ. This measurement was not in the visibility of Church Order, but only in
the inward work of true grace, and worship thence arising; as will appear by
these reasons.

1. Because when the visible Church is measured, it has always degrees of
outward demensions and distances specified in the measuring; as of the new
Jerusalem the city was found by the golden rod to be ten thousand furlongs, the
walls one hundred forty four cubits, Revel. 21.15, 16, 17. also Ezekiels temple
and City, from Chap. 40. to the end of the book: whereas this has no such
demensions specified in the meting.

2. Because the outward court (which we have proved in the Cessation to be the
externality of Church Order) was excluded, and forbidden by the spirit to be
measured; which must infer that nothing was here comprehended, but the inward
rooms of the hidden man, with worship, etc. flowing from those intimate
springs of grace.

3. Because only the sealed elect number remained, Rev. 7.3, etc. Chap. 9.4.
Chap. 14.1. Chap. 13.8. Mat. 24.24.

Object. Those sealed ones were (as you truly say) elect saved ones; but in all
ages many more have made profession then the elect: and so during the Apostasy
many beside the sealed ones did help to make up a visible Church.

Answ. In a true stated Church, hypocrites may be circumscribed within the
compass of a true external stand, and so may have an outward measurement: but
when the exterior order is excluded, and the measurement only internal to the
elect, who are visible in false stands (as here they are in Babylon) then such
who have only an outward station, must be wholly shut out, they standing solely
in the outward court of false constitutions. And therefore here all the world
of Israelites worshipped the beast, except those whose names were written in the
book of life of the Lamb, slain from the foundation of the world, Chap. 13.8.
and Chap. 17.8. none are excepted, but those who were written in this book from
the foundation of the world. So that here, all save the elect are excluded, and
that for one thousand two hundred and sixty years, Chap. 14.1, which razeth
your next argument from its sandy foundation. Their sealing notes their
confirmation of the truth of grace: and that being in their foreheads, argues
some measure of visible profession.

We shall in the last place deliver Master Elmestons assertion touching the
outward court, which he affirmed in a verbal dispute, which was after this
manner; That it typed out the state of a false Church, and that it never had
any measurement at all.

To which was then answered, That it did prefigure the outward order, or
visibility of Church-constitution; and three reasons were produced to prove it,
drawn from the text, which you may find written in the Cessation; also, that
this was true till here rejected by the Lord Jesus, and could not denote that
which never had any approved measurement, as was then likewise cleared by these
following arguments.

1. By way of allusion to the temple of old: That as there was not only a
Temple within, whereinto the Priests and none but they might enter, but also a
Court without erected by Divine institution, and sanctified by the Spirit, into
which the Priests and people had access in common; both which made a full and
complete temple: so in the primitive times there was the internality of true
grace, wherein properly the elect (who only were a royal Priesthood) had
interest; and likewise an outward order built up, and breathed into by divine
inspiration, into which Christians visibly professing (some true, and some
seeming) came: and both these together concurred to make a full visible Church.

2. From the words of the text, the court without cast out, which the original
phrase (...) signifies: Nothing in propriety of speech can be said to be cast
out, that was not before within: Ishmael was a member in the family of Abraham,
before he was excluded; none can be excommunicated, unless he be first a
brother; so this being now cast out, argues it to be till then approved.

3. From the reason rendered by the Spirit why it was excluded [for it is given
to the nations] which implies that it had measurement till it was thus given,
and corrupted by Antichrist.

Some trifling objections were made by Master Elmestone against these, which
(partly for brevity sake, and partly because I conceive them not to be
material) I shall now omit. If he think them to be otherwise, and be pleased
to publish them, I shall be ready (with Gods assistance) to give a reply. Thus
much of the fourth Section: we shall now pass on to the fifth.

Section 5.
The fifth and last Section is taken from Mat. 24. where the visible models,
Lo here, and Lo there, or as Luke has it, Chap. 17.23, See here, or see
there (being thus rejected by Christ) are false, and deceivable; the powers
that bear, and teach them up, are false Christ's or Antichrists, and false
Prophets; the spheres wherein they rule, are the wilderness, and secret
Chambers.

For the clearer apprehending of this Scripture, it may be requisite, first to
explain something on the Chapter, and after to declare your mistakes thereon.

To begin with the unfolding of the Chapter, we are to consider, there were
three questions demanded by Christ's Disciples, verse. 3.

The first, When these things shall be, to wit, the destruction of Jerusalem,
and dissolution of the temple spoken of in verse. 2.

The second, What shall be the signs of his coming; that is, of his bright
ministerial coming, and dispensing his spirit-like lightning.

The third, The signs of the end of the world, to wit, of the great and last
day of judgment, and the general resurrection. To which the Lord methodically,
and in order one after another answers, with the signs thereof, from verse.
the 15. to verse. the 32. To the first, from verse. 15. to verse. 23. To the
second, from verse. 23. to verse. 30. To the third, verse. 30, 31. To omit the
first as that impertinent to this subject, we shall begin with the second, of
his coming like lightning.

The signs of the second are double.

1. The long foregoing delusion of Antichristianisme, abiding till his bright
coming, from verse.23, to verse. 27.

2. The short noted immediate signals, as the darkning of the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, and the shaking of the powers of heaven, verse. 29.

If you desire to understand what these figurative speeches mean, you may know
by these places, Isa. 34.4. Joel 3.15. Hag. 2.21, 22. and by the subversion of
outward Babylon set forth by the like metaphors, Isa. 13. 10. Also by the
overthrow of the Jewish Church, Joel 2.30, 31. And that of the Roman Heathen
Emperors, Rev. 6.12, 13, 14.

The signs preceding the third, to wit, the end of the world, are also twofold.

1. The appearing of the Son of man in heaven, that is, his bright coming like
lightning.

2. The mourning of all the tribes of the earth upon the sight of the same
glorious dispensation, Psalm. 97.4. Zech. 12.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. of the Jews for
their long blindness in Judaisme, of the false stated Churches amongst
Christians for their defilements in Antichristiansme, of Turks and Heathens for
their Mahometisme and gross Idolatry.

Again, we are to mind, that the long Babylonish delusion, of the sign of the
second, contains two distinct seasons.

1 The time of the tribulation of the godly, by the overswaying power of the
false Antichristian Churches; which by comparing this with the Revelations,
continued 1260 years, chap. 11.2, 3. chap. 12.6, 14. chap. 13.5; a remarkable
time, it being engraven in five places of that prophecy, for our more
espiciall remembrance.

2 The time of the Sun and Moons darkning, the Stars falling, etc. to wit, the
season of the vials wrath, wherein the Saints are passing from their former
bondage, and retaliate the reward upon their Enemies, verse. 29; where it is
said, Immediately after the tribulation, to wit, that wrought by the Beasts
prevailing for 1260 years: the word after, notes our another distinct time of
the Sun and Moons darkning, etc. and the Saints lifting up their heads; who at
this time are said to come out of great tribulation, Rev. 7.14; and to get
victory over the Beast, cha. 15.2.: and that this delusion continues the same
season also, is clear from Mark 13.24, where it is said, In those days (to
wit, of the Antichristian deceit) after the tribulation.

This orderly method of the text concurring with the Disciples three questions,
the agreement of the Apocalypse therewith, and the succession of the times so
directly answering, may lead us to conclude, that this notable deceit belongs
to that of the great Babylonish apostacy: yet for the further clearing up this
truth, we shall evidence it by these ensuing reasons.

1 Because Christ marks this out to be the next after Jerusalems destruction:
and the next grand deceiveable evil alteration succeeding to the Church, was
that of Antichristianism.

2 This ominous falsity is evidenced by the Spirit in Luke 17.22, 23, to be
after the primitive, when he says The days will come; and withal, that the
time when they shall say, See here, and see there, is the time of an invisible
day, as is further asserted, They shall desire to see one of the days of the
Son of man (to wit, either that of the primitive, or the latter of his bright
coming) and shall not see it: which most aptly agrees with that dark gloomie
night of Antichristianism, when the Sun and Air were darkened, the day of
Christ's power disappeared, and the Beast had power to prevail, Rev. 9.1 chap.
7.1. chap. 13.5.

3 From the continuance of the same delusion, which was from the end of the
primitive day, till this latter day of his bright coming, which none ever did
but that of the great Antichrist.

4 From the bewitching subtilty of their signs and wonders; which fitly
complies with the first and second beast, who did the like deceitful miracles,
Rev. 13.13, 14: the second beast is there called a false Prophet, implying the
first to be a false Christ, or Antichrist: only there it is typed out by one
false Christ and false Prophet, there being but one in the root, which is man,
ver. 18: here by many, in respect of their particular statings, their diverse
forms, and the different time of their several rises,

5 From the effectual working of this deceit; [They shall seduce (if it were
possible) the very Elect:] nothing that is possible to deceive, but is
subverted; only the Election based on Christ is excepted: which complies with
none but that of the beast, who deceived all universally except the sealed
ones, and them too so far as was possible; only the work of the election, with
that flowed purely from it, was untouched, as is proved in the Cessation.

6 Christ gives a principal and general forewarning, the danger being so great,
which must relate to a notable and epidemical deceit, as was that of the
beast,: this admonition took its effect by the ministry of the third Angel,
Rev. 14.9, etc. who rouzed the godly out of their former sleep. Furthermore, it
cannot be imagined, that our Savior briefly deciphering all the principal
occurrences from the primitive Gospel-day to the end of all things, should let
slip a matter of such weighty, consequence, and so long continuance, without
giving any notice thereof.

We shall in the next come more nearly to the exposition of the text, in which
our Messiah lively emblemes the state of false Churches, wherein the substance
of this deceit does lie: and there we may at once take a survey, 1 Of their
marks. 2 Of their grounds. 3 Of their forms, or rather their Spheres in which
they inhabit.


1 The marks of these falls Churches are four.

1 Their visibilitie in their stative order, Lo, or sea, in that time when the
true Kingdom was within, not to be seen in such an open dispensation, Luke
17.21, 22.

2 The phrase Here and there notes out a manifest place of rest, or sitting
down, fitly representing Church-constitutions: it is the character of the woman
Babylon in this season to sit as a Queen.

3 Their variety, here, and there, which must scatter, whereas the true is
uniforme, and universally gathers the Eagles unto it.

4 The visible Lo or model is first, and then Christ is brought to it, Lor
here is Christ, as if the Spirit of life, and divine primitive power were in
it, when it is but their own spirit, even that of Antichrist ascending from an
humane bottom: hereupon, Luke 17.20, implicitly tells us that it arises from
humane observation of such and such a form drawn from their imaginary
platformes, and forcing Christ unto it: whereas in the true Christ the dead
carcass is there first, who inspires it by the flashing lightning glory of his
Spirit.

2 The grounds are twofold.

1 A false Christ, Antichrist, or a Beast, are persons usurping that power
which is proper and essential to Christ only; and this they assume and use in
constituting visible Churches: hereupon they are said to come in Christ's name,
viz. with his power and authority in pretense, verse. 5, (when in realitie it is
but their own name, Joh. 5.43.) saying, I am Christ, that is, taking up such a
power as peculiarly belongs to him, whose sole prerogative it is to begin
visible constitutions, Psalm. 102.16. Zech. 4.6, 10. Hos. 2.19, 20.

2 A false Prophet is the teaching and managing of the same false power, as
exercising in Ministry all the power of the first Beast or false Christ,
before him, Rev. 13.21.

Both these concur to the making and completing of false Churches: the most
sublime mystery, and quintessence of whose deceit lies in their signs and
wonders, ver. 24. which in Revel. 13.13, is to make fire to come down from
Heaven in the sight of men; to wit, their pretending of the fiery operation of
the Spirit to be in their stative ordinances, with such a show of working like
unto God his working, as if it were Christ's true fire coming down from Heaven,
when indeed it is but ignis culinaris, or rather ignis fatuus, a strange
feigned fire of their own kindling; and verse. 15. he had power to give life to
the Image of the Beast by his spiriting these stative ordinances, which when
true, are the image of Christ; when false, the image of a Beast: all which they
so set in the face of men, as if it were celestial, and the lively breathings
of the Spirit: and this kind of spiritual magic, may be fitly termed signs
and wonders, that do the more universally seduce, because they seem to be
heavenly, and to be derived from Apostolical power.

3 The forms or spheres of these false Churches are pictured out by a double
figure; the Wilderness, and the secret chambers.

1 The Wilderness. This is not a proper, but a metaphorical Wilderness (as the
Sun, Moon, Stars, and the powers of heaven are, and so are the lightning, the
dead carcass, and Eagles) and pictures out a visible station resembling a
desert; which most congruously complies with that of National Churches, whether
Romish, Episcopal, or Presbyterial. Hence the woman, when once she declined
into a National stand, is said to fly from Heaven into the Wilderness, Revel.
12:6. Hence is she said to go out of the City to dwell in the field of this
Babylon, Mica. 4.10. Likewise the great strumpet was seen of John in the
Wilderness, Rev. 17.3, thereby showing that her place and residence should be
in the like earthly confusion: for John beheld her sitting in that desert upon
her scarlet-colored Beast, who by his name and similitude is a Beast of the
desert, or wild beast, chap. 13.1, 2. Also outward Babylon alluding to the
mystical, is said to be built for them that dwell in the Wilderness, Isa. 23.13.
The Sword of the Nations is called the Sword of the Wilderness, Lament. 5.9.
and Israel scattered amongst these Babylonish people, is said to be planted in
the Wilderness, in a dry thirsty and land, Ezekiel. 19.13. in which confusion, at
last after seventy years she found favor, Jer. 31.2. So that in a spiritual
sense, that which is barren, earthly, and confused, is figuratively named a
Wilderness.

But to return to our subject, we will show you how fitly this type of the
wilderness symbolizeth the abovesaid national Churches. That as the wilderness
is a low terrene place, in comparison of the heavenly orbs; so are these, if
balanced with the high celestial glory of the primitive: as that is open and
vast; so are these wide, spacious and open for all of the nation, good and bad,
to enter: as that is a dry thirsty ground, and barren of true natural
fertility; so are these of spiritual: as that is full of thorns, brambles,
heath, fruitless trees; so are these of such men whose end is to be burned, and
of many superstitious inventions: as that is a confused rough place, where men
may lose themselves; so are these a Chaos, or Babylon, wherein millions of
souls have been lost eternally: as that is termed a houling wilderness, full of
wolves and such like wild beasts, who tear, devour and kill; so are these of
such beasts that have the mouths of Lions, the paws of Bears, the enticing
cruelty of the Leopard, with swarms of Locusts; who though they come in sheeps
clothing, yet inwardly, are ravening wolves. The true Church in this confusion
is as a Lilly, not in the garden, but amongst thorns; and Christ to his as an
aple-tree, not in the orchard, but amongst the trees of the wood. And though
these be something differing in their forms, yet, as national, all make up one
great City; and have all such hierarchies as concur in the same root: and they
have all the marks and grounds before declared.

2. The second Character is that of the secret Chambers, which are not outward,
but mystical, or more secret retired Church-models resembling these Chambers.
The Spirit could not take up a more exact symbol to figure out our lesser
stated bodies, then this of the secret Chambers.

For besides, that they foot upon man, and have all the marks and grounds above
expressed, they concur in all points with this type. That as the Chambers are
set in figure after the wilderness; so did these arise for time after national
Churches, even in the latter and declining age of the Antichristian kingdom:
as they are severed from the open face of the desert; so are these sequestered
from the national opacity: as they are small compared with the vast wilderness;
so these are but little corporations if considered with the former: as they are
a more curious structure then the rude Chaos of the other; so these seem to be
more orderly buildings then the national: as they notwithstanding are only
framed by the skill and wisdom of man; so these pertaining to the outward
rejected court, and being not grounded on the pouring out of the Spirit, must
be a building made with hands, a mere humane architect: as they are Chambers in
the plural number, many; so are these manifold, being erected answerable to the
several and discording Idaea's of the artificers: as Chambers are severed from
the open air, and parted one from another by walls; so these divide themselves
by their dissenting constitutions, not only from the nations, but one from one
another, as by so many bars of partition: as they are built up and closed in by
their respective walls, that a man within cannot get fairly out, unless the
door be opened; so these are kept retired by their statings, and by types and
covenants so walled in, that one entered, can hardly get out without some
pretense of perjury, if not excommunication, unless the door of their consent
be granted: as they are secret; so these are outwardly more reserved, and
mystically concealed under a more specious show of holiness, and similitude to
the primitive pattern; and are thereby more difficult to be disclosed; howbeit,
being but dark imaginary Chambers of their own invention, Ezekiel. 8.12. they
cannot in these secret rooms be hid from the discovery of truth, Jerem. 23.24.
Isa. 42.22. as the Chambers are first built, and then Christ is forced into
them; so every one of these divisim first bring, and then enclose Christ within
the narrow limits of their own private corporations, to which they in a
peculiar manner tie up all the promises. The Chambers are not situate in a
heavenly sphere, but in the foresaid earthly wilderness, though their
parvitude, secrecy, retired closures, their exquisite artifice seem to allude
to such constitutions as consist of more choice and culled-out men, and are
more methodically framed, and nearer to their first pattern then the former.
Thus we may take notice that these two metaphors of the wilderness, and secret
chambers so lively type out false stated Churches, as he that runs may read it,
and admire the wisdom of the Lord Jesus, who contracted the perfect image of so
large a subject, into such a compendious platform.

Having thus explained our sense upon the text, we shall now give reply to your
exceptions against it. Ours to you was thus. Satan's subtilty was deep and
deceivable in all ages; but the chiefest strength of his art and policy was
combined in making up the man of sin: all deceivableness of unrighteousness,
the whole mystery of iniquity is in him contracted, who being now by the
glorious beam of truth, clearly discovered in the Romanist, Episcopacy, etc. to
be a false Christ in the wilderness, has since entered into his secret
Chambers, where he seemingly puts on a more curious dress of holiness and
purity, nearly resembling the wedding garment of the primitive Church; that
thereby he might the more effectually deceive (if it were possible) the very
elect.

Object. Against this you oppose, That this place in Matthew belongs not to the
Roman Antichrist, but is meant of such who take on them to be Christ in person,
as did Benchocab amongst the Jews, and Hacket with his company in England.

Answ. These were false Christ's or Antichrists, who in pretense were for Christ
(they coming in his name) and yet in reality were against him, as is before
declared: neither was any that took on them to be Christ in person, so subtle
and prevalent in false signs and wonders, as to endanger the elect, and
subvert all Christians besides; nor did any such continue through all the times
of the Apostasy till the day of Christ's appearing like lightning, nor did they
bring such a general and long tribulation, out of which the godly at last do
come, nor does the figure of the wilderness and secret Chambers fitly allude to
those who took on them to be Christ in Person; but all these properties with
the rest above specified most exactly concur with the great Antichrist, whether
Romish, Episcopal, or elsewhere, and none but in him. As for Bencocab, he was a
Jew, and seduced none but Mosaical Jews, who soon found him (as you confess) to
be an impostor, and therefore called him Bencosban, the son of a lie: his
deceit was to the Jews only, of short continuance, and did not at all endanger
Christians, much less the elect amongst them. As for Hacket, he was an obscure
man, and did not involve England, much less the Christian world in his private
error, which was not known of most; or if it had, was too too gross to delude
so universally. The special warning of Christ to beware, infers a greater and
more mystical subtilty, then were Bencocabs, or Hackets.

Object. But (say you) this false one in the wilderness, cannot be applied,
much less appropriated to the Roman Antichrist, who has not acted his part in
a desert, but has set as God in the Temple of God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. and ruled
with pomp over nations.

Answ. 1. We did not appropriate him to the Pope, but granted the Bishops and
national Presbyters also to have an interest in him, who mingled all together,
complete this false Christ in the wilderness.

2. This wilderness is not a proper (as you carnally apprehend) but
metaphorical speech, and alludes to such a way as resembles a desert, which is
cleared above.

Now though such worldly pomp may appear very majestical to flesh and blood,
yet in the Spirits judgment, and in a mystical sense, it is a desolation,
being barren and void of spiritual fruitfulness. Thus outward Babylon was the
glory of kingdoms, the golden city, anc very magnificent in the eyes of natural
reason; yet together with her nations is called a wilderness, as before. So
Rome the head and mother of this mystical Babel is (as you assert) to a carnal
judgment a great and stately City, and ruled over multitudes of people; yet
together with her nations, compared with the primitive heavenly glory of
Christianity, is a mere desert: as says the Prophet, Isa. 65.10. Sion is
become a wilderness. That Church which in the first Gospel-day was Sion in the
beauty of apostolical order, afterward having such a desolation and confusion
of her first Gospel Order, so great a famine of the word of God, so many
thorns and briars in her, and usurping a terrene national hierarchy, with
multitude of ravenous devouring beasts, together with a pompous show of humane
Ceremonies, Canons, etc. might most fitly be styled an earthly wilderness, she
being worldly in her foundation and whole artifice. The place in 2 These. 2.4.
in which Antichrist sits, is called the temple by a Synecdoche, the whole for
the part, to wit, for the outward Court: for no more was given to the Nations
over whom he rules as God, then the outward Court, Rev. 11.2. but the temple,
verse. 1. within, to wit, the inward rooms of the hidden man, that beast never
reigned over, it being sustained by Christ: and this you must assent to, unless
you make Rome to be a true Church, and to have true measurement: this text of
the Apocalypse, interprets that of Paul: and the same outward Court was by the
Antichristian impiety made a wilderness.

You grant, That the Brownist, Dippers, etc. invite into secret chambers.

Answ. If so, then surely it is very improbable, that Christ should pass over
in utter silence the great beast of Rome, the head of all the rest, which for
many ages did so universally deceive the world; and hint only upon the last,
and least. It is not safe to tax Wisdom it self with such an oversight, not to
close up your eyes against the light of so clear a prophecy.

You further inquire, Whether the calling of men into houses, parlors, and
Chambers, do not reflect, etc.

Answ. These Chambers are not proper, but figurative Chambers, as before is
showed: and preaching and praying in houses, are not, as barely considered,
these false narrow rooms: for the Apostles went about from house to house; and
Christ has promised his Spirit to those who truly worship him in any place
whatsoever.

You tell me, That mutato nomine, de me fabula narratur: the fable may be told
of me.

Answ. If any can tax me with false doctrine, or touch us in out call for or
walk in separation, let him come forth: we do not bring Christ to any
particular stating, so to say, Lo, nor bottom our union on a narrow
corporation; but separating from all these restraints, we bear up our spiritual
relation with all the godly wherever scattered, and endeavor to bring them off
from these bestial formalities which bondage the Saints, and divide Christ to
Lo here, and Lo there; that renouncing these, they may join together with one
consent in the way of separation, wherein Christ is gone forth, that so they
may get full victory over the beast; and this is not to bring into, but pull
men off from their inthralings either in the wilderness, or secret Chambers. I
will not say, Fabula de te narratur, as making the oracle of Truth to be an old
wives fable, which your inversion against me is: but whether for you to take up
a new power to state Churches, and to make members and officers, upon your own
call, name, time, spiriting, and to show such signs and wonders in inspiring
you stative Ordinances, some whereof are mere inventions; for you, I say, to
begin such a narrow, limited, obscure and unwarrantable work upon your own
observation as a false Christ, and teach it up as a false prophet, be not
numbered amongst these secret Chambers, we leave it for wise and impartial men
to determine.

You indeed plead for national Churches, and are officiated from their
hierarchies, being in your confession in the wilderness; but in your walk as
those in the narrow rooms.

Conclusion.
For conclusion and close of this subject, we acquainted you, that these latter
Ordinances of Ordination, Confirmation, etc. have a being in the Scriptures,
and the mind and desires of the faithful; and that we carry them along with us
in our journey of separation (as the Israelites of old did the vessels of the
temple out of outward Chaldea) but dare not officiate in them within the
territories of Babylon, in which we are, till we have passed by the sixth vail
over the river Euphrates.

Object. If they have a being in the Scriptures, then are they the institution
of Christ, and ought always to be taken up in practice, proved from Mat. 28.20.

Answ. Those Ordinances which have their constant existence perpetuated in the
word by institution and promise, are ever accompanied by the same Word and the
Spirit thereof for their continued use in all convenient times and places (as
you affirm) during the time of their administration; and thus were the former
fort of Ordinances; as Ministry, Prayer, etc.

But for others that are so upheld, though their being may remain in the
Scriptures, yet their vital existence by some occasions, and in some seasons
may fail, lie deserted, and their dispensation resolve into its prime original
cause; from whence till it flow forth again into these channels, they cannot be
made use of without presumption, as bottoming on the name and power of man.
Thus the vessels and ordinances proper to the legal temple, even when that was
destroyed, and the vessels carried into Babylon, had an institution and being
in the Scriptures and minds of the godly, yet lay void of their ministration,
and could not be officiated with either there, or after in their journey of
separation, till they were come to Sion, and there sanctified. Thus also, under
the Gospel, Ministry and Baptism were foretold to be successive, as we have
showed from this text of Matthew; and from Isa. 55.11. and Chap. 56.5. and in
that last Scripture, Chap. 56.5. which foretells the continual succession of
Baptism, the place or hand is secluded from the same promise. Nay, when the
externality of government was ruined by antichrist, and made a desolation, then
the administration of Christ was withheld from it, then did the key become
another, then was it cast out by God, Rev. 7.1. Chap. 9.1, 2. Chap. 11.2, and
cannot be assumed but upon an humane bottomless key, till the Lord return into
them by the visible blast of the Spirit, Isa. 32.15. Hence the Lord Jesus
himself, Mat. 24.26. Mark. 13. 23. warnes us to beware of these visible Lo's,
as delusive; and shows that such as build them be antichrists during the
antichristian time. And this command of Christ is to be taught: for as his
dispensions are various, so are his precepts and commands thereunto parallel:
when Christ and his Spirit were in them, he charge his people to observe
them: when he had left, and antichrist had surprised them, he commands his
servants to beware.

Object. You tell us, That herein the example of the Israelites will not help
us, because the use of those vessels was confined to a certain place, the
Temple at Jerusalem: but now God may be worshipped in any place.

Answ. Many of those things which were literal and local to the Israelites
under the Law, are by way of an allegory and in a mystical sense, fulfilled on
the Israel of God under the Gospel. For as then the temple, vessels, and the
use of them were confined to a certain place, mount Sion; so
Gospel-constitutions with the ordinances proper thereto, are limited to a more
manifest dispensation, which makes them a stated visible Sion; and this is
confined to the two days of Christ, the primitive, and his last coming like
lightning; it cannot, but upon an antichristian root, be taken up when the
kingdom is more retired, and neither of these two days are to be seen, Luke
17.22. As Babylon then was an outward place without the precincts of the land
of promise; so is it now a confused Church State, without the limits of a
Gospel Order: then the king of Babel ruinated Jerusalem, and the outward
temple, carried the vessels thereof into the house of his idol-gods, where they
were abused as quaffing bouls to the praise of graven and molten images; now
antichrist, the destroying king, has made desolate the outward count, trodden
the holy city under foot, introduced a false and bottomless key into
Church Government, whereby the ordinances of Ordination, Confirmation, etc. are
changed into the image of the beast: then the Jewish Church was carried from
their native country Canaan, into the wilderness of Babylon, where she was a
captive in a foraign Country, in which she was to abide for the space of
seventy years: now the woman declined from her own heavenly order into the
wilderness of Babylonish constitutions, where she was an exile in a strange
land, and there trampled upon by other lords; in which condition she was to
remain for 1260 years: then the Lord provided a little sanctuary for them in
the place of their captivity, Ezekiel. 11.16. now he had a spiritual place, or
mystical abode for his scattered sealed ones: then the date of those seventy
years being expired, they were called to come out from Chalaea: now the 1260
years of the Saints thraldom being finished, Christ calls, Come out of her my
people: then they had a long and local journey to return to their own resting
place, in the way to which they passed over proper Euphrates; and so at last to
Sion: now the Saints have a spiritual journey of separation by the vials, or a
way cast up for them, in the which they shall go over the figurative Euphrates,
and thence forward till they come to the visible Sion of their own native
order, Revel. 16.12. and that this passage answers to theirs toward outward
Sion, is further evidenced, Isa. 48.20, 21. Chap. 43.14, 19. Chap. 35.8, 10,
where the Saints go out of captivity to a Sion they were absent from before:
then they in their voyage did bear the Lords vessels up to Sion, which were of
no use in their travel, till that was accomplished, and they sanctified in
their peculiar place: now we carry the Ordinances of external
Church Government, as the Lords vessels, in our minds, but dare not officiate
in them till God smoke them from his glory and power; according to that precept
given to the separation of our time, Isa. 52. 11, 12. Be ye clean that bear the
vessels of the Lord, by way of allusion to that of old. Thus we may take
notice, how the wise distributer of the times, does so order his dispensations
in suting season to season, that what was more outward of old, does under
shadows and vailes figure out what is now under the Gospel: he so declares the
end from the beginning, that there is nothing altogether new under the Sun,
Isa. 46.10. Eccles. 1.9. Chap. 3.15. though there be something peculiar to this
latter (as every thing has its appropriated difference:) and I do foresee
wherein Master Elmestone does think to evade: but when he publishes his
oppositions, I shall be willing (if the Lord please) to meet him; and declare
from Scripture the grounds of some dissimiltudes. I shall now proceed to
resolve some doubts made by you in the 9 and 10 Pages of your book about my
study of the Revelations, which I will here divide into a distinct Paragraph.

Paragraph II.
I Acquainted you, that the reason of my diligent search in the Revelation was,
because it being a prophecy of all Gospel Times, contains the full testimony
of Jesus, wherein, as in a cabinet, Gods several dispensations proper to every
period, with Satan's opposite works, are included, etc.

You wish me, in searching the visions of the Apocalypse, together with the
prophets, to do it with humility and self-denial, as not having any conceit
that I have a more excellent spirit of revelation then other men: but rather
mistrust my own conceptions, in which I go alone, unless I can prove that I
have Daniels spirit, or justify it by irrefragable arguments.

Answ. My desire is to dive into these types and Prophecies with an humble and
self-denying mind; and to be free from puffed-up phansies of mine own wisdom
above others, or beyond the measure God has given me: neither do I acknowledge
immediate revelations and inspirations (as Daniel and the Prophets had) to
belong to any in our time, but mediate by the word; and for mine own
particular, am very cautious what I receive for truth upon these Prophecies,
either from myself or others, until by comparing Scripture with Scripture,
together with the event, it be cleared up to me by manifest arguments. As for
other interpreters, some of them I adjudge to be godly, learned and wise, and
highly prize their interpretations wherein I find them to agree with the
natural sense of the text. Yet they sticking in national Churches, and living
in the obscurer times of the tribulation, were so veiled, that they could not
behold the next dispensation of Christ, after the 1260 years should be expired.
But now the date of that time being finished, God has and will raise up a
separated people, who stand at the Glassie sea, Revel. 15.2. in the more bright
unfolding of the mind of the Apostles and Prophets, both for matter, and time,
answerable to the promise made to such a returning people, Isa. 42.16, I will
make darkness light before them. And for my sense upon them, as I have with
diligent circumspection examined it my self; so I wish others truly to weigh it
by the balance of the Sanctuary; and they may find, that it comes not from me,
but from Christ, his Apostles and Prophets; nor to me only, but to all those
freed redeemed ones, whose eyes the Lord has and will inlighten.

Your ensuing discourse on this subject contains two particulars.

Object. 1. The doctrine of Christ's persons, offices, the means to apply him,
faith, the most dangerous errors in faith and worship, are better learned out
of doctrinal texts of Scripture, then out of the Revelations: that holding
forth a story of the enemies of the Church, who they should be, how they should
oppress the Church, and at last be destroyed by her: and of the Churches estate
before the enemies rising, under their power, its deliverance, and glorious
estate in the end; and not of faith, worship and good works.

Answ. 1. The book of the Apocalypse is doctrinal, as well as other Scriptures:
for all Scripture is profitable for doctrine, 2 Timothy 2.61. if all be doctrinal,
then this book is not excluded.

2. The offices of Christ, faith, worship and good works are here figured out
by allegories, which being compared with other plainer texts, make their sense
much more full and bright to such whose eyes are open to discern the mystery.

3. This historical narration does not only show who the Churches enemies are,
but what they are, and in what they chiefly stand, to wit, in the court
without, Chap. 11.2. nor barely describes her persecution by, and deliverance
from, but also presents before us the several dispensations of God, the diverse
outward stands of his people in their distinct periods, both that of the
primitive, that under antichrist, this of the separation, that of the visible
marriage and call returning, and the glory of new Jerusalem; all which are of
great and high concernment for a Christians knowledge and walk, Chap. 1.3. and
the ignorance whereof may occasion deep misery, Revel. 18.4. Chap, 14.9, etc.
Besides, the subject we are treating upon (to wit, who the beast is, what he is
in his latitude, what was the dispensation and stand of the Saints in mystical
Babylon, what it is and ought to be in the season of their separation from her)
is not expressed by plain text of Scriptures, but by dark prophecies and
visions: by way of prophecy it must be, as being to come in the ages when
Scripture was penned: and the Lord in divine wisdom has delivered it more
obscurely, that the common multitude in hearing might not hear, and in seeing
might not see, but (as was fore-prophesied) might be deceived by the beast, and
partake with Babylon in her plagues: as also that the curious art of the Spirit
might the more be magnified, in its wrapping up so much choice matter into such
brief compendious platforms; and at last in its bright explicating those
intricate types and sayings to his despised servants, which are veiled from the
great Rabbis of the time: for such with other causes, these ways and
judgments of God are parabolically delivered: Now we must search them where
they are written, if we intend to find.

Object. 2. The Revelations is veiled with such mystical visions, as very
learned Christians cannot uncover the veil, nor clearly see to the end of them.

An. That this is concealed from such as adhere to national Churches, is true,
it being prophesied that the veil should lie upon nations, Isa. 25.7. Chap.
30.8, 9, 10, 11. Chap. 42. 19, 20. also Chap. 29.10. The Lord has poured out
upon you Prophets the spirit of a deep sleep; and verse. 11, 12. And the vision
of all is become unto you like to a book that is sealed, which men deliver to
one that is learned; saying, Read this, I pray thee; and he says, I cannot,
for it is sealed. And the book is delivered to him that is not learned to read,
and he says, I am not learned.

Here the Spirit meets you in your argumentations of this nature; for those who
are most eminent amongst you allege, that the visions of the Revelations and
Prophets are sealed, or (as you here say) veiled, and we must not presume to
dive into secrets; such as are of a lower capacity, complain that they are
unable to comprehend those mysteries; and tell us that it belongs to scholars
and learned men. The reason of this darkness is, because the Lord has covered
you: But behold, in verse. 18, what the Spirit promises to such whom you
adjudge to be blind and deaf, The deaf shall hear the words of the book, and
the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness. And to
these people who are enlightened to follow the Lamb, this book, together with
the parables of Christ, and the Prophets, are as a cloudy pillar to lead them
in their journey.

This worthy prophecy is the last book given by the Father unto the great
Prophet after his ascension into glory, and sent by his angel unto his servant
John; and is called a Revelation (being delivered to show to his servants
things that were to come) and that of Jesus Christ; an emphatical title, and
proper to this book, wherein it carries a dignity beyond the other Scriptures;
in the front whereof is promised an especial Gospel-blessing to such as read,
hear, and keep the words of this prophecy; (keeping implies both an
understanding of, and a way or walk for his people to keep in) and the
conclusion is sealed with a dreadful curse against adders to, or detracters
from it. This being the last, so nobly given, and peculiarly styled by the name
of Jesus Christ his Revelation, so argues it to be full of majesty, to be the
compleature and perfection of the whole Scripture, and shows the matter to be
very precious, and the comprehension thereof to be of weighty consequence for
the welfare of the Saints. And therefore it will prove our wisdom, being here
invited, as at the one side to count the number of the beast, and distinguish
Gods things from man's, Chap. 13.18; so on the other side to keep close to the
administration therein deciphered for the times in which we live: neither can
any wander therefrom, but he must needs run into multitude of errors and
absurdities.

Sir, we stand amazed, that you should inveavor to deter us from searching into
this prophecy, and eclipse the light thereof from shining into our hearts,
that thereby (if it were possible) you might disrobe us of our blessing: take
heed lest you bring upon your self the curse. However, we shall rather obey the
counsel of the Spirit, in counting the number of the beast by those rules
whereby he is described, and to seek Christ in the path of separation in this
book, where the call and way are lively set before us. I shall have occasion to
speak more upon this subject in the fourth Paragraph.

Paragraph III.
WE informed you, that the foundation of the beast consists in an usurped
power of Church Discipline footed on man's will without the call of God.

Object. Against this is alleged, That the foundation of the beast lies not
in false discipline, but doctrine.

Answ. Doctrine may be considered either in a more general sense, for whatever
may be taught; and thus discipline may be comprehended under that notion, it
being teachable; or else it is used in a narrower and more limited acceptance,
as it is opposed to, and set apart from discipline and worship: and so doctrine
respects the free grace of God, and justification by Jesus Christ: and
discipline is that part of divinity whether conceived, spoken, written or
exercised, which concerns external Church government. Now that the beast
described Revel. 13. grounded himself primarily, originally, and radically in
this latter part of discipline or government, and not in Doctrine, we render
these ensuing reasons.

1. Because the Scripture declares that his residence should be in the court
without, which must pertain to the outside in discipline, and not to the
inside in doctrine.

2. Where Antichrist first grounded himself, there he brought a whole
corruption: for the foundation of the beast, and that of truth, are extreme
contraries, and cannot in the same thing subsist together. Now Doctrine, Christ
believed and professed, were not originally razed in Rome, being all born up by
the power of Christ: but Discipline, as confined to that government peculiar to
a stated-Church, was wholly defaced by that destroyer: hereupon in office, he
was a mere beast; the Angel of the bottomless pit, and the Church became
bottomless of truth, and Babylon.

3. This total defection lasted 1260 years, and some space after till the
seventh vial: during all the former season he was a beast, utterly false in his
office, and that prevailing; all that while the court was excluded, and the
nations had power to trample, Revel. 13.5. Chap. 11.2. And you cannot for shame
affirm, that the Church of Rome has for so long a time been radically false
in doctrine.

4. If the beast had primarily eradicated the principle of doctrine, there
could not have been any breathing for an elect number in such an outward
station, where neither the grace of God, nor Christ, nor justificaby him was to
be found. But the Scripture does tell us that there was a sealed company, a
temple, a woman, and feeding for her in Mystical Babylon; and the event has
cleared, that there were a godly people, a ministry of Christ to nourish them
in the Romish Church, during the abovesaid season, or else it was nowhere for
many ages.

5 It is assented to by all the Protestant party, that the Pope and his
hierarchy make up this beast. Now the foundation of the Pope is his Popedom,
whose rise was (as Mr. Brightman well observes) from the Authority of Peter's
Chair; the ground of his hierarchy is their respective orders and prelacies;
all which chiefly belong to discipline.

6. The Beast carries the woman Babylon, chap. 17.37. and who knows not that
the Pope with his creatures bear up the Romish Church by their ecclesiastical
government?

7 Upon a serious view you may find, that most, if not all the corrupt Tenants
of Rome, meet radically in some false maxims of discipline, which argues that
to be the corrupt root from whence they sprouted forth.

8. The Dragon gave him power, Rev. 13.2, which is the soul and spirit of
Antichrist: The original of doctrine never was in the Devils hands to give, it
being upheld by Christ; but the externallitie of rule, being forsaken and cast
out by God, was left in Satan's power, who inspired the beast therewith;
hereupon ensued a Throne and great Authority; all which appertain to discipline.

Your Arguments on the other side to prove the beast to ground in doctrine.

Object. 1. The foundation of Christian religion lies in Doctrine, therefore
also does does the Antichristian.

Answ. This your consequence carries no convincing force, but rather cusus
contrarium verum est, The contrary sequel may challenge the truer sense: for,
as the naturalists say, Ars incipit ubi natura desinit, Art begins where nature
ends; because natural existences being the workmanship of God, begin first with
the intr^nsecal, and more essential parts, and thence pass outward to the
external; whereas Artificers begin with the exterior or outward part. So
Christian religion being created of God, founds first in the inside of grace
and faith, and from thence operateth to the outside of discipline; whereas the
Antichristion, being an artificial structure, or man in its base, Rev. 13.18.,
initiates in the superficies of discipline, and thence goes gradually into
corruptions of Doctrine.

Object. 2 Your next is taken from John 4.2, 3, He that denies Christ to be
come in the flesh, is not of God, this is the spirit of Antichrist: false
doctrine then about Christ's nature, Persons; and Officers, is the foundation of
Antichristian religion.

Answ. This great Antichrist does not directly deny Christ his natures, persons
and offices, as some petty ones in the primitive time might, but secondarily
and by consequence: The first Popes and Bishops at the entrance of the 1260
years, were so far from denying these, that they published and zealously
preached them up before the world, as you also do: only they laid another
foundation of discipline, by taking the government from Christ his shoulders,
and laying it on their own; and so in their outward order, or rather disorder,
they denied Christ in his natures, persons, and offices; and set up a false
Christ in regiment. This was not so palpable in outward show, but came in
Christ his name under very specious pretenses of Order, Unity, repressing
heresies, holiness, advancing Christ and his Kingdom, and therefore did the
more universally deceive. If the natures, persons, and offices our Lord Jesus
had been directly, originally and fundamentally razed in the Romish Church,
then Gods people could never have remained for so many ages in such a visible
stand.

Object. 3. The Popes extravagant exercise of discipline in excommunicating,
suspending, not only simple persons, but whole Nations, and disposing of all
Ecclesiastical dignities, was founded on this false doctrine, that the Pope is
universal Bishop, Christ's Vicar, etc.

Answ. 1 The same barely considered as a Notion, or thing taught, was not the
groundwork of the beast; but as usurped and laid in discipline: a stone in
the quarrie is not the foundation of a house, till it be hewn out thence, and
disposed in the bottom of the building.

2 This false Tenent of universality and visible headship is not a doctrinal
(if doctrine be minded as opposed to discipline) but a disciplinall principle,
as any rational man may apprehend.

Object. 4 None can comply with the Beast in the foundation of his estate,
without the loss of his salvation; as who does rely on another besides Christ,
and acknowledges him to be supreme head, under him vicar of Christ, and submit
to his new Articles of faith: but many godly Christian have complied with him
in discipline, as Ridly, Latimer, etc.

Answer. 1 The beast (it is true) laid another foundation which primarily and
radically was in discipline, and secondarily struck against doctrine, as is
showed before: his visible headship and vicarship are principles of discipline,
and thence flow his articles of faith. Besides, he was fundamentally both in
matter and form a Beast for 1260 years, and some time after, and so long the
Church is Babylon, as before is cleared; and all that time the world worshipped
him: but his Articles of faith are not of so long standing, most whereof were
framed in the Council of Trent. And then that cannot be his groundwork, which
in order of nature and time followed his being: the Cause must be before the
Effect.

2 This was damnable, as to all, so only to those Christians not truly
grounded upon the Rock Jusus Christ, Rev. 13.8: who having a mere outside,
shallow and sandy bottom, might be radically supplanted by such a total and
delusive externality: but the Elect having a deeper root then that of the
Beast, could not in the inward work of grace be by him subverted, though they
were outwardly clothed with his Livery. Thus Gregory, and other Popes of Rome
before him might be in the Election, yet their Office was essentially a Beast,
they living within the aforenamed time of the tribulation: the like may be said
of Ridly, Hooper, with the rest by you nominated. If this beast had been
originally false in the essentials of doctrine, it had been damnable to them,
as well as to the rest of the world: for if the foundations be utterly
destroyed, how can the righteous stand? Psalm. 11.3.

We desire the Reader rightly to observe the difference betwixt Mr. Elmestone
and us in this particular subject. He pleads, that the Church of Rome is
fundamentally false in doctrine, which you may find by his Arguments above;
and yet that in her order or Church-constitution she is in her groundwork
true: for he avers that the Pope has the true key of Christ's discipline in
Ordination, Excommunication, etc. and that Friars, Monks Priests, Bishops, etc.
were radically right in their membership and orders which they had in and from
that Church, as you may read in the 29 and 30 pages of his book. The former he
is driven to maintain, or else he must contradict in writing, what he and his
party have published for many years in open Pulpits, before the Nation, that
Rome is a false Church, and that woman Babylon described in Revel. 17. that the
Pope is Antichrist, and the beast delineated chap. 13. the latter he is
enforced to manage, or else he must yield their office to be false, which
lineally descended from the Romish Church. But how the body of discipline can
retain life in its binding and loosing, where the soul of doctrine is
departed; or how she can be a bottomless pit, and a stranger to Sion, who is
bottomly true in her order, and has the keys of the Kingdom of heaven to let
into and shut out of such a visible Kingdom, (we conceive) cannot be proved by
Scripture, nor agree with any reason.

On the contrary, we affirm, that Church to be in visible Order false, in her
membership Babylonish, in her office bestial: but yet as the Prophecies
foretold, and the event has manifested, that there should be a godly people in
that false visibility: so for their sakes the Lord reserved the root of the
Covenant, of doctrine, faith, profession issuing thence in prayer, praises,
etc. as also a gifted ministry, coming not from the bottomless key of that
Church, but from the immediate gift of Jesus Christ, which you may see evinced
in the Cessation: the former must be fundamentally false, or else Rome could
not be Babylon; the latter must be radically true, or else there had been no
subsistence for the Saints. And thus we shall end with this third Paragraph.

Paragraph IV.
OUrs in brief was this, that the call of God in our times is only for
separation without stating, or without constituting and modelling visible
Churches, and sitting down therein, Rev. 18.4.

You may find it declared in the Cessation, that there are two bright and
manifest days of Jesus Christ in the clear administration of his glory.

1. That of the primitive apostolical day; which continued till the key of the
bottomless pit was given, and thereby the Sun and air darkened, which shut up
that brightness with darkness of a succeeding night.

2. The day of his coming like lightning, when the marriage of the Lamb does
again return, after the final subversion of Antichrist.

Betwixt these two periods is the time of the Babylonish age, wherein neither
of those two days are to be seen in such an open dispensation of his power;
the kingdom then being inward.

This latter season contains two distinct, special, and very observable
revolutions.

1. The time of the Saints tribulation lasting 1260 years, in which term the
true Church is only a sealed number, disrobed of the beauty of her exterior
order, and visibly seated in the desert of nations, where her choicest
witnesses were outwardly invested with defiled and mournful garments, and
prophesied in that earth before the God of the earth, where the beast had power
to prevail, and tread them under foot, making their estate mournful. This
begun about the year three hundred and ninty, when the Bishop of Rome obtained
the primacy of seat, and is expired in the year 1650, as is showed in the
Cessation: and as that priority was working some space before, yet came not to
its perfaction till after; so the consummation and end of this adverse
condition was preparing a little before, but not completed till some time after
1650. By the end, we may the better understand the beginning: for who knows not
that the Bishops and national Presbytery did trample upon the godly with their
tyrannical exorbitances within the territories of Britanny, till this last
Parliament was convened, and since in Scotland?

2. The next revolution, or time of the second, begins at the end of the first;
when the time of the tribulation procured by the Antichristian apostasy is
blowing over, the Saints begin to lift up their heads, the powers of the Sun
Moon, and Stars to darken, the enemies being rewarded by the law of
retaliation, and that doubled, Rev. 18.6. Mark. 13.24. and this abides till the
end of the vials wrath, the destruction of Babylon, and the marriage of the
Lamb be come. If we be not obstinately blinded, we may observe the admired
judgments of God, prepared a little before, but brought to a head about the
year 1650. For how has the Lord made bare his holy arm in subduing the
proudest of Edoms sons (who cried, Raze it from the foundations) both in
England and Ireland! the very same year the beast in Scotland received a wound
never to be cured: the penal Statutes to force the conscience lay unrepealed
till the year 1650; and within the circuit thereof, our honored worthies (for
ever to remove the sense of our former bonds) have utterly broken the snare,
restored unto our consciences our birthright purchased by our Savior: near
and at this time the discovery of the beast in his full latitude man, began to
break forth in these ends of the earth, the prophecies before veiled to be
unmasked: many of the Lords people seeing the emptiness and formality of their
constitutions, with the said divisions by them caused, begin more zealously to
affect a general, unity of all the Saints, and to prize the power of godliness
before their outward forms, which may shortly bring them into one way of
separation. These unparalled mercies of God, bring to our mind a prophetical
carmen of that sweet singer of Israel, Unto thee O Lord we do give thanks, unto
thee we do give thanks; for that thy name is near, thy wondrous works declare,
Psa. 75.1. It is also prophesied that these admired works should begin in the
ends of the earth, Isa. 52.10, 11. Chap. 24.14, 15, 16. Chap. 42.10. Jer.
31.10. Isa. 30.27, 28, 29; as if it should point out to us who live in the
furthest point then known West and by North. Virgil sings of our Island, Et
penitus toto divisus ab orb Britannus.
Thou Britain which amidst the seas do stand,
Divided is from all the world thy land.


The next thing considerable is, what is the approved way and walk for the
Saints to trace, with their qualifications, during this season. The way and
walk is a coming out from nations and all false statings, Rev. 7. 9. Chap.
18.4. and standing immediately before the throne, without any interposition of
earthly powers, in a congregating assembling way; as also upon a sea of glass,
in the abundant and perspicuous unfolding of the Scriptures compared to glass,
2 Cor. 3.18; which is mingled with the fiery operation of the Spirit to burn up
what is bestial and combustible, and to administer light and heat to the truth,
Chap. 14.3. Chap. 15.2.

The qualities of these separated people are, First, their clothing with white
robes of joy, praises and purity.

Secondly, Palms in their hands, as symbols of their victory over the beast,
his image, mark, name, and the number thereof, Chap. 7.9.

Thirdly, They are styled harpers, Chap. 14.2, as singing the song of Moses and
the Lamb, for their outward and inward redemption from bondage.

Fourthly, These are not defiled with women, or false Churches: for they are
virgins.

Fifthly, They follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, in all his outgoings by
separation; and being the first beginners in this noble walk, are called the
first fruits unto God, verse. 4.

Sixthly, In their mouths or Ministry is found no guile, being therein without
fault before the throne of God.

Here you may behold an alterable stand and condition differing from the former
of the tribulation; and a figure of separation, with distinct assemblings, and
a joyful harping in Ministry, prayer, praisings, etc. but not the least symbol
of sitting down in a visible married way, but rather the contrary.

For first, they are typed out in the form of virgins: when the marriage comes,
they are deciphered in the emblem of a married wife, Chap. 19.7, 8.

Secondly, These virgins sit not down with, but follow the Lamb, and that
whithersoever he goes: the phrase whithersoever intimates a variety of Christ's
outgoing, and the Saints following him in several steps and gradations to a
higher perfection. Their multitude, purity of array, and clearness of
knowledge, are not so exact at the beginning (it being a gradual work) but are
set forth (according to the usual manner of this prophecy) in the first common
type, as they are in the highest degree of their virgin-like perfection, as is
declared in the fifth Section following.

Our Savior presents a most pathetical platform of the separated Saints in
Matthew. 25. by the similitude of ten virgins that went forth to meet the
bridegroom. The time of this going forth is somewhat darkly hinted in verse. 1.
Then shall the kingdom, etc. but because that is obscure, therefore does the
divine Wisdom more brightly declare, in verse. 5, 6. that the time is after the
long absence of Christ in the Antichristian desertion, and the slumbering, nay,
deep sleeping of all in that night: and then verse. 6, at the midnight of
security (to wit, at the harvest, or entrance of the vials wrath, when all
errors in their latitude were grown to their height, and works of darkness in
pride, covetousness, oppression, self-seeking, contention, riot,
lasciviousness, with all wickedness, were committed with a high hand, and ripe
for cutting down) then was the voice heard of the bridegrooms coming, with a
constraining force, Go ye forth to meet him (the sum of the Ministry of the
separation.) The call must be before the going out, Rev. 18.4. for it is that
which awakens, raises and accompanies them in their passage toward the
marriage. The spiritual commerce in buying and selling, the shutting of the
door against the foolish while they were thus trading, their knocking at the
door after shut in hope of admittance, can no way agree with the last general
resurrection, but duly pondered, together with other circumstances, must
belong to the next marriage to come.

In this parable we may see, that there was a space of time wherein the Saints
were Virgins, and a gradual preparing and trimming before entrance into the
wedding-Chamber: and after, verse. 10, Those that were ready, went in with him
to the marriage, answerable to Rev. 19.7, 8, 9; His wife has made her self
ready, has the grant of the wedding garment, and the call to marriage-supper.
Blessed is he that shall be called to this nuptial feast: for none that are
unfurnished, uncircumcised, or unclean, shall enter thereinto, Isa. 52.1. Zech.
14.21; therefore will the door be shut against the foolish virgins. Let us take
the counsel of our Lord, verse. 13, Luke 21.36, Watch and pray, that ye may be
counted worthy to escape all these things ( viz. the vials wrath) and to stand
before the Son of man, when he comes in the glory of his Spirit. The arising,
taking, and trimming of the Lamps both of the wise and foolish virgins, is now:
the discerning of the one from the other, about the sixth vial, Revel. 16.15.
the wedding, is after the vials pouring on Antichrist. As these virgins go from
Babylon, and the Lord by his call, guidance and protection leads before, Isa.
52.12, so do they follow the Lamb: as they have an aspect toward the marriage,
and to Christ coming then in the visible manifestation of the Spirit, so do
they go forth to meet the bridegroom.

There be some other difficulties to be unfolded in this text, which for
brevity I shall here omit, till I see my opponents exceptions.

In the going forth or traveling of these virgins, or returners toward the
marriage, we find two noted and observable passages. The first-is from the
beast, his earth, sea, rivers and fountains, and throne, etc. The second is
over the river Euphrates at the sixth vial, Chap. 16. The Saints going over
this great river, are styled the kings of the East, which is not a proper, but
figurative and borrowed speech, as well as the earth, sea, etc. and are so
termed, partly in allusion to the kings of Judah, who went to the temple by
the way of the East gate, Ezekiel 36.12. partly for that they will be increasing
flourishing kings, resembling the Sunrising, by which they are distinguished
from the kings of nations, who are then declining and upon their fall, like to
the Sun in the West: partly as they will resemble their King Christ, who is
called the Angel of the East, Rev. 7. And these are not only Jews, but Gentiles
also, unless you intend to disrobe them of their kingly dignity, and do suppose
that the Dragon, Beast, false Prophets, kings of the whole world, with their
adherents, do make war only against the Jews, and are not gathered against the
godly Gentiles; an idle fancy to imagine. Besides, these are the men that pour
out their vial into the air.

Thus far in general. But because you seem to require it, and that it may more
fitly answer yours, we shall now divide it into particular Reasons, why this
walk of these harpers is separation without stating.

Reason 1. Our first ground is, because in this season, there is no divine call
for visible Church-constitution or marriage: if there be, we should desire to
be informed where: the highest we can find in the Scripture, is for separation
and rewarding. There was never any new work begun in Church Matters either not
in being before, or after a general and long privation, without a new call to
authorize and empower men for the work: Noah built not his ark till God
commanded him, Genesis 6.14. Abraham departed not from his country till the Lord
said unto him, Get thee out, Chap. 12.1. Aaron assumed not the honor of the
Priesthood, till called of God, Heb. 5.4. nay, Christ our Lord honored not
himself, but he that said unto him, etc. verse. 5. David durst not build a
resting place for his God, without asking counsel of the Prophet, the Lords
oracle; and being forbidden, prepared abundantly for the work, but durst not
attempt to build, 1 Chronicles. 17.1, 3. Chap. 29. his son Solomon, a king of Peace,
being called, begun and finished that magnificent building, 1 Chronicles. 17.12.
Chap. 28.6. the same temple being after ruinated by the king of Babylon, was
not reedified, but by a heavenly voice directing Cyrus and the Jews to do it,
Isa. 44.28. Chap. 45.1, 4.2 Chron. 36.23. Ezra. 1.2, 3. the Apostles waited at
Jerusalem, and went not forth to state visible Churches, till they received
power from heaven calling and priviledging them for that design: Acts 1.4.
Chap. 2.2. And questionless Jesus Christ in his Revelation, exactly marking out
and showing to his servants all the remarkable changes and dispensations of his
Saints, would after so long a cessation and confusion of their first order (the
greatest for matter and time that ever was) have in this book confirmed the
work of stating, and made it indubitable by his call in its first return, as
well as that of separation, if there had been any such fabric now to be
erected. If you object the primitive call, The Cessation of that ensuing, and
the other new call to come, makes that to be to us insufficient.

Again, there is not any visible administration of the Spirit to begin any
Church-constitution since the winds were with held, Rev. 7.1. nor will be till
the same winds are loosed, and the Spirit again poured out in a visible symbol,
as is proved in the Cessation, Quaer. 2.

Reason 2. Our next ground why we cannot at this time state, and but only
separate, is, because the book of the Revelation prescribes two distinct and
severed periods for separation, and visible Church-marriage: the first to be
during the rewarding by war, Chap. 18.4, 6. the last to be after a full
separation, and the downfall of Babylon, Chap. 19.7, 9. Now time is Gods
peculiar prerogative and proper interest: who can appoint him the times,
without intrenching upon his incommunicable royalty? Jer. 51.44. Again, as
there is a time fixed for every purpose, so every thing is beautiful in its
time, Eccles. 3.1, 11. but out of his season, there is and must be a deformity
and disproportion: the reason is, because many concurrences fall into the point
of opportunity, that contributes a comeliness, goodness, and sometimes truth of
existence to the thing or action: which being done out of its season, loses
its grace and beauty, and in Church matters is vain, false and unlawful. Thus
in this honorable work of stating, there will at that day be the rain of God,
the bright and powerful administration of the Spirit, the grant and gift of the
beautiful wedding garment, the lively call of Christ to make it incomparably
glorious, and of surpassing luster: but now in this your day there is not only
the want, but the contrary to all these, which causes it be both obscure,
formal, narrow, as also disuniting, dangerous, and sinful.

Now the harpers above specified, are virgins, not the defiled married women;
they are obedient followers of the Lamb in the call of separation, are not
intruders and goers before him in the act of stating.

Reason 3. The third is, because there is not now a sufficient dispensation of
light, suitable for the majesty of a Gospel-constitution. How various are ^iens
observations about the primitive pattern, and by consequence their ways of
corporating, which they all pretend to be thereby composed! and yet amongst
these mulutudes is there not one, but disagrees in the outward matter with that
apostolical order, whether it be in Rome, Episcopacy, with you, the Brownists,
Independents, Dippers, etc. and in the internal form, they are all contrary to
that rule by a direct diameter. Moreover, there is not a competent light to
judge the fitness of men for members, of whom there will be a notable trial by
the sixth vial, Rev. 16.15; nor a clearness of discovery to know the high
Gospel-rules by which they should walk, Antichrist has so defaced these, that
they are scarcely known amongst men, which we shall speak of in the following
reason: neither is there a requisite knowledge judically to determine in all,
nay many cases, what is error, or heresy: it may be, and for the most part
happens, that long and deep-rooted error fixed in men's minds, provokes them to
censure and reject that as erroneous, that is a new unmasking of their old
mistakes; and so the Spirit of truth revealing the mystery of iniquity, is in
his servants and messengers condemned for an heretic: our Saviors counsel to
these men, is, Let them grow together till harvest, lest ye pluck up the wheat
also, Matthew. 13.29. and at the harvest they are not distinguished by
Church Censures, but by separation. The reason of this obscurity is, because
these are but the dawnings, or new breakings forth of light, in which it is
neither day nor night, Zech. 14.6, 7. Whereas the day of Jesus Christ shall
shine from East to West like lightning, with an universal flashing brightness,
most perspicuously to manifest all these to his chosen: and then the building
will appear by evident demonstration to be the Lords own doing.

Reason 4. Another ground is, because during this time the best of Saints are
but devesting themselves from their former outward filth, and but shaking off
the dust which for such a length of time remained on them: they are not as yet
come to that hight of righteousness requirable in a Gospel Order in point of
love and mutual fellowship.

I shall here lay down in a treble sort of righteousness, by which the ordinary
strain of our times may be tried.

The first is the civil worldly righteousness, which stands in defect and
fall of Reason beneath its native sphere; and yet is in some degree reserved to
imband an uphold civil societies and Commonwealths: the rule of this, is, first
himself, then his neighbors; a fairness and respect to the well-being of
others, but the chiefest of his aims are bounded within the circumference of
his own private advantages: whatever is beneath this, is merely brutish; nay,
devilish, and destructive to all reasonable consociations.

2. The second is the legal, consisting in the genuine purity of reason: and
its axiom is, His neighbor as himself, as equally balancing the welfare of
others with his own benefit.

3. The third is that of the Gospel, a righteousness in its actings exceeding
that of the Scribes and Pharisees, having in it a superlative supernatural
excellency: and its rule is, His neighbor on brother above and beyond himself.
A new commandment I write unto you, that you love one another, 1 John 2.8. the
scope of which command is, that ye love one another as Christ has loved you,
John 15.12, 13; who loved his Saints above himself, in that he laid down his
life for them: so ought we for the brethren, 1 John 3.6; if our lives in the
extent, much more all other inferior interesses ought to be denied in their
behalf. Also in Matthew. 5, and in many other Scriptures, we find the
Gospel-righteousness and commands to transcend that of the law.

Now, if the general ways, dealings and intercourse of Christians be examined
by these rules, how far short do they come of the high glory of a Gospel-walk?
yea, where is the man to be seen that observes the legal, in considering his
neighbors case as his own? nay, the civil worldly rule is so defaced, that the
most of men are altogether self; and let their neighbor sink or swim, all is
one to them: insomuch as it is grown to a common Proverb, Every man for
himself; a maxim framed in hell, and usually put in Action on Earth,
throughout the whole Christian world, and that by many who in words seemingly
defy to own it. Does not that covetousness (which by the Spirits verdict is 1 Timothy 6.10.
the root of all evil, Ephesians. 5.5.
idolatry it self, and has in it Pro. 1.19.
the cry of blood) so overspread the face of all interchanges, that the common
current thereof tends to deceit, overreaching, cruelty, oppression, devouring
one another, making up themselves by the ruins of multitudes, and they deemed
the happiest men that gain most by such indirect dealings? Indeed many of the
stated members boast much of a Gpspel walk; but who amongst them practices the
abovesaid Evangelical precepts? and how little differing they are from the
common stream of selfishness, and how unfit to state and sit down in so much
defection and pollution, we leave to the consideration of the wife. And so
great is the misery, that the Ministry it self, which should be as the mouth
of God to set forth the light of a Gospel-conversation, does so eclipse and
darken the natural luster of those noble commands of Christ and his Apostles,
so mangle and pervert their native sense by conforming them to the corruptions
of the times, that they present to the face of the people a kind of worldly
Gospel, and imprint in their mind such degenerate principles, as sooths up and
hardens them in the like wretched tyranny. Hereupon the Spirit foreseeing the
deviation of these times, complains, that judgment is turned backward, truth
is fallen in the streets, and equity cannot enter: yea truth fails, and there
was no judgment, Isa. 59.14, 15, 16. as also, that the good man is perished
from the earth, there is none upright amongst men, they all lie in wait for
blood, they hunt every man his brother with a net; that the best in his walk is
as a brier, the most upright like a thorn hedge, Mica. 7.2, 4. Yea, the
defection is so universal, that the Lord Jesus says Revel. 16.15.
Luke 18.8, that when he comes (to wit, in the brightness of Ministry to
reprove the worlds righteousness) shall be find faith on earth? that is, in the
walk on faith which consists in love, wherein the excellency of a Gospel-way
resideth, John 13.35. Chap. 15.9. Gal. 5.6. 1 Corinthians. 12.31. Chap. 14. Nay,
the abovenamed worldly rudiments are so twisted into the whole frame of this
Euphratean fabric, that the separated people themselves, though in their aims
and desires they are off, yet actually, by reason of extreme exigencies for
private necessaries, they cannot attain to those high Evangelical rules of
charity, till Christ prepare away for these Eastern rising kings over the river
Euphrates, by drying up these waters. They are distinguished from the beast in
Ecclesiastics, but not from the great river, nor from that air in which as
yet they breath, Revel. 16.12, 17. and cannot sit down in a Gospel order till
these obstacles and pollutions be removed, and they receive the grant of their
beautiful wedding-garments, the righteousness of the Saints, Cap. 19.8.

Reason 5. The day of the vials pouring is a time of war and bloodshedding:
and it is the wise Decree of God, first to wash away the filth of the daughter
of Sion, and to purge the blood of Jerusalem from the midst of her by the
Spirit of judgment and burning, Isa. 4.4, and after that to create upon all
her assemblies a cloud and smoke by day, and a pillar of fire by night, verse.
5. Where observe, that this open dispensation that gives being to
Church-stating (as you may find proved in the Cessation, Quaere 2.) comes not
from heaven till after these combustions are put to a period, and the Saints
purged from filth and blood: and then it is done by a new creation. Also Revel.
15.8. at that marriage-season, the temple was filled with smoke from Gods glory
and power, to wit, a manifest pouring out of the Spirit to restore the keys,
and by them a power given to open the temple for visible entrance, Chap. 11.19.
but before that day, no man could enter into the temple till the seven plagues
of the seven Angels were fulfilled.

Reason 6. A further reason of the weakness and unwarrantableness of all
Church-constitutions in our times, may be the divisions and rents amongst the
godly caused by these forms, also other effects and defects wherein they are
directly opposite to the primitive, which are more fully recited in the Epistle
to the Reader.

Reason 7. The last reason why it is now by separation without stating, is,
because this return from mystical Babylon is not fully accomplished at once,
but is traced by distinct steps and degrees, Came. 6.13. Isa. 52.11, 12. it has
a journey in it, and a gradual going onward toward the visible marriage of
Sion, as Israel of old traveled out of Chaldea, and the nations with their
faces toward outward Sion. Hence the prodigal (who types out the Gentiles) his
return from the strange country Babylon to his native home, is intimated to be
a long journey, his father meeting him afar off; in which spiritual passage he
was embraced, kissed, jewelled, etc. before he entered into the house.

Also from the first call for the going out of, and rewarding Babylon, Rev.
8.4, 6. to the marriage and call thereto, chap. 19, 7, 8, 9. there is a tract
of time interceding, as before: For as Rome was not built at once, but
gradatim, by several trumpets, chap. 8 and 9. so she goes not down together,
but by degrees, and certain intervals by the vials. Hereupon chap. 11.18, 19.
Enemies must first be destroyed, by several distances, before the Temple in
Heaven was opened. To this agrees that of Matthew 13. where during the harvest
(which notes out this last holy war, and the time of separation, as we can
clear^, if desired) the Antichristian Enemies, the tares must first be cust
down and burned, before the wheat is gathered into the barn, the visible
Church; which must imply some space of time, Revel. 16. This journey of
separation is described in the Prophets; and in Isa. 35.8, 9, 10. is called a
way in the wilderness: that as the Saints had their place and abode in the
wilderness during the foregoing season for 1260 years, Rev. 12.6, 14. so now
the Lord prepares a way for her to go out by returning: and the same is styled
a highway, being paved and cast up by the Spirit above the Babylonish earthly
station, as that on high or above to the, wise: it is also by a redoubled
speech termed an highway, and a way, as being a way in it self, which must
have a space to be traced in: and is for form a way of holiness, as that more
pure then the times before. And that this belongs to a distinguished people, is
evident, ver. 10. where they are entitled ransomed separated ones, and
returners to Sion, not staters in Sion; and travelers and walkers in the way,
not sitters down in Church-constitutions. Also for time, it must pertain to
this last departing, because the text attributes everlasting joy to be on their
heads, which can be applied to not former separation, either to that out of
Egypt, Chaldea, or the primitive, all these being after darkened by a
succeeding sorrowful night: only this last shall have everlasting joy, it
being the passage to that glorious Kingdom, which shall never be eclipsed as
were the former, Dan. 2.44. chap. 7.18, 27. Besides, waters and streams are
said to break out in this desert, ver. 6 7, which was not literally fulfilled
in the Jews departure from outward Chaldea. Likewise the leaping of the lame
or him that halteth, and the singing of the dumb, ver. 6. fitly alludes to the
Harpers: the encouraging of the fearful to be strong, and Gods coming with
vengence and a recompense to save, ver. 4, fitly answers to the recompensing
and rewarding by the Vials.

If you except against this, we desire to know what the way is, when it is, and
who are the walkers in it. This Prophet further calls this way in the
wilderness a new thing, then springing forth, in which the Lord, the light of
the world, will lead his blind people, chap. 43.19. chap. 42.16. Likewise the
Spirit by Hosea confirms the same, chap. 2.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Behold, says
the Lord, I will allure her (in drawing her out) I will cause her to walk in
the wilderness (for so is the true original, and not I will bring her, as is
translated: before she sat in, now she walks out of the wilderness) I will
give her her vines from thence (where vines are metonymically taken for the
fruits of the vines, which metaphorically symbols the comfort of the Spirit, or
that love which is better then wine.) Here are also many other precious
promises to the walkers in this way, the last whereof is a quiet sitting down,
and a cessation from war: all which shows a space of time to walk in this way:
and then (agreeable to Rev. 1.97.) I will marry thee to me for ever. Also the
River Euphrates mentioned in the fourth Reason, whose waters will be dried up
to prepare for a passage over by the sixth Vial, chap. 16. relates to this
journey. We being as yet on this side that river, and not off from the
Euphratean world, and its affairs, nor come into the spiritual land of
promised, must be till then within the wilderness of Babylon, and can erect no
visible temple, but it must be built with Babylons stones, stand in her
territories, and so be Babylons temple. This will be dangerous, because the
Vials wherein the seven last plagues of God are wrapped up, will irresistably
pour out their wrath upon it, either by war and the punishments thereof, or at
least by a sharp and searching discovery. I shall therefore advise you, with
all my Christian friends wheresoever, to come off from such like defilements,
lest ye partake with Babylon in her plagues, and that your works burn not at
the appearance of Jesus Christ: and this you will find to be seasonable
Counsel, if the Lord open your eyes to embrace it.

Section 1.
Against this our assertion, you except first more generally, then
particularly: your general exceptions I shall bind within this Section: the
particular, I shall divide into several Sections apart.

Object. 1. More generally you assert, 1. That this course of ours is contrary
to all former times, whose separations were accompanied with the present
setting up of Church-societies.

Answ. 1. This of separation from spiritual Babel is called a new thing then
springing forth, Isa. 43.19. chap. 42.16. and so must in some respect be
differing from all the former.

Again, we grant the separations of former times were presently accompanied
with congregating, ministry, prayer, with other services that were lawfully
exercised before their departure, as we do the like now: but withal deny that
those servants of God assumed any new thing, or an old after its dispensation
lay void, without a new call and warrant for the work.

Object. To prove yours, You instance the departure of Abraham from Chaldaea,
Isreal's from Egypt, Judahs from Babylon, the Primitives from Judaisme and
H^athenisme.

Answ. We shall begin with that of Abraham's; who as he separated not till God
called him from his Country, and his Fathers house, Genesis 12.1. Act. 7.2, 3, 4.
so in this his journey he made no innovation, but only exercised himself in
Ministry, Prayer, and the like, which he emitted not in Chaldaea: and after he
came into Canaan, took not up the sign of Circumcision, till he received an
express command from Heaven, Genesis 17.10, 11, 12. and this was not till 24 years
after his first entrance into the Land of promise, as appears by comparing ver.
1. with chap. 12.3; and near 30 years from his going out from Vr of the
Chaldees, as may be gathered by Scripture-consent.

To that of Isreal's stating in the wilderness upon their going forth from
Egypt, we say, 1. That they were separated from Egypt, both people and land,
being passed through the red Sea; but we are not yet so from Babylon, nor can
be, till the way be traced over Euphrates. 2. They, being thus severed,
rema^ned a bare separated people a year or more, as you confess. 3. After that,
their marriage or Church State was not contracted by themselves, for the Lord
himself begun it at mount Smai, where they had a call, pattern and warrant for
all they did, all which was smoked by the cloud of Gods glory: but you can
produce no such call nor glory for any of your new-built constitutions; nor
prove the continuance of the primitive through the season of the apostasy.

Touching the Jews return from Babylon, we answer, That they did not rebuild
the Temple in their voyage of separation, but first came to Sion, the proper
resting place: and then begun it by virtue of an heavenly call directing Cyrus
and the Jews for that design; and by the encouragement of the Prophets
Haggai, and Zachariah, Isa. 44.28. chap. 45.4. Ezra. 5.12.

Object. Here you produce against us the saying of the Jews, Hag. 1, 2. It is
not time to build.

Answ. They being come to Sion and called of God to the work, might justly be
reproved for slacking their hands. Notwithstanding if they should have erected
that divine edifice in their journey before arrived there, they might have met
with a sharper rebuke and punishment. The crime is more heinous to usurp a
power, and build upon their own bottoms, then to neglect it in its time, though
I justify neither. However, God calls not his people to any such work now, in
these our travels from mystical Babell: neither can man do it in its own
season (this spiritual fabric being not built by hands, as the outward was)
but the Lord himself must first create it by the pouring out of his Spirit.

Your temerity in constituting your Church by your own power, before God
begins it, and charging us, as being too too slow, for waiting his proper time,
brings to our mind a story in Exodus, chap. 32. When Moses there seemed to the
Israelites to tarry too long; they as impatient of delay, must needs go before
God, and frame a golden Calfe by their own imaginations, as you now do a
bestiall Idol.

To that of the primitive, we reply, that the Disciples used ministry, prayer,
baptism, and at last received the communion, but did not state any visible
Churches: and after Christ's resurrection from the dead, they tarried at
Jerusalem, expecting the promise of the Father to empower them for the same
work. Indeed when they were first married by God, by the glorious emission of
the Spirit, they by virtue thereof as sons of the Church married in others by
bringing them into that Gospel-fellowship. So that when visible Churches are
existing, men are received in as married members; when not, there can be no
entrance further, then into a Covenant, membership, waiting the times of God.

Object. 2. Your next charge against us is, that ours is against a common rule
for interpreting Scriptures; which is, that wherein it commands the avoiding of
evil, it does vertually command the contrary good.

Answ. This rule we infringe not, but embrace and follow. For as we flee from
the beast, his image, mark, name and number; so we walk in that good way of
assembling, and exercise such ordinances as are now spirited by the Lord. But
you are so far from doing good upon the avoiding evil, that you run from one
evil of the Bishops, and rush into another of Presbytery; from Babylon and the
beast, into Babylon and the same beast newly translated.

Object. 3. You further tax us, that this course of ours casts a foul blot
of gross ignorance and rash presumption upon all the Protestant Churches.

Answ. 1. Your selves separating from the Nations, and setting up a Church
distinguished from the rest of your parish, do in your practice condemn all
national Churches. You also in your principles and words unchurch all the
lesser independent bodies: the like do they to you, and all others not of their
way. Therefore, for you to lay so high a charge against us, and do the same
things, seems to favor of partiality, and come under the reproof of the
Apostle, Romans 2.1.

2. For clearing our selves, we answer, Vivimus legibus, non exemplis: We set
not the practices of men, but the laws of God for our examplar. That of man
has especially from the first beginning, and so downward of the Antichristian
darkness, been the common misleading mark of Christians, both in Papacy,
Episcopacy, and the like. And the differing and disagreeing forms of Churches
in our age, may teach how invalid humane authority is in the things of God. But
the word of God (we are assured) is an unerring rule, by which we shall
endeavor to steer our course, and not by the wandering notion of learned men.
Our recourse is only to the Law and Testimony for proof, whether you, they, or
we be rightest. In the interim, we condemn not the grace of Christ wherever we
find it, nor the generation of the righteous as righteous: Yet if their
outward way be condemnable by the word of God, we conceive it true humility and
piety to judge accordingly, and charity to acquaint them therewith. Thus we
shall end with your general exceptions against the whole; and shall in the next
place proceed to the more particular, framed against some particular reasons
before nominated, which we will divide into several Sections.

Your fourth Objection is opposite to our first Reason deduced from Rev. 18.4,
9. and runs as follows.

Object. 4. All Circumstances considered, the time of this separating and
rewarding, is not until God shall put it into the hearts of Kings to join
together to destroy Rome it self: and is surely about the pouring out of the
last, or some of the last vials. And then, being ready to give the onset on
Rome, by this voice they are called to plague her thoroughly. At which time this
call is directed to such of Gods people who are hidden in the Idolairous City
and the adjacent territories, to flee from her by a personal flight. And how
long it will be ere this be effected, the Lord knows.

Answ. This your assertion consists of many fallacies, which must be drawn
out in their parts to clear up the truth.

1. As that Babylon is not only Rome with her adjacent territories, but the
great City, chap. 17.18. reaching where out Lord was slain; chap. 11.8. above
two thousand miles distant from Rome; and duly pondered, must be as large as
the whole Roman Christian Empire: and so compriseth England, Scotland, France,
or what place soever has a false Church, or beastly power to bear it up.

2 These last plagues of God, are not only against Rome, but every land where
Babylonish Churches are residing, even all Christian Nations. The same
whirlwind in these latter days, is said to begin at the ends of the earth, and
to go from Nation to Nation, Jer. 25.31, 32, 33. chap. 23.19, 20. chap. 30.23,
24. Psalm. 110.5, 6. and to be universal, Isa. 24. chap. 34. Luke 21.35. Mat.
24.37. etc. We have seen the beginnings of it in our Dominion; the effects
whereof were lately like to fall on some men of note in England. Caetera taceo.

3. This call of separation, is not simply from Rome as an outward place, but
from all Antichristian stands, whether Romish, Episcopal, Presbyterial, etc.
the call is general, and the surest remedy to escape the general judgment.

4. The pouring these plagues is not all at once by the last or some of the
last vials; it is gradual by every vial, degree after degree. For all the
Angels pour out in their order upon the Earth, Sea, Rivers, and fountains, Sun,
and Throne of the beast, upon the great river Euphrates, and the air, chap. 16.

5. Not the Kings of the earth, but the separated people are the principal
instruments in rewarding: for the text bids first Come out of her my people,
then reward. States that come off, may be assistants.

Object. But this was done by the ten horns, ten Kings, chap. 17.16, 12.

Answ. The reading of the text must be warily observed, for the better
understanding thereof. The most and authentic Greek copies have it, The ten
horns and the beast shall hate the Whore; but Aretas, whom the vulgar Latin
follows, renders it, The ten horns on or upon the beast shall hate: both
senses are true; and in both the horns and the beast are coupled together; the
horns and the beast hate, also the horns hating are fastened on the beast. And
as the horns are these ten, for nature Christians, not for number (for they did
not all ten, but some of them detest this Whore:) to the same Christian beast
that abhors, must be taken by the like Synecdoche, the whole for the part; to
wit, the Episcopal and Presbyterial beast shall hate, not the Papal; and the
Whore defied must must be the great Whore, or grandmother Rome, who in her
whordoms was grown over-foul: They detested not the lesser and more specious
daughters, of whom themselves were a part, nor yet the the woman Babylon in her
extent: for they most sadly mourned for her downfall, their riches and
delicacies being taken away with her, chap. 18.9, 10. Neither did they
abominate the beast; but being fastened on him, did assist him with their
Armies against the sitter on the white horse and his Armies; and both horns
and beast fell together; chapter 19.11. to the end. The abovesaid hating appears
to us to allude to the Protestant Princes, who together with their beast (the
ecclesiastical hierariches either Episcopal or Presbyteriall) did hate, make
desolate and naked, consume and burn up the whore of Rome, as having nothing to
do with her in their dominions. Now the rewarders before specified, were not
horns on the beast, being severed from the very number of his name: and being
on Christ's side, follow him upon white horses to subdue the beast and horns
together. For the time of the call of separation, I shall speak in the next
place.

Object. You go on, and say, that the spiritual separation made by Protestant
Princes and Churches from Rome in doctrine and worship, as they had a warrant
from this call; the reason whereof belonging to all times and persons not to
partake in Romes sins, do sufficiently enforce it, so had they pregnant grounds
from other Scriptures and commands.

Answ. Here are many insinuations also couched up in this sentence, which must
be examined in their parts. As,

1. What you here intend by your spiritual separation.

2. How you can justify a spiritual separation to be made by Princes; you
mean, I suppose, by their laws. If it be spiritual, it must be caused by the
free motion of the Spirit, constraining a people by the linkes of love, and not
enforced by the cumpulsive laws of men.

3. You affirm your separation to be in doctrine and worship: it seems, you
are ashamed to say in discipline, as being convinced in your conscience, that
yours is the same radically with Rome. If your Church be grounded upon a
Baylonish discipline, it cannot be a visible Sion, Jer. 51.26.

4. You tell us, they had a warrant for it from this call; by which at at one
breath you blow down all you built before. Mart cadunt subiti per mutua
vulnera fratres.
For if this call be not, until Kings join together to destroy Rome it self,
about the last or some of the last vials; and that then it is directed to such
only who are hid in that City with the adjacent territories, how can these be
applied to Protestant Princes and Churches? They renounced Rome long before;
they were not hid in that City, nor the adjacent territories, nor fled they
from thence by a personal flight. These two extremes will hardly come together.

5. This call here specified pertains not to all times and persons. For as
Israel was to be in outward Babylon for the space of seventy years, before the
call for their departure; so the woman was to remain in the mystical for a full
season, even 1260 years, Rev. 12.6, as before: the wheat and tares were to grow
together till harvest, which belongs to the vials, chap. 14. and then this call
for separation had its peculiar time prefixed, the war and it being conjoined
together. The primitive Saints failing in their first love, sunk into the same
earthly confused condition, and were left asleep in that wilderness for a full
season, till the times of God came for their deliverance from bondage.

6. This of Protestantisme cannot properly be termed a separation in respect of
Church-constitution, but rather a dividing of the kingdom, Dan. 2.41. The true
separation consists in a number out of Nations, Rev. 7.9. who are off from the
beast and his thorn over consciences, as standing immediately before the
highest throne, and were not defiled with women, chap. 14.2, 3, 4. But theirs
was whole Nations, good and bad together: and they set up a beast originally
derived from Rome, and by consequence must in their Church State be a strange
woman, as is proved in Paragraph 1. Sect. 3. Indeed Antichrist reigning long in
his Catholic pontificalitie, grew so foul at last, that he was found out by
the Protestants; and being discovered, was contented with them to sit down in
Episcopacy: but lording it there with too much tyranny, was also disclosed to
be the same beast trimmed in other habit: and where he could not be admitted
that attire (in policy, that he might the easier deceive) masked himself under
a more curious dress in Presbytery: yet his groundwork arising by descent from
the Pope, is the same with the former, and he also there usurps or chalengeth
the like popedom over consciences. The same beast remains in all, only his
Kingdom is divided.

To your fifth Objection we answer, that by the word only, we exclude stating,
not assembling for Ministry, Prayer, etc.

Section 3.
Your next Objections are directed against our seventh Reason, where we tell
you, that we are yet but in the way toward Sion. Before we give a reply to
yours, we shall acquaint you what we conceive of this subject, to prepare for
that following. We hold, that there was a Sion, 2 Temple, a Woman, a Kingdom
of grace, and a reign of God therein through all Gospel Times: yet withal,
that this did not constantly abide in the external order of Ecclesiastical
government, but was in its outward stand and dispensation various. In the
primitive day, Sion was not only inward in the work of grace and the hidden
man, says, etc. but likewise visibly stated by Christ in the glory of her
outward order. In the dark night of Antichristianisme, she was more retired;
subsisting simply in the grace of Election, mystical union, with some weak
degree of profession, and witness; had the badge of the covenant, but visibly
in a false, strange and Babylonish constitution, as is cleared in the
Cessation. After the final subversion of Antichrist, the like visible
government shall again descend from heaven: as is showed in the Cessation
also, Quaer. 2. This is diversely styled in the Prophets, answerable to the
sense it is opposed against, or applied to. Sometimes (to teach us that before
the Saints were outwardly a scattered and bondaged people in a strange land or
Babylon) the visibilty of true Gospel Order and regiment is by a Synecdoche
termed Sion, Rev. 18.4. Isa. 35.

The ransomed of the Lord return from Babylon to Sion. The redeemed ones were
never absented from the mystical Sion; but from the visible they were, and to
that are said to return. Likewise (to inform us that a mystical or more
invisible Sion remained, and to point out in particular what failed, and what
again reverts) the Prophets tell us, that it is the visibility of regiment
shall be added to the former: as Mich. 4. after the vials wars are ended in a
full peace, ver. 3.4. the Lord shall reign (agreeable to Rev. 19.6.) and then
thou, O Tower of the flock, the strong hold of the daughter of Sion, unto thee
shall it come, even the first dominion, the Kingdom shall come to the daughter
of Jerusalem, ver. 8. then judgment shall be given to the most high Saints,
Dan. 7.22. Now to apply this to our case, we affirm, that in the former of
these two acceptations, we are in our way to Sion: in the latter, we are on
Sion, expecting the glory of her government to come from the Lord Jesus.

So that Sion in the Scriptures is sometimes taken only for the mystical, or
mount of true grace, and thus it is in the times of the apostasy; sometimes for
the visible order of the Church-constitution, or outward rule. The not marking
this, has caused many, in the days of this more intrinsecall administration,
to bring the promises belonging to Sion, unto their stated forms, and so to
Babylon, thereby deluding both themselves and the people; thus did the Pope,
thus did the Bishops, and the like do all the rest. We shall now proceed to
remove your obstacles.

Object. 1. It is the state of all embracing the Gospel to be come to mount
Sion, and the celestial Jerusalem, Heb. 12.22.

Answer. This was spoken to the Gospel Church of the primitive day, who was
Sion, as in the being and profession of faith, so also in her outward
corporation and discipline; and cannot in its latitude be extended to all
Gospel Times.

Object. 2. To prove the perpetual succession of a Gospel Sion stated in
outward order through the Antichristian age, you instance Rev. 14.1.

Answ. Sion here specified, figures out the mount of true grace, and the
unmovable foundation thereof. For all the Elect sealed number, and only they,
stood with the Lamb upon this mountain: See the Cessation. If this be meant of
a visible constituted, Church then must if follow, either that all the Elect in
the world, and only they, through the whole season of tribulation, must
successively in every generation thereof, be congregated apart by themselves,
and set in a true order distinguished from the Papacy, Patriarkship, etc. or
else that Rome and the Greek Church as corrupt as she, carrying this
continuance of visibility, must be true and orderly constitutions, made up of
members elect and precious, and none but such. If the former be asserted, the
Scripture and the event both manifest, that the Saints were scattered and mixed
amongst the nations: if the latter, more must attributed to Rome, then she
dares challenge to her self.

Besides, this daughter of Sion was visibly in Babylon, where all the beauty of
her exterior order was turned into confusion, as you may at large read in the
same Cessation; as also Parag. 1. Sect. 4.

Object. But, say you, This Sion must be visible, because seen of John.

Answ. This we also assent unto: for her inward grace was not so concealed, but
that it did in some measure manifest it self in visible profession, and an holy
godly life. And thus was one godly man to be seen of another, though mixed
amongst the common multitude: thus also the world espied them, and with us of
late, branded them by the name of Puritans.

Your ensuing words tend to the confounding of two types parted by the Spirit;
to wit, that of the one hundred forty four thousand, verse. 1. and that of the
harpers, verse. 2, etc.

1. That of the one hundred forty four thousand is a symbol of the elect
remaining amongst the common national Israelites, during the one thousand two
hundred and sixty years of Antichrist his prevailing, and some space after,
Chap. 7, to verse the 9.

2. That of the harpers is a new addition of a number, who are in their stand
distinguished and redeemed from amongst men; which figures out the separated
people (as is declared in the beginning of this Paragraph) whose song was so
intricate, that none amongst the false Churches were capable of the mystery,
but the one hundred forty four thousand redeemed from the earth, who by
degrees will learn it, and come out of their intanglements.

Answ. We grant, that those truly pious amongst you may be and are of that
catalogue, and stand upon the same Sion: but that all your national members,
most of whom are profane, are of this number, or that your reformers that were
sanctified, may be saved, though their works burn. Why you are not of these
harpers, we shall inform you in the Postscript.

Object. 3. Admit we be but in our way to Sion, yet what lets, but that we may
set up all Gods ordinances, as well as some, in this our journey? The
Israelites in their way to Canaan had all Gods ordinances set up amongst them.

Answ. Such ordinances as are spirited for abiding, may be and are exercised:
such whose administration lies void (as Ordination, etc. proper to
Church-constitution) cannot, till the Lord inspires them, as is cleared in the
first Paragraph. The example of the Israelites serves not for your purpose: For
they were wholly separated from Egypt; we are not so as yet from the great
City: they first took their full journey to the place appointed, which was not
mount Sion, but mount Sinai, the answered to the legal Jerusalem, Gal. 4.24,
25. we are yet but in our journey of separation, are not passed from Euphrates
into the mystical Canaan of a pure Gospel-walk, nor to the Sion of visible
order, the peculiar center of a Gospel-marriage: they did not erect their legal
constitution by themselves; it was the Lord that framed it by his servant
Moses, and clouded it with his glory: much less can any now build up
Gospel-Churches, till our Lord Christ creates them by the descending influences
of his Spirit.

Section 4.
The fourth is touching the temple, which was not opened for visible entrance,
till after the vials pouring, evidenced from Rev. 15.8. chap. 11.19. Isa. 4.5,
6. Because you complain that we have not explicated our sense, we shall here
briefly declare what we apprehend of the temple. To pass by the temple of
Christ manhood, wherein the essence of the Deity dwells bodily, John 2.19, 20.
Cor. 2.9. we shall speak of it, as it relates to the Saints and Gospel Church.
And thus we understand the temple to be the house wherein the Lord inhabits by
the presence of his grace, Jesus Christ being the chief cornerstone. And this
may be either a single person, 1 Cor. 6.19. or the compection and conjunction
of the Saints, which is the intendment of the Spirit in the above cited places.
The same temple may be more hidden, Rev. 11.1.
The first is spiritual and mystical union of the Elect, and all the work of
the graces, wherein the Lord dwells, as in a more secret habitation. The second
is, when together with the former, the Saints are knit together by the
powerful administration of the Spirit into an external corporation, stated
with Officers, and having in their jurisdiction all the Ordinances belonging to
visible Church Power and Government: this is usually called a stated or
constituted Church. The inward rooms of true grace, with the invisible
relation, are the temple within; the outward Order is represented by the court
without, verse. 2. and is by a Synecdoche, the whole taken for the part, styled
the temple, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. You may see by its ruins, what and how it was before
its casting out.

We shall lay down a few distinctions betwixt the mystical, and the visible
constituted temple: The former being combined by the invisible bond of the
Spirit, comprehends only the elect sealed number; the later, being an outward
corporation, hypocrites may creep into: the one was always true during the time
of the apostacy; the other was false and rejected in that season; and when
true, does presuppose the former: the first, when alone, has a more sparing
breathing of the Spirit, with a hiding of his power, Revel. 7.1. Chap. 11.1, 3.
the later has a manifest apparent-blast, as is said, The temple was filled
with smoke from the glory of God and his power, Chap. 15.8. Isai. 4.4, 5, 6.
the like was in the Primitive, Acts 2.2. Isai. 6.4. into the former, there is
no visible entry mentioned; it being internal, undiscerned, and shut up from
the outward court: the other has an evident opening and entering. This word
open argues a shutting before; and withal, presupposes smoking, or keys given
by the visible dispensation of the Spirit to open with, and also doors to be
opened and entered by; which makes it to be a stated Church: and will not be
till after the Verse. 1^.
subversion of Antichristian enemies.

But to prove a stated Church to be before and during the vials, you produce
Rev. 11.1. Chap. 14.15, etc. Chap. 15.

Answ. The temple in Chap. 11.1, is a mystical temple made up only of the one
hundred and forty four thousand sealed ones, as is showed in Parag. 1. Sect.
4. Also the Angel or Minister, Chap. 14.15, came out of the same mystical
temple, from his former retiredness into a more open view, to invoke the fitter
on the cloud to thrust in his sickle, etc.

I shall be a little larger in delivering my judgment on Chap. 15. The Spirit
in the five first verses, briefly sets down general figures: first, Of the
Angel-pourers, verse. 1. Secondly, Of the harpers, or separated people, verse. 2,
3, 4, by their stand at the glassie sea, which was in all the season of
separation; by their victory over the Beast, that was gradual by each vial, but
completed by the last; and by their song, and praising of God for their several
trophies, which goes hand in hand with every vial, and expires in the noble
exulting Hallelujahs specified Chap. 19. Thirdly, then, after these things, (to
wit, after the conquest over Antichristian adversaries is finished, after the
praises by that song are perfected) the temple of the tabernacle of the
Testimony in heaven was opened; also Chap. 11.19, the same temple was opened
after they were destroyed who destroyed the earth, and God had taken to him his
great power, and had reigned; at that time likewise the marriage will come,
chap. 19.7. So that this book of the Revelation most exactly, in all these
three places, agrees in the same point of time wherein the visible
Church-marriage returns, and that is after the final overthrow of the beast and
his adherents.

The Spirit having thus summarily delineated the whole figure of the seven
Angels, separation and marriage succeeding in common Types, goes back again
with a further explication of the said Angels spoken of verse. 1, as that which
prepares and furnishes them for their pouring out wrath, Chap. 16. In verse. 6,
they come out of the temple, to wit, out from the elect number, to show
themselves in open manifestation of pouring: and verse. 7, the Beasts or
livings, who have the life and light of Gods Spirit in their Ministry, gave to
the seven Angels seven vials to make them ready for their following work: and
verse. 8. tells us that the visible opening for entrance specified verse. 5.
cannot be till the seven Angels had fulfilled their plagues, and that after
that the temple shall be smoaked and opened. Thus verse. 6, 7, go along in order
of story with verse 1, and furnishes for pouring, Chap. 16. and verse. 8.
prepares by smoking for the opening, verse. 5. It is usual in this book, first
in brief to describe generals, and after to come to some one or more
particulars.

If it be asked, how the seven Angels are said to be in heaven, verse. 1, and to
come out of heaven, verse. 6. as most Greek Copies have it, wherein it best
agrees with verse. 1. We answer, that heaven is often taken for a high and
prevailing power over others. Thus the Dragon with seven heads and ten horns,
Chap. 12.3, is said to be in heaven; to wit, in the high orb of regiment, from
whence he was cast down, verse. 8, 9, 13. thus the Babylonian Monarchy exalted
above others, is compared to heaven, Isa. 14.12. Jer. 51.53. So these Angels
are seen in heaven; that is, an overswaying administration of puissance over
their enemies, both in discovery, and war, who are beneath them as the low
earth; and they above, as pouring down their wrath upon them: their vials are
as the bottles of heaven dropping down plagues upon the world, Isa. 24.18. Or
if heaven do also note out brightness and purity, (as we conceive it does) then
the latter Angels are in a higher sphere then the former, as acting in a
loftier cause, and upon more sublime principles. Hereupon many that go along
assistants with the former, may be too low for the latter Angels, and proving
adversaries, have their wrath poured down upon their heads. And thus these
Angels are declared to come out of the temple, as coming from the number of the
Elect, to show themselves in such heroic designs, to be clothed with white
linen, as being of the separation, who had the like vesture, Chap. 7.9, and to
be in and come out from heaven, as being in power and purity above the
Antichristian world, and from those noble principles, go forth to reap down all
opposers.

So that this temple whence these Angels come was the mystical temple of the
elect number, from whence the externality of order was excluded, expressed
Chap. 11.1, 2. and was not opened for visible entrance till they had finished
their pouring upon Antichrist, verse. 19. If the tabernacle of the testimony of
the temple was opened in the beginning of Protestantisme, as you seem to aver,
we shall desire you to unfold unto us in your next reply, what the particulars
thereof signify; as the Mercy-seat, the Ark, the golden Pot, the Manna
therein; How the Manna differs from the Shewbread; What is Aarons rod that
budded, and the tables of the testimony in their highest excellency; What are
the Cherubims of glory; Why two; what are their wings; why always stretched
out, and meeting together, shadow the Mercy-seat; what are their faces; why
they look inward; what is the golden Censer; why of gold all within and
without; what gold emblems, as distinct from silver, brass and prerious stones;
What they also type out; what is the second veil; what is the candlestick with
its seven Lamps all of gold; what is table of the Shewbread; the bread it
self, the Incense thereon; why only the superficies was of gold, and the inside
Shittim wood; what i^ the golden altar, the fire, and the smoke of incense; why
that also, was gold without, and wood within; how that is distinguished from
the brazen altar; what is the brazen altar; what is the first veil. Lastly,
what all these are in Christ; what in the Saints in general; what in every
Saint in particular. All which will be clearly seen, when the veiles are
removed, and this temple opened. If you who are experienced in all the tenants
of the Protestants, and have the light and learning of the times to second it,
refuse to interpret these mysteries, when requested, understanding men must
either judge, that you neglect your duty in hiding your candle under a bushel,
or else that you with your party are not able to unfold the mystery. Most will
rather conclude the later, that these are not apparently open to your Church;
that your visibility is no part of this Temple opened, and that you meddle with
Scriptures to prove the same, of whose sense you are ignorant. We assure you,
the highest degree of knowledge attainable in this life, lies in the
comprehending of these profundities, which (as we conceive) will not be
apparently known, till the Spirit is again poured out: at that time knowledge
shall cover the earth, as waters cover the sea, Habak. 2.14, Isa. 33.6. Chap.
60.1.

Section 5.
Your next assertions are opposite to our fourth Reason, in which we tell you
that we are not as yet fully divested of our Babylonish defilements.

Object. 1. You affirm, That some rags of Antichristisme detained, though a
deformity, yet can no more keep any Christian company out of Sion, then the
sacrificing in high places kept the Jews from thence, or the sin of Polygamy
put Abraham out of the catalogue of the Patriarks, or the remainders of
infirmities debar the regenerate from communion with Christ.

Answ. That of the high places belongs to the legal, not to the Gospel Church;
who though after degenerated, yet in her first institution was separated wholly
from Egypts defilements, was outwardly cleansed before that covenant was given,
Exodus 19.14. had all her ordinances in the purity of divine institution without
any mixture of men's inventions. That external sanctifying before the Exodus
15.14.
law was given, may type out the spiritual cleansing, which ought to be before
a Gospel-stating. Besides, the temple and Church at Jerusalem was a true stated
Church of God, and kept up in purity by some; but yours was never rightly
constituted; and so the high places abroad in the country, could not
fundamentally corrupt the same.

The sin of Polygamy, was then accounted no sin, because, no law, no sin
imputed, and though partly connived at of old, yet, being more inconsistent
with a Gospel walk, was together with divorcement prohibited by our Savior,
Luke 19.3, 4, 5, 6. Matthew. 5.31, 32. The sinful infirmities of the regenerate,
if visible, were admonishable; and, if obstinately stood in, excommunicable.
The primitive Church was very pure in her constitution, and was not to suffer
leaven, lest it should leaven the whole lump, 1 Cor. 5.6, 7. And, it being the
Lords wisdom in this last return, to bring his people first off by a full
separation, before he grant their visible wedding-garments, who can control,
or argue against him?

Object. 1 The Angels are clothed with white pure linen, Rev. 16.6.

Answ. The Angels are of the separated people, who are clothed with the like
white robes, Chap. 7.9. These are said to be white,

1. As they are garments of rejoicing and praise for their victory, Chap. 15.2,
3. which in Scripture Language are called white, Eccles. 9.8. Isa. 61.3. also
the Spirit by Zechariah, presenting the state of the four Monarchs, sets forth
the Persian, who brought joy and deliverance to the Jews, in the form of a
white horse; Chap. 6.3, 6.

2. In purity, as by way of comparison, they are brighter then before, being
off from the beast in Ecclesiastics; likewise in their Ministry, aims and
desires, they are clear from Euphratean filth, and in that way of separation
which leads them over the river Euphrates. Albeit for the present, being on
this side that river, they cannot in their practice be altogether free from
some worldly uncleanness; the Spirit as yet evincing the highest righteousness
therein attainable, as is declared in our said reason.

And for that the Ministry and mind is thus off from self, and their way
ascending to a higher purity, the Spirit figures out the separation and the
Angels in the first general emblem, with the same whiteness and cleanness of
array which will be attained to in the upshot of the journey. Christ in this
Revelation does frequently pourtray things that go on gradually to such a
hight, first in a brief common type in the beginning, as they are in their
extent, and after sets down in particular the several steps by which they work
up to the same utmost degree, as we shall evidence in our next Answer, by
undeniable instances, if excepted against. Howbeit, these garments in their
perfection are but the garments of Virginity, Chap. 14.4. the visible
wedding-aray is not granted till the marriage comes, Chap. 19.7, 8. In the mean
time, virgins have a space for preparing and trimming their Lamps, before they
be ready, Matthew. 25.7.

Section 6.
In the last place, which is answerable to our second Reason, we informed you
that the visible marriage of the Lamb in point of Church Order will not come
till all enemies as Antichristian be subdued, and God only reigns, Revel.
19.2, 3, 6, 7, 9.

Your first Objection against this, is that of Hag. 1.2. The third is the
example of the Protestant Churches; to both which we have given Reply in this
Paragraph, Sect. 1.

We shall here add, that to do any thing in Church Matters without a call or
divine warrant, is in Scripture Language a sin of the highest nature: it being
rebellion and presumption, is idolatry, and like the sin of Witchcraft, 1 Samuel
15.23. it was the sin of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, as also of Nadab and Abthu,
together with Vzza: Much more is it heinous to erect. Gospel-tabernacles and
Churches without a call and spiriting from heaven. This we conceive to be the
fundamental cause and reason, why the Spirit gives to that of Antichristianism
terms of such detestation and terror. It bears the image of Luciferian pride
and boasting, 2 These. 2.4. Jam. 4.16. Rev. 18.7. John 5.43, 44. Hence it is
chiefly, that the Beast is full of the names of blasphemy, as if in all his
ways he acted in that sea, Rev. 17.3. principally for this, the woman is said
to be the abomination of the earth, verse. 5. and to be the habitation of
devils, Chap. 18.2. hence are so great Isa. 24. Rev. 18. Chap. 14.9, 10.
wrath and judgments against those that partake thereof; I say, the radical
ground of all this is, because they do it in their own names, without a call
and impowering from above.

And thus it will in short time be discovered, as light increases. And would
you have us to rush into such manner of sins against our own light, to the
hazarding of our own souls and others, through your corrupting that place of
Haggai? Cease, Master Elmstone, from such preposterous courses, and destructive
ways. As for that of Protestant Churches, we desire you in your next book to
show us out of the prophecies their call for their several stated Churches, and
their several forms both for matter and time, or otherwise to leave off such
impertinent arguments, and remember what you asserted against Rome and the
Bishops.

Object. 2. This is to make Christ to be a Bridegroom without a known Bride, a
King without a Kingdom, a Head without a Body, for more then a thousand years;
and so (as you elsewhere say) must bring a notable alteration in Christ.

Answ. Christ is the same in himself, yesterday, to day, and for ever; yet in
his administration to his Church is various: sometimes he is more secret and
hidden, and in some respect absent and gone: sometimes seen with an open
prospect of his glorious dispensation: all which, though it cause an alterable
condition in the Church, yet makes it no absolute change in the Lord Jesus. It
is your own carnal apprehension, that phancies such a Soloecisme in Divinity.

2. To reply to the relation; the union betwixt Christ and his Church may be
termed a marriage. This union is more mystical and concealed, or more visible
and manifest.

1. The mystical or more secret, is that where by the elect, however different
in respect of time, place, or condition, are related to Christ the head, and
one to another. This always continued; and thus Christ was ever a head, king
and husband.

2. The more visible Gospel-marriage is, when the Saints outwardly congregated
are by an open emission of the Spirit first invested from above with new
membership and office, whereby to become a married wife; and they receiving
this power from on high, do by virtue thereof marry others into the same
married body, which is further declared in the Cessation, Quaere 2.

And in this last regard she was not always married. For we are to mind, that
herein there are several seasons: times of love and maturity for marriage,
Ezekiel. 16.8. and thus it was in the primitive, and will be again at the last,
when the Church in her external order appears a married wife, and Christ to her
an husband in the open face of his glorious administration: and withal, in this
consideration there be times of minority, widowhood and forsaking; as through
the antichristian age, when the beloved in this second sense had withdrawn
himself and was gone, Cant. 5.6. the Church of the elect then in some respect
in the state of widowhood, Luke 18.4, 7. and one forsaken, Isa. 62.4. the being
no more forsaken, intimates a forsaking before; the marriage then coming,
infers a non-marriage the season preceding.

If it be demanded, how the marriage can be said to return, when the covenant
successively remained; We answer, that the bare Gospel Covenant, when not
stated in the free and full glory of Evangelical regiment, especially when the
visible order is another, does not in Scripture Language bear the dignity of a
visible Gospel-marriage. For the same covenant of grace runs tacitly along
through the Jewish legal stand, and had a secret saving influence on the godly;
yet is not styled a Gospel-marriage till set in the majesty of a Gospel Order,
and then the nuptials were solemnized, Mat. 22.

So in the antichristian defection, the said Covenant had some close hidden
being and breathing on the sealed number; yet being deprived of the outward
court of its regiment, and the Church-constitution becoming a stranger, it
could not carry the prerogative of a true, single, genuine, visible
Gospel-marriage, till re-estated from Heaven in the power and beauty of its
first dominion: and when this returns, the marriage of the Lamb is again said
to come, and not till then, Rev. 19.

Object. 4. It may as well be said that there is no visible marriage between
Christ and particular Christians before that time, as that there is none
between Churches and Christ.

Answ. As the marriage betwixt Christ and the Church was in this season only
more mystical and hidden, so is it betwixt Christ and particular Christians.

Object. You go on and assert, That no particular Christian can be a meet bride
for Christ, who is not clothed with the pure, fine, and shining linen, viz. The
righteousness of the Saints.

Answ. We assent, that without the righteousness of Christ applied by faith to
the heart, there can be no union or marriage to Christ, and so no salvation.
But this more internal work, when the outward stand is not answerable, is not
anywhere in type figured out by the metaphor of garments; because they being an
outward covering, do usually signify the visible station and walk of the
Saints. Hereupon this visible station of the godly since the Apostacy, is in
the Revelation allegorically set forth by a threefold clothing, parallel to a
treble condition.

1. That of the witnesses and Elect while abiding in spiritual Babylon: Rev.
11.3.
who though they had the inward grace, yet being externally in false Churches,
are emblem'd in the habit of black and filthy sackcloth; their clothing being
agreeable to their outward stand, Rev. 11.3.

2. The raiment of the Virgins or separated Saints in the season of separation,
Chap. 14.4.
which for that they are off from the beast and defiled women, Chap. 9.7.
and in a more approved way then before, together with joy and triumph, Chap.
15.6
is pictured in the form of pure white linen: and this is the first to whom
the type of white garments is attributed since the great defection.

3. The wedding garments given as a new grant by the pouring out of the Spirit,
Chap. 19.7, 9.
after the period of the former; which for their high, pure and emphaticall
excellency of walk, are styled the righteousness of the Saints. Without this
latter robe, neither many Saints in general, nor any one in particular, can be
a meet bride for a visible marriage with Christ; none can give it, till they
first receive it.

Object. But you appropriate this marriage, chap. 19. to the Jews, and those
wholly without.

Answ. That this belongs to all, as well to Gentile Christians, as to the
Jews, and Pagans, we render these reasons.

1. The reign of God is general, the marriage general, the Spouse married the
whole Bride, the Lambs wife; the call is universal [they] which must
comeprehend all the Saints. If the Christian Gentiles be not concluded in this
marriage, then are they no part of the bride, nor have any share in the reign,
marriage, or the blessing thereof. View the text well, and your sense cannot
avoid this absurdity.

2. The people enjoying and rejoicing in all this royal magnificence, are the
singers for the utter destruction of Babylon. And not only the Jews, but the
Gentiles also, who were the chief actors in her ruin, must questionless
rejoice in her downfall. Besides, this book was sent to the Christian Gentiles,
as principally pertaining unto them.

3. The externality of Church Government amongst the Gentile Israelites (which
carries the name and dignity of a Gospel visible marriage, as is showed before)
was cast out when given to the Nations, chap. 11.2. and since that exclusion,
we find no return, grant and call for the restoration thereof (if not here) in
this book; no, nor yet in any other Prophecy till this time: and at this very
point of time, the whole current of Scripture foretells the same work to revert.
Now, it is extreme folly to think, that this Revelation should not inform us
when the glory of outward order and rule should be restored, as well as it
teaches us when it was ruined and rejected; or that all the prophecies besides
should pass it over in deep silence. We rather believe it then again to come,
when the Spirit fore-declares it to be, and not before.

4. Our Savior in Matthew. 24.23, 24, 25, 26, 27. and Luke 17.21, 22, 23, 24.
acquaints us, that since the time of that great falling away, till the day of
his bright appearance, all the visible Lo's or models of Churches, being
grounded on men's observations, are false and delusive: and that in this his
day, his shining dispensation shall flash from east tow est like lightning, and
not be tied up to one or a few Nations. Again, the open pouring of the Spirit
(the begetting cause of a Gospel-marriage) does not return in its open blast,
till this season: and the effect cannot be existing before its cause: neither
can any without that manifest administration, build up true spiritual Churches.

Object. You insinuate, that Isa. 62.5. partains to Sion, and its restoration,
which must be the Jewish Nation.

Answ. If it belong to Sion, then must it be common to all believers, as well
Gentiles as Jews, which you have proved from Heb. 12.22. and Revel. 14.1. And
though you build so much upon other interpreters, and therein seem not to be an
hairs breadth from him whom you cite to have said, Malo cum Platone errare,
quam cum aliis vera sentire, I had rather err with eminent Plo^o, then to think
the truth with others; yet we shall rather prize the truth before any humane
authority, and think it far safer to follow the concurrences of the Prophets,
then to wander with others, though never so learned. Indeed Mr. Brightman, with
many that tread in his steps, was necessitated (to uphold Protestant Churches)
to tie up in a manner all this last noble work to the Jewish Nation; and so to
disinterest the Christian Gentiles from this glorious marriage, and the City
Jerusalem. But how then can the stone fill the whole earth, Dan. 2.35. or the
kingdom under the whole heaven be given to the most high Saints? chap. 7.27.
or the kingdom of the world become the kingdoms of Christ? Rev. 11.15. or the
Lord only reign therein in all the earth? Zech. 14.9. Surely, this must be
universal to all the Saints wherever inhabiting.

Object. You in the close of this subject, wish us to consider this saying of
Iraeneus; That Prophecies are dark and aenigmatical till fulfilled.

Answ. We agree to the rule of Iraeneus considered with this limitation, That
prophecies cannot be completely known till cleared by the Event; and the
further off the same time is, the greater veil lies over them. But withal we
do maintain, that some degree of light may be gathered, by viewing the
prophecies with their times; also by comparing Scripture with Scripture; and by
minding types and things that are past, we may the better conclude what the
like allegories represent in matters to come, when the Spirit (who searches
all things, even the deep things of God) directs us in these mysteries.
Besides, some events being gradual, and coming one in the neck of another (as
these of the vials are) hang together as it were in one chain: in which the
beginning, presents some aspect of what will be in the end. Hence Jeremiah
(fore-speaking of the day of vials) says, chap. 30.23, 24. chap. 23.19, 20,
When the fury of the Lord falls on the head of the wicked, figured out by a
whirlwind, that in the latter days ye shall consider it, and at last
perfectly, to wit, the thoughts and itents of his heart, and his great works to
come. Consideration implies a comprehension to the same time, of that which
could not (by reason of the covering) be considerably known before: the
Revelation likewise informs us, chap. 15.4, That then his judgments are made
manifest. Moreover, this last separation consists in the understanding of
things past, present, and to come; past, as to number the beast, (from whom
they distinguish) in his rise, foundation, and whole latitude; present, whereby
to know the way and walk now approved; and to come, so as to have an eye to the
Saints and Sion and marriage, which is terminus ad quem, the end, scope or
resting place which this their passage aims at. A traveller has some
apprehension of the place he travels to. Therefore have they their station on a
glassie sea, Rev. 15.2. and are promised to see eye to eye, when the Lord
returns again Sion, Isa. 52.8. This will be fully at the upshot, and yet so far
for the present, as to guide them in their walk and alms.

Object. You further charge against us, that these prophecies are subject to
various interpretations; and that the mistakes and differences of other learned
men, may teach us not to build such lofty opinions upon, etc.

Answ. The plainest texts of Scripture are subject to various, nay dissenting
interpretations, as well as these: hence arise so many differences about
Episcopacie, Presbytery, Independencie, Poedo baptism, Predestination, with
innumerable others: yet these divided principles ought not to weaken the force
of any truths drawn from those texts. The same Spirit that reveals the mind of
other Scriptures, may unclock the mystery of these.

2. The cause of such variety and mistakes of the godly in former ages, is the
veil foretold to be cast over men during the time of tribulation. But now the
Lord has promised to remove this covering from his returning people. And this
will have more force to highten us in searching into these profundities, then
all the discouragements of men to beat us back.

If it be true, that nihil datur frustra, nothing in the ordinary course of
providence be vain, is it then safe to imagine that the solemn Gospel-promise,
chap. 1.3. can be a mere empty sound, and such as drives men to bare
conjectures and trifling probabilities, unmeet to lay the weight of any real
determinations upon? Or is the book opened, chap. 10. without any certain
discovery of the mystery therein comprehended? Or did the same Spirit which
invites to count the beast, chap. 13.18. lay insufficient grounds and rules to
find out his number? Or is that mighty voice and call from heaven, chap. 18.
Mat. 25.6. void of light and efficacy to dictate what they ought to separate
from, the way they should walk in, and those nuptials they are preparing for?
We rather believe the sayings of this book to be the true sayings of God, chap.
19.9. and to be true and faithful, chap. 22.6. and to contain matters of
transcendent worth, and solid foundations for knowledge, practice and
argumentation. And though the spirituality thereof lie deep (as things of
rarest excellency usually do) yet such of wisdoms children who are divinely
inspired with an understanding Spirit, will by virtue of that power assisting
them, thence draw out those precious truths, which will confound and put to
silence the wisdom of the world. It is very remarkable, that the testimony of
Jesus in these latter ages, is called the Spirit of prophecy, chap. 19.10. The
reason is, because the prophecies hold forth that very dispensation, and those
Judgments of God proper to our own generation; which rightly teach us how to
distinguish the times, and to know the things that belong to our peace in this
our day: the ignorance whereof may occasion the misery of man to be great,
because he misseth his time.

This, and all your other arguments of the same nature, are no other for
substance, then what were formerly made use of by the Papists and Episcopalists
against your selves; which have not the least might to dishearten, or strip us
of our birthright in this prophecy, though coming from Mr. Elmestone. I shall
wish you for the future, either to disprove our interpretation, and give a
better and clearer sense, or forbear to speak evil of what you know not.

Now come we to your concluding argument specified in the 36 page of your book;
wherein you lay a high charge against our way and Tenants, as if they were
against the second and fourth Commandments, the three first Petitions, and a
hinderance to men's salvation.

Answ. We have already removed the violence of all this after-charge in
several passages of this treatise. This general return will here suffice; in
which we utterly deny your accusation; and affirm, that to follow Christ in
the path of separation, to exercise in this our journey those ordinances now
inspired by his Spirit, both in private, as also in our public assemblies,
especially on the Lords day, with a forbearance of the rest for the present,
which lie void of his administration, till his glory return from heaven to
sanctify them again for use, thereby avoiding the idols that must necessarily
ensue upon taking them up, can be no breach, but a fulfilling of the second and
fourth Commandments both in the affirmative and negative part: and this, being
grounded on the call and warrant of our Lord Jesus, must be done in his name,
advance his kingdom, fall into the compass of his divine will and pleasure,
agreeable to the three first petitions. The Virgins going forth to meet the
bridegroom, was a preparatory to that illustrious marriage, wherein Christ in
the open prospect of his dispensation will appear a husband, and they that are
wise a married wife when entered into the wedding-chamber of the Lamb. I say,
this high way in the wilderness, being the medium and passage to that spiritual
magnificence, tends to exalt the glory, throne, scepter, and kingdom of Jesus
Christ. And this walk can no way hinder the salvation of our selves or others,
but bends to the furtherance thereof; as the consciences of many can testify,
who have found the ministry to be as waters springing out of the desert, Isa.
48.21. chap. 41.17, 18. even when they could obtain no such new rising springs
of refreshments with you.

But Sir, Seeing you have so furiously charged against us, we shall entreat you
to reflect upon your own way (for, nosce teipsum, know your selves, is the
first point of wisdom) and you may with eyes anointed with spiritual
eye salve, discern, that you usurp a power only proper to the King of
Saints, to set up visible Churches, to make members and officers upon your own
call, power and spiriting; and that by omission of some of the primitive
ordinances, and placing other inventions in their stead. Thus to erect a
bestial Idol with subjection thereto, must be directly opposite to the second
Commandment: and having built up such a golden Calf, can do no less then
blemish and defile all your services in your assemblings on the Lords day,
contrary to the fourth command: and withal you bottoming the same upon your
own consultations, without a celestial investment first as power from above,
must honor your own names, derogating from the name of Christ; set up and
magnify your own kingdoms, eclipsing and darkning his, do your own wills in
opposition to the will of God; and by this, undermin'e the three first
petitions. Which machination of yours, striking so against the radix of
Divinity, can no way forward the salvation of souls, but is prejudicial, and a
drawing people to disobedience; not a bearing up of the stative ordinances,
wherein his sovereign power and goodness will be set forth, but a laying them
upon a humane Antichristian base, and thereby so changing them, that they carry
the majestical name, spirit and wisdom of man, the very Image of a beast; not
an establishing of doctrine therein, and a right officiated ministry, but a
broaching of errors, a constituting and bearing up of a delusive Ministry, as
a false Christ and false Prophet, the foundation of such untimely and
misleading visibilities (for though sometimes you preach up God and Christ
only, as coming in his Name in pretense, yet you establish and teach up
another in discipline, therein coming in your own name;) not a preventing of
scandals, and restraining licentious living by true discipline, but a causing
scandals and offenses by a false, not only in particular persons, but in your
whole unseasonable stated Churches; and therefore it brings a general woe,
Matthew. 18.7. Rev. 18 6. and this miserable Scotland has experienced, in whom
your greatest boast, glory, and hope of and for your Presbyterian Government
resided. You may plainly see how God works against such designs.

It is true, that in the Primitive day, when Church Government came from
Christ, and manifest smoke, wind, fire and lightning of his Spirit, which
breathed in and operated by the stative Ordinances of Ordination, Confirmation,
Church Censures, etc. there was the life, light, and glory of the same Spirit,
which presented the sovereign power, beauty and wisdom of Jesus Christ the
husband, and made them effectual means for the perfecting and completing of the
Church his spouse. But since this externality was forsaken and rejected by the
Spirit, and the key thereof being grounded barely upon an humane Antichristian
base, became bottomless, the same Ordinances have been found to be lifeless,
and empty of their primitive excellency; not to have the least virtue to
convey any spiritual nutriment to the Saints, but rather to increase formality,
and decrease the power of godliness. Nay, they springing from a bestial root,
have brought forth such bitter fruit, as has been most opposite to the
workings of the Spirit of grace. This key of Regiment through the West remained
solely in the hands of Rome for many ages, where it clouded and by degrees
darkened the whole Hemisphere with the poisonous sumes and exhalations arising
from that bottomless furnace: and though at first it came in more mildly in a
lamb-like visage, yet at last when discovered, it brake out into such open rage
against the godly, as has filled the Chronicles with most sad and tragical
stories. Of later years in England, it was taken thence and transplanted into
the Bishops, who by the enjoyment thereof so trampled upon the Saints, that we
are all sensible of that Antichristian spirit therein reigning and triumphing.
And those places where the Presbyterian Discipline has had the full swinge,
and was backed by the sword of the Magistrate, are known to abound with more
formality, worldly mindedness, nay open profaneness, then is usually to be found
with us in England; where also some precious men, who could not lay their
consciences passive to their yoke of tyranny, have felt the stripes of their
cruelty so deep in their persons and estates, as has forced some to flee from
their native Country; witness Scotland. The same spirit in our lesser
Corporations, acts its chiefest strength in disuniting of the Lords people,
where also the abovenamed Ordinances are lifeless and ineffectual: and this
many (the choicest amongst them) begin to be sensible of. It is only the
mystical Church or foundation of true grace, that is the pillar and ground of
truth, while the outward court is cast out, and becomes the base of falsehood.

In the close your Book, you excuse your being long before you sent us your
Answer.

Answ. We suppose you took the larger time to recollect and muster up your
chiefest forces into one entire body. It appears to us, that many lines meet in
that your center; and as the Poet says in another case, Virtus coit omnis in
unum.
Many results in one seem to combine,
to stablish what will fall by strength divine.


POSTSCRIPT.
WE shall in the last place pass to your Postscript, where you demand from Rev.
15, who the harpers are that stand at the glassie sea, etc.

Answ. Those harpers are a separated, not a stated people, which we have
evidenced in the fourth and foregoing Paragraph, and proved by several
Reasons. We shall here more amply decipher their nature, property, and stand,
out of the three several texts of the Revelations, in which the Spirit paints
them forth.

The first is Chap. 7. v. 9. There you may see them not to be whole nations,
but a great number of, or out of nations, being chosen from the rest, who stand
immediately before the throne of grace, clothed with white robes of rejoicing,
praise, and virgin-like purity, all palms in their hands, an ensign of victory
and peace, and alluding to the multitude who followed and cried Hosanna, when
Christ rode up to Jerusalem, Mat. 21.8, 9. Mark 11.8, 9, 10. Luke 19.37, 38.
all which attributes a difference of them from the sealed number and Witnesses
before. Verse. 14, they come out of great tribulation, which manifests the
time to be after the 1260 years. Verse. 15, these for their diligence in holy
exercises, are said to serve God day and night in his temple: their hungering
and thirsting no more, nor the sun and heat lighting on them, v. 16. infers the
spiritual famine and affliction they underwent the preceding season, from which
now they are perpetually freed. Their seeding by the lamb, their being led to
living fountains of water, answers to the fertility and springs of water (for
spiritual strengthening and recreating) breaking forth in the wilderness, or
highway there to Sion, Isa. 35.6, 7. chap. 41.18. chap. 48.21. chap. 49.9, 10.
Psalm. 107.35. and to the precious promises made to the same people, Hos. 2.
from verse. 14. to 19. Isa. 42.16.

The second Scripture is Chap. 14. Verse. 1, is a type of the sealed number
under Antichristisme, expressed chap. 7. from verse. 1. to 9. who stand upon the
mystical mount of election, or grace. The separated Saints are presented from
verse. 2. where they are not only rejoycers as before, but harpers, they
singing for joy of heart, and tuning their sounding instruments of praises,
Isa. 51.11. Psalm. 98. Isa. 42.10. Chap. 30.29. Their song for matter, v. 3. is
a new song, suitable to the new work then created for them, Isa. 43.19. Chap
42.16.9, 10. which was so abstruse and mysterious, that none amongst the
nations and false stands could truly learn it, but the 144000 redeemed from
the earth, who by degrees will be capable thereof, come out, and join with the
harpers. Verse. 4, these are not defiled with women, which notes their
separation from all false Churches either of the wilderness or secret chambers;
for they are virgins, preparing for the marriage to come in chap. 19. and as
the Lord goes before them, so do they follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes,
from vial to vial, both in separating from, and rewarding of: they are not
only redeemed from the earth with the 144000, but also purchased from amongst
men, which hints at their separation from the rest of the world: and being the
first thus bought, have the honor of being the first fruits unto God and the
Lamb. In verse. 5, for the pureness and sincerity in their Ministry, which
brings Divinity up into a Gospel-glory, they are said to have no guile in their
mouths, for they are without fault before the throne.

The third text is Chap. 15. v. 2, 3, 4. in which their victory, station, and
song, are more distinctly and accurately described. Verse. 2, their victory is
over the Beast, (to wit, all usurped Hierarchies over consciences, whether
Romish, Episcopal, Presbyterial, of any other) his Image, (their stated Frames
and Ordinances formed according to their carnal imaginations) his Mark, (a
subjection thereto:) from all which the harpers are redeemed; and from the
number of his name, as a people separated in their distinguished assemblies.
Their stand was on a glassie sea, the clear, pure, bright sensings of
Scripture; which for the copiousness is called a sea; for its perspicuity, of
glass, 2 Cor. 3.18. which is mingled with fire, to consume the timber, hay, and
stubble of Antichristian materials, 2 Thessalonians. 2.18, and to purge the filth of
the Saints by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning, Isa. 4.4.
In verse. 3, their song is the song of Moses and the Lamb, for their outward and
spiritual deliverance; the substance of which is compendiously drawn out in
verse. 3 and 4. the like is declared in Chap. 14.7, etc. And these, for time,
arose presently with the Angel-pourers, as appears by their being conjoined
together, verse. 1, 2. by their victory and triumphant song, which begins with
and continues all the series of the vials. These judgments and wonders of God
have been of late so clearly manifested with us, that no man spiritually
enlightened can gainsay it.

Having thus delivered the state of these harpers, we shall now acquaint you
why your National Churches, whether Episcopal or Presbyterial, are none of
their number. They for time arose long before the 1260 years of tribulation
were ended, and were not a selected company out of nations, nor redeemed from
amongst men, but were whole nations good and bad incorporated into one leprous
body: they were not clothed with white robes of joy, praise, and purity, nor
stand immediately before the throne; but even the godly amongst them were
clothed in sackcloth, stood visibly in the streets of the great city, and
before earthly Hierarchies, who as terrene gods lorded it over them, whereby
the sun and heat smote them, as was too well known in the Bishops times, and by
the proceedings of others elsewhere both before and since: neither are you a
growing people, with an increase of spiritual nourishment, and new rising
springs of heavenly refreshings; but are declining to more formality and
deadness, and will daily decrease, as the light of Truth increases; your
kingdom grows full of darkness: neither do you return from Babylon, but sit
down in that desert. Thus you may take notice how contrary you are to the
separated people expressed Chap. 7. Give us leave to show you how unlike your
National Churches ruled by Bishops or Presbyters, are to the harpers painted
out in Chap. 14. They sing not the new song of triumph over the Beast, but the
old one of crying him u^ and applauding him: they stand not immediately before
the highest throne, but before Classical, Provincial, and National Synods,
coming as a medium between, and ruling over the conscience: they are not
virgins in their purity from the Beast, nor wait they for the marriage to come,
nor are undefiled with strange women; but are strange women, boasting with her,
Chap. 18.7, that they sit as Queens, are already married in their visible
constitutions, and their members defiled with the same false married Churches:
they follow not the Lamb in his call of separation, but go before him in their
own of stating: they are not redeemed from amongst men, as herein obtaining the
honor of the first fruits, in whose mouth is sound no guile; but remain
bondaged themselves, and labor to enthral others (as their frequent
importuning the Magistrate for power to compel, does testify) still retaining
their old mustie store, and sour wild grapes of Antichrist; your Ministry is
foully corrupted with guile, and false principles about discipline, accompanied
with bitter and odious invectives against these harpers. Lastly, let us examine
your National Churches abovenamed by Chap. 15. They stand not simply upon a
sea of glass, the word only purely sensed, but upon the more gross
interpretations of the Fathers and other learned men in darker times, from whom
they esteem it presumption to differ, though to the native Truth, as your sharp
and frequent reproofs of me for differing from them, does demonstrate: they
have not obtained a conquest over the Beast, but have erected a Beast in
Episcopacie, Presbytery, etc. his Image in their Canons and other Ordinances
changed into his likeness; his Mark, by a subjection thereto: nor are their
members in distinct congregatings, as being off from the number of his name,
but are all numbered to him. And those who now adhere to these National
Hierarchies, are so far from harping out this triumphant song of victory by
separation and war, and singing, True and righteous are thy ways herein, thou
King of Saints; as they are secret mourners, having a wound in their spirits at
these his just proceedings, and his judgments now made manifest: witness of
late the dolor for the overthrow of the Scots, who fought in the Presbyterian
cause; your public reproaches against the Separation, with inward torments for
their freedom, together with many other passages; which show, how this great
work of God now beginning, is closed and fast locked up from your
understandings. We desire from our souls, that the Lord Jesus, who has the key
of David, would open the door of your hearts, whereby his admired designs,
changes, and works to be done, might enter. In the mean time, you may behold
your folly in bringing those texts to convince us, and prove your practice,
every circumstance whereof agrees with the way of separation, and rises up as
so many witnesses against yours.

You ask us, Whether the Ordination of Ministers in such National Churches, be
a mark of the Beast.

Answ. Seeing the Churches themselves are not these harpers, but such as stand
under a bestial power, the Ministers must be of the same nature with the
Churches. And your Ordination, whether by Bishops or preaching Presbyters
coming from the corrupt key of Rome (though done by fasting and prayer) must
carry with it the mark or brand of the same Beast; or if the man be truly
pious, his outward livery. And thus to judge, is neither ignorance nor malice,
as you charge it, but the discovery of Christ in his Revelation, who through
our sides you are pleased to defame with black terms of obloquie.

To your next, we say that you are not clothed with the white garments of the
harpers, but with the black habit of sackcloth.

You tax us with omitting singing of Psalms.

Answ. For mine own particular, I question not the Ordinance of vocal singing
of Psalms, though some do scruple the manner thereof, as conceiving it to be
much abused. Albeit this harmonizing here, is not tied to meter, but is the
inward joy wrought in the hearts of Gods separated Saints for their noble
redemption from the Beast, and the new mercies bestowed on them, which breathes
forth either in secret ejaculations, or acts more openly in Ministry, Prayer,
Thanksgiving, etc.

Object. You quaere. How we can be in our return from Babylon, and yet within
Babylons territories.

Answ. A man may be returning from London, and yet within the line of
Communication: so in this gradual separation, we cannot go clear off at once,
but by degrees. See Parag. 4. Reas. 7.

Before we conclude, give us leave to propound a few Quaeries very material to
be considered of: 1. In general for all. 2. In particular to you.


The general shall be a brief contracting of the whole body of this
Controversy; and are as follows.

1. Whether the being of yours or any other Office with us passing by
succession from the Primitive, came by a Lineal descent from Rome, or not. If
some say Not, then whether any can prove their Genealogy distinct and apart
from her. If from Rome, (as you confess) then whether the essence and
foundation of Office be true there, or not. If true, then whether she must not
radically be a true Church and a Sion. If she be in her constitution false,
bottomless, and Babylon, whether there were not a dissolution of your line and
chain.

2. Whether a true congregated Church, set in a right and complete order of
discipline in our Western Horizon, can be proved from the Apostolical times to
be distinct from the Romish Synagogue. If not (as the Scripture and the event
does clearly manifest) then must there be a cessation and departure of Gods
glory from this visibility, proved from these Scriptures: Rev. 7.1. Chap. 9.1,
2, 3, etc. Chap. 11.2.

3. Whether (the primitive order sinking) there must not be a new call and
spiriting from God for the first restoring and beginning of this work, whereby
his glory may return to make it a true spiritual and heavenly building.

4. Whether such a visible administration that gives being to a true, pure,
genuine and single Gospel-marriage be to be seen in the first initiation of any
of our new-built Church-formes, or can be evidenced by Scripture to be existing
at this present, or whether this same be not prophesied not to return till
after the downfall of Babylon, by these Scriptures, Rev. 19.2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9.
chap. 11. 19. Hos. 2.19, 20. Isa. 62.4, 5. chap. 14.15. Mic. 4.3, 8. Mat. 25.10.

5. Whether (if so) all our visible constitutions must not be man in their
groundwork, and so numbered to that beast, Rev. 13.18.

6. Whether then the way prepared, cast up, approved of and called unto for his
Servants now to walk in, be not a separation with distinct Congregations,
without sitting down as Queens in visible constitutions. I shall desire the
Godly seriously and impartially to examine these Quaeries by the word of God.
We were all in a spiritual sense asleep: and it is no shame, but a honor to
yield to the conquest of truth, and suffer it freely to triumph over our former
misleadings and wanderings

The Quaeries in particular to you, are these.

1. Whether (as above) your Office of the Ministry (the cornerstone of your
outward building) being derived from the national hierarchy, which successively
came from the Pope, be not one of Babylons stones: and whether it be not
against this text, Jer. 51.26. They shall not take of thee a stone for
foundations, but thou shall be desolate for ever, says the Lord.

2. Whether your gathering of Gospel-Churches out of true Gospel-Churches
(which you acknowledge the national to be) be warranted by the Scriptures: if
so, we desire your proofs for it.

3. Whether your making of Elders without laying on of hands, be agreeable to
the primitive practice.

4. Whether the receiving in of members made by your selves, be taken from the
primitive pattern: that is, whether such a Covenant, and subscription thereto,
was the Ordinance by which men entered into Church Fellowship in that
Gospel-day; or whether members were not then received in by laying on of hands:
if by such a Covenant, we desire your Scriptures to warrant it.

5. Whether all this be not to omit, or transgress the laws, and change the
ordinances, Isa. 24.6.

Yet one thing more. You have taken a great deal of pains through your whole
Book, to prove a true visible stated Gospel Church thorowout the Gospel Times:
but all this while you have not showed us which of all the several forms is
that true stated Church. Rome arrogates it, the Lutherans usurp it, the English
Episcopacie plead it, the Presbyters and you challenge it, the Dippers
appropriate it, those called Brownists claim it as their sole interest, the
Independents assume it. And truly, the wisest man in Europe taking a through
view of every one of these Church-models, will be at a stand certainly to
determine which of them is the true and right; and which had its lineal descent
in the rectitude of Order from the Primitive. The more accurately he examines,
the greater occasion he may find to question all.

Sir, I beseech you not to take in prejudice, what I have here presented in
benevolence. For though many things may appear something strange at first, yet,
I hope, upon second thoughts you will find them no other then the real truths
of God, delivered by the Prophets, Apostles, and the Lord himself. I presume
you will not adjudge him, who has been and is your cordial friend, to become
your enemy, because he tells you the truth, and that in the same language the
Spirit in Scripture speaks. Indeed, I may seem to some to be over-sharp: but
the discoveries by the vials are so imparted by the Spirit, as at the one side
to increase the torments of the marked soldiers of Antichrist, so on the other
side thoroughly to searse and eat out the mystery of that deceit too deeply
riveted in the minds of many vessels of honor. For though the Spouse was not
totally deceived, so as to be struck at the heart or killed, yet was she so
much deluded, as to receive a wound, Cant. 5.7. which cannot recover a perfect
cure, but by a searching salve. And for my self, I dare not daub in the things
of God, nor call evil good, nor darkness light, nor soothe up with flattering
titles, left my Maker should destroy me. When I see my brother straying, I am
commanded to rebuke with plainness, and not in any wise to suffer sin to rest
upon him, to omit which duty were a symptom of hatred, Lev. 19.17. And I will
assure you, they are no other then the faithful wounds of a friend, which in
receiving, may carry the virtue of an excellent oil, that will not break your
head, but only remove such putrefaction, as might otherwise procure your loss
at the day of Jesus Christ.

FINIS.

