COLONEL JAMES HAYS SPEECH TO THE PARLIAMENT Upon the Debate concerning
TOLERATION.

As it was taken by Anonimus A Member of the House, and sent to the Press with
this EPIGRAM on the Author.

(...)
Faelix fifa suis caelebrata Catonibus Eheu!
Clodius in miseros furit, and Catalina Britannos.
Printed in the Year 1655.

Coll: JAMES HAYS Speech to the Parliament upon the Debate concerning TOLERATION.
Mr. Speaker:
SOlomon has a notable advertisement, Prove: 21.23. Who keeps his mouth, and
his tongue, keeps his soul from troubles: and yet my spirit whispers me in
the ear, that whosoever at this time keeps his mouth, involveth his soul in
trouble. To me the Declaration of Jesus appears on the wall, Mat: 10.33.
Whosoever denies me before men, him will I deny before my father which is in
Heaven.

Sir, the ties of God are upon me, for my self and the people for whom I serve
here; is not the Lords prerogative? are not the privilidges of the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ called now in question? if I should hold my peace, how might my
silence be interpreted? suffer me therefore Sir, in all submission to speak to
the matter of your present Debate which in it self is of so high concernment,
and will undoubtedly p^ove of that consequence to this Commonwealth, that much
of the future peace and happiness of the State will depend upon it.

There has been much arguing these days bygone concerning a general
Toleration, and liberty of Conscience.

Sir, before you can happily discern either way in this question; I suppose
you will find it necessary to turn your eye toward Religion, upon which this
Toleration, Indulgence, and Liberty does reflect.

Religion, Sir, is that which ties the mind of Man to God, it is that requires
the Princes of the earth to rule in meekness, Justice, and sobriety; it is that
commands the subject to obey with love, and alacrity, and that unites the minds
of men amongst themselves. Hence the unity of bodies, the combining in one
politic society, from whence the unity of fortunes, the mind ruling the body,
and the body the interest and goods, which three are the only props and pillars
of all States, and Incorporations in the world. It Is a true aphorism. Quibus
non unio voluntatum non potest esse una habitatio: for as the soul rules over
the body natural by authority, and proper dominion, and the spirit by
deputation; so does Religion the soul of the body politic rule over the
State so absolutely, that if it be in distemper, the spirit will doubtless be
out of frame, and the body in danger.

A sick soul sir, will disorder the soundest spirit, the strongest body: how
often has it made the feet to precipice the bulk? how often the hands to cut
the throat? is it so Sir? then what shall become of that State where Religion
is misframed? O! shall not the Rulers rage, and the people miscarry?

I beseech you look narrowly to this, lest by granting too large a Toleration
you dishonor God, and disorder the State:

I am far from the opinion of those who ascribe unto themselves the
dispensation, and interpretation of the Law, converting their own will, into a
Law, allowing the world no immediate warrant for their faith, but their simple
authority: by these means changing the company of rational believers into a
hive of hooded smatterers.

I do also much differ in point of judgment, from these, who misregarding all
Law, and Ecclesiastic constitution, and practices, strive to turn the bounded
christian, the household of faith, into a drove of Rambling untied, untoward
Enthusiasts. Mistake me not Sir, I do not reflect in the least, upon any
soberminded christian, whom in my soul I love, and honor with my heart. No Sir,
of those I mean, of whom it may be said (I fear) they profess God with their
mouths, but live without him in the world.

That you may the better decide in this matter, and perfectly discern, both
what to tolerate, and what to cast out, I would have you keep a mids betwixt
these two extremes.

First, Sir let the Law and prior Ecclesiastic practices grounded on that Law
be your Rule, otherwise you will turn all into Anarchie again, and live at
random, assure your self, Si terminos a Deo and naturae constitutos
transiveris, qued ultra est infinitum est: No man can tell what you will not do,
for you know that Dato uno absurdo infinita sequntur, and I fear if you
overleap the Law and practice of the Church, there will be nothing after, but
Scelus scelere vindicatum, One crime made good by another.

Secondly, Sir, I would have you to try the truth of that Law, the verity of
these practices; these I humbly conceive, will be your best guides through this
desert of Toleration.

Over all you will find their was one uniformity in Religion, no such
Toleration, as is here aimed at, no liberty, no indulgence, as to fundamentals;
will you consult the unwritten Divine and natural Law? it will tell you it was so
ab initio. Advise with the written Law? the Scriptures, the Law of Nations? and
they will show you it was commanded to be so. Enquire at Reason? and she will
assure you it ought to be so. Look into the practices of the purest, primest,
ecclesiastic soeieties? and they will declare it was so. All which being found, I
cannot conceive, why it ought not to be so still amongst you; and the rather,
because there is nothing more certain, then all Ecclesiastic societies were
bounded by Laws, and who is so ignorant, as not to know? or so impudent as to
deny? that every Law has a double faculty, namely, one suasorie, another
obligatorie, By the first without the last, it differs nothing from a
Counsel. It may as a virtue persuade, but cannot as a duty oblige. It is the
last, the obligatorie part that makes the law, it is the form of the law, and
gives it being, and he who affirmitively will declare such a thing to be a Law,
and negatively say that law has no compulsorie power, and that no man shall be
tied to obedience by penalties, or otherwise, he must pardon me to tell him he
makes no Law at all. I speak this for you Sir, who has declared the true
Christian Protestant reformed Religion, to be the profession of England: If you
shall on the other part declare that none shall be compelled thereto by
penalties, or otherwise, but that all shall be protected in the exercise of
their Religion, though differing in judgment from the public profession. In
this case I desire to know what you have done? I say you have made no law for
that profession, but on the contrary a Law against it, for your negative does
closely stifle your affirmative, and makes that you aimed at for a law to be of
no force, but leaves all to a graceless liberty.

For the clearing of all Sir, I conceive it will be necessary to take a view of
the general state of the Church, first, (before you come unto the particular
Churches,) as it is set down in the Revelation of Saint John, which was a
vision of the Church, As it was from the beginning, and shall continue to the
end of the world. How sweet is it to observe the order of God (in his will
toward the Church,) as it pleased him to reveal it to Saint John! where you
find 1. Seals, 2. Trumpets, 3. Vials: with us, Churches, Laws, Penalties; seven
Seals opened, seven Trumpets blown, seven Vials powered forth. To each Church
called God gives, and proclaims the law; to the law proclaimed he appends the
Anathema, ordains the penalties, denounces Judgment on the Rebellious. And this
you will find verified in the particular survey of the several Churches in order.

The first whereof is the Archetypical Church, the Church of Angels. God Sir
being unum, verum, bonum, the only true Good: and the nature of good being Esse
sui diffusivum: God in the contemplation of his own goodness, did beget in
himself a desire to diffuse it, and make it communicable, and practicable,
which could not be without creatures: Therefore did he create the Archetyp
wherein the shapes, and Ideas of all things were breathed; and there, and then
did he send forth the spotles intelligences: who does inhabit that infinite
vacuity which is filled with the Majesty of God, whose Religion and work it is
to sing praise, honor, and glory to the Jasper on the Throne, with the rainbow
about him.

Thus Sir, was the first seal opened, the first mystery revealed; the first
Church called by the Lamb even the Bereshith, the principium principians, the
word, and wisdom of the Father, by whom al things were made. The characters of
which Church were: a white horse, a Crown: and bow: The Ensigns of Candor
Victory and triumph. So was it, and shall continue a pure, victorious,
triumphant, Church. Then was the first Trumpet blown, the first Vial powered
out, the first Law proclaimed, the Anathema appended, the first vengeance
denounced against the Rebels, the authors of division, the fountain of
Toleration.

In the constitution of this Church, Sir, there was but one God known by the
one great ineffable Name (...), One Sephiroth, one Emanation, one great power,
one company of Angels, of one mind, thinking the same, and singing the like,
all things in common amongst them, none knowing more than other, to none a more
full Vision of God than the rest, no place or possession peculiar to any, this
is the nature of Angels, Sir, thus it was, thus it is, and thus it shall be
with these blessed spirits for ever and ever.. The name of toleration was not
known here, heresy a stranger to this happy society, til Lucifer, and his
tender Conscience brake forth.

There is a proverb, which in all Ages of the Church has been found of
universal truth; namely, that God had never a Church, but the Devil had a
Chapel in some corner thereof. Sir, all Religion has its superstition, all
Doctrine its heresy, and here it did begin, even in this, the purest, and
perfectest Church that ever was, or shall be.

The Devil emulous of the glory and greatness of God, would needs set up his
own Image, erect a congregation of his own, by dividing that blessed unity into
two, Right, and wrong, truth, and falsehood. But what came of it, Sir, was he
tolerated? was he suffered to go so? No, the spirit of unity and truth went out
against him, with crown, and bow? and conquering did conquer the prince of
Darkness, cast him out of the congregation, deprived him the happiness of
Heaven and thurst him down to Hell, and the earth to have, his dominion amongst
the sons of Men, hence that Church purchased, and shall while the world lasts
enjoy the name of Triumphant

By this punishment God did not only condemn toleration; assert the truth, the
unity of Worship, the entirenes of Religion; clearly holding forth that he
would admit of no copartner in the Worship, and praises of the Angels: but also
did declare the detestable nature of heresy, and how unsupportable a thing it
was: and thus did he by the power of his own Council which cannot etr, reunite
the Church again.

The second Church was the Paternal church, that whereof Adam under God, was
Lord, and High Priest. In the constitution of this church you will find there was
but, One God, one man, one commandment, one Religion, one way of Worshipping
that God, one treasure, and common fortune for all, one body to enjoy that
fortune, one mind in that body: Adam knew none above God, loved none as God,
served none but God, feared none besides God There was no heresy in Doctrine
here, no schism in discipline, Adam stood in need of none to teach him, and as
few to enforce him to obey. All was one Sir, an universal Oneness; this was the
first, and great model amongst men.

Thus was the second Seal opened, the second Mystery revealed, the second
Church called, the Law proclaimed. Eat not of the Tree of knowledge, etc. Gen:
2.17. The Anathema appended, The day thou eatest thou shall surely dye,
comparatively like in every thing to the pattern, the Archetypicall Church,
only differing in the prophetical characters, the red horse and the sword, the
badges of blood, war, and manslaughter; signifying that this Church should be
liable to many, and great temptations; and the spirit of the times much
addicted to blood, cruelty, and revenge.

All things here were answerable to the pattern til the appearing of Satan, and
founding of heresy by him; Then were the characters of this Seal made
manifest, and read in Mundo. The pure perfect, and Trinial unity, (the prop
and pillar of all societies) rent asunder and all turned to confusion: Nothing
now but blood and War: God against man, and man against God, Father against
Son, and Brother against Brother, and the Devil against all, and all for
Religions sake. Adam was one, and the Devil made two, and that was Heresy: God
had a Temple, and now begins Satan to have a Synagogue: God had his Priest, and
the Devil his Chaplain. Abel of one mind, Cain of another, Cain draws the
sword, Abel is therewith killed. Thus the unity of mind, the unity of bodies
rent in two. Isaac had one portion, and Ishmael had another: Isaac the promise,
Ishmael what he could gain; his hand against all, and all against him. Thus
came the happy, and harmless unity of fortune into the community of possession;
to be converted into the miserable, and turbulent Law of property. Jacob was of
one mind, Esau of another; he chose the birthright, even Sacrum sacerdotii;
Sir, Esaw somewhat else, Mammon, Dominium ventriculi, the possessions of this
Earth, the things of this world. Nay look over the whole Paternal time, even
from Adam to Moses; you will find nothing but heresy in doctrine, and schism and
division in the matter of worship. The impression of the red horse seconded
with War, blood, and wounds. The miserable effects of the tearing sword: And
yet throughout al, not one word of Toleration, still he who chooses the better
part, and adhears to the unity and purity of Religion, goes away with a
blessing; and the other positively, or by consequence loaded with a curse. Adam
is punished, Eve plagued, the devil condemned: though there was neither man nor
woman in the world besides, yet would not the Lord away with the breach of his
Law; the questioning of his fundamentals, no toleration in these Sir, no
liberty, no indulgence, no by-worship allowed; Abel approved, Cain banished,
Isaac chosen, Ishmael cast out, Noah saved, the world drowned, Lot delivered,
and Sodom burnt, and so forth over the whole History of that Church, you shall
find the signals of love toward the one, and the tincture of his wrath and
indignation cleaving fast to the other.

The third Church, Sir, was the National Church, called of God by Moses, the
third Seal opened, the third Mystery revealed, the Church called, the Law
proclaimed, the third Anathema appended, conform to the first plot in every
thing, except the characters, viz. the black horse, the pair of balances,
intituling on this society the dead, and lingering works of the Law, much
selfishness and home love flowing from the niceness of property, and affection
to interest, occasioning much contempt of the Law of God, and neglect of his
glory. All which you may observe in the constitution of that Church, and
progress thereof.

First Moses summons it by showing the people he was come from (...) to call
them to the worship of him who is, as Exodus 3.14.

Secondly, he setleth fundamentals, and declares the Law, as you may find Exodus
12. from 2. to 21 verse, where he instituteth the Passover, and feast of
unleavened bread.

3ly. He adds the Anathema, the Segregetur, no stranger shall eat thereof, as
verse 43. no forraigner, no hired servant, as verse 45; the penalty may be
easily collected from that of the tabernacle, N^mb^^: 5 And every stranger that
draws nigh shall surely dye, and more fully Deuteronomy. 30.15, and 19. See, I have
set before thee this day, life and good, death and evil. And more clearly he
tells the people that if they would fear the Lord, and keep his statutes, they
should be blessed, and possess the Land, but if otherwise, they should perish,
and be accursed for ever. Suffer me to make a little digression; it shall be
short, and to good purpose I hope.

Sir, you know it is, and has been the care, nay I may say, the ambition of
all masters of Arts, sciences, and societies to reduce these arts, sciences,
and societies, to the purest perfection; neither is this perfection they aim at
(let them think what they will) an imaginary one, or of their own invention
(if they do, they are in an error, no Sir, it is that pure, and primitive
perfection which was in all arts, sciences, and societies, and in which all
arts, sciences, and societies were at the beginning: for there is nihil novi
inter nos: As to that Sir, it is impossible to make things better then once
they were: and it should be every ones care to bring them as nigh to the
pattern as they can.

This was Moses his practice in the beginning of that National Church, he
studied to have all of one mind that thereby he might reduce this numerous bulk
into one body politic, one Congregation; and consequently have the goods and
fortune as one treasury to serve and uphold the State. He well knew that
Dissonantia inter se soepe convenient in tertio. And that Quaecunque convenient
in uno tertio convenient inter se: therefore did he begin with the unity of
mind, Religion the pole of the State, at which all courses, though never so
different on the line, will meet in the end. He well knew, that having once (both
out of policy and piety) conjured them with Religion, and made them one there,
he should easily unite their bodies unite their fortunes, and so become master
of all: The mind ruling the body, and the body the Interest.

All over the constitution of this Church you will find this triple unity
commanded; and in the progress still aimed at, in case of defection; I need cite
to you for the first, only the manner of celebrating the Passover, and feast
of nleavened bread, Exodus: 12. from 43 upward, where

First is shown who shall be admitted, namely, all the house of Israel, either
by birth, or consequence. By Birth, as the Congregation verse 47. by
consequence, The circumcised stranger, v: 48.

Secondly, to prevent Toleration, or any Debate thereabout, is declared who
shall not be admitted, No stranger, no forreigner, no hired servant, ver: 43.
and 45. No Heretic, no Schismatic? None but he that will submit to the bloody
law of circumcision.

Thirdly, is shown the manner how this feast was to be celebrated, 1. In one
house, 2. No flesh to be carried without doors, 3. No bones broken.

By all which you see, how that first he will have them of one mind in
profession, acknowledging the one true God, and him only; of one mind in
Worship, he will be adored in the accustomed, and commanded manner, all must be
circumcised. 2. He Will have them of one body, under the name of a Congregation,
ruled by one Law, as ver: 49. Thirdly, he will have them of one fortune, as it
were, by meeting in one house, once every year, and eating of one dish
together, And while they are together, he will have them neither to carry flesh
without doors, nor break a bone: showing he would have no division, no Heresies
amongst them, that he would own no temporary professors, no livery-men, no
petty worshippers abroad: Peremptorily saying, no uncircumcised person shall
eat thereof: No Toleration, on any terms. This was but a small comfort to the
Libertines, whose squeemish, and tender stomachs could eat no Lamb with the
Congregation of Israel in the house of God; and yet perhaps they had an
appetite to devour Swines flesh with the Sons of Belial in Bethaven, the house
of iniquity.

The second remarkable passage against this Toleration is, the giving of the
Law at Mount Sinai, where you find the command of keeping the Sabbath to be so
very strict, that the very stranger within the gates is bound thereby. This (I
believe) looks liker compulsion then Toleration.

The third, and singularly observable thing in that Church against Toleration,
is to be seen in the great and mavelous fabric of the Tabernacle. Let no man
think that this was a bare piece of Artifice, signifying no more then what was
seen. It were ridiculous to think that God would have kept Mose^ 40 days in
the Mount, only to learn to build an house, which any ingenious artist could
have learned in one day ( I suppose) from a more unskilful master than was he
who taught Moses. No, it did contain within it the true mystery of all things
betwixt Alpha and Omega. God had said, Ostendam tibi omne bonum: And there he
made good his promise. For in the Mount he gave him a full sight of the
Archetype; and he commands him to build this house according to all that he saw
in the Mount. I do esteem it high arrogance to think that the smallest pin
thereof wanted some notable symbol or other: which, were it suitable for this
time, and this place, I should presume to evince by undeniable arguments; now I
shall only speak so far as relates to the present purpose now in hand.

Seldom falls it out, that a skilful master builder contrives for his own house
rooms which are superfluous: And can we be bold to think, that the Omnipotent
God of infinite wisdom who framed all, has put any thing unto this artifice of
his without a reason?

In this Tabernacle it is observable that it was al divided into three, 1:
Structure, 2ly Apparate, 3ly. Salva guarda, or the Temple militia. Again the
structure also into three, 1 Sanctum sanctorum, 2 The room for the Altar and
sacificing Levites, 3 The porch of the Temple or the Court of the Congregation.
Observe that the first was made of Gold, the second of Shittim wood, and the
third of courser materials yet. In the Apparat also three, 1. The Ark, the
mercy seat, and cherubims for the first room, 2 The Altar, the candlesticks,
the table, for the second, 3 Hangings, pillars, sockets, etc. for the third.

Observe, Sir, that the first room and furniture was neither seen, nor
frequented by the people, but by the high Priest alone, and that once a year.
The second room was seen, but not frequented by the people. Sir, it was the
service of the Priests to offer daily sacrifice there. The third room, Sir, was
both seen, and frequented by the people daily. By the first is signified (as to
us) the plentiful mysteries of Jesus Christ, who is both Arca and Arcus, the
Ark and the Rainbow: The mercy seat, and cherubims being the word in the two
Testaments, betwixt which God is pleased to reveal himself to the world. These
Sir, are secretiora sacra, which must not be meddled with, must not be called
into question: None are allowed, none are suffered to doubt of the Deity, the
Unity in Trinity, the Incarnation, Birth, Life, Transfiguration Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, and glorification of the Word; these with several
others are such as may not be denied upon any account whatsoever

By the second room and things therein, are signified the holy Ordinances of
Jesus Christ, The administration of the word and Sacraments; which may be seen,
but not frequented by the people, they are to look on them with a reverend
esteem. It is the charge of the Priests to be here, and to dispense them to the
people, these are the Jewels of the Gospel, which though the people do often
see and taste, yet must they not be trampled upon by the Canaile.

The third room, and things therein were yet more course, daily seen, daily
frequented by the people, such are the motions of the spirit in our hearts,
flowing on us by frequenting the word and sacraments. Here is a proper place, a
peculiar way of exercise allotted for those who are thus inspired: the place
The Porch of the Temple: The Subject of their operation, the Congregation, the
time, Always* So that sublimate, inspired Laics, are to exercise their gift
upon all men, at all times, by a good and exemplary life and conversation. And
not at first hand to invade the Priests charge; the holy things of the Altar,
to which they are and ought to be but strangers. And if they will at it, brevi
manu, upon pretense of toleration and liberty to tender Consciences: then let
them remember what was done to Saul for sacrificing in Samuels absence 1 Samuel:
13.14. Was not his Kingdom torn from him? was Saul a King thus dealt with?
what think you then shall become of A?

All the mention that I find in the Tabernacle of Toleration, is; And the
stranger that comes nigh shall surely dye.

The third thing I mentioned of the Tabernacle was the Salva guarda, the
Militia, and that you have also in three.

1. Secular guards, the bands of Juda, Ruben, Issachar, Gad, etc. 2ly.
Spiritual guards, the squadrons of the Gershonits, Cohathites, and Merarits,
3ly. The authority of both Moses and Aaron within all: Thus was the Tabernacle
guarded, and the stranger that came nigh was to dye, what think you had become
of that people, and that house, if those guards Moses and Aaron had left their
posts, and laid the holy tabernacle open to the wild boars, the uncircumcised
Nations?

In sum Sir, this Tabernacle was a type of the harmony of Gods works in
nature, and of his spirit in the Church: You see there was in it a great
variety of many pieces, whereof every one was indented in another. The whole
standing in one conjunction. You are the boords whereof the mystical tabernacle
is framed, Heb. 8.2. This is that whereof Isaiah did prophecy* Isa. 33.20. Thine
eyes shall see Jerusalem a tabernacle which never shall be removed And whosoever
is disjoynted, he cannot be within the tabernacle. We read Numb. 19.15. of
Vessels which if they lay open or uncovered were to be accounted unclean You
are the Vessels of the holy and heavenly temple, framed by the hand of the
omnipotent potter whereof St. Paul 2 Timothy 2.20. says. Alia vasa in honorem,
alia in contumeliam. If you be not close and united among your selves, but
shaken asunder into pieces, you are the contumelious vessels of dishonor.

Were it not to surprise your time, Sir, I could evidence much of the mind of
God against Toleration manifested by his Judgments upon the usurpers of
liberty: the vilipenders of the Law in the days of Moses, Joshua, Judges,
Kings, and Prophets of Israel. Why should I mention the abomination of God, the
calf of Israel? the rebellion of Core? the avarice of Achan? The Apostasy of
the new Generation of Israel after Joshua? and the Elders serving Baal and
Ashtaroth? Their worshipping the Gods of Syria, Zidon, and Moab? Saul's
sacrificing in absence of Samuel? Uzziah his touching the Ark? Ahabs covenant
with Benhadad? The building of Altars, erecting of groves and high places by
the wicked Kings of Israel? upon all whom their iniquity did heavily fall, and
the wrath of God eminently appear.

It is singularly remarkable, Sir, that the remnant of Israel, who (after the
death of Gedaliah at Mispah went into Egypt, and did rebel against Jeremiah to
worship the Host of Heaven. That they studied to convince him with reason, and
that by two arguments. 1. When we did so before we had bread to eat: 2ly, and
our Heads did it with us, that is our Rulers and leaders, Jer: 44 17. But
neither reason nor authority can satisfy, for Jer: v 20, 21, 22, 23 confesses
that it was so, but replies, and did not God meet with you? he did, for is not
Aegypts destruction clearly prophesied for their sake ch: 46. What proved
liberty here, Sir? Ilias malorum, a gulf of evils.

Over all this Church you will find nothing like Toleration, which if it could
have been granted to any people, or congregated number in the world, sure it
had been to the beloved house of Israel? And yet we find, that once upon their
Rebellion, God was about to have extinguished the very name of Israel, and made
a Nation of Moses, Numb: 12.12. And another time upon the like rebellion, God
condemns them to 40 years wandering, and suffered none that rebelled ever to
enter the promised Land.

If any one person might have been dispensed with in this matter, sure it had
been Moses the Lords familiar acquaintance, and yet, for but one blow more than
enough, he was blown out of the land of Canaan, he see it, but never came into
it, Numb. 20 11, 12.

Was it so with the chosen Israel? with the great Moses? whom neither
authority, nor State necessity could excuse, O what shall become of the
reconciled Gentiles, if we fall into the like errors? my soul does tremble, to
think on the sad consequence^. Avertat Deus! I hope, I hope Sir, the Lord will
preserve you from this uncovert iniquity! fly the sin as you would avoid the
Judgment.

I heard an honorable person below move, The Isralites suffering slaves to live
amongst them, as an argument for Toleration.

I humbly conceive, Sir, there is a twofold toleraration, a civil toleration,
and a spiritual: for the first, Sir, they had indeed, and upon a civil account
merely; they suffered them to live amongst them, because they served them to
good use. Josh. 9.21. So did they tolerate and cherish their horses and Oxen.
As to the second, Sir, they were strangers to it, and it to them. They were
neither admitted to the privileges of Israel in the Tabernacle; neither were
they allowed to serve the Gentile Gods after their own fashion at home. So to
this spiritual toleration it was with them as with the beasts. If this be it,
that is pleaded for the separate Saints, In time I shall make bold to speak to
it.

It was also Objected, what Elijah said to the people, 1 Kings 18.22. If the
Lord be God follow him, if Baal follow him, I hope no man will conclude that
this flowed from him as a rule, or as if he meant to argue a toleration of the
worship of Baal. No, he spoke it by way of reproach, showing what abominable
inconstancy, and detestable ingratitude it was, and would prove, to forsake the
living God who had done so much for them, and their Fathers, and serve Baal,
and his Chemarims.

It was likewise Objected, Sir, that we are not now under the Law, and
therefore not to be tied by arguments raised from the Law, We are not indeed,
under the dark Law, the Typical law, the Law of works: yet are we under the law
of grace, even the glorious liberty of the children of God, which is the same
in substance, the old Law was in shadow, and which in its substance is as
forcible, and binding now as ever. There was not one tittle of that Law which
did not signify something to come, which when it is come, is of so much more
power as the substance is above the shadow. Christ himself says Mat: 5.17.
That he came not to destroy, but to fulfill the Law and till Heaven and earth
pass away, one jot of the Law shall not pass till all be fulfilled; and whosoever
breaks the least of these, and teaches others to do so, shall be least in
the Kingdom of Heaven. Now this liberty, The law of the Gospel, must not be
misconstrued, and taken for, a loosing of all religious bonds and ties. To
prevent which St. Pa^l Gal. 5.13: forbids for to use liberty for occasion to
the flesh, but for love one to^ard another, and explaineth himself ver. 19.
declaring the w^rks of the flesh to be adultery, fornication, uncleaness, and
so forth, and v: 22. the fruits of the Spirit to be love, joy, peace, etc.
against which, there is no Law. We are then still under a Law, witness Jam.
2.12. So do, and so speak, as they that must be judged by the Law of Liberty.

The fourth Church is that which now is, the Universal, the Christian Church,
Universal, I call it, because the Lord came to call the Jew and Gentile to
repentance. This Church was called, This mystery revealed, This seal opened by
the Lamb, indeed the Lamb inc^rnate Jesus Christ, the author and finisher of
our faith. The characters of this Church were a pale horse, and Death, with the
sword, hunger, and famine, and the Beasts of the earth, to signify, that, this
pale and new revived Church, the dead, dark, and lingering letter of the old Law
being quickened by the spirit, and converted into the light and liberty of the
Gospel, The law of grace, should be begun with death, and continued with
persecutions of several kinds; the worst whereof, and the greatest Enemies to
the Church of God, I esteem to be the foul noisome Beasts of the earth, the
children of this world who hatch and maintain heresies, Atheism and
Idolatry, the greatest of all evils, Ut credant mendacio qui veritati non
crediderint, these are the beasts you have most need to be afraid of at this
time.

In this Church you will find Jesus the founder of it to have been of One mind
with the Father, and the Father with him; he was of one substance with the
Father, and the Father with him, had no property, all things were common to
him. This he leaves in legacy to his Apostles, willing them to be of One
mind, and love one another Joh. 13.34. A new commandment give I you, that ye
love one another, for hereby shall ye be known to be my disciples. He required
it also as a duty and mean of obedience as Ioh. 14.15. If you love me, you
will keep my Commandments; for this same union and love, he prays the
Father before his death on behalf of the Apostles, Ioh 17.11. that they may be
one as we are one. In the constitution of this Church I find two notable
passages in order to this same Toleration. The one Luke 10.11. where sending
abroad his disciples to preach, he charged them if any City refuse them, to
shake the dust of their feet against it, a sad Anathema indeed Sir, if it were
rightly considered. The other is a sadder (yet,) from the mouth of Christ
himself, If any man deny me before men, him will I deny before my Father in
Heaven. Matt. 10.33. Observe Sir, that he who denies the doctrine of Jesus
denies himself: for he says whosoever shall break the least of these, etc.
stall be least in the Kingdom of Heaven. And who offends one of these little
ones, or who refuses the works of love to the needy, all you know they are
liable to several sad Anathemas.

Will you look into the pactice of the apostles after Christ, and you will find
it was thus with the disciples and beleivers then also, for Act. 4.32. it is
said; And the multitude of beleivers were of one heart, one mind, one Soul;
neither didany man say what he had was his own; all things weie commond, and
the Apostle Paul assures the Romans, 12.5. that being many they were one bedy
in Christ, and every one Members one of another. He exhorts the Corinthians in
that 2. Ep. 13.11. to be of one mind and live in peace and love and finally, he
tells the Ephesians. 4.4.56 That there is one body, and one Spirit one Lord, one
faith one Baptism, one God and Father of all, In all their Counsels also they
were unanimous, for it was for the sake of unity, they were called. We must
not think that they did call Counsels to question their own Religion. No, it
was prorenata, ever upon the occasion of some Schism, some heresy, as you
will find in all their Counsels where their work was to clear truths and
condemn errors, without regard to Toleration. In the beeleving and obeying of
these truths to which there was ever an Anathema appended, witness Paul, 1 Cor.
16.22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be Anathema, Maranatha, also
Gal. 1.8. If I or an Angel from Heaven Preach any other Gospel unto you let him
be accursed. In all the apostles Canons, you will ever find a Deponatur for the
Clergy a Segregetur for the seculars. All men equally tied to the rule without
any exception or Latitude at all.

The first Councils they kept was at Jerusalem the 34 year of our Lord on the
occasion of Electing Matthias to serve in Lieu of Judas the Heretic, and high
Priest of Satan, Act. 1. where it is worthy observation, that before Matthias
was Elected, and the entire nubmer made up: Peter shows the occasion of their
meeting to be the fulfilling, and uniting the Apostolical number, the supplying
of Juda's charge, And next he pronounces an Anathema of the Charge, a sad one
indeed. Let his habitation be desolate. This smells nothing of Toleration.

The second Council was at Jerusalem, anno 34, before the death of Steven, upon
occasion of a murmuring amongst the Grecians against the Hebrews, because their
Widows were neglected, Act: 6.

The third Council you will find Act: 15. the cause was dissension about
Circumcision.

The fourth Council is Act: 21. Anent the permission of legal things for a
time. In these two last there was something might seem to be like to Toleration,
for in the third the Gentiles are exempted from the burden of the Law; by the
fourth the Jews are allowed the exercise thereof. But

Consider, Sir, first, that these things purifying washing, shaving, were in
themselves no sin at all; In themselves I say, for if otherwise they had been,
surely Paul had neither tolerated nor used them, sin being condemned even in
Casu necessitatis. There being no excuse able to wash away the guilt of sin.
2ly. Things in themselves indifferent cannot be used at all times without sin.
For it is one thing to tolerate somethings in Ecclesia constituenda, another in
Ecclesia constituta; It may be in the one expedient, in the other altogether
unlawful; which flows from the respective consequences of either.

Whether the like necessity does press you now, which urged the Apostles then,
you best know: for my part, I doubt of it: And were it so. Yet can I find no
warrant in all the Scriptures to blaspheme Gods Name: And I am persuaded the
Toleration now aimed at, will tend to that in the highest degree. What madness
is it that men will be content to be bound up from acting, or speaking against
the supreme Magistrate? or the State, under no less pain than Treason? And who
so transgresses is hailed to the stake. And yet will they strugle to unwreath
themselves from the yoke of Christ, and under the notion of tender Consciences
must needs be tolerated, yea, (why say I tolerated?) warranted by a Law to
rebel against God, and his Son Jesus Christ, if they please.

Would you but enquire at the four great Counsels universally received by all;
Namely, that of Nice in anno 323. Consisting of 300 Bishops, against the
Arrians, and Quadradecimals. That of Constance against the Macedonian Heresy.
That of Ephesus against the Nestorian Heresy, and that of Chalcedon against
the Eutychean heresy. Enquire I say, at these, and you shall find, there was
nothing amongst them like Toleration. Their care and practice was the clearing
and asserting of truth, and condemning of Error.

Do not you think, Sir, but these same errors, or worse, are amongst you, which
were amongst them at that time? Is there none, think you, Sir, in England? who
will say with Arrius. Dei filius aliquando erat, aliquando non erat? None, who
with Macedonius holds that Spiritus sanctus nihil ad patris and filii
divinitatem and gloriam pertinet? None who maintains Filium esse (...) non
(...), similem non ejusdem essentiae? None think you, who with Nestorius
divides the natures of God, and callleth the Virgin Mary (...), not (...)? As
if she had brought forth Christ as man only, not as God and man. Is it not
possible to find one who will say, Christus non sub carnis veritate, sed figura in
terris laborabat? Assure your self, Sir, there are thousands of this nature
amongst you, and worse, if worse may be: Nay, (what say I may be?) there wants
not, who deny that they hold any thing of God, or his Son either, they knowing
neither, and denying both; acknowledging nothing above themselves in dignity,
(I mean of Essence.) In place they may, and yet with a grudg I verily believe.
Loose the bonds, and break the curb of Religion, and cherish such impious
vermin as this land swarms with; and you shall see, what will become of your
State in the end, when it will be too late to repent. Seeing therefore you have
the same Enemies.

In all Humility I advise, that you use the same weapons against them which
they did with so much, and so good sucecss: otherwise show us a better way how
to overthrow this monstrous Hydra.

I pray you, Sir, the sweet and gentle voice of Syon the peaceful air of the
Gospel, The faith of Jesus, and the principles of Christian Religion; are they
not as dear to us the Children of Light, as the dictates of Nature were to the
Sons of Adam? As precious to the Adopted Gentile, as the fearful voice of Mount
Sinay, the Thundering Trumpet, the lingering works, and uncertain Ceremonies of
the Law, were to the chosen Israel.

Let me exhort you therefore, Sir, you who sits in the chair of Moses, to take
to heart the building of the sanctuary! Remember, that so soon as the people
were delivered from the bondage of Egypt, the Tabernacle was provided for, Exodus
25. No sooner had David rest from his enemies, but he intended the building of
a house to God, 2. Sam. 7.1. And amongst the first and greatest of the miracles
of Christ was the purgeing of the temple, the subduing of the enemies and
abuses thereof. Remember that super hanc potram even according to all that you
have seen in the Mount, after the model of Sion must you build your house:
otherwise, if the storm blow your house will fall.

But you will happily reply, that you have done that already in passing a Vote on
the 35 Article, and declaring the Christian Religion, to be the profession of
England. A good beginning (I confess,) a fair frontispiece indeed. But, beware
that it prove not like the Egyptian Temples, brave stately buildings to look
upon: but within, nothing but the Images of Dogs, Catts, Crocodiles, and
unclean Beasts. I advise you, Sir, to provide for this House, and furnish it
according to all that I have told you. The kindliest guest that ever came into
a house is the Landlord himself. If you do it not, Sir, be sure your Enemies
will do it for you. But what say I? do it? I fear they have done done it
already.

UP therefore, and call to mind: that Christ did with zeal and passion, if any
may be attributed to him, purge the Temple, brake down the the tables, and cast
out the buyers and sellars. Call your Brother Aaron, (whose mouth the ord has
filled with Eloquence, and his heart with understanding) and you with him, and
he with you scourge out the unapparalled guests with the cords of the spiritual
sword, and civil execution. Be not ashamed to assert the truth, nor afraid to
condemn errors. And then you will know both what to Tolerate, and whom to compel.
And this is my humble motion.

FINIS.

