An Additional brief NARRATIVE Of a late Bloody DESIGN Against The Protestants
in Ann Arundel County, and Severn, in Maryland in the Country of Virginia.

AS ALSO Of the extraordinary Deliverance of those poor oppressed people.

Set forth by Roger Heaman Commander of the Ship Golden Lion, an eye witness
there.

LONDON, July.24. Printed for Livewell Chapman at the Crown in
Popes-Head-Alley. 1655.

An Additionall brief Narrative of a late bloody design against the
Protestants in Anne Arundell County, and Severne in Maryland, in the Country of
VIRGINIA.
THAT the sixth of November last, in the year of our Lord, 1654. he set sail
from the Downs, then outward bound, for the Bay of Virginia, for the Ports of
Patuxent, and Severne, and through the blessing of God arrived at Patuxent the
29 of January following.

That within two days after his arrival at that Port, there came a Boat with
about five persons therein, to the Ship side, and by information of one of his
Ships company, who formerly had been at Maryland, declared that Capt. Stone,
formerly Governor Stone, was there. He thereupon called assistants of his
Ships company to Man the Ship side to accommodate the coming up of Mr. Stone
into the Ship; where after some civil respects showed him, he called for a
Glass of Wine, and drank to him by the name of Governor Stone: At which he
replied, he had formerly been a Governor, but was not so now; That the
Governor there at present was one Capt: Fuller, a Gentleman lately settled by
the Commissioners of the Parliament of England; and that Mr. Fuller was then at
Severne. He was likewise so informed by the Inhabitants of Patuxent, but
understood nothing of any difference, or Hostile preparations in the least.

After some dispatches of affairs in relation to the proceeding of his Voyage,
and the hard weather was broken, did on the sixteenth day of February, early in
the morning set sail for Severne, where he arrived late that night, and
settling the Ships business, went the next morning ashore to attend the
Governor, whom he found there; and having given the Governor satisfaction as
to his intended proceeding, came aboard his Ship again.

On the fifteenth of March following, in Order to his Voyage, left directions
with Mr. Cole his Mate concerning the Ship, and Manned forth one of his Sloopes,
and himself went for Roads River, some seven Leagues distant from thence, to
procure Goods; but before he could dispatch his business there, received a
particular Message from Capt. Fuller the Governor, then also at Severne,
requiring him presently to attend him, and that his men might presently repair
to his Ship, then at an Anchor at Severne. He not knowing what speed such a
Message might require, left his business, and endeavored so soon as might be,
to wait upon the Governor: But as he drew near, he perceived a piece of
Ordnance fired from his Ship, which much amazed him and his Boats crew,
whereupon hastening to the Ship, at his coming on board, he there found the
Governor, Capt. Fuller, with Mr. Cole, whom he had entrusted the care of his
ship unto, and demanding the reason of the firing of that Gun, he told him it
was by the Governors Order.

The Governor forthwith related to him, That he had received certain
Intelligence, that Capt. Stone with a party of Romish Catholics, Malignant,
and disaffected persons, who had called to their assistance a great number of
Heathen, were in Arms, and what other they could not by favor persuade, they
forced along with them, plundring all that refused to assist them. That they
had privately designed the destruction of the Governor, and all the
Protestants at Severne, and to destroy men, women, and Children, that should
not submit to their wicked design. And this, the better to carry on their
interest, was under pretense of bringing in subjection those factious people in
the County of Anne Arundell, to the obedience of the Lord Proprietary, not
owning the Lord Protector of England, etc. his power in the least.

The Governor further also informed him, that the design was against him, his
ship, and company (if they would not assist Captain Stone) to fire his Ship
riding at anchor, and to be effected by one Abraham Hely a seaman who ran away
from his Ship at Patuxent; and this design so settled, that Captain Stone and
his soldiery were ready to march.

The sudden news of such horrid treachery to be acted by such instruments, put
the poor Inhabitants into so lamentable a condition, in respect they were so
surprised, that they had no deliverance to expect, but only extraordinary
Providence from God, having formerly by sad experience known the malice of
their Adversaries, against all that owned the ways of God in truth.

The Governor desired that many of the poor trembling Women and Children might
come on board the ship, which was granted; In the mean time his Council and the
Inhabitants consulted their own safety, and agreed to have a Letter drawn up to
be directed to Capt. Stone, and sent to him by Messengers of their own by the
ships Wherry.

A first Message having been sent to demand his power, and the ground of such
his proceedings.

The second Message to him being such low terms, that those that sent it were
grieved at their hearts that ever it went out of their hands, which was as
follows, For Capt. William Stone Esquire;
SIR,
THe People of these parts have met together and considered the present
transactions on your part, and have not a little marvelled that no other Answer
of the last Message has been made, than what tended rather to make men
desperate than conformable, yet being desirous of Peace, do once again present
to your serious consideration these ensuing Proposals, as the mind of the
people.

1 If you will Governous so, as we may enjoy the liberty of English Subjects; 2
And that we be, and remain indempnified in respect of our engagement, and all
former acts relating to the Reducement and Government; 3 That those who are
minded to depart the Province, may freely do it without any prejudice to
themselves or Estates; We are content to own your self as Governor, and submit
to your Government. If not, we are resolved to commit our selves into the hands
of God, and rather die like men than be made Slaves.
Will Durand, Secret.




But no answer to this was returned, but the same paper in scorn sent back
again.

The Messengers being dispatched from the Governor and Council, had the ship
Golden Lions Wherry for their more speedy passage; And they accordingly came to
Capt. Stone, whom with the whole body they met at the Clifts, some marching by
Land, and others is Sloops or Boats coming by Water, in pursuance of the bloody
design.

And upon the Messengers coming to him to present the Letter, he immediately in
a rage commanded the Messengers to be taken into Guard, and took away the
Wherry; yet two of the Messengers escaped and came to Severn, and acquainted
the Governor, and the Council, of the Enemies proceedings, and what further
intelligence they could meet with. And withal, that Captain Stone had so
ordered, that if the Commander of the ship the Golden Lion would not assist him
and his Company, the ship should be fired as it lay at an Anchor by a Servant
of the Commanders that run from him at Patuxent.

The Governor and his Council in Order to their security sent several Warrants,
requiring observance of their Commands, one whereof directed to the Relator
hereof, as follows.

To Capt. Roger Heaman Commander of the Golden Lion, now riding at Anchor in
Severn River in Providence.
SIR,
THe Government of Mariland has been settled by the Supreme Authority of the
Commonwealth of England, and confirmed by the said Power, which is expressly
owned, what their Commissioners Rich. Bennet Esquire; and Col. Will. Claybourn, and
Cap. Edw. Curtis had done, and since by the Lord Protector, which is now
contradicted by the Lord Baltemore and his Officers, without showing any power
at all, These are in the name of the Lord PROTECTOR of England, to will and
require you the said Capt. Heaman, with your Ship and Men, to be for the
service of the Lord Protector and Commonwealth of England, in assisting to your
power the people of Providence oppressed.

Given at Providence the 22 of March, 1654. Will. Fuller.

The Governor sent a second Warrant dated 23. of March, following.

THese are in the Name of His Highness the Lord Protector, To will and require
you Capt. Heaman, Commander of the Golden Lion, to command all such Boats and
Vessels, as are now arrived, or shall arrive, to disturb the Government here
settled under His Highness the Lord Protector, and them to detain until further
Order herein, as you will answer the contrary at your peril.

Given 23. of March, 1654. William Fuller.

Directed to Cap. Roger Heaman.

This day in the evening, the Ships Watch descried a Boat rowing near to the
ship, which they commanded in, and when the men were come on Board, they
presented a Letter from Cap. Stone, directed to the Relator hereof, who so soon
as he received it, went forthwith ashore, and showed it to the Governor and
Council, the effect is as follows:

That he had heard the Relator would with his Ship and Company aid and assist
the people of Severn against the Lord Baltemores Government, which by
persuasions, he desired a desistance from, and that for his satisfaction he had
sent a Petition presented to His Highness the Lord Protector, and withal His
Highness Order thereupon, declaring against the Government of Richard Bennet
Esquire in Virginia, yet in truth, sends no such thing enclosed in the Letter,
but appointed the bearer to say so.

Whereupon Capt. Fuller, and the Council being well satisfied as to the matter
of the Letter, that it was of no greater weight, desired the Letter might be
answered by the Relator, as he thought fit, and send away the Messenger, who
presently writ a Letter to Cap. Stone, as follows: SIR,
AFter my service to you presented, These are to certify you I have received
your Letter, wherein you write to me of several things in particular, as to
resist your power which you have from the Lord Protector of England, a thing
altogether disowned by your self to me at Patuxent, and which if I once could
see, I should readily with my ship and life, be ready to serve you; but
expecting to have received a copy thereof, as you writ to me, and satisfaction
of the truth thereof, I find it only reported by your self, and of no more
credit. I find at Severn the Government settled in Cap. Fuller, by the Supreme
Power of England, and since established by the Lord Protector, which, Sir, I am
bound to obey. I have received several Warants from them, which this bearer
has seen, and desire you to be satisfied therewith, which is all at present,
etc.

R.H.




From Aboard the Golden Lion, March 23. 1654.

The same Messenger then also received a Letter from Mr. Richard Owen, directed
to Cap. Stone; Mr. Owen was a Merchant then aboard the ship, and by his Letter
certified him as follows verbatim.

SIR,
My kind love and respects to you presented, hoping of your good health; These
are to certify you, That I have seen the Letter you sent to the Commander of
the Golden Lion, which is my loving Friend, Wherein I understand, that you have
heard strange reports, that he should act, I am sure for his part, he desires
to meddle neither with one thing nor other, but to ply his voyage, which is
that he came to do, but I think you cannot blame him to obey the power here,
until such time you show him yours; and then I am sure he will to the utmost of
his power, obey you in what you shall command him, and not only him, but I my
self, and all the people in this place, for we must, and will all own, and obey
the Government of the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, and am
sure if once you do but produce that from his Highness, you need not think the
people will do any thing else but obey you. Sir, the Cap. and I, dealt with Mr.
Preston of Patuxent for some goods, and now here we are like to suffer in, by
reason of you, which I hope, Sir, we shall not need to fear; do therefore crave
leave to rest, as ever, your Friend and Kinsman to command,

Rich. Owen.
Golden Lion March 23, 1654.

The Relator receiving daily intelligence of the threats of Capt. Stone and his
party, and their Design against his Ship, endeavored to get his freight
aboard, which within a small matter was now accomplished, and the 24 of March in
the morning went ashoat to acquaint the Governor thereof and that in pursuance
of his Imployers trust he intended with the first Expedition to get his water
aboard, and so depart the Port, whereupon the Governor and Council then
considered of the stoppage of the ship, receiving daily intelligence from all
parts, how subtlely the interest of the Lord Baltemore was carried on, and
under such pretenses, and how their Adversaries were then near at hand, drew up
a special Warrant to command all parties to their assistance, and sent for the
Relator hereof, and in the presence of the Council, the Governor there gave
him a particular and strict charge, in the name of his Highness the Lord
Protector of England etc. not to offer to depart the Port without their Order,
as he and his Company would answer the contempt thereof at their perils,
declaring then how much the Government established by his Highness in that
Province was now concerned, that their Enemies were cruel, and bloody, and very
malicious against any that owned the Protestant cause.

The Relator then used several Arguments to the Council, in behalf of his
departure, the trust of the Owners in him, and that their goods were now on
board, that his ship was upon Merchants Affairs, and no ship of War; these and
many other Reasons were urged, but the necessity of Affairs could admit of no
longer dispute, and therefore they did require his speedy repair on board.

The Governor also by advice of his Council had drawn up a special Warrant, and
caused the same in the absence of the Relator hereof to be fixed to the Main
Mast of his ship, which Warrant he knew nothing of, till his coming on board,
the effect whereof follows, These are in the Name of his Highness the Lord
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. for the maintenance of the Laws
of the said Lord Protector, established in this Province, by the Supreme
Authority thereof, and for the defense of the Lives, Liberties, and Estates of
the free and obedient Subjects of the said Commonwealth, to require and charge
you Capt. Roger Heamans Commander of the good ship, the Golden Lion of London,
now riding at Anchor in the River of the County of Providence in Mariland, to
serve the public interest of the said Commonwealth, concerning the people of
Providence, and the rest of the Subjescts of the Commonwealth there residing,
in your own person, with your ships company, the Ships Ammunition, in such
services as you shall be commanded by the Government here established, by the
Commissioners, Richard Bennet Esquire Col. William Claybourn, and Capt. Edmund
Curtis, who by the Supreme Authority reduced this Province, and is since
settled by further Power. And hereof you are not to fail, as you will answer
the contrary at your perils.

Given at Providence March 24. 1654. WILL FULLER



The Relator at his coming aboard his ship, upon reading the Warrant, had
several debates by himself and Officers, and after by himself, and his whole
ships company, whom he found then unanimous in their Resolutions for relief of
those distressed people, and that they altered not from their first engagements
in England, to defend to the utmost with their lives and fortunes the
established Government in England, and in all places the Governments
subordinate to that, and that the case of the Protestants there was their own,
did then resolve not to leave that Port until God should put an end to the
restless condition of their Brethren, or suffer their deliverance to be wrought
from so wicked a design (then full ripe) against them.

The same day at night, in order to his ships Affairs, the Relator went a shore
to have his Bills of lading firmed, but staid not, being required to attend the
Council, who then imparted to him the certain news of the Enemies entering the
Mouth of the Harbor, with a great number of Sloopes and Boats full of men
armed, with Drums and Colors, in pursuance of their design, and therefore
required him speedily to repair to his ship, with two of the Council, and to
observe their commands.

That suddenly, or within two hours after at the most, in the very shutting up
of the daylight, the ships company descried off, a company of Sloops and
Boats, making toward the ship, whereupon the Council on board, and the ships
company, would have made shot at them, but this Relator commanded them to
forbear, and went himself upon the Poop in the Stern of his ship, and hailed
them several times, and no answer was made, he then charged them not to come
nearer the ship, but the Enemy kept rowing on their way and were come within
shot of the ship; His Mates and Company having had information of their
threatenings, as well against the ship as the poor distressed people, resolved
to fire upon them without their Commanders consent, rather than hazard all by
the Enemies nearer approach, whereupon he ordered them to fire a Gun at randum
to divert their course from the ship, but the Enemy kept still course right with
the ship, and took no notice of any warning given; He then commanded his Gunner
to fire at them, but one of his Mates, Mr. Robert Morris, who knew the Country
very well, the malice of the Adversary against those poor people, who were then
near worn out with fears and watchings, made a shot at them, which came fairly
with them; Whereupon they suddenly altered their course from the ship, and
rowed into the Creek, calling the ships Company, Rogues, Round-headed Rogues,
and Dogs, and with many execrations and railing, threatened to fire them on the
morning.

The same night came further intelligence from the Enemy in the Harbor as they
lay there that they were making fireworks against the ship, whereupon the
Governor (whose prudence and valor in this business deserves very much honor)
commanded a small ship of Capt. Cuts of New England, then in the River, to lie
in the mouth of the Creek to prevent the Enemies coming forth in the night, to
work any mischief against the ship.

The next morning by break of day, being the Lords day, the 25 of March last,
the Relator, himself, and Company, discerned Capt. Stone with his whole body
drawn out, and coming toward the water side, marching with Drums beating,
Colors flying, the Colors were black and yellow appointed by the Lord
Baltemore. There was not the least token of any subjection in Stone and his
Company, or acknowledgement of the Lord Protector of England, but God bless the
Lord Proprietary, and their railing against his ships Company, was Rogues, and
Round headed Rogues, etc.

The Governor by this time perceiving his Enemies Quarters and now time
admitted no delay, after an earnest seeking of God, and laying their innocence
at his feet, with his own Cause, in so remote a part of the World, Resolved
with an humble cheerfulness to go over to the Enemy, and withal sent for the
English Colors used aboard the ships in the service of his Highness, which
were lent, and fixed to a half pike for the Governors use, he having neither
Drum nor Colors in his party, and then went over the River some six miles
distant from the Enemy, and at his muster of his party, it consisted of 107 and
no more, the Enemies body was then 250 and upwards; as by their selves were
related after the fight.

The Governor and his Company being come to an open place, resolved to pitch
his Colors there, being the Colors of the Commonwealth of England, which he
believed might beget the Enemy to incline to a parley, and prevent the shedding
of blood; by which time the Enemy was come thither, and without any
deliberation at all, made several shot at the setting down the Colors, and as
the Relator is informed, killed two of the Governors men; whereupon the
Governors Body had the word given them, In the name of God fall an, God is our
strength, and with very much courage gave fire at the Enemy, whose word was,
Hey for St. Mary's, Hey for two Wives, who with great boldness engaged
likewise, which came to a very sharp dispute, though, blessed be God, not long
till Stone and his whole party totally toured, and near forty of his men slain
upon the place (now called by the name of the Papists Pound) and several
desperately wounded. And it pleased the good hand of God to order things so,
that notwithstanding the great thickness of the Woods and other advantages for
the Enemies, being a very neck of land, there was not above five of the Enemies
Body escaped, but what were prisoners and in custody. And of the Governors
Company, there was only three killed in the field, and three since dead of
their wounds, which unparalleled mercy did beget a far greater joy than can be
related; and to the Relators knowledge no Narration yet made, is to be
equalized with the peoples religious, humble and holy rejoicing, each common
Soldier with such Christian incitement revived the hearts of one another. Give
the glory to the God of our deliverance.

All the Arms bag and baggage was taken together, with the Boats that brought
them, wherein was the preparations and fuses, for the firing of the ship Golden
Lion.

And amongst the rest of their losses, all their consecrated Ware was taken
(viz.) their Pictures, Crucifixes, and rows of Beads, with great store of
Relics and trash they trusted in, which as the Relator is informed, diverse
was put to the Ancient, or Colors, for their defense; the vanity whereof as
also their great boasting in their own strength, has much confirmed the hearts
of the people of God in those parts.

Captain Stone himself was so convinced in this overthrow, that he declared
that he did conceive he was cursed, and many such like words expressed, in that
he should be brought into so ignominious an overthrow, and the rather, in
company with those who he knew were the very direct and absolute enemies of
the people of God, and did much relent his ever undertaking their late Design;
Declared further, That it was just with God to blast his company and him, and
for his part, did wholly disclaim the Lord Baltemores cause and interest, and
engaged, he would choose rather to dye than own his cause, to join with the
Catholics.

The Relator did observe further, when he came ashore after the fight, God had
put such a spirit of fear and trembling in the hearts of the Enemy, that the
poor tired people, who slept as they were keeping the door where the Prisoners
were put in, yet their Adversaries durst not attempt to run away.

The Relator amongst the Prisoners found Hely a Seaman, who run from his Ship
at Patuxe^t, who was particularly brought before the Council upon the 28. day
of March, 1655. and examined, did there confess, that he was solicited by
diverse eminent Officers under Captain Stone, to set fire on the Ship, or blow
up the Ship Golden Lion, whereof Capt. Roger Heaman is Commander. And some
Implements and Materials delivered, and large rewards promised to effect it.
And he further declared aboard the Ship, after he was cleared by the Governor,
that the firing of the Ship should have been the same night they came into the
Harbor with their Boats, and that two of Capt. Stones Officers were to go along
with him. And for this service he was to have twenty thousand weight of
Tobacco.

The Governor being daily solicited by the Relator for his dispatch from
thence, was some four days after the fight discharged, at which time, after
many thanks of the Governor and people, he set sail with the first opportunity,
and came for Patuxent, where he heard a large Narration of the Enemies Threats
against him and his Ship, and that they had burned and destroyed a great part
of his Wood and Cask. And Hely the second night of his Arrival at Patuxent
fearing his Trial at his return home, run away again.

The Relator in this so remarkable a passage, was an eye witness of the
constant and religious practices and duties of those precious servants of God,
in those remote parts, with what assurance of believing they rested on the God
of their deliverance, that neither the malice or treachery of so subtle an
Adversary could change them, or their resolutions, from waiting upon God for
this great mercy which they beforehand did assuredly believe and see, as if
acted already.

In all this time (notwithstanding the false and scandalous reports) that the
Relator himself should be a fomenter or stickler amongst the Protestants party,
to withstand the lawful power of Captain Stone, Governor under the Lord
Baltemore, as some would suggest, he is ready to prove, he never left his ship
at any time, unless about his Freight; or when the Governor by special command
enjoined his appearance at the Council.

He could say much as to the pretenses of Captain Stone, and others, as to the
Laws for Liberties, but leaves that to the prudence of His Highness the Lord
Protector, that has provided better Governors for the people of God, than
professed enemies of his truth, and those who hunt after the innocent.

What he did in relation to the Protestants cause, he doubts not but good men
will own, and encourage others to act the like; and to say no more in this, He
has seen the plottings of the Wicked, and the deliverance of the Innocent.

The truth of this Relation, the Relator with his Merchants, and all his Ships
Company, are ready to justify.

The first Message sent to Capt. William Stone Esquire.
WHereas we are given to understand, That by Warrant from your self, expressed
to be in the name of His Highness the Lord Protector of England, etc. a party
of men in Arms was appointed to surprise the Records of this Country, to remove
them from the place, where by act of Assembly they were appointed to be kept,
which is effected; We think it is our duty, and the discharge of trust which is
committed to us by the Commissioners of the Commonwealth of England, to require
you, in the Name of the Lord Protector of England, that for the peace and
welfare of the Province, and preventing of troubles, if you have any other or
higher power than is here established, by the Commissioners of the Commonwealth
of England, you would make it known to us, and to the free Inhabitants of this
Province, in an orderly and legal way, which indeed is the great desire of the
people about Providence and Kent, as well as others, which power once being
made known, shall not be opposed or disturbed by us in the least measure.

And this also we request of you, at friends and neighbors, which is so
equitable, as cannot be denied by any that have good ground for what they do,
or desire the peace and welfare of the Commonwealth, and the Honor of His
Highness the Lord Protector himself, or the fair accommodation of their own
affairs and proceedings; For our parts, we affect not pre-eminence, but had
much rather be governed our selves by the Law of God, and lawful Authority by
him set over us, than that we our selves should be placed in an employment, the
nature whereof in these times is above our abilities, and those that are far
more able; for we believe that God himself Reigns, and will bring down all high
Mountains which men are lifted up to, and thereupon oppose the Kingdom of
Christ: Our addresses to you, at this time, are in a way of peace and love; And
we entreat you, as you are Christians, to be tender of his Name; the condition
of so many that are in darkness inwardly, and outwardly, and to take care that
the Country be not brought to ruin and desolation, whilst you think to heal
the breaches thereof. We hope it shall be found that we are not the men as we
are censured to be by men, if we be true to that which is just and right, and
not repugnant to the lawful Authority, not injurious to our Neighbors.

Sir, we have sent a Messenger to you on purpose, with these Demands and
Requests, desiring your answer, if you desire the composement of the affairs of
the Province, the good of your Friends, and Neighbors, and your own, and so we
desire the God of Heaven may counsel and direct you into that way which is
well-pleasing unto him, and all honest men, and rest your loving Friends,

March the 5. 1654. W.F.W.D.R.P.L.S.R.E.
This was subscribed by the Commissioners at Providence.

William Durand Secretary of the Province of Maryland.




FINIS.

