NINE SELECT SERMONS Preached upon special occasions in the Parish Church of
St. Gregory's by St. Paul's.

By the late Reverend JOHN HEWYTT D. D.

Together With his public Prayers before and after SERMON.

LONDON Printed for Henry Eversden at the Greyhound in St. Paul's Churchyard,
and Tho. Rooks at the Holy Lamb, at the East end of St. Paul's near the School.

TO The Right Honorable LADY, THE Lady Mary Hewyt, Relict of the late Reverend
JOHN HEWYT, D. D.
Madam,
THe principal intent of our publishing these ensuing Sermons, is no other then
Edification: and for the avoiding all suspicion of being accounted spurious and
illegitimate; we have assumed the boldness to dedicate them to your Ladyship,
with a confident hope of your Honorable Protection; and that whereas
heretofore they have been beneficial to his Auditory, they may now prove no
less successful to the intelligent Reader; it being pity the Works of so
Famous and Eminent a Divine, should be raked up in the embers of Oblivion: And
though they have no other Original then the Pen of a ready Writer; yet such
diligent care has been employed in emitting them to the World, that we doubt
not, but you will conclude, we have endeavored the perpetuating the memory of
your Pious Consort: For here lurks no Snake under these Verdant Herbs, nor
Poisonous Serpent under these Fragrant Flowers; in this enclosed Garden grows
no Root of Schism, no slip of Error, no fruit of Disobedience; but within this
pleasant Grove are such variety of refreshing contentments to be found, as may
delight your Ladyship amidst your more Solitary Cogitations; and yet these are
but parts of that Image which ere long we hope to erect, and in a larger
Volume. We shall crave leave to (as we do at present) subscribe our selves,

Madam, Your Ladyships humbly devoted Servants, H. E. T. R.


THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
IT was not popular applause, nor private interest, that induced us to expose
these ensuing Discourses to public view; but only an ardent desire to draw a
Landscape of the reverend Authors abilities, and though but in Transitu, to give
a dark representation of that glorious light, which continually, with unwearied
beams did radiate the Souls of his faithful Auditory. They are but the shadows
of a faithful life; therefore be not displeased to find them fall short of the
living Voice: such curious pieces cannot be drawn without the concurrence of
sable lines; so that if thou find them halt, and only with a crooked finger to
point at the Authors style, be not discouraged thereat, nor with a prejudicate
opinion deem this naked Babe illegitimate, because destitute of a Patron; for
thou will find assuredly, they are the true offspring of that worthy Parent,
and want only the Fathers hand to lead them into, and preserve them from a
captious world. Lay aside all partial interests, and we are bold to presume,
that thou can not but with unspeakable profit give them perusal: we are
sensible of the many calumnies that will be cast upon our persons for this
innocent work, having already in part undergone the reproach of some malicious
tongues, who have endeavored to render the Sermons abortive, and our selves
contemptible in the eyes of a deceived multitude; nor are we able to divine
what acceptance they will gain at the hands of any. But we question not
(ingenious Reader, whoever thou art) but that thou will love the picture for
the persons sake; and wilt impute whatever defect shall be found therein, to
the want of the Authors pen, and not the ignorant or willing mistake of the
Perusers thereof; for they are notes taken by the pen of a ready Writer, the
swiftness of whose motion is able to overtake the most voluble tongue: yet thou
can not but know, that sometimes the smallest hair interposing it self will
make a breach in the fullest sentence, thereby interrupting the perfect sense;
therefore our care has been extended to the utmost, that no remarkable fault
might appear obvious to the most critical Reader; still endeavoring, that
those sacred truths which formerly have been beneficial to the intelligent
Hearers, when preached by the reverend Author, may now prove advantageous to
the eternal welfare of every Soul that shall peruse them; which is the earnest
desire of,

Reader, Thy unfeigned Friends and Servants, H. E. T. R.


A Table of the Titles and Texts of the Sermons contained in this Book.
MErcy and Judgment, 2 Sermons. Page 1. 28. Psalm. 130. v. 3. If thou Lord wilt
be extreme, etc. A Nativity Sermon, page 62. Saint Luke 2. v. 7. And she
brought forth her firstborn son, etc. A Funeral Sermon. p. 81. 1 Cor. 15.19.
If in this life only we have hope in Christ. Testis Fidelis, or the faithful
witness. Five Sermons upon 18. St. John v. 37. To this end was I born, etc.
whereof 1. Upon St. Thomas day, p. 106. whereof 1. Upon Christmas day. p. 126.
Three more upon the same Text on several occasions.
Dr. Hewit's public Prayer before Sermon.
O thou that hear Prayers, unto thee shall all flesh come, for our help
stands in thy name (O Lord) which have made heaven and earth, we beseech thee
therefore, let the words of my mouth, and the meditations of all our hearts, be
now, and evermore acceptable in thy sight, O Lord our strength and our
Redeemer.
O Most glorious and most powerful Lord God, whose dwelling is so far above
the highest heavens, that thou humblest thy self but to look upon the things
that are in heaven, and that are in earth; thou art omnipotent and omnipresent,
do whatsoever thou will, both in heaven in earth, in the sea, and in all deep
places; thou art about our beds, and about our paths; thou spyest out all our
ways, understandest all our thoughts long before we thought. O Lord, when we
look up unto thee, and consider thee, to be a God of so pure eyes, as that thou
can not behold iniquity without indignation and wrath; and when we look
within our selves, and see that world of corruption that lies hidden in our
breasts, and those innumerable acts of transgressions that have stained both
our persons and our lives; we cannot but be confounded and ashamed before thy
face, and are not able to open our mouths; for our sins witness against us,
and our iniquities are as sore burdens too heavy for us to bear, they cry up to
heaven for vengeance against us, and it is of thy infinite patience and
longsuffering toward us, that thou have not long since powered upon us the
Vials of thy wrathful indignation, nor sentenced us to the pit of eternal
destruction. Lord, who can tell how often he offends? The sinfulness of our
natures, the sins of our lives, the sins of our souls, and the sins of our
bodies, our secret and whispering sins, our crying and open sins, our idle and
wanton sins, our presumptuous and deliberate sins, the sins we have committed
to please our selves, and the sins we have committed to please others; the sins
we have committed in our own persons, and the sins we have occasioned others to
commit; the sins we know, and the sins we know not; the sins that we have so
long striven to hide from others knowledge, that we have even now hid them from
our own memories; these, O Lord are more in number then the sands upon the Sea
shore, or the Stars of Heaven which cannot be numbered. We have sinned against
the light of Nature, and against the light of Grace, against thy Law, and
against thy Gospel, against thy Promises, and against thy Threats, against thy
Mercies, and against thy Judgments, against all vows, and promises, and
resolutions of better obedience, against the reproofs of thy word, against the
many motions of thy good Spirit in our souls, against thy Fatherly admonitions,
against thy loving corrections, against the many fearful examples of thy
Judgments, against the infinite obligations of thy favors, and against the
checks of our own consciences. These things have we done, and because thou held
thy tongue, we have also thought wickedly, that thou art altogether such an one
as our selves, or that either thou do not see, or do approve, or wilt not
severely punish the crimes that we have so long doted on. If thou Lord God,
should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, Lord, who is able to abide
it? but with thee there is mercy, and with thee there is plenteous redemption,
and thou desire not the death of him that dies, but rather that be should
turn from sin and be saved; and seeing that without thee it is not possible for
us of our selves to be able to please thee; Lord, turn us to thee, and we shall
be turned, for thou art the Lord our God; Draw us, and we shall run after thee,
draw us by the cords of love, and with the bands of loving kindness; work
powerfully upon our spirits by thy holy Spirit, work- contrition in our hearts,
and godly sorrow for all our sins, even a sorrow to repentance, and repentance
to salvation never to be repented off. Break these hard and stony hearts of
ours by the hammer of thy word, mollify them by the oil of thy grace, smite
these rocky hearts of ours, by the rod of thy most gracious power, that we may
shed forth rivers of tears for all the sins we have committed; Lord, make us
grieve because we cannot grieve, and to weep because we cannot weep enough. O
that thou would humble us more and more under the true sight and sense of
all our ungodliness, of all our wickedness, and of all our unworthiness. And
O thou Father of mercies, have mercy on us, O Lamb of God that take away the
sins of the world, have mercy upon us; thou that take away the sins of the
world, take away the world of our sins; they are too heavy (O Lord) for us to
bear, thou only art able to bear them, and thou did bear all our sins upon
thine own body upon the tree; O thou that wast wounded for our sins, and
bruised for our transgressions, we beseech thee, let the chastisement of our
peace be upon thee, and do thou by thy stripes heal us. Hide us most gracious
Redeemer, hide us from the wrath of God, in the glorious skars of those
meritorious wounds which thou did suffer for us, and by the virtue of them
create peace in heaven for us, by reconciling the Father to us; And O thou that
wast our Savior on earth, we beseech thee, be thou our Advocate in heaven; be
thou our High Priest, still offering up thy self a Victim to the Father for us,
and besprinkle us with thine own most precious blood, that through that blood
of sprinkling, our persons, our services, and the desires of our souls may be
acceptable to the Father. Be thou our King, set up thy throne in our hearts,
dismantle, and disgarison all the strong holds, and fortifications of sin, that
sin may no longer have dominion over us, but do thou rule, and overruled us,
enable us to do thy will, write thy Commandments in our hearts, and thy
Statutes in our inward parts, put thy fear into our souls, that we may fear
thee, and love thee, and diligently live after thy commands; Be thou our
Prophet leading us into all truth. Oh do thou inform us and teach us the way
wherein we should go, and do thou guide us by thine eye, be thou the voice
behind us, still directing us, this is the way, walk in it, guide us by thy
counsels here, and hereafter receive us unto thy glory. And O Holy Spirit the
Comforter, do thou help our infirmities, and with thy unutterable groans, make
intercession for us. And thou that workest both to will, and the deed in us of
thine own good pleasure, put into our hearts good desires, and let the
continual assistance of thy grace help us to bring the same to good effect,
plant in our souls the love of thy name, graffe in our hearts true Religion,
nourish us with all goodness, and of thy great mercy keep us in the same so
long as we have to live; make us to love that which thou command, and to
desire that which thou have promised, that among the sundry and manifold
changes, and chances of this mortal life our hearts may surely there be fixed,
where true joys are to be found. And thou that sheddest the precious ointments
of thy grace upon all thy faithful people, O do thou open the eyes of our
souls that we may see thee who art invisible, that beholding thy glorious (but
invisible) presence in all our actions, we may be so awfully affected toward
thee, that whether either the Devil shall tempt us, or the world shall allure
us, or our own carnal lusts and sinful affections shall incline us to commit
any wickedness; thy Holy Spirit (O Lord) may in all things so direct, rule,
and overrule our hearts, and awaken our consciences to ask us, How shall we
dare to commit any wickedness and sin against thee? Gracious God, keep us from
sinning against thee, though it were to gain the whole world, for it will not
profit us to gain the whole world, and lose our own souls; help us rather, we
pray thee, to work out our own salvation with fear and trembling, and to give
all diligence to make our calling and election sure. Help us to eschew, and
decline all the occasions, all the opportunities that have betrayed us unto
sin, and to hate the very garments spotted with the flesh. O Lord, with what
affliction soever thou shall punish us, do not punish us with spiritual
judgments and desertions, give us not over to our own hearts lusts, to our own
vile, lewd, and corrupt affections, give us not over to hardness and
impenitency of heart, but make us sensible of the least sin; and give us thy
grace to think no sin little committed against thee, our God, but that we may
be humbled for it, and repent of it, and reform it in our lives and
conversations; and keep us from presumptuous sins, O let not them get the
dominion over us, but keep us innocent from the great offense, O Lord our
strength, and our Redeemer. And sanctify unto us all thy methods and
proceedings with us, fitting us for all further tribulations and trials;
whatsoever thou in thy divine pleasure shall be pleased to impose upon us, give
us patience, and constancy, and resolution, and fortitude to undergo it, that
though we walk through the valley of the shadow of death we may fear no ill,
knowing that thou, O Lord, art mercifully with us, and that with thy rod as
well as with thy staff thou will support and comfort us, and that nothing
shall be able to separate us from thy love which is in Jesus Christ our Lord.

For whose sake we beseech thee, be thou merciful, as to us, so to all
mankind, we are all, O Lord the work of thy hands, gracious God, if it be thy
will make us all the sheep of thy pasture, thou have made us all of one common
mould, Lord, if it be to thy glory, make us all partakers of one common
Salvation; but inspire continually thine universal Church, with the Spirit of
truth, unity, and concord; and grant that all they that do confess thy holy
name may agree in the truth of thy holy word, and live in unity and godly love.
Thou have promised, O Lord, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against
thy Church, perform we beseech thee, thy most gracious promises both to thy
whole Church, and to that part of it, which thou have planted and now afflicted
in these sinful Lands, and Nations wherein we live. Arise (O Lord) and have
mercy upon our Sion, it is time that thou have mercy upon her, yea the time is
come, for thy servants think upon her stones, and it pities them to see her in
the dust. Lord maintain thine own cause, rescue the light of thy truth, from
all those clouds of errors, and heresies which do so much obscure it, and let
the light thereof in a free profession break forth and shine again among us,
and that continually even as long as the Sun and Moon endures. To this end,
bless us all, and above us all bless all those to whom thou have given a
right for to govern thy people; Lord, enable them with thy power (as well as
thou have invested them with authority) to govern the people committed to their
charge, in peace, wealth, and godliness. And thou in whose hands are the
hearts of all men, and turnest them which way soever thou will, turn the
hearts of the disobedient, that the streams of their obedience may run within
its proper channel, and all flow to the ocean of thy glory. And bless thy
Church with Pastors after thine own heart, that they may feed thy people with
knowledge and understanding; that they may teach thy way unto the wicked, and
convert sinners unto thee, and in all things, and above all things they may
seek thy honor, and glory. And for the continuance of thy Gospel among us,
restore in thy good time to their several places and callings, (and give
grace, O heavenly Father, to) all the reverend Fathers of the Church, and other
Orthodox Clergy, that they may both by their life and Doctrine, set forth thy
true and lively word, and rightly and duly administer thy holy Sacraments; let
thy blessing be upon the labors of all those whom thou have commissioned to
preach thy word as this day to thy people; be with me the meanest and
unworthiest of all thy servants; O that thou would work wonderfully in me,
for me, and by me, make me a happy instrument of much glory to thy name, and of
much good to thy Church and people. And to all thy people every where, give
hearing ears, understanding hearts, conscientious souls, and obedient lives,
especially to this Congregation here present, that with meek hearts, and due
reverence they may hear and receive thy holy word, truly serving thee in
righteousness and true holiness all the days of their lives.

And we beseech thee, of thy goodness, O Lord, to comfort and succor all
those that in this transitory life, be in trouble, sorrow, need, sickness, or
any other adversity; these especially that are commended to our devotion, we
humbly recommend to thy Fatherly goodness, those whom thou have visited with
thine hand upon the bed of sickness, O Lord look down from heaven, behold;
visit, and relieve those thy sick servants, look upon them with the eyes of thy
mercy; give them comfort and sure confidence in thee, defend them from the
danger of the enemy, and keep them in perpetual peace and safety through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Hear us Almighty and most merciful God, and Savior, extend
thy accustomed goodness to those thy servants who are grieved with sicknesses,
visit them O Lord, as thou did visit Peter's wives mother, and the Captains
servant, so visit and restore unto those sick persons their former healths (if
it be thy will) or else give them grace so to take thy visitation here upon
earth that after this painful life ended, they may dwell with thee in life
everlasting. And for those thy handmaids that draw near to the time of their
travel, thou who art the presant help in the needful time of trouble, stand by
them, and save them, preserve them in the danger of Childe-bearing; make them
joyful Mothers of gracious Children, bring them to thy holy Baptism, bring
them up in thy holy and true Religion, till thou finally bring them to thine
everlasting kingdom. And accept of the thankful hearts of those thy servants,
whom thou have delivered from the great pain and peril of childe-birth; grant,
we beseech thee most merciful Father, that they through thy help may both
faithfully live, and walk in their vocations according to thy will in this
life present, and also may be partakers of everlasting glory in the life to
come, through Jesus Christ our Lord. And whoever else desire our prayers (thou
know all their names, and all their several necessities) whether at Sea or
at Land, in this. Land, or in others; Lord we humbly recommend them all unto
thee, beseeching thee, to visit them with thy salvation, and according to the
desire of their souls, as it shall be for thy glory, and their eternal good,
Lord grant them their hearts desire, and all for Jesus Christ the righteous
sake, in whose blessed name and words, we further call on thee, as he himself
has taught and commanded, and encouraged us in his holy Gospel, saying, Our
Father, etc.

SERMON. I.
PSALM. 130. v. 3. If thou Lord wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O
Lord, who may abide it?


I Will sing of Mercy and of Judgment (says the Kingly Prophet,) the two
everlasting Arms, O Lord, by which thou upholdest and suppottest the beings of
mortal Creatures; the two everlasting wings by which the eternal majesty of
Heaven covers immortal Spirits with unspeakable goodness, which like the two
Cherubims seated upon the Ark of Gods glory, cast continually their unspotted
eyes upon the rotten rags of Humane frailty, aiming still at man's felicity;
How else could dust and ashes expect continued life from such dry bones as was,
and is still, the foundation of man's body? for should Heavens propitious eye
glance forth nothing but renewed smiles upon our actions, and mercy always sit
hovering over our Tabernacles, we should quickly ingulf our spirits in the
bottom of miserable security; or on the contrary, should but the direful hand
of Omnipotency it self draw forth his glittering sword against our weak
resistance, unto what a paralytick posture would such an appearance strike us,
as coming from him whose very breath can speak us into nothing? Oh then with
what bowed knees and humble hearts should every soul of us kiss the very
remembrance of a Jesus, coming not only to save them that believe, but to work
a present reconcilememt betwixt the Justice and Mercy of God the Father? that
now the one as well as the other, or rather with united consent both together
may conspire and join issue in the great work of man's redemption: for could
your drowsy spirits but lend an ear to the pleasant dialogue that continually
passes betwixt these glorious Attributes, now you should hear Justice calls for
the Sanctuaries balance to weigh all the actions of the sons of men, and with
a Mean, Mean, Tekel, etc. find such dusty performances, of no validity in
Heavens account; and so poor we, being in Adam wilfully lost, are now
necessarily fallen short of immortal bliss. Thus is our sentence irrecoverable,
and no door of hope left for our escape, till Mercy, that eternal beam of love,
stand forth, and present the all-sufficient merit of a dying Savior, as full
satisfaction for the sins of the whole world; pleading that faithful covenant
made by Justice it self, that whosoever believes shall not perish, but have
everlasting life: Which faith is the golden pillar that bears up the stately
structure of man's everlasting glory; the only hand by which the promises of a
better life are made ours; the sure entail, by which the inheritance purchased
in common is become mine, in particular; it is the only voice by which holy
David could make an echo that would reach from the lowest deeps to the highest
Heavens; Out of the deeps have I called unto thee O Lord; Lord hear my voice,
as you may see, verse the first of this Psalm: nay, it is the very nerve and
sinewe of all pious Devotion; for if you peruse the whole Psalm, you will find
it is nothing else but a rehearsal of religious petitions, and serious
exhortations. In his petitions you will find his soul big with holy affiance,
spiritual confidence, grounded on Gods word promising, and his own Experience
tasting. In his Exhortations, like a faithful Physician he prescribes nothing
but what is attested to with his own and others Probatum est: making mercy both
the beginning and the end, the principal and the final cause of Happiness; but
in both he keeps the eye of humility placed upon the rags of man's
unworthiness, as justly demeriting eternal wrath, were God exact in
remunerating our actions; for so he closes up the sum of his requests in the
words of my Text:

If thou Lord wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord who may abide
it?

In which words please to consider two general parts.

1 An antecedent, in these words; If thou Lord be extreme to mark what is done
amiss.

2. A Consequent, in the other words; who can abide it? Or if you will, look on
them.

1 In the Thesis.

2 In the Hypothesis.

1 In the Thesis; wherein you have Gods extremity in punishing.

2 In the Hypothesis; There you have man's misery in suffering.

And now my Text in its situation is not unlike a pleasant Grove, presenting to
your view variety of pleasant Trees; each bough thereof being richly laden with
delicious and goodly fruit, not only delightful to the eye, but beneficial to
the Taste: or if you will, your Conceptions may behold most costly Arras,
enriched with the lively story of Gods bounty and man's felicity mutually
interwoven in the same piece; but if you list to change the scene, and have the
true parts more nearly acted, you may gain a precious enterview of Gods
omnipotency displayed in its several Dispensations, and management of Humane
affairs, where Justice and Mercy, the twins of royalty, discovering on the one
Hand Gods free benevolence in bestowing, and man's utter unworthiness for so
large a guerdon; on the reverse parts, your sight is presented with the
Almighties just severity in punishing, together with man's reaping misery, the
true fruit of his sin. In fine, that I may unbowel this sacred writ, take the
substance thereof distilled into these four observations:

1 Its the Corruption of man's nature to do amiss.

2 God is not always extreme to mark and punish what is done amiss.

3 God can when he pleases be extreme in marking and punishing what is done
amiss.

4 If God be extreme in punishing, man must needs be extreme in suffering.

These are the four streams that naturally run their division from this
pleasant spring, that voluntarily tenders its silver drops to refresh the heart
of every pious Christian; which makes me beg your patience and zealous
attention, whilst in order I make these glorious truths to pass before the
spiritual eye of your intelligent souls. And first of the

First, namely

Its the corrupt nature of man to do amiss.

As its the nature of man to be doing, so its the corruption of that nature to
be doing amiss; and though God see and observe all the actions of discomposed
and distempered man, yet its only the obliquity of those actions his severity
intends to reward with punishment: for every action simply considered in it
self is good, and no way meriting unspeakable torment; but every such action
contracts eternal guilt, as performed by and prersisted in of sinful man, whose
customary nature and natural custom is to do evil; for as things are in being
so they are in operation: Can a man gather grapes of thorns, or figgs of
thissles? says our Blessed Savior. Or, can any man bring a clean thing out of
an unclean? was the question put by holy Job.

Ever since man eat the forbidden fruit, man himself has become a barren tree,
and cumbred the ground; for ever, since man voluntarily fell, man has been
under a necessity of sin, a necessity, I say, proceeding not from Gods
peremptory decree but his feeble and corrupted will; for its a voluntary
necessity; should I set open the door of this defiled cage and present to your
view the misery, lapsed man's unhappiness has reduced him to, or give you but a
glimpse of those polluted birds whose habitation is in the house of every soul
by nature; or but read a Lecture of man's depraved condition, I could do it in
no other language, then that of Esaias, from the sole of the foot even unto the
Head, there is no soundness in it, but wounds and bruises and putrefying sores,
etc. Esaias, the 1 c. and 6. v. so total a defection has seized upon our nature
that not now the pool of Bethesda, or the waters of Jordan must be washed in to
heal our Leprosy; but the fountain of life set open by a crucified Savior to
wash and bath our sinful souls for sin and for uncleanness; yea so foul is our
Crime, that it has made man out of order both in Soul and Body; His very
spirituals are much carnalized; look upon him in his soul, and that you will find
is amiss and very much disordered.

1 In the understanding, which is the eye of the soul, is there not much
dimness contracted? and if the light that is in us, be darkness how great must
our decay in sight needs be? What St. Paul says of the Gentiles is true of
every one of us by nature, in Ephesians. 4.18. having the understanding darkened,
being alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them,
because of the blindness of their hearts: and until he, the power of whose
death, tore in pieces the Temples vail, rent the vail of ignorance from off our
rocky hearts, we did abide benighted with the black clouds of sin and
rebellion, it being just with the Almighty either totally to Eclipse, or
finally to withdraw that spiritual light our wills voluntarily cast away, as
being puffed up with an overweening conceit of being made like Omnipotency it
self in the knowledge of good and evil. Such towering thoughts being likely to
lead to no other place but that of darkness, yea and that irremediless too,
without the assistance of that true light graciously promised to enlighten
every soul that comes into the world; for our nature has not only led us
from the way of truth, but the best discerning our souls have is only to find
our selves involved in misery and a total deprivation of good. So that you see
our understanding can only let us know our selves miserable, but can no way
relieve us.

2 The will is perverse, and utterly unconformable to the law of God: the
relish of Eves forbidden fruit is still fresh on the palate of every son of
Adam, delighting to go astray rather then follow the straight rules of Gods
command, so that he puts his people to their (...), and since he cannot
affright us with our dangerous estate nature has left us in (by its unskilful
choice,) he would feign convince all men of their extreme madness, putting the
question with a quare moriemini? Why will ye dye O house of Israel? Ezekiel.
18.31. and the more folly you will find lodges in the heart of every man who
wilfully turns off from the truth of Gods law, if you but seriously consider
that his inducement thereunto arises from no experienced comforts he ever found
in those gilded vanities, which most account the worlds pleasures, or fleeting
trifles which are reckoned for profit; for we have all good reason to believe
Solomon's knowledge, who distilled all the quintessence of sublunary beings into
his own cup of delight, and what is the sum total at the foot of this account?
you may take it in his own language, I have seen all the works that are done
under the Sun, and behold all is vanity and vexation of Spirit, Eccles. 1. chapter
14. vanity in their being, and vexation of spirit in their operation, for they
are no other but pricking goads, and stinging thorns in the sides and hands of
him that enjoyes them; so that by this time you may well sit down and take up a
lamentation both on the behalf of your selves and others, that so great folly
should be entailed upon your actions, as voluntarily to run from the straight
path that leads to eternal life, and wilfully to follow the perverse guidance
of your own unbounded appetite; and seeing therefore there is so much evil in
vice, and so great glory in virtue, that even wicked men would appear godly,
Sejanus, incipiente adhuc potentia, bonis consiliis notescere volebat. Tacit.
Annal. l. 4. p. 116.
that Sejanus (himself whilst a young courtier) took care for nothing but to
grow famous by his integrity; let us al learn this pious prudence to run with
speed to heavens merciful throne, and with uncessant cries beg that our crooked
man's will may be made straight by the guidance of Gods commands.

3 Our affections are placed upon wrong objects, (for its the object and the
end, together with the manner of performance, which makes every action either
good or evil;) we covet our own pleasure and are unsatisfied without it, though
the purchasing thereof cost us no less then the loss of Gods heavenly
countenance; such fools have we made our selves, that our chief delight is
folded up in the enjoyment of a few transitory beings, forgetting the only
Jewel which the worlds treasure is of too mean a value to make purchase of; for
as one says Well, no glory that's woven in the finest tapestry of this world,
but will lose color, decay and perish, whereas saving grace and the knowledge
of Jesus Christ is (...) a possession for eternity;) and we are so wedded to
our carnal interests, that we cannot endure to have mention made of their
removal, and are so besotted with their imaginary beauty, that we seek to cover
all their deformities; dealing with our affectionate lusts as the painter did
with Antigonus, who had but, one eye, he drew his picture imagine lusca half,
faced, and so buried the deformity out of the beholders sight; We usually
present our seeming contents with the fair face of outward joy, while in the
mean time we draw a curtain before their cloven foot and stinging tail; such is
the unhappiness our first parents folly has reduced us to, that we naturally
choose the evil and let pass the good; court the shadow, and let the substance
flee away: Greedy affection was the inlet of our sin and misery, and still
the same porter keeps open the doors for our unruly appetites. With how much
eagerness therefore should we endeavor to get our desires and affections
placed upon their proper object? that so they may attain the truest end, by the
rightest means, and not rest contented with a few lifeless wishes and cold
desires, which at the best (as one says well) can gain but this mean
character, (been cogitare est been somniare) a good thinker is but a good
dreamer, whose awakened sight serves only to let him see he has but the cloud
instead of Juno; therefore above all things it teaches us the truth of this
lesson, that needs must men do evil whose very affections are wrong placed: Our
souls being amiss we must needs do amiss, for man is borne to evil as naturally
as the sparks fly upward, says holy Job; for the best of men without renewing
grace are (...), men of perverse and depraved minds; till then all we preach or
learn, is but as new wine put into old bottles, whose strength their weakness
cannot contain: or as a new piece in an old garment; it may help a little to
patch up our lives and actions, but at length that natural acquired knowledge
which with much study, labor, and sorrow we have obtained, will but agravate
our sins, and make the rupture of our consciences the more desperate and wide,
therefore while others sit mourning over the loss of some terrene bliss, which
perhaps was gone before truly enjoyed, let us bewail the true depravation of
that real goodness once given to the first, and now proffered us by believing in
the second Adam. It were folly beyond compare for rebels to imagine that a
pardon can be merited by resistance; such sturdy oaks must be cut down, not
bowed; and cannot we make the case our own? drawing this sure conclusion, that
while at enmity with God no peace of conscience, no joy in the Holy Ghost; and
that we are traterous rebels beyond all contradiction and dispute.

For there is a double rebellion:

1 Of the soul against God, Romans 3.10. As it is written, there is none
righteous, no not one; there is none that understands, there is none that
seeks after God, etc. and likewise he goes on, showing the totality of this
rebellion, verses 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. drawing up this conclusion ver.
the 16. destruction and misery are in their ways, and the way of peace have
they not known, there is no fear of God before their eyes. When once the reigns
of loyalty are laid in the neck of licentious liberty, there can be expected
nothing but ruin and calamity; you have already seen the defection that reigns
predominant in the three principal faculties of every unregenerate soul; from
which it must necessarily follow, if the streams abound with so much pollution,
the fountain and spring must needs overflow with corruption; it is the
unsanctified heart that occasions all unnatural heats and quarrels against God
and his righteous Law; Whence come wars and fightings? (says S. James;) come
they not hence? 4. James 1. viz. from a lusting and unsatisfied principle that
has taken possession of our souls? for ever since man eat of the forbidden
fruit the envious one has endeavored to steal the seed of Gods grace out of
his heart, that so he might with greater freedom have the larger room wherein
to sow his own Tares; so that no way can peace be expected from us, but by true
contrition, and holy submission; to carry our dead souls in the arms of faith
to Jesus the only true mediator, and beg of him to take away the
partition wall which our sins had erected; that so our reconciliation being
wrought by him, we may have strong consolation through believing.

2 As there is a rebellion of the soul against God; so, secondly, it follows,
that there is a rebellion in the senses against the soul, Romans 7. c. 21. I find
then a law, that when I would do good evil is present with me: and if the great
Apostle found such struglings within his sanctified spirit, what reason sure
have we to make complaint, whose senses are continually boiling up with fiery
passions and enormous lusts? as might easily be made appear, would your
patience grant me the liberty but to particularize, and show you how each sense
apart has joined in conspiracy against the soul: and I Will begin

1 With Hearing, that once heavenly organ, whose delight was in nothing, when
created, but to hear the heavenly Anthems the glorious Quire of Angels
continually sing with changeable parts, and unspeakable ravishment, in praise
of their and his Creator; or to receive the lively oracles, and upright rules
of life, from the mouth of God himself: but alas, no sooner had the soul sinned
then the ear was stopped from the former glorious sounds; and that voice which
before was pleasant to Adam innocent, is now terrible and intolerable to the
same person naked: and what is now our employment, but to listen after those
things rhat cannot profit, or else to attend to that which will certainly bring
punishment? The most heavenly charmer with all his melting rhetoric cannot
unstop the ear of an obdurate impenitent, but he will persist in the hearkening
to those diabolical lectures, whose doctrine is deceitful, and application
damnable; whose propositions are to teach us to sow the seeds of sin, and Uses,
to persuade us to reap the fruits thereof. That this is a truth beyond control
I need fetch no further arguments then your own sad experience, whose daily
practice bespeaks the woeful knowledge you have thereof.

2 The sense of Seeing also is not without its interest, in complotting how by
rebellion to ruin our souls. Indeed I find it sometimes the threatening of Gods
angry curse as the punishment of a rebellious people, that seeing they may not
see, lest they should be converted and live, Esaias 9.10. though for the most
part it is the subject of his complaint against both Prince and subjects,
Priest and people, as you may see at large up and down that prophecy, that by a
kind of spiritual adultery, the sight of men is divorced from that object which
is best: and do we not find, that these optic nerves of ours which were made
only to be the recesses of glorious and immortal objects, are by us made the
casements and inlets to all kinds of folly? and madness that now our blear eyes
are either offended with every beam of light, the sun of righteousness darts
upon us (so miserable is the decay of our sight in respect of its noblest
capacity and operations) or else in its luxuriancy and wantonness runs out,
glaring upon vain and unprofitable things, to the breeding of base disorder and
unreasonableness in our minds: (...) says St. Chrysostom. wicked men are
unreasonable men: are they not without understanding that work wickedness?
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 14.14. such is the extravagancy of our natural sight,
that it for the most part makes way to the blindness of our spiritual sight.

3 Smelling; which once was like that of a pleasant field which the Lord has
blessed, is now by sin become abominable, to God and nauseous to our selves,
we lost the savor of that good ointment for which the Virgin daughters of Sion
should love us; Cant. 4.11.
our smell is now become earthy, and by a sinful dejection we bend our souls
downwards, for having in Adam lost the smell of those garments, more pleasant
then that of Lebanus, we are now with holy Job content to sit and enjoy the
savor of a dunghill; there is a filth, and stench remaining in the heart and
conscience of every impenitent sinner, that the sweet perfumes of a pure mind
and upright spirit, which continually refresh the heaven-borne souls, are
foreign, and have no alliance to them whose minds are orewhelmed with the
turbulent cares of a tossed world, whose impatient billows serve but to force
them so much the nearer dangers brink: therefore let no man please himself in
any sensual enjoyments, for they are the wicked man's portion; and as we are
unwilling to undergo they smart, so let us refuse their seeming pleasure, lest
we find such gilded pills to be but the forerunner of a bitter potion.

4 Tasting comes in also for its share in the unprofitable merchandise sin
has brought poor man as the return of all his unlawful actions; indeed its
holy David's Exhortation that we should taste and see how good the Lord is; but
happy is the man that has so much wisdom, for we are so vitiated with the
practice of evil, that we have no palate at all to relish heavenly food,
minding rather to patch up our decaying carcases, which are daily veterascent
and mouldring away, then the taking hold of any opportunity that may lead us to
partake and taste of those immortal joys whose duration runs parallel with
eternity; Temptations to evil always appearing big with a promising fruition
of pleasantness: so that with Eves deceived eye, we are often prevailed with to
try and taste their goodness, fleeing from all holy consultation, till with
her we pay no less then the smart of a troubled mind for the satisfying of an
unbridled lust. I question not but your own experience can sadly witness the
truth of this assertion, that impatient and immoderate desires after carnal
pleasures always return laden with the intolerable burden of grief and sorrow.

5 Touching; which is the fifth sense that suffers with us and for our
transgression, evil appetites being borne do also grow up with us; the
consideration whereof induced me the rather to stretch the line of your
patience to a particular enumeration thereof, that so beholding our vileness we
might be brought to consider, that the sins of our bodies and senses, such as
are lusts, will wither in time, and decay of themselves; but sinful habits, and
spiritual wickedness, which vitiate and corrupt the mind (except in this life
they be put off by grace) will continue to infect and oppress our souls to
eternity; of how much concernment then is it for us all to lay hold on those
things that will stand by and witness for us in a day of trouble? We see the
drowning man will catch at a straw, rather then let pass any thing that with
safety may bring him to the shore; and our selves are curious, and careful to
lay hold on those means that will either purchase or preserve temporal safety;
oh why then should we not be as wise for our spiritual estate, to lay up
treasure where neither moth nor rust can come, to decay or lessen it? In a
word, by all that has been said, it plainly appears that the subject of sin
is the soul, and the body is the instrument that subject works by; therefore
sin is said to reign in our mortal bodies: so then the proposition is true
not only of them that with Ahab sell themselves for sin; making merchandise
of that invaluable gemme, which a righteous man would purchase with the loss of
life it self (could any thing but the blood of God make redemption thereof) or
them that make a league with sin and death; but even the saints of God also
make too true a proof of this assertion: Holy David, a man after Gods own
heart, is sometimes found following the devises of his own, though his freedom
therefrom cost him no less then a bedewed couch, or broken bones; such fruit
must all the sowers of sin expect to gather. Nay holy Job gives the same
testimony against himself, in 9. Job 20. If I justify my self, my own mouth
shall condemn me; If I say I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse.

And if the task would not procure wearisomness to your patience, I might in
tracing holy ground, present you with variety of examples out of sacred Writ;
Lot was no sooner delivered from devouring fire, but himself presently burns
in unnatural lust: Noah has not long escaped the floods of waters, but himself
is drowned in a deluge of wine; and he that was to be the rock upon which
Christ will build his Church, he himself falls from the spiritual rock Christ
Jesus; and if this be done in the green tree, what will come of the dry? that
are no sooner tempted, but yield, assaulted, but embrace it, like the willing
bulrush continually sink into its nourishment the filth and mire of a roaring
sea; so that the Pelagians impeccant purity, and the Donatists unspotted
sanctity, are but Apochryphal, and will never be inserted into the Christians
Creed, for we must say with holy David, in the words of my Text, If thou, Lord,
wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss, Lord, who can abide it? And the
reasons of it are clear.

1 Because not only our nature alone is found active in evil, but it has
drawn in the will and affections also to be its companions in sin; a truth
which but now I have preached to your ears, my whole time for the most part
hitherto being spent in the narration of our corruption both in soul and body,
of the rebellion of each against other, and both against God; so that if we eye
our selves as the objects of Gods anger, nothing but everlasting destruction
can be expected; the soul sins, and the sin is conveyed thereunto by the organs
of the body, which by a free consent are joined in rebellion against the Father
of lights; whose vengeance, if severe in reckoning, must be expected to destroy
us.

2 Because its easier in it self for man to do amiss than to walk uprightly;
for there must be the concurrence of all circumstances to denominate an action
good, whereas the defection and want but of one will make it become evil. Our
very conception is in sin, therefore needs must there be facility for us to do
amiss; we need run no further then little infants, who are but our selves
multiplied, for example in this kind, how much difficulty and industry is
required to work in them one moral action that may bear the name of goodness?
when, on the contrary, great restraints and much severity can scarce withhold
them from multiplied acts of evil: Nay, that you may as soon bind a wolf with
the guts of a tender kid, as seek to bridle an impenitent wretch with the cords
of love, for by nature we are all King Solomon's fools, who make it our pastime
to do evil, but to do good have no understanding.

3 That perfect symmetry of righteousness that obtains life, if there be
found therein but the obliquity of one act, the demerit thereof will be eternal
wrath; so says St. James 2. chap. 10. For whosoever shall keep the whole law,
and offend in one point, is guilty of all. Good reason then have we to stand in
awe and sin not, to watch over our ways, and be circumspect: a little leven
will leven the whole lump; the smallest sin unrepented of is able to damn us,
and the least law transgrest is sufficient to procure our damnation, whereas
Christ's infinite merit only can obtain our salvation; for the wrath of man
works not the righteousness of God, St. James 1.20. By all which you cannot
but understand the truth of our assertion, namely, its the corrupt nature of
man to do amiss; together with the reasons thereof. I shall briefly make some
application to our selves, and so in order pass on to the second doctrine
propounded.

Use.
1 Fall down to prayer, and cry out with holy David, Enter not into judgment
with thy servants O Lord, for in thy sight shall no flesh living be justified;
if in the gold of Angels there was much dust found, if those pure spirits were
charged with folly, what extremity of madness, and intolerable ire may we
expect as the wages of our unrighteousness? For if thou Lord be extreme to mark
what is done amiss, who can abide it? you have seen the doctrine cleared, let
us a little apply it, and so pass on to the last conclusion.

Application.
Oh consider this ye that forget God, lest he destroy you, lest he tear you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver you. Fear ye not me, says the Lord? will
ye not tremble at my presence, which have placed the sand for the bound of the
sea? Jeremiah 5.22. fear not them that can kill the body, but are not able to
kill the soul, but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body
in hell; says our Savior, 10. S. Mat. 28. for patience provoked turns to the
greatest fury, and when the malevolous planet of Gods anger shall fall upon our
heads, like the flying roll in the 5. of Zach. it will dread nothing, but
everlasting destruction. Oh how should all our pulses beat at the remembrance
of Gods wrath for sins! how contracted our span of of time, and how trembling
should our clay cottages appear! how much better were it for us to measure out
the ground by our length before him, and in humility to kiss the rod, then with
impudent foreheads to stand it out against his vengeance? how should we with
speed lay hold and fix upon all means that may bring us near unto himself? how
willing should we be with the silken cords of his favor to be led to
repentance, seeing he is so loath to be severe, and waits that he may be
gracious to us? and withal considering that if God be extreme in punishing, man
must needs be extreme in suffering: which brings me to the fourth and last
conclusion.

That if God be extreme in punishing, man must needs be extreme in suffering.

When thou with rebukes do chasten man for sin, thou make his beauty to
consume like a moth, says holy David Ps. 39.12. But it were well if only his
beauty were gone, and his outward comeliness done away; but he adds as a
greater misery, every man is but vanity, and every way miserable; for what
happiness can be expected when Gods heavenly countenance looks with anger upon
us? for who can bind up that which God in wrath lays open? who can speak peace
to that soul whom he afflicts? or if he withdraw, who can comfort us? and who
can abide his justice when he is severe, and looks upon us with the eyes of
fiery indignation? surely none; for then the body will but begin the pain of
the soul, and the soul endure the grief of both, then you may hear the
Shunamites child cry out, my head, my head; holy David complains that his
heart is melted like wax before the sun; then it is that king Asa is sick
indeed from head to foot; that holy Job is sitting upon the dunghill, and
cursing the day of his birth; then, oh then indeed it is that King David cries
out, his strength is dried up like a potsheard, and that he is become like a
Pelican in the wilderness; there you shall hear Hezekiah chatter like a crane,
and mourn like a Dove: for when God is extreme in his judgments, man must
needs be miserable in suffering, even in the outward man; and yet all these are
but the beginning of sorrow (as our Savior says) in comparison of those
calamities that will overtake us, when our breath shall be turned into sighs,
our eyes into fountains of tears, and our hearts like mournful harpes, shall be
hung upon the willowes of contrition, and our organical music into the voice
of them that weep; all which are but as so many doleful witnesses of our
sufferings, when God shall come to visit for our transgressions; so that you
see the doctrine cleared, and the truth thereof in lively examples illustrated.
One word of application, and then my whole discourse shall be concluded.

Application.
Oh be astonished and wonder at the rich mercy of God, all you that go on in an
uninterrupted course of sinning; that God has not long since made you the
subjects of eternal wrath; oh let the greatness of his patience encourage you
not to go on, but repent of your sins, lest your destruction come unawares as
an armed man, and there be none to deliver you. Let me therefore exhort all men
to make their peace with him betimes, before death makes a separation between
them and their chiefest happiness; before your souls be swallowed up in misery,
and drowned with an overflowing deluge of useless tears (the only Emblemes of
a too late repentance) which shall never be wiped off with the smallest remnant
of mercy, or drunk up with the least sponge of pity and fatherly compassion;
for then the Lamb slain for the redemption of your souls repenting, will be
found no lose then Iudahs Lion enthroned, to condemn both soul and body for
wilful and impenitent sins; so that we must all conclude with the words of my
Text, If thou Lord wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord who may
abide it?

Regi seculorum immortali and invisibili, soli Deo honor and gloria, Amen.
SERMON. II.
PSALM. 130. V. 3. If thou Lord be extreme, etc.


Introduction.
THe glory of the Shepherd is the thriving of the Sheep, as Saint Chrysostom
says; and the fatness of Christ's Lambs, is the strength of their graces; by
the one the outward man is refreshed, but with the other, the inward spirit is
rejoiced, and in both the glory of God is highly exalted: Heavens spotless eye
endures not to behold leprous Souls with any other look, besides that of
vengeance; nor can the Creature ever expect to see its Creators face, without a
renewed mind; For without Holiness no man shall ever see God, Heb. 12.14. We
are but stubble to his consuming fire, so that while we are in a state of
sinning, we are liable to damnation, Heb. 10.13.
It being a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, whose just
severity will wound the hairy scalp of such as wilfully go astray: why then
should we be so stupidly ignorant as to pass on in a way of sin, casting all
fear of danger behind us, as if we were able to encounter devouring fire, or
dwell with everlasting burning? especially when we consider but our own frame,
we cannot but know we are but dust, and that which is our mould will soon
decay; and withal remembering our time is but short, and the word, read
rationem, backed with a Thou fool, may this night be given suddenly; and then
assuredly as the tree falls, so it lies; and in the same condition must we
appear at Gods Tribunal. Oh then with what circumspection should our actions be
performed, lest any evil or vicious habits should square themselves to join
with us in our holiest Oblations! because we pretend service to him whose power
in a few words can write great Monarchs into trembling, and can make a hair,
Adrian 4.
or the kernel of a raisin as mortal as a Goliahs spear; and can with ease blow
down our bubling lives into nothing; for the time is coming, when not astuta
verba, but pura corda, (as Saint Bernard says) not fair words, but honest
hearts will prevail and commend us to him who judges all things; for he will
infatuate all fallacious wisdom and self-destroying wit; For thou art the God
that have no pleasure in wickedness, nor shall any evil dwell with thee, says
holy David, Psalm. 5.4. So that Holiness is now the only path that leads weary
and wandering souls to the Paradise of Celestial Bliss; all other ways being
severely kept against us by the flaming sword of Gods irreconcilable anger and
hatred against sin and sinners; for no unholy thing shall enter (much less
remain) in the Holy City; all such shall be cast out, Rev. 21.27. A good
nature, like a shallow brook, may empty it self into the narrow river of Humane
love; but perfect Holiness, and real Sanctity is only that noble stream which
carries the soul to Heaven, and loses it in the Ocean of infinite Bliss. You
may for a time sport your selves with the fire of lustful pleasures, but ere
you are aware, the flame thereof will not only sindge your gilded wings of
ambitious desires which so long bore you up with the breath of popular
applause, but also consume your soul and body in endless woe and misery; for
when God shall come in flaming fire, he will render vengeance to all that are
ungodly; not enduring longer to have the cry of our sins to come up before him:
and therefore holy David well considered this Meditation, when he broke forth
with the words of my Text:

If thou Lord will be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord who may abide
it?

In which words we have already considered two general parts.

1 An Antecedent.

2 A consequent. Or if you will, here is 1 The Thesis. 2 The Hypothesis.
In the first you have Gods extremity in punishing.

In the second you have man's misery in suffering, for he says: If thou Lord be
extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord who may abide it?

From which sacred concession, we have enedavoured to wind up the sum and
substance of holy David's intention into these four bottoms or doctrinal
conclusions, viz.

1 It is the corruption of man's nature to do amiss.

2 God is not always extreme to punish man when he has done amiss.

3 God can when he pleases be extreme in punishing man when he has done amiss.

4 If God be extreme in punishing, man must needs be extreme in suffering.

Thus far our general division has had its equal course; and our progress in
the dispatch of these truths has but quitted the first, and made entrance upon
the second, which together with the two latter, acompanied with your patience,
shall at this time terminate my hours discourse. And that I may with the more
benefit to your understanding proceed therein, I shall only lead your memories
back to the second conclusion, namely

The mercy of God is such, he will not always be extreme to mark what is done
amiss.

Examples of Gods patience and long forbearance have no where such lively
representations as in our selves, whose unconsumed lives are nothing else but a
series of continued mercy; nor is there any rational account to be rendered for
the same save only that it is the good will of him that dwells in the bush,
whose glory is not to be given to another; and that he will have mercy on whom
he will have mercy, etc. Which he does

1 For his name sake, Exodus 34.6.

2 For his natures sake, which is always prone to show mercy.

3 For his glories sake, and that

1 In general.

2 In particular.

1 In general, it is the constant language of holy Scripture, as you have
already heard.

2 In particular, he is not extreme for his Glory sake, which is great in many
respects.

I In respect of his judgments, for they are his strange work, and never had
he felicity in executing the same, but with an unwilling willingness is always
constrained to visit for the sins, whether of nations, cities, or particular
persons; witness his sending the Gospel to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel, his low condescension to Abraham, when he became Advocate for Sodom;
and his own tears over Ierusalems approaching ruin; yea and witness the
repentings that were kindled in his bowels for revolting Ephraim: but mercy is
his delight, because he waits to be gracious.

2 Great in respect of time, for the mercy of God endures for ever, in Ps. 136.
As his power is unlimited, so neither can bounds be set to his mercy; sun and
moon, heaven and earth, these all have their periods, but the rich treasure of
Gods mercy shall have no end: I have seen an end of all perfection, but thy
commandment is exceeding broad, says holy David. Ps. 119.96. All the
attributes of God like himself are from everlasting to everlasting.

3 Great in extent of place, for his mercy reaches unto the clouds, Psalm. 36.6,
7. Thy mercy O Lord is in the heavens, and thy faithfulness reaches unto the
clouds. Thy righteousness is like the great mountains, thy judgments are as a
great deep; Lord, etc. Gods extended grace makes its full appearance not only
in delivering from danger, but in supplying our wants; not only in saving our
bodies from temporal evils, but in redeeming our souls from eternal damnation,
for with him is great deliverance.

4 Great in extent of plenty, for God is rich in mercy; Ephesians. 2.4. But God
(says the Apostle) who is rich in mercy, for the great love wherewith he loved
us, etc. as if St. Paul had spoke his mind in larger phrases thus; You are poor
and needy, you want blessings temporal and spiritual, and know not whither to
flee for succor and supply, so that the narrowness of your hearts imagines
Gods free hand is straightened; but let no such scruple bear rule in your minds;
for with God is so great a treasure of grace as never can be exhausted, such
riches of mercy as can admit of no decrease; for God is rich in mercy, and
great in love; yea and he accounts it his glory to pass by iniquity,
transgression and sin. O then who would not be in love with him that is so
lovely in goodness? who would not in want flee to him for salvation, who is so
rich in mercy, that he sent his only begotten Son into the world, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life? John
9.15.

5 Great in respect of his works; for his mercy is over all his works. If you
survey Gods curious architecture in creating of the world, you will find mercy
communicating its goodness to poor man, in making him possessor and Lord of so
rich a dominion; nor were the hands of mercy bound up by man's rebellion, or
consumed by the Angels flaming sword, but it took its proper seat to make
restoration of his own most glorious Image in the death of his beloved Son,
which is and will be manifested to the whole world; the Gospel of the
ever-blessed Jesus being that holy city set upon a hill, unto which all nations
are invited to come and make their habitation; each word of truth made manifest
before us being a particular call to every individual son of Adam to come and
embrace him, the power of whose resurrection will raise their dead souls from a
state of sin to newness of life: and thus has mercy rid triumphant through
the whole proceedings betwixt a faithful God and a rebellious creature.

4 God is not always extrem to mark what is done amiss in respect of his
Saints and elected ones, for they are his beloved, and his delight, for whose
sake alone the foundations of the earth are kept firm, and not thrown into the
midst of a bottomless sea: God is not willing (to use holy Abraham's
expostulation) to destroy the righteous with the wicked; no, for tens sake
destruction shall not fall upon a people or city: and if any doubt the truth of
this assertion, let them but peruse the 12. chap. of Genesis* where they shall
find the great unwillingness the father of compassions does express to go about
the destruction of that sinful city with righteous judgment, which to him is
accounted a strange work* nay it shall go well with Potiphars house and
Pharaohs court also, if upright Joseph dwell therein: He Will defer his plagues to
another generation rather then his children should suffer; or else, which is
far better, they shall be taken away from the evil to come, that their blessed
eyes may never see what utter ruin divine vengeance does bring upon a sinful
people; therefore for his elect sake he will not always be angry.

5 In respect of the reprobate he is not always extreme to mark what they have
done; and that upon a twofold account:

1 To let them see their just condemnation.

2 In respect of judgment.

1 To let them see the justice of their condemnation, that though he has long
spared them, and given them space and opportunity to repent, yet they have
chose their own destruction by a wilful impenitency; nay God complains in the
Prophet Esaias, All the day long have I stretched out my arm to a rebellious
people, etc. (but says he) I will not always keep silence, but will
recompense, even recompense into their bosom, Esa. 65.9. their continued
rebellion it makes God ingeminate his threatened severity, which though he be
loath to execute, yet he will not always be silent, abused patience turning
into the greatest fury: witness his passionate compassion over sinful
Jerusalem, whom thus he speaks; Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the
Prophets, and stonest them that were sent unto thee, how often would I have
gathered thy children together as a hen gathers her brood under her wings, and
you would not? There is their times for repentance, but now upon their neglect
and abuse thereof must needs follow Gods severest vengeance: for so it follows,
Behold, your house is left unto you desolate, etc. Luke 13.34, 35. Yea, thus he
deals with Iezabel her self, that mother of Fornications; I gave her space
(says the merciful God) but she repented not, therefore behold, I will cast
her into a bed, and them that commit adultery with her into great tribulation,
except they repent of their deeds, and I will kill her children with death,
Rev. 2.21, 22. By all which (as in a crystal mirror) you may clearly see the
sad event which continually attends an impenitent state; Gods mercy affords us
space, and leaves us without excuse, but his Justice will certainly punish us
if we repent not.

2. In respect of Judgment; shall I call it a mercy to the wicked, that God
suffers them to treasure up wrath against the day of wrath? had it not been a
greater mercy rather to have cut them off by shortning of their days? for by
it surely something had been subtracted from their torments, which is
proportioned to, and measured out by their sins: but that God should in
Judgment spare them, to prosper in sin, that they may sin themselves finally
into perdition, and spare them that the sin may grow as old as the sinner, that
he may go into his grave with bones full of sin: though, on the one hand,
their length of days shows Gods unwearied patience, yet, on the other hand,
it gives full proof of their final intolerable misery. God then is not always
extreme in punishing of sin, and that in respect of Judgment to the persons
guilty; he will not presently destroy the Amorites, though their sins come up
with a loud cry before him; no, there is a measure of sin to be filled up as
well by Nations as particular persons, before the decree go forth, and Judgment
come upon a Land, to the utter ruin thereof; nay, a Nation may be arrived to
the very Zenith of Sin, and yet Judgment not immediately follow, witness
Jerusalem, (and oh that England might not be brought in for a testimony also! I
mean as not deserving what she did) for they had committed the greatest of
sins, in not only slaying the Prophets, stoning them that preached repentance
unto them, but also in killing the Lord of Glory; and yet God spared that
rebellious City forty two years after; which shows that God is not always
extreme with them that are come to the Zenith of sin. Oh therefore let
Ierusalems space of repentance move us to turn unto the Lord with speed, lest
we also perish in our sins, and there be none to deliver; For God will make
his power known that his name may be declared throughout the earth, Romans 9.17.
Thus in respect of Sinners unconverted, of Saints that are converted, and of
Reprobates that will not be converted, God is not always extreme to punish.
And so I have done with the second conclusion, and shall only make a little
Application thereof to our selves, and so pass to the third observable in the
Text.

Application.
1. Admire the riches of Gods mercy, that he always punishes not according to
our sins, and is not always extreme in observing when we have sinned: mercy
it was that the Almighty at first did make man, who stood in no need of the
best of Creatures, and their most pious services; but greater mercy, that the
Holy One should not utterly destroy man when he had sinned, and that his
patience should forbear destroying sinful flesh; a God of so pure a nature that
he cannot behold sin without hatred, and yet a God of so rich mercy, that he
saves the soul when it has sinned, proclaiming himself to be the Lord,
gracious and merciful, passing by iniquity, trangression and sin: the
consideration whereof made S. Chrysostom cry out, Lord, what am I to thee,
that thou should command me to love thee, and when I love the not thou art
angry, seeing its misery enough not to love thee; and when I sin and run from
thee, yet thou waitest still to be gracious to me, and leavest no means
unattempted that may make me love thee? And Saint Austin I remember has this
expression, God, (says he) is weary of our sins, and is pressed with them as
a cart heavy laden with sheaves; and why does he not rid himself of us who
sin wilfully in contempt of him, but casts our sins behind his back, as if
no dishonor were done to his Holy Name by them? Why does he thus (says that
holy Father, expostulating with himself) but merely because he will not be
extreme with us? O therefore admire the riches of Gods mercy, who gives you
space to repent, and by no means wills your death. Oh I beseech you then, if you
expect that God should make your souls incessantly happy in his eternity, be
you holy ( in tua aeternitate, as Saint Bernard says) in thy limited and short
eternity, that so you may come to see, not his footsteps or back parts, but his
glorious face, by an immediate intuition of his Majesty: O think with your
selves how your souls shall then be filled with glory and happiness!

O praeclarum and invidendum spectaculum! Oh what a sea and inundation of
unspeakable Joy must needs flow in upon the Soul! and will you not stand and
admire the riches of that grace which gives you space and means for the
obtaining of so great a blessing?

2 This may move every one to begin, and, if begun, to increase their
repentance; the Lord is ready to forgive, and with thee is mercy (says the
verse following my Text) therefore shall thou be feared. Our sacrifice and
propitiation can be nothing as from our selves, its only Jesus Christ the
righteous that can satisfy Gods offended justice for our sins; For if any
man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, 1
John 2.1. This is that pearl of great price which has redeemed us from our
Sins, this is the Propitiation with which God is well pleased, and is now
become, not our angry Judge, but reconciled Father; for were he a Judge, and
not our Farher, he would be extreme to mark our actions; and were he severe,
and not merciful, we could not stand before him; But with thee is mercy that
thou may be feared, Psalm. 130.4. And in his Beloved he is now made one with
us; the partition wall which sin had erected, by his suffering is now destroyed
and broken down, that so we may now come with boldness to the throne of Grace,
having an High Priest pleading continually for us, and one who knows what it is
to bear our sins, and endure our sorrows. Therefore let us cast off the works
of darkness* and put on the whole armor of light, that so we may be able to
stand in the evil day.

But withal, let us take heed of taking occasion to live in sin because God
is merciful, and because he is gracious, to turn that grace which should save
us into wantonness; this is to treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, and
to lay upon our selves a mark of reprobation: for though it be true of our God
what Benhadads servants said of the Kings of Israel, we have heard that they
are merciful Kings; so you may say, if we sin, yet our God is merciful to
forgive; and so sin, that grace may abound: do not thus deceive your souls;
for the same God that is a merciful Father to true Penitents, is also a jealous
Lord over wretched sinners, and will, like Iehu, drive on his Judgments
furiously against rebellious sinners, and will wound the hairy scalp of all
Impenitents. Behold therefore the goodness, and the severity of God; severity
to them that go on in sin impenitently, but goodness to them which truly
repent, Romans 11.22. Oh therefore let me persuade you whose souls as yet sit in
darkness, and in a state of sin, to awaken your selves out of this woeful
security; consider, if thou turn to the Lord with all thy heart, and truly art
sorry for thy sins, consider I say, he is ready to forgive, and waits that he
may be gracious to thy immortal Soul for which Christ dyed: but on the other
hand, if thou continue in sin, know assuredly, thou vile impenitent, he will
come in flames of fire, to revenge himself upon thy implacable and immalleable
heart: Oh therefore, while its called to day, harden not your selves against
his fear, but get your peace made with him ere it be too late: and you that
have already begun, do you persevere unto the end, that so you may receive that
crown of Life which shall never be taken from you, for he will not always be
extreme with you; and yet severe with those that continue in sin, because
when he pleases, he can be extreme to mark what is done amiss: and that brings
me to the third Observation.

Third Observation. That God can when he pleases be extreme in punishing man
when he has done amiss.
The will and the power of God in themselves are the same, though to our
corrupt understandings they seem distinct, because our irregular wills are
confined by a limited power; and though God may do what he will with his
Creatures, because he is Omnipotent, yet when they have sinned, he does not
always will their destruction, because he is merciful; his Omnipotent and
executing power being always limited by the will of mercy, when he comes to
deal with sinners for their transgressions, though God when he list can be
extreme to punish. See the proof of this: 1. A priori. 2. A posteriori.


1. A priori; The power of God is infinite, and that infinity of his is
omnipotent; as he can make a Genesis to give being, so also an Exodus to
destroy that being; as there is in him a power to create, so an infinite
justice to destroy that creation when made: though he create light out of
darkness, because he is the parent of Infiniteness, so also is he Omnipotent,
and can when he pleases will the new light into its ancient state of darkness;
the same Word that gave the world a being, can carry her again to the grave of
destruction, leaving her in the same confused Chaos which his merciful goodness
at first found her in; and the same six days which past away in building of
her up (if it so please him) with as much facility may take it down, though his
excellent Mercy will have no less then six thousand years to bring a period to
the same, as most learned interpreters expound the words of Saint Peter, 2 Pet.
3.8. So that a priori you see there is power enough in God, not only to be
angry with, but infinitely to punish the sins of his people.

2. A posteriori: Who sees Nebuchadnezzar grazing like an Ox, and acknowledges
not Gods Power to be Infinite, and can do with ease what seems good in his
sight? who sees Belshazar in the midst of his carousing cups weighed in the
balance of the Sanctuary, and found too light, and acknowledges not his
Justice? who sees Goshen full of light, and Egypt covered with thick darkness,
and acknowledges not an Infinite Deity? Examples are most profitable
illustrations of his power in dealing with the sons of men, and in this case
are almost infinite. What son of Adam is there that knows not of his fathers
fall, and the dreadful curse the just consequent thereof? In the day thou
eatest thereof thou shall surely die, Genesis 2.17. and it was surely performed;
witness Cains inability to bear the loud cry of his brothers blood; Cham justly
cursed by his Father, as the reward of his shameful action; Esau sadly, and too
late seeking a sold Blessing; the flames of provoked fire licking up sinful
Sodom; the earth of her self making a grave for Corah and his wicked Accomplices;
the great deeps swallowing up Pharaoh and his Host, as the just avenger of his
intolerable Persecution. But these are but temporal evils; but there are
eternal miseries; for when he is extreme, his eyes shall not spare his enemies.
But you will say, what means this? Can God destroy that which he has made? Can he
that delights in man, destroy or despise the works of his hands? Will he pluck
down with one hand what but now he built? And can he laugh when their fear
comes, who has sworn he delights not in the sinners death? Nothing less; yet
we must not say with Job, I am righteous, though he has condemned me; for
shall not the Judge of all the earth do right, and glorify himself in, and
upon his Creatures? For if we go astray, he must and will hedge up our way with
thorns.

Though it is true, God afflicts not willingly, yet he does, and will punish
the sons of men when they sin and wilfully go astray; and that for these
reasons:

1. To remove that grand idol which men make, and set up in their own hearts,
that God is all mercy, and will not punish, or all love, and cannot endure to
afflict his people: deceive not your selves with such vain delusions, for the
soul that sins that soul shall surely die, Ezekiel. 18.4. As sure as there is a
God that mercifully saves them that repent, so sure will the same God
infinitely punish them that continue in sin; as it is his Mercy that offers,
and invites us to accept of Salvation, so also will it be the office of his
Justice infinitely to punish all those that refuse to come when called by his
Word and Spirit. Remember the story of the great Supper, and Gods severe answer
to them that would not come when invited: I say unto you, that none of those
men which were bidden shall taste of my Supper, S. Luke 14.24. though God spare
us for a time, yet he will send forth Judgment unto victory.

2. To remove the Atheism that lodges in men's hearts, of no revenging Justice;
that men live and speak as if there was no God, uttering that in words and
actions which holy David's fool entertained in his heart; that men being to
think there is no God, because they see no fearful examples of his Justice set
before them in the destruction of his enemies; that the wickeds prosperity in
evil makes him boast himself, and despise his Maker. I remember Saint Austin
brings in the proud man, speaking thus; when he was at peace, and no
disturbance injured him, says he of himself, if I had nothing worth despising
I should be a God; blasphemously imagining God were ignorant of that which men
call contempt: but faith the Father, It was not long ere I saw the same wretch
cast down with utter amazement by a small clap of thunder: when God did but
seem to clothe himself with the garment of vengeance, he presently fell down
with humble obeisance. Therefore God will sometimes be extreme in punishing,
that he may rescue the glory of his justice out of the hands of the wicked.

3 Such is the nature of sin, it justly provokes God to be extreme, because

1 Its a transgression of his righteous law; and if earthly Monarchs punish
their rebels with temporal, well may the Lord of Heaven and earth reward his
traitors with eternal death; if temporal magistrates are so tender of their
precepts, that they esteem each breach thereof as an injury done to their
persons, well may the Father of spirits cast away with scorn all those that
are found fighters against his commands..But that is not all; for

2 Every sin is not only a transgression of Gods law, but its an injury
offered to his sacred person; there being no act of evil wherein our whole man
deliberately concurs, but it is as much as in us lies to dethrone the Majesty
of heaven, and if it lay in our power also, to ungod the sacred Trinity; an
action which my soul trembles to think of, much more to utter; and were it not
that I might leave the impression thereof so deep as to imbitter sin unto
you, I should not have named it.

But that is not all, for

3 Every sin is so much the greater, because it is committed by persons that
have received all sorts of kindness, and are under all manner of obligations to
the contrary; therefore well may God be extreme for sin, when found in them
that are engaged to the contrary.

4 Such is the nature of Gods justice that it requires exact and equal
proportion of punishment to the sins that have been committed; now every
sin is of an infinite duration, for did the sinner always live, he would for
ever be guilty of sin; therefore it is but just the punishment should be
infinite also; for if God reward us with glory (if we serve him) above our
deserts, can we condemn him for but rewarding us according to our faults? and
if he do spare us, and not inflict the extremity of his justice, it is because
his mercy intercedes, that glorious attribute wherein is his chief delight: but
God will sometimes be extreme to punish, because the nature of his justice is
such as that it will proportion its punishment to our deserts, and that with
speed too; for the time draws near, when God will come to judge the earth
righteously, and the nations with his truth, Psalm. 96.13. He will try all
things (as the refiner) by fire, which will discover and make legible that
(...), the blind and subtle characters of men's thoughts and actions, which
before could not be read or perceived; and all this by the power of his
righteous judgment, and the unerring law of his revealed will, those righteous
statutes, the breaking whereof will make the wicked call to the mountains to
cover them from the wrath of the Lamb, when he shall come in flaming fire to
render vengeance upon all ungodly and impenitent sinners; whose destruction is
of themselves, their sins being the measure of his punishments; for he will
reward every man according to his works, whether they be good or whether they
be evil, for with him is no respect of persons; for as suffers the pesant, so
shall the Princes of the earth, if found in their impenitency; if their steel
melt before his fierceness, what shall man do whose clay-cottage continually
sticks in the mire of sin? Oh sit down then, and hang your mournful harps
upon the willows of contrition, cast away from you all terrene hopes of
comfort, which at last, like Egypts reeds, will prove no further useful, then
with sorrow to pierce your troubled sides; lean no longer upon the staff of
your own understanding, lest your falling thence become irrecoverable; but
betake your selves with true and pure devotion to that golden mercy-seat,
whence none ever returned empty that sought aright; for there is no armor able
to resist or divert Gods severe judgments but pious prayers and fervent
ejaculations; and no doubt but if you thus do, but he who lends an ear to the
cry of speechless blood, will not turn it away from the voice of your
petitions, especially if put up in the name of him, whose employment it is to
propitiate for the sins of the whole world; you must needs confess your selves
sinners, and if living and dying such, you may be sure the end thereof will be
eternal misery; Therefore its every man's great concernment, as he would escape
the last, to provide against the former; and the sooner the better, because we
know not how soon our accounts will be demanded, and God come with, ah thou
fool, this night shall thy soul be taken from thee, etc. Therefore to day while
its called to day let us hear his voice, and not harden our hearts against him.

2 Seeing none can say his heart is clean, and all have reason to say, every
one is more righteous then we; Oh then what fountains of tears should we shed,
if possible, to bath our sinful souls in, and baptize our selves anew in
penitential tears! not that the water alone has any cleansing virtue in it,
(for the very springs must be purged by the rock Jesus Christ) yet contrition
is ofttimes an inseparable sign of being cleansed; for when sins by us are
truly repented of, Gods favorable eye of compassion looks on those sins as if
they were never committed; and where our sins look as red as crimson, we must
endeavor to have our tears as white as snow, that falling sincerely from the
eye of a true penitentiary they prevail with the father of mercies to pass over
our souls when his judgments begin to be executed; so then we must put off the
redness of guilt, that so we may be clothed with the white robe of innocence,
by getting our sins and iniquities blotted out. But do not deceive your selves,
it is not a seeming holiness, or appearing innocence, acquired by our own
strength, that will avail us; such weak lights are easily blown out and extinct
by the gust of every temptation; or like the costly gilt of a well-tuned
instrument, appearing pleasant while such, but when once the strings begin to
jar, the impatient hand with fury casts both them and all its beauty from it,
as if no such loveliness had ever there been found. Therefore above all things
it is our concernment to make sure work in the things of eternity, not taking
them upon trust, or others credit, but our own experience, not fearing others
so much as our own eternal weal; for there is nothing has been so much the
bane of Christian community, as an overweening conceit of our own sanctity,
saluting every man with a Pharisaical Stand off, I am more holy then thou,
disdaining to think any are so high in Christ's esteem as our selves; whereas
our truest glorying is only in the cross of Christ, and an humble heart, which
in the sight of God is of great price: For if thou Lord be extreme to mark what
is done amiss, who can abide it? And this brings me to the second observation
propounded, namely,

That the mercy of God is such, he will not always be extreme to mark what is done
amiss.

Mercy is Gods proper work, it is that wherein his chief delight does rest:
what was reported of Dionysius the Emperor, and left upon record for his
eternal fame, viz. that he wept when he came to subscribe his name to condemn
a man, as being loath to dip his finger in the blood of his fellow creature; is
much more true of the Father of Mercy: witness those tears that dropped from the
eyes of our Savior over impenitent Jerusalem, a sad presage of approaching
ruin, and yet a true symptom of his unwillingness to put the same in
execution, though they were already come to the Zenith of impiety, killing the
King of Glory, and the Savior of the world; and though but beholding this at a
distance, such was his mercy that it made him weep.

Mercy is an attribute that of it self properly belongs to God; justice is as
it were by accident, because of man's evil; therefore is he said to wait to do
the one, but sparing in execution of the other; yea he is unwilling to execute
determined wrath; therefore he says, how shall I give thee up O Ephraim? and,
I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, etc. Hos. 11.8, 9. therefore,
he that hates nothing that he has made, will not always be extreme with what
he has not made, lest with it he destroy the work of his hands: for the mercy
of God is exercised toward man as considered in a twofold capacity.

1. As a sinner. 2. As his creature.
1. As a sinner; that he may do away his sins, Isa. 43.25. he makes open
proclamation thereof; I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for
mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins: so willing is God to free the
sinner from mistaking the person, that he ingeminates the word, as if he had
said, if thou art unacquainted who it is that must do away thy sins, know that
it is I, I, who am thy maker, and put thee in a blessed condition whence thou
fell; and it is I who again will restore thee and send a pardon in the name of
my Son and thy Jesus.

2 Mercy is exercised about him as his creature, to receive him into favor,
not to punish him above measure, though he be out of measure sinful: Isa. 46.9.
Remember the former things of old, for I am God, and there is none else, I am
God, and there is none like me. That God punishes sinful man, is the act of his
justice; that he is not severe in punishing, is an act of his mercy; yea so
loath he is to be cruel, that he would have his creatures put him in mind of his
mercy, as if nothing so much delighted him as to have his servants to think and
believe him to be merciful; for so you read, Put me in remembrance, let us
plead together, declare thou that thou may be justified, Isa. 43.29. wherein
he that runs may read this sacred truth, that God is not always extreme to
mark what is done amiss, but is full of compassion. And this he does

1. For his names sake, which in holy Moses style is no other then the Lord,
the Lord, God merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness
and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and
sin, Exodus 34.6. And that the power of this glorious name may never fall, nor
the remembrance thereof fail in the hearts of the sons of men, he will still go
on to make his merciful name in much glory, in much majesty to pass before
them; for all the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth, Ps. 26.10. For though
many sorrows shall be to the wicked, yet he that trusts in the Lord mercy
shall compass him about. Ps. 32.10. He is only the God that hears, and can
answer prayer, therefore to him must all flesh come: it is his glorious name
alone which is as an ointment poured out, the excellency of whose favor
perfumes the hearts of all that love him; whose very goings rejoice the morning
and evening seasons. Other names and titles may give us free passage among the
sons of men, and get or lose their favor; but it is only the name Jehovah,
who is mighty to save, that can give us a name to live when dead in sin; whose
goodness crowns not only the years, Ps. 60.11.
but the hearts of his people with joy unspeakable and full of glory. And so I
pass to the second ground of mercy.

2. For his natures sake, whose very property is to have mercy; therefore when
God in mercy spares his people from demerited wrath, he compares himself to a
father, vailing his compassion under that tender relation; but when justice can
no longer spare but by being injurious to its honor, by the provocation of our
sins calling for vengeance to be poured upon our persons, then he represents
himself like a woman big with pain, and travailing with grief (if I may so
speak) to bring forth that just ire he has been long in conceiving.

Yea mercy appears and is seen in hell it self, because though he punish to
extremity of time, yet not to a fullness of horror, in intension of torment;
whereas justice, like the harlots, will have the sinner divided soul from body,
to be different sharers in eternal misery. Let thy laws (O Lord) be writ in
bloody characters upon the sinners head, is justices language, that so he may
eternally wound the hairy scalp of him that has wilfully gone astray: but
mercy, like the true mother, continually cries, spare the child (Lord) and save
the sinner from eternal woe; and at length this mournful voice proves effectual
in the ears of Heaven, and with Jacob, obtaines the blessing; for indeed mercy
is the true mother of our lives, which else had long since been a sacrifice for
our sins, had not the scapegoat carried them away into the land of
forgetfulness, and by becoming a victime for the same, buried all our
transgressions in his grave, that so they may never be able to rise in
judgment, either against our persons or our services; whose very nature it is
to become an advocate for rebels, and like an affectionate surety pay the
debt, that so the debtor may go free: and this he does, not for our
righteousness, or any merit that is to be found in us or our performances, but
for his name and natures sake. And so I pass to the third ground of mercy,
namely

3. For his glories sake.

For his glory, 1. In general. 2. In particular.


First, for his glory in general, that being the utmost my limited time and
your patience will give leave to discuss, reserving the more particular parts,
together with the dispatch of the two last doctrines, to our second part of
this discourse: but I say

1. Generally, and in that I shall only but point you to those excellent
graces wherewith he is pleased to furnish the hearts of the sons of men, that
thereby they may become vessels fit for the masters service. God is delighted
with showing compassion; and mercy is so joined to his nature, that he would
have it wrought in, as well as bestowed upon us, that in this glorious
attribute we may again bear his heavenly image: to that end sometimes our
trials are made the subject for his love to work on; at other times he presents
others misery as the opportunity for our mercy; and therein he calls out our
faith, to believe that he who has inclined our hearts to pity others, will
show abundant compassion to us; our hope, that God will deal no worse with our
souls then he has commanded us to use the soul of our brother; and lastly, he
calls our charity to exercise its benevolence, knowing that besides the
hundredfold which in this life we shall receive for one drop of cold water
bestowed in his name, and given for his sake, we shall receive in the life to
come a crown of righteousness which shall never be taken from us; for his mercy
is over all his works, else should we be soon consumed: which made holy Job cry
out, Remember I beseech thee that thou have made me as the clay, and will thou
bring me unto dust again? Job 10.9. and again Job 7.17, 20. What is man that
thou should magnify him, and that thou should set thy heart upon him? I
have sinned, what shall I do unto thee O thou preserver of men? why have thou
set me as a mark against thee? etc. Once for all, take it in the 14. chap. 2.
verse. and so on, Man comes out like a flower, and is cut down, he flees also
as a shadow, and continues not; and do thou open thine eyes upon such an
one, and bring me into judgment with thee? as a leaf also is he blown away
with every wind: so is our soul tossed with various temptations, sometimes with
the east wind of presumption, on the contrary, with the west of despair; now
hurried with the north of rage, by and by carried away with the southwind of
lust: thus like a tennis-ball is poor man racketed from one temptation to
another, till at last he hazard eternal ruin; reeling from one extreme to
another until he fall into perpetual misery.

Therefore to conclude, let me implore every soul that expects and looks for
eternal life, (as who does not?) to get cleansed from all your iniquities,
whether secret or open, latent or revealed, before you come unto the brink of
misery from whence is no return; before your feet stumble upon the dark
mountains wherein is no security: let no iniquity ever have any more dominion
over you, get all your actions salted with true grace, that God may smell a
sweet savor in your holy devotions and pious services, knowing that your best
performances are but gilded appearances, and glittering abominations, if God
should with severity inspect them: so that we must all say with holy David in
the words of my Text, If thou Lord should be extreme, etc.

FINIS.
SERMON. III.
LUKE 2.7. And she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in
swadling-clothes, and laid him in a manger, because there was no room for them
in the Inn.


Introduction.
GOd is a most pure Act, never was he idle, but always in being, even when this
world was not in being; he was in himself love, and nigh enough to himself; yet
when he was so, he thought of some eminent act of bounty wherein to produce an
Idea of his goodness, and accordingly wills thoughts to himself of showing
mercy to mankind; for yet he would do good to all: therefore all his ways are
good, his being and well-being envied as yet by none, no not by Satan, the
first parent of malice, and grand enemy both of Gods unspeakable glory and man's
eternal felicity, not enduring to entertain the least thought of seeing humane
nature deified; yet God, to show the freedom of his love, in rich mercy stamps
his own Image upon man, for it was his goodness as well as his power* that he
made us good as well as men; but what was at first made good we soon made sin,
for God made man upright, but he has sought out many inventions: so that had
not God redeemed us, we had been miserable to all eternity; much rather had our
souls not been, then not be happy. When man was made holy, and had sinned,
though such iniquity deserved the ruin of what he was before, having defaced
that image, yet God is prone to mercy when provoked: goodness would rescue that
part of himself from ruin; for scarce one had sinned, but one was promised to
save, the Son of God was promised and presented to the Patriarchs, being
revealed to them by his promises, and foretold by his Prophets, that God would
send his Son; he saw a fit vessel wherein he would enclose his son ( viz. the
Blessed Virgin) and therefore he sends his Angel to provide a lodging, telling
her that she was highly honored of God, Luke 7.3.
and she shall conceive in her womb, and bring forth a Son, and shall call his
name Jesus; that God would give him a name above every name, and of his kingdom
there shall be no end: she examined, and believed the Angels Message, and and
was found with child of the holy Ghost, Luke 1. the power of the highest
over-shadowing her. But lo she is summoned to another travel, for there is a
decree from Augustus Caesar, and behold she takes no small pains to obey; for
though her appearance might have been excused, yet she would not disobey the
lawful magistrates command, the custom of women is on Mary; but alas, desolate
Virgin, she is driven to that pass, that having no room in the inn, necessity
compels her to make a chamber of the stable, and to turn the manger, (the
place wherein is laid the food of beasts,) into a Cradle, the now only
receptacle for the bread of life, and at once both mother and midwife; for she
brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in swadling-clothes, and laid
him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the Inn.

In which words consider with me these four general parts.

1 A Virgins travail. 2 A mothers tenderness. 3 A child's poverty. 4 The peoples
inhospitality.
1 A Virgins travail: She brought forth her firstborn son.

2 A mothers tenderness: She wrapped him in swadling-clothes.

3 A child's poverty: laid in a manger.

4 The peoples inhospitality: There was no room in the Inn.

I begin with the first.

1. The virgins travail: she brought forth her firstborn son. Wherein consider
1. The person, she. 2. The birth, brought forth. 3. The fruit, her firstborn
child.


1. For the woman, she was a virgin, but what, a virgin to bear, to bring forth
a son? a wonder; and she her self cries out, I know not a man; well might the
Prophet Ierem. say, Behold a Virgin: and the Prophet Isai. likewise, yet she is
the same, Isa. the 7.14. verse. but that Christ was conceived of the holy Ghost,
and born of the Virgin Mary, is an article of our faith, not of our
understanding; best known is the manner to him that has the power; virgins are
not usually pregnant, yet the spirit ingenders flesh, we take it not from his
nature but power; the Holy Ghost produces the man Christ not of himself, but by
his power: Christ begotten of himself as one with the Father, sending him on
the great errand of man's salvation; for all the three Persons in the sacred
Trinity have a share in this great work, the Father begetting, the Son
begotten, and the Holy Ghost produced him at the fullness of time: I call the
Holy Ghost Father, as his shadow; the virgin his mother as his substance, or
the matter of his person, whereby he is called the son of man, that by this
means he might be joined to our nature, and so become surety for us: as for
example, we christians are born of water and of the spirit, and are not called
the sons of water, but of the spirit, because of the spirit we are made one
with Christ, and are thereby become the sons of God, that Christ was conceived
of the Holy Ghost and of Mary is most certain, but for our sakes called the son
of Mary, and not of the Holy Ghost, yet has the son an equality with the
spirit, and is perfect God as well as man, therefore is it that the Holy Ghost
concurs with Mary in the conception, both agree to make Christ, but not one
way; for it is his the shadow, hers the substance; hers the carkase, his the
quintessence: how could it be but a holy thing, being of the Holy Ghost? though
she had sin, yet Christ took none from her, because he would expel it from her;
for had Christ been born of an Harlot, of Mary Magdalen, yet she could not have
contaminated his integrity, but commended his power and mercy; he could have
sanctified the most sinful person and unhallowed womb.

Being conceived of the holy Ghost, he took our flesh, but not our corruption;
can the sun shine untainted on the dunghill? much more can the sun of
righteousness appear in our clay without contagion; can we suspect a deity to
receive a contagion from humanity? for he was born of a Virgin, etc.

Though a Virgin, yet espoused to a man, that Christ might be Joseph's supposed
son, Esa. 7.19.
and Joseph be Christ's supposed father; he chose one that was a Virgin, that
the Jews might see their prophecy fulfilled in him, the true Messiah; and
that they should not suppose him the son of an Harlot, he was born of an
espoused virgin, that marriage might be honorable to all; 2 Cor. 11.2.
for a virgin shall conceive etc. And thus, the Church bears us as chaste
virgins to Christ the espoused head. There was no need of the Elders of the
City to judge of her purity, for she was no Harlot, but one under espousals,
22. Deuteronomy. 15.
and yet not a wife, but a virgin, for as yet she had not known man, St. Luke
1.34. Mary brought forth Christ, for she brought forth; which brings me to the
second thing.

2. The birth, she brought forth; when the fullness of time was brought to the
period, he that made time was in time, he that created the world came into the
world, he that brought forth his mother was born of his mother: the Angels
wonder at the incarnation, every good spirit groans to see this glorious wonder
brought forth; now or never truth flourishes out of the earth, and
righteousness out of the womb of the mother: he that stepped from heaven into the
womb, stepped into the earth out of the womb; he that at the first creation made
man without a mother would not now make God-man without a mother; the Creator
makes use sometimes of a creature to produce his omnipotency, and who cannot
admire such purity, virginity, in such pregnancy? that the fruit of her body
should ripen, and yet a virgin, a maiden bringing forth what was not begotten,
but made, and yet not created, but begotten; well might it be a virgin in whom
it was made, and a God by whom it was begotten. Add to this, that the begetting
not the birth dishonours the party among men, whose conceptions are in sin; but
here the begetting brings honor to the party both in the conception and birth,
because begotten from above: the flesh of man is not of man, but of the mother,
and the flesh of Christ God-man, is not of man, but a virgin, that none should
dispute his humanity; and yet begotten not by man, but of the Spirit, that none
might question his Deity. Therefore let us not dispute how begotten of a
virgin, considering his power; for I cannot believe him man without a mother,
and I cannot believe him God if I do not believe his virgin mother. The virgin
did breed by her own, but unusual way of conception; if we believe not the
Father begets him without the help of the wife, we shall not believe he was
born of a mother without the help of a husband; she was a virgin, and brought
forth her firstborn son, which brings me to the third particular.

3. The fruit, her firstborn son; her firstborn, because none before; not
that she had any after, but as it is firstborn of many brethren, not by nature
but adoption, so the firstborn of his mother, and the first-begotten of his
Father; and all, that the begotten of men might become the sons of God; that we
cannot boast as we are natural, but as made the adopted sons of God. It was
once the saying of an Heathen Philosopher, that he thanked God because he had
made him a man, and not a beast; because he was made man, and not a woman.
Indeed nature did make man above the woman, but grace preferred the woman: it
is our honor and happiness that God has made and saved us by himself; it made
the holy virgin say, I will sing and rejoice in God my Savior, and yet her
son, a son in several natures, a son equal with God, and like to his mother; so
tr^ly God as ever, as truly man as now he began to be; God before all time,
and man in time; a son he was, yet motherless, because begotten, and not born;
a man and fatherless, because borne and not begotten. One denies that he is
God, another denies that he is man; one will have him man indeed, but God
apparent; another will have him God; but man in show; one calls him mere man,
yet deified; another a mere God, but carnal, one the word transubstantiate to
flesh; another spirit in the likeness and similitude of flesh. O the blindness
of men! because they conceive him not to be as he is, they will have him to be
as they imagine. But we shall take the wary Christians way, that will not utter
any thing besides the worth of his humanity, besides his divinity; and they
will confess him as truly man as God, for he was born of the Virgin Mary; she
brought forth her firstborn son. From hence learn 2. Our Savior humbled.


1 Our nature dignified; what an honor is it to be dignified above the Angels,
and the natural Son of God thus becoming the son of man? Our nature though it
be base by degeneration, yet it is noble by his regeneration; he dignified us
with his nature: as many as received him to them gave he power to become the
sons of God: Though many stand upon their blood, as if true nobleness consisted
in that which is derived from man to man; but all is fetched from Christ; and,
not my blood, but Christianity makes me noble said that worthy Emperor
Constantine: here is comfort that God is not ashamed to call us brethren; and
that 2 ways.

1 By right of propriety; so we have interest in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

2 Of neerness, and that in relation to Christ, for he is of kin to us; for
they that are sanctified and he that sanctifies are all one: Christ is both
our father and brother, our father as God, our brother as man; and what an
honor and comfort is it to us to be brethren unto the son of God? that we that
have the earth for our mother should have the God of heaven for our father? and
will he deny us any thing that has given himself to be our father, and his son
to be our brother? he that has given us Christ he will not deny us any thing;
he that has given marks to redeem us will he not crown us? shall we doubt to
receive any good from him, in regard Christ is our brother, in that he took our
nature upon him? for he was born of the Virgin Mary; for she brought forth her
firstborn son. And why should we then debase our selves to lusts, and give our
selves to unworthy lovers, the lusts of the flesh, the vanities of the world,
or Satan's temptations? we are made heirs of God, and coheirs with Christ, let
us walk as the children of the light, as the redeemed ones of God, and such as
Christ will own to be his brethren.

2 Christ humbled; what a wondrous abasement was this of Christ, that he that
enjoyed the height of Divinity, should yet be the lowest of our nature? that
the Word should be incarnate, should be borne? that the great God should become
a child? that the Ancient of days should become an infant of one day? that the
Almighty Jehovah should become the weakest of men, yea even as a child? that
glory should be so humbled that God should become man? this is the wonder of
wonders, a miracle placed upon pinnacle of admiration that he whom the Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain* should be laid in a manger: The inhabitants of the
earth wonder to see a new star, much more to see a new sun on earth; he was
accounted, yea was, equal with God, yet made himself of no account in taking
our form; he made himself like to us by a willing humiliation. It was the
saying of a Father, Whether can be most, to pity him that he was so, or admire
him that he would be so? that he would so descend to come in person, was a
wonder, but that he should come in the wants and weaknesses of a child, that
might have come in the glory of God, is above all wonder: and we are not more
beholden to him that he came, then that he should so come; he must be nothing
that would be made like us; he made himself of no reputation, not of his
declining power, but of his inclining mercy: it was the goodness of God that he
would not be glorious, rather then not profitable, and therefore the more and
greater was his humility in debasing himself to us, the more should we magnify
him: not any thing of his, but ours was the unworthiness: And if our Savior
humbled himself thus, are not we yet humbled? our thoughts cannot be too meanly
conceited of our selves, since our Savior was so low and vile; the very
heathen cannot debase us so low as the earth did God, who likened himself to
us: let us compare our selves to nothing; he was called the son of man born of
a pure Virgin; what should we call our selves? worms and no men, and say to
corruption, thou art my mother, since Christ was thus borne; for she brought
forth her firstborn son. And so I come to the second general, the mothers
tenderness.

2 The mothers tenderness; she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped
him in swadling-clothes. She wrapped him; that custom was the office of a
midwife, the visitation of friends and kindred; among those many women in
Bethlehem, was there no tender mother to afford Mary the office of common
civility? none to consider the wants of a necessitous Virgin? among the many
that gave to Caesar was there none to give to God the things of God? Never was
heavenly majesty invested in so homely a throne; Christ was now first borne,
that we might be borne again; he became an infant in us that we might become
men in him; he was now straightened to a span of mortality, that we might be
enlarged to immortality; his mother now embraces him in her arms; she laps him
not in a fine mantle, for what cares he to be gorgeous that cares not to be
glorious? his rags they were pure, and clean, though poor and mean; so soon as
we had sinned we could be clothed; but so soon as he was borne he began to be
miserable, he was wrapped in swadling-clothes; Christ was wrapped in our clothes,
to procure a blessing for us: though God made us naked and innocent, yet we
presently made our selves nocent, and we had not been clothed, had we not
blushed; what was there in Christ that he should be clothed, and thus clothed?
surely no unrighteousness of his procured it but Christ was covered with these,
only for our sakes, whose sinful nakedness wanted the covering of his
righteousness. O the vanity of men much more of Christians! Christ took our
clothes to take our sins, yet we see not our sins in the vanity of our
clothes; we accounted it our ornament to be clothed, and yet so full of poverty
and indigency in our selves that all we have is either from the earth, or from
the beasts that inhabit therein; it was sin that brought us to borrow of the
earth and beasts; it was sin that made us thus shamefully clothed, to clothe
our sins; and why should we be proud in the gaiest clothing, since it is but
a remembrance of sin? why should we trim and deck our selves, when Christ
coming to save us, was wrapped in swadling-clothes? Necessity of clothes speaks
us men and the decency of them speaks us Christians; Christ was wrapped in
swadling-clothes, and laid in a manger. And so I come to the Child's poverty,
viz.

3 She laid him in a manger.

God brought forth man like a King, and placed him in Paradise, but he brought
forth God-man like a beast, in a stable, and laid him in a manger; Christ was
abased as to a beast, left all honor as to understanding, that he might
restore them to spiritual wisdom who by sin were become like the beasts that
perish. Christ came to restore man, and therefore would become one with the
lowest of men, that none might come short of salvation. O silly creature, know
thy master, the Lord of honor is now companion of beasts; obey him then in his
humiliation, that has disobeyed him in his glory; what can we behold in this
his abridgment, but the contemning of the pride and the glory of the world in
his sanctified humility? why should Christ be thus low and mean, but to teach
us to prize nothing but heavenly things?

To Apply this.
If our Savior did so humble himself to this mean condition, how low should we
humble our selves before him? did the Son of God abase himself to misery and
death, that he might exalt us to glory and life? therefore why are you lifted
up? While Christ was vile thou were raised up; though Christ was patient, thou
art full of impatient malice; he embraces where thou despisest; thou likest not
the taste of delicates, yet he sucked a poor woman's breasts; thou grudgest thy
finest apparel, he contented to be in clouts, he was (though a King, though a
God) borne in a stable, laid in a manger; to teach thee, that where thou art,
thou should have nothing to regard or be proud of either in thy self, or thine
enjoyments. For what was there about thee O blessed Jesus, but poverty was
visible in it? a poor carpenter, and a desolate Virgin; and perhaps the beasts
were thy only companions: what was magnificent there but that which was
noisome, and by the presence of Christ was made pure? a dark dungeon by this
bright sun becomes full of light; the rags that wrapped him were more precious
then raiment of purple, the clouts that comforted him were of more value then
if made of the finest and most gorgeous linen. O Lord, our hearts are by reason
of sin become dens, caves, and stables of uncleanness, oh that thou would
sanctify and beautify them by thy glorious presence! they cannot be happy or
blessed one minute without thee, yet shall be as thou art, if thou come but
into them: but alas! we are many of us, as the Bethlemites that would not
entertain Christ in the inn; for there was no room for them in the inn. Which
brings me to the 4 thing, viz. the peoples inhospitality.

4 There was no room for them in the Inn. What? was the suddenness of the
journey any cause of the virgins speedy travail, or her sudden travail rather a
cause of the Bethlehemites uncharitableness? poor virgin, and yet happy mother
of so blessed a babe, she comes too late to be lodged in the Inn, that came too
soon to be entertained of her kindred; but too late for the Inn, and all the
room was taken up before she came, and therefore must be in the stable: rather
then an honest traveller will be burdensome, the meanest room to his humility
shall be great satisfaction: indeed some had their delicates, and fed only for
wantonness, though she wants necessaries; the Carpenter that had built many a
house, now wants a house wherein to rest himself and almost wearied traveller;
contentedly accepting the beasts for his companions rather then want a lodging:
just so the God of heaven and earth having left heaven, was glad to shroud
himself in this clay of ours; Joseph came to his City, and the Citizens
received him not, because they knew not that the Lord of glory was with him;
thus the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib, but Israel did not
know, the Bethlemites did not consider, Esaias 1.3. Whom have you rejected you
Bethlemites? Will ye rather reject God in a stranger, then entertain a stranger
for Gods sake? What, do you throw God into a stable? Know you not that out of
you shall come the ruler of Israel? Mich. 5.2. And are you so stupidly
ignorant, that now you will lose the accomplishment of that promise? How unlike
art thou to Bethlehem, the house of Bread; in regard thou neither affordest him
house to harbor, nor bread to succor him? But alas! woe unto us, we censure
thee O Bethlehem, but if we had lived in thy days we should have been worse;
and now can expect nothing but that Bethlehem should rise up in Judgment
against us, for in this she is more righteous then we; for Christ came but once
to them, and in humility, but he comes often to us in power, and we regard not.
How often does he knock at the door of our hearts by his Word, and by his
Spirit, yea and that until his head be filled with dew, and his locks with
drops of the night? but we will not entertain him. O! if those rude heaps have
had the dust of his feet shaken against them for their inhospitableness, how
shall these hard hearts of ours that will not receive him be ground to powder,
Matthew. 21.24.
when that great millstone shall fall upon us for our hardness and impenitency?
do not your hearts tremble to hear the sad doom? I was a stranger, and ye took
me not in; naked, and ye clothed me not; sick, and in prison, and ye visited me
not: therefore ye shall go into everlasting punishment, S. Mat. 25.43, 46. With
what sadness of countenance shall we hear this woe denounced, and that by
Christ himself? and certainly without repentance it will be our portion: how
then should we pray, oh that our hearts were worthy the harboring of so rare a
guest! With what diligence and care should we sweep our houses, set open our
doors, and make us in a readiness when we heard of some earthly monarch that
were coming to us? and thus we should by repentance and holy devotion prepare
our hearts, that they may be meet Tabernacles for him, and labor to get all
those graces his Spirit confers on those that love him; that so our Lord might
not come before expected, nor pass by uninvited, but freely turn unto us, and
dwell by Faith in us, that we may dwell in him by the same Spirit; that Christ
dwelling in us here, we may dwell with him for ever hereafter, In whose
presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore.

A Funeral Sermon. SERMON IV.
1 COR. 15.19* If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men
most miserable.


THere is a time to be born, and a time to die, says Solomon, Eccles. 3.2. And
the day of a man's death is better then the day of a man's birth, for he is born
to misery and trouble, as the sparks fly out of the fire; but by death he is
delivered out of the misery of this sinful world, to enjoy true bliss and
happiness: therefore, why should we hang down our heads like a bulrush, and
afflict our souls? or rather, why should we not, were it not that we know that
God will give us beauty for ashes, Isa. 61.3.
and the spirit of joy for the garment of heaviness; or give us the felicity of
his chosen, and make us rejoice with the gladness of his people? or with S.
Paul, 1 Cor. 15 32.
Why should I fight with beasts at Ephesus, or contend with unreasonable men?
Why should I subdue the beastly lusts of the flesh, or overcome sinful
corruptions, or rather, not run to all excess of riot, were it not that after
this life there is laid up a crown of glory, 2 Timothy 4.8.
which God will give to them that love and serve him? Why should we arraign and
judge our selves, for to bring these days to an end, were it not, that upon
this moment hangs eternity, which we shall be possessed of when death shall be
swallowed up of victory, 1 Cor. 15.54.
and mortality shall put on immortality? or why should we account all things
loss and dung for the excellency of Christ, Phil. 3 8.
but that besides the hundredfold which we shall receive here below, God will
reckon us among his precious Jewels? Why should we not embrace liberty and
freedom, rather then abide a furnace of trials, were there not the Son of God
to comfort us, and a fiery Chariot whereby to escape the fire that never goes
out? And who can dwell with everlasting burning, or who can abide with
devouring fire? Isai. 33.14. Why should we not be discouraged at the death of
friends, and with great despondency hang down our heads in discomfort, when we
see the lives of our relations are cut off, and withal remember that we our
selves must shortly turn to dust, were we not assured, that he who out of
stones can raise up children unto Abraham, Mat 3.9.
will from among these stones raise us again, and give us a crown of
righteousness? And set this crown aside, well may the world think Christians
the most miserable. Take away the hope of a better life; I say, take away the
hope we have in Christ of a better life, and we are so, since we are miserable,
and outwardly most miserable: For if in this life only we have hope in Christ,
we are of all men most m^serable.

In which words be pleased to consider these two general parts.

1. Our happiness inferred. 2 Our misery supposed.
1. Our happiness inferred, that in this life we have hope of another life; If
we have hope only in this life.

2 Our misery supposed: Otherwise we are of all men most miserable.

In the former general consider with me these particulars; 1. The termination
of this happiness, We. 2. The foundation of it, and that is in Christ. 3. There
is the common term, where the one has interest in the other, and that is in
Christ, even hope, which is twofold; 1. In this life. 2. Not in this life only.



In the second general, there is our misery supposed; and therein consider two
things.

1. The extension of it, all men miserable. 2. The intension of it, we the most
miserable.
If we invert the order of the words, we may draw these Conclusions: 1. From
the extension, all men miserable; 2. From the intension, we the most miserable;
3. From the subject, with the common term we may note; 4. We may observe from
that, that he has it not only in this life; etc.


So that here are the two Vessels spoken of by the Prophet, Jer. 18.4.
The first was marred, and another made in its stead, here is the one Vessel of
sorrow, the other of joy; or a miracle answerable to that in the Land of Cana,
Joh. 2 7, 8.
where water was turned into wine; the water of misery turned into wine of
Consolation, to make glad our hearts: or here are as it were two affections
struggling the one with the other, Genesis 39.25, 22.
(like Jacob and Esau in the womb) Misery and Happiness; this world being as
the place assigned for their production, misery first comes forth, like Esau,
red and all hairy; and after it Happiness comes like Jacob, and supplants it;
so in respect of the life hoped for, while we are here upon earth, happiness
supplants misery, and gets the start of it; though all men are miserable, and
Christ^ans in this life the most miserable, yet by the hope in this life which
they have of the hope of the life to come; the misery is taked away: For if in
this life only, etc.

I shall follow the parts of the Text according to the order I drew the
Conclusions, and begin with the first of them: namely, 1. That all men are of
themselves miserable.

That it is so, whose own experience does not testify it? misery is an
argument of our being* for whether you consider the objects, the Soul, or the
Body, you must conclude with holy Job, that our souls are poured out of us; Job
30.16.
or with the Prophet David, The days of affliction have taken hold of us; for
we have found, those very things wherein our happiness consisted, to have
proved either broken reeds, or miserable comforters. For,





Common.
1. Common, and Here, all those qualities that conspire to the good of the whole
yield to a general distemper: Or,

Appropria^e.
2. Appropriate, and here man must fully join himself to misery, for there are
several kinds of misery, proportionable to his several degrees of knowledge,
and that also to his several years or ages, as infancy, childhood, youth,
middle age, decaying age, old age; and for which of these is there any Balm in
Gilead, any releasement from all trouble? For look

are no better then vanity, and the best vexation of spirit, Eccles. 2.11. We
find it by experience all men are miserable. The goodness of a thing rests in
the content and permanency of it; yet how short are all earthly things in their
durance, yielding to change even while we enjoy them? as holy David, Psalm. 30.6.
I said in my prosperity I shall never be moved. And holy Job said, I shall die
in my nest. Job 29.18.
Yet holy David he found his thoughts deceived, which made him complain, Thou
did turn away thy eyes, Psalm 30 7.
and I was troubled; and holy Job experienced no less, When I looked for
peace, Job 30.26.
and quietness, then came trouble. Such are the troubles of this life, though
they seem like a river of oil, smooth and pleasant, yet they prove like the
waters of Marah, bitter; Exodus 15.23.
or like those of Jericho, salt and unsavory; or if they are delightful, and
at that present be what they seem, yet at last they prove a trouble; thus is
man most miserable, and sometimes even in his best contents. But what means
this? Can the goodness of God estrange it self? or ^s his mercy clean extinct?
surely neither, he has made nothing in vain: or can the God of nature, who
made all things for the use of man, can he so far estrange himself in any
thing, as to deny the participation of it to his image? no not in any wise.
There was a time when piety and perfection were concentrick in the same person,
when love and hatred dwelt not in the same tabernacle: there was a time when
happiness was as perfect as man's innocence, when freedom from sin and
punishment were equal: when heaven dwelt on earth, and did communicate the
Image of God unto Man, vindicating him from misery; man was not born in sorrow,
nor had iniquity as yet dominion over him, felicity and blessedness being then
the companions of his life; as yet the days of affliction had not taken hold of
us, or our sorrow overtaken us, nor did it, till abominable man had drunk
iniquity like water, which like a merciless deluge drowned every faculty both
of soul, and body: Man was not miserable till man had ploughed iniquity; and
sown wickedness, and then no wonder if sorrow springs out of the dust; for now
man is born to sorrow as the sparks fly upwards; as will appear a majore ad
minorem and aminore ad majorem.

A majore ad minorem, from the greater to the lesser: Christ knew no sin, yet
he was a man of sorrow* the imputation of our sin, made him the heir of our
sorrows, he being the Surety for man, he paid the debt when the Principal went
free, which brought him to that pathetical exclamation, Lament. 1 12.
Behold, if ^ver sorrow was like unto my sorrow. Thus the Son of God for man
became miserable, and not only did man by sin bring sorrow upon his Redeemer,
but also upon himself and the whole creation too, as will appear.

A minore ad majorem, from the less to the greater: The creatures which were
not capable of sin, but being subject to man, are made liable to suffering; The
creature is made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by constraint, Wherefore
the whole Creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now, etc.
Romans 8.20, 22. How much more Man is become miserable, for whose sake the whole
Creation became miserable? Misery is the common condition of this life; though
grace raise the soul to a higher contemplation, which often mitigateth and
eases the bitterness of the trouble; yet notwithstanding it often comes to
pass that through the inequality of sufferings in this present life, she and
all her followers must wear garments of a deeper black, then the rest of her
sons: for if others have their cups filled up to the top with bitter
afflictions, these filled with the dregs; if one be scourged with whips, the
other with Scorpions; if they partake of common afflictions, good men must be
most miserable: which brings me to the second conclusion; 2. That Christians in
this life are outwardly

V^rtue has such power over the soul of man, could it be seen, it is so pure
it would ravish the beholder with admiration, that it is strange how it comes
to pass, though grace be but virtue sanctified, and raised to contemplation,
that she that commends her better part, is so far from having that respect due
to her, that she is made the heir of sorrows, and wicked men like the unjust
servants (in the Gospel) conspire her death and utter extirpation.

It is strange to see the Sun cursed for its heat, the most innocent to be
least secure in this life, where they must expect sorrow and trouble; 2 Timothy
3.12.
For all that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution: and that
either inwardly, or outwardly:

1. Inwardly, while the godly cry out with holy David, Psalm. 120 5.
Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell in Mesech, etc. or with just Let
(while in Sodom) who complained that his righteous soul was vexed with the
unclean conversation of the wicked, 2 Pet. 2.7.
hearing the sacred Name of God blasphemed with oaths, and seeing the consent
of ungodly men. And

2. Outwardly; and that either secret, or manifest

1. Secret, witness the low esteem and base value the world rate Gods Jewels
at; 1 Cor. 4.13.
accounting them the filth, and off scouring of the world.

2. Manifest; and that in words, behavior, or actions.

1. In words, thus Tertullus called Saint Paul a babbler, a pestilent fellow, a
mover of sedition, Act. 24.5. And Ahab called Elijah, him that troubled Israel,
1 King. 18.17.

Psalm. 69.12.
2. In behavior; and thus the drunkards make songs of David; and even Christ
himself is derided; the Jews mock him in his Prophetic Office, saying,
Prophecy who smote thee, St. Mat. 26.68.

The Soldiers mocked him in his Priestly Office, bowing their knees, and
worshipped him, St. Mark. 15.19.

Herod mocked him in his Kingly Office, when he put a purple robe on him, and
platted a crown of thorns on his head, and all in scorn to his sacred person,
St. Mat. 27.29.

3. In actions; and here what mischiefs are not executed, while wicked men's
heads are plotting against the Lords peculiar people? Their foul suggestions
create ways to disturb them, that we cannot conclude that Homo est homini Deus,
that man is to man a God, unless we believe there are two Gods, a good and a
bad; what then? Est homo homini demon, is man to man a devil? not so good;
That Kingdom that is divided against it self cannot stand, Mark. 3.24.
says our Savior; the Kingdom of Satan remains and stands, and therefore that
Kingdom is not divided: how then? Est homo homini lupus, is man to man a wolf?
not so good neither; wolves prey not on wolves, the savage wild beasts do not
devour and prey on their own kind: but what then? Homo est homini homo, man is
to man a man, and what creature does man more mischief then man? Dan. 3.27.
See the fire less cruel to the three Children, and the hungry Lions more
merciful to Daniel then were their accusers; Dan. 6.22.
the earth more pities Abel in opening her mouth to receive his blood, then was
Cain his brother which slew him; and wherefore slew he him, but because his own
works were evil, and his brothers righteous? 1 John 3.12. So though at the very
first you see man walking from the womb to the grave, giving up that breath he
first drew into misery, yet here you have mischief more active, though the
wicked shall substract from the number of the days of the godly, it is but to
increase his miseries; and though they breviate the Text, it is he that
comments upon it; yet here is the comfort, though in his way from Jericho unto
Jerusalem he fall among thieves, Luke 10.30.
and they wound him, and leave him half dead, yet the pious Samaritan his
Savior, takes care of him, pours in Wine, to make glad the heart, and Oil,
to make him cheerful, which are the true effects of a faithful soul in greatest
miseries and extremities, which he receives by hope in Christ: For, 3. The
misery of a Christian is taken away by the hope in Christ.

Yet mistake not, it is not for all trees to heal the bitterness of the waters
of Marah, Exodus 15.25.
nor all meal to heal the deadly pottage; it is for every hope, out of the
eater to bring forth meat: it is a riddle (a good Samson puts forth) of too
sublime a nature for carnality to unfold, it is a mystrey so divinely pleasant
and delightful, that none can declare but they that plough with Christ's heifer,
Judges 14.18. Indeed wicked men may presume, and by the help of their own
abilities, think to find perfect freedom, but their expectation shall fail, and
their hope be cut off, Job 8.14. only those are they that receive comfort, that
have the God of Jacob for their help. Now in what part of the soul Hope is
seated, is disputable, it matters not whether or no it be referred to the Will,
seeing it extends to the object he desires; and that hope is properly taken not
to be a passion, but a habit infused by the Spirit of God into a Christian;
which I take to be not the soul of a man, but the affections thereof; for faith
that proceeds from hope, and hope that relies on righteousness, not that our
unrighteousness can expect any thing from God, (this would include presumption,
or merit) but by it we wait for the Righteousness of God through Jesus Christ
our Lord, who is the object of our hope two ways.

1. I^clusively. 2 Exclusively.
1. Inclusively; and that two ways.

1. Including as the end, all the persons of the sacred Trinity; and 2. All the
Attributes of God.
2. Including the less principal objects of our hope, the graces of the Holy
Spirit, by which salvation is revealed to the soul.

the God of hope, Romans 15.13. and Jer. 14.8. and that not as the efficient
cause working this grace in our hearts only, but as the final cause to which it
moves, expecting to enjoy the presence of God, which is the fullness of joy for
evermore, Psalm. 16.11.

of God, and is the Horns of that holy Altar which by grace is erected in the
heart of every true believer; as holy David said, God is his shield, his
fortress and deliverer, yea and the Horn of his salvation also, Psalm. 18.1. For
you may in sacred Writ find pregnant examples of Gods Saints which have
particularly committed themselves to his several properties; as Jacob to his
Truth, Genesis 32. the three Children to his Omnipotency, Dan. 3.17. the two blind
men to his Goodness, St. Mat. 20.30. the father of the Lunatic to Christ's
Power, St. Luke 9.38. the Leper to Christ's Will* St Mark 1.4

2. Including the less principal objects Threefold hope.
so it flies to God with a threefold hope, 1 With hope in the promises of
Christ. 2. Of the Graces of Christ. 3. In the merits of Christ. First in the
promises in him they are yea and amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. and these promises of
Christ may be considered two manner of ways: 1. Absolutely. 2 Conditionally.


1. Absolutely, as the promise of the Messiah, Isai. 28.16. Or,

2. Conditionally, and that Legally and Evangelically; 1. Legally as the
promises which annex eternal life to the condition of perfect Obedience, which
was at first made with Adam in a covenant of Works under the Law; but here 2.
Evangelically we have annexed Hope of entering Heaven, as our Fathers entered
Paradise, and that to the Evangelical condition of Faith; for it is a far
greater privilege to be brought like sons into the fathers house, only upon
such conditions as we know are already performed by our Surety, and wants only
the act of Faith to make them ours* then with a servile spirit continually to
be enslaved to that bondage from which we can never free our selves, which is
much more likely a beggarly receiving, then a working hand. But,

Pet. 13. Hope, that is the grace that is offered to you and brought to you, for
by grace ye are saved, Ephesians. 2.8. Nor does this diminish any thing in Christ,
when the object upon which our Anchor lays hold, is only Christ Jesus our
Lord; for we can do nothing by our act of hope but only when grace is
propounded as subordinate, and the means to the other; we may fix both in
Christ, the principal help to attain Eternal Life; it is Christ that can bring
a Soul to that happiness he desires, and grace that is the instrument and agent
toward attaining it.

this hope is the root of prayer, but the Merits of Christ is the ground; we
pray for what we hope, and hope what we pray for shall be granted through the
Merits of Christ; without this Faith would be deperateness, and hope
presumption; our prayers without the eye of faith would be but blind; though we
had this hand, we should but be weak without this staff of hope; the merits of
Christ would be but to us as unrighteousness: prayer is the Dove sent out of
the Ark; hope the wings that help her in her speedy flight, and both return
empty except they come with a leaf from that branch that is plucked from the
merits of Christ; faith is the hand of the soul, prayer the sinews, and hope
the nerves that act in this conveyance; but without the merit of Christ all
will be but like a brandished weapon, clashing against the brazen pillars of
our own created confidence, this verily must be the support of our devotions,
that we may pray for what we hope Christ has merited, which consists in
justification, sanctification, and glorification.

1. In hope of justification, viz. pardon of sin, remission and freedom from
punishment.

2. Hope of grace, for sanctification, whether it be the inward favor of God,
as the Apostles blessing, when he says, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with them, or the habitual grace of Gods spirit, which is daily given us, till
we become perfect men, and the hope of glory answerable to glorification.

3. Hope in glorification, where we expect to be made happy in that estate,
where shall be no intermissions of joy, or periods in our felicity; where faith
shall triumph in vision, and hope in fruition, and that to all eternity. Thus
Christ is the object of our hope inclusively.

2. Exclusively, Christ the obect of hope, and that, 1. In respect of the
creature. 2. In respect of our selves.


1. The creature: for what good is there in the creature without, or our selves
within? for do men gather grapes of thorns or figs on thistles?

What folly were it for him, in the next danger of drowning, to catch hold of a
twig, that might get to the rock or the shore, which might secure him? yet such
is the folly of vain hope, that neglects the rock of salvation and trusts to
the creature, that is but as a rush and a flag within the water.

2. Excluding what good there is in our selves, for though in regard of
naturalls our wants are great, yet in regard of spiritualls they are much
greater, we by our fall were cast out of the Paradise of Gods favor into the
field of danger, where was nothing to move compassion but pollution in our own
blood; but when we were so, he passed by, and said Live, he washed us in the
laver of regeneration, and made us comely by his imputative righteousness, and
clothed us with sanctifying grace, and shall we now play the harlot, and bestow
any thing upon another which belongs to him? it is no other then dividing the
living child with Christ, he will have none of our divided hope, or distrusting
faith: where grace is feeble, the soul often hangs in suspense between hope and
fear; for had it but once convinst the soul of the object, he would not any
longer trust to himself, which breeds distraction, which is but as a broken
reed, but he that trusts in me (says the Lord) shall possess the land, and
inherit my holy mountain, Isa. 57.13. so that now we have found the rock of
salvation on whom we may build without fearing to be removed, though the winds
blow and the tempests rise, we shall but slight and scorn all their foaming
rage; the hope of future good will out-ballance all the present misery, this
sustaining hope will either lessen the burden of our miseries, or add to our
strength to bear them; so that although all helps may seem gone, no remedy but
the ready miserable destruction of despairing; though we cannot see when any
good shall come, Ier. 17.6. Yet all these evils laid in the balance of the
Sanctuary are too light to stand in competition with the hope in Christ: nay
every true hope is then most strong when most opposed; every affliction is
advantageous, making their hope more quick; the fire proves more intense, when
its labored, to be extinguished by cold elements, such is the nature of this
grace of hope, every affliction recovers her life and heat, which before were
raked in the ashes; she gives wings to the souls flight, every blustering wind
helps her in soaring upward; here we have her got to the hill from whence she
expects salvation, here we have her like Sampson carrying the gates of Gaza;
not only helping a Christian to bear crosses with patience and resolution, so
as she can sing in prison, but with the Angel to St. Peter, it opens the gates
of the city, and makes all work together for good to them that love God; so
that the misery of a Christian is taken away by the hope which he has in
Christ, which hope brings me to the fourth conclusion.

That a good Christian has not only hope in this life, but in a better; which
hope is twofold.

1. The lower, in this life. 2. The upper, not in this life only: For if in
this life only we have hope in Christ we are of all men most miserable.
1. A Christian has hope in Christ in this life, though Heaven be the chief
place of hope, yet earth is for the exercise of that hope, in this life is the
proper time of getting it as being necessary for the whole, there it hopes for
the manifestation of all the promises, and here nature gives leave in the
journey to prepare for the land of safety; nor could a Christian bear up
against the storms and billows that arise and molest him in his passage through
this world, but for the hope of coming home to that place in Heaven which is
prepared for him, and no other comfort in the danger of the way, but in coming
to our country, where we shall be absent from the body, but present with the
Lord, does support them: the Saints are Strangers and Pilgrims, and have here
no abiding city; thus did the Patriarchs cheerfully cast of all earthly
comforts for the obtaining of the holy rest and glorious promises which by
faith they saw afar off, and by hope enjoyed them, this hope served them in the
valley of tears to revive their strength, or like the honey on Ionathans rod,
to open our eyes to behold our comfort, in the object of true delights which is
Christ Jesus our Lord, for it is ordinary for every thing to desire its own
content, as the rule in nature teaches; for the very plants will not be wanting
to the creatures in things necessary to their being, so it is the rule of the
God of nature, to be wanting to his creatures in any thing that tends to their
well being; witness the free Ordinary which the fowls of the air daily feed
on at Gods table; and if his goodness be extended to meaner creatures, shall it
be straightned to you? or rather he that has given you all things for this
present, will he be wanting to you for the things that pertain to a future
life? he has given extraordinary deliverance in peril, rescued you from the
power of thousands by despicable hands: it is true we cannot conclude the love
of God from outward prosperity, they are not essential to make up happiness,
but because of the promise of this life we may wait for the manifestation of
his goodness in these outward things; suppose God deny the lesser, and give us
the greater, that he stop the springs below, that the springs above may run the
faster; he makes them that are his children often to possess the sins of their
youth, and the wicked that are prepared for destruction to take the wall while
the heart of the godly are sunk down; what shall we say with holy David? verily
I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence; Ps. 83.13.
verse, nothing less; for the best of our hope survives the worst of our
sufferings; though when ye look on a Christian in the outside, you may see him
miserable, but look upon him in the hope that he has in Christ, and you see
him secure, he is happy though that hope may be crossed; for here is the comfort
that a good Christian has hope in Christ not in this life only, and that in
two things: 1. The less proper place for the exercise of the act of Hope. 2.
The more principle Object of it.


1. The less proper place for the exercise of the act of Hope; for when the
Soul departing from the Body shall come to her country, and be possessed of the
fruition of God, which she panted after, she in her self does not hope, because
the things hoped for are present, and because of the special union of the Soul
with Christ, yet still there is hope in Heaven, for the full manifestation of
the promises: For the Souls under the Altar cry, how long Lord, holy and true?
etc. Rev. 6.9, 10. But that which the Souls in Heaven have simply, and in
regard of the happiness they enjoy is not hope, for hope that is seen is not
hope; for there it is not faith but vision, and not hope, but fruition; yet in
some sense, they wait for the accomplishment of all the Divine promises: for
the difference lies in these respects following:

1. That above it differs from that below in degrees of Excellency; that here
below is grounded on Faith, which beholds the promises of God darkly, but that
above is grounded on a clear sight, and a perfect vision.

2. That hope below is attended with sighs and sadnesses, that above without
sorrow, all sighing and sorrow being removed from their hearts, whose tears are
wiped away with the light of Gods Countenance.

3. This below has weaknesses and imperfections, but that above is a confirmed
hope, thus our hope, even to the day of Judgment shall not be abolished in
Heaven, in regard of Essence it remains, but in regard of weaknesses, it
ceases. For till Gods promises be accomplished there, is yet hope in exercising
that act, that may bring us to the enjoyment of the highest manifestation of
Divine Love.

2. The more principal objects, not in this life only, that is not only for
the things of this life, but the things of a better life; for though hope
looking to God, it refers to the things of this life for subsistence, yet it
chiefly respects the things of the other life, the resurrection of the flesh,
etc. other hopes may promise eternal, but will but serve as fig leaves;
other hopes may bring to the fruition of what we hope for, but cannot give
satisfaction; but such is the excellency of this hope, as it will supply so
much as faith can believe, or hope desire: so that, as it would be
desperateness to cast away this anchor, so again madness to cast it off as
needless: the Saints which should be climbing Heaven, it would be folly for
them to ply this hope about this life, when we may have it about a better; to
hope in this life only is unchristian, and less then Christianity will not
give us the hope of an eternal life: to follow Christ only to get possession
of outward comforts, is but to starve our souls while we feed our bodies with
the loaves of pretended Sanctity; for he that will be Heir to Christ's Kingdom,
must expect to be crowned with thorns, temporal felicity having no entailment
upon his discipleship, persecution being their portion, and their sufferings
part of their triumph. So that each true Believer must join in the Chorus, with
the song of Saint Paul, pathetically expressed in the words of my Text:

If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most
miserable.

FINIS.
A SERMON ON St. THOMAS Day. SERMON V.
St. JOHN 18.37. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the
world, that I should bear witness unto the truth, etc.


Introduction.
Envy and Malice, the inseparable companions of a vicious heart, are always in
unwearied motion until they have found out some convenient means whereby to
bring about their abominable ends; and rather then be disappointed of
unhallowed thoughts, or wicked words, they will not cease to speak evil of the
way of truth; yea (by them) those are accounted enemies that speak the truth:
thus wicked Ahab salutes the Prophet Elijah, Have I found thee O my enemy? 1
Kings 21.20. So that it seems he accounted that holy person no less then his
souls adversary for telling the truth; so persecuted they the Prophets of old;
and the malice of men and devils have been so persecuting in all ages, that the
Church has not found where to rest, for the Saints wandered up and down
afflicted and tormented; yea, they wandered about (says the Apostle) in
sheeps-skins and goats-skins* etc. of whom the world was not worthy, Heb.
11.38. And in this the Disciple was not before, or above his Lord, for no
better entertainment had Christ himself; and he is pleased to say, To this was
I born, and for this cause came I into the world, etc.

Which words have a double aspect, and Ianus-like appear with a double face,
the one looking upon Christ, the other upon Christians; the one concerns our
Savior, the other respects our selves: For,

1. If you respect the day, so they look at Christ, not only as this is the
Lords Day, but as it is the Advent-Sunday, instituted for the Advent, or coming
of Christ in the Flesh.

2. It looks upon Christ as coming in his Ordinances and administrations to his
people.

3. It looks upon his coming in gracious visitations, as on this day by his
power coming to deliver the Church Militant from sin and misery to be a
Church triumphant in glory; and thus my Text has reference to the several
comings of Christ. But that's not all; the words not only concern Christ, but
they have reference unto Christians also, and that in a threefold respect; for
they eye all the errors and mislookings of the times.

1. They look upon the gross opinions of those that say the Scepter of Christ,
and the power of earthly Kings stand in opposition one to another, and
thereupon cry down all rule and all authority, saying like the heathen, Let us
break their bands in sunder, etc. Psalm. 2.3. It is true, Christ had the Title
of a King, yet neither that, nor himself made any impeachment of Caesar's Laws;
and though he denied not himself to be a King, yet he refused to dethrone
Caesar; for he says expressly, my Kingdom is not of this world: So then, you
see he is not in opposition to the Kings of the earth, he came not to take away
earthly Kingdoms, but to give an Heavenly Kingdom; and therefore he says,
Give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, etc. We must obey the temporal Lord
for his sake who is the Heavenly Lord, for they who yield not obedience to
temporal Kings for Christ's sake, (who has commanded it) have as yet made no
glorious entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven; for love to Christ, and
submission to Caesar may and do dwell together in the same heart.

2. The words look upon men's works as they are Christians, who in defense of
lawful Superiors with their swords in their hands, had rather die fighting,
then betray their liberty by a cowardly resignation of their lives and
fortunes; and also as Christians they have learnt of Christ their Head, to pay
Tribute where lawfully it is demanded; for if any might have rebelled, and
refused the same, none more lawful and able then our Savior, who could at his
pleasure command more then twelve legions of Angels to assist him, and could
command all the treasures of the earth as King and Lord thereof; yet refused
the glory of the one to pay lawful tribute, and the innumerable force of the
other, that with silence he might answer Caesar's Deputy, for he came to bear
witness of the truth; and he will rather lose his life then his obedience.

3. That none that would be thought a Christian, might think himself
unconcerned, the words look upon all men, but especially upon those that in
pretended religious, yet persecuting times, are ready to betray the truth,
rather then stand against all the opposition that arises from men and Devils;
for why should not Christians be as ready to defend truth, as others are to
oppose it? Christ Jesus, the Captain of our Salvation has led us the way; for
when all conspired against him because he spoke the truth, yet was he with his
life ready to justify the truth, saying, To this end was I born, and for this
cause came I into the world, etc.

In which words consider these two general parts: 1. An Engagement. 2. A
Design.


1. An Engagement; he was born, he came into the world.

2. A Design; to bear witness to the truth.

But since the end and the Object denominate every action, here is 1. The
action; Christ's incarnation. 2. The end; to bear witness. 3. The Object, the
truth; to bear witness to the truth.


Or if you will, take them in this order: 1. The end, and that pointed at, and
pointed out. 1. Pointed at; for this cause, and to this end. 2. Pointed out; by
being born and brought into the world.
2. The action; to bear witness. 3. The Object, the truth; to this end was I
born, and for this cause came I into the world, etc.


But since the end is first in intention, though last in execution, I shall
begin at the end, yet the right end, and that pointed at; for this cause, and
to this end came I into the world, etc.

The lives of most men are misspent only for want of a certain end to run at,
because they shoot their arrows, and know not at what mark they level, and
direct their proceeding by they know not what rule; therefore it is that they
reach not to perfection, and end not in comfort. Some level at the right end,
but level amiss: To level without an end were folly, to a false end, were
loss; true Christians only find the right way, for a wise Christian amidst
the many changes of this mortal life, still presses on to one steady end by
holy endeavors; for the more he is unshaken in his resolutions, the nearer he
comes to the great exemplar of life, Christ Jesus, who stood firm unto the
end, and continued steadfast in the truth, witnessing the same with the loss of
his most precious life, as himself affirms, To this end was I borne, etc.

It would be both needless and unprofitable for me to undertake the calculation
of our Saviors Nativity, or to make a discovery unto you of those signs which
did accompany it in a most miraculous manner, or to tell you the wonderful
effects thereof set down in the Gospel; which though they were above the
ordinary course of nature, yet you must know, that those Celestial
constellations did not contribute any thing to the producing of that glorious
Birth, but only in an admirable and unusual manner were made to bear witness
unto this great truth that is in my Text said to be born, that he also may give
testimony to the truth. Indeed there is a no less impious then foolish Proverb
taken up by men in the world, upon the event of any action or thing, to lay the
cause thereof upon the Stars and Planerary influencies; and thereby men think,
when guilty, to excuse themselves, saying, a fatal necessity brought it upon
me, or they were compelled to it, saying irreligiously, I was born to this, or
the Stars designed me to it; as if some extrinsecal necessity did draw men to
sin, as if the Stars were the causes of men's iniquity; yet of the two those
are better (though justly to be condemned also) that would excuse themselves by
laying the fault upon the influence of malignant Planets, or their own corrupt
nature, then those that infer the cause from a necessity in the peremptory
decree of Almighty God, as if Holiness it self should take pleasure in making
men criminal. Such a principle imbibed, is enough to bring a man to that
opinion of the Stoics at least; if not to think that there is a good and an
evil God, yet that the one Almighty Essence acts as if he were divided, by
saying, though God would have men otherwise then they are, yet he has decreed
a certain end of misery to the greatest part of men, without any respect of
good or evil in their persons; and so make the evil actions of men determined
by Gods Decree: and what will this come short of them that attribute the good
actions of men to a good God, and their evil actions to an evil God? Yet those
Stoics that make two Gods, and these Planetists that lay the fault of their
actions upon the Stars, are much better then those that say all things are
absolutely necessary, and that all their ends are undeterminable by any actions
of men whether good or evil; it will be better to raise the evil accidents from
an evil then from a good God. But that we are under a fatal decree of necessity
as to event, or that we were born to commit this or the other evil, we utterly
deny; and that,

1. First, by considering the evil consequences that will follow upon asserting
a peremptory decree; for if Gods peremptory decree has designed sin to come
into the world, then men sin not in deed, but in opinion only; necessity
has no law, and where necessity bears sway, there the will has no power, and
so man becomes equal with the beasts of the field, with the Lion, whose
unbridled appetite cannot be restrained by the rigor of the severest law; and
the reason is, because they cannot upon admonition do otherwise, they cannot
use principles of reason; and therefore is it that mad men and children are
under no law, because not capable of rational actions, for no man is commanded
to do those things necessity requires; as for example, no man is bidden to eat,
drink, and sleep, because these actions, and affections are necessary for the
preservation of life; the will may govern, but not suppress them: indeed
charity is of necessity; whether it be considered as a free principle within*
or without; and we are careless of those things that are without, if necessity
have no law; for if actions in themselves have no law, then they are not sinful,
for where no transgression of the law is, there can be no sin, and if all
things be ruled by destiny, then they are of necessity, and so by consequence
our actions are neither good nor bad in themselves, but only are good or evil,
as esteemed by us, and in our opinion; and if it be so, then to what purpose
was the Son of God made man, and so became a sacrifice for sin? to what end are
exhortations, and means used to hinder men from sin, if they are but fancies? a
Christians calling and Christ's dying are mere fables, if sin be not sin; if sin
be nothing, it matters not, let men live how they list; and whither tends this
principle, but to the subversion of all religion? when a man lays the ground
of all his actions upon the peremptory decree of Almighty God.

2. Consider, this belief clearly takes away a man's conscience; for why should
men strive to hinder sin, or make conscience of what they do, when they are
persuaded there is a necessity of sinning lies upon them? and why should a man
weep and mourn for that evil for which there is a necessity he do commit it? as
it must needs be, when a man's sins are his destiny, and not any thing in
himself the cause thereof: therefore if it be so, if sin be not at all ours,
but of destiny, or upon an inevitable decree, then all our tears and
repentance are spent in vain* and when once this principle is thoroughly
entertained, religion cannot long continue, therefore how cautious should we be
of harboring such principles? much better were it for us to reflect upon our
selves as the only cause and instruments of sin; and be always afraid lest
Gods just punishments should unavoidably overtake our evil actions; and in this
moderate sense fear makes a man apprehensive of a Deity, always unwilling to
offend him, and ever careful to keep a good conscience, which the contrary
opinion will lead a man to destroy.

3. It takes away the guilt of sin; for whatsoever is fatal, cannot be justly
punished, because those sins for which men are justly rewarded with punishment,
must be concluded to have been within their power to have avoided them; but
fatal actions are not so, neither can any man be temporally or eternally
punished for those actions which he was born to commit; for for a temporary
offense which a man could no way avoid, no eternal punishment can justly be
inflicted, the imbecility of his power justly reprieving him from the sentence
of condemnation; and as no eternal, so no temporary judgment can belong unto
them, for if magistrates thought men's offenses unavoidable, they would think it
bootless to punish them; but we see Judges punish men for offenses, because
they know men have a power to refrain from breaking the law, having daily
experience, that fear of punishment has kept men inoffensive: but on the other
side, if the offender should think the offense for which he stands convicted to
have been his destiny, whether it be murder, rebellion or acts of treason, and
other villainies, etc. and that they were committed by the necessity of a
decree, and that to this end he was born, then he would and might very well
plead innocence, and complain he was unjustly punished for that which he had no
power to refuse, so that you see such a principle as this, will be the
dissolution of all government both temporal and spiritual; for how can it stand
with the justice of God to punish man, yea to destroy to eternity both soul and
body, for the breaking of that law which he never had power to keep? nay more,
to punish him for that evil which he could not avoid; because his peremptory
decree from all eternity had reprobated him unto it: and if this be true, that
tribunal would not be just, where the sentence of everlasting fire shall be
pronounced against a man for that very action in which he was merely passive,
having no power to avoid it; this were to make God unjust in his proceedings
with mankind, for the recompense of good or evil cannot be given to good or
evil, that are so, not freely, but of necessity, for where necessity is, there
is no place for retribution. And therefore how vain and simple are we in our
thoughts, words and actions, when we place men's Nativities under fatal
constellations, or their actions under a peremptory decree, when as God has
given men liberty to live freely under his righteous judgments? It were
injustice in God to punish such that he had first made such; therefore a point
of ignorance and madness for any that believe the resurrection of the dead, and
the day of judgment, where God will render to all according to their works,
for him to say, that there is a destiny lies upon their actions; for how can
true faith and piety stand to this monstrous assertion? But,

4. If this were so, then all the whole life of man would be but a destiny, all
our imaginations would be destiny, and all the several changes and events that
fall out in a nation or kingdom would be but by chance, and a kind of fatal
necessity, if there were truth in this opinion, and so we should do just
nothing; for if it be Gods decree to purpose sin within; and an extrinsecal
necessity rule us without; to what purpose were preaching and hearing if men be
not capable of exhortation? all such means are in vain, and will never convert
a sinner: or to what end is duty pressed* and men called upon to repent, to get
grace, to be meek and humble? yea why are there promises made in Christ Jesus
through believing that we may obtain remission of sins, if that be a truth,
which some affirm, that the peremptory decree of Almighty God rules all, and
that to this or that end men were born? And if laws do nothing, wherefore were
they made? wherefore were Ordinances prescribed, if they contribute nothing to
help us heavenward? and why is it that ministers accommodate themselves by
meet words, fit to work on men's understandings and affections, and with the
reasonableness of Christian religion labor to captivate their wills, to bring
them under obedience, if by a peremptory decree, which is unalterable, they are
designed to another end? wherefore are the promises of mercy, and the threats
of eternal judgment made use of, if there be no power in man that is capable
of persuasion, and that will admit of a change from evil to good? I am sure
such a tenent is none of the doctrine of the holy Catholic Church, for St.
Austin pronounces them accursed that say any man is predestined to sin; and
we do pronounce such accursed, if any such there be; and many there are amongst
us that say all events are from necessity: so that by this time you cannot but
see how irrational and unchristian it is for a man to lay the cause of all his
actions upon Gods peremptory decree. And so I have done with that error, and
come now to the other opinion, which will have all actions regulated by the
influence of stars.

And here secondly, we utterly deny that any action is brought about or
necessitated by the influence of stars, or in respect of any fatal
constellation; for though it be true, that there are infinite of heavenly
bodies, conformable to the inferior creatures, and that there are some
particular planets, which have special influence upon, and domination over some
particular climates over which they are placed, and therefore it is that we
read of the sweet influences of Pleiades, and of Mazzoroth in his season, Job
38.31. and the whole heavens shall hear the earth, Hosea 2.21. so that we see
there is a correspondence held between the stars above, and the creatures below
the firmament, though some are destructive in their courses, and fight against
their enemies; thus the stars in their courses are said to fight against
Sisera, Judge. 5.20. and hence it is said, there is a heavenly vessel that
empties it self into the lower vessel, and that every herb discovers it self to
be useful for this or that part of man's body, by the similitude which it
carries unto that part for which it is medicinal; and that every one has
governing from its proper star, that every thing living has a starry influence
upon it, and that there is not a man, beast, or stone, but has influence from
the stars: now granting all this to be a truth (as it is the opinion of some)
yet it will be still found an infallible assertion, that though all the stars
at once were malignant, they could not force any man to sin, their malevolous
aspects cannot compel any man to commit iniquity: indeed by the fall of Adam
our nature was corrupted, and so the creature became subject unto vanity, yet
as we recover our selves from destruction in the second Adam, they lose that
power of vanity, and so by consequence no extrinsecal means can be the cause
of sin in respect of a fatal constellation: but to say we were born during the
predominancy of such or such a Plannet, and our guidance in the way to eternal
life is from God alone is a most certain truth; for the sun and Moon which are
the great luminaries of heaven and earth, can do no more by their power toward
our good or evil estate, then a lame man can help himself to walk that has no
legs; nay the Angels in Heaven can do no more then wish and long for the
prosperity of Gods chosen. Therefore how much of vanity is there in those minds
who impute that power to celestial creatures, which God never intended they
should possess? for take them at the best, and they are but such instruments as
can do nothing without him, that does whatsoever he will both in Heaven and in
Earth, the Sea and all deep places. We must not when we do that which is evil
lay the charge upon God, or the Stars, or the Angels, who are the instruments
that act those Stars.

1. We must not lay the blame on God; Let no man say when he is tempted he is
tempted of God, etc. St. James 13.13. No, let no man say he has caused me to
err, or that it is through the Lord that I fell away, for he has no need of
the son of man says the son of Syrach, Ecclesiasticus 15.11, 12. For the
Lord hates all abomination; so contrary is sin unto his Holiness, that his
eyes are upon them that fear him; and they that truly love God, will do his
will, and obey his Commandments; for they know that Gods Justice has no need
to advance its glory by the destruction of their lives. Nor

2. Can any man justly impute his sins to the holy Angels; for it is the
property of them to hearken to the voice of God, and always to be doing of
that which is good: O praise the Lord ye Angels of his, ye that excel in
strength, ye that fulfill his commands, and hearken unto the voice of his
words, Psalm. 103.20, 21. Therefore certainly, they that fulfill Gods command,
and hearken to his voice, will be far enough from causing others to commit
that which they hate, especially in the Children of God, for whose sakes they
are made ministering Spirits. But then some will be ready to excuse themselves,
and lay the fault upon the Devil and his evil Angels: it is true, the Prince of
the Air rules in the children of disobedience; but it is as true, they give up
themselves unto him, their lusts first ruled in their members, before Satan got
domination over their hearts; they are taken captives at his pleasure, but they
first give up themselves willingly to be captivated, they are willing to lie
under the yoke of Egyptian bondage, nor care they for other freedom then what
the service of sin will allow of; and therefore our Savior tells the Jews,
You are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father you will do.
The lusts of your father you will obey; you have a lust to do whatsoever he
wills, and your will is bent to do whatsoever your lust dictates; and yet men
would fain make God the author of their evil, as if he had decreed that to come
upon them which they cannot refuse. To this end (says St. Austin) evil men lay
not the blame of their vicious actions upon their evil nature, but upon the
Stars, or on Gods peremptory Decree; whereas what is sin, is voluntary, and
what is not voluntary is not sin. Saint Paul says, Ye have yielded your
members servants unto sin. So that we must not lay the fault upon the Stars,
but upon our own perverse wills; for though the Stars do draw vicious
passions, as in melancholy hearts, in some anger, and in others wanton love,
etc. And though by nature we readily yield to those influences, yet there is
power in grace, which is able, and does break in every regenerate man the power
of the Stars: But if we give up our selves to sin, we must needs yield unto
those evil passions, whereas a wise man, even by his very reason, will domineer
over the malignant influence of any Star; and though the corruption of our
nature, or the evil influence of the Stars, may incline us to any kind of
vice, as lying, stealing, to commit adultery, etc. yet as we are rational
creatures we may and ought to strive against them, laboring to get power from
above to assist us: and to that end is it that we are born again by holy
Baptism; for this cause came we into the Christian Church, that we might no
longer live after the lusts of the Gentiles which know not God, but that we
forsaking the lusts of the flesh, following godliness with the greatest
eagerness, and sharpest conflicts that a renewed heart can use against stubborn
and rebellious flesh, that our whole man may be woun^ up to so high a pitch of
Piety, that in righteousness and godly sincerity we may perfect holiness in
the fear of God, and in our several stations follow God as dear children, and
walk in love as Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for us an
offering and a sacrifice to God, etc. Ephesians. 5.1, 2.

And so I have done with the end as asserted, To this end was I borne, and for
this cause came I into the world, etc.

The next thing in order to be handled, is the Action, viz. To bear witness:
For so says our Savior, To this end was I borne, and for this cause came I
into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth.

FINIS.
A second NATIVITIE SERMON. SERMON VI.
St. JOHN 18.37. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the
world, that I should bear witness unto the truth.


Introduction.
AN imprudent discourse attended with ambitious thoughts, was the first occasion
of Adams misery; and the mercy of God in making the New Covenant, is the
principal cause of the Serpents ruin; whose mischeivous head was early broke
by the promised Seed (the true Messiah) whom the Patriarchs foresaw, and the
Prophets foretold: The Patriarchs foresaw him, Genesis 49.10. The Prophets
foretold him under diverse representations, Esaias, Esaias 7.14. Jer. 23.5. Dan.
9.25, 26. Zachary 6.12. Haggai 2.7.
by the Emanuel; Jeremy, the Branch; Daniel, the Messiah; Zachary, By him that
rises on high; Haggai, The desire of all Nations.

That God should be Incarnate, that sinners should be saved, that a despicable
man should save a World, was thought so incredible, that the Prophet Esaias cries
out, Who has believed our report? (which was in time fulfilled, But when the
fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, etc.
Gal. 4.4.) though the news was true, and proclaimed from Heaven by an Angel,
and that of great Joy, for that on this day was born a Savior Christ the Lord;
what was in the Prophets prophesied concerning his coming, was by himself
fulfilled in time; what they pointed at, he pointed out, and by a Miracle
showed it to the Wise Men, saying, Where is he that is borne King of the Jews?
for we have seen his Star in the East, and we are come to worship him, St.
Matthew 2.2. Yet when he came to his own, they received him not, but rejected
the counsels of God, as they did that slew the Prophets, who declared the
coming of the just One; for when he was come, he was forced to be gone, and
fly for the safety of his life into a foreign Country, to avoid the fury of
that mighty Nimrod, whose pretended worship was only the dark vizour of an
inhumane murder; disguising his wicked purposes under the beautiful mask of a
desired amity: no wonder therefore, that there are some amongst us that call
themselves Christ's, when there are those that call themselves Christians, that
would, and do disown Christ's Nativity; and this old Simeon (by inspiration)
calculated at his Nativity, saying, This child is set for a sign which shall
be spoken against, St. Luke 2.34. And wicked people make it good, as if he had
not been foretold by Prophets, nor come into the world in the fullness of time
at an appointed day; and that for us men, and for our Salvation, Christ came
down from Heaven, and was incarnate in the womb of the blessed Virgin Mary: it
is a work that many would not believe, says God, Hab. 1.5. which was
fulfilled, Acts 13.41. Behold ye despisers, and wonder, and perish, for I work
a work in your days, a work which you shall not believe, etc. For so would
they have hindered the Author and finisher of our Faith from working that which
he had wrought, and what God had set down should be done which w^ accordingly
fulfilled, that he should not be borne, but to witness to the truth (...) he
himself says so much of himself, To this end was I borne, and for this cause
came I into the world, that I should bear witness to the truth.

In which words you may remember I have formerly observed these three parts.

1. An Action. 1. The End. 3. The Object.
1. The Action, Christ's Incarnation; He was borne, he came into the world.

2. The End; and that pointed at, and pointed out: 1. Pointed at; To this end,
and for this cause. 2. Pointed out; To bear witness.


3. The Object was the truth; To this end was I borne, and for this cause came
I into the world, to bear witness to the truth.

And since the end is the first thing in the intention, though last in
execution, I did begin with the end

Pointed at, and that was to this end, and for this cause: But

I shall now proceed to the proper work of this day, Christ's Nativity; I was
born, I came into the world: and here at the first step of our discourse, we
are plunged into an unfathomed depth of mystery; for this he that was here
borne, is the same he that calls himself I am that I am, Exodus 3.14. That
Socinian that says he was not very God, is a blasphemer; I am that I am, it is
the Name of God, whose Essence is from everlasting to everlasting, and to be
born notes his humanity; and how this work was, that he that is I am should be
borne, and close with the Deity, tongue cannot express, and heart cannot
conceive; we can conceive how nothing is but what is in and of our selves, and
not that neither but with much imperfection; for the first of us that was so
desirous of knowledge, left us nothing but a penury of what we were; and if we
know not our selves, we cannot possibly conceive how God was made man, and at
the same time remain incommunicable; or how he being incommunicable, did
vouchsafe to partake of humane Nature; yet thus was Christ both God and Man in
the same person; as man he had a mother that bare him, and as God a Father that
begat him: but who can without admiration speak of such a Son, or tell of
such a generation, that was like both, and yet like neither? like neither; for
consider him as Man, and so he has no similitude of an ineffable Essence; look
upon him as God, and so he bears no proportion with the Virgins Womb; and yet
like both; as God, like his Father, as man, like his mother; God and yet the
son of a woman; Man, and still the Image of his Father, and that from
Eternity, being without beginning of days, or end of time; Gods Son and
Motherlesse, a Virgins Babe and Fatherless; without a Father as borne of a
Woman, and without a Mother as begotten of God: Thus was he God and
motherlesse, as begotten and not borne; a man and Fatherless, because borne
and not begotten; we must believe both beyond enquiry, because more is possible
with God then is conceiveable with man, and divine Mysteries should persuade us
to believe that they are undoubted truths, though our reason cannot comprehend
them; for what we cannot understand by believing, we must believe beyond
understanding; and of all the divine Mysteries, this of our blessed Saviors
Incarnation especially, whose very mystery heightens Faith to no less then a
Miracle; and where a Miracle is wrought wonder must needs be created, and both
these two meet in this one act of Faith, exercised about the hypostaticall
union; for believing we wonder, and marvelling we believe, and make our blessed
Saviors Incarnation the object of both; we believe what we marvel at, and yet
wonder at our Faith, still doubling the Miracle by marvelling that we can at
once both wonder and believe: it is a wonder, and yet this wonder is the object
of our Faith; for how can we do less then marvel, when we consider that on
the Fathers side he should be God and no man, on the Mothers side man and no
God, and yet both God and Man? For Eternity had begotten man but once, because
begotten from Eternity; his Father begot him equal to God, his Mother bare him
like to Man; he was man besides God, and therefore Man and no God, and yet God
and Man, for when he was made man he ceased not to be God which he was before:
like as the Sun loses not its brightness, though shadowed in the clouds; so
not Christ his glory, though obscuted in flesh, he was not so conceived in his
Mother as to be separated from his Father; Christ was not less equal to his
Fathet by being like his Mother; the Word was made flesh, St. John 1.14. and
not less Word then Flesh, by an assumption of the flesh, not consumption of
the Word; the Word that God by flesh did present to our sight was real Flesh,
and was not less God still; for he is no less God now that he is clad in
humane clay, then when only clothed with deified Glory; he remains God and
Man in one person, very God and very Man in one singular subsistence, he took
the person of Man, and the substance, by converting the person to his proper
being; and that this may not altogether seem strange to your understandings,
please to turn your eyes inward, and an example thereof will be presented; for
if man has the life of Plants, and the sense of Beasts, and both in
conjunction with the reasonable soul in an individual being, why may not Christ
take the Soul of man into union with himself, and yet consist in his Divinity,
making a Trinity in the union of his Person? For as he was God and Man in the
humane nature, he consisted of a Deity, a soul and a body, there a Trinity in
unity, here unity in Trinity; he was one person not divided, a person of the
Trinity distinguished, not divided; for every person in the Sacred Trinity is
perfect God, distinguished into persons, but not divided in substance, for all
take propriety each with the other; the Father God, the Son God, and the holy
Ghost God, and yet not three, but one God, as we are taught by the holy
Catholic Faith to believe; yet that God might redeem us from our iniquities,
he that was perfect God equal with the Father, took upon him our flesh, and
therefore it is that God was said to suffer what man himself should have borne;
only here is the admired union of natures, but not natural of persons,

But what were the reasons why he whose name is I am should be borne, so as to
say of himself, To this end was I borne, and for this cause came I into the
world, to bear witness to the truth?

1. To make God and Man one by atonement; and therefore it was necessary he
should be of both natures, whose office is to reconcile both persons.

2. He was to do that for us which was impossible for man to do, and to
suffer what was unmeet for God to undergo; and that he might both do and
suffer for us he took the blessed Virgin Mary for his mother, that from her he
might receive a body capable of suffering; but it was his Divinity which
enabled his Humanity to suffer what our Souls deserved.

3. He was to undergo for an infinite offense, for man had sinned, and none
but God could satisfy for an infinite offense, it being reasonable that the
same nature that broke the Law should pay the Debt; and therefore it was
necessary for him to be God as well as Man, that did undertake to make God and
Man to be reconciled and made one.

4. Had he been God and not Man, man could not have been redeemed; had he been
only man and not God, the Devils would have boasted; but he was both God and
man, that our redemption might be finished, and the Devils malice silenced:
whence wisely was our redemption shared between God and man, because the
arbitrament was such, that a mere man could not undertake to appease a God
offended neither one nor the other nature would have, or could have relieved us
single, because he must be God that will be mediator from God to man, and he
must be man that he may be an intercessor to God for man: and this mystery
though our reason cannot fathom, yet our belief must reach it, our faith must
believe what our hearts and tongues cannot express, and our faith is then
proficient when it has attained so high, and not before; for we can say more
by silence then by words, and when we find him in our souls by Hallelujahs and
praise, we shall then know thee O Savior, not for thy self, but our selves,
and it is our faith to believe that as thou art so shall we be, though not so
fully: therefore let every one make it his request, O that thou would come
down from heaven, and dwell in our hearts by faith and love, who out of love to
mankind came in flesh, when faith and truth were banished out of the earth; and
that thou should so come as to say, To this end was I born, and for this
cause came I into the world, etc. And so much may suffice for that part of his
incarnation, the end of his coming. I now come to that of his Nativity, his
coming into the world, and here three things are to be considered.

1. The Dignity of his person. 2. The Humility of his condescension. 3. The
Place of his entertaintainment.
1. The Dignity of his person, in that he was the Son of God.

2. The Humility of his condescension, in that he would clothe himself with the
rags of our mortality.

3. The Place, unworthy of his enterment, being the world.

Of these in their order.

1. The Dignity of his person, and that as he is the Son of God by nature,
and as in his Birth the most noble person that ever was; on the Fathers side he
is God, very God, the very God of one substance with the Father, as you have
heard, and which to deny is no less then blasphemy, for when he calls God
Father, the Jews knew that thereby he made himself equal with God, St. John
10.33. He as Gods Son was always with the Father, and so everlastingly great
as he was God; and not only so, but he was full of dignity on his Mothers
side, as he was descended from the Patriarchs, and Royal Kings of Judah; so he
was a Prince renowned.

1. For his authority, because he does what he will, both in heaven and in
earth, Psalm. 13.5, 6.
in the sea, and in all deep places.

2. For his power, St. Mar. 4.41.
he commands the wind, and the waves, and they obey him.

3. For the largeness of his dominions, heaven and earth is his, Psalm. 72.8.
and the fullness thereof; his dominion is from one part of heaven and earth
unto the other.

4. For multitude of Subjects; Angels, Saints and Kings, yea and those that
depose Kings are his Subjects, either voluntarily or against their wills, for he
sits down among the Gods.

5. For lasting, his Dominion is everlasting, and he shall reign over the house
of Jacob for ever, Psalm. 16.11, 6.7.
and of his Kingdom there shall be no end, St. Luke 1.33.

6. For fullness, In his presence is fullness of joy etc.

7. For subduing of enemies; Bring those my enemies that would not that I
should reign over them, etc. St. Luke 19.27.
But why go I about to describe that which is infinite, or blazon the glory of
a power that is incomprehensible? It made holy David cry out, Lord what is man
that thou art mindful of him, etc. Psalm. 8.4.
Man is as a thing of naught, for when he was not guilty, being innocent, and
had not sinned, he could merit no favor; but when he was guilty, and by
sinning had deserved not to be what he was before, yet then, God to show the
freeness of his mercy, that he who had made the world for man, would not make
man for nothing, and though his Image was defaced by him, yet he would not have
it ruinated; that goodness that planted him in uprightness, would not have him
presently destroyed when found in wickedness; no, he was prone to mercy, though
provoked to wrath by beholding that in man which his infinite Power never
created; and therefore to this purpose he came into the world, 1 St. John 3.8.
that he might destroy the works of the devil.

To apply this.
Since God was pleased so to honor us, as not to redeem us with corruptible
things, 1 St. Pet. 1.18.
as silver and gold, nor with the blood of bulls and goats, nor the power of men
and Angels, but by the death and passion of his own Son, St. John 3.16.
of his own Substance; If God so loved us, that he gave his only begotten Son
for us, why should we think any thing too much for him, or through the ambition
and pride of our hearts, think our selves too good to serve him, or imagine we
can be happy without him? Or on the contrary, let us not suppose our sins to be
more and greater then he is able or willing to pardon: since God is pleased to
send his Son to redeem you, why should you think your selves too good to serve
him? let the beasts be sensual, and the devils wicked, why should you be
scornful, or so far degenerate, as to do any action that may entitle you to the
insensibleness of the one, or to the loss of the other? to be ungrateful to
the God of Heaven is impious, therefore bear your selves worthy of the
Favorites of Heaven, since Gods Son came into the world to redeem you. And so
I come to the second thing noted in his coming, namely

The humility of his Condescension.
If love to the Father, and respect to our O man, that sees the Truths of God
opposed, his Worship represt, his Ministers suppressed, and do not what thou
can to maintain the truth; for every one, in his proportion and degree, to
this end is born, and comes into the world, that he, after the example of his
Savior, should bear witness to the truth. And so I come to the Nativity it
self, Christ's coming into the world.

Came into the world.
We read in Scripture of a threefold coming of Christ.

1. Imperiously, To give the Law. 2. Graciously: To give the Gospel. 3.
Gloriously: When he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
The first was to the world the second in the world, and the third will be at
the end of the world.

a God.

a Savior.

a Judge, to require an account of every man, for every particular action,
whether it be good, or whether it be evil.

His first coming under the Law in Levitical types is not here intended, but
the coming mentioned in this place is his second coming, when he came as a
Savior to give the Gospel; Christ Jesus, who is God-man, thus came into the
world, and because as God he is omnipresent, some will have his presence in
every place, and his being in every thing; it is true, he was with us before he
came to us, but that God that is omnipresent, and fills all places, yet has
diverse tranmsissions in Scripture; Heaven is his place or throne of glory, and
earth his footstool; but he is said to come to us, when he manifests himself
to us after a new manner, and this coming of his is by an act of new Mercy; he
that is all Mercy, now vouchsafed to his Creatures a new way of coming, such as
was never manifested before, for he came to the old world in types and figures,
he was a Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, when the Elect was, Christ
was there, not only as the second person in the sacred Trinity, but as a
Propitiation for man; in short, he always came in purpose, he early came in
the Promises, and he successfully came in the fullness of time; the Promises
could not be frustrated, and the Prophets could not be mistaken; he is given to
us in the Gospel, and married to us by his Spirit, having assumed our flesh in
the blessed Virgin; and that he should thus come to us was great humility from
sitting in Heaven and hearing the Quire of Angels singing his praises, working
wonders in heaven and in earth, etc. yet he forsook all this to find us out,
who were rolling in clay; for when he came to glorify our nature we were in
trouble, we could be found in no condition but that of misery, when he bowed
the heavens and came down, he then turned the name of Majesty into Pity, his
Glory into Humility, and laying aside his Glory, he leapt from that his
Greatness, and came and dwelt among us, clothed in flesh: indeed had he come in
the form of an Angel, that had been condescension; or but to our flesh, or had
he but come to the circumcision of his flesh, that had been a large extent of
his love, for his circumcision was no other than the shedding of his most
precious blood, one drop whereof would have been sufficient for the ransom of
a world; but he took upon him the form of a servant, and that to wash his
Disciples feet, which was a step lower for God to tread; nay lower than that,
he humbled himself to the death, and that of the cross, 2 Phil. 8.
where he found his enemies to be his Judges, and those that hated him, falsely
to accuse his sacred Works; but both divided, for there you have one drawing up
a charge against his life, and here another answering for his life; here one
proclaiming his innocence, there another crying out, he is guilty; yet
notwithstanding, amidst the many divided tongues there are found some united
hands to slay him. Indeed the Atheists scoff at this, saying, shall we begin
our Religion at a Babe in the manger? or believe in him whose poverty was so
great, that to pay tribute for his allegiance, was fain to be obliged to a Fish
for money? whose penury necessitated him to beg for a living? who was hungry,
and thirsty, and sleepy, and sorrowful, yea so despicably mean and
contemptible, that his own kindred was ready to lay hands on him, as one out of
his wits? and he complained for want of lodging, esteeming himself more
despicable than the foxes of the earth, or the fowls in the air: this was the
esteem, or very little better, which the world had of him, of whom they were
altogether unworthy, not considering why he so came, for he came to be thus
mean, that we might become honorable; therefore did he come to be killed by
sinners, that sinners might live in his death; to die for them, that they might
die to sin; and though they now crucify afresh the Son of God by their
iniquities, yet a time will come when they will be glad of the saving virtue of
one drop of that blood which they now disgrace.

To apply this.
If the Son of God came in such humility, as to humble himself to come into the
world to die for us; why should we disdain to do our friends good, though never
so mean, even to the degree of a servant, seeing that when the Son of God came
to redeem us, he did it in the form of a servant? Again, why should we think
our selves too good to serve our brethren, since Christ disdained not to wash
his Disciples feet, showing himself in nothing so much as in humility? And what
does this teach us, but to lay a foundation for greater glory? that we
beginning in humility here, may be raised to glory hereafter; for he that is
low shall be exalted, and in his humility is a follower of him that came to the
place of his reception in the lowest form: which brings me to the third
particular, namely, The place of his entertainment, the World.

And it is taken two ways: 1. Either for the frame of this vast Globe. 2. Or
for the Inhabitants thereof.


But I understand it here for the fabric of this vast earth, which is too
mean, and altogether unworthy to entertain him, nay it is not of capacity to do
it, for how should this great house hold his glorious Majesty, when the Heaven
of Heavens is not able to contain him? It was humility for him to come into
this world, and yet he came to the world to show his humility, for the Word was
made flesh, St. John 1.14.
and dwelt among us, etc. and he abhorred not the Virgins womb, though a simple
Lady; I mean simple in respect of outward glory or worldly riches, for so poor
she was, that at her Churching she was necessitated instead of a Lamb to offer
a pair of young Pigeons; and though he did seem to straiten himself at his
conception, because he had little room in the womb, yet he was more straitened
at his birth, for there was no room for him in the Inn; which shows the
greatness of his love to us, that our blessed Savior will want room on earth,
rather than we shall want Mansions in heaven: the blessed Virgin is driven to
so great necessity, that her chamber must be in the stable, her bed no better
than that of straw, and the glorious Babe lodged in no other cradle, but that
of the manger. Never was Glory in so homely a place before: God at first
brought forth man like a King, and placed him in Paradise, to rule over the
Beasts; but God is brought forth man in the place of beasts. See then vile man,
who it is whom thou have neglected in Heaven, by sinning on earth? the Lord of
Men and Angels is now made the companion of Beasts, because thou have made thy
self like the beasts that perish; how can thou not admire at the low
condescension of thy Savior, that he should so come into the world, and be
born of such mean parents, and in so base a place as is a stable; and that
which is worse, to be laid in a manger also? O the height and depth of the
love of the Son of God! Who would not fall into admiration to see God in a
manger? God is in his holy Temple, what shall he descend? Yea we believe him
when he said he would do so; and now that he has so done, who can forbear
loving of him? view him in the manger, and there you see him become food for
beasts, for men who are transformed by beastly lusts; and yet he will be found
in the Temple also, that so he may gather both great and small: he is meat for
strong men, yea, and he will be milk to the little ones also; and unless every
one of us become as little ones, St. Matt. 18.3.
we shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: he was born that he
might have us born again; he was wrapped in swadling-cloths, to teach us, that we
should not despise men how mean soever in appearance; and in a stable, to show
his communicableness to all persons; he was laid in a manger, not for food to
the beasts, but for bread to men. Indeed as he is God he gives fodder to the
cattle of the earth, and the fowls in the air, for he feeds the young Ravens;
but it is only unto men that he gives himself as bread; and in a mystery was he
found in a stable, to show us, that as men became beasts by their fall, so he
was found among the beasts, that he might be food for all, and that beastly man
might find and taste the bread of life: he will also become bread, that so we
may indeed eat his flesh and drink his blood. St. John 6.55.
Therefore since Christ came in such elements; hence learn

those that consider not what is really the body and blood of Christ, eat not
bread, and drink not wine, 1 Cor. 11.29.
but eat and drink their own condemnation; but they that by a true and lively
faith do eat and drink the body and blood of Christ spiritually in the blessed
Eucharist, do truly fulfill the great end of his coming into the world, for thus
he came and was born that we might reap the benefit of his life and death; and
he came so meanly, that his poverty might enrich us, so lowly that his
humility might strengthen us; and though we disdainfully neglected the means of
our salvation, yet he took care of us before all time, and manifested his love
in coming to us in the fullness of time. Ttherfore to wind up all, Praise thou
the Lord O my soul, Ps. 103.1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
and all that is within me praise his holy name. Bless the Lord O my soul, and
forget not all his benefits, who forgiveth all thy iniquities, and heals all
thy infirmities; which saves thy life from destruction, who crowns thee with
mercy and loving kindness; who satisfies thy mouth with good things, so that
thy youth is renewed like the Eagles: for he will not deal with us after our
sins, nor reward us according to our iniquities.

Testis fidelis OR A faithful Witness. SERMON VII.
St. JOHN 18.37. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the
world, that I should bear witness unto the truth.


Introduction.
THe words of my Text are like the eye of a well-drawn picture, that still which
way soever you go, looks toward you; for which way so ever you consider the
words they still have reference to all the parts, and circumstances of Christ's
coming in the flesh; if you look upon his conception, which coming was foretold
by an Angel as witness thereof, S. Luke 1.31. yet there it was but the
preparation to that coming which is in my text, (viz.) his Nativity, which is
not left without a witness neither, in that St. Stephen, one of the twelve, who
was to testify of him, is joined next unto the birthday of our Savior, he
being the first that suffered for him, and therefore called by the Holy
Catholic Church St. Stephens day; but that Protomartyr who here is a witness
to that witness in my Text, did witness what the great witness did both do and
suffer; but that this truth might be established by more then a single
testimony, our Mother the Church does celebrate St. John's day, in commemoration
of that beloved Disciple, whose faithful affection begot in him an Eagles eye,
wherewith to behold those glorious mysteries which none else of all the
Disciples, were able to reveal; and that we might not be without occasions of
stirring up our affections also, God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son, and here is the only begotten Son so loving that he gives
himself for us: and as his Disciples testified the truth of Christ living and
dying; so the innocent babes slain for his sake by cruel Herod, did witness to
the truth, not by speaking but by dying: but he who is the great witness both by
speaking and dying did bear witness for us, while himself was an infant,
antedating his cruel passion by a bloody circumcision, instituted as a pledge
of our interest in his covenant, which was wonderfully effected by his own
person when manifested in the world: hence the Epiphany is famous for the wise
men, who first made discovery of this blessed babe by the guidance of an
unusual light: and here now is that star of Jacob, which leads to the rising in
his birth; and by this was the King of the Jews first found out, that
afterward by his people was betrayed into the hands of enemies to be condemned
as a malefactor, and as an enemy to Caesar; and that with the greatest
formality of justice, being brought before a President, and arraigned for his
life; and yet notwithstanding their malice and cruelty, he still asserted his
innocence, though he knew he should die for it, and therefore he says, To
this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should
bear witness of the truth.

Look upon the words once more, and they present you with the faithfulness and
constancy of our blessed Saviors testimony, even then when he was deserted by
his most intimate friends and servants; and at that time especially, wherein
(as man) he stood most in need of them, being now had in examination before the
Judgment Seat of Pilate; wherein you have fulfilled that saying of his, that
he came to his own, and his own received him not. Nay, he was so far from being
received by them, that he was forsaken by all, despised of most, and pitied by
few; and yet herein also he came to do his Fathers will, by a willing death
witnessing to that truth which some had foresworn, and others denied, saying,
To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should
bear witness to the truth.

In which words you may remember I have observed these parts: 1. An action. 2.
An end. 3. The object.


1. The action, he was born, he came into the world.

2. The end 1. pointed at. 2. pointed out.


1. Pointed at, to this end and for this cause.

2. Pointed out, to bear witness.

3. The object, the truth.

And whereas the end in every action is first in intention, though last in
execution, I did begin with the end, the right end and that pointed at, To this
end and for this cause, etc. and I came to the second thing, namely

2. The action which was Christ's incarnation and his coming into the world; To
this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world: and come now to
the third thing; the end of the action, wherefore he came, and why he was born;
and that is

3. The object, the truth, to bear witness. And to bear witness to the truth:
and in this third part there are two things considerable, 1. The end. 2. The
object.


The one in reference unto Christ, the other unto Christians.

1. In reference unto Christ as the primary intention of them; and so the words
concern our Savior, as he was a witness unto the truth in his own person.

2. In the extent of them, so they concern us, for we also are to bear witness
to the truth; and as in the testimony of our Savior, so in ours, there must
concur to demonstrate our fidelity, 1. The end. 2. The action. 3. The object.


For we are in our particular station to bear witness to the truth as well as
others; for Christ in all the ages of the world has still had some faithful
servants to witness for him, though they continually met with opposition.

For though under the Law witness was given unto him at diverse times, and in
sundry manners, etc. yet not only the vain errors of the Gentiles, but also
the careless perverseness of the Jews, led multitudes of people into a
disbelief of God himself, and the truth of our blessed Saviors coming into the
world; insomuch that the Prophet Esaias says, Who has believed our report? Esaias
53.1. Yea, the people changed the truths of God into lies, and caused the way
of truth to be evil spoken of; endeavoring by all means, if possible, to
banish truth out of the earth; but notwithstanding all their malicious
oppositions, the truths of God were not left without record, for there is not
any one person in the Sacred Trinity, but bears witness to the truth; for
there are three that bear record in Heaven, The Father, the Word, and the holy
Ghost, and these three are one, St. John 5.7. The Father promising, the holy
Ghost preparing, and the Son assuming, or taking what was so prepared for him,
that he himself was a witness of himself; for so he says, I am one that bear
witness of my self, St. John 8.18. The way to the truth, and the truth of the
way, and the life of all came to witness to them both; yet you find him
saying, If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true, St. John 5.31.
Places seemingly contradictory, and yet easily reconciled, if truly considered:
for in the one he spoke to those that acknowledged no more in him then
Humanity; in the other he discovers his Deity, and equality with the Father,
showing his submission to him as man; that though in the one they would not,
yet by the other they may be convinced. And since Christ as man was without
error, and could not be guilty of falsehood, then it is not true to affirm
Christ's witnessing to the truth is invalid, as the Jews supposed; for though
what he spoke was truth in it self, yet in their acception it was not so
accounted; and though that truth most times is suspected which barely testifies
of it self; yet it could not be so imputed unto Christ, because he is light it
self, and light helps to discover both it self and others; and therefore it
must remain a truth, that Christ's coming into the world was to bear witness to
the truth, both In Words and Works.
Christ Jesus our Redeemer bare witness to the truth

1. In Words; his words were such as the Jews were convinced by them, For they
conclude, never man spoke like him, St. John 7.46. his words were of such
energy as that they proved all his actions authentic.

2. In his works; he testified of the truth, in so much that his very enemies
said, when Christ comes will he do more miracles then those which this man has
done? St. Joh. 7.31. and since the world began was it not heard that any man
opened the eyes of one that was born blind, Saint John 9.32, 33. for if this
man was not of God he could do nothing: therefore when St. John Baptists
Disciples came with this message, art thou he that should come, or do we look
for another, he says no more then Go tell John what things you have seen and
heard, how that the blind see, the lame walk, etc. Saint Luke, 7.22. and
presently that precursor knew by his works that it was no other then the
Messiah: nor did he only testify by saying and doing, but also by suffering
and dying; for rather then truth shall suffer, he will die, and not one drop of
blood shall be left in his veins, rather then the least part of truth shall
want a testimony; for he came to bear witness to the truth, and by dying gave
testimony to the truth. And so I have done with the first, namely the end; and
I come to the second thing, viz.

2. The object, the truth.

To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, to bear
witness to the truth. Truth is threefold: 1. There is the truth of Gods
promises concerning the Messiah. 2. The truth of the Substance, whereof the
Types were but shadows. 3. The truth of the Doctrines delivered to the people.


1. The truth of Gods promises concerning the Messiah, he was promised in the
beginning of time to him that was to be the Father of all living; for when God
had made man a living Soul, and man by sin had made himself a dying body,
then was the promise of a quickening spirit, Genesis 3.15. She that was accursed
for eating the forbidden fruit, shall now be blessed in the fruit of her body.

2. As God promised him to the father of all living, so to the father of the
Faithful, Genesis 15.18. and it was to procure our good; For in thy seed shall
all the Nations of the earth be blessed* Genesis 18.18. In him we have freedom
from misery, and fullness of glory, and by him we have interest in glory, and
comfort in calamity.

3. God promised Christ by the Prophets, and not only that he should, but how
he must be borne: Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and call his
name Emanuel, Isa. 7.14. How he should die; After threescore and two weeks
shall the Messiah be cut off, but not for himself, Dan. 9.26. How he should
rise again; for thou will not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thy holy one to
see corruption, Psalm. 16.10. Thus the Prophets foretold the incarnation of
Christ, together with the several gradations thereof: but if you please we will
once more consider the Messiah, as chalked out in the Old Testament, you find
him promised, Genesis 22.18. then promised to be of the tribe of Judah, Genesis
49.10. his conception, birth, death and passion at large set down by the
Psalmist in the 22. Psalm. his being derided at, and lightly esteemed, his being
a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, expressed in the 118. Psa. nay
foretold to be of the body of Mary, Isa. 7. etc. Has God spoken, and will he
not do? no, he spoke that he might do it, yea he came to bear witness of his
promises, that they might have a consummation, not a consumption; for as God
promised, and the Prophets foretold, so he was looked for in the beginning; and
in the fullness of time he came, beeause so promised; for the promises are the
most and best part of his word: we expect nothing but promises, and of all the
promises, none but Christ; for it is his mercy, not our deserts, that all the
promises are in Christ yea and amen. Thus you see the first truth demonstrated,
the truth of Gods promise in sending the Messiah.

2. The truth of the substance, whereof the types and figures under the law
were but shadows: how many things were there that presented Christ? nay, in
every thing where and when was not Christ prefigured? each promise and prophecy
speaks nothing foretold which he did not fulfill and do, that the shadows might
yield to the substance, that the types might have accomplishment as well as
abrogation, Christ came into the world; all the types end in him, He came to
witness to the truth.

3. The truth of doctrines of faith and manners.

1. For the doctrine of faith, take this instance; the Prophet Isa. has
foretold, that those that sat in darkness have seen a great light, Isa. 9.2.
and Saint John says, this is the true light that lights every man that
comes into the world, St. John 1.9. indeed concerning the doctrines of faith,
there were diverse in the world, some were false, and some likely, but the most
true; the first two were they of the Philosophers, the third of our Savior;
and how false they of the Philosophers were, is obvious to most, for they often
changed the truth of God into lies, and truth was vanished from those children
of men; some of them fancied many gods, some believed no God at all; some
granted an eternal being but no providence; and some a providence, and yet did
attribute all to fate; but Christ came to maintain a Trinity of persons, and
that in a divine Essence, and that he takes care of the whole world, and does
not necessitate any man's actions by a fatal destiny. And not only were there
errors in men's judgments, but

2. In their manners and ways: how great the errors of the Philosophers were,
is well known to those that are and have been conversant in their writings; and
not only they, but the Rabbis of old under the law, taught against literal
hypocrisy, that no obedience is profitable, if it be not in observation of the
whole Law; and that not then neither, but when only in the letter, and to man's
appearance: but Christ when he came, he required truth in the inward parts, and
what they stood for in the letter he required in the spirit, expounding their
doctrine more strictly, saying, It has been said of old, Thou shall not kill,
and whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the judgment; but I say unto
you, whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of
the judgment, as is set down the 5, 6, 7. chap. of Saint Matthew. Christ came
to witness to the truth, and did witness to it in his Sermons, Judgments and
Censures, Answers and Reproves.

1. In his Sermons; that his adversaries could not but pass this censure of
them, Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God in truth.
St. Matthew 22.16.

2. In his judgments and censures; for how did he use in reading, pleading,
and deciding, to demonstrate his faithfulness? you have the full story of the
first of these in Saint Luke 7.4. and so on, concerning his willingness to
forgive the greatest debt: an example of the second is pregnant to this
purpose, when he defended the pious woman against his Disciples for anointing
his Head with preous ointment Saint Matthew 26.10, 11, 12, 13. You have his
faithfulness in the third, when against the Scribes and Pharisees, he became an
advocate for himself, to defend that true power which the Father had committed
to him, Saint John 8.12. and so on.

3. In his Answers and Reproves; in his answers, though they were many times
in silence, yet he convinced them by saying nothing; and in his reproves how
true? for when he spoke, they were such as never man uttered, for faithful,
seasonable, and meek, never expressing any seeming passion but once, in purging
the Temple of those buyers and sellers, who had made his Fathers house a place
of Merchandise, and instead of the house of Prayer, had turned it into a Den of
Thieves: indeed he spared neither friend nor foe; for when he reproved his
Disciples, Saint Luke 9.46. upon their contention for greatness, he did it in
meekness, by the innocent similitude of a Child, ver. 48.

When to the Pharisees, he said, Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites,
for ye are like unto whited sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful
outwardly, but are within full of dead men's bones: he did it in faithfulness,
St. Matthew 23.27. And even of Herod he said no less, nor showed he any fear
of his power; for he said, Go ye, and tell that Fox, behold, I cast out
Devils, and I do cures to day and to morrow, and the third day I shall be
perfected, Saint Luke 13.32. whereby you see, he always bare witness to the
truth; and wherein else should we follow his example? for every one, is obliged
in word and work, in life and in death, to bear witness to the truth, every man
in his place and calling. Indeed there is a special duty lies upon
Magistrates, and all public Officers, that they in their several spheres,
move exemplarily toward the mark of truth; but most of all, upon the Ministers
of the blessed Word and Sacraments; for that which is laid upon on them by way
of obligation, is double, because they come into the world, the Church, as
members thereof, and Officers therein; and that extraordinarily as called
thereunto, inwardly, by the Spirit of God, and outwardly sent by those, that
have power in the Church, lawfully to commission them thereunto; and then they
are obliged also to bear witness to the truth; as common Christians in their
degree, that they may bear witness to the truth, in excellency of goodness
following the excellency of all good, that good man, God and man, the man
Christ Jesus, who left us his example as a pattern to imitate; who was full of
Humility, strong in beloeving, wonderful in patience, rich in love, and in all
a pattern of Holiness: and it is the highest reason imaginable, that we should
imitate him whom we pretend to worship, being careful that we bring no
dishonor to his name, by doing what he did not, or in refusing to do what he
did and commanded; but rather looking upon him as the author and finisher of
our Faith, we may be engaged to run (as he did) with patience the race that is
set before us, taking all manner of encouragement from him; that so if we are
unable, or unwilling to follow Christ in his Word commanding, yet we may do it
by his Word directing. And what though Christians meet with unreasonable
dealings from men? yet they must not turn away their ears from hearing, nor
their tongues from speaking, nor their lives from suffering for the truth, if
called thereunto: for since they were borne for this end, to follow the great
examplary who died for witnessing to the truth, they must not basely decline
it; for he himself says, To this end was I born, and for this cause came I
into the world, etc. And so I have done with the words in their primary
intention, as they concerned our Savior; and come now

2. To the extension of them, as they concern us; for since Christ in the
whole course of his life is presented as a pattern of Holiness, we that profess
our selves to be Christians, our eyes must so look to Jesus, the author and
finisher of our Faith, that we should follow his steps, and as he did, so we
should bear witness to the truth: and to this end were we borne, and for this
cause came we into the world, that we should bear witness to the truth. And so
I begin again with

The act, to bear witness.

For though all the Sacred Word be called a testimony, because sufficient to
bear witness to it self; yet God will have every truth of his established by
the mouths and lives of Christians also; and for this cause, besides others,
came Christ into the world: yea Christ, who is the Word and Truth it self, took
the witness of others to himself, and joined himself to their witness; for the
whole sacred Trinity bears record of his truth,

1. The Father, and that to the Saints of old, he did then bear witness of him;
the substance whereof was audibly delivered in that voice, This is my beloved
Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him, St. Matthew 17.5.

2. The Word; he did bear witness to himself, when he said, I am from him, and
he has sent me, Saint John 7.29. And

3. The holy Ghost in Scripture testifies of him; yea all the Scriptures, St.
John 5.8. And all the testimonies therein that speak of him, whether it be by
way of promise, or prophecy, you shall find them all meeting as so many lines
in this one center, Saint Luke 1.31. Yea, the Scriptures of the New Testament
especially clearly set down all the parts of his incarnation, both as to the
divine and humane nature.

1. His Nativity, Saint Matthew 1.18. 2. His Majesty, 1 Saint John 1, 2, 3, 4.
3. His Life, in the story of all the Gospels. 4. His Death, St. Mat. 27.35.
Saint Mark 15.24. Saint Luke 23.35. Saint John 19.18. 5. His Resurrection,
Saint Luke 24.1. etc. 6. His Ascension into Heaven, Acts 1.10.
Nay, Saint John Baptist was sent before him as a witness to prepare his way,
and to bear witness of that light that lights every man that comes into the
world, and that all men through him might believe, Saint John 1.6, 7. For truth
mus^ have its testimony from Heaven, and by the Scriptures, besides the witness
of men; and that for these reasons:

1. Because that man is such a flatterer of his own reason and knowledge, that
he is apt to have a better conceit of himself then Divine rules and principles;
he thinks to guide himself well enough without the assistance of Almighty God;
and therefore it is that many are so studious to find out some unheard of
thing, and endeavor to make themselves the authors, and inventers of something
that may make them seem wiser then their brethren, and at last to lay aside
the rules of God, as if they knew what was fitter and better for them then he:
and much, if not all of this is to be found in those innovations, and
reformations which have been made upon the worship, and service of God; men
have itching ears, devising new opinions, and professing extraordinary lights
and revelations, such strange stuff as our Fathers never knew, nor we ever
heard of before; and being Authors thereof themselves, they highly extol their
own conceptions, looking upon well-ordered and religious discipline as no
better than popish zeal, and superstitious worship; proceeding even to the
questioning of the Truths of God, and the Principles of Christian Religion,
whether plainly or covertly laid down in his holy Word.

2. Nothing is more loud than errors, and the more false the matter, the more
loud the clamor, getting more voices for its entertainment than truth can
find; for every illiterate tongue is ready to cry out, Great is Diana, and with
the noise of their new erected goodness, quite stop their ears against all
religious serving of the true God; yea, we find this project to have been
practiced of old, where we read of their inhumane zeal in burning their
children, and making them pass through the fire to Moloch; and that the people
might not be incensed against them for their cruelty, nor themselves moved to
pity, they had the noise of Instruments to drown the cries of their children,
that their voice might not be heard. And in allusion to this I may say, that
the loud cry of error and heresy may be so great in a Nation, that the voice
of one man or more that is faithful, and would plead in defense of truth,
cannot possibly be heard, but may be overborn by a multitude; because each man
will have his vote, and as much, if not more, talk than he; yet know this, that
one Micaiah speaking from the Oracle of God, is better than many Balaams
offering sacrifices, and cursed devotions from enchanted Altars; whose great
conspiracy is only to work the ruin of Gods people: yea such is the wickedness
of ungodly men, that if a Micaiah speak the truth, he must presently suffer,
and be buffeted on the cheek with a contumelious reproof; saying (as that
wicked one did) Which way went the Spirit of God from me to speak unto thee? 2 Chronicles. 18.23. the truth is, none are more ready to boast of the Spirit of God,
than they that have it not.

3. The wickedness of men's lives is such, that Gods glory loses much honor by
them, and therefore he is pleased to vindicate himself by bearing witness to
the truth by his own Word; Many, says St. Peter, shall follow their pernicious
ways, by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of, 2. St. Peter
2.2. not so much neither by the blasphemy of tongues, and Jewish calumnies, as
by those that have the confidence to call themselves Christians; the wickedness
of whose actions causes Gods glorious Name to be dishonored, and those sacred
Truths (that ought to be prized and valued above gold and silver, or any
earthly treasure) so much as in them lies, is disgraced by their unholy
conversations, who prefer lying vanities before them; the consideration whereof
should make those that are Christians indeed to defend truth against the loud
noise of errors, and preserve it against the malice of those that study nothing
so much as to contradict it; for this end are we made Christians, for this
cause do we receive a second birth, for this end are we made members of the
holy Catholic Church, namely, that we should defend the Truths of God with our
lives and estates: though it must be granted, that truth lies not within the
power of men, or the malice of Devils, that they should harm it; Truth is not
less glorious in it self for being contradicted, but only in the worlds
estimation; Truth is of the nature of God, whose Glory is not capable of
augmentation or diminution, though God is said to be glorified by his creatures
serving of him now you must not suppose it to arise from any addition we can
make to his Glory, but only a satisfaction he is pleased to take in beholding
our obedience to his Will; for though we be never so wicked, yet we must
continually conclude, thou art holy, O thou holy One of Israel, that art the
same for ever and changest not: and as is God himself, the same is his Truth,
whose Excellency lies in this, that it is unchangeable in its being, it is that
Verity unto which nothing can be added or subtracted; for if the one were
found, the other would necessarily follow, as we find it by daily experience,
that those things that may be extended may also be contracted, and where there
is room for addition, there will be also place found for substraction; but God
and his Truth can have nothing added or taken from them; the highest part of
our greatness being unable to reach the lowest part of his Glory, and when we
have said all that can be expressed, we can say nothing more than this, that he
is infinite; for when we magnify God, we only express him great, but do not
thereby make him great; when we blaspheme him, we endeavor our utmost to
lessen his Glory, but no harm can we do thereby to him, though very much to our
selves, by increasing our own misery; and when we praise him, it shows our
endeavors to make him great, but nothing is added to his Greatness by our
exultations: when we oppose his Power, it is not he, but our selves that
receive damage by the same; so likewise when we witness to the Truth, it is not
God, but our selves that are made the better by our fidelity; for the Truth
makes us free, when in witnessing we confess with our lips, and profess in our
lives that Divine Truth. Thus to give testimony (indeed) to that Truth will
save our souls from death eternal, and bring them to the possession of Glory
everlasting; for it is Truth that will bring benefit unto us, and not we to the
Truth; but the aim of Almighty God, in calling us to be his Servants and
Ministers, is, that we should be honored by witnessing to the Truth, for the
Truth of God is not the greater by it, but only appears the more glorious in
us; the better we are made by the Truths of God, the more glory we bring to the
God of Truth: There are two things, the apple of a man's eye, and the Christian
Religion, which of all things in the world are the most tender, and which may
be easily offended, the one with a mote, the other with a scruple; therefore it
concerns us, as we are men, to preserve the one, and as we are Christians to
beware of the other, lest through our unholy conversations the way of truth
come to be evil spoken of. Indeed it is every man's duty to know truly what may,
and what must not be done, when persecutions arise; and accordingly there are
four things principally considerable and necessary respecting Truth.

1. Light. 2. Dissimulation. 3. Similation. 4. Denial.
1. Light to discern truth from falsehood. 2. Dissimulation of the truth. 3.
Similation of falsehood: Or, 4. Denial of the Truth.
1. If personal persecutions arise, then light is necessary to direct a man
whether it be lawful for him to fly, or to stand still and undergo the cruelty
of his adversaries; indeed our Savior says, When one is sought he must fly
from one city to another, St. Matthew. 10.23. but he means of a personal
persecution, when a man has no public charge committed to him, then he may
lawfully fly to secure himself; but if otherwise he have a charge under him, as
suppose him a Minister of the blessed Word and Sacraments, then he must defend
his Flock, for the Church must not be forsaken for the fear of undergoing the
wrath of men, lest his flight should betray them to errors and heresy; for
when a common persecution of the Sheep and the Shepherd comes both together, it
is altogether unlawful for a Shepherd to fly: A good Shepherd lays down his
life for his Sheep, says our Savior, St. John 10.11. and though a man may use
all lawful means to preserve his life, when a single persecution arises, as by
flight, or other ways; yet it is not so when it comes against both the
Shepherd and the Flock; for a Shepherd by dying or suffering for them may
preserve his Flock from ruin: I say, then a Shepherd should rather choose to
have his own body mangled alone; or if that will not satisfy their rage, then
willingly and cheerfully he must make one with the butchered Flock, rather than
leave his Sheep in the way of persecuters cruelty. And therefore I wonder not
at the just retaliation of Gods Vengeance upon those, who for self-preservation
dissemble the truth: and that brings me to the second thing considerable;

2. Dissimulation* whether it be of men, or of truth; if understood of men,
then it is an hiding or diminution of such a man that is sought for, and
inquired after by persecutors, as if he were not in being, or as if such an one
never had been; and thus to do is unlawful: so likewise in matter of truth and
faith, as it is lawful for a man not to detect himself, but to carry himself as
purely from the blood of all men, so likewise to preserve his own, so far as
self-preservation brings no dishonor to God and his Truth; for what he has
seen and heard, that he testifies like a good Disciple of Jesus Christ: though
it is true indeed, sometimes we find in the holy Scritures, that men have taken
the safest way they could to come to Christ, as Nicodemus did when he came by
night, in St. John 3.26. and likewise Joseph of Arimathea came secretly to beg
the body of Jesus for fear of the Jews, St. John 19.38. and though, I say, we
find so much done in holy Writ, yet it was through the greatness of their
infirmities; for the one being a great man, a Ruler in Israel, and the other a
Counselor, they should have been as exemplary as their places, for the better
encouragement of others to seek after life, it being the glory of such persons
to attract goodness as well as greatness. Indeed I grant, that the best of
Saints want not their infirmities, and that the best Christians cannot keep in
such a resolution, as may enable them always to be in a readiness to suffer;
for we are commanded to be innocently serpentine, and serpentinely innocent;
yet thus much I do affirm, that no man can keep himself a true Christian, that
is either ashamed or afraid to be thought a Christian; for our Savior says,
He that is ashamed of me and my words, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed
when he shall come in his own glory, St. Luke 9.26. And though the Apostle
says, If thou have faith have it to thy self, Romans 14.22. as if a man might
conceal his faith* nothing less, for he speaks it not of those things which
we are to believe as necessary unto salvation, but of those things which are in
different in themselves, and may or may not be done, as they please or
displease our brethren; such a faith a man is to keep to himself: but a faith
that contains those things which are necessary unto salvation he ought not, nor
can he, if a real Christian, conceal it in times of persecution or suffering,
for in so doing he brings himself to lose his interest in the Promises which
are made ours in Christ Jesus, only upon the condition of continuing steadfast
in believing unto the end.

3. Similation, which is a fiction in faith; and another demonstration of a
thing then it is in it self; and for a man to counterfeit any thing in, or
against, true Religion or the Truths of God, to save himself in time of
persecution, is altogether unlawful. Scotus says, When a man has a sign of
another thing which he is to do, besides that which is before him, and it
proves not a sign, but he knows it to be really the thing it self which he is
to do, then, though an ignorance of what the sign intended might have excused
him before, because he did not understand the meaning thereof; yet now that he
is sure it is the thing it self, the mistaking or leaving out but of one
circumstance may make the whole action sinful, there being no excuse to be
drawn for the same, either from the goodness of his person now, or the holiness
of his former life, that can make good, or fill up what was wanting and
defective in his actions. Nor is David excusable in feigning himself mad before
the people, 1 Samuel 21.13. though he was a man after Gods own heart: No, much
more is commendable the saying of old Eleazar, when at the command of
Antiochus, all were to die that would not eat swines flesh, and when he had
eaten it, or at least seemed to eat it (for he spit it out again) and
repenting, came of his own accord to the torment, choosing to die gloriously,
rather than live stained with such an abomination; therefore says he
excellently, when persuaded by friends to bring flesh of his own, and make as
if he obeyed the King in eating the flesh taken from the Sacrifice; It becomes
not one of my years to dissemble; for then any young person may think that I,
being fourscore years old and ten, were now gone to a strange Religion; and so
they, through my hypocrisy, and desire to live a little time, and a moment
longer, should be deceived by me, and so I get a stain, and make my old age
abominable: and though I should at present be delivered from men, yet should I
not escape the hand of the Almighty, neither alive nor dead: 2 Maccab. 6.19,
20, 21. When it once comes to this strait, that we must either deny the truth,
or fall under the sword of persecution, we are rather to die in, or for the
Faith, then forsake it: and as we may not, for the saving of our lives, do
that which is unlawful; much less must we free our goods from danger by
similation, or making a lie; we must not similate good into evil, nor truth
into falsehood, by wicked words or works; nor seem to do good when we intend
nothing less, because of the lie which will lie upon us, and we shall be
guilty of, for so doing; and withal, because there is a lie in deed as well as
in saying, and neither is allowable in any man, under what pretense soever,
though the doing thereof were to save his life; For we must not do evil that
good may come thereof, Romans 3.8.

4. Denial of the truth, and that either by subscribing against it, or by
doing that in our lives and actions which is directly opposite unto it; for
there is a double denial of truth: 1. In Faith. 2. In practice.
1. In Faith, for the love of pleasures. 2. In Practice, for fear of pain.


1. In Faith; Some have made shipwreck of faith and a good conscience, 1 Timothy
1.19. and the reason is given in 2 Timothy 3.4. why they so did; it was because
they were lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God. And as they for love of
worldly pleasure, cast away truth of Faith: So

2. Others for fear of pain have done it in fact, having a form of godliness,
but denying the power thereof, etc. 2 Timothy 3.5. And in words profess that they
know God, but in works they deny him, Titus 1.16. being reprobate to every
good work, etc. But besides this denying of truth in faith and practice, there
is also a denial of the truth in judgment, and this admits of diverse degrees.

1. Apostasy, when men fall from truth into sinful errors.

2 When they revile the truth by evil speeches: Thus wicked men detect
themselves to be enemies to that truth which with their tongues and hands they
violently oppose.

3. The sin (also) against the holy Ghost, comes in under the notion of a
sinful, Apostate, and reviling judgment; and that appears 1. In matter of
Faith. 2. In matter of Fact.


1. In matter of Faith, when men fall off from the truth of Faith; first
forsaking of it, then denying, and at last blaspheming the truths of God, and
continuing in that blasphemy; this is to sin against the holy Ghost in matter
of Faith.

2. In matter of Fact; and that is, when men do those things which are utterly
contrary to the revealed will of Almighty God, and obstinately persist in the
same: this is to sin in matter of Fact against the holy Ghost; for every
action that dishonours God, and heartens others to do the like, is to deny the
truths of God; therefore it concerns every man to look to himself, and make a
curious examination by what has been said in reference to his words and works,
that so he may not be found guilty of those errors and crimes which the works
and words of our Savior eminently convince of; for we are obliged, though with
the loss of our lives, to bear witness to the truth; for to this end were we
born, regenerate, made Christians, came into the world, the Christian Chruch,
that we both in our words, in our works, in our lives, by our deaths, if
called thereunto, should bear witness to the truth. And so I have done with the
act, Bear witness.

To this end was I borne, and for this cause came I into the world, that I
should bear witness to the truth.

Testis fidelis: OR, The faithful Witness. SERMON VIII.
St. JOHN 18.37. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the
world, that I should bear witness unto the truth.


THe lives of most men are misspent; it being only they who have a certain end
of their actions, that shall attain to the right end for which those actions
are designed, namely, the glory of God, and their own salvation; some there are
that shoot at they know not what mark, they direct themselves to an universal
scope, not minding, or regarding the particular tendency of their doings; hence
it is that they arise not to perfection, they continue in that evil which ends
in discomfort; some level at the right end, but level amiss, wanting prudence
and discretion rightly to manage their actions, so as may best direct to the
true end of their creation: It is only true Christian wisdom that shows the
right end, and certainly finds out the way thereunto; and a wise Christian,
amidst the many changes of this life, continually presses to one end, with
reverence and respect, still setting his resolution in all his ways, if
possible, to get near to the great center; who when he was summoned unto death,
and betrayed thereunto by his seeming friend, yet steadfastly asserted the end
of his life, saying, To this end was I borne, and for this cause came I into
the world, that I should bear witness to the truth.

In which words I have already observed these particulars: 1. An Action. 2. An
End. 3. The Object.
1. The Action, he was born, he came into the world. 2. The End, and that
Pointed at, and Pointed out. 1. Pointed at, to this end, and for this cause. 2.
Pointed out, to bear witness.
3. The Object, the truth: To this end was I borne, and for this cause came I
into the world, etc.


I have traversed over all the parts of my Text, in the primary intention
thereof, as it concerned our Savior, and have entered upon the two last parts,
as they concern us, in the extension thereof, and have insisted upon the former
of the latter parts; namely, To bear witness.

I shall now come to the third and last thing

The Object, The truth.

To this end was I borne, and for this cause came I into the world, that I
should bear witness to the truth. Truth is the first thing in intention, though
last in enjoyment, as being the end of all; and he that would be happy in the
end, must lay hold of truth in the beginning: it was a question too good for a
Pilate to ask, What is truth? St. John 18.38. because his jesting speech showed
he never intended a sober inquiry after it: and besides, the Schools have
wearied themselves in their Questions raised about the power, and Infiniteness
of God, as distinguished into parts, how all could be in one, and yet that one
in all; so as that it is distinguished into past present and future, and so he
has a time of giving and receiving. Thus the body of the Sun contains all
light essentially in it self, and when communicated to the Moon and Stars, it
is still the same, though multiplied. So is truth, according to the diverse
acceptations of it; for as it is considered in it self, so it is one entire
being; but as embraced by several apprehensions, it is divided, though in it
self still the same; and this truth is that light which is really one in all;
yet so, as this one light gives information to several capacities: For

1. There is essentially, a cause of light in the understanding; and this the
Schools call the first light; and this you may understand, to be as the light
in the Sun, when entire in it self, and uncommunicated to the lesser and
inferior Globes.

2. There is a formal light, and that consists in the exercising the dictates,
and right informations of the understanding; and therefore Saint Austin rightly
defines truth when exercised, to be the creature of an enlightened
understanding; and this created truth is called, a life exemplary from the
increated truths of God: and this is as the light of the sunne-beames to the
moon and stars, etc. or the diffusions of truth, from the understanding
received into all the parts and faculties of the Soul, together with the
affections which are as the lesser stars: but besides this, there is also a
secondary light, conformable to the thing expressed; and this, whether it be in
the mind, or in words conceived, or uttered, it must first suppose a form of
knowledge, received by the apprehension of a man, according to the will of God;
and these two do but differ as the understanding, to the thing conceived; which
in it self is so necessary, that without it no Salvation can be received.

But then this truth, as it may diversely be distinguished, is not to be the
object of our Faith, so as that without the knowledge thereof we cannot be
happy; for there are truths natural, and truths theological; but those truths
which we are called out principally to witness unto in speaking and doing, by
words and works, are theological; and that is, those truths that are declared
in the principles of divine Scriptures; and they are the Scriptures of truth,
the law of truth, the word of truth, that necessarily call for our testimony,
together with all those doctrines of Faith and manners therein expressed, as they
are reduced from errors; for every divine truth laid down in Scripture, or
drawn from Scripture, is that the subject we are to bear witness unto; and
this is the truth, that contains in it the doctrine of Faith and manners, the
one in words, the other in works; so as that we, in testimony of words and
works, should bear witness to the truth.

1. We must bear witness to the doctrines of Faith, by the testimony of our
words; as with the heart man believes to righteousness, so with the tongue
confession is made unto Salvation. Romans 10.10. What we believe in our hearts,
we must confess with our lips, and in Saint John 1.20. St. John Baptist
confessing himself not to be Christ, it is clear, he denied not the truth, but
only that he was not the Christ; but he that confesses not the truth openly,
denies Christ in that place where God has set him, whether he be considered as
a private man, or a Minister; as a Minister, he denies Christ in words, who is
guilty of abusing the Scriptures by false glosses, for the countenancing of
rebellion or error, either against God or man.

He denies Christ as a private man that omits to do what God wills, as well as
by doing of that which he nills; you find this in the song of Deborah, though
they denied not to go out to battle, yet because they stood still, and
appeared not for Israel, it is said (by the Angel of the Lord) Curse ye Meroz,
curse them bitterly, because they came not to the help of the Lord to the help
of the Lord against the mighty, Jud. 5.23. and wherever there is truth of faith
in the heart, there will be confession of God in the mouth: for confession is an
act of faith, I believed, therefore have I spoken, etc. he forsakes the truth,
that does not profess it in words and works; therefore let not any man think,
that only silence, where the truths of God are to be manifested, will argue
his consent; for they that will bear witness, must confess the truth indeed:
there is a confession which is only by constraint, even the Heretics and
hypocrites do so, they will confess truth, but they do it with equivocation;
for if it be from their minds, it is extorted, or if otherways they do it, it
is from conviction of conscience; so we find the Egyptian sorcerers confessed,
it was the finger of God, when they saw no likelihood of longer deceiving the
people; for we find by experience, that those that will not voluntarily and
freely, shall be driven by constraint to confess the truth: thus Balaam shall
bless those people for nothing, he was formerly hired to curse. But though some
speak well of goodness against their wills, and by constraint, yet a voluntary
acknowledging of the truth best becomes a Christian; therefore says Saint
Peter, sanctify the Lord in your hearts, and be ready always to give an
answer to any man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you with
meekness and fear, 1 Saint Peter 3.15.

But further, it is not enough to witness a good confession, though before a
Pilate, when brought thereunto as a Malefactor, but also as a free Christian,
thou art bound to profess the truth openly, not only against persecutors, and
Schismatics, but also against Heretics, and all others whatever* that say, or
do any thing that we know is contrary, or against the truth; when we see men
bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, as Saint
Peter says 2 Pe. 2.1. then take heed lest our silence at those be found to
give occasion to men of corrupt minds to say, lo here is Christ and there is
Christ, as some have blasphemously done, and I know you are not ignorant (of
that which I tremble to speak) that there are those that call themselves God,
the Lamb of God, and the Virgin Mary, etc. But I fear they are no better then
Magdalen but before her conversion; and whence has this proceeded but from the
unholy conversations of men, silently suffering the glorious name of Almighty
God to be blasphemed? and now that this wickedness is already come to so great
a fullness, shall I hold my peace? no, rather shall my tongue cleave to the roof
of my mouth, then with silence I suffer such blasphemy to go unreproved; the
watchman ought always to be in readiness to give the alarm when he sees the
enemy approach, lest his silence incur the guilt of the peoples blood, if shed
through his default: and that minister that holds his peace, when errors and
heresies begin to destroy the Church, and servants of God, does by that his
silence give consent to their destruction; and their blood, if they die in their
sins, will God require at his hands, Ezekiel. 33.8. and woe unto that man that
suffers his flock to be scattered by his neglect, and so they become meat to
all the beasts of the field, Ezekiel. 34.5. for when once the flock is scattered
they must needs be devoured by the wild beasts of the Forest; and our Savior
tells us plainly, that the Talent which is not improved in Gods service, shall
be taken away from him, and given unto those who have better deserved it, Saint
Matt. 25.28. noting thereby unto us, that we are to improve all the gifts and
graces that are in us, for the best advantage both of our own, and other souls
welfare, lest God charge the loss of any soul upon our account; for certainly
if any perish through our default, the blood of that man shall be required at
our hands; and woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel, says Saint Paul, 1 Cor.
9.16. that is, surely (above all others) my condition will be extremely sad, if
through my neglect of faithful declaring the mind of God, any poor soul
miscarry: and as it was the condition of that great Apostle, so is it of every
minister of the Gospel, for we kill those souls, we see going to destruction
through ignorance, or otherways, and do not admonish them: therefore it is
that St. Paul says, he kept nothing from the people of God that was for their
good, which makes him truly to boast that he was pure from the blood of all
men, Acts the 20.26. and he himself gives a reason of his pureness, because he
had declared unto them the whole counsel of God, v. 17. therefore it concerns
all the Ministers of the Gospel that are faithful to deliver their message
truly, not withholding from the people any thing of the whole counsel of God*
for the unwarned sinner shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will be
required at the watchmans hands; therefore says the Lord, Ezekiel. 33.8. If thou
do not speak to warn the wicked from his evil way, that wicked man shall die
in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy hands: and for us to be
guilty of silence, when any of our brethren go astray, is no other then
bringing their iniquities upon our heads, who are set to watch over their
souls; and seeing it is so necessary a duty to warn people of their sins, to
this end do I come to wait upon you, that I should bear witness to the truth,
by telling you of those evils that will certainly follow upon unholy walking,
and sinful apprehensions, either of God or his truth, and Ordinances; for to
this end came every man into the world (but Ministers especially) that in words
they might bear witness to the truth; and not only in words, but

2. In works also, we must witness to the doctrines of faith by doing, for the
testimony of the life in action, and the hand in communicating, is far more
effectual then the mouth can express; and not only must we by holy actions do
that which may convince and strengthen them that are with us, but also by
communicating the truth in writing to those that are absent from us; for the
pen conveyeth to many, the tongue but to a few: and therefore the Church of God
has in all ages made provision accordingly; to this end were those six general
Councels held, at Nice, Trent, etc. besides, we find the enemies of the truth
are busy, and careful to instruct their followers, by all ways and means that
may make them able to defend error and heresy: and therefore it would be a
shame to Christianity, that our zeal should not be as great to defend the
truth, as the malice of wicked ones is to destroy it. O let it never be said of
us, that we are so careless of men's souls, that we never endeavored to arm them
against the errors that rise up in opposition to the truth, but suffer the
adversaries thereof to get advantage against them, and so by our negligence and
remisness, the undervaluers of truth come to prevail. O let it never be spoken,
(to our reproach) that they that make it their business to speak evil of God and
Godliness, are more industrious to promote error and heresy, then we are to
manifest the word of truth in sincerity: rather let us lift up our voices like
trumpets (and tell Judah of her sins, and Israel of their transgressions) then
suffer our selves to be mealy-mouthed, and afraid to speak against error and
heresy, though we should meet with it in robes and gorgeous apparel; for an
unfaithful minister is like an unjust judge; which cannot but condemn himself,
while he passes sentence upon others. But then,

3. If our active testimony by words and works be not received, then our
passive testimony, in suffering for the Truth, must not be denied; for it is a
Christians duty, both to do (and if God call for it) to die for the truth; yea,
though the world should condemn us of folly for becoming Martyrs to rescue
Truth from the snare of the wicked, and our cheerful contests for the same be
laid upon us by wicked and unregenerate men, as a mark of contradiction; yet
let us not be discouraged therewith, as knowing, that thereby we do but fill up
the sufferings of our blessed Redeemer, who will have us to contend earnestly
for the faith, though it be sometimes not without loss of goods, estate, yea
and suffering of pain, imprisonment, loss of blood, and that in great
abundance, but also by death it self. For it is a Tyrants way, to torture
Christians by cruel usage, and at last destroy them: yea such has been the lot
of Gods Saints in all ages, thus to be persecuted and destroyed; for the
Prophet Elijahs must be in danger, the Ieremies in prison, the Disciples lose
their goods, and the holy Confessors pay their tribute of allegiance to
Almighty God with pain, and the Martyrs with their lives; and though these
afflictions may seem terrible to Christians to suffer for the Truth, yet the
highest of them is no more than lawful, and necessary if called thereunto; for
the pious hearts of true Christians have always thus testified to the Truth,
witness Saint Paul, What mean you to weep and break my heart? for I am ready
not to be bound only, but to die at Jerusalem, for the Name of the Lord Jesus,
Acts 21.13. and Acts 20.24. He says elsewhere, Neither do I account my life
dear unto my self, so that I might finish my course with joy. It is remarkable
to consider the way which Almighty God took to support his Disciples and
Servants, in despite of the wisdom and malice of the Jews, for the planting of
his Church in Christianity, that it will appear almost incredible to hear what
were the afflictions of the Church, how intolerable her sufferings, that had
they not had one to support them who was Almighty and All-sufficient, it had
been impossible they should have continued steadfast; but they had not only the
inward support of the Spirit to strengthen, but the outward example of our
Saviors Passion to encourage them unto a conformity to him, both in doing and
suffering; and so nearly did the Saints copy out one another lives, that their
spirits were seemingly converted into one another bodies, and one would have
thought that the dying blood of the one was infused into another veins; for no
sooner was one cut off by the hands of cruelty, but God presently inspired
another with faith and patience to witness to his Truth, and the torturing of
the body made but the mouth speak the louder in witnessing unto the Truth. So
that by what you have already heard you may see Christian Profession is no
secure kind of living; for he that believes in Christ, must be no niggard of
his life for the Truth, when God calls to bring him home by death. Indeed it is
yet our happiness, that in these cloudy days we are not brought to the fire
and faggot for the trial of our faith; God only knows when, and upon whom that
heavy lot must fall, and in what manner it will come; this we are not able to
demonstrate, but by the luke-warmness of most men's zeal in the truth of
Religion; it is to be feared, that when those days do come, that many will
turn from Christ rather than burn for the Truth, because it appears, that many
untrained souls are so wedded to their lusts, that they had rather lose their
interest in Gods love, then forgo one darling sin: many do so love the works
of vanity, that they have made shipwreck of faith, and turned their ears unto
fables; and when you shall read, or hear of these, then may you imagine those
locusts are come upon the earth, spoken of by St. John in the 9th of the
Revelation 8, 9. verses, which had power to torture men, and like Scorpions
with their power able to sting them to death; then beware, lest you be led into
the errors of the wicked, 2 St. Pet. 3.17. but be you stablished in the known,
acknowledged and established Church of England; which I dare be bold to say,
for doctrine and discipline is more purely true, and truly pure from errors,
than any Christian Church or Congregation whatsoever; and shall be ready to
prove them so, when occasion shall call me thereunto; for the Truth of God will
remain pure, notwithstanding the malice of gainsayers, and therefore we should
defend it with all our might, for the Truth will spread it self, though there
be no other place but Pulpits to declare it in, nor no other witnessing but by
preaching, nor no witnesses but Prophets; but yet many in their lowest
condition have yet highly exalted God, by a faithful testimony to his Truth;
and though this life be encombred by sickness and infirmities, yet this
readiness to suffer shall be able to silence any gain-sayer: when thou art not
able to witness much, because of thy weakness, yet do as much as thou can, do
your best, and God will accept it, though mean, if from a willing mind; for it
will be nothing to suffer by martyrdom, when we consider it is for so great a
prize, as is the Truth of God, and will be to our souls, if we continue
steadfast therein: for still, in every age, God will keep some defenders of the
Truth; and why may not we be the persons? therefore should God call us to it,
and we refuse to suffer for the Truth, it would be but a just judgment for God
to take his Gospel from us, and give it to a more faithful people; for so the
Apostles were commanded to serve the Jews, Acts 13.46. the Truth of God, in the
House of God had dwelt among us for many years together, in much serenity, till
of late years it has been tossed upon the troubled waters; therefore let us in
our words and works witness to it, lest he take it from us also, and give it to
others that will give it better entertainment than we have done. Therefore let
all of us make it our prayer unto Almighty God:

Oh Lord, rather let our hearts witness to the Truth, that thy Truth may
witness unto us; then by our not witnessing for thee we come to be destroyed by
thee: let thy Truth dwell with us here, that we may dwell with thee hereafter.

Brethren, let not your faith be shaken or moved by tribulations, or any kind
of sufferings whatsoever, knowing this, that after you have fought a good
fight, and kept the faith, there shall be laid up for you (and all other his
faithful Servants) a Crown of righteousness, which the righteous Judge shall
give you at that day, 2 Timothy 3.7, 8. and to this end were we born, and for this
cause we all came to the Christian world, the Church of God, that we, in our
estates and callings, lives and deaths, should bear witness to the truth.

Testis fidelis: OR, The faithful Witness. SERMON IX.
St. JOHN 18.37. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the
world, that I should bear witness unto the truth.


THe pattern of all Presidents, and the life of all that is good in man, is the
God in man, the man in God, the man Christ Jesus, who in his birth was a
pattern of humility, in his life of innocence, in his death of patience, in all
a pattern of holiness: as it is the marrow of Religion, to worship God in
spirit and Truth, and to serve him with truth in the inward man; so the
iniquity of a Christian consists in not doing what he did, or not doing what he
commands; for as he did endure the contradiction of sinners, in witnessing to
the Truth, so should Christians; and though they meet with unreasonable
dealings from men, yet they should undergo all with patience, for since Christ
was a pattern of goodness, we must so look to Jesus in our lives, that we
should bear witness to the Truth; for to this end were we, as well as he, born,
and for this cause came we into the world, etc.

In which words I have already observed these three things: 1. An Action. 2. An
End. 3. An Object.
1. The Action, He was born, he came into the world. 2. The End Pointed at. and
Pointed out. Pointed at, for this cause, and to this end. Pointed out, to bear
witness.
3. The Object, The Truth.


I have discoursed over all the parts of the Text as they concerned our
Savior; and came to the two last parts, as they generally concern us, and
dispatched the act, and the end of Christ's coming into the world, and shall now
go on with the last part of the Text, The object, the truth. And shall show

1. What it is, so as that it is distinguished into past, present, and future:
truth is as the sun, which has an intrinsecal light in it self; and as in the
sun, so there is an essence of light in the understanding, and this is as the
light of the sun uncommunicated. But

2. There is an extrinsecal light communicated to other things, which in their
beings are no other then uncreated truths of things, and these are divided from
the created truths of God, and are as the light of the sun to the moon and
stars; and then there is a proposition following the thing expressed, which is no
other in being, but the thing it self, and is demonstrated in the truth, by a
double application to the thing expressed, and which is conceived in the mind by
word, and in the understanding by knowledge; and this is as the light of the
sun communicating it self to this region of the lower air, and this has
multiplicity of acts, derived from the matter conceived; and accordingly we
must distinguish truth into these four parts: there is a divine, historical,
moral, and civil truth, though especially the divine truth is that which is to
be witnessed unto; though the other in a subordinate manner are to have their
attestation also, yet divine truths most of all, whether we consider them as
Principal, or Less principal.


1. Principal, and they are the Scriptures of truth, the law of truth, and the
word of truth.

2. The less principal, are the necessary conclusions, which upon inferences
are deduced from those grounds; therefore every parcel of truth, whether it be
Scripture, or deduced from Scripture, is to be the subject matter of a
Christians testimony, and these are they which we are to witness unto, and
comprehend the truth of faith and manners, which is to be witnessed unto both
in words and works: I have spoken of the doctrine of faith formerly, and showed
that we are to witness to it by doing and suffering, and if God call us
thereunto, by dying also: I shall now come to the

Second branch, which contains these divine moral truths, that are for the
regulation of our lives laid down in the Scriptures of the old and new
Testament; there Gods law is the truth, and the truth of the Gospel is that law
whose precepts and promises we are to imitate. It was a custom among the
heathens, to derive their laws from their Gods, giving them names accordingly:
but we that are Christians have our law from the true God, who is the author of
truth; The law was given by Moses, but Grace and truth came by Jesus Christ,
Saint John 1.17. where you see the truth of salvation is ascribed to the
Gospel; and that which we are to consider, the end of Christ's coming into the
world for, is, that it was not to give new laws, but to fulfill the old law:
for we find not the form of the new Testament to carry in it the authority of
a law, but only the precepts thereof to be brought in occasionally by our
Savior, in a way of interpretation, exhortation, and also by application, but
not in a way of constitution: therefore says our Savior, think not that I
came to destroy the law and the Prophets, etc. Saint Matt. 5.17.18. It is not
that I come to take away the law and the Prophets, but rather to fulfill them;
this is that law which is the rule of men's actions, written First by Moses, and
Then by the Prophets.


It is to be understood of all the law, as it was given unto the Jews, and
others, whether they were men just or unjust; but especially unto the Jews, in
a more ample translation then to other people: the law of works, it is true,
was abolished by our Saviors coming; but the law of doctrines, and rules of
holy living, given by Almighty God in the Mount, though these were in some
sense perfected by bringing in the substance, (for the shadows fly away when
the substance appears,) yet I say, this law is not disanulled, but perfected in
such a manner, that it is now become the perfect rule of Christian piety,
whatever the Antinomians say in opposition thereunto, as that it was nailed to
the Cross of Christ, and so abolished by his death; but it is evident to the
contrary, that still the whole commanding power remains, because the whole
world shall be judged by the law, and word of truth, for every man shall be
judged according to his works, Rev. 2.23. and we are to bear witness to this
truth, by the testimony of our hands and tongues, our words and works: of our
tongues, and that two ways;

Both by speaking the truth to the religious, and also by defending of it
against the erroneous.

1. By speaking of the truth to the religious, though they know it already, yet
that they may be established in the truth; and therefore holy David makes it
his prayer to get direction from God, how to be enabled to walk in the truth of
God, under diverse denominations; Psalm 119. sometimes he prays to be directed
in the law of God, verse 18. sometimes in the statues of God, ver. 26.
sometimes in the Judgments of God, v. 7. sometimes in the truth of God, ver.
43, sometimes in the word of God, ver. 17. and sometimes in the Ordinances of
God, v. 91. thereby giving us to understand that in the most confirmed Saints
there is still so much of corruption, that if left to themselves, they will be
in danger of relapsing; and therefore says St. Paul to his Ephesians, who were
great Christians, Let no man deceive you with vain words, etc. Ephesians. 5.6.
intimating, that there was a possibility for them to be led away with the error
of the wicked, for what Saint Peter long since foretold, is in our days found
too true, as there were false teachers among them, so there should be amongst
us that shall deceive many, etc. 2 St. Peter 2.12. though indeed he tells us,
that they were the unlearned and the unstable that wrested the Scriptures to
their own destruction, chapter 16. yet he admonishes the faithful that they should
not be led away by the errors of the wicked, 2 St. Peter 3.17, 18. and St. Paul
says, if he, or an Angel from heaven, should come and offer any other doctrine
let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8. which implies that there would some come which
would offer another doctrine, and that to the eminent Christians of Galatia:
and if it were possible the very elect should be deceived, so says our
Savior, Saint Matthew. 24.24. therefore I say in a matter of so high concernment
as divine truth is, we cannot do better then to confirm and bear witness to
the truth, as by speaking of it to the religious, so

Secondly, by speaking of it against the erroneous, passing the sentence of
condemnation upon them that contradict the Scriptures, that by it we may
confirm the truth to the faithful, by confutation of the opposite errors with
the holy Scripture, which is the word of truth; and as it is the will of God,
so the rule of righteousness, and they that will rove from this rule of truth
are erroneous, whether it be in understanding, or conversation: for those
teachers that are already gone astray, and by breaking Gods commands, teach
others so to do, are chiefly erroneous, however they may think to pacify the
world, only with a bare pretense to the truth, and call the wisdom that is
above, their father, thereby intending to deceive the simple with a show of
relation unto Almighty God, while indeed they are the servants of the Devil;
for they know that if error should come in its proper shape, it would be
loathsome to every eye, but now that it comes in the name, and semblance of
truth, they think none will refuse it, for many, says our Savior, shall come
in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many, Saint Mat. 24.5. so
that you see truth is wounded by her own bow: and as Jacob got the blessing in
the hairy garment of Esau his elder brother, thereby deceiving his Father; so
the wicked and erroneous men that are in the world, seek to deceive the Church
and servants of God, in the apparel of our elder brother Christ Jesus; so the
Devil, that father of lies, could come and tempt our Savior with the words of
holy Scripture, for when Christ alleged Scripture against him, he did the same
to our blessed Redeemer; St. Mat. 4.6. no cunninger way for Apostates to bring
in others under the same condemation with themselves, then by pretending truth
and piety to be the ground of theit actions. The Prince of darkness will not
think scorn to borrow the shape of an Angel of light, if he thinks it may
prove to his advantage; and is it not a countenancing of blasphemy for any
nation or people to give dispensation for all manner of heretical opinions, who
are ready upon all occasions to betray the truth, and the professors thereof
into a state of sin and misery? Examine but Acts 18.19. and 1 Kin. 22.20.
therefore seeing the factors of Satan are ready to betray many souls to
perdition, by corrupting Gods holy word, is it not time for us to snatch the
sword out of their hands, and beat them with the strength and edge of those
spiritual weapons, which they endeavor to wound our heads withal: for the
truth is not like wax, which is made to receive the image of every phanatical
brain; no, where doubts arise in the holy Scripture, they must be answered by
its own spirit, and not another. But as we must defend truth with our tongues,
so

Secondly, practically, by our words and works; when the doctrine of
Christianity is that way of truth which is evil spoken of, and when men in
profession are Christians, but in conversation are Pagans, and Papists, etc.
To. 2.24. and St. Iam. 2.7. and when that truth is disgraced by the bad lives
of men, their sins become ours if we rebuke them not; therefore Saint Paul
says, have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather
reprove them* Ephesians. 5.11. That tongue which rebukes not his brother when he
sees him go astray, draws all the guilt of the action upon himself, and so we
make our selves sharers with him in misery; for it is most certain, he gives
consent that holds his peace, and no way contradicts the action, Number. 30.4. the
father by his silence at the daughters vow is there made co-partner with her;
and not only the father, but the husband also, or any other person by their
silence are said to give consent to the action, as appears at large in that
chapter. Indeed there are two ways to keep a man from evil: The one by
reproof. The other by not consenting to the action when committed.


For the truth is, any Christians connivance, or evil example, (but Masters and
Rulers especially) do harden the sinners heart, and make him think well or ill
of himself, according as they approve or condemn the actions they see committed
by him; the truth is, the Ministers silence at the sins which he sees
committed, often encourages his people to go to hell; therefore it is St.
Paul's complaint, The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you,
Romans 2.24. and God himself has commanded expressly, Thou shall not hate thy
brother in thy heart, Levit. 19.17. not to rebuke thy brother when he does
amiss, is as much as to hate thy brother; therefore it is said, cry aloud and
spare not, tell Judah of her sins, and Israel of their transgressions; if we
please men, we cannot speak the truth, and we must speak the truth, what man
soever we displease. Indeed there are three things especially, which breed
enmity in men against us for speaking the truth unto them: 1. Displeasure. 2.
Disprofit. 3. Discredit.


1. Displeasure; for hearing of the truth only spoken many times galls some:
for let but truth be rightly spoken, or seem in the application but to touch
their iniquities, and they will presently, like the frantic patient, fly in
the Surgeons face when he searches deep, though it be for their safety; so
sometimes the least touch of truth will make men fret and fume, and vent their
malice in furious words against them who do but discharge their duty, by a
faithful reproof of their sinful actions.

2. If it be against their profit, or against their trade, when application of
truth is so made, they cannot endure such doctrine, but presently the Minister
must suffer an ejection at least for his faithfulness, and this must be done
too, with the greatest pretense of Piety; for they think it no sacrilege to
take the houses of God, and make them dens of Thieves; so that you may see, and
cannot but find, that many times the witnessing of the truth against that
where the gain of wicked men lies, breeds in them enmity, both against the
truth, and the revealers thereof.

3. Discredit; rebuke the persons that commit such deeds as are offensive to
Almighty God, and presently they conclude their reputation is vanished; for
they think truth no sooner beholds, then accuses their actions; and, which they
account worst of all, it condemns them, and their courses; for truth has the
nature of light, it will discover all the darkness of our works, and therefore
do men hate the light of truth, because their deeds are evil; for truth, in
the whole tenor of it, cannot be otherwise then a revealer of evil; for though
no man can hate the truth, as pleading for it self in the general; yet men do
envy it, when particularly it shines upon them, and lets them see themselves;
and because men would have a full swindge in their courses, therefore do they
take offense at the truths of God, when manifest to their faces: but however it
should not discourage any, whether Minister, or other, from the discharge of
their duty, (if we do it in the discharge of a good conscience) because the
world frowns upon us for so doing; knowing this for a truth, that while we
bear the ill will of men in witnessing for the truth, yet we gain the good will
of God. What though flesh and blood shall say, favor thy self, and comply with
wicked men for thy safety? and bid thee change thy voice, as often as the men
of the world their principles, and advise thee that this, or that thing is
true, because the great ones will have it so? do not thou incline to any such
persuasions, for Solomon says, Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, then
a stalled Ox, and hatred therewith, Prove. 15.17. Which shows that the
enjoyment of Gods love, in the depth of misery, is more to be priced, then the
greatest plenty, and the anger of God therewith. But flesh and blood will
persuade to the contrary, as if truth had place, but not at all times: but our
Savior shows it is far otherwise; for now being before Pilate, he carries
the same face he had when he was in the Temple: Innocence is as meekly bold,
and faithfully confident, when pleading at the bar, as preaching in the
Pulpit; nor is it less ashamed of truth, because pleading before men, whose
intentions are to condemn, not to applaud it for the same; our nakedness and
inability to secure us from their malice and cruelty, should not* at all
frighten us from our duty, in witnessing to the truth, but rather encourage our
whole man to be employed in so acceptable a service; for we should bear
witness to the truth in our understanding, opinion, practice, and in our good
works; for the testimony of the tongue, without the hand, is not sufficient,
profession of good works is the whole work of a Christian; and walking
contrary to the truth, is a denial, or casting a soul aspersion on the truth:
we should bear witness to the truth both in words and works; and it is
certainly a great offense to be guilty of either, but most offense when found
tardy in both; yet of the two, it is the far greater sin to deny God in
works, then in words; and that will appear, if you consider these following
reasons.

1. From the Object, the greater it is that we sin against, the greater is
the sin we commit; now to deny the truth, is to sin against God himself,
because he is the Author of truth; therefore to work wickedness against God,
must needs be most criminal, the sins against the first Table being those
which especially concern him; for which cause Divines conclude him the greater
sinner that is found guilty of the first, then he that offends against the
second Table only; because that by the one, he is but guilty of impiety
against men, but in the other of wickedness against God; the one being of
defect, the other of excess: so that the Object, which is offended in the
first Table, being the greater, must needs make the sin to be the more
grievous.

2. From the greater evidence; he that denies the truth with his lips, as Saint
Peter did, he evidently injures God and Christ; but he that by a wicked life
denies the truth, and the God of truth, not only injures their natures
himself, but incourageth others also to do the same, by giving them an example
of wickedness: the difference, as to men, is only this; the one seems openly
to deny him in words, the other with his works; the one speaks, and the other
does, evil against him.

3. The sin is greater in regard of punishment inflicted; for a far greater
punishment is imposed upon the swearer and blasphemer, under the Law, then upon
him that offended man only; the denial of God in the old Law, was to suffer
no other punishment then stoning to death; and the civil Law amongst us does
command, that offenders in this kind should have their tongues cut out, or
bored through; which, it seems, was thought too gentle a punishment among the
people of the Jews: And if evil tongues deserve this heavy doom, what think
you, is the just desert of wicked hands, and evil works? so that still it
remains a truth, that he that denies God and his truth by a wicked life, is a
far greater sinner then he that does it only with his lips: which will more
fully appear, if you consider but these four grounds of sin in their several
causes and degrees: 1. Consider the moving cause. 2. The voluntarinesse. 3. The
perfection. 4. The full signification of sin.


1. From the moving cause of sin; the more forcible it is, the more grievous
it will be to us after the commission thereof; for the seeming pleasures which
move men to wicked lives, end in no other then real disquiet; and let the
moving cause of open denying the truth be what it will, yet this is certain,
the less forcible it is from any extrinsecal cause, the more guilt we contract
by doing of it: as for example, the fear of death may sometimes make a man to
deny the truth with his lips, which in many respects will receive a more
favorable construction, then if with violence we should turn from professors
in show, to real persecutors of the truth.

2. From the voluntariness thereof; where there is no consent of the Will the
sin is little, but where there is full consent of the will, there is very much
of sin, and sin is therefore sin, because voluntary; therefore he who denies
the Truth only with his lips for fear of death, does sin less than he who with
a wicked life sins with a full liberty of the will, by a free consent, and
unconstrained thereunto by either tyranny or self-interest.

3. From the perfection of all the parts of a man, united in full strength to
resist and persecute the Truth; which very much differs from compulsion,
because in the one there is a full consent of perfect parts, and in the other
there is but a lame consent yielded by constraint; for he that by a Tyrant is
compelled with force of punishment to deny the Truth, does in a sort deny and
not deny, he denies it outwardly with his lips, but his heart greives inwardly
for the same, because his conscience bears witness to the Truth; but he that
with a wicked life is given wholly to sin, that he has all his delights in it,
that man has made himself perfect in evil.

4. From the more full signification, we do signify more of wickedness to be
in us by our works than by our words; he sits at a far greater denial of
truth, that denies it by a wicked life, than he that denies it only with his
lips for fear of death; though both these are great aggravations, since in our
lives, words, and works we are to bear witness to the Truth; for to this end
were we born, and for this cause came we into the world, etc.

Application.
Our Savior bids, Let your light so shine before men, etc. Saint Matthew 5.6.
then we may hence learn, that those that should light others to Heaven by their
Doctrine, must not darken their way by the evil example of an unholy life; and
not only must Ministers, but people also, let the light of holiness appear
visible in their lives: When God places a man (a private Christian) in the
lower Orb, he puts him there to shine like a star, bright and clear in his
own sphere; Christians should shine and bear witness in their lives, and be
cautious how they walk, because every sin puts a dimness upon the soul, and
darkness internal can expect no other but to go to darkness eternal; and
therefore St. Peter says, that our good works should make those that look on
us as evil doers glorify God in the day of visitation, 1 Saint Peter 2.12.
There be some that must believe in Christ throughout the world, and witness his
Truth to unbelievers by a holy life; and why may it not belong to us? but if on
the contrary we be found to live as they live, how shall they be brought to
believe as we believe? It was the saying of a Heathen, If I did see the
Christians lives better, I should think their faith better than mine. Religion
and the Doctrines of Faith are often disgraced by wicked Professors, 1 Timothy
1.6, 7. the rebellion of a Christian that is a Servant, though to an Heathen
Master, brings a scandal both upon God and on holy Religion: Sure I am, God and
Religion is very much disgraced, and the Gospel dishonored, and the Church of
Christ abused, by the wicked lives of those that are called the Sons of the
Church.

Oh therefore, that by holy lives, judicious reading, faithful hearing and
constant studying and meditating in the ways of God, and the Truths of God, we
would make our selves able and ready to give an account of the hope that is in
us; that so both in our knowledge and practice, we bearing witness to the Truth
here on earth, we may have the truth in our consciences, to bear witness to our
selves, that we are the Sons of God; that so he that ascended into Heaven to
take possession of his own Glory, may in time bring us thither, who himself
affirmed, and after whose example we should walk, that as he was born, and came
into the world to bear witness to the truth, so we should also account of our
selves, that we were born, and that we came into the world, that we might bear
witness to the truth: that we came into the world, this Christian world, to
witness to the truth as common Christians; that we came into the world, the
Church of God, as members thereof, to justify that faith by a holy life, unto
which our parents had baptized us; still endeavoring to carry the same mind in
us that was in Christ Jesus, that as he did, so we came into the world to bear
witness to the truth; for he justified himself before the judgment seat of
Pilate, saying in the words of my Text, To this end was I born, and for this
cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness to the truth.

The end of the Sermons.
Dr. Hewit's public Prayer after Sermon.
O HOLY, HOLY, HOLY Lord God of heaven and earth, heaven and earth are full of
the majesty of thy glory; Glory, be to thee O Lord, glory be to thee, glory be
to thee, glory be to thee for all those infinite favors, which thou of thine
infinite goodness have voucsafed to us, who are less then the least of all
thy mercies, for the fountain of all mercies Jesus Christ, in whom thou have
loved us with an everlasting love, before ever we or the world were made; that
thou have created us after thine own Image, and redeemed us by the blood of
Jesus Christ, when we were utterly lost; that thou have called us, with an holy
calling, and in some measure sanctified us by the graces of thy holy Spirit;
that thou have spared us thus long, and given us so long, and so large a time
of repentance, when as thou might have cut us off in the midst of our
transgressions, whilst we were rebelling against thee. Blessed be thy name, O
Lord, for all thy mercies vouchsafed unto us: thy mercies to allure us, thy
promises to woo us, thy patience, and long-suffering toward us, to lead us to
repentance, thy corrections to reclaim us, thy judgments to affright and
better us; blessed by thy name for all opportunities of well-doing, for all
hindrances of evill-doing, for all the good purposes and resolutions thou have
put into our hands, to draw our souls from the dregs of sin and ignorance, into
the glory of thy Saints: for any assistance that thou have given to any of us
in any holy performance; for the Communion of thy Saints, the aid of their
counsels, the benefit of their Prayers, the comfort of their conversations, the
protection of thy Holy Angels; for all corporal, spiritual, temporal, and
eternal mercies; mercies concerning this life, and mercies concerning the life
to come. Blessed be thy name for thy mercies to us all the days of our lives,
thy mercies unto us this present day, for the light thereof; the greater light,
the light of thy truth, to shine into our souls, to guide our feet into the
way of all truth: For that portion of Scripture, wherein thou have been pleased
to reveal thy self unto us at this time; Lord, though it be sown in much
weakness, do thou raise it up in great power, let it not be as water spilt
upon the ground, but let it be as seed sown in good ground, that it may take
deep root downward in our hearts by faith, and bring forth much fruit upwards
in our lives and conversations, to the glory of thy holy name, to the
edification of thy Church and people, and to the salvation of our souls, in the
day of Jesus Christ, to whom with thy self and holy Spirit, we desire to
ascribe, as is most due, all glory, honor, power, praise, might, majesty, and
dominion, now, henceforth, and for evermore, Amen.

These Books following are to be sold by Henry Eversden, at the Greyhound in
Paul's Churchyard.
THe Universal body of Physic, In five Books; Comprehending the several
treatises of the Nature of Diseases, and their causes, of Symptoms, of the
preservation of Health, and of Cures. Written in Latin by that famous and
learned Doctor Laz. Riverius, Counselor and Physician to the present King of
France, and Professor in the University of Montpelier. Exactly translated into
English by William Carr Practitioner in Physic.

An Exposition, with Practical Observations on the nine first Chapters of the
Proverbs, by Francis Tailor, Minister of Canterbury: in quarto.

An Exposition, with Practical Observations on the whole Book of Canticles, in
quarto, by John Robotham, Minister of the Gospel.

An Idea, or body of Church Discipline in the Theorick and Practick, by Mr.
Rogers, in quarto.

Imputatio Fidei, Or a Treatise of Justification; wherein the imputation of
Faith for righteousness (mentioned in Romans 4.5, 6.) is explained, by Mr. John
Goodwin, Minister of the Gospel; in quarto.

Triumviri, or the Genius, Spirit, and Deportment of the three men, Mr. Richard
Resbury, Mr. John Pawson, and Mr. George Kendall, in their late writings
against the Free Grace of God in the Redemption of the World, and vouchsafement
of means of salvation unto men; briefly described in their native and true
colors, borrowed of themselves in their writings (respectivly.) Together with
some brief touches (in the Preface) upon Dr. John Owen, Mr. Thomas Lamb (of the
Spittle) Mr. Ieanes, Mr. Obadiah How, and Mr. Marchamond Needham, in relation
to their late writings against the Author: in quarto, by Mr. John Goodwin.

The Right of Dominions, or the Prerogative of Kings, proved from Scripture, by
Dr. Welden.

Lucas Ridivivus, or the Gospel-Physician, prescribing (by way of meditation)
Divine Physic to prevent diseases not yet entered upon the soul, by John
Anthony, Dr. in Physic: in quarto.

The Tryers and Ejectors tried and cast by the Laws of God and men, by John
Goodwin.

Mercy in her Exaltation, a Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mr. Thomas
Tailor, by Mr. John Goodwin: in quarto.

Anabaptists Meribah, or Waters of Strife; being an Answer to Mr. Lamb
Merchant, by Mr. Price one of Mr. John Goodwins Congregation.

The natural man's case stated, or an exact map of the little world, Man, in
seventeen Sermons, by Mr. Christopher Love; to which is added a Sermon preached
at his Funeral, by Mr. Thomas Manton of Newington: in octavo.

A Comment on Ruth; together with two Sermons, one teaching how to live well;
the other minding all how to die well; by Thomas Fuller, Author of the Holy
State.

Gospel public worship, or the Translation, Metaphrase, Analysis, and
Exposition of Romans 12. from verse. 1. to 8. describing the complete pattern of
Gospel Worship.

Also an Exposition of the 18. Chapter of Matthew; to which is added a
discovery of Adams threefold estate in Paradise, viz. Moral, Legal, and
Evangelical, by Thomas Brewer: in octavo.

Gods glory in man's happiness, or the freeness of Gods grace electing us, by
Francis Tailor of Canterbury, in octavo.

The Lords Prayer unclapsed, being a vindication of it against all Schismatics
and Heretics, called Enthuasiasts and Fratricilli, by Harwood, B. D.

The Grand Inquiry who is the righteous Man, William Moor Minister in Whaley in
Lancashire.

The just man's defense, being the declaration of the judgment of James
Arminius, concerning Election and Reprobation.

Pearls of Eloquence, or the school of Complements, wherein Ladies, and
Gentlewomen may accommodate their Court by practice, by William Elder Gent. in
12.

Master Theophilus Buckworth, the true Author of the most excellent and
approved Lozenges (which have wrought great and admirable effects, to the good
and welfare of this Nation, until of late they have been counterfeited, which
has been a great disparagement to this Gentleman, and abuse to the people of
this Island; for prevention thereof (for the future) does expose them to sale
himself, and they are only to be had at Tho. Rookes, Stationer, at the sign
of the Lamb, at the east end of St. Paul's, near the School: And every paper is
sealed with his own Coat of Arms.

Their Properties are;

A perfect cure of all Colds in general, Consumptions, Coughs, Catarrhes,
Asthmaes, all infirmities of the Lungs: It is a sovereign Antidote against the
Plague, and other infectious and contagious Diseases. Also he has made these
more excellent than heretofore, by adding most sovereign Spirits for the cure
of those malevolent and destructive diseases, which have been of late to this
City, and the whole Land.

These following sold by T. Rookes.

Christian Prayers, and holy Meditations, as well for private as public
exercise,

True Catholic, collected out of the Oracles and Psalteries of the holy Ghost,
for Instruction, Devotion,

by Tho. Parker, his Majesty's servant.

Godly Prayers and Meditations, by John Field, D. D.

Concordance of years, by Mr. Hopton.

An admonition to all such as shall intend hereafter to enter into the state of
Marriage godlily, and agreeable to Laws, by A. B. Cant.


