Dr. HEWIT'S LETTER TO Dr WILD on Monday, June 7. 1658. being the day before
he suffered Death, and read by Dr. Wild at his FUNERAL.
Dearest Brother,
I Have no cause to think that you have not at any time taken me along with you
in the daily walk upon your knees to Heaven, but I beseech you and all my
Brethren to be (now especially) very mindful to call upon God for me. The more
company I go withal, the more welcome I shall be made. I should be loath either
to leave out of my Creed, or to be left out of the benefit of the Communion of
Saints Two are better then one. Two or three have the advantage of a Promise;
but to go with a multitude to the House of God, where all comers are welcome,
is to be assured beforehand of good entertainment. Admission will hardly be
denied to any, for whom there is great importunity of many: If the Gate be
shut, much knocking will open it; or if that would not do it, united Forces
would offer an Holy violence. Many will prevail, where one alone can do but
little good Woe unto him that is alone.

Therefore dear Brother, since it is the infirmity of our nature, that we live
not without the occasions of giving and taking of offense. And it is the
corruption of our nature that the offenses we give, we write in the dust; Those
we take, we engrave in Marble. If you know, or shall hear of any one either of
my Brethren, or other persons whom by any act of scandal I have tempted, or
provoked, or lessened or disturbed, to exclude me the benefits of their
charitable prayers or wishes I beseech you beg of them from me, for me, their
pardon. And let not any private wildfire of passion put out the holy flames of
a diffusive charity: And as for my self, I do here protest before God that I
do heartily desire to forget the injuries of whosoever has trespassed against
me, either by word or deed. And if God should have been pleased to have granted
a longer life, I would not refuse, (yea I am steadfastly resolved to solicit
terms of Reconciliation with them that have done me the wrong) And if my own
heart do not deceive me, I would give my life to save the soul of any of my
Christian Brethren, and would be content to want some degrees of glory in
Heaven, so that my very greatest Enemies might be so happy as to have some. The
God of Mercy shed forth his Bowels for them that shed my blood, and the blood
of Christ save, and the Spirit of Christ sanctify, and support him who desires
to live no longer then to honor the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and both
living and dying craves yours, and the prayers of the whole Church for her
unworthy Child, and

Tower, June 7. 1658. Morning 7 a Clock. Dearest Brother Your most affectionate
Friend, Brother and Servant in Christ Jesus, John Hewit.


