THE ANSWER OF Sir Edward Herbert, Knight, His Majesty's Attorney General, TO
THE IMPEACHMENT Exhibited against him By the Honorable House of Commons In
this present Parliament assembled.

John Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

Printed at London for George Tomlinson, August 24. 1642.

The answer of Sr Edward Harbert Knight, his Maiesti^s Attorney General, to
the impeachment exhibited against him by the honorable House of Commons in
this present Parliament.
THe said defendant saving to himself now and at all times hereafter, all just
exception to the said impeachment, as the same is charged, for answer, says
and acknowledges, that he is, and the third day of January last past was his
Majesty's Attorney General sworn: but whereas he is charged with the
malicious, false and scandalous, advising and contriving the Articles in the
said impeachment mentioned, he says, that he was and is so far from any
malice, falsehood or scandal, in the advising and contriving of the same, or
any of them, that he did not at all advise or contrive the said Articles, or
any of them, ever knew or heard of them or any of them, until he received
them from his Majesty's hands the said third day of January last past, ready
engrossed in paper, and as so that part of the said impeachment which charge
this defendant with the exhibiting of the said Articles to this Honorable
House, he says, that upon the said third day of January he repaired to his
Majesty by his command, who then delivered unto this defendant a paper
containing the Articles in the said impeachment mentioned, and did command him
in his Majesty's name, to acquaint this Honorable House, that diverse great and
treasonable designs and practices against his Majesty and the State, and come
to his Majesty's knowledge, for which his Majesty commanded this defendant in
his Majesty's name, to accuse six Members in the said paper mentioned, of high
Treason, and other high misdemeanors, by delivering that paper to your
Lordships, and to desire to have it read: and further to desire in his
Majesty's name that a select Committee of Lords might be appointed to take the
examinations of such witnesses as his Majesty should produce, as formerly had
been done in cases of like nature, according to the justice of this House, and
that Committee to be under a command of secrecy, as formerly: and further in
his Majesty's name to ask liberty to add and alter, if there should be cause,
according to justice: and likewise that your Lordships would take care of the
securing of the said persons, as in justice there should be cause, and
according to his Majesty's said command, this defendant did come to this
Honorable House the said third day of January, and then after the Right
Honorable Edward Lord Littleton, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England had
declared to this Honorable House, that he was commanded by his Majesty to let
your Lordships know, that his Majesty had given this defendant command to
acquaint your Lordships with some things from his Majesty. This defendant
thereupon the said third day of January, in this Honorable House, before your
Lordships then and there sitting in Parliament, in obedience to his Majesty's
said commands as a message from him did declare the foresaid commands of his
Majesty, by acquainting your Lordships that the King had commanded him to tell
your Lordships, that diverse great and treasonable designs and practices
against him and the State, had come to his Majesty's knowledge, for which the
King had given his command to accuse six persons of high Treason, and other
high misdemeanors, by delivering these Articles: And that he was commanded to
desire your Lordships to have them read, which by your Lordships command were
accordingly read by the Clarke, and then further declared, that he was also
commanded by his Majesty to desire on his Majesty's behalf, that a select
Committee might be appointed to take the examination of such witnesses as the
King would produce, as formerly had been in cases of like nature, according to
the justice of this House: and this Committee to be under a command of
secrecy, as formerly: and that he was commanded to ask liberty to add
according to justice: and that he was commanded to desire, that your Lordships
would take care for the securing of those persons, as in justice there shall
be cause, and alter as there shall be cause: And says he did not conceive
there could be any offense in what was so done by him in this Honorable
House, in obedience to those his Majesty's commands, being wholly thereby left
to your Lordships wisdoms and judgments, being his Majesty's great Council,
and greatest Court for advice and justice. And as touching the false,
scandalous, and malicious advising, contriving, or publishing the said
Articles, or any other Articles against the said persons in the said paper
mentioned, or any of them, or any breach of this defendants oath of Attorney
General, and to the false, unlawful and malicious exhibiting the said
Articles into this Honorable House, or causing any entry thereof to be made,
and the intent and endeavor, falsely, unlawfully and maliciously to deprive
this Honorable House, or the Honorable House of Commons, or any of the
Members of the said Houses, or to take away any of their lives, estates, or
good names, and every offense and misdemeanour charged by the said impeachment
upon this defendant, he says he is not guilty of them, or any of them, in such
manner and form as by the said impeachment is charged. All which matters and
things this defendant is and will be ready to aver and prove in such sort as
to this Honorable House of Parliament shall seem meet.

Tho: Gardener. John Fountain. Arthur Trevor.

Copia vera.

John Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.



FINIS.

