A Perfect NARATIVE OF A SEA FIGHT NEAR The Coast of PORTUGAL; BETWEEN The
ENGLISH and the FRENCH. WITH, The manner of their engagement, the further
Proceedings of the French Fleet, and the staying of some Merchants ships at
Roan, in Normandy.

London, Printed for R. W. and are to be sold at the Royall-Exchange. 1650.

An Exact Relation of a Sea Fight near the Coast of PORTUGAL, between the
FRENCH and ENGLISH.
SIR,
SInce the time of our weighing Anchor at Gravesend, and passing the Channel of
the British Seas, great has been the perilous distempers which accompanied
us; for we had not been many days at Sea (being bound for Scanderoon, a place
of great traffic in Turkey) but immediately the raging billows of the
merciless Sea, began to swell against us; insomuch, that by the extremity of
weather, and vehement storms arising thereupon, the Ships that accompanied us
in our Voyage (being 5) were soon dispersed, and separated; and a tempest
arising, every man bequeathed his life and fortune to the mercy of the
all-devouring Ocean; but divine providence had so decreed, that in our greatest
extremity appeared Gods omnipotent and tender mercy, and when we thought the
Seas to be our grave, they gaping to swallow and entomb our mortal carcasses,
then did the omnipotent Jehovah cause the wind to cease, and the waters to
become calm, whereby our ship might ride free from tossing and tumbling: In
thankful acknowledgment thereof, for the great mercy and freedom which we then
received, our Captain and Master of the ship, ordered some time to be set a
part, for an humble thanksgiving to be given to the Almighty, for those his
great mercies, and delivering us his poor contemptible creatures, from the
merciless jaws of death; which with great alacrity was accordingly performed,
with bended knees, watery eyes, and hearts lift up to heaven, for our miraculous
deliverance from (present) perishing, and destruction. We had not sailed many
Leagues, 'ere we perceived our ship to be driven near the Coast of Portugal,
and that we had utterly lost the rest of our Fleet: Notwithstanding we steered
on our intended course, in which we had not continued many hours, but the Lord
having delivered us out of the precedent danger, another presented it self
before us; for we espied certain ships make after us, which we soon perceived
to be French men of War, who having the benefit of the wind (and being very
swift of sail) soon hailed us; whereupon, we committed our selves to the same
providence who had formerly delivered us, and resolved (if they proved enemies)
to sacrifice our lives and fortunes each with other: But they being approached
(espying us to be Merchantmen) their Admiral immediately gave us a broad side,
whereupon (they forcing us) we answered with a Volley suitable to that
received; which caused the rest to steer up, and encompassed us round, giving
us several broad sides; but we being sensible of their bloudthirsty barbarism
to the English, unanimously resolved to fight it out, and answered them again
with round and key-shot, which did great execution on those that manned their
Decks; But the French being too numerous, we were over-powred by them, and they
boorded us on both sides, and slew many of our men, the residue desired
quarter, which was granted; and having ransacked our Ship and Cabines, a convoy
was ordered for our transportation to Dunkirk; where we now remain prisoners,
until a ransom can be procured from some certain Merchants: for the obtaining
whereof, liberty is granted to represent our state and condition to those who
employed us from England; amongst which papers, I used means that this
Narrative might be inserted: And truly, if timely opportunity be not suddenly
embraced, for the clearing of the narrow Seas, and British Coasts, of the
French Pirates, and Danish robbers, I much fear, that it will be the case of
many other of our Countrymen; for under the pretense of having Commission from
the King of Scots, they commit great spoil, by annoying and intercepting the
English shipping; and if by chance they light on any small ships or vessels,
not able or unlikely to make opposition, they immediately board them,
exercising unheard of cruelty, tying their prisoners back to back, and
mercilesly casting them into the Sea; which had been our cases (without doubt)
but that the Lord put it in the heart of their Commander in chief, to lay a
strict command upon the rest, that those which desired quarter, and submitted
to mercy, should not receive any further prejudice. Sir, It is reported here,
that certain ships which are now ready to put forth to Sea, are to go for the
relief of Prince Rupert, whose condition many [in this Town] seem to bewail,
but very few will afford to redress; Here is much talk of the Parliaments
Summer-Fleet, which does much startle the Governor, and retards Rupert's
supply: Also, some Merchants (who had formerly promised the Governor, to be
aiding and assisting in setting forth certain ships) hearing of the
preparations that are made for the English Fleet, are resolved not to enter
into any further engagement against England, but to use all the interest they
have, to obtain leave to have free commerce and trade with the English. We have
also intelligence here, that Captain Newbery, with one of the Parliaments men
of War, has lately lighted on two Frenchmen, and after a sharp conflict took
them; By which means we hope for our enlargement by way of exchange, and I
entreat you, to be a means to hasten it. The Governor of Roan in Normandy (we
hear) has caused some English ships to be staid, that were laden with Paper
and other Commodities, which causes some jealousies (at present) that those
Manufactures will be denied transportation into England. There are some old
grudges newly revived by the French, which threaten ruin to the peace and
tranquillity of England; But it is hoped, all their devices will be blasted in
the bud, and England (which now seems despicable in the eyes of many) will still
be preserved from the fury of her enemies: Which is the continual prayer of
him, who remains

Your Christian friend and fellow-soldier, C. H.
From our Captivity in Dunkirk, this 22. instant, 1650.
FINIS.

