A SERMON Preached before the KINGS MAJESTY At Whitehall on Friday the 22 of
March Anno 1660

By JOHN HACKET D.D.

Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty.

Published by his MAJESTY'S appointment.

E R



LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson, for John Place at Furnivalls-Inn-Gate In
Holborn. 1660.

A SERMON Preached before the KINGS MAJESTY At White Hall on Friday the 22 of
March Anno 1660.
Acts 15. v. 39. And the contention was so sharp between them, that they
departed asunder one from another.
THe Contents of this Chapter are famous for two things, that had most contrary
events. The one, how a great variance was concluded with a happy concord: The
other, how a small variance did proceed to an unhappy discord.

The great variance was, whether such as were converted to believe in Christ,
must continue in the observation of the Law of Moses. For some in the first
Verse of the Chapter were so rigid, that they held, except ye be circumcised
after the manner of Moses, ye can not be saved, This point was decided. And
they that were Jewish were overborn, by a moderate determination agreed upon by
all the Apostles, and Elders that met at Jerusalem. Which is also remarkable,
the men that were chiefly picked out to be sent to Antioch to satisfy the
opposites were Paul and Barnabas. And the flame was quenched by the authority of
the Apostles, and their labor.

But when matter of Doctrine, and deep dispute could not divide the Church,
Satan laid a smaller stumbling block in their way: and the two most holy
Servants of God, the chief Vmpires, and the Ambassadors for peace, Paul and
Barnabas, dashed their foot against it, And they that plucked a beam out of their
Brothers eye, were troubled with a mote in their own. it was not about a point
of doctrine, but upon a circumstance of a person, no way considerable to the
main benefit of the Gospel, that begat a quarrel, and a disjunction between them.

John, whose surname was Mark (whether Mark, the Evangelist, or some other
disciple I leave it as uncertain) but, he had dedicated himself to the
ministry, and to go step by step with S. Paul as his fellow labourer. Yet he
lest Paul at Pamphylia to return to Jerusalem, his own home, Act 13. 13
persuaded either by weakeness, and fear of persecution, or some other
domestical relation. After this backsliding, the young Novice awakt, and was
willing to mend his error. So that when Paul and Barnabas resolved to go a
circuit, to examine the Churches which they had planted, whether they continued
sound in the Faith, Barnabas presents Mark his sisters son, to be their fellow
undertaker in that holy employment Paul refused him, because he had put his
hand to the plough, and looked back. ^ach stood very stiff to his own purpose
and proposition. Rather than Barnabas would suffer Mark to be discountenanced,
he would forsake Paul Rather than Paul would consent to Mark's readmission, he
would forsake Barnabas, And the contention was so sharp between them, that they
departed asunder the one from the other.

You have heard the two different cases. In a matter of great dispute the
Church maintein'd it is unity, and showed that it was built upon a rock. But in
a petty dissension (see how all men are frail, and unity will never be kept
entirely) the greatest pillars of it were shaken, and showed how peace was
built upon the sands. Here Is the drift of the Text: not to excuse discord,
because it was incident to two such eminent Apostles; but to teach us, that
these burning lights did a little lose their luster, because their division
increased to that stifness, that they were separated the one from the other.

Upon the handling of the Text in several points, First, we must enter in at a
breach, Here was a contention. Secondly, this struggling was not between mean
and ordinary Persons, but between the Champions of the Holy Cause, between Paul
and Barnabas. Thirdly, it was not carried with meekness, and cool temper, but
it swelled high, it was (...), a sharp, a fretful contention. Fourthly, they
fell not out for any thing that touched the life of truth, or the honor of
Christ; the fortunes of Greece, as the Proverb is, did not ly upon it: it was
only about the accommodation of a person, whether Mark were sit for the present
work: that was all the matter, and no more. Fifthly, as small a matter as it
was, it waxt to a separation, and to disjoyn these two in body, as well as in
mind, They departed as under the one from the other.

It is thus being re-capitulated. Contention is the canker of Evangelical
fruit, which is peace on earth, good will toward men. Yet the mischief is the
less, when mean ones contend: but woe to the Church because of scandal, when
Paul and Barnabas are the Actors in it. Yet again, if those that were qualified
with the greatest graces, the beacons upon an hill, did vary in a calm, and a
mitigated manner, it were not so strange, but it might be expected. This was
not so well: it was a variance joined with passion, and acerbity; a sore that
can not be touched without much compassion For all this, if the provocation had
been such, wherein piety could not yield, it had been constancy, and not
contention to be inflexible: But this was a case of no such weight, wherein
charity might not have satisfied conscience, and conscience have submitted to
charity. Lastly, after so many discords, if the cloze of the Music had been
sweet, it had not wanted harmony: but this determined in a final acrimony; from
a wrinkle in the garment it came to a rent; it was a contention that grew to a
separation; and that is the partition wall that re-trencheth unity.

Now I resume all this again. And that which we meet first of all at the door
of the Text is contention. None of the least: sins, none of the least
punishments. For if Babel it self could not be built up among discord of
tongues; how much more can Sion never be well built up with discord of hearts?
If the net be broken, the Fishers of Men may catch a draught, but they can keep
nothing. Cut a seed of wheat in twain, and the pieces lose the nature of
fructification. If words be not well put together, they will make no sense: and
if men's senses do not well join together in one profession, they will make no
Church. Contention is the Devils wedge to rive asunder the Cross of Christ; it
turns order into a heap, amity into jangling, unity into Schism, and truth into
Heresy.

There is one Themistius in Eusebius that made an Oration before Valens the
Emperor, about the time that there were many distractions on foot in the cause
of Religion, and he flattered the sin with this encouragement; Deum sectarum
varietate latius innotescere, That the variety of Sects would dispread the
knowledge of God the wider over all the Earth. No doubt they will make a loud
noise, but a bad report. And where many Sects spring up, it calls Truth the
more into question, and the fewer proselytes will be gained. The waters that
slowed out of the Rock in the Wilderness were more than elementary, for they
were spiritual drink, in a figure spiritual, 1 Cor. 3. 4. and yet they were
waters of strise, Exodus 17. 7. Even the spiritual fountain it self was a
troubled water: but that which troubles it is a carnal spirit. For while there
are strises, and divisions among you, are you not carnal, and walk as men? 1
Cor. 3.3. The walk of men is contention: the way of God is peace. We are sure
he is in the still voice: and we are sure that he is not in the whirl-winds of
controversies and uproars.

Two men of the Hebrews strove together, Ex 2. 13 Their own Doctors make it out
from their bold traditions, that they were Dathan and Abiram: An unlucky
couple, whosoever they were. All 7 26.
Moses would have set them at one, but they rejected him. He would have made
them all quiet, before he took upon him to be the Prince of their deliverance:
but since they loved variance better than amity, he departed, and came not to
them again in forty years. The cankardness of two men cost them forty years
bondage more, before he returned again to deliver them out of Egypt. Men that
are addicted to moderation, will shun the company that resounds with brawling
and bitterness. As the passage is well known about Constantine the Great, how
he removed from his Palace in the East, because every corner of the Imperial
City was filled with adverse Disputations about Religion; and after some space
of absence he wrote to his Clergy, Patefacite mihi aditum etc. I would return
unto you: but make the way to receive me smooth and plain by Peace, which you
have made so rugged by your Contentions. Much more you may presume, that God
will depart from that Church, where the flames of notorious discords are broken
out. Therefore as God is the author of peace, so let us be lovers of concord.

Wherefore else has he made us partakers of one Table, but to invite us to the
conjunction of one Heart? so our Apostle, for we being many are one bread, and
one body, 1 Cor. 10. 17. One bread in the thing which we do communicate: One
body among them that do communicate. So our Elders say, it is Signum unitatis,
vinculum caritatis. Yet the unity does not rise from the outward ceremony, that
we all eat of one Sacrament: but that we eat of it with one Faith, are gathered
together in one Charity, and depend upon the grace and reconciliation of one
Lord Jesus Christ, whose earnest prayer was for his Disciples, That they all
may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they all may be one
in us, Jo. 17. 21.

The use of it to the best is this There is nothing that we ask in prayer for
our selves, or Christ for us, but likely there is somewhat requisite on our
part, to do our duty, that we may obtein it. Be it therefore propounded, what
we should do as well as pray, that we may be one, and that no contention fall
among us First bring a supple, a soft, a tractable mind, that has a good
affection to agreement, and I will undertake to furnish you with Rules enough,
that if you differ in no greater things than Paul and Barnabas did (yea what if
they were greater?) you may soon greet one another with the kiss of Peace. But
if we stand at this distance, I have pitched upon my resolution, I must have my
will, and will not yield an inch, such an untractable obstinacy can never
profit by any exhortation. Only by pride comes contention, says Solomon,
Prove. 13. 10. He that is wife in his own opinions, will never want occasions to
begin them, nor arguments to maintain them. And he that thinks the yielding
party loses in his honor, had rather lead and perish, than follow after and
be preserved. As Core had rather die in his own way, than be ruled by Moses and
save his life. But humility is limber, and will easily bend; it is never given
to contradiction; it stands not upon vain points of reputation, to carry the
sway in every opposition. For let the wrangler get the better in obstinacy, the
modest Christian shall overcome in charity. Mortify self-love, and Peace will
please you better than Victory.

Away with strife God himself did abate and condescend from it for says the
Lord, My spirit shall not always strive with man, Genesis 6. 3. And when Christ
was upon the earth in the flesh, he used the same calmness, He shall not
strive, nor cry, neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets, Mat 12.
19. The best that he can say for himself, that continues in contention, is, It
is unreasonable that I should yield, for I am in the right. It were no hurt for
a modest judgment to suspect it self in that confidence of persuasion. But be
it granted that the right is on your side: was not Elisha assured by his
prophetical Spirit, nay by his very eyes, that Elias was ascended up to heaven?
yet when the sons of the Prophets urged him, that they might appoint forty
men, lest peradventure he was cast in a mountain, or in a valley, though Elisha
knew it was labor in vain, yet, says the Scripture, 2 Kin. 2. 17. When they
urged him till he was ashamed, he bade them send. Here was a tractable
disposition, that was ashamed in a right cause to persist in contention

After this which I have required, that men be not rigid, but humble, and
flexible, the rules to be kept for composing smaller debates, and my Text
reaches to no other, are these. First there is no exception to be made against
the sentence of the Law under which we live. It is an indifferent judge,
ordained to try our causes, before we were born. It has no passions, no
kindred, no corruption to transport it. It is the public wisdom not of one
age, but of many. What color can there be for any private man to refuse it?
Unless he would quite take away Justice, which were to pluck the Sun out of the
Firmament, to demolish the pillar that upholds the Kingdom. According to the
sentence of the Law, which they shall teach thee: and according to the
judgment, which they (The Rulers) shall tell thee, thou shall do, Deuteronomy. 17. 11.
etc.

Secondly, as the Kingdom has Statute-La^, so the Church has Canons, which
served our turn, to much benefit, in the best ages, before Imperial Laws came
forth to help us. And if they that flight them had lived, when the distressed
Christians were served with the Emperors writts almost every week, to be haled
to heathenish Rites and Festivals, nay to flat Idolatry, how glad would they
have been to have nothing laid upon them, but Canons for Ceremonies, and forms
of prayer? Now they are wanton. And being no longer scared with the howling of
the Wolf, they are offended at the whistle of the Shephard. And they that could
press upon their Fellowservants -- I know what -- lumps of pitch and hair, able
to choke the Dragon in the Apocryphals to swallow them, a few imposed forms can
not be bolted through the fine fives of their consciences, which for almost
fifteen Centuries were never chaleng'd to be offensive.

Thirdly, when some cases fall out, for which neither Laws nor Canons have
provided, Custom has much force to decide them. For it can not be thought, but
in a long tract of time, some that are sincere and incorrupt would hinder the
progress of a thing, if it were not laudable. Long permission is a tolerable
confirmation. That Custom is an arbiter of peace, I refer to St. Paul, 1 Cor.
11. 16. If any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, nor the
Churches of God. As who should say, you go against Custom, your behavior is of
the new cut, therefore your contention is in vain.

Fourthly, if it fall out that Laws are silent, and Customs are contrary one
to another, then, by the Privilege which we have above beasts, we must resort
to Reason. I will put you an instance. The Churches of Asia observed their
Easter day upon the Jews Passover, accounting their Custom from the time of St.
John. The Western Churches kept their Easter upon the first day of the week,
claiming their Custom from the days of other Apostles. Hear how reason
interposeth in this debate. Either Custom has the tradition of the best
antiquity for it: But the Resurrection of Christ may most fitly be celebrated
upon the first day of the week, the same wherein our Lord rose from the dead,
called the Lords day. Unto this all the Churches gave ear, and so it is
established to this day.

Fifthly, I report me to the Apostles, how they handled a discord in this
Chapter. Some would have all the Ceremonies of Moses kept, which would have
made the Gentiles become Jews, and not Christians. Some would have none of them
be observed, no, not for a time, to satisfy the weakness of the Jew, which
would have provokt the Jew to esteem the Gentile a scandalous Christian. To
prevent all Schism, the Apostles and Elders fall upon that course, which we
call Media consilia, a middle temper. Some ceremonies the Gentile shall conform
unto: that will appease the Jew. Some ceremonies the Jews shall forgo: that
will edify the Gentile.

Lastly, what think you of arbitration? And the fewer arbiters the better. When
many take the thing in hand, commonly it is so long a doing that it is never
done. Make the appeal then to few. Nay why not to one person? I am so directed
by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.5. Is there not a wise man among you, not one, that
shall be able to judge between his brethren? Not that one, or many should have
dominion over your consciences, but to make him, or them, the settlers of
outward peace. This is it, as every Scholar knows, which S. Hierom delivers to
prevent troubles in a Church, Nisi exors quaedam dignitas, etc. Unless you give
some prerogative of power to one Bishop in a Diocese, to examine external order,
and to maintain sound doctrine, you will have so many fashions as there are
men, and so many Faiths as there are Parishes.

Though there are so many remedies to stop contention, Law, Canons, Custom,
Reason, Middle temper, Arbitration, yet my Text tells you they do not always
prevail: for the most considerable members of Christ's body were at odds, Paul
and Barnabas, which is the next point. Had they been enmities with Insidels,
and Pagans, with those that are without, they had been natural: for what
agreement has light with darkness? But this was a jarr at home, among
themselves, a Civil war; I tremble to speak the word though in a bare
metaphor. This is not an opposition between Ismael and Isaac of two venters,
but between Jacob and Esau in one womb: nay between the Pilot and the master in
one ship. God help us, if the right hand sight against the left, when both are
made to defend the body. When the Rams of the flock contend, the poor Sheep
that look on must stand amazed. But such infelicities have been so frequent, in
all ages, that the Devil has cast a bone between the Champions of our cause,
that such as take scandal at it seem to be ignorant, that the Lord has set men
over us, to govern the Church, who have impotent passions, and not Angels.

And what if Angels were appointed to rule the holy Church? I do not say they
are, nay, I say they are not. Yet some Divines, I could name good ones,
Theodoret, Gregory the great, and others, are of opinion that the good Angels,
guardians to the Churches and Provinces, and ministering spirits to the Saints
on earth, do not always fulfill their charge, without opposite ways in their
several attendance. That which they chiefly ground it upon is the 10th chap. of
Daniel, v. 13. When Daniel besought God to have the Temple built again, and the
people restored that were sent into Babylon, the Archangel Michael took his
part, but the Prince of the Kingdom of Persia withstood him. I like their
opinion that say, the Prince of the Kingdom of Persia was no Angel, but
Cambyses the Son of Cyrus, who recalled all favors intended to the Iows by his
father Cyrus, while Cyrus was busy in his wars against the Scythians. Yet
antiquity knew not this interpretation; they made this out of it, that the
Angels Guardians of the Jews, and Porsians, not understanding the secret will
of God, what he would determine, labored in several ways, for the good of
distinct Nations over whom they had the charge. The Angel ministering to the
Jews showed all readiness to bring that people from the Persians, most
scandalous in their Idolatry. The Angel of Persia might attempt to have the
Jews remain some longer time, to reclame the natives of Persia from Idolatry.
They have no contrary wills or oppositions among themselves: for God makes
peace in his high places, Job 25. 2. It is a variety without a variance, when
they do their endeavors diversely, as God has placed them, prosecuting nothing
absolutely, but conditionally, as God shall please in the end to settle it.

This is a dark and a misty point, therefore I stip out of it. But I stand to
this doctrine, that Paul and Barnabas, and such good men as they are, may
pursue a good meaning in a contrary way one to another, and be guiltless. For
it is the ignorance of good men, and not their perverseness, which makes the^
seek the true end by multiplicity of means, and very opposite. Cyprian and
Cornelius were adversaries sometimes, so were Chrysostom and Epiphanius, so
were Cyril and Theodoret. None of them but loved the truth. But they had not
all the same fancy, the same complexio^, the same educatio^: therefore Truth
did not enter into them all through one and the same persuasion. Cloth of the
same making has not always the same die. And they that are propense to
glorify one God, in the same Church, with the same Charity, do not always
build with the same materials. Paul loves the Church as well as Barnabas, but
he would not offend it for want of Justice. Barnabas loves the Church as well
as Paul, but he would not offend it for want of clemency and compassion. Here Is
one Wool, and one Cloth, but dipped in two colors. Then I let you see, that for
their part that do equally consent to maintain the true Gospel, the inequality
of their judgments may be inoffensive.

I would I could say for our own parts, that the dissentions of our Reformed
Churches were unblamable, and that there were no transgression against charity
in our discords. But there are two wounds, deeper than others, which can not be
concealed, that stink and are corrupt through our foolishness. The one
continued by the unrelenting Vbiquitaries among the rigid Lutherans, never
ceasing to cry out, and yet never proving, that, with the substance of bread
remaining, Christ's fleshly body is in the Sacrament of his Supper, by the
communication of the properties of the Divine Nature to the Humane. In vain
they have been urged to fall back to a more moderate sentence. For Scholars
love the opinions which themselves have broacht, more than Monarchs do the
Kingdoms which themselves have conquered.

Our other rent falls upon a less subject, but the breach is no less that it
has made between party and party. Therefore do not imagine, that I mean those
hard Disputes about Gods eternal decrees, and strange working of his grace.
These are canvas'd alike by all part: which will never cease, and never be
decided. I mean in the second place the struggling to admit, or not admit, some
ancient, innocent, out ward forms of worship. In whose forbearance I could
never perceive, why Learned and Wise men should be Incorrigible The question
is, whether every Christian should observe those decencies, or circumstantial
parts of reverence, which the Church, wherein he lives, has appointed. While
they that resist stand upon their own liberty, they take away that liberty
which is inherent in the Church their Mother, to prescribe comeliness and order,
for the better beautifying of God service.

These, which I have named, these are the two quarrels, at which the Papists
clap their hands, to see us brawl among our selves. I confess we cannot triumph
in a perfect Peace. But do they insult upon us for it? what they? whose
janglings are ten for one of ours, and twice ten times greater, as a Millstone
is bigger than a pebble Let them, and none but them that have no contentions in
themselves, cast the first stone at us. It is not their dependence upon one
Supreme Head, that can keep them from divisions. To fit it with a similitude,
Job describes Leviathan, or rather God himself, c. 41. 15. His scales are his
pride, shut up close together as with a seal, they stick together, that they
cannot be sundred. It is not that Leviathan has one grout head, which keeps
him from offense: his safety must be that his scales ly close, and cover him.
But how uneaven the scales of this beast lie, let it be judged from the
irreconcilable opposition of seculars and regulars; of Dominicans and Jesuits;
of Tridentine and Anti-Tridentine Catholics. And no wonder it there be
turbulent opinions in the congregation of malignants: for the best of Gods
servants draw not the same yoke, without a little jogging of the Ark, there was
a contention between Paul and Barnabas.

Nay, to our wonder, it rested not there, it exceeded the bounds of meekness:
for in the third point my Text says it was (...), a sharp contention. An
unanimity of opinions is not necessary to friendship, says Aristotel very
well. Dear friends may retain the sweetness of love together, and yet vary in
some conclusions of judgment. A little more may be granted, That each may be
earnest in their own way, to win the other to assent: as Martha pressed it home,
and complained of her sister Mary, that she did not join with her in the same
household care. It was a light word, and no violation of kindness Concertationes
apud benevolos non lites sunt, sed jurgia, says Cicero: The dissentions of
them that keep benevolent minds, are not fallings out, but wranglings. As Paul
resisted Peter to his face, Gal. 2. 11. boldly, but charitably. His confidence
for the truth became him, and his inoffensiveness commended him.

It was otherwise at this bout between him and Barnabas: passion and
provocation transported them both so far, that it was a sharp contention. The
Greek word (...) has a cursed meaning it it. When a disease has intermitted a
while, and begins it access and violence again, that is called a paroxysm of
sickness: and when a brable is worse and worse, louder and louder, that is a
paroxysm of contention. These two, that had been fellow Soldiers under
Christ's banner, in so many travails, in so many perils, in so many
persecutions, they cannot bear with one another with patience, and they that
were ready to die together, cannot live together: they that were the strongest
confederates in the world, are the strongest opposites. O what a fickle and
fallacious thing is the concord of men! Anger is ready to run into enmity: and
wrath tears off the seals from the bond of love.

Yet I must not say that the sharpness between two such sweet Olive-Branches
had any taste of the vinacre of reproach, or that they peirced one another with
opprobrious speeches. I do not onerate them with any such accusation. That Is
sitter for Jobs deformed beast, lately mentioned, Out of his mouth go burning
lamps, and sparks of fire sly out, Job 41. v. 19. Have they no regard of their
common brotherhood in Christ, who are not satisfied to contend, but they must
mix sharpness with it? And no small quantity. A sting is a little matter: they
tear one another in pieces, as with the paw of a Lion. Their pen drops nothing
but gall and venom, as if their quill were plucked from the wing of a
Cockatrice. Then they think they write strongly, when they rail lowdly, indeed
when they lie lowdly. And he that should strive to be more powerful in truth,
thinks he has prevailed when he is more bitter than his adversary.

Quis leget haec? what man of Godly temper can read such lines, which stink of
malice in every sentence, as if they had been wrote in dog-dayes? Michael the
Archangel would not speak to the Devil in a railing accusation, Ep. Jud. v. 9
Though Satan deserved the worst that could be said, yet an Archangel was too
good to utter such filthiness. Let every reader enjoy his own judgment: for my
part, I seldom expect Truth and Argument in that book, where I find fury and
distemper in the style. Antibi Mavors ventosa in lingua? And who is there of a
candide, and a clean soul, that will not sooner be gained with the coolness of
Charity, than with the heat of Rage? Therefore as much as in us lies, let there
be no jarrs, no diversities among us: be peaceable in our Civil, peaceable in
our Religious profession. But if sundry shapes and appearances of reason will
not suffer us all to enjoy the same knowledge, and the same conscience, yet let
us dissent as Brethren, not as Enemies Avoid these paroxysms, and sharp
contentions.

I am ready now for the fourth point: and I think my Hearers expect it with
some attention. Having acquainted you that Paul and Barnabas did disagree, and
not simply so, but with some eagerness and provocation, might not a solid
judgment suspect, that some great offense had thrust it self in between them?
You shall find it otherwise, that the contention was in no weighty cause, it
touched not the life of truth, or the honor of Christ, the verse before my Text
will tell you all in the beginning of it, Paul thought it not good to take Mark
with him. And our Translation gives it more than is due to it, as I conceive.
We say that Paul thought it not good, as if it were a matter of good or evil.
Much better thus, as I apprehend, Paul thought it not fit. Paulus haud ae quum
censebat, as Beza very aptly. Paul thought it not meet, as it is in one of our
English Translations. It was not what was good, for it was good either way, but
what was more fit and meet that made the controversy. This is fit, says one:
it is not so fit, says his partner: a poor beginning for a sharp contention.

It may be supposed, Dr. P^t. L^lli^.
as I find it in part in a good Author, that Barnabas pleaded on this wise for
Mark. He had shrunk indeed from his calling, and left Paul at Pamphilia: but it
was not strange in a Novice to be a little daunted, when he was in jeopardy of
his life. But give him his due, he had not renounced the Faith, but retired
home for fear of the worlds anger. He had not forsaken Christ, o nothing less,
but intermitted the labor of his vocation. Yet he defended not this fault, but
repented, and bewailed it. Now he would fain begin a fresh: for he felt himself
by the grace of God more strong and resolute than ever, and offered himself
courageously to endure all storms and tempests for the glory of Christ. Should
not indulgence be shown to his unseigned repentance? Is it not often seen, that
such as fly from their colors return again, and sight it out valiantly? Was
not Peter, that had denied his Master, restored to his Apostleship, after he
had wept bitterly? Paul himself had been a persecutor, and yet obtained grace.
Consider with it, that Mary, the mother of this Mark, had spared her House to
receive the Apostles, in the hottest times of Herod's rage, Act. 12. v. 12.
Surely the son of so good a mother deserved some mildness and benign favor
from the Presidents of the Church. And what was more proper to Christ's
Commissioners, than to reconcile offenders that had gone astray?

These reasons prevailing not with Paul, you may imagine with me, if you
please, that his sentence was to this purpose. That they are worthy of great
reproof, that make execuses, and follow not Christ, when he calls them. What do
they deserve, that are recreants after their calling, and leave their station,
when they have taken up Christ's Cross, with Covenant to follow him? The young
Disciple had give^ up his liberty to follow his Master: and was no longer his
own, no more than a wife can leave her husband, or a son his father. And he
that loves his life more than Christ, is not worthy of him. Mark could foresee
well enough, that persecutions to come would be far greater than the former:
if he could not endure light ones, he would utterly sink under those of the
latter growth. His repentance was good, that is, it was profitable to himself,
but to be repulsed for his levity, would be more profitable to others, by the
severity of the example. Or if he were not thrust quite into the order of the
Plebians, yet let him be restored to his function after a larger time of
probation. An easy pardon would flatter him in his fault: this repulse would
make him know the magnitude of his sin. Paul could say for himself, that he was
never straightened in his bowels, but was full of pity to Onesimus the fugitive
servant; to the incestuous Corinthian; and who was it but he, that went so far,
that he wished to be anathema for his brethren? Yet Favor must give place to
Justice A Bishop must act the part both of a Father and a Mother in the Church,
in tenderness he must be a Mother, but a Father in discipline. Barnabas spoke
affectionately for a kinsman, but he spoke impartially for the cause of Christ.

Here is the whole state of their opposition, as well as I can devise it in a
form of pleading. The odds between them do not lie in any point of doctrine:
for the privilege of immediate inspiration of Truth belonged by Gods grace to
their Apostleship; then they could not dissent in a cause of Faith. The strife
was no more but whether Mark was fit at that time to be their fellow labourer.
And why might not Paul have remitted a little of his rigor to have gratified
Barnabas? And why not Barnabas have taken the denial friendly to content Paul?
Sacrifice small and indifferent things to the fruition of peace. To hold fast
to our conclusions in petty matters with all the strength of our will and wit,
is not constancy, but a worse thing.

You would hear from me now perhaps, which of these two upheld the better
cause. Non nostrum inter vos etc. It is not sit for my meanness to make my self
a Judge between such famous Apostles. This I will say with submission, that
Paul's proceedings were grounded upon Justice and discipline: Barnabas his
motion was grounded upon gentleness and humanity. Many of the wiser sort, I
think, will vote with Paul, and that the greater part of men will vote with
Barnabas But the spirit of Moses and Elias are both good: the Ark contained
both Aarons Rod, and the delicious pot of Manna. Sometimes the Scriptures seem
to favor Barnabas, which bid us bind up the broken in heart, and not to break
the bruised reed. Again, they seem to favor Paul, when they charge us to
remove away all scandals, and them that sin rebuke before all, that others also
may fear, 1 Timothy 5. 20.

But Scripturae non pugnant, though Paul and Barnabas dissent, there is no
contradiction in the Scriptures. For they bid us forgive and retain sins, bind
and loose sinners, as a prudent man shall judge upon the circumstances of
actions. But it is an heavy thing for that Church, where the Fathers of it can
neither bind nor loose, neither do the work of Paul nor Barnabas. But Noverint
universi, the power of the keys is inherent in their office in actu primo; and
can no more be disjoined from it, than light from the Sun, or moisture from the
water of the Seas. Allthough in actu exercito it may be qualified in the
practice of it.

I return to the point that is under my hand: are there any other circumstances
to sway our judgment in it? some, but of no great force. As that such as were
present at this contention may seem to incline to Paul. For after this,
Barnabas, like a Hen with one Chicken, went into Cyprus, without any more
company than Mark, that we read. But the Brethren, plurally, all of them did
commend Paul to the grace of God. And what shall we think of this passage, that
from this time the Scripture records all the travails of Paul exactly till he
came to Rome: but after this, the story of Barnabas his jornalls is buried in
silence for ever?

To counterpoise this a little, I will allege Paul against himself, and draw
enough from his own pen, to show that Mark did blot out the stain of his former
levity with the high praise of the great Apostle, 2 Timothy 4.11. Take Mark, and
bring him with thee, for he is profitable to me for the ministry. This was not
long before Paul died. The other quotation is in an Epistle written from Rome,
a good while after this sharp bickering, colos. 4. 10. There he offers them the
salutations of Mark, and adds, Touching whom ye have received Commandment, if
he come unto you receive him. May we not infer from hence, that Barnabas was
not altogether in the wrong, though Paul would not hear of it at first, since
twice, in the days following, he set such a precious value upon Mark?

Let me put in but to one scrutinie more, and stay upon it in the cloze. Which
of these two has the Church of Christ observed in it is practice from age to
age? Truly the most ancient, that is, the best times of it, were as severe as
Paul. For if a Clergyman shrunk in the wetting, as we say, either he was
thrust down to a Laical communion, or chastned with a penance of many years:
the Canons of the oldest Concils are full of this. But the middle, and latter
times of the Church have been as remiss as Barnabas. For the longer we know
evils, they are the more familiar to us; and the more familiar they grow, the
less they are corrected. Further than this I will not, I dare not go, to make a
precise decision, which of these two had the fairer end of the quarrel. Let them
stand, or fall to their own Master, by whom they shall be judged. But our
judgment may be clearly convinced against the^ both, that their difference fell
upon such an object, so mean, so inconsiderable, in respect of peace, that it
did little deserve a sharp contention, but least of all to extend unto this
acrimony, that they should depart asunder the one from the other.

This is the last point, and the saddest word of the Text, this (...), the
departing asunder. To come even with the time, I will fall presently upon the
use. First, this is utterly against our Savious rule, Go and be reconciled to
thy brother, Math. 5.24. A wound will never be healed, but by drawing the parts
together that were dissolved. Esau and jacob, Saul and David, the remoter
distance they kept, the further they were from pacification: as soon as ever
they met, they melted, and embraced. Affability and sweet conversation strikes
fire out of a flint. But disjunction of persons is an eclypse of friendship,
till the light of one does shine with a propitious aspect upon the other. Seek
for Charity, and pursue it. Go home, and offer thy self to those whom thou have
offended. Though there be no hostility in your heart, yet you can not call it a
reconciliation of love, if you estrange your presence from your adversary.

I know that in the case of these two Apostles, though they were prevented with
an error, yet shortly after their unkind farewell, they returned to their
Christian temper, and afterward in sundry Texts of Scripture Paul did put
himself in the same scale with Barnabas, as with his sworn brother, as 1 Cor.
9.6. I only, and Barnabas, have not we power to forbear working? and Gal. 2. 9.
James, Cephas, and John, gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship.
This is a great evidence of their redintegration, the Spirit of God mediating
this in secret between their souls in their absence. But I stick to my
Doctrine, that this was not the Kings high way, the ordinary, and common road
to atonement, to keep asunder. It is God that makes men to be of one mind,
and to dwell in an house, says the Psalm. It is not by dissevering, but
coming under one roof, that begets Unity. Make the contract Per verba de
praesenti, and then it is indissoluble

Here is another thing worthy our consideration. They that are the
kindlecoales, and divide others, many times draw both parts against themselves.
Satan followed his old rule here, Divide and impera, divide both, and master
both, o he propounded some great victory to himself, it Paul and Barnabas would
break asunder. It was effected: but what got he? Both turned against his
Kingdom. For by taking several journeys, they communicated the Gospel twice as
far, as they could have done in one company: as seedcorn serves best for the
use of man, when it is scattered abroad. If Paul and Barnabas had both gone to
Cilicia, Cyprus had wanted them: or if both had gone to Cyprus, Cilicia had
wanted them. Now they were singled, they propagated the Faith of Christ both by
Sea and Land. Barnabas sailed into Cyprus, and Paul journied into Cilicia. This
was not like a Bowes-string snapt asunder; but they were two strings to one
Bow: and that which was division to themselves, was multiplication to the
Gospel of Christ.

Finally, they performed what they intended, to visit their brethren in every
City, where they had preached the word of God, Verse 32. of this Chap. All
governments, in all ages, have approved this to be the best: way to conserve
Unity. Not that every City, much less every Conventicle, should be entire
within it self, and acknowledge no authority over it. As if every Parish should
be like a several Hand, divided from the continent. Such a government can never
be shown in any Civil Policy, since the World began. And I could never learn,
why spiritual Administrations should not be knit together in as good rank, and
subordination, as temporal, It is impossible to avoid a multitude of
corruptions in Faith, and not to contract a prodigious licentiousness in
Discipline, where the part, against nature, shall not depend upon the whole:
where the part shall have no correspondence or communion with the whole, but
upon sufferance, and courtesy. Then the whole Church shall be nothing else but
a geat Schism, and yet no man shall be convinced to be a Schismatique. But to
prevent such confusion, Paul and Barnabas supervised the several Cities where
they had laid the foundation of Evangelical Faith; and, like careful Rulers,
interposed the power with which Christ had endewed them, to keep their Brethren
dispersed far and wide in one. Though they were two upon a small disgust, yet
they remembered there was but one Shephard, and one Sheepfold, whose peace they
studied to preserve by their pastoral vigilance.

I have done, and am at shore. You shall stay but a minute or two for your
landing. It is to give my reason in short, why I have preached to day upon this
Subject. It is well known, from the time of the First Nicen-Council, that
Bishops were to hold Synods twice a year. In the AEquinoctial time of Lent, and
in the beginning of Autumn. At this time of Lent, to compose all debates for a
charitable preparation against the Feast of Easter: At the end of Summer, only
if need did require, says the Gloss of the Greek Councils Suitable to this
Ecclesiastical prudence, I have cast my Mite at this time into the Treasury, to
remind them, who are of the same lot before Christ with Paul and Barnabas, to
stop contentions: and as they dread the sharp wrath of God, to mitigate all
sharpness. This was the season of old to make Church-peace. I would to God it
were done at any time of the year, but the admonition is proper, most proper
now, according to the Ancient Calendar. Which peace, so long buried, if it
would rise at last from the dead, it would put another Gloss of joy upon the
feast of the Resurrection. And if unnecessary exceptions were past over, it
would prove indeed a most holy Passover unto the Lord? To which aeternal Lord,
one God in Unity, three Persons in Trinity, be ascribed and performed all
praise and honor, dominion and thanksgiving, obedience and adoration, from
henceforth and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

