A NEW METHOD OF Rosy Crucian physic: Wherein is showed the Cause; and
therewith their experienced Medicines for the Cure of all DISEASES, (...);
Freely given to the inspired CHRISTIANS, BY (...).

And in obedience fitted for the understanding of mean capacities by the
Adorer, and the most unworthy of their LOVE, John Heydon, a Servant of God, and
Secretary of Nature.

Penes nos unda Tagi. London Printed for Thomas Lock, 1658.

An Apologue for an Epilogue.
I Shall here tell you what Rosy Crucians are, and that Moses was their Father,
and he was (...); some say they were of the order of Elias, some say the
Disciples of Ezekiel, others define them to be (...); i.e. The Officers of the
Generalissimo of the world, that are as the eyes and cares of the great King,
seeing and hearing all things; they are Seraphically illuminated, as Moses was
according to this order of the Elements, earth refined to water, water to air,
air to fire; so of a man to be one of the Heroes of a Heroes, a Demon, or good
genius, of a genius, a partaker of Divine things, and a companion of the holy
company of unbodied souls and immortal Angels, and according to their
vehicles, a versatile life, turning themselves Proteus-like into any shape.

But there is yet arguments to procure Mr. Walfoord, and T. Williams, Rosy
Crucians by election, and that is the miracles that were done by them, in any
sight; for it should seem Rosy Crucians were not only initiated into the
Mosaicall Theory, but have arrived also to the power of working miracles as
Moses, Elias, Ezekiel and the succeeding Prophets did, as being transported
where they please, as Habakkuk was from Jewry to Babylon or as Philip after he
had baptized the Enuch to Arotus, and one of these went from me to a friend of
mine in Devonshire, and came and brought me an answer to London the same day,
which is four days journey, they taught me excellent predictions of
Astrology, and earthquakes; they slack the plague in Cities; they silence the
violent winds and tempests; they calm the rage of the Sea and rivers; they
walk in the Air, they frustrate the Malicious aspect of Witches; they cure all
diseases; I desired one of these to tell me whether my complexion were capable
of the society of my good Genius? when I see you again, said he, I will tell
you (which is) (when he pleases to come to me, for I know not where to go to
him) when I saw him then he said Ye should pray to God, for a good and holy man
can offer no greater nor more acceptable sacrifice to God, then the oblation of
himself, his soul.

He said also that the good Genii are as the benign eyes of God, running to
and fro in the world, with love and pity beholding the innocent endeavors of
harmless and single hearted men, ever ready to do them good, and to help them;
and at his going away he bid me beware of my seeming friends who would do me
all the hurt they could, and cause the Governors of the Nations to be angry
with me, and set bounds to my liberty, which truly happened to me, as they did
indeed: many things more he told me before we parted, but I shall not name them
here.

For this Rosy Crucian Physic or Medicines, I happily and unexpectedly light
upon in Arabia, which will prove a restoration of health to all that are
afflicted wh that sickness, which we ordinarily call natural, and all other
diseases, as the Gour, Dropsy, Leprosy and falling sickness; and these men
may be said to have no small insight in the body, and that Walfoord, Williams,
and others of the Fraternity now living, may bear up in the same likely
Equipage, with those noble Divine spirits their predecessors, though the
unskilfullness in men commonly acknowledge more of supernatural assistance in
hot unsettled fancies, and perplexed melancholy, then in the calm and distinct
use of reason; yet for mine own part, but not without submission to better
judgments, I look upon these Rosy Crucians above all men truly inspired, and
more than any that professed or pretended themselves so, this sixteen hundred
years, and I am ravished with admiration of their miracles and transcendent
mechanical inventions, for the salving the Phenomenon in the world; I may
without offense therefore compare them with Bezaliel and Aholiab, those
skillful and cunning workers of the tabernacle, who, as Moses testifies, were
filled with the spirit of God, and therefore were of an excellent understanding
to find out all manner of curious work.

Nor is it any more argument, that these Rosy Crucians are not inspired,
because they do not say they are; then that others are inspired, because they
say they are; which to me is no argument at all; but the suppression of what so
happened, would argue much more sobriety and modesty; whenas the profession of it
with sober men, would be suspected of some piece of melancholy and distraction,
especially in these things, where the grand pleasure is the evidence and
exercise of reason, not a bare belief, or an ineffable sense of life, in
respect whereof there is no true christian but he is inspired; but if any more
zealous pretender to prudence and righteousness, wanting either leisure or
ability to examine these Rosy Crucian Medicines to the bottom shall
notwithstanding either condemn them or admire them; he has unbecommingly and
indiscreetly vetered out of his own sphere, and I cannot acquit him of
injustice or folly: Nor am I a Rosy Crucian, nor do I speak of spite, or hope
of gain, or for any such matter; there is no cause, God knows, I envy no man,
be he what he will be, I am no physician, never was, nor never mean to be: what
I am it makes no matter as to my profession.

Lastly, these holy and good men would have me know that the greatest sweet and
perfection of a virtuous soul, is the kindly accomplishment of her own nature,
in true wisdom and divine love; and these miraculus things that are done by
them are, that that worth and knowledge that is in them may be taken notice of,
and that God thereby may be glorified whose witnesses they are; but no other
happiness accrues to them from this, but that hereby they may be in a better
capacity of making others happy,

From my house in Spittle fields next door to the red Lion this 10. of May,
1658. John Heydon.

A New METHOD OF Rosy Crucian Physic.
CHAP. I.
Of the Accurate Structure of Man's body.

I Admire the goodness of God toward us in the frame and structure of our
bodies, the admirable Artifice whereof, Galen, though a Naturalist, was so
taken with, that he could not but adjudge the honor of a hymn to the wise
Creator of it. The continuance of the whole, and every particular, is so
evident an Argument of exquisite skill in the Maker, that if I should pursue
all that suits to my purpose, it would amount to too large (yet an entire)
Volume. I shall therefore write all that is needful to be known by all men,
leaving the rest to be supplied by Anatomists: And I think there is no man that
has any skill in that Art, but will confess, the more diligently and
accurately the frame of our body is examined, it is found the more exquisitely
conformable to our Reason, Judgment, and Desire; so that supposing the same
matter that our bodies are made of, if it had been in our own power to have
made our selves, we should have framed our selves no otherwise then we are: To
instance in some particulars; As in our Eyes, the Number, the Situation, the
Fabric of them is such, that we can excogitate nothing to be added thereto, or
to be altered, either for their beauty, safety, or usefulness; but as for their
beauty, I have treated largely of it in my youthful merry Poems, and now am not
minded to transcribe my tender nice subject, and couple it with my severer
style; I will only note how safely they are guarded, and fitly framed out for
the use they are intended: The Brow and the Nose saves them from harder
strokes; but such a curious part as the Eye being necessarily liable to
mischief from smallest matters, the sweat of the Forehead is fenced off by
those two Wreaths of Hair which we call the Eyebrows; and the Eyelids are
fortified with little stiff bristles, as with Pallisadoes, against the assault
of Flies and Gnats, and suchlike bold Animalcula; besides, the upper-lid
presently claps down, and is as good a Fence as a Port-Cullis against the
importunity of the Enemy; which is done also every night, whether there be any
present assault or no, as if nature kept Garrison in this Acropolis of man's
body, the Head, and looked that such Laws should be duly observed, as were most
for his safety.

And now for the use of the Eye, which is sight, it is evident that this Organ
is so exquisitely framed for that purpose, that not the least curiosity can be
added: For first, the Humor and Tunicles are purely transparent to let in
light, and colors unfould, and unsophisticated by any inward tincture. And
then again, the parts of the Eye are made unequal, that there might be a
direction of many rays coming from one point of the object, unto one point
answerable in the bottom of the eye; to which purpose the Chrystalline humor is
of great moment, and without which, the sight would be very obscure and weak.
Thirdly, The Tunica uvea has a Musculous Power, and can dilate and contract
that round hole in it which is called the Pupil of the Eye, for the better
moderating the transmission of light. Fourthly, The inside of the uvea is
blacked like the Wall of a Tennis-Court, the rays falling upon the Retina
again; for such a repercussion would make the sight more confused. Fifthly, The
Tanica Arachnoides, which invellops the Chrystalline Humor, by virtue of its
Processus Ciliaros, can thrust forward, or draw back that precious useful part
of the Eye, as the nearness or distance of the objects shall require. Sixthly
and lastly, The Tunica Retina is white, for the better and more true reception
of the species of things, (as they ordinarily call them) as white paper is
fittest to receive those Images into a dark room; and the eye is already so
perfect, that I believe it is not needful to speak any more thereof; we being
able to move our head upwards and downwards, and on every side, might have
unawares thought our selves sufficiently well provided for; but Nature has
added Muscles also to the Eyes, that no perfection might be wanting; for we
have often occasion to move our Eyes, our Heads being unmoved, as in reading, and
viewing more particularly any object set before us; and that this may be done
with more ease and accuracy, she has furnished that Organ with no less then
six several Muscles; and indeed, this framing of Muscles, not only in the Eye,
but in the whole body, is admirable; for is it not a wonder that even all our
flesh should be so handsomely formed and contrived into distinct pieces, whose
rise and insertions should be with such advantage that they do serve to move
some part of the body or other? and that the parts of our body are not moved
only so conveniently as will serve us to walk and subsist by, but that they are
able to move every way imaginable that will advantage us; for we can fling out
Legs and Arms upwards and downwards, backwards, forwards, and round, as they
that spin, or would spread a Molehill with their feet. To say nothing of
Respiration, the constriction of the Diaphragme for the keeping down the Guts,
and so enlarging the Thorax, that the Lungs may have play, and the assistance
of the inward intercostal Muscles in deep suspirations, when we take more large
gulps of air to cool our heart overcharged with love or sorrow; nor of the
curious Fabric of the Lainix, so well fitted with Muscles for the modulation
of the Voice, tunable speech, and delicious singing: You may add to these the
notable contrivance of the Heart, its two ventricles, and its many valvulae, so
framed and situated, as is most fit for the reception and transmission of the
blood, and it is sent thence away warm to comfort and cherish the rest of the
body; for which purpose also the valvulae in the veins are made.

But we see by experience that joy and grief proceed not in all men from the
same causes, and that men differ very much in the constitution of the body,
whereby that which helps and furthereth vital constitution in one, and is
therefore delightful, hinders and crosses it in another, and therefore
causes grief. The difference therefore of Wits, has its original from the
different passions, and from the ends to which the appetite leads them. As
for that difference which arises from sickness, and such accidental
distempers, I have appointed them for the second Part of this Book, and
therefore I omit the same as impertinent to this place, and consider it only
in such as have their health, perfection of body, and Organs well disposed.

CHAP. II.
Of the perfection of the Body, and then of the Nature of the Senses; of
Delight, Pain, Love, Hatred, sensual Delight, and Pains of the Body, Joy, and
Grief.

OTher things I have to say, but I will rather insist upon such things as are
easy ahd intelligible even to Idiots, or such Physicians that are no wiser,
who if they can but tell the Joints of their hands, or know the use of their
teeth, they may easily discover it was Counsel, not Chance, that created them;
and if they but understand these natural Medecines I have prepared in this Book
for their example, they will know that they shall be cured of all Diseases
without pain, or any great cost; and Love, not Money, was it that made me
undertake this Task. Now of the well-fram'd parts of our body, I would know why
we have three joints in our Legs and Arms, as also in our fingers, but that it
was much better then having but two or four? And why are our fore-teeth sharp,
like Chizzels, to cut, but our inward teeth broad, to grind? but this is more
exquisite then having them all sharp, or all broad, or the fore-teeth broad,
and the other sharp; but we might have made a hard shift to have lived, though
in that worser condition. Again, Why are the Teeth so luckily placed? or
rather, Why are there not Teeth in other bones as well as in the Jaw-bones, for
they might have been as capable as these. But the reason is, Nothing is done
foollshly, nor in vain. I will show you how to prolong life, and to return from
age to youth; and how to change, alter, and amend the state of the body; but
that I intend in a Treatise entitled The Wise Man's Crown: To keep the body in
perfect health is my present design, and to cure all Diseases without reward;
for there is a Divine Providence that orders all things. Again, (to say nothing
of the inward curiosity of the Ear) Why is that outward frame of it, but that
it is certainly known that it is for the bettering of our hearing?

I might add, That Nature has made the hind-most parts of our body (which we
sit upon) most fleshy, as providing for our ease, making us a Natural Cushion,
as well as for Instruments of Motion for our Thighs and Legs; she has made the
hinder part of the Head more strong, as being otherwise unfenced against falls
and other casualties. She has made the Backbon of several Vertebrae, as being
more fit to bend, more tough, and less in danger of breaking then if they were
all one entire bone, without those gristly Junctures. She has strengthened our
fingers and toes with Nails, whereas she might have sent out that substance at
the end of the first and second Joints, which had not been so handsome and
useful, nay, rather somewhat troublesome and hurtful. And lastly, She has made
all bones devoid of sense, because they were to bear the weight of themselves,
and of the whole body; and therefore if they had had sense, our life had been
painful continually, and dolorous.

And now I have considered the fitness of the parts of man's body for the good
of the whole, let me but consider briefly his senses and his nature, and then I
intend more solidly to demonstrate the cause of all Diseases, and with that the
Cure, because I intend a Method of Rosy Crucian Physic, promised in my way to
Bliss. By our several Organs, we have several Conceptions of several qualities
in the objects; for by sight we have a conception or image composed of color
and figure, which is all the notice and knowledge the object imparteth to us of
its nature, by the excellency of the eye. By Hearing we have a conception
called Sound, which is all the knowledge we have of the quality of the object
from the Ear: And so the rest of the Senses are also conceptions of several
qualities or natures of their objects.

Because the Image in vision consisting of color and shape, is the knowledge
we have of the qualities of the object of that Sense, it is no hard matter for
a man to fall into this opinion, That the same color and shape are the very
qualities themselves; and for the same cause that sound and noise are the
qualities of a piece of Canon or Culvering charged with sulphurous Powder,
fired, or of the Air: And this opinion has been so long received, that the
contrary must needs appear a great Paradox. The same qualities are easier in a
bell; and yet the introduction of species visible and intelligible, (which is
necessary for the maintenance of that opinion) passing to and fro from the
object, is worse then any Paradox, as being a plain impossibility. I shall
therefore endeavor to make plain these points.

That the subject wherein color and image are inherent; is not the object or
thing seen.

That there is nothing (really) which we call an Image or Color.

That the said Image, or Color, is but an apparation unto us of the motion,
agitation, or alteration, which the object works in the brain, or spirits, or
some internal substance of the Head.

That as in vision, so also in conceptions that arise from the other senses,
the subject of their inherence is not the object, but the continent.

That conceptions and apparitions are nothing really, but motion in some
internal substance of the Head; which motion not stopping there, of necessity
must there either help, or hinder the motion which is called Vital; when it
helps it is called Delight, Contentment or Pleasure, which is nothing really
but motion about the heart, as conception is nothing but motion in the head;
and the objects that cause it are called Pleasant, or Delightful; and the same
Delight, with reference to the object is called Love; but when such motion
weakneth or hinders the vital motion, then it is called Pain, and in relation
to that which causes it, Hatred.

There are two sorts of pleasures, whereof one seems to affect the corporeal
Organ of the sense, and that I call sensual, the greatest part whereof is that
by which we are invited to give continuance to our species; and the next by
which a man is invited to meat, for preservation of his individual person. The
other sort of Delight is not particularly any part of the body, and is called
The Delight of the mind, and is that which we call Joy. Likewise of pains, some
affect the body, and are therefore called The pains of the body; and some not,
and those are called grief.

CHAP. III.
Of the nature of the Soul of Man, whether she be a mere Modification of the
body, or a Substance really distinct; and then whether corporeal, or
incorporeal, and of the temper of the body.

HEre I am forced to speak what I have in my Familiar Spirit, and it is not
impertinent to my purpose; therefore if we say that the soul is a mere
modification of the body, the soul then is but one universal faculty of the
body, or a many faculties put together; and those operations which are usually
attributed unto the soul, must of necessity be attributed unto the body: I
demand therefore, To what in the body will you attribute spontaneous motion? I
understand thereby a power in our selves of wagging, or holding still most of
the parts of our body, as our hand suppose, or little finger: If you will say
that it is nothing but the immission of the spirits into such and such Muscles,
I would gladly know what does immit these spirits, and direct them so
curiously; is it themselves? or the brains? or that particular piece of the
brain they call the Pine-Kernel? What ever it be, that which does thus immit
them, and direct them, must have Animadversion; and the same that has
Animadversion, has Memory and Reason also: Now I would know whether the
spirits themselves be capable of Animadversion, Memory, and Reason; for it
indeed seems altogether impossible; for these animal spirits are nothing else
but matter very thin and liquid, whose nature consists in this, that all the
particles of it be in motion, and being loose from one another, frigge and play
up and down according to the measure and manner of agitation in them.

I therefore demand which of these particles in these so many loosly moving one
from another, has Animadversion in it? if you say that they all put together
have; I appeal to him that thus answers, how unlikely it is that that should
have Animadversion that is so utterly incapable of Memory, and consequently, of
Reason; for it is impossible to conceive memory competible to such a subject,
as it is how to write Characters in the Water, or in the Wind.

If you say the Brain immits and directs these spirits; how can that so freely
and spontaneously move it self, or another, that has no Muscles? Besides
Doctor Culpepper tells you that though the Brain be the instrument of sense,
yet it has no sense at all of it self; how then can that that has no sense
direct thus spontaneously and arbitrariously, the animal spirits in to any part
of the body? an Act that plainly requires determinate sense and perception: But
let the Physicians and Anatomists conclude what they will, I shall, I think,
little less then demonstrate that the brains have no sense; for the same in us
that has sense, has likewise animadversion; and that which has animadversion
in us, has also a faculty of free and arbitrarious Fancy and Reason.

Let us now consider the nature of the brain, and see how competible those
alterations are to such a subject; verily if we take a right view of this Laxe
pith or marrow in man's head, neither our sense nor understanding can discover
any thing more in this substance that can pretend to such noble operations, as
free imagination and sagacious collections of Reason, then we can discern in a
lump of fat, or a pot of honey; for this loose pulpe that is thus wrapped up
within our Cranium, is but a spongie and porous body, and pervious, not only
to the animal spirits, but also to more Juice and Liquor; else it could not
well be nourished, at least it could not be so soft and moistened by drunkenness
and excess, as to make the understanding inept and sottish in its operations.
Wherefore I now demand, in this soft substance which we call the brain, whose
softness implies that it is in some measure liquid, and liquidity implies a
several motion of loosened parts; in what part or parcel thereof does Fancy,
Reason, and Animadversion lie? In this laxe consistence that lies like a Net,
all on heaps in the water; I demand, In what Knot, Loope, or Interval thereof,
does this faculty of free Fancy, and active Reason reside? I believe not a
Doctor in England, nay, not Dr. Culpepper himself, were he alive, nor his men,
Doctor Freeman, and the rest, can assign me any; and if any will say, in all
together; they must say that the whole brain is figured into this or that
representation, which would cancel memory, and take away all capacity of there
being any distinct notes and places for the several species of things there
presented. But if they will say there is in every part of the brain this power
of Animadversion and Fancy, they are to remember that the brain is in some
measure a liquid body, and we must enquire how these loose parts understand one
another several Animadversions and notions; and if they could (which is yet
very unconceivable) yet if they could from hence do any thing toward the
immission and direction of the animal spirits into this or that part of the
body, they must do it by knowing one another minds, and by a joint contention
of strength, as when many men at once, the word being given when they weigh
Anchor, put their strength together for the moving of that Massy body, that
the single strength of one could not deal with; but this is to make the several
particles of the brain so many individual persons; a fitter object for
laughter, then the least measure of belief.

Besides, how come these many Animadversions to seem but one to us, our mind
being these, as is supposed? Or why if the figuration of one part of the brain
be communicated to all the rest, does not the same object seem situated both
behind us, and before us, above, and beneath, on the right hand and on the
left; and every way as the impress of the object is reflected against all the
parts of the brains? but there appearing to us but one animadversion, and one
sight of things, it is a sufficient Argument that there is but one; or if there
be many, that they are not mutually communicated from the parts one to another,
and therefore there can be no such joint endeavor toward one design; whence it
is manifest, that the brains cannot immit or direct these animal spirits into
what part of the body they please.

CHAP. IV.
Of Spontaneous Motion; of the External Phenomenon; of the nature of the
Essence of the Soul her self, what it is, and whether it be corporeal, or
incorporeal.

NOW I must tell you, that the brain has no sense, and therefore cannot
impress spontaneously any motion on the animal spirits; it is no slight
Argument that some being dissected, have been found without brains; and this I
saw, a Captain in Chrisley, in Arabia that was accidentally killed by an
Alcade, and an Arabian, the story is pleasant, but not pertinent to our
purpose; but this man had nothing but a limpid water in his head instead of
brains, and the brains generally are easily dissolvable into a watery
consistence, which agrees with what I intimated before. Now I appeal to any
free Judge, how likely these liquid particles are to approve themselves of that
nature and power, as to be able by erecting and knitting themselves together
for a moment of time, to bear themselves so, as with one joint contention of
strength, to cause an arbitrarious obligation of the spirits into this or that
determinate part of the body; but the absurdity of this I have sufficiently
insinuated already.

The Nerves, I mean the Marrow of them, which is of the same substance with the
brain, have no sense, as is demonstrated from a Cataleps^e, or Cat^chus; but I
will not accumulate Arguments in a matter so palpable. As for that little
sprunt piece of the brain which they call the Conacion, that this should be the
very substance, whose natural faculty it is to move it self, and by its motion
and nods to determine the course of the spirits into this or that part of the
body, seems to me no less foolish and fabulous then the Story of this
entitled Doctor Freeman, so much commended by ignorantly innocent people: If
you heard but the magnificent story that is told of the little lurking
Mushrome, how it does not only hear and see, but imagines, reasons, commands
the whole fabric of the body more dexterously then an Indian Boy does an
Elephant: what an acute Logician, subtle Geometrician, prudent Statesman,
skilful Physician, and profound Philosopher he is! and then afterward by
dissection you discover this worker of miracles to be nothing but a poor silly
contemptible Knob, or Protuberancy, consisting of a thin Membrane, containing a
little pulpous matter, much of the same nature with the rest of the Brain,

Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici? Would you not sooner laugh at it, then
go about to confute it? and truly I may the better laugh it now, having already
confuted it in what I have before merrily argued concerning the rest of the
Brain.

I shall therefore make bold to conclude, That the impress of Spontaneous
Motion is neither from the animal spirits, nor from the Brain, etc. therefore
that those operations that are usually attributed unto the soul, are really
incompetible to any part of the body; and therefore, as in the last Chapter I
hinted, I say, That the soul is not a mere modification of the body, but a
substance distinct therefrom.

Now we are to enquire, Whether this substance distinct from what we ordinarily
call the body, be also it self a Corporeal Substance, or whether it be
incorporeal? If you say that it is a corporeal substance, you can understand no
other then matter more subtle and tenuious then the animal spirits themselves,
mingled with them, and dispersed through the vessels and porosities of the
body; for there can be no penetration of dimensions: But I need no new
arguments to confute this fond conceit; for what I said of the animal spirits
before, is applicable with all ease and fitness to this present case; and let
it be sufficient that I advertise you so much, and so be excused from the
repeating of the same things over again.

It remains therefore that we conclude, That that which impresses Spontaneous
Motion upon the body or more immediately upon the animal spirits: That which
imagines, remembers, and reasons, is an immaterial substance, distinct from the
body, which uses the animal spirits and the brain for Instruments in such and
such operations. And thus we have found a spirit in a proper notion and
signification, that has apparently these faculties in it, it can both
understand and move corporeal matter.

And now this prize that we have won will prove for our design in this new
Method of Physic and Philosophy of very great consequence; for it is obvious
here to observe that the soul of man is as it were (...) a compendious statue
of the Deity; her substance is a solid Essigies of God; and therefore as with
ease we consider the substance and motion of the vast Heavens on a little
Sphere, or Globe, so we may with like facility contemplate the nature of the
Almighty in this little Model of God, the soul of Man, enlarging to Infinity
what we observe in our selves when we transfer it unto God, as we do imagine
these Circles which we view on the Globe, to be vastly bigger while we fancy
them as described in the heavens.

Wherefore we being assured of this, That there is a spiritual substance in our
selves, in which both these properties do reside, viz. of the understanding,
and of moving the corporeal matter; let us but enlarge our minds so as to
conceive as well as we can of a spiritual substance that is able to move and
actuate all matter whatsoever, never so far extended, and after what way and
manner soever it please, and that it has not only the knowledge of this or
that particular thing, but a distinct and plenary cognizance of all things; and
we have indeed a very competent apprehension of the nature of the eternal and
invisible God, who like the soul of man, does not indeed fall under sense, but
does everywhere operate so, that his person is easily to be gathered from what
is discovered by our outward senses.

CHAP. V.
Of Plants; that the mere motion of the matter may do something, yet it will
not amount to the production of Plants. That it is no botch in Nature that some
Phenomenon be the results of Motion, others of substantial forms. That beauty
is not a mere fancy, and that the beauty and virtue of Plants is an Argument
that they are made for the use of our bodies from an intellectual principle.

HOW weak is Man if you consider his nature, what faculties he has, and in
what order he is in respect of the rest of the creatures? And indeed, though
his body be but weak and disarmed, yet his inward abilities of Reason, and
artificial contrivance, is admirable, both for finding out those secret
Medicines which God prepared for the use of Man in the Bowels of the Earth, of
Plants and Minerals.

And first of Vegetables, where I shall touch only these four heads, their
form and beauty, their seed, their signatures, and their great use, as well for
medicines as sustenance; and that we may the better understand the advantage we
have in this closer contemplation of the works of nature, we are in the first
place to take notice of the condition of the substance, which we call matter,
how fluid and slippery, and undeterminate it is of it self; or if it be hard,
how unfit it is to be changed into any thing else; and therefore all things rot
into a moisture before any thing can be generated of them, as we soften the wax
before we set on the seal.

Now therefore, unless we will be foolish, as because the uniform motion of the
Air, or some more subtle corporeal Element, may so equally compress or bear
against the parts of a little vaporous moisture, as to form it into round drops
(as we see in the dew, and other experiments) and therefore because this more
rude and general motion can do something, to conclude that it does all things;
We must in all reason confess that there is an eternal Mind and Virtue, whereof
the matter is thus usefully formed and changed.

But mere rude and undirected motion, because naturally it will have some kind
of results, that therefore it will reach to such as plainly imply a wise
contrivance of counsel, is so ridiculous a Sophism, as I have already
intimated, that it is more fit to impose upon the inconsiderate souls of fool
and children, then upon men of Mature Reason, and well exercised in Philosophy,
or the grave and well practiced, seraphically illuminated Rosy Crucians. Admit
that Rain, and Snow, and Wind, and Hail, and Ice, and Thunder, and Lightning,
and a Star I mention for example, that may be let in amongst Meteors, by some
called Hellens-star, and is well known at Sea; I have seen it melt Copper
Vessels a-board a ship; it comes of an heap of such vapors as are carried by
violent cross Winds up from the Earth; and such like Meteors may be the
products of heat and cold, or of the motion and rest of certain small particles
of the matter; yet that the useful and beautiful contrivance of the Branches,
Flowers, and Fruits of Plants should be so too, (to say nothing yet of
Minerals, and the bodies of men) is as ridiculous and supine a collection, as
to infer, That because mere heat and cold does soften and harden Wax, and puts
it into some shape or other, that therefore this mere heat and cold, or Motion
and Rest, without any Art and Direction, made the Silver Seal too, and graved
upon it so curiously some Coat of Arms, or the shape of some Bird or Beast, as
an Eagle, a Lion, etc. nay indeed this inference is more tolerable far then the
other, these effects of Art being more easy, and less noble then those other
of nature.

Nor is it any deficiency at all in the Works of Nature, that some particular
Phenomenon be but the easy results of that general motion communicated unto
the matter from God; others the effects of more curious contrivance, or of the
Divine Ar^, or Reason, (for such are the (...), the Rations Seminales)
incorporated in the Matter, especially the Matter it self being in some sort
vital, else it would not continue the motion that it is put upon, when it is
occasionally this or the other way moved; and besides the Nature of God being
the most perfect fullness of life that is possibly conceiveable, it is very
congruous that this outmost and remotest shadow of himself, be some way, though
but obscurely vital: Wherefore things falling off by degrees from the highest
perfection, it will be no uneven or unproportionable step, if descending from
the top of this utmost Creation, Man, in whom there is a more fine conception,
or reflexive Reason, which hangs on, as every man has so much experience as to
have seen the Sun, and other visible objects by reflection in the Water and
Glasses; and this as yet shall be all I will say for this reason; I will give
you more then I promised in the Contents, by four propositions concerning the
nature of conceptions, and they shall be proved; and also of the main deception
of sense, that Color and Image may be there where the thing seen is not: But
because it may be said, That notwithstanding the Image in the Water be not in
the object, but a thing merely fantastical, yet there may be colors really in
the thing it self, I will urge further this experience, That diverse times men
see directly the same object double, as two Candles for one, which may happen
from distemper, or otherwise without distemper if a man will; the Organs being
either in their right temper, or equally distempered, the colors and images in
two such characters of the same thing, cannot be inherent therein, because the
thing seen cannot be in two places.

One of these Images therefore is not inherent in the Object but the seeing,
the Organs of the sight are then in equal temper or distemper, the one of them
is no more inherent then the other, and consequently, neither of them both are
in the Objects, which is the first proposition mentioned in the precedent
number.

Secondly, that the Image of any thing by reflection in a glass, or water, or
the like, is not any thing in, or behind the glass, or in, or under the Water,
every man may grant to himself; which is the second proposition of Des Carts.
For thirdly We are to consider, first, That every great agitation or concussion
of the brain (as it happens from a stroke, especially if the stroke be upon
the eye) whereby the Optic Nerve suffers any great violence, there appears
before the Eyes a certain light, which light is nothing without, but an
apparition only; all that is real being the concussion or motion of the parts
of the Nerve; from which experience we may conclude, That apparition of light
is really nothing but motion within. If therefore from Lucid bodies there can
be derived motion, so as to affect the Optic Nerve in such manner as is proper
thereunto, there will follow an Image of light some-where in that line by which
the motion was last derived to the eye, that is to say, In the object, if we
look directly on it, and in the Glass or Water, when we look upon it in the
line of reflection, which in effect is the third proposition, namely, That image
and color is but an apparition to us of that motion, agitation, or alteration,
which the object works in the brain or spirits, or some internal substance in
the head.

But that from all lucid, shining, and illuminate bodies, there is a motion
produced to the eye, and through the eye, to the Optic Nerve and so into the
Brain, by which the apparition of light or color is effected, is not hard to
prove. And first, it is evident that the Fire, the only lucid body here upon
Earth, works by motion equally every way, insomuch as the motion thereof
stopped or enclosed, it is presently extinguished, and no more fire. And
further, That that motion whereby the fire works, is dilation and contraction
of it self alternately, commonly called Scintillation, or glowing, is manifest
also by experience; from such motion in the fire must needs arise a rejection,
or casting from it self off that part of the medium which is contiguous to it,
whereby that part also rejects the next, and so successively one part beats
back another to the very eye, and in the same manner the exterior part of the
eye presses the interior, (the Laws of refraction still observed.) Now the
interior coat of the eye is nothing else but a piece of the Optic Nerve, and
therefore the motion is still continued thereby into the Brain, and by
resistance or re-action of the Brain, is also a rebound into the Optic Nerve
again, which we not conceiving as motion or rebound from within, do think it is
without, and call it Light, as has been already showed by the experience of a
stroke: We have no reason to doubt that the Fountain of Light, the Sun,
works by any other ways then the Fire, at least in this matter; and thus all
vision has its original from such motion as is here described; for where there
is no light, there is no sight; and therefore color must be the same thing
with light, as being the effect of the lucid bodies, their difference being
only this, That when the light comes directly from the Fountain to the eye,
or indirectly by reflection from clean and polite bodies, and such as have not
any polite bodies, and such as have not any particular motion internal to alter
it, we call it light; but when it comes to the eye by reflection from uneven,
rough, and course bodies, or such as are affected with internal motion of their
own that may alter it, then we call it Color; color and light differing only
in this, that the one is pure, and the other perturbed light; by that which
has been said, not only the truth of the third proposition, but also the
whole manner of producing light and color, is apparent.

As color is not inherent in the object, but an effect thereof upon us, caused
by such motion in the object as has been described; so neither is sound in the
thing we hear, but in our selves; one manifest sign thereof, is, That as man
may see, so also he may hear double and trebble by multiplication of Echoes,
which Echoes are sounds as well as the Original; and not being in one and the
same place, cannot be inherent in the body that makes them; nothing can make
any thing which is not in it self; the Clapper of a Bell has no sound in it,
but motion, and makes motion in the internal parts of the Bell; so the Bell
has motion and not sound, that imparteth motion to the air; and the air has
motion, but not sound; the air imparteth motion by the ear and nerve unto the
Brain; and the Brain has motion, but not sound; from the Brain it reboundeth
back into the Nerves outward, and thence it becomes an Apparition without,
which we call sound; And to proceed to the rest of the senses, it is apparent
enough, that the smell and taste of the same thing are not the same to every
man, and therefore are not in the thing smelt or tasted, but in the men; so
likewise the heat we feel from the fire is manifestly in us, and is quite
different from the heat which is in the fire; for our heat is pleasure or pain,
according as it is great or moderate; but in the cool there is no such thing:
By this the last is proved, viz. that as in vision, so also in Conceptions that
arise from other senses, the subject of their inherence is not in the object,
but in the Sentinent; And from hence also it follows that whatsoever
accidents or qualities our senses make us think there be in the world, they be
not there, but are seeming and apparitions only; the things that really are in
the world without us, are those motions by which these seemings are caused; and
this is the great deception of sense, which also is to be by sense corrected:
for as sense tells me when I see directly, that the color seems to be in
the object; so also sense tells me when I see by reflection, that color is
in the object. But now I am out of the way from the outward Creation of Man, in
whom there is a principle of more fine and reflexive reason, which hangs on,
though not in that manner, in the more perfect kind of Brutes, as sense also
(loath to be curbed with too narrow compass) lays hold upon some kind of
plants, as in those sundry sorts of Zoophyta, but in the rest there are no
further footsteps discovered of an animadversive form abiding in them; yet
there be the effects of an inadvertent form ((...)) of materiated or
incorporated Art or seminal Reason; I say it is no uneven jot to pass from the
more faint and obscure example of Spermatical life, to the more Considerable
effects of general Motion in Mineralls, Metalls, nor yet to say any thing of
the Medicines extracted, mortified, fixed, dissolved and incorporated with their
proper Veagles, because we have intended it our last business to return to
Mineralls, Metals, and sundry Meteors, whose easy and rude shapes have no
need of any particular principle of life, or Spermatical form distinct from the
rest, or motion of the particles of the matter.

But there is that curiosity of form and beauty in the more noble kind of
Plants, bearing such a sutableness and harmony with the more refined sense and
sagacity of the soul of Man, that he cannot choose (his intellectual touch
being so sweetly gratified by what it deprehends in such like objects,) but
acknowledge that some hidden cause much akin to his own nature that is
intellectual, is the contriver and perfecter of these so pleasant spectacles in
the world.

Nor is it at all to the purpose to object that this business of Beauty and
comeliness of proportion is but a conceit, because some men acknowledge no such
thing, and all things are alike handsome to them, who yet notwithstanding have
the use of their eyes as well as other folks; for I say, this rather makes for
what we aim at, that Pulchritudo is conveyed indeed by the outward senses unto
the soul, but a more intellectual faculty is that which relishes it; as an
Astrologicall, or better, a Geometrical Scheam is let in by the eyes, but the
Demonstration is discerned by Reason: And therefore it is more rational to
affirm, that some intellectual principle was the Author of this Pulchritude of
things, then that they should be thus fashioned without the help of that
principle: And to say there is no such thing as Pulchritude, and some say,
there is no way to felicity; The first, I answer, is because some men's souls
are so dull and stupid. And the second is that they never knew The way to
bliss, The first cannot relish all objects alike in that respect; The second
knows not Happiness, nor the way to long life, nor the means to Health, nor how
to return from Age to Youth, etc. which is as absurd and groundless as to
conclude there is no such thing as Reason and Demonstration, because a natural
fool cannot reach unto it. But that there is such a thing as The way to Bliss,
Long life, and a certain way to Health, not as yet known in England, I will
demonstrate in a Treatise by it self; The way to Health I shall show you anon
in this book, the rest in another Part, as I promised you.

Now that there is such a thing as Beauty, and that it is acknowledged by the
whole generations of men, to be in Trees, flowers and fruits, and the adorning
of buildings in all Ages, is an example, and undeniable testimony; for what is
more and ordinary with them then taking in flowers and fruitage for the
garnishing of their work? Besides I appeal to any man that is not sunk into so
forlorn a pitch of Degeneracy; that he is as stupid to these things as the
basest of Beasts, whether for example, a rightly cut Tetrae^rum, cube or
Icosa^drum, have no more pulchritude in them, then any rude broken s^one lying
in the field or highways; Or to name other solid Figures which though they be
not regular properly so called, yet have a settled Idea, and Nature, as a Cone,
Sphere, or Cylinder, whether the sight of these do not gratify the minds of
men more, and pretend to more elegancy of shape, then those rude cuttings or
chippings of freestone that fall from the Masons hands, and serve for nothing
but to fill up the middle of the wall, and so to be hid from the eyes of Man
for their ugliness: And it is observable, That if Nature shape any thing near
this Geometrical accuracy, that we take notice of it with much content and
pleasure, as if it be but exactly round, as there be abundance of such stones
upon Mesque, a hill in Arabia, I have seen them there, or ordinarily
Quinquangular, or have the sides but parallels, though the Angles be unequal,
as is seen in some little stones, and in a kind of Alablaster found here in
England, and other pretty stones found upon Bulverton-hill near Sidmouth in
Devonshire; and near Stratford upon Avon, and in Tyms Grove at Colton in
Warwickeshire, are found such stones that grow naturally carved with various
works, some with Roses, others with Lions, Eagles, and all manner of
delightful works; These stones I say, gratify our sight, as having a nearer
cognation with the soul of man that is rational and intellectual, and therefore
is well pleased when it meets with any outward object that fits and agrees with
those congenite Ideas her own nature is furnished with: For Symmemetry,
Equality, and Correspondency of parts, is the discernment of Reason, not the
object of Sense, as I have in another place proved.

Now therefore it being evident, that there is such a thing as Beauty, Symmetry
and Comeliness of proportion, (to say nothing of the delightful mixture of
colors, and that this is the proper object of the Understanding and Reason;
for these things be not taken notice of by the Beasts) I think I may safely
infer, that whatsoever is the first and principal cause of changing the fluid
and undeterminated Matter into shapes so comely and symmetrical, as we see in
flowers and trees, is an understanding Principle, and knows both the nature of
man, and of those objects he offers to his sight in this outward and visible
world, and would have man search and find out those secrets by the which he
might keep his body in health many hundreds of years, and at last find the way
to Bliss; for these things cannot come by chance, or by a Multiranious attempt
of the parts of the matter upon themselves, for then it were likely that the
species of things though some might hit right, yet most would be maimed and
ridiculous; but now there is not any ineptitude in any thing which is a sign
that the fluidnesse of the matter is guided and determined by the overpowering
counsel of an eternal mind.

If it were not needless, I might instance in sundry kinds of flowers herbs
and trees; but these objects being so obvious, and every man's fancy being
brauched with the remembrance of Roses, Marigolds, Gelliflowers, Pionies,
Tulips, Pausies, Primroses, the leaves and clusters of the Vine etc. Of all
which you must confess that there is in them beauty and symetry, and use in
Physic, and grateful proportion; I hold it superfluity to weary you with any
longer induction, but shall pass on to those considerations behind, of their
seed, signaure and usefullness, and shall pass through them very briefly, and
then I shall come to mineral Medicines, these observables being very necessary
first to be known by way of an Introduction, and as ordinary and easily
Intelligible.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Seeds and Signatures of Plants, and wherefore GOD made them.

EVery plant has its seed; Rosy Crucians therefore say there are secret
Mysteries lie hidden in them, which should be our delight to find out; for
Divine Providence made all good for the use of man: And this being no necessary
result of the motion of the matter, as the whole contrivance of the plant
indeed is not; and it being of great consequence that they have Seed for the
continuance of propagation of their whole Species, and for the gratifying of
man's Art also, industry and necessity, (for much of Husbandry and Gardening
lies in this) it cannot but be the Act of Counsel to furnish the several kinds
of Plants with their Seeds, especially the Earth being of such a nature that
though at first for a while it might bring forth all manner of Plantts, (as
some will have it also to have brought forth all kinds of Animals) yet at last
it would grow so sluggish, that without the advantage of those small
compendious principles of generation, the Grain of Seed would yield no such
births, no more then a Pump grown dry will yield any Water, unless you pour a
little Water into it first, and then for so many Basins full, you may fetch up
as many Tankards full.

Nor is it material to object that stinking Weeds, and poisonous Plants bear
Seed too, as well as the most pleasant and useful; for even those stinking
Weeds, and poisonous Plants have their use in Rosy Crucian Physic, as you
shall know hereafter; besides our common Physick-Mongers often use them as
their Fancy guides them, grounded upon no other reason then woeful and deadly
experience; sometimes the industry of man is exercised by them to weed them out
where they are hurtful, which reasons if they seem fleight, let us but
consider, that if humane industry had nothing to conflict and struggle with,
the fire of man's spirit would behalf extinguished in the flesh, and then we
shall acknowledge that that which I have alleged is not so contemptible nor
invalid.

But secondly, Who knows but it is so with poisonous Plants, as vulgarly is
fancyed concerning Toads, and other poisonous Serpents that lick the Venom from
off the Earth? So poisonous Plants may well draw to them all the Malign Juice
and nourishment, that the other may be more pure and defaecate, as there are
Recepticles in the body of man, and Emunctories to drain them of superfluous
Choler and Melancholy, etc.

Lastly, It is very well known by them that know any thing in Nature and
Physic, That those Herbs that the rude and ignorant would call Weeds, are the
materials of very sovereign Medicines, that Aconitum Hyemale, or Winter Wolfs
bain, that otherwise is rank poison, is reported to prevail mightily against
the biting of Vipers, Scorpions, and mad dogs, which Sir Christopher Heydon
assenteth unto; and that that plant that bears death in the very Name of it,
Solanum Lethiferum, prevents death by procuring sleep, if it be ayplyed in a
Fever; nor are those things to be deemed uprofitable, say the Rosy Crucians,
whose use our heavy ignorance will not let us understand; but they will teach
us as follows.

We come now to the signatures of plants, which indeed respects us more
properly and adaequately then the other, and is a Key (as Rosy Crucians say)
to enter man into the knowledge and use of the Treasures of nature; I demand
therefore, Whether it be not a very easy and Genuine inference from the
observing that several herbs are marked with some mark or sign that intimates
their virtue, what they are good for; and there being such a creature as man in
the World that can read and understand these signs and characters, hence to
collect that the Author both of man and them, knew the nature of them both; and
besides divine providence would only initiate and enter mankind in the useful
knowledge of her Treasures by the Seraphical illuminated Rosy Crucians,
leaving the rest to employ the vulgar that they might not be idle; for the
Theater of the World is an exercise of man's wit, and therefore all things are
in some measure obscure and intricate; that the sedulity of that divine spark,
the soul of man, may have matter of conquest and triumph, when he has done
bravely by a superadvenient assistance of God.

But that there be some plants that bear a very evident signature of their
nature and use, for example, Capillus veneris, Politrichon, or Maidenhair; the
Lie in which it is sodden or infused, is good to wash the head, and make the
hair grow in those places that are bare; the decoction of Quinces, which are a
downey and hairy Fruit, is accounted good for the fetching again hair that has
been fallen by the French Pox; the Leaf of Balm and Alleluia, or Wood Sorrel,
as also the roots of Anthora, represent the heart in figure, and are Cordiacal.

Walnuts bear the whole signature of the head; the outward green Cortex
answers to the Pericranium, and a Salt made of it is singular good for Wounds
in that part, as the Kernel is good for the Brains, which it resembles.

Vmbelicus Veneris is powerful to provoke lust, as Doctor Culpepper affirms; as
also your several sorts of Satyrions, which have the evident resemblance of the
genetal parts upon them; Aron especially, and all your Orchisses, that they
have given Names unto, from some beast or other, as Cynosorchis, Orchis Miodes,
Tragorchis, etc. the last whereof notoriorious for its Goatish smell, and Tufts
not unlike the Beard of that Lecherous Animal, is of all the rest the most
powerful incentive to lust.

The Leaves of Hypericon are very thick pricked, or pointed with little holes,
and it is a singular good Wound-herb, as useful also for de-obstructing the
pores of the body.

Scorpioides, Echium, or Scorpions grass, is like the crooked Tail of a
Scorpion; and Ophioglossum, or Adders Tongue, has a very plain and perfect
resemblance of the Tongue of a Serpent; as also Ophioscorodon of the entire
head and upper-parts of the body; and these are all held very good against
poison, and the biting of Serpents; and generally all such plants as are
speckled with spots like the Skins of Vipers, or other venomous creatures, are
known to be good against the stings or bitings of them, and are powerful
objects against poison.

Thus did divine providence by natural Hieroglyphics, read short Lectures to
the rude wit of vulgar man; others of the Seraphically illuminated Fraternity,
being entered, and sufficiently experienced of these, found out the rest, it
being very reasonable that other herbs that had not such signatures, might be
very good for Medicinal uses, as well as they that had.

Rosy Crucians have quickened and actuated their Phlegmatic natures to more
frequent and effectual venery; for their long lives health, and youthfulness,
shows they were not very fiery, to say nothing of their happiness, riches,
wisdom and virtue, because I have in my Treatise of The way to bliss, spoken
of it largely.

CHAP. VII.
Of the usefulness of Plants, and of the Works of God.

YOu shall now briefly take notice of the usefulnes and profitableness of plants
both for Physic and Food, and then pass on to the consideration of the
inspired Rosy Crucians, what their Medicines are: As for the common uses of
Plants, Herbals teach you something; but I refer you to the singular Medicines
of Rosy Crucians in my Book of The way to bliss for the salvation of your
health, Animals know as much by instinct and nature; and that which is most
observable here, is this, That brute Beasts know as much as many Physicians do
that are taught by Herbals only; and these deny the power of God in the Works
of Nature, and the power of Nature in the skill of man, that it should be
impossible to make Trees bear fruit in December, and Apple Trees to grow to
blossom, and bear Apples contrary to kind in March.

Beasts have knowledge in the virtue of Plants as well as men, for the Toad
being overcharged with the poison of the Spider, (as is well known) has
recourse to the Plantane-Leaf. The Weasel when she is to encounter the Serpent,
arms her self with eating of Rue. The Dog when he is sick at the stomach, knows
his cure, falls to his grass, vomits, and is well. The Swallows make use of
Celandine, the Lennet of Euphragia for the repairing of their sight. And the
Ass when he is oppressed with melancholy, eats of the Herb Asplenium, or
Miltwast and so eases himself of the swelling of the spleen. The Raven makes
use of Cinquefoyle for the prolongation of his life to sometimes six or
sevenhundred years; and therefore I think it is that the Rosy Crucians
prescribe the oil of Ravens, Swallows, and Hearts for the use of man to anoint
himself, to continue his flesh and well-complexioned body from wrinkles and
lameness; and Dictamnum Cretense is much used, as I told you in my Wise man's
Crown; Cretian Dittany cures Wounds of what nature soever.

Which thing I conceive no obscure indigation of providence; for they doing
that by instinct and Nature, which men who have free Reason cannot but
acknowledge to be very pertinent and fitting, nay such that the skilfullest
Physician will approve and allow; and these creatures having no such reason and
skill themselves as to turn Physicians, it must needs be concluded by virtue of
that principle that contrived them, and made them of that Nature they are,
enabled them also to do these things.

Let us now consider the Fruits of the Trees, where I think it will appear very
manifestly, That there was one worker of Miracles, and inspirer of Rosy
Crucians; I might now reach out to Exortick-Plants, such as the Cinamon-Tree,
the Balsome-Tree, and the Tree that bears the Nutmeg, invelopped the Mace; as
also the famous Indian Nut-Tree, which at once (as the Rosy Crucians say)
affords almost all the necessaries of life; for if they cut but the Twigs at
Evening, there is a plentiful and pleasant Juice comes out, which they receive
into Bottles, and drink instead of Wine, and out of which they extract such an
Aquae Vitae as is very sovereign against all manner of sicknesses, the branches
and boughs they make their Houses of, and the body of the tree being very
spongy within, though hard without, they easily contrive into the frame and use
of their Canoes, or boats. the Kernel of the Nut serves them for bread and
meat, and the Shells for Cups to drink in; and indeed they are not mere empty
Cups, for there is found a delicious cooling milk in them; besides there is a
kind of hemp that incloses the Nut, of which they make Ropes and Cables, and of
the finest of it, Sails for their ships; and the Leaves are so hard and sharp
pointed, that they easily make Needles or Bodkins of them for stitching their
Sails, and for other necessary purposes; and that Providence may show her self
benign as well as wise, this so notable a Plant is not restrained to one coast
of the World as the East Indies, but is found in Africa, Arabia, and in all
the Islands of the West Indies, as Hispaniola, Cuba, where our men are
victorers; and several other places of the newfound World.

But I thought fit to insist upon these things by way of introduction, but to
contain my self within the compass of such objects as are necessary for our
knowledge, and familiarly and ordinarily before our eyes, that we may the
better (these things understood) take occasion from thence to demonstrate the
Rosy Crucian way to health, and their ordinary Medicines which to us are not
as yet known.

CHAP. IX.
The Rosy Crucian way how to get health; The causes why we eat food; Of the
first nature of the World; A measure of raw and temperate meat, and the cause
of the fiery, and soummy Gall and needless muddy bowels the melt; nature
careless of making the reins of Urine drawers, drinkless animals have none at
all; how to cleanse your self from these idle Bowels and avoid all diseases.

DO you not consider the weakness of man, what faculties he has, and in what
order he is in respect of the rest of the creatures; Rosy Crucians observe
though his body be weak and disarmed, yet his inward abilities of reason, and
artificial contrivance is admirable; he is much given to search out the
Medicinal virtues of Plants, Wights, and Mineralls, and has found out those
that were of so present and great consequence as to be Antidotes against poison
that would so quickly have dispatched mankind, it were good for us to
demonstrate the Rosy Crucian Medicines, now our land is afflicted with a
sickness called the new disease, of which all sorts dye, without remedy, for
none as yet have prescribed a Medicine, for young men that desire to live, and
for old men that wish for health, without which no life is sweet and savory,
then let us bend our selves to cure our brethren first, and endeavor to show
the means (besides the commmon Collegian Doctors drenches, or Culpepers way,
how every man may get and keep his health, that is something strange but a
vowed truth; the consent and equal (I mean agreeable to kind) temper and
dulling our four first beginnings, the staff of our bodies, for if this knot be
broken, and they loos toward their former liberty, they wax proud and strong,
and fight, for their nature is together by the ears, and put us to pain, and
lets the rule of nature, and this they call the disease.

Then to handle one at once as our manner is, and will keep our custom still,
to keep our health and body in temper, seems no such matter to me as the world
would make it, even plainly impossible, when I know all the ways and entries
to let in diseases and distempers of the body, may by small heed be stoped and
fenced.

We must needs draw breath and eat meat; for the cause I shall speak of it in
its place; and as this is not all clear and agreeable, so nature has her
leavings; and again labor and rest are needful, and perhaps we cannot choose
but be moved in mind with joy, grief, fear, hope, and such like passions,
though the Stoic deny necessity, says Des Carte.

By so many ways and gat^s diseases may enter, if they be not well watced and
looked unto, which may be done in reason, and has been done often, as they
assure us that have lived long without all disease and sicknesses, as John
Harding relates of a Minister called John Macklaine to have continued for these
fourscore years last past together in health, and after his hair, teeth, eyes
and flesh renewed, and became young again, and such like stories are to be found
enough if we might stay to seek them; some are contented for all but air and
meat, but these say they have often seeds of diseases lie hid in them unable to
be foreseen or prevented, as we find those meats that make the finest show, (as
Wine and Sugar) and such enticeing baits, to have hid in them most hateful
diseases and dregs in the bottom; so the air when it seems the best and
highest, yet is sometimes infected and poisoned with venomous breath sent out
and thrust into it either from below or from the scars of Heaven, and as the
cause is hidden and unknown to us, so the hurt impossible to be avoyed and
prevented.

If I list to let my speech run at large, especialy in other men's grounds, I
could find that that Division is false, first, (to come to meat anon) and then
if it were true, yet the cause of that infection not unable to be foreseen and
warded; but I am so sorry for the fault above, that I can the better take heed
hereafter; yet methinks it is a grief to hear the harmless and glorious divine
things above so defaced with stander, and no man makes answer for them.

Gentle Reader, be pleased to stay a little; If the Stars have no light, and so
no power but from the Sun, that most wholesome and prosperous creature, then
they hurt him most wrongfully, and reprove themselves very rightly. And again,
if they be but a piece of the finer part; and first nature, as it were, of the
World, as I have showed in my Book of the The Wise Man's Crown, then they be the
wholsomest things in the World; so far be they from poisoned slander: And so
let their Lights be never so grossly mingled in their meetings, and thereby that
state of the Weather changed suddenly, and from thence our body's troubled and
turned into Diseases, because they were not prepared and made ready for it, yet
the things are good and prosperous; and by knowledge of Astrology, or
influences of the Planets, and races of the stars, we may prepare our selves,
and prevent all, if we cannot have that happiness to converse with our Guardian
Genius. Now for lower reflection, it is not worth the answering when there is so
much waste ground in the World; then let us pass over to that other Breach; may
we not shun the leaving baits in our Diet, and take such meat as is most
temperate and near our Nature, and then dress the same after the most kindly
and wholesome manner, seasoning it well with labor, mirth and sleep?

And to be plain, I have showed in another Treatise of mine, entitled, The way
to bliss, so much noted by our Writers, what a jewel of health it were to use
all raw and temperate meat, or because we be wise and virtuous, and this Diet
would perhaps change our Nature of fire, but like Philosophers, a quite
contrary way; taking the best, when as none is lost, and leaving the worst,
which is that we now take, a Way I say, to strip of all grossness and foulness
of bodies, the only hurt of themselves, and is the Food of all Diseases.

I will tell you another way which you will think strange, but you shall find
it true; if the meat be temperate, as I bid you choose it, there is no hurt can
come thereby, (if you keep measure in your selves) save from your leavings;
these in so clear a Diet first will be very few; but if you would be ruled by
my Counsel which Nature taught me, those few should never hurt you.

Of all the Leavings in the body, there are three which the liver makes most
troublesome unto us, (for the rest are easily dispatched) a light and easy, or
rather a fiery (as some call) Choler; a cold and heavy mud, called
Melancholy; and the third is Urine, which I will treat of in the next Chapter
but those two the worser, and this fault is not in themselves, but all by
reason of the needless and hurtful bowels in our bodies, (as the Seeds-man
uses to sow good and bad together) which being of the same kind and quality
with those humors, do draw and pull them still unto them (as all other parts and
things do) for their Food and nourishment and so by the narrow passages to and
fro, their greediness in pulling and holding, and a hundred such means, subject
to great mischances, have brought in as many mischiefs, whereas Nature the
great expeller of her unlike, and Enemies, if she had free choice and liberty,
would otherwise with case, and without hurt, expel those Leavings, especially
so small a number of the better sort in so clean a Diet; nay, set the malice of
those parts, (those parts are Melt-Gall, and Reins) if there be not sufficient
store of other soul meat at hand, like a poisoned or a purging Medicine, they
use to draw good Juices, and to make Food of them; what is not manifested in
this chapter, shall methodically be demonstrated in the ensuing, for I intend
to be serious in this part of my Book, and will show you what Nature taught me.

CHAP. X.
Rosy Crucian Medicines made plain by examples, and those are above
controlement; That the wet Sunbeams declare some fine and foreign fatness to
nourish mankind. How to live twenty years without Food, as many creatures do.
Use and Custom a second Nature: The Bird called Manuda Diaoa, and the singing
Dog, and Camelian that never eat food. An experienced Medicine, and how to
apply it, Paracelse, and the Rosy Crucian new Art of Healing.

OF Aristotle it is reported, That he is the witty Spy of Nature, and as if he
had been made in this matter, he shows the need and use of the greater Entralls
and Bowels of Wights, and says very truly and wisely, The Heart and Liver as
the spring of Life and Food, to be needful for all VVights, adding to the
hotter one, the Brain to cool, and the Lights to cleanse the Heat, staying there
as if he thought the other three unprofitable; nay for one of them in the same
Book, (I say) telling the stories of the Heart and Camel, and giving the reason
why they be both so swift, healthful, long-lived and other good properties
above the rest enfeoffed, vouched in plain terms, the want of the fiery and
scummy Gall, as a great Enemy to them, for the Melt that muddy Bowel, that it
may be left out as needless in the bodies of the better creatures. The Meadows
near Cortinae and Muggadore declare when by a strange and hidden virtue they
bereave the Beasts thereof that graze upon them of it; the Herb is called
Asplenium; as I told you in the preceding Chapters, nay, that the Milt is not
only idle, but hurtful, which all experience, even in our selves has taught
it.

The Turks light Footmen, (I say, which I know not by what example unless it
were the want of the same in the Camel, making the Beast able to travel an
hundred miles a day, and so without drink fifteen days together) being in
their childhood purged of their Milt, prove thereby the most light, swift,
sound and lasting Footmen in the World.

As for the veins of Urine-drawers, as drinkless creatures have none at all, so
some men have but one of them, as if nature passed not to make any at all; if
we could forbear our drink (as these Beasts do by kind, and some men by
custom) we might the better spare them, and avoid many mischiefs in our bodies.

Therefore the odd man, Paracelsus, I know not by what light, if not of the
Rosy Cross, (cast in I think from seraphical illumination) not only sees
these faults, but also finds ways to amend them, and to cut the mischiefs off
all these three noisome parts, not with any yiedling Craft, but with Rosy
Crucian divine kind of Healing, with Aurum protabile, etc. so that to avoid all
diseases that spring of the Leavings, take of Aurum potabile, one ounce; one
pound of the Oil of Ravens; two pound of Miltwast, or Asplenium; a handful of
Cinkefoyle, of Dictamnum Cretense, Ophioglossum and Scorpioides, Echium, of
each a like quantity, and observe the Ascendent, and his Lord; and the Moon,
and Lord of the sixth, at your discretion, and take the quantity of a Walnut
every night and morning, and anoint the face and hands, and (if you will) the
rest of the body: Rosy Crucians have other healing and yiedling Medicines, you
shall know them in their places; this is such an experienced Medicine, that you
know where to find it; I need not show you to put out the sway and power of
these idle bowels, or perhaps it should not need, and in a stock that eases
our clean Diet Nature her self as she does in those Meadows by other creatures
would also quite raze and dispatch them within a few generations.

But I will go further, Hear a Rosy Crucian new and unheard of opinion, and
yet let not your judgment run, before you see good reason; What if we could
fast for ever, and live without all food? might not all hurt and danger of meat
be then forestalled? if other Creatures, whose life hangs upon the same hold,
by the sufferance, nay by the commandment of God and Nature, do last for ever,
there is no Reason but the same common Nature will at last suffer it in us; Let
us see. And to step over the Camelion, because it is a Cold and bloodless
Creature; what say we to a Bird, which is an hot and perfect one? a bird in the
Molucco Islands, Manuda Diaca by name, that has no feet at all, no more then
an ordinary fish, as Mr. Moore says, and I have seen her; the bigness of her
body and bill, as likewise the form of them, is much what of a Swallows, but
the spreading out of her wings and Tail has no less compass then an Eagles; she
lives and breeds in the Air, born up by the force of wind with more ease then
Archytas his Dove, and comes not near the earth but for her Burial; for the
largeness and lightness of her wings and tail sustain her without Lassitude,
and the laying of her Eggs and brooding of her young is upon the back of the
Male, which is made hollow, as also the breast of the Female, for the more
easy incubation, taking no other food, as alas how should she? then there is
found: but whether she lives merely of the dew of Heaven, or of flies and such
like insects, I leave to others to dispute.

Nay, have you not heard of the Little Dog in the West Indies, which sings so
sweetly all the night long, neither night nor day eating any thing? But there
be examples in our kind as well, then it is certain above controlment: Sir
Christopher Heydon says there is a Mouthless and so a meatless people or kind
of men about the head of Ganges, which lives by the breath of their Nostrils,
except when they take a far journey, they mend their Diet with the smell of
flowers: and lest you may think I lean upon bare Authorities without the stay
of reason, all the matter rests upon this reason I told you before, that our
life lay in the hand (beside a little exercise) of two like meats, one for the
Soul and Natural heat which is within us, and the finest and first moisture in
our body, the others is without any meat, of the same Temper with our body as
near as may be; to uphold the frame and building of the same which I said to be
a fine Aerie and Fiery flame.

And we are now grown so out of order, and so much estranged from our Etherial
first Moisture and the life of God, that we creep downward toward the Earth
through diseases, before we can reach the Life of the Vehicle; within sixscore
years we dye, and are hidden from the sensible approach of renewing life.

CHAP. XI.
Of Nature and her medicines experienced by Rosy Crucians, and of the occult
virtue of Mysteries; of the healing and consuming medicines and of their use;
of the Gout, Leprosy, Dropsy and Falling Sickness, etc.

NOW the Air it self, especially when it is ever more as the wet Sunbeams
declare, so sprinkled with some Fine foreign fatness, may seem sufficient food
to nourish the finer part of our Frame, wherein the temper of mankind, and his
life (touching that point) stands, which is as much as any meat can do to
life, (for it is not fed by common food, as I said above) though not enough for
strength, because the grosser, sounder, and tougher parts wherein the strength
lies, shall want food in this Diet, and fail no doubt greatly, yet life shall
last still, as long as Air and first moisture holds, in my opinion: or if we
think that so spare a Diet, we may mend it (as the mouthless people do) with
smell of Flowers: or rather, as we know Nature is able to draw Air and other
food which she desires through the skin into all places of the body; so if she
had meat applied to the stomach, she would no doubt satisfy herself that way
most finely, without the heap of hurts let in at the broad and common gates, as
we see by example for Drink, that all the while we sit in Water we shall never
thirst* And for meat, I have heard Rosy Crucians say, by applying of wine in
this sort they fasted without all hunger for two years together.

And in like manner I have experienced this, and fasted two days when I first
studied the nature of the Guardian Genii: But if that would not serve the turn,
and we must needs receive in meat at the common gate, yet we may let it pass no
further then the gate, and make the stomach in the mouth, which is the use of
some Rosy Crucians when they are Seraphically illuminated; and to provide
enough for life and strength, and a great deal better for our health, then we
do, because the clearer part alone should be received, And moreover I say, for
the clear dispatch of that our ordinary trouble and anoyance which your
reverence will not suffer me to name, although I might among Physicians, but
they know my meaning: But it shall not need to steal shifts and holds if you
will believe the Rosy Crucians, that we may easily fast all our life (though
it be three hundred years together) without all kind of meat, and so cut off
all doubts and dangers of diseases thereof springing; and for my own part, I
know some that have fasted and lived in the holy orders of the Fraternity
without all food ten years space together. What need we say more? if you be
both so hard of belief, and dull of sight, and reports of good Authors, nor my
own experience will sink into you, nor yet can you see the light of reason
shining before you, take here a few of ordinary matters in the life and use of
men, and weigh one with another; is it not as common in use, and indeed
needful, to spit, and avoid another nameless leaving? and to Drink but to sleep
especially? If some of these, nay all may be spared, why not our meat also? let
us see a little, and by example, because Reason is both too long and too open
to cavil.

To leave drink, which many have all their lives left; Elizabeth Drew, a
Devonshire Gentlewoman, is reported never to have spat, nor the whole Indian
Nation. Sr. John Heydon says, he knew one that kept the nameless matter forty
days together. And although this answers not the question, yet it shows
the truth of the former Holy Story, for if in so foul and gross a thing as diet
is, he could so long want it, why not these men for ever, in so clear and fine
adiet, almost empty and void of all leavings? For the grosser sort, which make
up this foul and shameful one we left before, as you heard, and the finer in
the passage from the Stomach through the former Gates were drawn all away to
the Liver, as the like is ever in us and voided otherways. To close up all, I
was at Sea with one that slept not one wink for these three years last past,
and Mr. John Knotsford is a Witness to this truth, and Capt. Windsor.

And thus we see these strange things fall our in proof, but how I cannot stand
to show: First, nature suffers them, then use and custom another Nature brings
them in, yet we may well believe the like in this matter of meat we have in
hand; For as the Bear (according to the guise of many Beasts that lurk in
Winter) fasteth forty days, so Eugenius Theodidactus, the reported
Rosie-Crucian tells of a Scottish young man, David Zeamons, that waited on him,
that by use brought himself to fast three days together, which by use might
have been three hundred as well, if he had ordered himself thereafter by slow
and creeping custom, as Captain Copeland calls it, and by such means as I set
down before.

So we see, I say, great wordly wonders prove plain and easy truths in the
sight of Wisdom: you have read of the wonderful works of God in the Acourate
Structure of man's Body, of his Soul, of his Senses, of Plants, of Minerals; and
Rosy Crucian medicine shall be that which I will insist upon, and that by the
means aforesaid (where are more than one, if this like them not, they may take
another) it is possible for all men by kind and custom to keep their health
for ever: Let us come to the next point, that is, as well to be recovered if it
were lost, and that all diseases may be cured. This is a point much harder then
the first, even so beset and stopped with all kind of lets and encumbrances, that
a man can scarce tell which way to set his foot forwards. First appears
Aesculapius, Hippocrates, and Plato, the chief among the Grecians, bearing in
hand sundry diseases of both kinds (both come by descent, and gotten by
purchase) hopeless and past recovery, and giving over the men that owe them,
for troublesome to themselves and to the Commonwealth: Then you may see Galen,
and his soft and fine Company with him, and that follow these are Gerard and
Riverius, and Culpepper, and these with a long train of hedge-Doctours; and
among these stands Freeman, with Caterers, and Cooks, laden after them with all
kind of dainty Druggs, stand forth and Cry, they have these many ages devoured
heaps of Books, and took endless pains in searching out the Nature of single
Medicines, and making mixtures of the same, and yet could hardly cure some
Agues, and other less diseases; But for the four great diseases, viz. the Gout,
Leprosy, Dropsy, Falling Sickness, they could never heal them, and have
therefore for Oracles set them down incurable.

CHAP. XII.
That the knowledge and virtue of Medicines are secretly hid from vulgar
understanding: how they may be gotten: and of what lies couched in the Oil of
Bodies: of the use, and how to fetch it out by Skill, the Haven of Medicine.

What is left to be done in this Matter? what shall we set against the weight
of so many great men's Authorities? Equally put them in the Balance, as we have
done hitherto, and weigh them with truth and reason: But where shall we find
it? say they; As it is every where, as Mr. Hobbs said, drowned in the deep, so
in this matter it is scattered all about, and largely spread withal; for there
be three things, and every one full of under- Branches, belonging to the Rosy
Crucian Art and way of Healing; The first is knowledge of the Diseases, the
second the remedies against them, and the third of the Appliance of the
remedies, all which should be traversed in this Methodical mysterious Treatise:
but it shall not need I hope, nay we must take heed how we enter into so long
and large a race, in so short and narrow a compass of time appointed,
especially being never run before by any man but our self, not one of the wise
Egyptians, nor our Ancestors, the holy Company of Moses and Elias, whose steps
we strive to follow, and their successors; for when they have once hit the
mark they have shot at, and gotten the great and general Medicine Caput mortuum
A. P. curing with ease all diseases, they think it straight enough, and an
empty and needless Labor, as it is indeed, to trouble themselves and their
Children with large Rules about innumerable Signs and Causes of infinite
diseases, and about other small particulars in appliance. Neither would I have
you set Sendivogius, Paracelse, and their heirs upon me, and say they have
taken great and goodly pains in this field; you will then force me to speak my
thoughts.

Though these men, (to let Philalethes, Vaughan, and Culpepper, Varlet,
Freeman, and other Pretenders, with some Scholars go, as too young and
childish yet,) by great light of Wit wherewith they flowed, and by long proling
both with eyes, ears, and hands, in the mysteries of Egypt, saw and performed
many of the Rosy Crucian deep secrets, yea and there got most of their worldly
praise, although I think a number feigned, yet Paracelse his new Art and Rules
of Healing are not good in my opinion; For first, against the example of the
Rosy crucians, from whom he had received all things, and then in despite and
disgrace of Galen, for miscalling his Countrymen, as you have heard, but
chiefly carried away with a mad and raging desire of Fame and Honor, which
Culpepper always despised, yet the Stars favored him, when I assisted to
set up that new, famous and strange work of Physic, now well known and
practiced, which Paracelse when he took in hand, a man unfit to do it, to pull
down and raze the old Work, and to set up our new experienced secret, which he
could never do all his life.

Then we see how it is performed, he sets down some false rules, some wast,
idle, and some wanting, and all unconstant, disordered, and unlearned; when he
does well (as he does sometime) he does no more then was done before him, and
brings in the same thing disguised with new, odd, cross, and unheard of names,
such as may move wonder at the first, but when they be scanned, Laughter, as
Mr. Moor says of Eugenius Philalethes his like devises in his Aula Lucis
Adamica Magica and Euphrates, and others of his Welsh Philosophy. And that I
do not slander them where there is no cause, I could prove, if this place
would admit a Volume. Wherefore let us follow the true and right Rosy
Crucians, as easily you may know them by their actions, if ever you fortune to
see them and be acquainted with them; and leave Paracelse, and the rest in this
ill matter, and Light and Apish, as he makes it; and why should we spend all
our care and thought about a small matter? you have a good Medicine and remedy
against diseases, when old wives in the Country, and some good Women, amongst
other Dr. Culpeppers late wife, and Simple men, on our side (I mean Simple in
respect of the Grecian subtilties about nothing) when these people have healed
most, nay, even all diseases, and with which womanish Medicines indeed, the
German Doctor (let us give him his due praise) has quite slain the Grecian
Physic, and here done much for mankind, by describing and dispatching our
close and secret enemy, which under color of friendship and fighting against
our enemies has this long time betrayed us and done us much mischief; which
thing one of their best Captains of their State, Fernell by name, after he had
been a while in Egypt, began to smell at last, and began to repent himself of
all his former pains (which we know were great) bestowed in that kind of
Healing, saying it to be but words, and the whole force and weight of this Art
to lean upon the knowledge and virtues of Medicines, secretly hid and couched
in the midst and oil of bodies, to be fetched out and gotten by the skilful
means of Alchymists; even so of that Art, which is so much condemned of his
fellows before and since him, have fled and do daily fly from the daily toil
and trouble of their fruitless and barren dead Sea: Now let us shift our
Sails, and fly further too, I hope of wind and tide and all; which we have.

But let us mount up to the mainmast top of our Knowledge, and see if we can
describe the Haven of Rosy Crucian Medicines, and see what marks it has, and
how it differs from other Creeks adjoining, lest at our journeys end we miss,
with more shame and grief, and suffer shipwreck. A medicine is that which kills
the face of that which hurts us; and this it does many ways, and yet also to
one end (which is is the end of all doing and working as I said before) for his
food and sustenance.

CHAP. XIII.
Medicines against Witchcraft, and to cure those that are afflicted thereby,
although their bodies be possessed with evil spirits, that cause them to vomit
up Needles, Thimbles, Pots, Glasses, Hair, and shreds of cloth, which by the
Divil were conveyed into the body. That Winds and Tempests are raised by
Witches upon mere ceremonies of Medicines, and of poisons; with the examples
also of other supernatural effects of unclean spirits, and of imagination. How
to cure a Witch, and to take away her power.

A Servant of God and Secretary of Nature, must be well advised of what he
writes, especially in this age, and of this matter (viz.) of the Rosy Crucian
Physic, lest he should, as I said before, fail in this design, and so it may
be a shame that he should be reproved, by the pretenders to those wise truths
he alone has opened to public view; then let us come again and sort our
speeches.

A Medicine heals us, and kills our enemy, either by dulling or consuming it;
for when it meets with a contrary of even strength (as when oil and poison etc.
join) then in strength they neither eat up nor destroy one another, but both
are dulled and weakened, and make one heavy thing which nature casts out for
an unlike and unkindly dead thing, which they call an excrement, or (Leaving;)
but in case it be of more strength and power then our enemy, then it quite
destroys, devours, and turns him into his own nature. And this consumer is
either like the thing that hurts us, in which sort even as every herb of sundry
qualities draws and feeds upon his own juice in a Garden; so one Poison does
cure another, and all purging and drawing things do heal us, and all Rosy
Crucians hid and Divine properties do work by plain reason; or else it is
unlike and contrary to their custom; after which manner as dry sticks, and
Tow, and vinegar quench wild fire, or other Fat Fires, before water, whose
fatness feeds it, for the strong contrary quality quelling and eating up the
weaker; so does any cold and dry thing as Bolearminick, Terra Lemnia, etc. cure
a Rotten poison: and so are a great number of cures done; which only course,
in a word, the Rosy Crucians use for Physic, and not indeed without good
success; we heard even now of two hindrances of healing, which our common
Physicians did take unawares, and Paracelse pretends to have found out before
me, gave any hint to the World of our experienced inventions, of Gold dissolved
and made potable, being incorporated with its proper Veyle, which we now use by
the name of Aurum potabile; but Paracelse straieth much in the making of it,
and knows it not no more than that tattered Doctor Freeman, so shamefully
called amongst Physicians: Whither in their poisons, on the other side, when
they think all cures thereby performed.

Now when the Consuming Medicines have done their duties, Nature expells them
for poison and unlike strange things, according to the Rosy Crucian Axiomata,
as well as the Grecian Rules, because all their Medicines were not approved by
the Fraternity, and were by their confession such: But if they had either
thought of the dulling nourisher, which as I told you, takes the nature of the
leaving or excrement, or had known the Rosy Crucian wholesome Medicine, they
would have made another reckoning; But let them go, and us see out in time
toward the Haven of Health, If the Art of Healing be nothing but destroying
hurtful things, And their stronger enemies (but equality will sometimes serve
the turn) or likes together; and the world be full of both these kinds of
Creatures, following the nature of their Parents of four beginnings, which are
as we see, some like, and some contrary one to another.

Then sure the Rosy Crucian Art of Healing is not (as some may say)
impossible, truly it wants nothing, but a man well skilled in the Nature of
things, A servant of God, and Secretary of Nature by name; for (I think) I need
not put in a Physician, to know what other part the Causes of the diseases,
which must be known and matched, because as Sr. Christopher Heydon the
Seraphically Illuminated Rosy Crucian, and learned Astrologer, well says, He
that knows the changes and chances of things in the great World, may soon
find them in the Little.

But our nought-Healing Bill-men, that daub Medicines upon every Wall and Post,
and some Leaches, will step in, and say, diseases are in some so great, and in
all so many, and man's wit is so weak and shallow, and the Medicines so hid and
drowned in the deep of Nature, that it is not possible to find them all; or if
they were found, to apply them with such discretion as Nature might abide those
poisoned Fraies and Battles within her. And again, admit all this untrue, yet
there be some diseases sent from Witchcraft and Sorcery, and other means which
have their cause, and so their Cure. I have read of some that have vomited
uppieces of Cloth with Pins stuck in them, Nails, Needles, and such like stuff;
and this is ingested into the Stomach, by the prestigious Sleights of Witches;
Others I have seen vomit up Hair, Glass, Iron, and pieces of Wood with Pins
stuck in it; another Corpse was dissected, and ripping up the Ventricle, there
they found the Cause of the disease, which was a round piece of Wood, four
Knives, some even and sharp, others were indented like a Saw. Others do
Miracles by casting Flint-stones behind their Backs toward the West, or
striking a River with Broom, or flinging of Sand in the Air, the stirring of
Urine in a hole in the ground, or boiling of Hogs Bristles in a pot; some by
whispering some words in the Ear of an horse or wild Stagg, could direct him a
journey according to their own desire. But what are these things available? to
gather Clouds, and to cover the Air with darkness, and then to make the ground
smoke with peals of Hail and Rain, and make the Air terrible with frequent
Lightning and rattling Claps of Thunder: But this is from the power of the Devil
(as some fancy) which he has in his Kingdom of the Air.

For the Remedy of these mischiefs, I have seen a man was present, when some
have vomited up Needles, Thimbles, Shreds of Cloth, pieces of Pots, Glass,
Hair; another would suffer himself for money to be run through with a sword when
I was not there, but it appeared to me a Fable. I have seen a Rosy Crucian
Physician cure these afflicted People. But if you will say, There is a
touchstone whereby we may discern the truth of Metals, but that there is
nothing whereby we may discover the truth of Miracles recorded every where in
History. But I answer there is, and that is this:

First, If what is recorded was avouched by such persons, who had no end nor
interest in avouching such things.

Secondly, if there were many eyewitnesses of the same matter.

Thirdly and lastly, If these things which are so strange and miraculous leave
any sensible effects behind them; Though I will not acknowledge that all those
Stories are false that want these Conditions, yet I dare affirm that it is
mere Humor and Sullenness in a man to reject the Truth, of those that hear
them: For it is to believe nothing but what he sees himself, from whence it
will follow, That he is to read nothing of History, for there is neither
Pleasure nor any usefulness, if it deserve no Belief.

Another Remedy for these Supernatural diseases, is, Let one watch the party
Suspected, when they go home to their house, and presently after, before any
body go into the house after him or her, let one pull a handful of the Thatch,
or a Tyle that is over the Door, and if it be a Tyle, make a good Fire, and
heat it red hot therein, setting a Trivet over it; then take the parties Water,
if it be a Man, Woman, or Child, and pour it upon the red hot Tyle, upon one
side first, and then on the other, and again put the Tyle into the Fire, and
make it extremely hot, turning it ever and anon, and let no body come into the
house in the mean time.

If they be Cattle that are bewitched, take some of the Hair of every one of
them, and mix the Hair in fair water, or wet it well, and then lay it under the
Tyle, the Trevet standing over the Tyle, make a lusty fire, turn your Tyle often
upon the Hair, and stir up the Hair ever and anon; after you have done this by
the space of a quarter of an hour; let the fire alone, and when the Ashes are
cold, bury them in the ground toward that quarter of Heaven where the
suspected Witch lives; this Mr. Lilly says he has experienced.

If the Witch live where there is no Tyle, but Thatch, then take a great
handful thereof, and wet it in the parties Water, or else in common Water mixed
with some Salt, then lay it in the Fire, so that it may molter and smother by
degrees, and in a long time: setting a Trivet over it. Or else take two new
Horse-shooes, heat them red hot, and nail one of them on the Threshold of the
Door, but quench the other in the Urine of the party so bewitched, then set the
Urine over the fire, and put the Horse-shooe in it, setting a Tryvet over the
Pipkin or Pan wherein the Urine is; make the urine boil with a little salt put
into it, and the Horse nails, until its almost consumed, viz. the Urine; what
is not boiled fully away pour into the fire: Keep your Hors-shoe and Nails in a
clean Cloth or Paper, and do likewise three several times; the operation will
be far more effectual if you do these things at the very change or full Moon,
or at the very hour of the first or second Quarter.

If they be Cattle, you must mix the hair of their Tails with the Thatch, and
moisten them being well bound together, and so let them be a long time in the
fire consuming.

You have heard the Cause of some of these diseases, and have heard the Cure by
Sympathy also; but these are without the compass of Nature, and so let them
pass with our fickle standing, which is daily and hourly so beset with
destinies, that a man can warrant nothing.

Truly destinies are so deep and bottomless, (to return straight Homer-like
upon them, and therefore it were best indeed to let them go, and the applying
of the Medicines with them) The rather because the other, (I mean the former)
is so slight a matter to a discreet Physician, such a one as is pointed out by
their old and famous Leader Hippocrates, who both in this and all other duties
of his Art made such speed, and so far passed all his fellows (as none since,
which is a good time, could ever overtake him) no nor yet come so near as to
keep the sight of him, whom they had in chase and followed.

Then for those Supernatural causes, which I shall not stand here to search
(for so they are called) if they flow from unclean and wicked Spirits (as some
think) they are not the Stuff of the things that hurt us, though sometimes they
dwell in and possess the body, but windy matters, much like unto those fierce
and sudden changes of the Weather, proceeding from the Influences of the
Planets and fixed Stars, and working the like effects in men's bodies, so that
since the nearest cause is Natural, let the rest be what they will, and the Cure
be done by Natural means, as we see by experience amongst us: And therefore E.
A. that pretends this, and puts the fault in the Faith of the wicked, which is
a thing as far above Nature, yet holds its Cure with a Natural Medicine, which
we call a Quintessence.

Although I am not willing, that sometimes this sickness is such as he bids us
sometimes withstand it with another as strong a belief set against it, but for
my part, I cannot reach it with my conceit (let deeper heads then mine or the
Vice Chancellor of Oxford, Doctor Owen, think upon it) how these beliefs and
imaginations, and other parts and powers of the soul or mind of man, can so
fly out of their own kingdom, and Reign over a foreign body, when we know
the Soul and mind is so fast bound in the body indurance, and so like to be,
until it be the great pleasure of the Omnipotent and the Omnissent God, the
chief good, who has committed them, to let them loose at once, and set them
full at Liberty; and this may be disputed with Grace and knowledge on my part;
Let this man therefore buzze against my knowledge, which he would have to be
more then Grace, I appeal to the Natural faculties of any free judge, whether
there be not as much Grace in me as there is honesty in him: All men censure as
they like of Stories; so let them pass amongst old wives tales for me, we will
severely follow our task. That if the effect do not cease which the object has
wrought upon the Brain, so soon as ever by turning aside of the Organs the
object cease to work (viz.) though the sense be past; As the stroke of a
stone, a blast of wind, puts standing water into Motion, and it does not
presently give over moving as soon as the wind cease, or the Stone setleth:
so the Image or Conception remains, but more obscure, while we are awake,
because some object or other continually plyeth and solliciteth our eyes and
ears, keeps the mind in a stronger Motion, whereby the weaker does not easily
appear. And this obscure conception is that we call Fantasy, or Imagination;
Imagination being (to define it) conception remaining, and by little and little
decaying from and after the act of sense, etc. If some of these diseases
spring, as Mr. Moore, Doctor Culpeper, and some others hold, and with good
reason, from neither of both these two roots named, but from a foul and
venomous breath, sent forth from a poisoned temper of the Witches body, through
the windiness of hateful eyes: For Thought fashioneth the blood and Spirits
almost at his pleasure; then all the causes being ordinary, and agreeing to the
course of Nature, they may be cured and put to flight by the same course and
means; which opinion, if you please to bear with my tarrying, it is worth the
handling, takes hold upon this reason, because (as Rosy Crucians do witness)
some beasts of ranker venom, do witch and hurt after the same manner; as an
old Toad by steadfast view, not only prevails, but benums a Weasell, but kills
a young child. And by the same means the Bever hunts the little fish, and takes
his prey: But most fiercely and mischieously of all creatures in the world, the
two monsters in kind, the Cockatrice and Apoblepas: again, for that the eye of
a menstruous woman (as all report) does spot the glass which it beholds; and
moreover Eugenius Theodidactus, in the wisemans Crown, tells of many folk
that through a poisoned prerogative, which a monstrous Mark of a double-sighted
eye gave unto them, were able to bewitch to death all those upon whom that eye
was angerly and surely set and fastened; but chiefly because we see them that
use this wicked trade, to be by kind of a muddy and Earthlike complexion and
nature, brought by age, as they be most commonly long life, and gross diet, to
the pitch of melancholy, that is, to a cold and most dry nature in the world.

For certain proof whereof, bring one of them out of that beastlike life,
brought unto merry company, and fed full with dainty Diet, and within twenty
days, as has by a Rosy Crucian been tried a truth, the whole state and nature
of her body will be so changed, as it shall not suffer her to bewitch and hurt
again; as you may read in my Familiar Spirit or Guardian Genius.

CHAP. XIV.
The Natural effects of Medicine: the force and power of mineralls in
diseases; with examples also that every disease-breeder has the cure or remedy
in it: examples that poison prepared cures poisoned people: Rosy Crucian Arts:
the virtue and power of the Planets and heavenly Stars poured through the
influence of the moon upon the Lower Creatures: of Hot Stomachs: of the
Etherial first moisture of of man: examples also of Rosy Crucian Natural and
supernatural cures: of the understanding of these experienced truths by the
wit of man: of Paracelsus and Culpeper.

LEt us come to the next and chiefest point; And there we must not say for
shame, that these helps and remedies lie hid in nature, too far for the wit of
man to find, unless we will accuse our own sloth and dullness: For nature has
brought them forth and laid them open as well as the Poisons and hurtful things,
or else she were very cross and ill-willing to him for whose sake it seems she
does all things.

Nay further (as Mr. Hobs says) her good will is such, as she has not only
laid them open, but given us ways to come by them, and means of speech, hands
and wit also, far above all other living creatures. And yet she has not left
us so, but lest by chance we might go wide and miss them, to show her motherly
love and affection toward us, she has guided (as Mr. Moor says) many witless
Beasts, even by common sense, unto their speedy helps and remdies in their
diseases: That we by the plainness and shame of the example (as Mr. Gadbury
wisely says) might be taught and moved to seek out the mysterious truths of
nature in Celestial bodies, as well as beasts that seek and find us Medicines
helpful in the like diseases, for our Terrestial Tabernacle. As to name a few
not unworthy meaning; she makes the beast Hippotamus in time of his fullness
and fatness to go to a reed, and by rubbing a vain to let himself blood, and to
stop it again by laying mud upon it; A sick dog to seek an Herb and purge
himself; and the bear to do the same after his long fast in Winter; she leads
the Panther, when he is poisoned, to her foul and nameless leaving; and the
Tortoyse, after he has eat a Viper, to Summer Savery: And the Hedg-hog is so
good a natural Astronomer, that he fortifies his hole against foul weather; the
Hog will gather Moss and straw to cover himself a little before it rains; The
dog knows the influence of Mars when he does sleep by the fire, and will not go
out a doors when he is in any evil position: and many such like examples has
nature laid before us for our instruction; by which at last wise Plato, Philo,
Apollonius, Pythagoras, and painful men of Greece, as they themselves report,
be they Elias or Elisha, from whom the order of the Rosy Cross came, (as some
say) or else as others will have it, from Moses, or Ezekiel, or whosoever, and
by laying reason and further proof together, first made the Art and rules of
Healing, to know whence diseases came, and how to recover them. And then
seeking all about for remedies to serve each turn, by little and little they
matched the most part of the lesser rank with single Medicines, and the greater
ones they doubled and coupled many together, insomuch as at last, which was in
Hippocrates time, they were able to heal all (saving four,) of the greatest and
deepest diseases, the Gout, the Dropsy, the Leprosy, the Falling sickness;
which are now healed by the Rosy Crucians only. But this race is below the
Seraphically illuminated Fraternity: now not a Physician that is lined with
Plush in England, Spain, Germany, or France; but holds that Long-life, Health,
Youth, not attainable, they therefore with one consent, amongst the other four,
call them impossible.

But to come to the point; what wrong this was both to skill and nature, they
do easily see and laugh at, which know that in this labor, they did not only
oversee and skip the Minerals, the stoutest helps in the whole storehouse of
Nature (although they could dig them out well enough to other and worser uses)
but also, which is in all, did let the Rosy Crucian skill of preparing
Medicines, whereby weak things are made almighty, quite escape them.

Wherefore to make up the Rosy Crucian Art of healing, and to make it able (as
they say) to help and cure all diseases came in, or rather went before them,
into man's body; The Egyptians in great savor too with nature both for their
soil and bringing up, so notably commended above all nations, (having for
example, to move and teach them even the great weight of the world as Sr. John
Heydon says) for wits to devise, and bodies to put in practice.

Whereby in short time they unfolded the knot why the Minerals were of greatest
force and power against diseases; and soon after, which was a divine light, and
in-sight, they perceived the huge labor of seeking such a huge sort of singles
and mixtures to be vain and empty, and pitiful among wisemen.

Because first, there is nothing hurtful and a breeder of disease, but it has
the heal and remedy for the same about him: For the wings and feet of
Cantharides, the Fruit of the Root Bezar, the Ashes of Scorpions, Toads, and
Vipers; and diverse other stronger poisons, both by nature and skill dressed and
prepared, do cure and heal their own and all other Poisons; nay as all stronger
likes do cure their likes throughout the whole world of diseases, even so when
a man has found out the thing that hurts him, he may by easy skill mingle and
break the temper of the same further; that is, make it able to eat up and
consume it self as easily, without any further doubt, toil and labor; But
especially because there is no one thing in the world, take what you will, that
has not the virtues of the Planets arrested and fastened upon it, and also of
the qualities thereof within it self, that is not as good as all, and may serve
instead of all, and that is not able to cure all diseases; which thing weighed,
and with discourse of wit and reason fully reached, they went to practice, and
by the like sharpness of wit, they found out the kindly and ready way to dress
and make fit these three kinds of Medicines aforesaid, which contain all the
Art of healing, all the rest are but wast words and grievous toil, to tire a
world of wits about a bootless matter, as says Des Carts. But especially they
rested in the last, which is enough alone, and yet not without great forecast,
to choose one of the best, and that the very best of all, for their ease in
dressing. Though Dr. Culpeper of late was not content with this, but ran
through the rest, as well to spite his enemies, the College of Physicians, as
to make himself famous in Taverns and Alehouses, as Paracelse in his time did*
whose steps he strove to follow against the rule of Rosy Crucian wisdom and
virtue; and the example of his ancestors.

But has every thing all the virtues and influences taken from the Planets and
Stars by the Moon, to the earth; That is, all the curing and healing power of
all the things in the world? very well you must remember that I proved above
all the virtues and powers of heaven, poured down through the Influence of the
Moon, upon these lower creatures, to be nothing else (as Captain George Wharton
truly says) but one self same life and Soul, and heavenly heat in all things,
And again, that all diseases flow from distemper, and as it were discord of the
Natural consent of the body; then that thing which is endued with store of
life, and with exact and perfect temperateness, seated upon both a subtle and
strong body, (which the thing in the bottom is) able alone by subduing his
weaker enemies, those distempered diseases, by strengthening his fellow life,
Aurum Potabile, in our bodies. And lastly, by orderly binding together the
frame that was slipped out of order, to do as much as all the powers and forces
of all the Plants, Weights, and minerals in the world, that is, to put to
flight all trouble of diseases, and restore the body to perfect health and
quierness.

But how is all this done? we talk of high things, and huddle up too many great
matters together. It were good for us to work them out distinctly; when this
Aurum Potabile we speak of, and strong tempered medicines, slip into the
stomach, it stays no long digestion, being already digested, nor look for any
ordinary passages to be opened unto it, but as soon as it is raised out of
sleep by his fellow, the natural heat, by and by he flies our, and skowers
about, as fast as the Dolphine after his prey, or as nature her self, whom Mr.
Booker, as I take it (says) to pierce bounds, and all to the purpose, that is
to seek his like food, and sustenance, whereby to preserve his state and being,
which is the purpose of all things in the world, as was said above.

Now there is nothing so like and near a perfect temperature in the world, as
the Etherial first moisture in man; But what this is, you may read in my book
entitled (...) Ventus magnus.

This is best and most in the heart, the root of life, then thither it hyeth
and preyeth upon that part first, and that is the cause why it presently
restores a man half dead, and as it were, pulls him out of the throat of
death; then it runs to the rest all about, increasing by that means the natural
heat, and first moisture of every part of the body; when this is done, he turns
upon the parts themselves, and by encountering with them in the same sort,
according to his might, feeds upon them, and brings them a certain way toward
his own nature, even so far as we will by our usage suffer; for if we take it
with measure and discretion, it will bring our body to a middle mean and state,
between his own exact temperature and the distemper of diseases, even a better
state then ever it had before; if we use it out of measure, it takes us up too
high, and too near his own nature, and makes us unmeet for the deeds of the
duties of an earthly life. But in the mean while in the midst of this work, we
must know that by his exceeding heat and subtleness which is gotten by Rosy
Crucian skill, and which make up the strength above all things, it divides and
scatters, like smoke before the wind, all distempered and hurtful things, and
if they cannot be reconciled and turned to goodness, nature throws them out as
dead, and unfruitful leavings.

But how do we talk, (as Mr William Tub the Astrological Fencer says) so much
of exact and perfect temper, when by the verdict of all the Quest in these
cases there is no such thing found in nature, but in heaven only? neither
heard you me say that it floated aloft, but was sunk to the bottom of all
nature; notwithstanding by a true and Holy Rosy Crucian to be sounded and
weighed up. For as heaven was once a gross and distempered lump (as I told you
in my book of the nature and dignity of Angels) by the divine art of God that
ordered all things (as you have read in the Introductory part of this book,)
refined and sundred away round to the place and nature where it now stands;
even so one of our gross bodies here below, being a piece of the same lump
also, and all one with that which Heaven once was, may by the like art and
cunning be refined and parted from all his distempered dross and foul
drossiness, and brought into a Heavenly nature of the best and goodliest thing
in Heaven: And yet you must not take me as though I would have (...) wit of
man, which is b^t a spark of the divine g^ (...) in my book called Ventus
Ingens) to be able to reach the excellency of his work, and to make so great
perfection; if he do but shadow it, and make a Counterfeit, that is, if he
reach not so far as to make all things, but to mend a few by this his Heaven,
all is well, it is as much as I can look for at the hand of any man that is not
a Rosy Crucian. Now is the time to rest a little, and pray for the good use
and practice of those that shall read our writing.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Rosy Crucian Sun, or Spiritual Oil. Of the Divine Works of God not yet
observed. How we make Ether. Examples of Medicines Rosy Crucian and Grecian.
Of Poison. Of the Supernatural Miracles of the Rosy Crucians, with obedience
to Reason. Another Medicine of Supernatural effect. Of the power and secret
skill of Nature. How to dissolve Minerals: And how to prepare them for Men's
Bodies.

EUgenius Theodidactus has showed you this Heaven, Nay this Sun of ours, which
is naught else, as I told you in one of my books of Astrology, but an Oil full
of heavenly Spirits, and yet in Quality of his body just, even and natural,
fine and piercing, close and lasting, able as well to rule this little World,
as Mr. Thomas Heydon says, the great Sun is able to govern the great World.

But what is he, says Mr. John Cleeveland, that can see this Divine Art and
Way, whereby God made his great and mighty work, viz: (...) as I showed in my
Book, entitled, Moses speech to God, upon the second chapter of Genesis? or if
he saw it, learn and match it by imitation? I answer, None but Rosy Crucians,
to whom I am a friend, and they God has enlightened and unsealed their eyes,
they have found the way lying open in all places, and in all Natural changes,
they see them pass and travel, I say still, the course that Heydon calls soft
and witty, that is, kindly separation: and if he be not swift and rash as many,
such as Thomas Vaughan and Street, but will have sober patience, his own skill
and labor will be but little if he please; for Nature her self very kindly
will in her due time perform all, and even all that heavenly workmanship be
easily performed; and yet I mean not so but that Art must accompany and attend
upon Nature (though with no great pains and skill) both forward and backward in
this Journey (Doctor French knows my meaning, so does Doctor Owen, if his
angry Censure will suffer his Natural judgment) until he come to his wished
rest, and to the top of all perfection.

If you perceive not, consider the way whereby we made our Either in our book
abovenamed, and matched our own first moisture, a thing Etherial, I say, and
almost Temperate; mark what I say, there is a further end in the matter, hold
on the same means whereby you came so far through The wise man's Crown, and are
gone so far in the Way to bliss, which is that I spoke of, and you may reach it.

Then you see the way to cure all diseases by the third way of Egyptian
healing, which they do, and we may well call it the Egyptians Heaven, and yet
it is a way far beneath the Rosy Crucian Art of Healing, as we shall show
hereafter.

But if they will not yield yet to reason, but mutter still Thomas Street-like,
that these Heavenly Medicines of ours are very high for the reach of men's silly
wits, here strowed below upon the ground for other lesser and baser uses, and
that no man since the first man, or if I will say Moses, was the first, that
first found out these inventions as they call them, after Adam; and that none
but the successors of Moses have been ever yet known to have found and wrought
the same; I will not stand to beat reason into such giddy-braindmen, but go to
the other two ways of healing, which the Egyptians found out and used, and
called the first Mineral Medicines, and these Moses taught the children of
Israel in the valley of mount Sinai, when he took the Golden Calf which he had
made, and calcined it in the fire, and ground it to powder, and incorporated it
with a Solar Veagle, and made the children of Israel drink Aurum potabile.

And the next mysteries and secrets, as may appear by Riverius his speaking of
Rosy Crucian Secrets, we fitly may call this second, kind, because that is too
large a Name (if it be lawful for us as well as for all other Learned men,
where a fit word wants to make a new) we may do well I say to call it a Cure it
self, because it is by that way of healing, whereby every self same thing
further broken may cure it self; and this inward and hidden thing as they say,
the outward and apparent by the course of kind, whereby the stronger like eats
up in trial and consumes the weaker.

If this leave be once granted, we will borrow a little more for the other two
likewise, because their names, are not pertinent to our purpose, and call that
Heaven a Cure-all, for so it does, and the next a Cure-the Great, because the
Order of the Rosy Crucians is always to match the greater and more stubborn
sort of diseases with the Stout and mighty minerals, and the rest with those
hidden cure-themselves, or at least in the lower rank of lighter diseases, with
their likes, only raw, as the Grecians use them, without any curious dressing.

Let us draw nearer a conclusion of the matter; because Grecians themselves are
able, and our English Physicians that learn of them, to cure the lighter sort
of diseases, and to heal all but the four aforesaid, we will leave the rest for
them, and so let this second kind of healing go called our hidden cure
themselves, and bend all our batteries against these four which they call
incurable, and see how by force of our Mineral Medicines, they may be cured: we
see the Poisoned spirits and breaths of venomous things, with what force they
work upon our bodies, things in Nature set against them, and how they consume
them; If you do not see by imagination, reason with your selves, if not
remember those above named, that killed with their sight; Hear one or two more
that work the same by touch as violently. The Hare-fish, a most cold and dry
creature (to omit that she makes a man's head ache by sight) if you touch her
aloof only with a staff, that her venomous breath may go straight and round
unto you, you die presently. The root Baazam in Palestine, as Pythagoras
writes, kills the man that handles it, and therefore they used to make a dog
pull it up (as Ben. Johnson says) who thereby died imediately. To come into
the body; that costly poison Mr. Linacre talks of, that is in Nubia, and one
grain kills a man out of hand yet stay but a quarter of an hours working, and
that one grain divided will overcome ten men; I hope you doubt not but these
mighty poisons if they were like in Nature to the four great diseases, and by
little and little to be born by Nature, and set upon them, would be able
easily, by their great strength to devour and consume them; or else sure such
heaps of poison as the Physicians give us would not dwell so long within us,
but would put out life in a moment. Now what are these poisoned Vapors, but
most cold and dry bodies, wrought and broken up by natural mingling, unto
great fineness and subtileness, by this peircing swiftly all about, and by
these contrary qualities overcoming? Then let us take the stoutest Minerals,
such as are called Middle Minerals by Rosy Crucians, or hard juices by Mr.
Berkenhead (to leave the Metals for a better purpose) be they poisons, as G.
Agricola says, but what they be I care not, and after we have by mere working,
cleansed them and stripped them of their cloggs and hindrances, broken and
raised them to a fine substance, then match them with their likes, the hurtful
things in our bodies, shall they not let all the rest alone, and straightway
cleave to their fellows, as well as a purging medicines, and so devour and draw
them out by little and little? If there be no likes, I grant they will as well
as that, fall upon their enemies, or good juices, and feed upon them.

Then what do you doubt is not a Mineral body far better? And therefore if it
be raised to as great a fineness, much stronger in working then the gentle and
loose temper of a wight or plant: wherefore these our Mineral Medicines, and
some other forementioned Medicines, and cure the great, as we call them, shall
in any reason, work more violently upon their likes, then the natural poisons
of Wights and Plants do upon their contraries, both because the like does more
easily yield then the contrary, and for that the lighter here is the stronger.

But if you cannot see these things by the light of mind, open your eyes, and
cast them a little into the School of Alchimy, into the lesser and lower
school, I mean of Germans, and you shall see the Scholars, especially the
masters, by stripping the Minerals, and lifting up their properties, but a few
degrees, to work wonders; as to name three or four, by quenching the Loadstone
in the oil of Iron, his proper food, they make him ten times stronger, able to
pull a nail out of a post, etc. And by this natural pattern they make
Artificial drawers, not for Iron only, but for all other things, yea and some
so mighty, as they will lift up an Ox from the ground, and rent the arm of a
Tree from the body, as Mr. Comer does witness; who reports again that he saw
a flesh-drawer, that pulled up 100 weight of flesh, and a man's eye out of his
head, and his Lights up into his Throat and choked him. They make binders also
to glue two pieces of Iron together, as fast as the Smith can join them To be
short they make eaters also, that will consume Iron stones or any hard thing to
naught in a moment; they dissolve Gold into an oil; they Fix Mercury with the
smoke of Brimstone, and make many rare devises of it; And all these wonders and
many more they do by certain reason: I could tell you, if I could stand about
it. In the mean time consider, if these or any other such like Minerals were
raised higher, and led to the top of their fineness and subtleness, and matched
with their like companions, or with their contraries, if you will, those great
diseases in our bodies, what stirrs they would make among them, how easily they
would hew them, pierce, divide, waste, and consume them? But you mus^ always
have a special regard, that the Medicines be not liker our natures, then the
nature of the thing that hurts us; for then they would first fall upon us, and
let the diseases alone, which heed is easily taken in minerals, things very far
off our nature, says Des Carts.

And with these experience the wonderful virtue of the oil and water of Tobacco
wise men I have known do miracles with it.

What is to be said more in these matters? I think nothing, unless through the
countenance of an idle opinion that reigns among them, they dare fly to the
last, and of all other the most slender shelter, and deny our ability to break,
tame and handle as we list, such stout and stubborn bodies: (what) because you
know not how to do it, will you fashion all men by your mould? wise men would
first look into the power and strength of skill and nature, and see what they
can do and measure it thereby, and not by their own weakness; there shall you
understand, that there is nothing in nature so strong and stubborn, but it has
its match at least, if not his overmatch in Nature, such is the nature of man's
body, of his Soul of signatures of Plants, of metals, and minerals, and other
things also.

But admit somewhat weaker as Herbs and Plants, etc. yet this, if he get the
help of a wisemans Art unto him, shall quickly wax great and mend in strength
and be able easily to overcome, that other; mark how the dregs of Vinegar, a
thing sprung out from a weak beginning, and it self as weak as water, is able
if it be but once distilled, to make stouter things then minerals even metals
themselves, all but silver and gold, to yield and melt down to his own waterish
nature, nay which is more then Mild-dew of Heaven, as Mr. Cooks the Vicar calls
it, wrought first by the Be that cunning beast, and then, twice or thrice by
the distiller, distilled will do the same, you may judge with your self, what
not only these, but other fiercer and sharper things, as Salts, etc. more like
to do upon Minerals; and by the way consider, if such mild things as wine and
honey, so meanly prepared, are able to subdue in that sort the most stiff and
tough things in the world, so minerals cheaper then Aurum Potabile, in their
highest degree of dignity would cure the stoutest disease (being prepared
fitly) that can grow in our bodies. Now let us sit and take our rest a little
and then we will conclude our Rosy Crucian Medicines.

CHAP. XVI.
How the Rosy Crucians make a Surgeons instrument; that it shall pierce
through any part of the whole body, without sense or feeling, and sound the
depth of a wound. The difference of Common Physicians Raw, Blunt, and herby
medicines, and Rosy Crucians: What a Physician ought to be, what they ought to
learn, and what they ought to practice, and then I shall love them of the order
of the Rosy Cross.

BUt I wear away time in vain, to speak so much about it is matter; and yet since
all are not of like Capacity, I will add one yet familiar example; when a
Surgeon goes about to search a wound that is deep, if he thrust at it with a
Butchers prick he would move Laughter; let him take a Thorwe, and it will pierce
somewhat prettily; but to do it thoroughly, and at his pleasure he will use,
(though to the great grief of his Patient) a fine and long instrument of
Metal. But a right Surgeon the common ones are but Butchers, such a one as is
a Physician, and Astrologer, nay a Rosy Crucian also, would touch his
Instrument, with a Loadstone, that is commonly found, to make it pierce
throughout the body without all sense or feeling; Even so good Physicians such
an one, as the Lord Marquis of Worcester had, whom he taught many fine
inventions: he told me of a Golden ball that this Lord made, that let him throw
it into a River or Pool, it would arise aagain from the bottom at what hour he
pleased. This noble Marquis showed me a key of the lock, that would tell him
who touched it. Nay if it fortuned to be picked he could know who did it, and
what was taken away (before their faces) and many rare things I have seen this
princely Philosopher do, which his excellency was pleased to show me; such as
these are hard to be found in this Government, where none of these can live
without great envy. If one of these Rosy Crucians be to encounter with our
greatest enemies, these four we speak of, he would not I hope, if he were a
true Rosy Crucian be so mad as to thrust at them with the Raw and blunt Herby
Medicines such as Dr. Scarborough, prescribe, no nor although they be sharpened
by Jacob Heydon, by plain distillations: neither would he, I think for pity,
sting the poor patieni with Eugenius Philalethes Martyrdom of rude and rank
Minerals, and unless they were made into a fine clean natural and temperate
quality, which would work mightily, and destroy either of these four great
diseases, Leprosy, Gout, Dropsy, and Falling sickness: but feed, Comfort, or
at least not offend, and hurt his patient; they labor in vain that practice
otherwise. These are the medecines which I only use, and which a good and wise
Physician ought only to seek and follow, and if he cannot find it, let him use
the cure themselves. But such a thing as this; I say, brought to this equality,
and fineness of frame and temper, (were it at the first, wight, plant or
mineral) was it which our father and founder Moses, (the chief of the Rosy
Cross) said is like to Heaven, and the strength of all strengths piercing and
subduing all things.

This was it that warranted his Sons the rosy Crucians to avow so stoutly,
that Art was long and Life short, and all diseases curable, when Hippocrates
the Father of Common Physicians, was driven by the infirmity and endless matter
of his weak body, and envious mind tinctured with Covetousness, and fickle
Medicines, to cry to Rosy Crucians, but they would not hear such hard-hearted
Fellows, nor give him long Life, he said therefore that Art was long, and Life
was short. And whereas he and his offspring were fain to leave many diseased
helpless, to the great shame of Art and Plague of mankind, is it any marvel
when as they prick at them (as I said) with a Butchers-prick? Nay, see what
they do by their practice, they be so far from all help and comfort to the
Patient in greatest danger, that they increase his wiser eyes many ways, except
the great easer of all pain, and their common Medicine Death, be quickly
administered: First, they make the Patient suffer the punishment due to their
own slothful Idleness, burdening his stomach with that labor of loosnening and
sundering the Fine from the Gross, which they should before have taken into
their Glasses: and then by doing these often, they clean tire his feeble Nature
(as it would tire a horse) when as by stripping the foul and gross stuff, that
dulls the working, and reteining the Virtue in a narrow strong body, they might
do as much at one time as they do now in twenty, and because their Medicines
applied are of smaller power and weaker than the things that hurt us, they feed
nourish and strengthen the disease and sickness, but for all this if some of
this company and side of Leeches have been and are yet sometimes able to heal
all diseases in our body (though with much ado, as you have heard) save the
four named remediless, yea and those as well in their spring as before their
ripeness, as they themselves report. Is there any Proportion in Geometry? Let
the College of Physicians lay measures why the Rosy Crucian mighty Medicines
which I call Cure-the-greats, passing these in power, as much as the ripeness
of a disease is above the Spring, shall not overmatch the ripe as well as the
green Diseases: Wherefore there be no doubts left, but this plainly true, That
albeit the Grecians is weak and halting in this kind of healing, yet is the
Egyptian, or (as now they term it) the Paracelsians and Mineral skill
sufficient to cure all diseases: Then I have paid the whole sum of my
promise, touching the second means and helps to Bliss and Happiness, which is
Life and Health.

Before I close, I think it very meet, while the time and place very fitly
serves, to do a good deed, and this shall be my intent to admonish and exhort
the Grecian Leaches, and their Scholars the English, Spanish, and French
Physicians, whom if they follow Hippocrates, Plato, Pythagoras, and his
fellows, I love for their Learning, and pity for their misleading others
(although it be grievous, I know to old Scholars, wone in a kind of Learning,
to unlearne all as it were and begin again, for their own Credit and Virtue,
yea and profit sake also, if they esteem that best, to leave those Gilded Pills
and Sugared Baits, and all other crafty snares, wherewith the World has been so
long caught and so long tormented, and to seek this only heavenly Society; as
(to you that are learned) easily may temper your selves, and be acquainted with
the ready, true, plain and certain way of Healing diseases. I think in former
time they were not greatly to be blamed and accused but of dullness and weakness
of understanding, in not applying and seeing this perfection, and supplying of
all their wants; but since they have been so often warned not with words only,
but with examples of Learned men, Matheolus Fernelius, Severinus Danus, Philo
Iudaeus, Diodorus Siculus, and other such like which have and do revolt, and
fly away from them daily, yea and by the certain deeds of Paracelse, it were
imqity to sit still: Well, few words will serve to wise and virtuous
Physicians, such as are of themselves forward.

But there is another, and I am afraid, the greater sort, less honest, more
Idle and Covetous, full of windy Pride and Words, but empty of all good
learning, and they are no friends to Rosy Crucians, nor they to them, and
these no gentle warning of any, no though a Rosy Crucian himself should come
and bring Truth her self along with him in person, would prevail: who care not
it seems if half mankind should perish for want of help and succor, rather
then lose their gains; And which not only speak foully but write foolishly,
against this overflourishing virtue, but also like the giddy people of my time,
where they catch the State, banish the men that hold and possess it; whereas if
it were a good Commonwealth (quoth Aristotle) the matter would be so far from
Banishment or Imprisonment, as they would esteem such a man as well as the Laws
(for he is himself a Law) exempt from all obedience, and judge him worthy to be
followed and obeyed as a perpetual King.

This untowardness and crookedness in men causod all our Alhealing Ancestors
the Rosy Crucians from time to time, never to abide their Sentence, but to the
great hurt and loss of mankind go into willing Banishment, you have established
a kind of Government among you (to pursue the same, like a little --) wherein
you rule alone over the weak and sorry subjects of men's Bodies, then their
health and safety you ought to seek only, besides enough to maintain a
contented estate also, which Plato allows his Governors, and not profit only
(that were Tyranny) both for humanity and Religion sake, for to omit Religion,
which they do lightly omit, if a Physician begin once to make a prey of men, he
is not only no man, but a most Fierce and cruel Beast, not fit to be compared
and matched and matched any where, if you seek all over the world as with the
misshapen monster of India, which Aristotle describes, and calls Martichora,
which being by nature or custom, I know not whether, very greedy upon man's
flesh, is with manifold and wonderful helps furnished, and armed unto it.

First with a face like a Man, a voice like a Trumpet, two fit things to allure
and call him in) and then if he fly, with the swiftness of an Heart to overtake
him, he darts like a Porcupine, to wound him afar of; and with the tail of a
Scorpion, as it were a poisoned shaft, near hand to sting him: furthermore,
lest all this might not serve, by occasion of Armor, he has feet like a Lion,
fiercely and cruelly to tear him, and three rows of teeth, on each Chap for
the in devouring. Apply you and the Apothecarries, the rest your selves, in
secret for my part, as I am not a Rosy Crucian, so I am as well as they, sorry
to see evil done. And I am loath to speak evil of it, and sure were not the
great grief and envy I do bear; and always did, to see desert trodden down by
such unworthiness, and some little hopes I have to hear of the amendment, and
so of the return of the truth, and good men out of banishment and imprisonment,
you should have found me in Westminster Hall: as I have been an Atturny in
Term time, and mean to continue my practice there so long as I live, except in
the Vacation, which I intend to spend in Chimical and Rosy Crucian Medicines
for the good of honest plain meaning men and my self Eugenius Theodidactus.

But some may ask what I mean by R. C. the Ceremony is an Ebony Cross,
flourished and decked with Roses of Gold, the Cross typisies Christ's sufferings
upon the Cross for our sins, the Roses of Gold show the Glory and Beauty of his
Resurrection from death to life. And this is carried to Mesque, Cascle, Apamia,
Chaulatean Virissa Caunuch, Mount Calvery, Haran and Mount Sinai, where they
meet when they please and make Resolution of all their Actions, and then
disperse themselves abroad, taking their pleasure always in one of these
places, where they resolve also all questions of whatsoever has been done, is
done, or shall be done in the world, from the beginning to the end thereof. And
these are the men are called Rosy Crucians.

FINIS.

