Certamen Epistolare, OR, THE Letter-Combate. MANAGED By Peter Heylyn, D. D.
With 1. Mr. Baxter of Kederminster* 2. Dr. Barnard of Grays-Inne. 3. Mr.
Hickman of Mag. C. Oxon. And 4. J. H. of the City of Westminster Esquire With 5. An
Appendix to the same, in Answer to some passages in Mr. Fullers late APPEAL.


Ovid. in Epist. Phedrae. Perlege quodcunque est, quid Epistola lecta nocebit,
Te quoque in his aliquid, quod juvet, esse Po^est.
LONDON, Printed by J. M. for H. Twyford, ^. Dring, and ^. Place, and are to be
sold at their Shops, in Vine-Court in the Middle Temple, at the George near S.
Dunstons Church in Fleet Street, and at Furnivals-Inne Gate, in Holburn, 1659.

To my dear Brethren, The poor Remainders of the old Regular and Confromable
Clergy of the Church of ENGLAND.
IT was fore-signified by the Prophet, of Christ our Savior, Arundinem quassam
non confringere, etc. That he should not break a bruised Reed, nor so much as
quench the smoking flax; that is to say, as Isa. 42. 3. in Mat. 12. etc.
Maldionate very well expounds the place, that his goings should be so gentle,
and his weight so light, that though he trod upon a bruised Reed, he should not
break it; and though he walked on smoking flax, yet he should not quench it.
Which shows (says he) quam incredibili mansuetudine, ac Lenitate usurus
esset: with what incredible meekness, and incomparable tenderness our Savior
should proceed in all his Actions. The breaking of a bruised Reed was unknown
to Christ, though nothing be more frequent in the practice of those, who most
pretend to be his followers in their Words and Actings. And if the bruised Reed
ought not to be broken, if we are to carry our selves with the spirit of
meekness toward all those which have been bruised only by ungentle usage; with
how much tenderness and compassion should those men be handled, who have been
broken by the blows of unprosperous fortune, and crushed almost to nothing by
unmerciful Pressures. For certainly there cannot be a greater Argument of an
uncharitable and unchristian disposition, then to insult on those that are
oppressed, and add affliction unto such as have suffered wrong; to multiply
Reproaches, even on guilty persons when they have satisfied the Law, and paid
their utmost debt to justice. Malice in this respect is far worse then Cruelty,
Cruelty many times is satisfied with the blood and death of such as have been
marked out for a public slaughter. But Malice commonly outlives Cruelty, and
will not suffer those to remain in peace on whom the face of heaven has
frownned, and against whom the hands of men have bin lifted up, to their
destruction and undoing.

Yet such is the unhappy age in which we live, that nothing is more ordinary
then the adding of sorrow to affliction, and reproach to trouble; practiced
most commonly by those men who pretend most to follow the example of Christ our
Savior, of which there cannot be a clearer and more evident proof then the
procedings of some men toward you (my dear Brethren) of the Regular, and
conformable Clergy of the Church of England; smitten into the Den of Dragons,
and almost broken to pieces like a Potters vessel: For when the sword had spent
its fury, and the hand of power filled it self with subverting so many men's
estates, the ejecting some, sequestring others, and sifting almost every one of
us to the very bran; there started up a race of men, who agreed together to
afflict them in a further measure, saying to one another (as did those Sons of
Belial) in the Book of God) Come let us smite them with the Tongue. The fury of
the Sword and the hand of Power has already laid them open unto want and
poverty; let us expose them therefore to contempt and scorn; let us add shame
unto their sufferings, and sport our selves in their misfortunes. These are
the men whom God has smitten, and now we have them down, let us keep them
under, not suffering them to rise in Reputation, or revive in credit, for fear
of drawing pity toward their calamities, or some commiseration at the least
to their grievous sufferings. It has been grown into a Proverb, that when a
man is once thrown flat upon his back, (qui jacet in terram etc.) he could fall
no lower. But these men are so cross of nature, and have so long run cross to
all public Order, that now, they will be crossing Proverbs, to bring us lower
then we are, disabling us of all means toward our subsistence, and laying all
manner of disgraces on us, which either an insolent Enemy could inflict, or an
impeverisht Clergy suffer.

This cry first taken up in that uncharitable Pamphlet, Entitled, The first
Century of scandalous and malignant Priests, was eagerly pursued by those, who
had got their Benefices, whom it concerned to make them seem as foul as they
could, the better to justify the wiping them of their means and livelihoods.
And it had been the less considerable, if only men so interessed by their own
concernments had kept up the clamor, and that some others who would fain be
looked on as the Sons of the Church, had not continued it as industriously, as
it was maliciously begun. One of our Civil Historians Hist. of K. Charles, fol.
144.
diverting on the late Archbishop of Canterbury, tells us that some of those
whom he employed as instruments and subordinates under him, were so far from
being blameless, that they were vicious even as to scandal, so far from being
of such meek and humble behavior, as was to be wished, that they were grown
insolent, at a rate intolerable. Which though it be as much as could be
thronged together in so narrow a compass; yet falls it infinitely short of that
in the Chapter Hist. lib. 11. 207
Church Historian: Who speaking of a great and general purgation of the Clergy
in the Parliaments Quarters, a little before the coming out of that infamous
Century, tells us expressly, that their offenses were so foul, as it was a shame
to report them crying to justice for punishment, that when Constantine was wont
to say, that if he saw a Clergyman offending, he would cover him with his
Cloak, he was to be understood of such offenses, as were but frailties and
infirmities, not scandalous enormities; that such unsavory salt was good for
nothing, no not for the Dunghill, because as the savor was lost that made it
useful, so the freting was left which made it useless, whereby it was so far
from being good Composs to fatten Ground, that it did rather make it barren;
and therefore that Baal should be left to plead for himself, there being
nothing to be said in their excuse. And thus far he had dipped his Pen in the
Gall of Bitterness before he had bethought himself of a salve for it, before he
considered whether the crimes had been sufficiently proved, as they never were,
which he makes to be the main matter, as indeed it was.

But M. Baxters hand was filtered with a sicker quil, and his Ink mixed with
more of the durty puddle, then the Church Historians was with gall and vinegar,
when he bespattered the poor Clergy in the Preface to his Book of the Grotian
Preface to the Grotian Religion, Ser. 23.
Religion, with all the filth that could proceed from a Pen so qualified. I
need not (says he) go to M. Whites Centuryes to be acquainted of the qualities
of the ejected: our Country have had too many of them, that have long been a
burden instead of a blessing; some never preached, but read the Common Prayer
Book, and some preached much worse then they that were never called Preachers.
Some understood not the Catechism or Creed: many of them lived more in the
Alehouse then the Church, and used to lead their people in drunkenness,
cursing, swearing, quarrelling, and other ungodly practices, and to amend all
by railing at the Puritans and Praecisians: some that were better would be
drunk but now and then, and preach once a day (remembering still to meet with
the Precise, least their hearers should have any mind to become Godly) but
neglecting most of the Pastoral cure, and lived much in worldliness and
profaneness, though not so disgracefully as the Rest. Which passage when I
read over, it caused in me so great an horror, and amazement, that I could not
tell whether I might give any credit to my senses or not; the words sounding
loud in my ears, but not sinking at first into my heart. For who could possibly
believe, that one who does pretend to so much piety, should show himself the
master of so little charity. To all the Acts and offices of which excellent
virtue, enumerated by S. Paul in his 1. Epist. to the Corinthians, cap. 13. he
has showed himself so great a stranger* as if his Soul had never been
acquainted with the Graces of it. Such as have thrust themselves into other
men's livings, and they who patronize them in it, seem to have quitted all the
other properties of Charity to the Sequestered Clergy, and retain only to
themselves the not seeking their own. For they seek after the Benefices and
Goods of others. The Rear brought up by a young man of * Hickmans defense of
the Fathers etc.
Magdalen Coll. Oxon (whom I shall not call a whelp of the same litter, though
he has pleased to give me no other title then that of a bird of the same
feather) who spends his mouth by telling his Reverend brethren of the Brackly
breed, that the Episcopal Government will be desired by the bad, and therefore
that they should take care that the Good did not wish it restored also; that
the Prelatical oppressions were such as might make wise men mad: that some of
the Prelates might with reason be called Antichristian, whose Courts vexed
sundry laborious Preachers, because they could not bow at the name of Jesus;
when as, sundry idle sots, whom they might frequently observe to stagger in the
streets, were never questioned; and finally he leaves it unto consideration,
whether it be not envy rather then conscience, which makes some to exclaim
with so much bitterness, against the late Ejections, Sequestrations and
Deprivations: and whether our late Sequestrations were not more justifiable
then those proceedings in the late Archbishops times, when men were suspended
ab officio and beneficio, merely for not Reading the Book of sports: In which
particulars although he does not ^ark so loud, yet he bites as close as any
other in ^he Pack who have deeper mouths.

I must confess that neither finding my self particularly named in that
infamous Century, nor concerned more then any other in those general calumnies,
I did not think my self obliged to take notice of them. It was my expectation
rather, that some one or other of those who sustained most wrong, would have
done themselves the right of a vindication; and not have suffered those
reproaches to have gained belief, by such a dull and dangerous silence. But at
the last finding the cry revived by the Civil Historian, the Divine Right of
Episcopacy called in question, the Bishops and Clergy ignorantly censured for
their Proceedings in Convocation, and the subordinates of the late Archbishops
(whereof I had the honor to be one) so unhandsomely handled, I thought it my
duty to appear in defense of those points, wherein I found the Author either by
inadvertency, or want of better intelligence to have been mistaken. And so far
I was liberum Agens, prompted by none, but my own good affections to the pulick
interess, to that undertaking. But so I cannot say of my engagings with the
Church Historian, being solicited thereunto by persons of all Orders, Degrees
and stations, as well Ecclesiastical as Accademical, in the pursuance whereof, I
could not but take notice of that passage before laid down, and do the poor
Clergy so much right as the nature of an Animadversion might comport withal.
Nec solum ad nos haec in juriavenit ab illo, in the Poets words; it is not we
alone, that are the poor sequestered and ejected Clergy, but the whole Church
which has been injured by him in her power and privileges; for the asserting
whereof, and rectifying such mistakes as I found therein, I first applied my
self unto that performance.

What led me to this Letter-Combate, with M. Baxter, you will find in the
discourse it self. In which you may perceive how sensible I am of those
reproaches, which he so prodigally casts abroad upon those poor men, whom the
late Ordinance for ejecting of ignorant and scandalous Ministers has brought
under his power, I must needs say, I might have slipped my self out of this
employment, as one of those whose casting out he has disowned among many
others, under the notion of being Prelatical, and so far interessed in the late
Civil Wars, as my attending on the Kings person at Oxon can ascribe unto me.
But in this case I will not sever my own interess from that of my Brethren, my
brethren not like Simeon and Levi, in the evil of sin, but like to Act. Apost.
14. 5.
Paul and Barnabas in the evil of Punishment, when used despitefully and
threatened to be stoned to death by the men of Iconium. For though we are all
guilty through human frailties of our several sins, yet for those sins we stand
accomptable only at the Bar of Heaven: Those scandalous crimes under color
whereof so many of us have received the punishment of Sequestration and
Ejection, that the Hands of men, falling so short from being proved, that the
nonproseuting of the Evidence to a legal Trial, may rationally be thought to
acquit us of them. And therefore I shall weave up your defense in the same
piece with my own, that as we fell together, we may stand together in the
recovery of that Reputation which is dearer to us then our lives, not suffering
our common Adversaries, to deal with us as Ignorant Jurors do too often in
passing their verdict upon the Prisoners at the Bar, when, without
consideration of the crimes or evidence, they resolve to save one half, and
hang the other.

Whatsoever I have done herein, as it was done chiefly for your sakes, so (my
dear Brethren) it is wholly submitted to your fair and favorable accepta^ion;
beseeching you to pardon the exuberances of that honest zeal, which carried me
rather to the maintenance of yours and the Churches Cause, then to the
preservation of my own Peace, and more particular Contentments: And to this
resolution I shall stand to the very last, without retracting any thing which
has passed my hand, in reference to the just Power and Honor of the Church,
or to the vindication of all Orthodox and Conformable Churchmen; which I think
fit the rather to make known unto you at this time, because I have met with a
report, that I should supplicate for a pardon from the two Historians, for
writing the Examen Historicum lately published, in which the Church and you (my
Brethren) are so much concerned; the eport was founded (as I have been nce
advertized) from a passage in one of Squire Sandersons Pamphlets, in which the
foolish fellow is said to affirm, That he would have spared his own and the
Readers pains, in his Pursuit of me, if I had had so much ingenuity, as to
crave pardon of him, as I did of the other, whose Histories I had also
quarrelled. What he has done in this Pursuit I am not able to say, not having
troubled my self to enquire after the Pamphlet, or ever heard more of it then
that passage only: But if he follow the Hue and Cry no better now, then he did
in his Post-hast Reply, etc. which crept out last Summer, he may be Shipped away
with the next fair wind to the Isles of Scicilie. So far I am from craving
pardon of this Squire, that I am sorry I have used him so like a Gentleman, and
passed by so many of his follies and falsities as remain untouched: And so far
I have been from craving pardon of the other, that being to write to him on
another account, I began my Letter in these words, viz. I understand you have
an Answer on the Press to my Animadversions, which I am very glad to hear of,
because I hope the truth will come out between us: If you can show me any
mistakes, I shall be one of the first that shall give you thanks for it, and do
my endeavor to correct them: If you can charge me with any viciousness in life
or conversation, do it in Gods Name, and spare not, I will not be unthankful to
you for that neither, because I shall the better know what I am to Reform, etc.
After which preamble, I descended unto that particular which gave occasion to
my writing, relating wholly to a third Person, utterly unconcerned in the
differences which were betwixt us, to which he presently returns a very civil,
full, and satisfactory Answer: If this be craving of pardon, I am guilty of it?
And for the truth hereof, I do Appeal to Mr. Fuller himself, though for my
better justification, I could produce two several Copies of that Letter, one of
them kept by my Amanuensis here at home, the other taken by a friend in London,
before it came to his hands; the certainty whereof I do most humbly desire you
to make known, to such as come in your way, who possibly may not have the
opportunity of perusing these Papers. How Mr. Fuller has dealt with me, I am
yet to learn; neither his Book it self, nor the name thereof, nor any of the
Contents of it being come M. Fuller's Appeal was sent unto the Author about
four days after the date of this Preface
unto me; Which has made me the more willing to lay hold upon this occasion,
of clearing my self from that poor Aspersion, which this Squire of low Degree
(they of no kin to him whom Spencer speaks of) has thrown upon me; not knowing
whether I shall trouble my self in making an Answer to the one, but being
resolved never to foul my fingers in a Reply to the other.

But all these Winds shake no Corn of mine, who have long since learned to
contemn those Calumnies, which from my first appearing in the Churches service,
have been thrown upon me: Nor can I doubt of finding the like resolution in you
(my Brethren) who have so long been trained up in the School of Patience, that
the suffering of reproaches, whether from the Tongue or Pen, from the Press or
Pulpit, cannot be taken out as a new Lesson, never learnt before. I know I
speak to men who are not to be put in mind of that, which you once learned in
* Aesopi Fabuloe.
Aesops Fables, in one of the Morals whereof, you are taught to imitate those
generous Horses Qui latrantes canicusos cum contemptu pretereunt, which use to
pass by barking curs with neglect and scorn; or to be told of that which you
once read in the Annuals of Tac. An. lib. 13.
Tacitus, viz. Convitia spreta exolescant, that contumelies soonest dye, when
regarded least; or to be remembered of that memorable saying of S. Cyprian, who
had suffered as much in this kind as the most amongst us: But having suffered
no more by the tongues of his Enemies, then Christ our Savior did before from
the hands of Judas, he thus encouraged himself, and others, by this Golden
Sentence, Nec nobis turpe esse pati, quae passus est Christus, nec illis
gloriam facere quae fecerit Judas. Which passages, though very full of use and
comfort, how infinitely short are they of that Celestial consolation, which our
Savior gives us in his Gospel, pronouncing Mat. 5. v. 11. 12.
a blessing on all those which were persecuted and reviled, and against whom
all manner of evil is falsely spoken for his Name sake; assuring them, that it
should be a cause of gladness and rejoicing to them in this present life, and
of a great reward in Heaven for the life to come. Let us therefore behave our
selves with such sobriety and moderation, such piety and Christian candor, * 1
Pet. c. 2. v. 12. 15.
that the ignorance of foolish men may be put to silence, and that all those
who speak against us as evil doers, may be convicted of their faults and
malicious speakings before God and Man: But more particularly let us not suffer
our selves to be abused, by any flattering and deceivable hopes of bettering
our condition by the change of times; but entertain Fortune by the day, and
patiently submit our selves to the appointments of that heavenly Providence,
which powerfully disposes all things to the good of the Universe: So doing, we
shall show our selves the followers of that Lamb of God, which opened not his
mouth before the shearers; the Scholars of that gracious Master, who when he
was reviled, reviled not again, nor used any unbecoming speeches in the midst
of his sufferings. For my own part, I hope I have so carried my self in these.
Letter Combats, that my language shall not be offensive to any, though
possibly the matter prove unpleasing to some, who are of a different judgment
from me in the Points Disputed. From whom if I hear nothing which may force me
to Replication, I am resolved to sit down quietly for the time to come, having
concluded with my self, not to engage hereafter in any of these unhappy
Controversies, which this unhappy Age has bred, but where some unavoidable
necessity shall compel me to it: For though Mr. Baxter has been pleased in a
late Book of his, to give me the Title of an hot Anti-Puritan, as I am credibly
informed by a Letter, which is come newly to my hands: I verily persuade my
self, that neither you nor he, will find any such heat in my Conference with
him, as may render me obnoxious to that accusation: But whether it be so or
not, and whether that which I have done in that whole Discourse, to which Mr.
Baxter is a party, will be taken for an acceptable service to your selves and
the Church our mother, remains in you to be determined; to whose upright, just,
and impartial censure, I do most cheerfully recommend my performance in it (the
other tracts having particular applications) as I do you to the divine
consolations of the Heavenly Comforter, with that affection which becomes.

The most unworthy of your Brethren in these common Sufferings. Peter Heylyn
Lacies Court in Abing don, ^^y 2. 1659.
Certamen Epistolare, Or The Letter Combat. Managed by P. Heylyn, D. D. with
M. Baxter of Keederminster, etc.
IT was about the middle of August last, that M. Baxter's Book, Entitled, The
Grotian Religion, was put into my hands; and it was put into my hands with this
advertisement, that I should find somewhat in the Preface which concerned my
self: That intimation gave me the curiosity of turning first to that which was
said to be of my own concernment, as indeed it prooved, not without much
amazement to me, that a man whom I had never known by face, and not much by
fame, should put such an unnecessary provocation on me: For speaking of the
various acceptations of the word Puritan, he lets us know, that with the late
Prelates a Puritan was either a Nonconformist, or a Conformist that in
Doctrine was not Arminian ( of which set Peter Heylyn gives us a description by
their opinions, Ser. 23.) My first amazement being over, I began to examine my
memory upon these two points: First whether in any Book or Books of mine, I had
applied the name of Puritan to any such of the Clergy, who being conformable to
the Church in Rites and Ceremonies, agreed not in some Doctrinal points, with
such of their Brethren whom M. Baxter there brandeth with the name of
Arminians. And secondly, whether in any Book or Books of mine, I had made any
such description of those Puritan-Conformists (for so I may express M. Baxter's
meaning) by their opinions, as might and did distinguish them from other men;
but not being able to find the remembrance (or any the least footsteps of it)
of any such application of the name, or any such description of the men, as is
described to me in that Preface; I began to consider with my self what might be
M. Baxter's design in it. Doubtful I was whether it might not be his purpose,
to render my name as unpleasing to the conformable Clergy, by attributing to
them the title of Puritans, because they hold not with those whom M. Baxter
calls Arminians in some points of Doctrine, as it had been before to the
Presbiterians, for standing in defense of the Church, and the conformable
Children of it: good sport it would have made amongst them, if such a (...),
ball of discord, such a bone of division being cast amongst us, we had fallen
foul on one another; whilst they attending the success, and taking opportunity
to go on securely, might in fine triumph over both. And no less doubtful was I,
whether it might not be done upon some design of drawing me into fresh
disputes, and multiplying those invidious controversies, which I choose rather
to decline. Amongst so many uncertainties, I thought it most agreeable unto my
present condition, to dispatch a fair but short Letter to him, to let him know
in what I found my self concerned, and to desire him so far to assist my
memory, as to direct me to such Book or Books of mine, and the particular
places in them, in which the name of Puritan was so applied, and they to whom
it was applied, had been so described. According to which resolution, I had no
sooner put an end to some business, which detained me in London till the end of
August, and renewed the acquaintance betwixt me and my Study, at my coming
home, but I prepared and sent away a Letter to him, bearing date the thirteenth
of September; but either by my own incogitancy, or the carelessness of my Scribe
or Amanuensis, there was no Copy of it taken; so as I am necessitated to hit
upon the matter and expressions of it as well as I can, desiring M. Baxter to
rectify my mistakes therein, if any shall be committed by me in laying down
the sum and substance of that Letter, which in brief was this.

The Substance of D. Heylyn's first Letter to M. Baxter of Keederminster.
SIR,
I Have lately caused your Book of the Grotian Religion to be read over to me,
and cannot but approve the modesty of your expressions, and the ingenuity which
you have shown in the carrying on of your design. Only I could have wished you
had spared my name, unless you would have proved me to have been one of that
Religion, as I think you cannot, or else have had some more particular matter
wherewithal to have charged me, then I find you have: For whereas it is said by
you in your Preface, That with the late Prelates a Puritan was either a
Nonconformist, or a Conformist that in Doctrine was no Arminian ( of which
sort Peter Heylyn gave us a description by their opinions) I desire you to
please to let me know in what Book or Books of mine, you either find the name
Puritan to be so applied, or any such description made of them, as your Preface
speaks of: Which favor if you please to do me, you will not only therein
supply the defect of my memory, by which I may the better discern what I am to
do, but give me very just occasion to subscribe my self.

SIR, Your very humble Servant, and Christian Brother, Peter Heylyn.
Lacies Court in Abingdon, September. 13. 1658.

This Letter being thus dispatched, I proposed these two hopes unto my self.
First, That M. Baxter seeing his mistake, would do me right, and make me such
amends in a public way, as might be answerable to the wrong he had publicly
done me; or otherwise that without any suspicion of pragmaticalness, or any new
desire of being in action, I might right my self. What I have done in the last
case must be left to the Reader, M. Baxter having failed on his part of doing
it for me: For after more then six weeks expectation, I received an Answer to
my Letter on Saturday the thirtieth of October; In the first part whereof, he
wishes he had spared my name ^mpuring it to his temerity, that he made mention
of me on that occasion, and finally acknowledging, that the principal part of
what he intended, was in a Book of M. Dow's. But scarce had he absolved me from
it, when he endeavored presently to make good the charge out of some scattered
passages, in a Book of mine against M. Burton, published in the year 1637. so
that it seems to be my fortune to be called unto as late a reckoning by M.
Baxter, for some passages in my Answer to Burtons most seditious Pamphlets, and
by D. Barnard and him both, for some things taken up here and there out of my
History of the Sabbath, first published in the year 1635. And as if this had
not been enough to quicken me to a new encounter, he passes from one point
unto another, charging me with profaneness in reproaching extemporary Prayer,
and being an enemy to the holy improvements of the Lord's day, etc. accusing me
for many unjust as well as uncharitable speeches, against my brethren, for
having some bloody desires, and making such rigorous Laws to hang up all that
are against me, for speaking more favorably of the Papists then the Protestant
party, with many other things intermixed here and there; in some of which he
disputes against me, and in others he desires to be satisfied by me: So that
taking one thing with another, he has afforded me work enough in returning an
answer; which being to long to be contained in a Letter, I have digested it
Letter-wise, into a set discourse upon all particulars which are offered to me.
Now M. Baxter's Letter was as follows.

The Copy of M. Baxter's Answer to the first Letter of D. Heylyn's.
Reverend SIR,
I Received yours of September 13. containing your favorable judgment of my
extorted discourse of Grotius his Religion, with your exception of that only
which concerns your ^elf. And first, you here wish I had spared your name,
unless I could have proved you to have been one of that Religion, which y^u
think I cannot, or found some more particular charge against you, etc. To which
I answer.

First, I now wish I had spared your name my self, for the reason that I shall
render you anon.

But secondly, I never gave the least intimation that I took you to be of
Grotius Religion, and therefore you need not call for proof of it; it is
another subject (the sensing of the word Puri an) that I am speaking of, where
I mention your name: I hope you think not that I charge every man with the same
opinion that is but named by me in the same Book.

Thirdly, Yea, I did not so much as charge you at all, that is accuse you, but
tell the world who you took for a Puritan; Concerning which words, in Answer to
the rest of your Letter, I shall give you the just account. I had read on one
day (above 20. years ago, when it first came out) your Book against M Burton,
and M. Dow's Book against him, and I think one of M. Pocklinton's on another
occasion; I certainly remembered the foresaid character of a Puritan in one of
them, and I was persuaded that it was in yours, and that something of it more
or less was in both: I now confess to you it was my temerity, the concomitant
of have, to mention you upon the trust of my memory, after above 20. years time
(for I never had your Book since) and now upon search I find the principal part
of what I intended is in M. Dow's, who charactereth them from their Doctrines
of predestination, perseverance, or nonability to fulfill the Law, etc.

4. But so much of it I find in yours, as justifies what I said of you, if I
can understand you, you deal with M. Burton, as the Puritans Oracle, page 152.
their superintendent Champion, etc. ( Preface) And your description of him
contains, first that he follows Illyricus in his Doctrines, providentia,
predestinatione, gratia, libero Arbitrio, etc. page 182. And to satisfy us
fully what you meant, you refer us to the Arminians, necessaria responsio, page
83: where (with page 82. 84, 85.) it is expressly manifest, that it is the
Doctrine of Pareus and the rest of the Contra-remonstrants, that the Arminians
there do charge upon Illiricus, and consequently that you do charge on M.
Burton, the Oracle (as you call him) of the Puritans, and so upon the Puritans
with him. If you say, you charge not these on him quatenus a Puritan. I Answer,
You carry it openly in all your Book, as if you dealt with him only as a
Puritan, and seditious, and so describe Puritans by him. If you mix such
Doctrinal charges, and afterward tell us that you meant them on some other
account, you satisfy your Reader, that understands you as describing
Puritans only, when you so often give the person described that name, and
profess to oppose him as such, and tell us of no other ground: And what else you
mean by their accustomed wresting of the Article in the point of
predestination, is past my understanding, there being no accustomed Doctrine
but the Anti-Arminian among the Puritans, in the point of Predestination, that
you can call a wresting of the Article; you add also to help us further to
understand you, that it is false that D. Jackson' s Books are to maintain
Arminianism, page 122. 123.

5. Sir, You are the expounder of your own words, and may give us the Law in
what sense we shall understand them, because they are the signs of your own
mind, which is known only to your self: And if you shall but tell me that you
meant somewhat else then your words in the common sense import, I shall take my
self bound to understand you accordingly hereafter; and if you require it, I
shall willingly publish an account of my misunderstanding of you, with my
following satisfaction to the world to do you right: But till you shall give us
another sense of your own, you must needs allow us to take your words in the
common sense.

6. I shall not trouble you with any more on that subject: But were it not that
in your writings I ^avour a spirit so very distant from my disposition, that I
have small hopes that my words will escape your displeasure, I should on this
occasion have dealt freely with you, about many things in many of your Books,
that have long been matter of scandal and grief, to men that have much
Christian meekness and moderation; Many reproaches against extemporary Prayer,
the holy improvement of the Lords day, etc. with many unjust as well as
uncharitable speeches of your Brethren, whom you took for adversaries, are
matters that I am exceeding confident you have exceeding cause in tears and
sorrow, to bewail before the Lord, and for which you are very much obliged to
publish your penitential lamentations to the World; and were it my case, I
would not for ten thousand Worlds dye before I had done it; and if I err in
this, I think it not through partiality, but through weakness. Oh the holy
breathings after Christ! the love to God! the heavenly mindedness! the hatred
of all known sin! the humility! self-denial! meekness! etc. that I have
discerned (as far as effects can show the heart to others) in abundance of
those people that differ from you in some smaller things, which occasioned your
frequent bitter reproaches: if God love them not, I have not yet met with the
people whom I may say he loves; if he do love them, he will scarcely take your
dealing well, especially when you rise to such bloody desires, of hanging them,
as the better remedy then burning their Books, as in your History of Sabbath,
page 254. Ecclesia vindicata, Preface, and passim you express*

7. I am not an approver of the violence of any of them, nor do I justify M.
Burtons way, nor am I of the mind of the party you most oppose in all their
discipline (as a Book now in the Press will give the world an account;) but I
am sure the Church must have unity and charity, in the ancient simplicity of
Doctrine, Worship and Government, or not at all. And if you would have men live
in peace as Brethren, our union must not be Law or Ceremonies or ind^fferent
Forms; nor must you make such rigorous Laws for all, and hang them that are
against you: Scripture, and reason, and the primitive practice, and great
experience, do lead us all to another course. But of these words if I could
procure your pardon, I expect no more because of our difference.

8. To pass by many others, I am also much unsatisfied in three things you say
concerning Popery. 1. That the Papist was the more moderate adversary, and the
Puritan faction hurried on with greater violence, etc. Preface to Ecclesia
vindicata. 2. That you maintain against M. Burton, that the Religion of the
Papists is not rebellion, nor their faith faction. I prove both. 1 That
Religion which defines the deposition of Princes, and absolving their Subjects
from their fidelity by the Pope, because they deny Transubstantiation, etc. is
rebellion ( Doctrinal;) but such is the Popish Religion: The Minor is evident:
That which is defined by a Pope and general Council, is the Papist^ Religion;
(It is defide, yea, and essential, because they will have all essentials, and
deny our distinguishing them from the rest:) But the aforesaid Doctrine is
defined by a Pope and an approved general Council, viz: at the Laterane under
INNOCENT III. That if any Protestant Writers should teach the same, that puts
it not into our Creed, as this is in theirs. 2. If it be an Article of the
Papists faith, that none are members of Christ and his Church, but the Subjects
of the Pope, then the Papists faith is faction: But the Antecedent is true,
being defined by Pope LEO X. in a general Council. 3. I am a sorry Lawyer, but
truly I would fain understand whether it be true, that written by M. Dow and
you (his page 185. and yours 210. of the History of the Sabbath) That the Popes
decretals the body of the Canon Law, is to be accepted (as not abrogated) which
being made for the direction and reiglement of the Church in general, were by
degrees admitted and obeyed in these parts of Christendom, and are by Act of
Parliament so far still in force, as they oppose not the Prerogative Royal and
the municipal Laws and Statu^es of this Realm of England; these are your words,
and M. Dow gives some reason for them, out from a Statute of HEN. 8.

But little know I by what Authority the Popes decretals are Laws to the Church
in general, or to us, and I will yet hope they are not in force: But if ever I
live to see another Parliament, if I be mistaken, I shall crave a freedom from
that bondage: I thought the Acts that impose the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, had disobliged us from all foreign power, and nulled the Popes
authority in England.

9. I am very glad that you (who are esteemed the Primipilus among the
defenders of the late turgid and persecuting sort of Prelacy) do so freely
disclaim the Grotian Religion (which I never charged you with) I hope the more
confidently that most of the Prelatical Divines will disown it; but if ever you
put your self to the trouble of writing to me again, I should be glad to
understand how you can take the Popes decretals and the body of the Canon Law,
as a Law for the government of the Church in general, and here received to be
still so far in force as you affirm, and yet not hold, that the Pope and his
Council have the power of making Laws for the government of the Church in
general, and see that we and all other Christians are his Subjects.

Sir, I crave your pardon of the displeasing plainness of these lines, and
remain,

Your unfaignedly well willing Brother, and fellow Servant, R. Baxter.
October. 20. 1658.

To this Letter being thus received and seriously considered of, I thought my
self obliged to return an Answer, and such an Answer as might satisfy him in
all particulars which were in difference between us; and it is here cheerfully
presented to the eye of the Reader.

The Answer of Peter Heylyn D. D. to M. Baxter's Letter of October. 20.
SIR.
YOur Letter of Octo. 20 last, I received on Saturday the 30. of the same
Month, at what time I was preparing for a Journey to London, from whence I
returned not till that day Month; I had there so much other business to take up
my thoughts that I could not give my self the leisure to read and consider the
Contents of that your Letter, much less of dispatching an Answer to it. But
being now at home in full peace of mind and health of body, I thank God for
it, I have more thoroughly considered of all particulars which may s^em necessary
for me to take notice of, in order to my own defense and your satisfaction,
which shall go hand in hand together.

10. But first, I must needs tell you, that I could not choose but wonder at the
extreme but most unnecessary length thereof, and the impertinencies of the
greatest part of it, in reference to that Letter of mine which it was to
Answer, and whereunto you had given so full an Answer in the first 25. lines
(which make but the fifth part of the whole) that there was no need of any
thing to be added to it. The cause of my address unto you was to let you know,
how much I wished that you had spared my name in your Preface to your Book of
the Grotian Religion, unless you could have proved me to have been one of that
Religion, which I thought you could not, or had had some more particular charge
to have laid against me, then I sound you had. And secondly, To desire you to
let me know in what Book or Books of mine you had found a Puritan defined to be
a Conformist who was no Arminian, a description of whom, one Peter Heylyn had
given us by their opinions. To both which you return this Answer. First, that
you wish you h^d spared my name as well as I. Secondly, that you never took me
to be of Grotius his Religion, and therefore that I needed not to have called
for proof of it. And thirdly, that though it was in the sensing of the word
Puritan, in which you were pleased to use my name, telling the world whom you
took for a Puritan; yet upon further consideration, you ascribe it unto your
temerity, the ordinary concommitant of have; and having blamed your self for
mentioning me upon the trust of your memory after above twenty years (for so
long it is (as y^u please to tell us) since you saw my Book against M. Burton,
wherein you thought to have found such a description of a Puritan:) You father
the chiefest part thereof upon M. Dow, who had writ likewise against M. Burton
much about that time: It seems your notions are like ware mislaid in a Pedlers
pack, you have them, but you know not where to find them, whether in me, or in
M. Dow (for D. Pocklinton comes in upon another occasion) it is hard to say.
Two Books of the same argument coming into your mind, you were persuaded
first, that it was in mine; next, that the chiefest parts of that description
were to be found in M. Dow's, and finally, that somewhat of it more or less
might be found in both, though perhaps in neither: How ever we have here that
great advantage spoken of by the Orator, Confitentem reum, which gives me as
much private satisfaction as I could desire. And when you have made good your
promise, in publishing an account of your misunderstanding me, with your
following satisfaction to the world to do me right (for doing whereof you have
declared so great a readiness) I shall then much applaud your ingenuity in
doing me that piece of justice, and shall with cheerfulness affirm in the
Poets language,

Vna eademque manus, vulnus opemque tulit, That the same hand has righted me,
which had done me wrong. 11. If your Letter had been ended here, it would have
put a period to all differences and disputes between us. But much I fear that
by giving you new matter of provocation, you will not give me any such cause of
magnifying that ingenuity in you, of which I cannot see the expected fruits:
For contrary to the former part of your Letter, wherein you had absolved me
from that accusation, which you laid against me in your Preface, and charged it
in M. Dow; you use your best endeavors to prove me guilty of that charge
implicitly, and by consequents at the least, if not in terminis and expressly.
But first, how may we be assured that you deal better with M. Dow, then with
Peter Heylyn (for you allow neither of us the title of Doctors) considering
that you direct us not to that part of his Book in which we may find any such
description of a Puritan, as you put upon him; as you have sent us to page 185.
of the very same Book, in which he is said to speak of the Authority, which
some of the Popes Decretals and other parts of the Canon Law have obtained in
England. But admitting what you tell us of him to be true, yet all that you
have told us from him, amounts not to a full description of the Puritans by
their opinions, but only to a principal part (as you now confess) of what you
intended; and what you intended in those words will be hard for any man to say,
unless you make a further explication of them, then you have done hitherto: For
if you have no other meaning then your words in the common sense import, may
not D. Dow tell us (as perhaps he does) of what judgment or opinion the
Puritans are in the points of predestination, perseverance, or inability to
fulfill the Law, etc. But presently this must be taken for a Description of the
Puritans by their opinions, as you please to word it: I am sure you never
learned this in Baxter's Logic, published at Frankford, Anno 1593. which was a
Book in some credit at my first coming to Oxon; nor in your Aditus ad Logicam,
or your Breerwoods Element. In all or any of these you might have learned, that
the Definition is to be Reciprocal with the thing defined, as, Omnis homo est
animal rationale, omne animal rationale est homo. And though a description by
the rules of Logic be of a larger latitude then a definition* yet there is par
ratio in them both, the description being to be made commensurate to the thing
described; so that though D. Dow might say, that every Puritan was a Calvinist,
in matters of predestination, grace, free will, etc. yet cannot this be called
the character or description of a Puritan (as you please to make it) because it
follows not e converso, that every one who follows Calvin's judgment in the
points aforesaid, is a Puritan also; no more then if a man should say, Every
Presbiterian is an enemy to the Authority of the King and supreme Magistrates
in the concernments of the Church; and therefore it must follow also, that all
which do not allow any such Authority in the supreme Magistrate ( Papists of
all sorts, Jesuits, yea the Pope himself) must be Presbiterians.

12. Having thus rescued D. Dow, I shall next come unto my self, in whom you
hope to find such a description of a Puritan, as you have charged on me in your
Preface, though but just now you had ascribed that charge unto your temerity,
and seem to cry pecavi for it, for you say next that so much you have found in
a Book of mine against M. Burton, as justifies what you said of me, if you can
understand me; and if you cannot understand me, it is no fault of mine, who
commonly speak plain enough to be understood, and shall now give you leave to
understand me in your own sense, or in any other which shall please you better.
I have not so much of the Frenchman in me, as either to speak what I do not
think, or not to write as I speak, nor so much of the Hypocrite, Ore aliud
retinens, aliud sub pectore condens, (as we know who says) as to write
otherwise with my pen then my heart inditeth: My heart and my tongue goes still
together, and my pen keeps pace with both; leaving equivocation to the
Jesuits, and mental reservation to the Presbiterians, who are better studied
in them both then I can pretend to: I am a kind of plain Tom tell troth, and
have so much in me of the old Spartan, as to call a Spade a Spade. (...); as
they phrased it without fear or wit; so that you might have spared your
Metaphysical discourse about the nature of words, as they are the expressions
of the mind; and the suspicion that you have that I reserve some other meaning
to my self then my words in the common sense import, though I desire that my
words should be understood always in the litteral sense, or in any other sense
that you shall give them, as before was said, which being premised, I would fain
see how you prove the point which you have so blindly undertaken. Marry, say
you, I deal with M. Burton as the Puritans Oracle, page 152. their
superintendent, Champion, etc. as in my Preface to that Book; and my
des^r^pti^n of him, is that he follows Illyricus in his Doctrines, de
providentia, predestinatione, gratia, libero arbitrio, etc. page 182. Stay here
a little M Baxter; do you not tell us in the former part of your Letter, that
you had not seen that Book against M. Burton above 20. years, and therefore
condemned your temerity in mentioning me on the trust of your memory after so
long time; and can you now direct us not only unto single words, Oracle,
Superintendent, Champion, etc. and to the several pages where they are? Can you
direct us to a marginal Note, page 182. relating to a Book called Necessaria
Responsio, and to the folios of that Book, viz. page 82. with page 82, 84. 85.
or tell your Read^^ in what part or page of that Book he may find D Jackson
acquitted from maintaining Arminianism and the Puritans condemned for wresting
the Articles of the Church, page 122, 123. Can you do this, and yet with
confidence declare that it is 20. years since you saw that Book? Assuredly your
memory must be very good, in remembering so many single words and particular
passages, with the very places where they are, after the space of twenty years;
or very bad, in not remembering that the description of a Puritan (which you had
charged on Peter Heylyn) was to be found in M. Dow, and perhaps not there. Quid
verba audiam, cum facta videam? You tell us that you have not seen that book
this twenty years, and here is evidence enough that you have it by you (for I
cannot think that you clogged your Note Book with such petit remembrances)
unless the term of twenty years may pass in your account for no more then
yesterday.

13. But be your memory good or bad, I am sure your Logic is far worse (none
of old Baxter's this) then your memory can be. The Charge you are to prove is
this, That with the late Prelates a Puritan was either a Nonconformist, or a
Conformist, that in Doctrine was no Arminian ( of which sort Peter Heylyn gave
us a description by their opinions;) By which we are to understand (if you mean
nothing else but what your words in the common sense import) that the Puritans
( of whom (the said sorry fellow called) Peter Heylyn has given us a
description by their opinions) is such a Conformist who in Doctrine is no
Arminian. This is the point you are to prove; and for the proof of this, you
instance in M. Burton of Fryday-Street, who though he was no Arminian in point
of Doctrine, yet was he so far from being a Conformist, that since the hanging
up of Penry at Saint Thomas of Waterings (where he Preached before a very thin
audience on the top of the Ladder) (as Johannes Stow informs us) Anno 1593.
There never was a more professed, outrageous, violent and seditious
Nonconformist in the Church of England: Now if the Puritans be there described
by M. Burton as you say they are; or if the Reader understand me as describing
Puritans only, because I have so often given the person described that name, as
I am willing that he should, and you say he must; It must needs follow
thereupon, that the Puritans against whom I write, cannot be such Conformists
as are no Arminians, but such notorious Non-Conformists as their Oracle and
Champion M. Burton was. There was an old distinction made by I know not whom,
betwixt the Knaves Puritan, and the Knave Puritans, the Knaves Puritan being
one that made a conscience of his ways, and followed not profane and
licentious persons in their ungodly way of living: But the Knave Puritans were
those, who under pretense of long Prayer devoured widows houses, and wilfully
opposed the Rights and Ceremonies of the Church, and clamorously cried down the
Lordly Prelacy and jurisdiction of the Bishops, that they might themselves Lord
it over Gods people, in their several Parishes, and sit as so many petit Popes
in their Classical Sessions. These and no others are the Puritans against whom
I write; not against those who walk unblamably before God and man; nor against
those who following Calvin's judgment in the matter of predestination and the
points concomitant, conform themselves unto the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church of England, here by Law established; of which last sort were many
Bishops, Deanes and Dignitaries in Cathedral Churches, whose parts and piety I
admire as much as any, whom it had been a madness to condemn for Puritans, such
Puritanism and their several dignities being inconsistent.

14. So then the Puritan whom I aim at in the person of M Burton, is a
notorious Nonconformist; and whither I had described him or them we are next
to see. And my description of him (as you tell us) contain^th, first, that he
follows Illyricus in his Doctrines d^ providentia, predestinatione, gratia,
libero arbitrio, etc. If it conteins that first (as you say it does, it must
needs contain something in the second, third and fourth places, which you are
willing not to speak of: For if ^ou look into the place by you cited, page 882.
you will there find that M. Burton is not only said to be a follower of
Illyricus in his Doctrines de providentia, etc. but to have also followed him
in his fiery nature and seditious principles one of which was, Principes potius
metu seditionum terrendos, quam vel minimum pacis causa indulgendum, That
Princes should be rather terrified with the fears of tumults, then any thing
should be yielded to for quietness sake: All which being laid together, as it
stands in your Author, falls so much short of being a description of such
Puritans, as being conformable to the Church in Rites and Ceremonies, are
notwithstanding no Arminians in point of Doctrine, which you have charged on
Peter Heylyn, that it contains not such a principal part of that description,
as you have laid on D. Dow: For besides that the Puritans hold the same
opinions with those who follow Calvin's judgment in some controverted points
before remembered; they hold also some opinions of their own, that is to say, it
is not lawful to use the Cross in Baptism, or to bow at the blessed name of
Jesus (which M. Burton calls Cross-worship and Jesu-worship) nor to be
uncovered in the time of Divine Service, to wear the Surplice, kneel at the
Communion, to marry with the Ring, and finally to stand up at the Gospels, and
the Gloria Patri: In all which he and they were as much opposed by those of the
Conformable Clergy, who follow Calvin's judgment in the points aforesaid, as
by any of those Divines whom you call Arminians. You grant that I behold not
M. Burton as a Puritan only, but as a Puritan and seditious, and being such
might pass the better in the train of Illyricus his followers, without drawing
after him all the rest which hold the same opinions in some doctrinal matters,
as Illyricus did: Nor does it help your cause at all, that M. Burton is accused
for wresting the Articles of the Church, to make good his Doctrines in that
point page 122. or said to have dealt fasly with D. Jackson, in charging him to
be a maintainer of Arminianism, page 123. for M. Burton might do both, as
indeed he did; and those who are of M. Burton's judgment in those Doctrinal
matters (whom you here call by the name of Anti-Arminians) might and did wrest
the Articles from their proper sense: For did not many of them draw the Article
aside, refusing to submit to the full and plain meaning of it, but putting their
own sense or comment to be the meaning of the Article, and consequently not
taking it in the litteral and grammatical sense? Contrary to the tenor and
command of his Majesty's D^claration, prefixed before the Book of Articles,
Anno 1628. All this may be or may not be, and you be not a jot nearer to your
Journie^ end, which was to let us know in what Book or Books the said Peter
Heylyn, by gathering together their opinions, had made up the description of
such Puritans, who being Conformists (you may add Non-Conformists also, if you
have a mind to it) as were no Arminians; for if you find not this upon your
Melius inquirendum, you have found just nothing, but must return a non est
inventus, as at first you did: Where by the way I would fain learn, why those
that are of different persuasion from you in the points aforesaid, must be
called Arminians, or D. Jackson must be said to maintain Arminianism,
instancing to the established Doctrine of the Church of England. Assuredly
Arminius was too much a Puisue, of too late standing in the world, to be
accounted the first Broacher of those Doctrinal points, which have such warrant
from the Scripture, and were so generally held by the Ancient Fathers, both
Greek and Latin, till S. Austin's time, defended since that time by the
Jesuits and Franciscans in the Church of Rome, by all the Melancthonian
Divines among the Lutherans by Castelio in Geneva it self, by Bishop Latimer
and Bishop Hooper, in the time of K. Edward, by some of our Confessors in
Prison in Q Mary's days, by Bishop Hursnet in the Pulpit, and Peter Barrow in
the Divinity Schools of Cambridge, during the reign of Q. Elisabeth, by Hardem
Bergius, the first reformer of the Church and City of Emden; and finally by
Anastatius Veluanus, Anno 1554. and afterward by Henrious Antonii, Johannis
Ibrandi, Clemens Martini, Cornelius Meinardi. the Ministers generally of the
Province of Vterick, Manaus the Divinity Professor of Leyden, Gellius Suecanus
in the Province of Friezland, before the name of JACOB VAN' HARMINE has been
ever heard of in the World. Lay all that has been said together, and the sum
is this, that I apply not the name of Puritan (in any Book or Books of mine) to
such Conformists as in Doctrine are no Arminians, not have given any such
description of them by their opinions, as your Preface speaks of; and therefore
once again I shall claim your promise of publishing an account of your
misunderstanding me in that particular, with your following satisfaction to the
World to do me right.

15. And here again you might have left me, teling me that you have no more
wherewith to trouble me on that subject, which was indeed the only subject in
which you had been troublesome to me, and for which trouble I desire
satisfaction from you. But having said thus much to so little purpose, you will
proceed a little further to no purpose at all, but that you cannot let me pass
without a use of Exhortation and Reproof to conclude the business: In order
whereunto you tell me, that had you not savoured in my writings a spirit so
very distant from your disposition, that you have small hopes that your words
shall escape my displeasure, you would on this occasion have dealt freely with
me about many things in many of my Books, which have long been matter of
scandal and grief, to men that have much Christian meekness and moderation.
What your own disposition is, as I know not otherwise, so I cannot gather it
from your Writings, having never seen any of them but this of the Grotian
Religion, which is now before us, and what I find in that you shall see
hereafter. But if you be of such a disposition as inclines to peace, and
cheerfully submissive to the higher Powers under which you live; you shall not
find such a spirit in me, but that we may take sweet council together, and walk
in the house of God as friends. Certain I am you savor not in my Writings any
such spirit as bends me to despise dominion and speak evil of dignity, or tends
to the embroilment of Kingdoms, the subversion of Churches, and the confusion
of Estates. If the Writings of many of your party and persuasions, had savoured
of no other spirit then mine* there had not been such scandal given to the rest
of Christendom, by our Schisms and Heterodoxies, by lifting up our hands
against Gods anointed, and washing them in the blood of one another. My
Writings have all tended unto peace and unity, and if they had been better
followed, we might have kept the spirit of unity in the bond of peace. Nor need
you fear that any thing which you can either say or write shall escape my
displeasure, as I think you do not; I have been always patientissimui very, I
thank God for it, and can give ear to friendly admonition and severe reproof,
without any disturbance; and therefore you may deal as freely with me as you
please: your tongue is your own, and my ears are mine, nor can you speak or
write more of me, then I can willingly hear without any displeasure, Tu
linguae, ego aurium dominus sum, as once he in Tacitus.

16. Useing the freedom which I give you, you say (as in the way of
reprehension and reproof) that there are many things in many of my Books, that
have long been matter of scandal and grief, to men that have much Christian
meekness and moderation. Matter of scandal there has been, there is no
question of it; but whether it be Scandalum pusillorum, or Pharisaicum, whether
it be datum or acceptum, as the Schools distinguish: A scandal given by me to
those whom you have honored with the Attributes of much Christian meekness and
moderation, or causl^sly and perverslesly taken by them against the Rules of
Christian meekness and moderation, is the thing in question; but you think it
to be past all question, exemplifying in my many repr^ac^es against extemporary
Prayer, the holy improvement of the Lords day, etc. but where I beseech you, in
what Book or Books of mine may a man meet with any of those many reproaches
against extemporary Prayer? May you not be again mistaken, and find upon a
further search that those many reproaches against extemporary Prayer are to be
found in D. ^olkinton or in some body else? The most that I have said against
extemporary Prayer occurreth in a brief discourse touching the form of Prayer
appointed to be used before the Sermon. Sect. 22. in which you read, That
whereas the Church prescribes a set form of Prayer in her public Liturgy,
from which it is not lawful for any of her Ministers to vary or recede; she did
it principally to avoid all unadvised effusions of gross and undigested
Prayers, as little capable of piety, as they are uterly void of order: and this
she did upon the reason given in the Melevitan Council, viz. least else through
ignorance or want of care any thing should be uttered contrary to the rules of
faith, Ne forte aliquid contra fidem. vel per ignorantiam, vel per minus
studium si^ compositum, as the Canon has it. And again page 348. We plainly
see by the effects, what the effect of theirs would tend to: What is the issue
of the liberty most men have taken to themselves; too many of that sort who
most stand upon it, useing such passages in their Prayers before their Sermons,
that even their Prayers in the Psalmist's language, are turned into sin. Thus
find we in the General Preface, That the inconveniences which the liberty has
brought upon us in these latter days, are so apparent, that it is very hard to
say, whether the liberty of Prophesying, or the licentiousness in Praying what
and how we list, has more conduced to these distractions which are now amongst
us; and if there were no such effect too visible of this licentiousness (which
I desire the present state to take notice of) the scandal which is thereby
given unto our Religion, in speaking so irreverently, with such vain
repetitions and tautologies to almighty God (as in extemporary and
unpremeditated Prayers is too frequently done) seem a sufficient consideration
to bring us back again to that ancient form which the wisdom of the Church
prescribed to prevent that mischief. And finally, that men never did so
literally offer unto God the Calves of their lips as they have done of late,
since the extemporary way of praying has been taken up: and if it were
prohibited by the Law of Moses, to offer any thing unto God in the way of the
legal Sacrifices, which was maimed, sported or imperfect; how can it rationally
be conceived that God should be delighted with those Oblations, or spiritual
Sacrifices, which have nothing almost in them but maims, spots and blemishes.
These are my words I must confess; but that they are reproaches, I must needs
deny. But first, I do not speak these words of all extemporary Prayers in
general, or more particularly of those which gifted men may make in their
private devotions, but of those unpremeditated, undigested Prayers which men
ungifted, and unlearned men, have poured out too frequently in the Church of
God. And secondly, if they be reproaches, they are such reproaches and such
only, as when a man is said to have been slandered with a matter of truth, and
for the proof hereof, besides the authority of the Council of Melevis, before
remembered, I man bring that our incomparable Hooker, in the fifth Book of his
Eccles: Polity, Number 25. Who though he actually saw but few, did foresee many
of ^ho^e inconveniences which the humor of extemporary Prayer at last would
bring into the public worship of Almighty God; for there he tells us of the
grievous and scandalous inconveniences whereunto they make themselves daily
subject, who by their irksome deformities, whereby through endless and senseless
effusions of undigested Prayers, they oftentimes disgrace in most unsufferable
manner, the worthiest part of Christian duty toward God, when being subject
herein to no certain order, pray both what they list, and how they list. But
behold a greater then Hooker is here; even His most Excellent and most
Incomparable Majesty, the late King CHARLES, who tells us in his large
declaration against the Scots, That for want of a set form of Prayer, they did
sometimes pray so ignorantly, that it was a shame to all Religion, to hear the
Majesty of God so barbarously spoken unto; and sometimes so seditiously, that
their very Prayers were either plain libels against Authority, or manifest
lies, stuffed with all the false reports in the Kingdom. And what effects he
found of them among the English, appears by his Proclamation against the
Directory, bearing date November. 30. Anno 1644. where we are told, That by
abolishing the Book of Common Prayer, there would be a means to open the way,
and give the liberty to all ignorant, factious or evil men, to broach their own
fancies and conceits, be they never so wicked and erroneous, and to mislead
people into sin and rebellion, and to utter those things even in that which
they make for their Prayers, in their Congregations, as in Gods presence, which
no conscientious man can assent to say Amen to. And hereunto I shall add no
more but this, viz. that the passages produced before out of two of my Books,
and countenanced both by sad experience, and such great Authorities, must needs
be either true or false; if true, they can be no reproaches; if false, why do
you not rather study to confute them, then reprove me for them.

17. The next charge which you lay upon me, and thereby render me obnoxious to
a new reproof, relates to my reproaches against the holy improvements of the
Lords day, etc. How far your ( etc.) will extend is hard to say; and therefore
had you done more wisely, had you left it out; especially consider how many
doubtful descants and ridiculous glosses were made upon a former ( etc.) and
happily left standing in one of the Canons, Anno 1640. for either I am guilty
of more reproaches against piety and the power of godliness, or I am not guilty;
if guilty, why do you not let me know both their number and nature, that I may
either plead my innocence or confess my crime? If not, why do you thus
insinuate by this ( etc,) that you suppress some other charges which you have
against me? But letting that pass cum ceteris ^rroribus, Where (I beseech you)
can you point me to any reproaches of that day, or of the holy improvements of
it? Much I confess is to be found in some of my Books, against the
superstitious and more then judaical observation of it, which cannot come
within the compass of being a reproach unto it. Might not the Scribes and
Pharisees ( Si licet exemplis in parvo grandibus uti, in the Poets words) have
charged our Savior with the like, and reckoned him for a reproach to the holy
improvements of the Sabbath, by justifying his Disciples in plucking off the
ears of Corn upon that day; commanding the man whom he had cured of his
diseases, to take up his bed and walk, though upon the Sabbath; and finally
giving this general Aphorism to his Disciples, That the Sabbath was made for
man, and not man for the Sabbath; Then which there could be nothing more
destructive of those superstitions wherewith that day was burdened by the
Scribes and Pharisees, and thereby more accommodated to the ease of the Ox and
Ass, then to the comfort and refreshment of the laboring man: might not the
latter Rabines among the Jews defend themselves in those ridiculous niceties,
about the keeping of that Sabbath ( Queen-Sabbath as they commonly call it)
(for which they stand derided and condemned by all sober Christians) by
reckoning them for such holy improvements, as D. Bound and his Disciples have
since encogitated and devised to advance the dignity of the Lords day (Saints
Sunday, as the people called it in times of Popery) to as high a pitch? Restore
the Lords day to that innocent freedom in which it stood in the best and
happiest times of Christianity, and lay every day fresh burdens upon the
consciences of Gods people (in your restraints from necessary labors and
lawful pleasures) which neither we nor our forefathers have been able to bear,
though christened by the name of holy improvements. The coming out of Barbours's
Book (Printed and secretly dispersed, Anno 1628. but walking more confidently
abroad, with an Epistle Dedicatory to his Sacred Majesty, about five years
after) declare* sufficiently what dangerous effects your holy improvements had
produced, if not stopped in time; and stopped they could not be by any who maintain
your Principles; that poor man being then deceived into the error of a
Saturday Sabbath (a near neighbor of this place has been of late) by the
continual inculcating (both from the Pulpit and the Press) of the perpetual and
indispensable morality of the fourth Commandment, as it has been lately urged
upon us. But so much has been said of this by others, and elsewhere by me,
that I forbear to press it further; nor indeed had I said thus much, had you
not forced me upon it for my own defense.

18. And for those most unjust as well as uncharitable speeches (those bitter
reproaches as you call them afterward) which you charge upon me in reference
to my brethren whom I take for adversaries; when you have told me what they
are, and of whom they are spoken, and where a man may chance to find them, I
shall return a more particular answer to this calumny also; but till then I
cannot: In the mean time, where is that ingenuity and justice you so much
pretend too; you make it foul crime in me, not easily to be washed away with
the tears of repentance, that I have used some tart expressions (which you
sometimes call bitter reproaches) sometimes unjust and uncharitable speeches
against my brethren, many of them being my inferiors, and the best but my
equals, and take no notice of those odious and reproachful Attributes which you
have given unto your Fathers, all of them being your superiors de facto,
though perhaps you will not grant them to be such de jure: You call me in a
following passage, the Primipilus (by which I find you have studied Godwin's
Antiquities) or chief of the defenders of the late turgid or persecuting sort
of Prelates; whither with greater scorn to me, or reproach to them, it is hard
to say; the merit of the accusation we shall see anon; I note here only by the
way in S. Paul's expression, that that wherein you judge another you condemn
yourself, seeing you do the same things, and perhaps far worse: But to return
unto my self, take this in general, that though I may sometimes put vinegar
into my inck to make it quick and opulative, as the case requires, yet there
is nothing of securrility or malice in it, nothing that savoureth of
uncharitableness, or of such bitter reproaches as you unjustly tax me with: But
when I meet with such a firebrand as M. Burton (whose ways you will not seem to
justify in that which follows) I hope you cannot think I should pour Oil
upon him to increase the flame, and not bring all the water I had to quench it,
whither soul or clean: Or when I meet with such unsavory pieces of wit and
mischief as the Minister of Lincoln Diocese, and the Church Historian, would
you not have me rub them with a little salt to keep them sweet? The good
Samaritan when he undertook the care of the wounded passenger, is said to have
poured into his wounds both Oil and Wine, that is to say, the Oil to cherish
and refresh it, and the Wine to cleanse it, Oleum quo foveatur* Vinum quo
mordeatur, as I have read in some good Authors; he had not been a skilful
Chyrurgion if he had done otherwise; one plaster is not medcinal to all kind
of sores, some of which may be cured with Balm, when others more corrupt and
putrified, do require a lancing; but ^o I shall not deal with M. Baxter, nor
have I dealt so with others of his persuasion; insomuch that I have received
thanks from the Ministers of Surrey and Buckingham shire (in the name of
themselves and of that party) for my fair and respectful language to them, both
in the Preface to my History of the Sabbath, and the Conclusion to the same.

19. But you go on, and having given me some good council which I shall thank
you for anon; you tell me that besides those many bitter reproaches of my
Brethren which I take for adversaries, I rise unto such bloody desires of
hanging them, as the better remedy then burning their Books: For this you point
us to the History of the Sabbath, page 2 page 254. and in the general Preface
to Ecclesia vindicata, Sect. 8. In which last place we find it thus, "That
partly by the constancy and courage of the Archbishop Whitgift, who succeeded
Grindal, Anno 1583. the opportune death of the Earl of Leicester their chief
Patron, Anno 1588. and the incomparable pains of judicious Hooker, Anno 1595.
but principally by the seasonable execution of Copping and Thacker, hanged at
Saint Edmonds bury in Suffolk, for publishing the Pamphlets of Robert Brown
against the Book of Common Prayer, they became so quier, that the Church seems
to be restored to some hopes of peace. Nothing in this that savoureth of such
bloody desires as you charge upon me, I am sure of that; and there is little
more then nothing in the other passage, where speaking of D. Bound's Book of
Sabbath-Doctrines, and the sad consequents thereof, I add that on the discovery
of it, this good ensued, that the said Books were called in by Arch Bishop
Whitgift in his V^sitations, and by several Letters; and forbidden to be
Printed and made common, by Sir John Popham, Lord Chief Justice at the Assizes
held at Bury; and thereunto I subjoyned these words, viz. Good remedies indeed,
had they been soon enough applied: yet not so good as those which formerly were
applied to Thacker and his fellow Copping, in the aforesaid Town of Bury, for
publishing the Books of Brown against the Service of the Church. But here is no
mention, not a syllable of burning the said Books of Sabbath-Doctrines, but
only of suppressing and calling in; Which makes me apt enough to think that you
intended that for a private nip, relating to a Book of mine called Respondit
Petrus; which was publicly voyced abroad, to have been publicly burnt in
London (as indeed the burning of it was severely prosecuted) though itscaped
the fire; a full account whereof being too long to be inserted in this place, I
may perhaps present you with, in a place by it self. And secondly, what find
you in that latter passage, which argues me to be guilty of such bloody
desires as I stand accused for in your Letter? Cannot a man report the passages
of former times, and by comparing two remedies for the same disease, prefer the
one before the other, as the case then stood, when the spirit of sedition moved
in all parts of the Realm, but he must be accused of such bloody desires, for
making that comparison in a time of quietness, in a time of such a general
calm, that there was no fear of any such tempest in the State as did after
follow? If this can prove me guilty of such bloody desires, the best is, that I
stand not single, but have a second to stand by me, of your own persuasion; for
in the same page where you find that passage, viz. page 254. you cannot choose
but find the story of a Sermon, Preached in my hearing at Sergeants Inn in
Fleetstreet; in which the Preacher broached this Doctrine, That temporal death
was at this day to be inflicted by the Law of God on the Sabbath breaker, on
him who on the Lord's day did the works of his daily calling; with a grave
application to my Masters of the Law, that if they did their ordinary works on
the Sabbath day, in taking fees, and giving counsel, they should consider what
they did deserve by the Law of God. The man that Preached this was Father
Foxly, Lecturer of S. Martins in the Fields* Superintendent general of the
Lecturers in S. Antholin's Church, and Legate a Latere from the Grandees
residing at London, to their friends and agents in the Country; who having
brought these learned Lawyers to the top of the Ladder, thought it a high piece
of mercy not to turn them off, but there to leave them, either to look after a
Reprieve, or sue out their Pardon. This Doctrine you approve in him (for you
have passed it quietly over, and qui tacet, consentire videtur, as the saying
is, without taking any notice of it, or exceptions against it) and consequently
may be thought to allow all those bloody uses also, which either a blind
superstition, or a fiery zeal shall think fit to raise: But on the other side,
you find such bloody desires in the passages before remembered, which cannot
possibly be found in them, but by such a gloss as must pervert my meaning, and
corrupt my text; and it is, Male dicta glossa qua corrumpit textum, as the old
Civilians have informed us,

20. But to come nearer to your self; May we be sure that no such bloody
desires may be found in you as to the taking away of life, in whom we find such
merciless resolutions, as to the taking away of the livelihood of your
Christian Brethren. The life of man consists not only in the union of the soul
and body, but in the enjoyment of those comforts which make life valued for a
blessing; for* Vita non est vivere, sed valere; as they use to say; there is as
well a civil as a natural death; as when a man is said to be dead in law, dead
to the world, dead to all hopes of bettering his condition for the time to
come; and though it be a most divine truth, that the life is more then food,
and the body then raiment; yet when a man is plundered both of food and
clothing, and declared void of all capacities of acquiring more, will not the
sense of hunger and the shame of nakedness be far more irksome to him then a
thousand deaths? How far the chiefs of your party have been guilty of these
civil slaughters, appears by the sequestring of some thousands of the
Conformable and Established Clergy from their means and maintenance, without
form of Law; who if they had done any thing against the Canons of the Church,
or the Laws of the Land, were to be judged according to those Laws and Canons,
against which they had so much transgressed; but suffering as they did, without
Law or against the Law, or by a Law made after the fact (against which last his
Highness the late LORD PROTECTOR complains in his Speech made in the year
1654.) they may be truly said to have suffered as Innocents, and to be made
Confessors and Martyrs against their wills: Either they must be guilty, or not
guilty of the crimes objected: If they were guilty, and found so by the Grand
Inquest, why were they not convicted and deprived in due form of Law? If not,
why were they suspended, sine die, the profits of their Churches, sequestered
from them, and a Vote passed for rendering them incapable of being restored
again to their former Benefices? Of this, if you do not know the reason, give
me leave to tell you; The Presbyterians out of Holland, the Independents from
New- England, the beggarly Scots, and many Tr^n ch^r-Chaplains amongst our
selves were drawn together, like so many Vultures, to seek after a prey; for
gratifying of whom, the regular and established Clergy must be turned out of
their Benefices, that every Bird of r pine might have its nest (some of them,
two or three for failing) which holding by no other Tenure then as Tenants at
will, they were necessitated to perform such services as their great Patrons
from time to time required of them.

21. Now for your part how far you are and have been guilty of these civil
slaughters, appears abundantly in the Preface which is now before us; in which
you do not only justify the sequestring of so many of the regular and
established Clergy, to the undoing of themselves and their several families;
but openly profess, That you take it to be one of the charitablest works you
can do* to help to cast out a bad Minister, and to get a better in the place;
so that you prefer it (as a work of mercy) before much sacrifice: Which that it
may be done with the better color, you must first murder them in their fame,
then destroy them in their fortunes, reproaching them with the Atributes of
utterly insufficient, ungodly, unfaithful, scandalous, or that do more harm
then good; and reckoning their ejection to be one of the most pious and
charitable work you can put your hand to: And as if this had not been enough,
you tell us, that many of them have long been a burden to the Church, instead
of a blessing; that they understood neither the Catechism nor the Creed; that
many of them lived more in the Alehouse then the Church (which might be done,
though they spent but three hours at the Ale house in all the week) and use to
lead their people in drunkenness cursing swearing* quarrelling, and other
ungodly practices* and that such of them as were better then the rest, would be
drunk but now and then, and lived in much worldl^ness and profaneness, though
not so disgracefully as the rest. Our Ecclesiastical Historians tell us of one
Ithasius (a professed enemy of the Priscili^nists, a potent Sect at that time
in the West of Christendom) who if he met with any man that walked not
directly in his own way, put him down presently in his Catalogue of suspected
Priscilianists. Take heed I beseech M. Baxter, that you be not of the same
humor as Ithasius was, and that you put not every one into your ^able book for
a good fellow, or a drunkard, etc. in whom you find not such an affected
austerity of deportment such an unsociableness of conversation, such a
disguisedness in their countenance^, as if their faces were not made at the
same time with the rest of their bodies. And take heed also, that you be not of
their mind, who think that God sees no sin in his Elect; and that you put not
some men out of their Benefices, who never were at an Alehouse, and put such
others in their places, who never^ly out of it* as has been done (and I could
tell you where and when if it were material) under pretense of such a
Reformation as you are in hand with: And that you do not in this case, as LEWIS
XI. of France did in another, of whom it is Recorded, That when he had lost the
Battle of Mount le Herie, he took many Offices and Commands from some who ran a
little out of the Field, and conferred them upon those who ran ten miles
further. In order whereunto, I desire you to let me know what justice these
poor men (of whom you have undertaken the prosecution) are to look for from
you, whom you have thus prejudge before hand, and condemned without hearing? Or
with what equity you can charge me with useing such unjust and uncharitable
speeches (which you call afterward by the name of bitter reproaches) against
my brethren, when you have showed your self more really guilty in that kind,
then you have unjustly reported me to be? And in the turn thereof, I shall let
you know, how vast the difference is between the old Incumbents and the new
Intruders; the greatest part of those who have been sequestered or ejected,
being far more eminent in all parts of learning, and no less eminent for their
exemplary piety, then the best of them who have been thrust into their places!
Had I observed the passages in your Preface, before I writ my first Letter to
you, I should not have so much commended the modesty of your expressions, as I
did therein, when I had looked upon no more of it then that which did concern
my self, and then passed directly to your description of the Grotian Religion,
which gives the Title to your Book.

22. But then admitting that some of those who have been sequestered and
ejected, had not been altogether so unblamable in their conversation, as the
dignity of their calling and the strictness of the time required; yet might
they take heed unto themselves, and unto Doctrine, and continue therein, which
you make to be God's appointed means to save themselves, and them that hear
them, as indeed it is. But then I hope you do not think, that the Doctrine
becomes ineffectual by proceeding from an unclean mouth (for veritas a
quocunque est, est a spiritu sancto, as S. Ambrose has it) or that the waters
of Life contract any corruption by passing through an impure Channel; for if
you do, you cross not only with the Church of England, but with Christ himself*
The Church of England in the twenty sixth Article teaches thus, viz. Although
in the visible Church, the evil be ever mingled with the good, and sometimes
the evil have chief authority, in the ministration of the Word and Sacraments;
yet forasmuch as they do not the same in their own name, but in Christ's, and do
minister by his Commission and Authority, we may use their ministry both in
hearing the Word of God, and in the receiving the Sacraments; neither is the
effect of Christ's Ordinance taken away by their wickednesses, nor the grace of
God's gifts diminished from such as by faith and rightly do receive the
Sacraments ministered unto them, which are effectual, because of Christ's
institution and promise, although they be administered by evil men; and Christ
our Savior having told the Multitude in Mat. 23. That the Scribes and
Pharisees (whose palpable Hypocrisy and corruptions he describes at large)
sit in Moses Chair, adds this, viz. All therefore whatsoever they bid you do
that observe ye and do; but after their works do not: for they say and do not.
Had you been present at that time, you would have interposed and said, There
was no such need the Scribes and Pharisees (having by their own vitiousness
rendered themselves incapable of it) should sit any longer in that Chair, but
rather be sequestered, ejected, and turned out of all, that so the Gaulonites
(men eminent for their zeal to the public liberty, and such as taught the
people not to give to Caesar that which belonged unto Caesar) might possess
their places. Its true that we find this clause in the former Article viz.
Nevertheless it appertains to the Discipline of the Church, that enquiry be
made of ev^^ Ministers, and that they be accused by those that have knowledge of
their offenses; and finally* being found guilty by just judgment, be deposed.
And it is true* that I find the name of Richard Baxter of Keederminster, in the
front of those Ministers of Worcester shire, who are to be subservient to the
Commissioners authorized by the Ordinance of August 29. 1654. For the ejecting
of scandalous, ignorant* and insufficient Ministers. But as the one gives you
no authority to prejudge your brethren before hand by your bitter reproaches,
and your uncharitable speeches, or to accuse any of them on a partial fame, but
only on the certain knowledge of their offenses: So neither are you empowered by
the other, to sit as Judge upon the life and conversation of any Minister, but
only to deliver your opinion (if it be required) touching his ignorance and
insufficiency, and no more then so. And therefore M. Baxter, let me advise you
to follow the counsel of the old Proverb, and be good in your Office, that you
may continue longer in it; and that you do not too much Lord it over your
brethren of the Clergy (...) (...), as it is in the Original (neither
dominantes in cleris, as the vulgar Latin) by virtue of any such Commission as
I find your name in. You say you are a sorry Lawyer, and I think so too; for
else you could not choose but know, that every minister upon his institution and
induction* is actually possessed of a free hold in that Benefice into which he
is instituted or inducted; of which he is not to be dis-placed (if the Magna
Charta be in force, as I think it is) but by the Laws of the Land; and
therefore cease not by his own vitiousness to have a right to the mantainance
which belongs unto it (as you strangely tell us) until he be convicted
according to those Laws, and deposed accordingly.

23. But you proceed, and having charged me with some bloody desires, which you
find not mine; you tell me, that I must not make such rigorous Laws for all,
and hang them that are against me. This, if you speak to me in my personal
capacity, you might well have spared it, knowing that I have no authority of
making Laws, and that the Legislative Power is in other hands; but if you speak
to me as the Primipilus (as in scorn you call me) amongst the chi^^ of the
defenders of the late turgid and persecuting sort of Prela^y, you may do well
to let us know what rigorous Laws have been made at the instigation of the
Prelates, for hanging all that were against them! what execution has been done
upon any of the Puritan faction, since the so much celebrated Reign of Q.
ELIZABETH! What Confessors and Martyrs have been added lately unto Fox's
Calendar* The Prelates in the mean time must be thought to be in a sad
condition, and every one of them might have said in his own particular, Si b^ne
r^xe^o ^civ^s; si mlae Deos iratos habeo; If they discharged the trust reposed
in them, for suppressing Heresies and Schisms, and preserving Order in the
Church, according to the Canons of the Church and the Laws of the Land, they
were sure to get nothing but anger and hate from men; if not, they were as sure
to incur the high displeasure of almighty God: And yet for this, for doing
nothing but their duty (and would to God they had done that as they should have
done) they must be branded by the odious name of Persecutors. But certainly M.
Baxter, if they may be called a persecuting sort of Prelates* they must be
called so, a non Pers^qu^n^o (as Lucus was a non Lucendo, by some old
Gramarians) for being too indulgent to the Puritan faction, for standing in the
gapp betwixt them and the Kings displeasure, when he might more easily have
crushed them then have spoke the word: For if you look into his Majesty's
Proclamation against the Scots, bearing date Febr. 20* in the 14 year of his
Reign, when he first took up Arms against them, you will there find* First that
it was given out by the Covenanters, that some of power in the Hierarchy of
England have been the cause of his Majesty's first taking Arms to invade that
his Native Kingdom, and of meddling with their Religion. And secondly, that his
Majesty Answers thereunto, that it was most certain, that no one of them had
done any thing therein, but by his own Princely direction and command; and that
it was notoriously known to all the Council then present, that their counsels
were for peace, and that they were the perswaders (as much as in them lay) of
the undeserved moderation wherewith he had hitherto proceeded toward so great
offenders. And therefore tell me, if you can, in what this persecuting humor
of theirs did consist especially. Cannot such a seditious wretch as Burton,
such a rake-shame as Vicars of Stamford, such a notorious piece of
Nonconformity as Rood of Abingdon, be censured in the high Commission (perhaps
to deprivation, and some short imprisonment) but presently you must c^y out of
a Persecution? Cannot the Ordinaries in their several and respective
Jurisdictions, proceed unto the silencing of a factious Lecturer, or the
suspending of an unconformable Minister, usque ad Reformationem, but that must
pass also under the same account? If there be persecuting on the one side,
there must be martyrdom, and other sufferings on the other side* And then such
sufferings must not be (for it is Causa, non Paena, quae facit Martyrem) either
for factious Preaching, or seditious Writing, or an incorrigiable opposition to
established Orders; but for the testimony of a good conscience, in bearing
witness to the truth, and constantly adhering to the faith of Christ, when the
abnegation or renouncing of it is required of them: Such sufferers, if you can
show me, you have gained the cause; and for such Persecutions as you complain
of, they so seldom happened, that there was the more notice taken of them,
because they were so rare, and came so seldom* once in a year, or perhaps not
above once in two or three years, we might hear the news of some one or other
notoriously known for his inconformity, who was brought upon the stage for a
terror to others, which is the most you can complain of* but so, I trow, it
was not with the Presbyterians when they were in power, whose little finger was
heavier on the Regular Clergy, then the loins of all the Bishops had been on
them. Consult the Acts of the High Commission, inquire into the Registers of
the several Bishops, and tell me, if for every one of the Puritan party who had
been silenced, suspended or deprived, according to the Laws of the Land during
the last 20. years of Episcopal Government; some scores at the least, of the
conformable Clergy have not been sequestered, ejected, and turned out of all
(without law, in less then half that time) by the Presbyterians. Here is a
persecution indeed, ( undecima persecutio, as the Book not unfitly calls it) A
Persecution with a witness.

24. But you have other Titles of Honor to bestow upon them, and think it not
enough to brand the Bishops with the odious title of a persecuting sort of
Prelacie; but you must add the word Turgid, to make up the measure as well of
your incivilities as of their afflictions: which word, although it be not usual
in the English Tongue, yet we can understand it without the help of a
Dictionarie, and understand by it, that you tax the Prelates with a high
swelling kind of pride. I heard one preach in Westminster Abbey about the
beginning of the long Parliament, who much bemoaned the sad condition of the
Clergy, and the impossibilities under which they lay, of giving content unto
the people; for if (said he) they kept close and privately, or lived any thing
below their means, the people were then apt to cry, O the base sordidness of
the Clergy! but if according to their means and in any little outward luster,
they then cried on the other side, O the pride of the Clergy! But tell me, M.
Baxter, (if you can at the least) in what the turgidness, or the high swelling
pride of the Prelates did appear most visibly; was it in the bravery of their
apparel, or in the train of their attendance, or in their lordly port, or lofty
looks, or in all, or none. Admitting the worst and most you can of these
particulars, would you have men that shine in an higher Orb, move in a lower
Sphere then that in which God has placed them? o^ being ranked in order and
degree above you, would you not have them keep that distance which belongs to
their places? or because you affect a Paritie in the Church, (and perhaps in
the State) would you have all men brought to the same level with your self,
without admitting sub and supra in the Scale of Government? If they were your
Fathers in God, why did you not look upon them with such reverence as becomes
children? If your superiors in the Lord, why did you not yield them that
subjection which was due unto them? If fixed in place and power above you by the
Laws of the Land only, and no more then so, why did you not give obedience to
those Laws under which you lived, and by which you were to be directed? Take
heed I beseech you M. Baxter, that more spiritual pride be not found in that
heart of yours, then ever you found worldly and external pride in any of my
Lords the Bishops, and that you do not trample on them with a greater insolence
( calco Platonis fastum, sed majore fastu, as you know who said) in these
unfortunate days of their calamity, then ever they expressed toward any in the
times of their Glory. Were it my case as it is yours, I would not for 10000
worlds depart this life before I had obtained their pardon, and given
satisfaction to the world for these horrible scandals.

25. This leads me from your uses of reproofs or reprehension, (which for my
better method I have laid together) to that of Exhortation, which comes next in
order. For having told me of my many reproaches against extemporary prayers,
the holy improvements of the Lords day, etc. with my uncharitable as well as
unjust speeches against my brethren; you add, how confident you are, that they
are matters which I have exceeding cause in tears and sorrow to bewail before
the Lord, and for which I am very much obliged to publish my penitential
lam^ntations to the world, and that if it were your case you would not for
10000 worlds dye before you had done it. This is good counsel I confess, if it
were well grounded, and as divine ^hysick as could be given, if it were
properly administered as it ought to be. But let me tell you M. Baxter, you go
not the right way to work in your Application; you should first convince me of
my errors, before you press me to a public Recantation of them; and make me
sensible of my sins, before you preach repentance to me, or can require such a
solemn and severe repentance as you have prescribed? It was in the year 1635.
that the History of the Sabbath was first published, which if it does contain
such matters of Reproach against the holy improvements of the Lords day, as you
say it does, why has it not been answered in all this time; my errors,
falsities, and mistakes, laid open in the sight of the world? It is true, that
in the Postscript of a Letter writ from Dr. Twisse to the late Lord Primate,
bearing date May 29. Anno 1640. I find it signified (with great joy no
question) that M. Chambers of Clouford by Bath, has long ago answered Dr.
Heylins History of the Sabbath, but knew not how to have it printed. But this
was nothing but a flourish, a cup of hot water as it were, to keep life and
soul together till the pang was over. For M. Chambers might as well know how to
get his Book printed, had he been so pleased, as M. Byfield of Surry could get
a Book of his printed in answer to that of Dr. White then Lord Bishop of Ely,
which came out at the same time with that History. Or if he could not get it
printed before that time which the Doctor speaks of, I am sure he might have
done it since, the Press being open to all comers: but to none more then unto
such as write against the Government and established Orders of the Church of
England. And it is more then 20. years since I published that Book (so much
complained of) against M. Burton, in which I answered all his Objections
against the pre-eminence of Bishops, their function in the Church, the exercise
of their Jurisdiction; and cleared them from the guilt of all innovations in
Doctrine, Discipline, and Forms of Worship, which M. Burton in a furious zeal
had laid upon them: Why has not that been answered neither? in which the
differences between us are so briefly handled, that it would have required no
great study, but that the truth is mighty. and prevails above all things.
Give me but a satisfactory answer to those two Books, not nibling at them here
and there, like a Mouse at a hard piece of Cheese which he cannot Master; and
then you may take further time to look into the History of Episcopacy, and that
of Liturgies. Give me I say a full and satisfactory answer to those two Books,
and you shall find I have a malleable soul, that I shall be as ready to publish
my penitential Lamentations to the world (as Origin did his in the Primitive
times; (and cast my self, as Esebollus did) before the doors of the Church, and
call upon the Congregation passing in and out, to trample on me, for an
unsavory piece of salt (calcate me tanquam salem insipidum) fit only to be
thrown on the common dunghill. Till you do this, you have done nothing, but must
leave me in the same state in which you found me; and when you do it, I hope
you will give me leave to use your own words, and say, that if I have erred, it
has been through weakn^sse, not by partiality, much less by any willful
opposition to a manifest truth.

26. This said, you fall into rapture, and cry out, Oh the holy breathings
after Christ, the love to God, the heavenly mindedness, the hatred of all known
sin, the humility, self denial, meekness, etc! that you have discerned as far
as effects can show the heart to others, in abundance of those people that
differ from you in some smaller things. Here is a Panegyric indeed, fit only
for Angelical spirits, or such at least as live only on the food of Angels. How
well accommodated and applied to the present subject we shall best perceive by
consulting some of the particulars. Some of your holy breathings we have seen
before, and shall see more in that which follows; tell me then what you think
of these passages, these breathings of M. Burton in his Apology and Appeal. In
which he calls on the Nobility, To rouse up their spirits and magnanimous
courage for the truth, and to stick close to God and the King, in helping the
Lord and his anointed against the mighty; upon the Judges, to draw forth the
sword of Justice, to defend the Laws against such Innovators, who as much as in
them lies, divide between the King and People: upon the Courtiers to put too
their helping hands and prayers to rescue our religion and faithful Ministers
then suspended from the jaws of those devouring Wolves and tyrannizing lordly
Prelates, etc. Upon the people generally to take notice of the desperate
practices, innovations and Popish designs of these Antichristian Prelates, and
to oppose and redress them with all their force and power. And yet (as if this
had not been enough to declare his meaning) he breaths more plainly in his
Libel called The News from Ipswich; in which he lets us know That till his
Majesty shall hang up some of these Romish Prelates and Inquisitors before the
Lord, as the Gibbeonites once did the seven sons of Saul, we can never hope to
abate any of Gods plagues, etc. What think you of these breathings of Buchannan
in his book De Jure Regni apud Scotos, where he advises, Regum interfectoribus
proemia discerni, etc. that Rewards should publicly be decreed for those who
kill a Tyrant (and the meekest King that ever was shall be called a Tyrant if
he oppose the setting up of the holy Discipline) as usually are proposed to
those who kill Wolves or Bears. And finally, what think you of these breathings
in one of the brethren, who preaching before the House of Commons in the
beginning of the long Parliament, required them in the name of the Lord to show
no mercy to the Prelatical party their wives and children, but that they
should proceed against them as against Babylon it self, even to the taking of
their children and dashing their brains against the stones. Call you these holy
breathings the holy breathings after Christ which you so applaud? Or are they
not such breathings rather a^ the Scripture attributes to Saul before his
conversion, who in the ninth chapter of the Acts is said to be Spirator minarum
and caedis adversus discipules Domini, that is to say, that he breathed out
threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord.

27. As are their breathings, such also is their meekness, their humility,
their hatred of known sin, their heavenly mindedness, and that self-denial
which you so commend, for of their love to God I can take no notice. As well as
they are known unto you, may you not be deceived in your opinion of them, and
take that first for a real and Christian meekness which is but counterfeit and
pretended for their worldly ends. Does not our Savior tell us of a sort of
men, false-preachers, seducers, and the like, which should come in sheeps
clothing but inwardly they are ravening wolves. What means our Savior by sheeps
clothing, but that innocence, meekness, and humility, which they should
manifest and express in their outward actions: it being the observation of
Thomas Aquinas that grand dictator in the Schools, In nomine ^vis innocentiam
and simplicitatem per totam Scripturam designar^. And yet for all this fair
appearance they were inwardly but ravening Wolves, greedily thi^sting for the
prey, and hungry after spoil and rapine. Astutam rapido gestan^es pectore
vulpem, in the Poets language. This you may find exemplified in the Sect of the
Anabaptists, who at their first appearance disguised themselves in such an
habit of meekness and humility, and Christian patience as gained them great
affection amongst the people, but when they were grown unto a head, and had got
some power into their hands, what lusts, what slaughter, what unmerciful
cruelties did they not commit, when Tyranny and K. John of Leyden did so rage
in Munster. But because possible you may say that these are not the men whom
your character aims at, tell me what spirit of meekness you find in Calvin,
when he called Mary Q. of England by the name of Proserpine, and tells us of
her, that she did superare omnes diabolos, that all the Devils in hell were not
half so mischievous: or what in Beza when he could find no better title for
Mary Q. of Scots then those of Athaliah and Medea, the one as infamous in
Scripture for her barbarous cruelty, as the other is in heathen Writers: or
what of Peury, Vdal, and the rest of the Rabble of Mar* Prelates in Queen
Elizabeth's time, to whom there never was the like generation of railing
Rabshakehs since the beginning of the world. Or what of Dido Clari^s who calls
King James (for neither Kings nor Queens can escape them) intentissimum
Evangelii hostem, the most bitter enemy of the Gospel: and I say nothing of the
scandalous reports and base reproaches which were laid upon his son and
successor by the tongues and pens of too many others of that party.

28. Look upon their humility and you shall find them exalting themselves above
Kings and Princes, and all that is called God, the Pope and they contending for
the supreme power in the Church of Christ. For does not Traverse say expressly,
in his Book of Discipline, Huic Disciplinae omnes principes fasces suas
submittere necesse est, that Kings and Princes must submit their Scepters to
the Rod of that Discipline, which Calvin had devised, and his followers here
pursued so fiercely. Have not some others of them declared elsewhere, that
Kings and Princes must lay down their Scepters at the Churches feet, yea and
lick up the dust thereof; understanding always by the Church their one holy
Discipline; did they not carry themselves so proudly in the time of that Queen,
whom they compared to a sluttish housewife, who swept the middle of the room,
but left the dust behind the door and in every corner, that being asked by a
grave Counselor of State, whether the removal of some Ceremonies would not
serve the turn; they answered with insolence enough, ne ungulam esse
relinquendam; that they would not leave so much as an hoof behind. And that you
may perceive they have been as good at it in Scotland as ever they have been in
England. Take here the testimony of King James (who had very good experience of
them) in the Preface to his Basilicon Doron where telling us what he means by
Puritans, he describes them thus, I give this style (says he) to such
brainsick and Headie Preachers as refusing to be called Anabaptists,
participate too much with their humors; not only agreeing with the general
rule of all Anabaptists in the contempt of the Civil Magistrate, and in leaning
to their own Dreams and Revelations; but particularly, in accounting all men
profane that swear not to all their fantasies, in making for every particular
question of the Policy of the Church, as great commotion, as if the Article of
the Trinity were called in controversy; in making the Scriptures to be ruled
by their conscience, and not their conscience by the Scripture; and he that
denies the least jot of their Grounds, sit tibi tanquam Ethnicus and
Publicanus, not worthy to enjoy the benefit of Breathing, much less to
participate with them of the Sacraments: and before that any of their Grounds
be impugned, let King, People, Law and all be trod under foot. Such holy Wars
are to be preferred to an ungodly Peace: no, in such cases Christian Princes
are not only to be resisted unto, but not to be prayed for: for Prayer must
come of Faith, and it is not revealed unto their Consciences that God will hear
no prayer for such a Prince. I would to God you had not put me to these
remembrances, which cannot be more unpleasing unto you, then they are to my
self. But taking them for most good truths, may we not thereupon infer, that
as the Masters were, such are the Scholars; or as the Mother was, such are the
Daughters; and as the Fathers were, such are the Sons. Nil mirum est si
patrizent filii, says the old Comoedian.

29. Then for their Heavenly mindedness we have seen somewhat of it before,
and shall see more thereof, as also of their hatred of all known sin, in that
which follows. And here again we will take the Character which King James makes
of them in the second Book of his Basilicon Doron before mentioned. In which he
tells us, That there never rose Faction in the time of his minority, nor
trouble since, but they that were upon that factious part were ever careful to
persuade and allure those unruly Spirits among the Ministry to Spouse that
quarrel as their own; and that he was calumniated by them to that end, in their
popular Sermons, not for any evil or vice which they found in him, but only
because he was a King, which they thought to be the highest evil; informing the
People that all Kings and Princes were naturally enemies to the Liberty of the
Church, and could never patiently bear the yoke of Christ. After which having
spoken of the violence wherewith they had endeavored to introduce a parity
both in Church and State, he gives this counsel to the Prince, Take heed
therefore my son (says he) to such Puritans, very pests in the Church and
Commonweal, whom no deserts can oblige, neither oaths or promises bind;
breathing nothing but sedition and calumnies; aspiring without measure, railing
without reason, and making their own imaginations (without any warrant of the
Word) the square of their conscience, protesting to him before the great God,
that he should never find with any Highlander, base^ Thieves, greater
ingratitude, and more lies and vile perjuries, then with those fanatic
spirits. And suffer not (says he to his son) the principles of them to brook
your Land, if you like to sit at rest; except you would keep them for trying
your patience, as Socrates did an evil wife. Such is the heavenly-mindednesse,
and such the hatred of all known sin, which you have observed in many of those
who differ from me as you say, in some smaller things, nec ovum ov^, nec lac
lacti similius, as you know who said.

30. And then as for their Self-denial, I could wish you had spared it, unless
you had some better ground for it then I doubt you have. For if you ask the
Country people, they will tell you generally, that they have found in those who
live upon Sequestrations, so little self denial, that they are more rigorous in
exacting of their Tithes, even in trifling matters; and far less hospitable for
relief of the Poor, or entertainment of the better sort of the Parishioners,
and consequently to have more of Earth and Self in them, then ever had been
found, or could be honestly complained of in the old Incumbents; whom if you
look on with an equal and impartial eye, you will find them to be of another
temper, notwithstanding all the provocation of want and scorn which from day to
day are laid upon them; neither repining openly at their own misfortune, nor
railing maliciously on those whom they know to be the Authors of them; nor
libelling against the persons, nor wilfully standing out against the pleasure
and commands of the higher Powers; but bearing patiently the present, and
charitably hoping for some better measure, then has been hitherto meeted to
them; as best becomes the scholars of that gracious Master, who when he was 1
Pet. 2. 23
reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not; but commits
himself to him that judges righteously: but the Crow thinks her own birds
fairest, and so let them be.

31. But you proceed, and tell us, That if God love them not (that is to say,
the persons whom you so extol) you have not yet met with the people whom you
may hope he loves: and if he do love them, he will scarcely take my dealing
will: spoken with confidence enough. But how came you to know the mind of the
Lord, or to be of his Council, that you can tell so perfectly whom he loves or
hates, e^ nos scire Deus voluit, quae oportet scire ad vitam aeternam
consequendam, as the Father has it, God has communicated to us all those
things which are fit and necessary to be known for the attaining of everlasting
salvation, but keeps such secrets to himself. And though we are most sure and
certain that the Lord, knows who are his, yet how may we be sure or certain
that he has made you acquainted with it. I cannot easily believe that you have
been either wrapped up into the third heaven, or perused the Alphabetical Table
to the Book of Life, or have had any such Revelation made unto you, by which
you may distinctly know whom the Lord loves, or whom he does not. But if you
go by outward signs, and gather this love of God unto them from the afflictions
and chastisements which they suffer under ( God chastning every son whom he
does receive) that mark of filiation runs on the other side; those of your
Party enjoying as much worldly prosperity, as the reaping of the fruits, and
living in the houses of other men, (which you call by the name of carnal
accommodations) can estate them in. If you conclude on their behalf from their
outward prosperity, you go on worse grounds then before: for David tells us of
some wicked and unrighteous persons, that they are neither in want or misery
like other men; that they live plentifully on the lot which is fallen unto
them, and leave the rest of their substance unto their babes. And Christ the
Son of David tells us, that the Lord God makes the Sun to shi^e and the rain to
rain as well on the sinners as the just. All mankind being equally capable of
those temporary and temporal comforts: and finally if you collect it from those
spiritual graces and celestial gifts which you have attributed to them ( as far
as the effects can show the heart to others) I have before took some pains to
let you see how easily men may be mistaken, when they behold a man through the
spectacles of partiality and defection, or take the visible appearances for
invisible graces; the fraudulent art fi^^s and deceits of men, for the
celestial gifts of God. And as for that which you have inferred hereupon, viz.
that if he love them he will scarcely take my dealing well. You should first
prove the Premises before you venture upon such a strange conclusion, and not
condemn a Christian brother upon Ifs and Ands.

32. In the next place, you please to tell me, that you are not an approver of
the violence of any of them: and that you do not justify M. Burtons way, and
that you are not of the mind of the party that I most oppose in all their
Discipline (as a Book now in the Press will give the world an account.) In the
two first parts of which Character (which you have given us of your self) as I
have great reason to commend your moderation, and hope that you will make it
good in your future actions; so I can say little to the last, not having heard
any thing before of the Book you speak of, nor knowing by what name to call for
it when it comes abroad. But whereas you tell us, in the next, that you are
sure the Church must have unity and charity in the ancient simplicity of
Doctrine, Worship and Government, or not at all. I take you at your word, hold
there, and we shall soon agree together. Unity and charity in the ancient
simplicity of Doctrine Worship and Government, no man likes better then my
self; bring but the same affections with you, and the wide breach which is
between us, (in some of the causes which we manage on either side will be
suddenly closed, but then you must be sure to stand to the word ancient also,
and not to keep your self to simplicity only: if unity and charity will content
you in the ancient Doctrine, in the simplicity thereof without subsequent
mixtures of the Church, I know no doctrine in the Church more pure and ancient
then that which is publicly held forth by the Church of England in the book of
Articles, the Homilies, and the Chatechism authorized by Law, under the head or
rubric of Confirmation. Of which, I safely may affirm, as S. Augustine does in
his Tract, or Book Ad Marcellinum, (if my memory fail not) his qui contradicit,
^ut a Christi fide alienus est, aut est haereticus; that is to say, he must be
either an Infidei or an Heretic who assenteth not to them. If unity and
charity in the simplicity of Worship be the thing you aim at, you must not give
every man the liberty of worshipping in what form he pleases, which destroys
all unity; nor cursing many times in stead of praying, which destroys all
charity: the ancient and most simple way of Worship in the Church of God was by
regular forms prescribed for the public use of Gods people in their
Congregations, and not by unpremeditated, indigested prayers, which every man
makes unto himself as his fancy shall lead him (which I hope I have
sufficiently proved in my Tract of Liturgies.) And if Set Forms of Worship are
to be retained, as I think they be, you will not easily meet with any which
has more in it of the ancient simplicity of the Primitive times, then that by
which we did officiate for the space of fourscore years and more, in the Church
of England. And finally, if the ancient simplicity in Government be the point
you drive at, what Government can you find more pure and ancient then that of
Bishops; of which I shall only present you with that Character of it which I
find in that Petition of the County of Rutland, where it is said to be, That
Government which the Apostles left the Church in, that the three ages of
Martyrs were governed by; that the thirteen ages since have always gloried in,
(by their succession of Bishops from the Apostles, proving themselves members
of the Catholic and Apostolic Church) that our Laws have established, so many
Kings and Parliaments have protected; into which we were baptized, as certainly
Apostolical, as the observation of the Lords day, as the distinction of Books
Apocryphal from Canonical, as that such Books were written by such Evangelists
and Apostles, as the consecration of the Eucharist by Presbyters, etc. An ample
commendation of Episcopal Government, but such as exceeds not the bounds of
truth or modesty. Stand to these grounds for keeping unity and charity in the
ancient simplicity of Doctrine, Worship, and Government in the Church of God,
and you shall see how cheerfully the Regal and Prelatical party ( whom you most
oppose) will join hands with you, and embrace you with most dear affections.

33. But you begin to shrink already, and tell me, that if I will have men live
in peace as brethren, our Union must be Law, or Ceremonies, or indifferent
Forms. This is a pretty speculation (I must needs confess) but such as would
not pass for practicable in any well-governed Commonwealth; unless it be in
the Old Vtopia, or the New Atlantis, or the last discovered Oceana. For how can
men possibly live in peace as brethren, where there is no Law to limit their
desires, or direct their actions. Take away Law, and every man will be a Law
unto himself, and do whatsoever seems best in his own eyes, without control:
then Lust will be a law for one, Felony will be a law for another; Perjury
shall be held no crime, nor shall any Treason or Rebellion receive their
punishments; for where there is no law, there is no transgression; and where
there is no transgression there can be no punishment, punishments being only
due for the breach of Laws. Thus is it also in the service and worship of
Almighty God, which by the hedge of Ceremonies is preserved from lying open to
all profaneness; and by Set Forms (be they as indifferent as they will) is
kept from breaking out into open confusion. God (as S. Paul has told us) is
the God of Order, not of Confusion in the Churches. If therefore we desire to
avoid confusion, let us keep some order; and if we would keep order, we must
have some forms: it being impossible that men should live in peace as brethren
in the house of God, where we find not both. David has told us in the Psalms,
that Jerusalem is like a City which is at unity in it self, and in Jerusalem
there were not only solemn Sacrifices, set Forms of blessing, and some
significant Ceremonies prescribed by God; but Musical Instruments, and Singers,
and linen vestures for those Singers; and certain hymns and several times and
places for them ordained by David* Had every Ward in that City, and every
Street in that Ward, and every Family in that Street, and perhaps, every person
in that Family used his own way in worshipping the Lord his God. Jerusalem could
not long have kept the name of a City, much less the honor of being the City
which was at unity in it self. And Solomon in the book of Canticles, compares
the Church unto an Army, an Army terrible with banners: now an army is a
gallant sight when it moves one way, when every Regiment and Troop marches in
order, with, and under their proper Ensigns; and as long as they do so they may
seem invincible: but if their files and ^anks be broken, if they march either
without order, or against direction, consusi Equites Pedit^sque in exitium
ruunt, both Horse and Foot will be easily vanquished, and the whole Army put to
rout by the weakest Enemies. When therefore the Apostle gives us this good
counsel, that we endeavor to keep the spirit of unity in the bond of peace; he
seems to intimate that there can be no unity where there is no peace; and that
peace cannot be preserved without some bond. If you destroy all Ceremonies and
subvert all Forms, you must break the bond; and if the bond be broken, you must
break the peace, and if you break the peace, what becomes of unity: so that it
is but a dream of a dry Summer (as the saying is) to think that without Law or
Forms or Ceremonies. men may live peaceably together, as becomes brethren,
though they profess one Faith, acknowledge one Lord, and receive one Baptism,
and be the sons of that one Father which is in heaven.

34. When therefore you subjoin that Scripture and reason, and the Primitive
practice, and great experience do lead in all to another course; I would fain
know particularly to what that passage does relate: if to the words immediately
foregoing, in which you tell me that I must not make such rigorous laws to hang
up all that are against me; I grant indeed, that the Church has no authority
to make any such laws, either from Scripture or the practice of the Primitive
times. Neither can any reason justify, or any great experience, add strength
to such executions: defendenda^est religio non occidendo, sed moriendo, was the
rule of old; but if those words relate to the former clause, as intimating that
an union which is built on Laws, preserved by Forms, and cemented by Ceremonies
in Gods public Worship; is neither consonant to Scripture, agreeable to
Reason, conform unto the Primitive times, nor countenanced by great Experience;
there is not any thing in the world which can be more unfitly spoken, or more
impossible to be proved. What may be* said in that behalf from Scripture,
Reason, and the practice of the Primitive times, has briefly been presented to
you in the former passages; and would to God we had not found by too great
experience, how much our union (which made us gloried and renowned in the eyes
of the World) is broken in pieces for want of those good Laws, those religious
Forms, and those decent Ceremonies which were before in use amongst us; certain
I am, that neither Scripture, Reason, the Primitive times, or great Experience
do lead us to any other course for preserving union in the Worship of God, but
by established Laws, set Forms, and commanded Ceremonies: in which if you
conceive me to be mistaken, you must endeavor to prove it, and not say it
only. But this you seem willing to decline, telling me, that if you could
procure my pardon for those words, you would expect no more, because of our
distance. My pardon is as easily obtained, as asked; if you conceive it worth
the asking, when there is no offense either given or taken. But whether you
expect any more or not, that remains wholly in your self, it being a matter of
your own seeking that you have so much. My desires are to live in peace, and
not to engage my self in new embroilments, having had too many Irons in the
fire already: howsoever as you like this, you may have more if you please, the
distance of our habitations not being so great, but that we may manage these
Pen Combats without any great trouble; and the distance in our affections
being so little, that I shall very cheerfully embrace the freindship, and
somewhat ambitiously desire a place in your good opinion: Distantia locorum non
tollit amicitiam, is a known Aphorism in our Ethics; A friendly correspondence
being once begun, cannot be intermitted by the distance of places, or the
remoteness of habitations, if both parties equally endeavor to maintain the
same.

35. And here again we might have parted, but that you have a mind (for what
ends I know not) to engage me in some fresh disputes: For thinking you had
satisfied me, you desire that I would satisfy you ( passing by many other
things) in three points especially, concerning Popery, in which you seem to be
much unsatisfied; such satisfaction as I can, I am bound to give you, as unto
any other man, who modestly shall require an account from me, for any thing
which has passed my Pen, or come within the compass of my small ability* and
the first thing for which satisfaction is desired, is, That the Papists are
affirmed by me, to have been the more moderate Adversaries then the Puritans;
and the Puritan Faction hurried on with greater violence, etc. For this you
cite the Preface of my Ecclesia Vindicata, where I am sure there is no such
matter; no such thing (I am sure) delivered in such general terms as you here
express it; but with limitations and restrictions, unto one particular, which
is the Argument there handled; so that you enter upon these new Disputes
concerning Popery, with that kind of fallacy which the Logicians call, A dicto
secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter: And how can I hope for a fair end from so
foul a beginning? Look on that Preface once again, and you will find, that I
speak not generally of all the differences which are betwixt us and the
Papists; but only of those heats which have passed on both sides about the
liturgy: for having told the Reader, That the Liturgy was faulted by the
Papist, because it had abolished the Mass, and was communicated to the people
in the English tongue, and blamed by the Genevians, for having too much in it
of the Roman Rituals: I presently subjoyn, That the Papist of the two was the
moderate Adversary, and such whose edges were sooner taken off, from the
prosecution of the quarrel, then others were. Would you be satisfied in this?
You may then please to know, that after the first heats were over, the Papists
presently grew cool, and relinquished the quarrel; considering seasonably and
discreetly, that the Liturgy being founded upon those common Principles of
faith and piety, in which both parties did agree, was not so subject to
disputes and contradiction, as at first it seemed: And hereupon it was that
Pope PIUS IV. offered to confirm it by his Papal Authority, that the English
Papists dilligently resorted to it; that after the Schism made by Pope PIUS V.
little or nothing for many years together (comparatively with those of the
other party) was writ against it; that being newly translated into the Latin
tongue, about the year 1618. it gave great content to the more moderate sort of
Papists amongst the French, as Bishop Hall informs us, in his Quo Vadis; and
being translated into Spanish (at such times as his late Majesty was in Spain)
it gave no less contentment to the learned and more sober sort amongst the
Spaniards, who marvelled much to see such a regular order and form of Divine
Worship amongst the English, of whom they had been frequently informed by our
English Fugitives, that there was neither form nor order to be found amongst
us: But on the other side, the Genevians beginning to take up the cry (called
Puritans upon that account) in the 6. or 8. year of Q. ELIZABETH, animated by
Billingham and Benson, conntenanced by Cartwright, and headed by the Earl of
Leicester, followed it with such a violent impetuosity, that nothing could
repress or allay that fury; neither the patience and authority of Archbishop
Whitgift, the great pains and learning of Bishop Bilson, the modesty of M.
Hooker, nor the exactness of D. Co^ens (all which did write against them in Q.
ELIZABETH'S time) was able to stop their current, till the severity of the Laws
gave a check unto them: Nor was King JAMES sooner received into this Kingdom,
but they again revived the quarrel, as may appear by their Petitions,
Admonitions, and other Printed Books and Tractates; to which the learned
labors of Bishop Buckridge, Bishop Morton and D. Burges (who had been once of
that party, but regained by K. James unto the Church) were not by them thought
to give such ample satisfaction, that they must be at it once again, during the
life of K. James, in their Al^are Damuscenam, in which the whole body of the
English Liturgy, the Hierarchy of Bishops, the Discipline and Equ^nomy of the
Church of England, was publicly vi^^ified and decried. How egerly this game
was followed by them after the first ten years of his late Majesty K. Charles,
till they had abolished the Liturgy, destroyed the discipline, and plucked up
Episcopacy both root and branch, is a thing known so well unto you, that it
needs no telling: And this I hope has satisfied you in your first enquiry,
viz. why and in what respects it was said in the Preface to my Ecclesia
Vindicata, That the Papist was the more moderate adversary; and for the other
words which follow, viz. That the Puritan faction hurried on with greater
violence, etc. which you find in the 17. Sect. of it; they relate only to the
violent prosecution against the Episcopal Government, in which, how far they
out went the Papists, is made so manifest in that and the former Section* that
it is no small wonder to me, that you should seek for any further satisfaction
in it; read but those Sections once again, and tell me in your second and more
serious thoughts, if any thing could be spoken more plainly, or proved more
fully, then that the Puritan ^action, with greater violence and impetuosity,
were hurried on toward their design (that is to say the destruction of
Episcopal Government) then the Papists were. Secondly, You seem much
unsatisfied that I maintained against M. Burton, That the Religion of the
Papists is not rebellion* nor their faith faction: But this when I maintained
against M. Burton, I did it not in the way of laying down my own reasons, why
it neither was nor could be so, but in the way of answering such silly
Arguments as he here brought to prove it was; but now that I may satisfy you*
and do right both to the Church and State, you shall have one Argument for it
now, and another I shall give you when I shall come in order to answer yours:
The Argument which I shall give you now, is briefly this, shall be founded on a
passage of the Speech, made in the Star Chamber by the late Arch Bishop, at the
sentencing of D. Bastwick, M. Burton, etc. in which he tells us, That if we
make their Religion to be Rebellion, then we make their Religion and Rebellion
to be all one; and that is against the ground both of State and the Law: for
when diverse Romish Priests and Jesuits have deservedly suffered death for
Treason, is it not the constant and just profession of the State, that they
never put any man to death for Religion, but for Rebellion and Treason only?
Does not the State truly affirm, that there was never any Law made against the
life of a Papist quatenus, a Papist only? And is not all this stark false, if
their very Religion be Rebellion? For if their Religion be Rebellion, it is not
only false but impossible, that the same man in the same act should suffer for
his Rebellion, and not for his Religion: And this ^aith he, K. James of ever
Blessed Memory, understood passing well, when (in his Premonition to all
Christian Monarchs) he says, I do constantly maintain that no Papist, either
in my time, or in the time of the late Queen, ever dyed for his conscience:
therefore he did not think their very Religion was Rebellion, thus he. And if
for all this you shall thus persist, and say that the Popish Religion is
Rebellion: you first acquit Papists from suffering death, banishment, or
imprisonment, under the Reign of the three last Princes, for their several
Treasons and Rebellions; and lay the guilt thereof upon the blood-thirstiness
of the Laws, and of the several Kings and Parliaments by which they were made:
And secondly, you add hereby more Martyrs to the Roman Calendar, then all the
Protestants in the world ever did besides.

36. But this you do not only say, but you prove it too (at the least* you
think so.) Your argument is this, 1. That Religion which defines the
deposition of Princes, and absolving their subjects from their fidelity by the
Pope, because they deny Transubstantiation, etc. is rebellion doctrinal. But
such is the Popish Religion: that is to say, the Popish Religion defines the
Deposition of Kings, and absolveth their Subjects from their fidelity by the
Pope* because they deny Transubstantiation, etc. The Minor you say is evident;
but I am willing to believe that you mean the Major, and that this only is an
escape of the pen, because you do not go about to prove the Major but the Minor
only. To the whole Sylogisme, I answer, first, that it is of a very strange
complexion, both Propositions being false: and therefore that it is impossible
by the Rules of Logic, that the conclusion should ensue: that the Proposition,
or the Major as they generally call it, is altogether false, may be proved by
this; that the thing which teaches, cannot be the thing which is taught, no
more then a Preacher can be said to be the word by him preached; or the Dog
which hunts the Hare, is the Hare which is hunted: so that although the
Religion of the Church of Rome had defined the Deposition of Kings by the Pope,
for denying Transubstantiation* etc. (as it never did) yet could not the Popish
Religion upon that account be called Rebellion, Rebellion by the Law of England
25. Edw. 3. c. 2. is defined to be an actual levying of War against our
Sovereign Lord the King in h^ Realm, or an adhering to the Kings enemies in his
Realm, giving to them aid and comfort in the Realm, or elsewhere. And by the
Civil Law all those qui arripiant arma contra eum cujus jurisdictioni subditi
sunt, who tak up arms against such persons, to whose Authority they are
subject, are declared to be Rebels, for which see Spigelus in his Lexicon of
the terms of Law. But that Religion which defines the Deposition of Princes by
the Pope, because they deny Transubstantiation, etc. is not an actual levying
of War against our Sovereign Lord the King in his Realm, or an adhering, etc..
Nor the the taking up of Arms against such persons to whose Authority they are
subject* Therefore that Religion which defines the Deposition of Princes, etc.
neither is really or nominally to be called Rebellion; if either the laws of
England, or the Civil laws do rightly understand what Rebellion is, as I think
they do. And whereas you hope to mend the matter by calling it a Rebellion
doctrinal, you make it worse on your side then it was before, For besides that
there is no such thing as Rebel on doctrinal (though some Doctrines there may
be too frequently preached for inciting the people to Rebellion) you find not
the word Doctrinal in the proposition which you have undertook to prove, and
when presents it self simply to you in these words, that the Religion of the
Papists is Rebellion.

37. Such being the faultiness of your Mejor, we will next consider whether
the Assumption or your Minor be any thing more evident then your Major was.
Your Minor is, that the Popish Religion is such, that is to say, such a
Religion that defines the Deposition of Kings by the Pope, because they deny
Transubstantiation, etc. This is the matter to be proved, and you prove it
thus, That which is defined by a Pope and General Council, is the Popish
Religion: But the aforesaid Doctrine is defined by a Pope and an approved
General Council, viz, at the Laterane under Innocent the 3. Erge, etc. This
makes it evident indeed, that you never saw the Cannons nor Decrees of the
Laterane Council, (and possibly your learning may not lie so high) but that you
took this passage upon trust, from some ignorant hand, which had seen them as
little as your self. Your Major I shall grant for true; but nothing can be
falser or mere unable to be proved then your Minor is. Consult the Acts of that
Council, search into all Editions of them, and into the Commentaries of such
Cannonists as have writ upon them, and you shall neither find in the one or the
other, that the Deposition of Kings and Princes by the Pope was defined to be
lawful, (for that I take to be your meaning, either for denying
Transubstantiation, or for any other cause whatsoever. Most true it is, that
the word Transubstantiation then newly hammered on the Anvil by some of the
Schoolmen to express that carnal presence of Christ in the Sacrament, as they
then maintained, was first received in this Council; and received then ad
^vitanda^ haere^icorum tergiversationes, as my Author has it, for avoiding the
wrangling^ and fallacious shifts, which Heretics otherwise might use. But that
the word was made such an Idol in this Council that all Christian Kings and
Princes which would no^ fall down and worship it, were to be deposed, has
neither color nor foundation in the Acts of that Council. And therefore I will
first lay down the Canon which I think you aim at, for otherwise there is none
in that Council which you can pretend to: and then acquaint as well with the
occasion and the meaning of it, and your own mistakings.

38. And first, the words of the Canon (as these now stand in the Tomes of the
Councels are these that follow, Si quis Dominus temporalis requisitus and
monitus ab Ecclesia terram suam purgare neglexerit ab hac haeretica foeditate,
per Metropolitanum and com provinciales Episcopos excommunicationis ^inculo
innodetur. Etsi satisfacere contempserit infra annum significetur hoc summo
Poniifici, ut ex tunc ipse vassallos ab ejus fidelitate denunciet absolutos,
and terram exponant catholicis occupandam qui eam exterminatis haereticis ^ine
ulla contradictione possideant, and in fidei puritate conservent, salvo jure
domini principalis, dummodo super hoc ipse nullum praestet obstaculum, nec
aliquod impedimentum opp^nat, eadem nihilominus lege servata circa eos qui non
habent Dominos principales, such is the Canon or Decree. And this was the
occasion of it. The Albigenses and Waldenses, differing in many points from the
received opinions of the Church of Rome, and constantly denying the Popes
Supremacy amongst other things, some years before the calling of this Council,
was grown to a very great power and insolency* countenanced therein by the two
last Raimonds Earls of Toulouse, and some of the Petit Lords of Gascoyn; all
which, though absolute enough in their several Territories in respect of their
vassals, but were fudataries either to the Empire or the Kings of France, as
the Lords in chief, for the reduction of these Albingenses to the Church of
Rome. Dominick a Spaniard (the Founder afterward of the Order of Dominical
Friars) used his best endeavors in the way of Argument and persuasion but
failing of his design therein, he instigated Pope Innocent the 3. to call this
Council, Anno, 1215. and the Prelates there assembled, to pass this Canon for
the suppressing both of them and their Patrons also; for having summed up the
principle heads of that Religion which was then publicly maintained in the
Church of Rome, they framed an Oath to be taken by all secular Magistrates, ut
haereticos universos ab Ecclesia denotatos bona fide pro viribus ex terminare
studeant, to use their best endeavors for the exterminating of all Heretics
(that is to say, all such as did oppose those Doctrines before laid down) out
of their dominions: and then it follows, as before, si quis vero dominus
temporalis, etc, that if any Temporal Lord being thereunto required by the
Church, should neglect to purge his Territories of that Infection, he should be
excommunicated by the Metropolitan and other Bishops of that Province in which
he lived; and if he gave no satisfaction within the year, notice thereof was to
be given to the Pope, that thereupon he might absolve his vassals from their
Allegiance, and give their Countries to the next Catholic Invador. who on the
rooting out of the Heretics should possess the same, to the end that he might
keep it in the holy Faith. But this was with a salvojure, a preservation of the
Rights and Interests of the Lords in chief, if they gave no hindrance to the
work. And with this clause, that it should after be extended to those also
which had no Lord Paramount superior to them. According unto which decree, the
Albigenses and their Patrons were warred on by the Kings of France, till both
sides were wearied with the War; and compounded it at last upon these
conditions: viz. That Alphonso younger brother to King Lewis the 9. of France,
should marry Joan daughter and heir to the last Raimond, and have with her the
full possession of the Country after his decease; provided also, that if the
said parties died without issue, the whole estate should be escheated to the
Crown, as in fine it did, An. 1270.

39. This the occasion of the Canon and this the meaning and the consequent of
it; but what makes this to the Deposing of Kings and such supreme Princes as
have no Lord Paramount above them. For if you mean such inferior Princes as
had Lords in chief, your argument was not home to the point it aimed at. If you
allege that Emperors and Kings (as well as such inferior Princes) are hooked
in the last clause of, viz eadem nihilominus lege servata circa eos qui dominos
non habent principales: I answer with the learned Bishop of Rochester in his
book De Potestate Papae, ^. 1. c. 8. clausulam istam a Parasito al quo, and
Pontificiae tyrannidis ministro, assutam esse: that it was patched unto the end
of the decree, by some Parasite or other Minister of the Sea of Rome. And this
he proves by several reasons; as namely, that Christian Kings and Emperors are
n^^ of such low esteem as to be comprehended in those general words, qui
dominos non habent principales* without being specially designed and
distinguished by their sovereign Titles. Secondly, that if any such thing had
been intended, it is not likely that the Ambassadors of such Kings and Emperors
who were then present in that Council, would ever have consented to it; but
rather have protested against it, and caused their Protestation to be registered
in the Acts thereof in due form of Law. Thirdly, In one of their Rescripts of
the said Pope Innocent, by whom this Council was confirmed, in which ^e does
plainly declare; That when inferior persons are named or pointed at in any of
his Commissions, majores and digniores sub generali clausula non intelligantur
includi: that is to say, that persons of more eminent rank, are not to be
understood as comprehended in such general clauses. Add hereunto, that in the
manner of the proceeding prescribed by this Canon, such temporal Lords as shall
neglect to purge their Countries of the filth of Heresies, were to be
excommunicated by the Metropolitan and other Bishops of that Province (per
Metropolitanum and ceteros com. provinciales Episcopos, as the Canon has it)
before the Pope could take any cognizance of the cause. And I conceive that no
man of reason can imagine that the Metropolitan and Provincial Bishops, could
or durst exercise any such jurisdiction upon those Christian Kings and
Emperors under whom they lived. I grant indeed, that some of the more
turbulent Popes did actually excommunicate, (and as much as in them lay) depose
some Christian Kings and Emperors, sometimes by arming their own Subjects
against them, and sometimes giving their Estates and Kingdoms to the next
Invador. But this makes nothing to your purpose, most of those turbulencies
being acted before the sitting of this Council, none of them by authority from
any Council at all; but carried on by them ex plenitudine potestatis, under
pretense of that unlimited power which they had arrogated to themselves over
all the world, and exercised too frequently in these Western parts.

40. Such is the Argument by which you justify M. Burton in his first
position, viz. That the Popish Religion is Rebellion: and may it not be proved
by the very same argument, that the Calvinian Religion is Rebellion also.
Calvin himself has told us in the closes of his Institutions, that the 3
Estates in every Kingdom, ( Pareus in his Comment on Rom 13.) that the
inferior Magistrates, and Buchannan (in his book Dejure Regni) that the people
have a power to curb and control their Kings, and in some cases, (as in that
of Maladministration) to depose him also; which is much as any of the Popes
Parasites have ascribed unto him: If you object that these are only private
persons and speak their own opinions, not the sense of the Churches; I hope you
will not say that Calvin is a private person, who sat as Pope over the
Churches of his platform; whose writings have been made the Rule and Canon by
which all men were to frame their judgments; and whose authority in this very
point, has been made use of for the justifying of Rebellious actions. For when
the Scots Commissioners were commanded by Queen Elizabeth to give a reason of
their proceedings against their Queen, whom not long before they had deposed
from the Regal Throne; they justified themselves by the authority of Calvin;
whereby they endeavored to prove (as my Author has it) That the Popular
Magistrates are appointed and made to moderate and keep in order the excess
and unrulinesse of Kings; and that it was lawful for them to put the Kings that
be evil and wicked into prison, and also to deprive them of their kingdoms.
Such instances as this we may find too many, enough to prove that none of the
three above mentioned (though the two last were private persons) delivered
their own opinions only but the sense of the party. The Revolt of the
Low Countries from the King of Spain, the man^old embroilments made by the
Hugonots in France, the withholding of the Town Embden from its natural Lord,
the Count of Friesland; the commotions in Brandenburg, the falling off of the
Bohemians from the house of Austria, the translating of the Crown of Sweden
from Sigismond K. of Poland to Charles Duke of Suderman (the father of the
great Gustavus); the Armies thrice raised by the Scots against King Charles, and
the most unnatural wars in England, with the sad consequents thereof: by whom
were they contrived and acted but by those of the Calvinian Faction, and the
predominancy which they have (or at the least aspired unto) in their several
Countries. The Genevians having lead the dance in expelling their Bishop, whom
they acknowledged also for their temporal Prince; the daughter Churches thought
themselves obliged to follow their dear Mother Church in that particular, and
many other points of Doctrine: sic instituere majores posteri imitantur, as we
read in Tacitus.

41. But against this blow you have a Buckler, and tell me, that if any
Protestant Writer should teach the same that puts it not into our Creed, as
this is in theirs. But first I hope you do not think that whatsoever is agreed
in a General Council, is presently put into our Creed, or becomes an Article of
the Faith; there being some things determined in the first General Council held
by the Apostles in Jerusalem, which being long disused are not now binding at
all; and such as are now binding not being observed because they were decreed
in that Council, but as they have their foundation in the Moral Law. Secondly,
if you think the doctrine of Deposing Kings is put into the Papists Creed, you
must tell me in what Creed it is; in none of their old Creeds I am sure of
that, nor in the new Creed made by Pope Pius the fourth, nor in the Roman
Catechism published by the authority of the Council of Trent, nor in any other
Authentic Record or public Monument of that Church: for if this doctrine had
been made a part of their Creed, as well before as since the Laterane Council,
so many learned men in the Church of Rome (as Brian, Marsepius, Butavinus, and
diverse others) had not writ against it; nor had so many secular Priests, living
or abiding here in England, so freely written in behalf of the Oath of
Allegiance (in which this doctrine is disclaimed) had it been entertained in
that Church as a part of their Creed. And on the other side, why may we not
conceive that this doctrine of Deposing Kings is made an Article of the Creed
by the Sect of Calvin, considering first how generally it is defended, how
frequently practiced and endeavored by them as before was said; considering
secondly, that though many National and Provincial Synods have been held by
them in their several and respective Churches, yet did they never in any one of
them disclaim this doctrine, or seek to free their Churches from the scandal of
it. All which clearly shows that they did very well approve the doctrine,
together with all the consequents thereof, in the way of practice. And then,
quid interest utrum velim fieri, an gaudeam factum, as the Orator has it; what
will the difference be I pray you between advising before hand such ungodly
practices, and approving of them on the post-fact as they seem to do. For were
it otherwise amongst them, they never had a better opportunity to have cleared
themselves from being enemies to Monarchical Government; from justifying such
seditious writings, from having a hand in any of those commotions which had
before disturbed the peace of Christendom; then in the Synod of Dort, Anno
1618. where the Commissioners, or Delegates of all the Calvinian Churches, both
in the higher and the lower Germany (those of Geneva and the Switzers being
added to them) were convened together. Their doing nothing in it then, declares
sufficiently how well they liked the doctrine, and allowed the practice.

42. Having thus justified M. Burton in his first assertion, you next proceed
unto the maintenance of his second; which is, that the Papists Faith is
Faction: and how prove you that? Marry thus, You say, if it be an article of
the Popish Faith, that none are Members of Christ and his Church but the
subjects of the Pope, then the Popish Faith is Faction. But the Antecedent is
true, being defined by the Pope Leo the 10. in a General Council This is the
Argument by which you hope to justify M. Burtons second proposition, though
afterward you would be thought to be no approver of his ways. But let me tell
you M. Baxter, your Hypothetical Syllogism is as faulty, and halts as much on
both legs as your Categorical. For taking it for granted, that such an article
of the Faith was made by Pope Leo the 10. in a General Council, yet can you not
with any reason or justice, either upbraid the whole Faith of the Papists with
being a Faction because of the obliquity and partiality of one article of it.
Nor 2ly. can the Papist Faith be termed Faction, supposing that any such
article had been made in that Council; for it would follow thereupon, that if a
Canon had been made in the Convocation of the Bishops and Clergy (which make
the representative body of the Church of England, that whosoever should oppose
the Rites. and Ceremonies by Law established, should not be capable either of
the Sacraments, or Sacramentals, that Canon might be called Faction; whereas
the Faction lies not in the Canon, but in them that do oppose the Ceremonies.
Or if any act or statute should be made in a free and lawful Parliament that
every one who shall not pay the Subsidies and Taxes imposed on them by the same
should be put out of the protection of the Laws of the Land; that Statute could
not be, or be called Faction; because the Faction lies not in the Act or
Statute, but in them who do refuse the payment. My reason is, because the main
body of a Church or State, or any of the Products or results thereof, cannot in
any propriety of speech, be held for Faction; whether considered in themselves,
or in relation to some few who dislike the same, and violently pursue their
dislikes thereof. For Faction (to speak properly) is the withdrawing of a
smaller or greater number from the main body either of a Church or State,
governing themselves by their own Councels, and openly opposing the established
Government; as here in England, they who communicate not with the Church in
favor of the Pope of Rome, are commonly called the Popish Faction, as they are
called the Puritan Faction who conform not to the Rites and Ceremonies by Law
established. But on the other side, the whole body of the Church is by no means
to be called a Faction, in reference to either of the opposite parties. And
then again, you should have told us whether you take the word Faith in your
proposition, for a justifying, historical, temporary Faith, or a Faith of
Miracles; whither you take it for the Habit or Act of Faith, by which they
believe, or for the Object of Faith, or that is to say the thing believed: If
you can take the word Faith in none of these senses (as I think you cannot) it
must be taken in a more general comprehension, for the true knowledge and
worship of God; and then it signifies the same with the word Religion; the
Christian Faith and the Christian Religion, denoting but one and the same thing
under diverse names; so that upon the whole matter you are but where you were
before; the Papists Religion being no more properly to be called faction in
this Proposition, then it was Rebellion in the former: Had you formed your
Proposition thus, viz. If it be an Article of the Papists faith, that none are
members of Christ and his Church, but the Subjects of the Pope, then the
Papists faith (or rather that one Article of the Papists faith) tends to the
making of a faction, you had come nearer to the truth; but standing in the same
terms in which I find it, you are as far from it as ever you were.

43. Howsoever taking that your Proposition to be undeniable, you proceed and
say, But the Antecedent is true, etc. which is a very strange piece of news to
me: You confess your self to be but a sorry Lawyer, and you have showed your
self in this to be but a sorry L^gician neither: For tell me what you mean by
the Antecedent, by which (if you understand the terms of Logic ^he^e can be
nothing understood but the first clause or member in your Proposition: For in
every Hypothetical Silogism, the Major P^oposition consists of two parts or
branches; whereof the one is called the Antecedent, and the other the
Consequent; as in this of your^, these words, viz. If it be an Article of the
Papists Religion, that none are members of Christ and his Church, but the
Subjects of the Pope, make the Antecedent; the following words. viz. then the
Papists faith is faction, make the consequent of it: Now both these parts or
members being laid together, the Proposition is entire and perfect, and may be
either true or false, according to the subject matter of it; as this of yours
is by you affirmed to be true, and by me proved to be false; But the Antecedent
in this of yours, as in all other Hypothetical Propositions, being conditional,
imperfect, and of no full sense, cannot be said to be either true or false, as
your own reason will inform you: For what sense, truth, or falsehood can be
found in the first branch of your Proposition, viz. If it be an Article of the
Papists faith, that none are members of Christ and his Church but the Subjects
of the Pope, until the following words be added. Had you formed your Silogism
thus, If it be an Article of the Papists faith, that none are members of Christ
and his Church, but the Subjects of the Pope, then the Papists faith is
faction: But it is an Article of the Papists faith, that none are members of
Christ and his Church, but the Subjects of the Pope, Ergo, the Papists faith is
faction. Had you contrived it thus, I say, your Silogism had been made in due
form of Logic, though either Proposition might have been denied, as it pleased
the Respondent etc. Had you cast your Argument into the form of an Enthimeme,
thus, viz. It is an Article of the Papists faith, that none are members of
Christ and his Church but the Subjects of the Pope, Ergo, the Papists faith is
Faction; the Antecedent had been false, and therefore of necessity the
consequent of Illation could not pass for true. And such a sorry Disputant was
D. Burges, who undertaking to answer in the Divinity Act at Oxon, showed
himself so sufficiently ignorant in the terms of Logic, that in stead of
saying negatur major, and negatur minor, he could say nothing else but negatur
id. Whereupon D. Prideaux said to him openly with a merry jear, tu potes been
praedicare, sed non potes been disputare; that he might possibly be a good
preacher, though he had showed himself but a silly disputant.

44. But taking your meaning along with me, and supposing you to have said the
Minor (as you ought to have called it) how do you prove it to be true, because
say you, It was so defined by Pope Leo the 10. in a General Council. The
Council which you mean, is called Consilium Lateranense, as the other was; and
you have showed your self as little skilled in this Laterane Council as you
were in the other. So against that which you have said in this answer of yours,
I have these Exceptions; First, That all things which are not determined nor
defined in a General Council, pass not for Articles of the Faith. Secondly, The
Council held at Rome by Pope Leo the 10. was no General Council: and Thirdly,
There was no such Article of the Faith defined in it, as you say there was: and
these three points being proved, I shall close the argument: Haec tria cum
docuero perorabo, in the Oracles language. And first all things which are
determined and defined in General Councels become not Articles of the Faith,
though for the time they bind men's assent unto them until the point be further
canvassed, and the mistakes or errors of it manifested in some following
Council. But hereof I have spoken already, and shall add but this, viz. That
if you please to look into the Tomes of the Councels, you will find that they
do more consist in Laws and Canons for Reformation of Manners, then either in
the D^claration of points of Faith, or the Determination of matters Doctrinal.
Secondly the Council held at Rome by Pope Leo the 10. was no General Council,
as being called on a particular occasion, and consisting of such a slender
number of Italian Bishops, that it could hardly make good the Reputation of a
National Synod: which that you may the better see, I must let you know the
occasion of the calling of that Counsel too; which was briefly this. Lewis the
12. of France having lately recovered the Dukedom of Millain to which he did
pretend some title in the right of his Mother, was warred on by Pope Julio the
2. who liked not the neighborhood of the French. Ferdinando King of Spain, and
some of the Italian Princes, confederating with him in that quarrel. To curb
the insolency of the Pope, a Council is called by the Cardinal S. Severine and
Caravaiali at the instigation of the French King, to be held at Pisa, a Town
belonging to the Seig^oury and Estate of Florence, Anno 1512. To which some of
the French Bishops, and as many Italian Prelates as lived within the Dukedom
of Millane, or elsewhere under the command of the F^ench, received order to
repair. And on the other side, the Pope to over balance that Scismatical
Council, ca^sed another to be held in Rome, consisting of so many of the
Bishops of Italy as could conveniently be drawn together in a time of War. But
Pope Juli^ dying not long after, before any thing could be done in that
Council, more then the condemning that of Pisa, and declaring all the Acts
thereof to be null and void; the Cardinal John de Medices succeeded by the name
of Pope Leo the 10. who being of a sweeter temper then his predecessor, closed
up that breach, admitting the two Cardinals and the rest of the Assembly at
Pisa, to a redintegration with the whole body of the Church from which they
were before divided. Nothing determined in this Council touching matters of
Faith, but that a Decree was made against some Philosophers (or rather
phylosophizing Schoolmen) what or about that time had began to teach quod anima
rationalis sit mortalis; that is to say, that the rational soul of man was
subject to Mortality. And therefore thirdly, there was no such article of Faith
defined in that Council, that none should be counted members of Christ and his
Church, but such as were subject to the Pope. Neither indeed was there any need
at that time of this Council, that any such Definitions should be made; no new
Heresy, or any new doctrine which by them might be called Heresy, being then
on foot, (for Luther did not rise in Germany till this Counsel was ended) which
might create any disturbance to the peace of that Church. If any such
privileges were arrogated by Pope Leo the 10. that none should be accounted
members of Christ and his Church but such as were subject to the Pope, which
you cannot find definitively in the Acts of that Council, you must rather have
looked for it in the Bulls of that Pope, after Luther had begun to dispute his
power, and question his usurped authority over all the Church. In one of which
Bulls you may find somewhat to your purpose; where you shall find him saying,
that the Church of Rome is Mother and Mistress of all Christians; and that her
doctrines ought to be received, of whosoever would be in the Communion of the
Church. If this be that you mean, much good do it you with, though this be
rather to be taken for a Declaration then a Definition.

45. But if your meaning is (as perhaps it may be) that the Papists Faith may
be called Faction, because they appropriate to themselves the name of the
Church, and exclude all other Christians from being members of Christ and his
Church, which are not subject to the Pope, (as indeed they do) take heed you
lose not more in the Hundreds then you got by the County; for then it may be
proved by the very same Argument, if there were no other: that the Puritan
Faith is Faction, and so to be accounted by all that know it, because they do
appropriate unto themselves the name of the Church, as the old Affrican
Scismaticks confined it, intra partem Donati. For proof whereof, if you please
to consult Bishop Bancrofts book of Dangerous Positions an^ Proceedings, etc.
part. 3. chap. 15. you will find them writing in this manner, viz I know the
Snape to Field.
state of this Church, make known to us the state of the Church with you. Our
Knewstub to Field.
Churches are in danger of such, as having been of us, do renounce all
fellowship with us. It is long Blake to Field.
since I have heard from you (says one Blake) of the state of the Church of
London. Another, By M. West and M. Brown you shall understand the state of the
Churches wherein we are. A third, If my offense may not be passed by without a
further confessi^n, even before God and his Church in London, will I lie down
and lick the dust off your feet (where you may see what it is which the
heavenlymindednesse, the self-denial, meekness, and Humility which the
brethren aim at) and confess it, etc. I have received (says the fourth) a
Letter from you in the name of the rest of the Brethren, whereby I understand
your joining together in choosing my self unto the service of the Church, under
the Earl of Leicester. I am ready to run if the Church command me according to
the holy Decrees and Orders of the Discipline. Lay all which has been said
together, and tell me he that can (my wits not being quick enough for so great
a nicety) whether the Papists Faith, or that of the Puritans most properly and
meritoriously may be counted Faction.

46. The third thing in which you seem unsatisfied in what I say, concerning
Popery, is, whether it be true or not, that the Popes Decretals, the body of
the Canon Law, is to be accepted, (as not being abrogated) which being made for
the direction and rei^lement of the Church in general, were by degrees admitted
and obeyed in these parts of Christendom, and are by Act of Parliament so far
still in force, as they oppose not the Prerogative royal or the municipal laws
and statutes of this Realm of England. These words I must confess for mine,
owning Hist. Sab. pa. 2. chapter 7. p. 202. and not 210. as your Letter cites it,
your parenthesis being only excep^ed; and you name it this Kingdom in stead of
the Realm of England, though both expressions be to one and the same effect. In
which you might have satisfied your self by M. Dow, who, as you say, gives some
reason for it out of a Statute of Hen. 8. But seeing you remain still
unsatisfied in that particular, I shall add something more for your
satisfaction. In order whereunto, you may please to know that in the Stat. 29.
Hen. 8. chapter 19. commonly called the Statute of the submission of the Clergy, it
is said expressly* First, that the Clergy in their convocation, promised the
King in verbo Sa^erdoris; not to enact or execute any new Canons but by his
Majesty's royal assent, and by his authority first obtained in that behalf: and
secondly, that all such Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances, and Synodals
Provincial, as were made before the said submission, which were not contrary or
repugnant to the Laws, Statutes, and Customs of this Realm, nor to the damage
or hurt of the Kings Prerogative Royal, were to be used and executed as in
former times. By which last clause the Decretal of preceding Popes, having been
admitted into this Land, and by several Canons and Constitutions of the Church
of England, and the main body of the Canon Law having for a long time been
accounted for a standing rule, by which all proceedings in the Courts
Ecclesiastical were to be regulated and directed, remain still in force and
practice as they had done formerly. But then you are to know withal, that they
were no longer to remain in force and practice, then till the said preceding
Canons and Constitutions (as appears by the said Act of Parliament) should be
viewed and accommodated to the use of this Church, by 32. Commissioners
selected out of the whole body of the Lords and Commons, and to be nominated by
the King. But nothing being done therein during the rest of the Kings reign,
the like authority was granted to King Edw. 6. 3. 4. Edw 6. c. 11. And such a
progress was made in it, that a Sub-committee was appointed to review all
their said former Canons and Constitutions, and to digest such of them into
form and order, as they thought most fit and necessary for the use of this
Church. Which Sub committee consisted of eight persons only, that is to say,
Thomas Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Lord Bishop of Eli, Dr. Richard
Cox the Kings Almoner, Peter Martyr his Majesty's professor for Divinity,
William May, and Rowland Tailor Doctors of the Law, John Lucas, and Richard
Gooderick Esquires; who having prepared and digested the whole work into form
and order, were to submit the same to the rest of the 32. and finally to be
presented to the King for his Royal Assent and confirmation. And though the
said Subcommittee had performed their parts, as appears by the Book entitled,
REFORMATIO LEGUM ECCLESIASTICARUM ex authoritate primum Regis HENRICI VIII.
inch^a^a. Deinde per Regem EDW. VI. provecta, etc. Reprinted not long since at
London, 1641. But that King also dying, before the said Canons so digested and
accommodated, could be confirmed and ratified by the Royal Assent, and
authorized under the Great Seal of England, the former Canons, Consti^utions
and Ordinances, and consequently the Decretals of the Popes and the body of the
Canon law, according to the limitations and restrictions by the Statute of King
Hen. 8. did remain in force, and so continue to this day: so that your hopes of
their not being in force amongst us, declares you for as sorry a Lawyer as you
confess your self to be.

47. Next, when you say, how little you know by what authority the Popes
Decretals are laws to the^ Church in gen^ral or to us. I will improve you^
knowledge in that particular also as far as I can: and for so doing, I am to
put you in mind, that the Popes for a long tract of time, were possessed of the
Supreme power in Ecclesiastical matters over all the Churches in the Western
and North-western parts, and amongst others, in this also; and that he did
pretend the like authority over all the Churches in the East and South: so that
their Decretals were made by them intentionally to serve for a rule and
reiglement of the Church in general, but were admitted only in the Churches of
the Western and North-western parts, which did acknowledge his Supremacy, and
made themselves subject to his power. But having now shaken off his power in
the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, in the three Realms of
Denmark, Norway, and Sweden; in the united Provinces of the Netherlands, and
many great Provinces and Estates of the Higher Germany, besides some thousands
of the Protestant Churches in the Realm of France: he has now lost that power
which before he challenged, of making laws for the Government of the Church in
general; though such of them as we here received, are still so far in force, as
I have affirmed; that is to say, according to the sad restrictions and
limitations before laid down. And therefore I can well maintain, that the Pope
and his Councels had a power (you never heard me say he has) of imposing his
Decretals and the body of the Canon law, as a law for the Government of so much
of the Church as was then actually under his command, having been made
intentionally for the reiglement of the Church in general, and that being here
received, are still so far in force (that is to say, in such form and manner) as
I have affirmed; and yet not grant that he and his Councels have any such power
at this present time, or that are, and all other Christians must be thought to
be his Subjects; which is the thing you seem glad to understand; if ever I
should put my self to the trouble of writing to you again, as I have done now.

48. Having thus laid before you the true state of the Question, I am in the
next place to answer such Objections as you make against it; and your
Objections being built chiefly on your own thoughts, and such hopes as you had
fancied to your self: For want of knowledge in these matters, will be easily
answered. You object first, That you will yet hope that they are not in force;
but I have proved to you that they are. And you object next, That you thought
the Acts that impose the Oaths of allegiance and supremacy, had disobliged us
from all forreigue power, and nulled the Pope's authority in England; and
though you thought well enough in this; yet if you think that because those
Acts of Parliament above mentioned, have disobliged us from all foreign power,
and nulled the Popes authority in England; and therefore that all the Decretals
of the former Popes, or Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, made in times
of Popery, are either by those Acts and Oths anulled and abrogated; your
thoughts will prove to be as deceitful, as your hopes are groundless, and
therefore when you say, that if ever you live to see another Parliament (which
you are like to do very shortly, if the news be true) you will crave a freedom
from that bondage. I would fain know from what b^ndage you desire this freedom;
If from subjection to the Pope, you are freed from it by the Act primo Eliz.
cap. 1. by which all the Popes authority and jurisdiction in the Realm of
England, as well over the consciences as the pens of men, were finally
exterminated and abolished: If from their Canons and Decrees made, and in force
within this Realm, before the 25. of King Henry 8. they were confirmed by the
Parliament of that year (according to the limitations before expressed) and are
so complicated since that time with the Laws of the Land, that the alteration
will be far more difficult then you may imagine; so that you may do well to
spare your address to the following Parliament, and reserve that strong
influence which you believe you have upon it, for some greater occasions, or at
the least, for such as are more possible to be compassed then this present
project: Besides you may be pleased to know, that a great part of the Civil or
Imperial Laws are in force amongst us; and that they are the standing rules by
which the Court of Admiralty, as also that for the probate of Wills and
Testaments are generally regulated and directed: and yet you may conclude as
strongly, that because no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or
Potentate, has or ought to have any jurisdiction, power, superiority,
pre-eminence, or authority within this Realm; no not the Emperor himself,
though honored with the Title of Augustus Caesar, and such like glorious
attributes, belonging to the Roman Empire; therefore the Civil and Imperial
Laws, so long continued in this Kingdom, are to be reckoned of no force and
effect amongst us, but to be utterly abrogated and abolished also; which if it
should be took for granted (as you take the other) you must then double your
design in moving and soliciting the next Parliament to free you from that yoke
of bondage; that the Pontificial and Imperial laws may be for ever banished and
expelled this Kingdom, that so it may be said of us as Haman once objected
against the Jews, their Laws were contrary to all Nations; Divis^s orb
Brittannos, even in that sense also. It is reported of Alphonso surnamed the
Wise, one of the Kings of Castile in Spain, that he used many times to say
(never the wiser for so saying) that if he had stood at Gods elbow when he made
the World, many things should have been ordered better then they were in the
first Creation. Take heed left that you be thought no wiser then Alphonso was,
in pressing at the Parliament doors, and urging your desires for abrogating all
those ancient Canons and Constitutions, by what name soever they are called,
and by what Authority soever they were first enacted, which so many Kings and
Queens of this Realm have continued in force, and so many Parliaments since the
first Reformation have left unquestioned.

49. Your Letter now draws toward an end, in which you profess some seeming
gladness, that I whom you call the Primipilus amongst the defenders of the
late turgid and persecuting sort of Prelacy (I like your words so well that I
must needs bring them to a repetition) do so freely disclaim the Grotian
Religion (which you say you never charged me with) and thereupon conceive some
confident hopes that the rest of the Prelatical Clergy will disown it also.
How far the most of the Prelatical Clergy shall think fit to disown the
Grotian Religion (as you have described it in your book) I am not able to
determine Aetatem habent they are all old enough to answer for themselves if
you put them to it. But if you have no better hopes of their disowning, then
you have assurances from me of my disclaiming that Religion, you may cry out, O
spe^ inanes and frustra cogitationes meae, without help or remedy. For tell me,
I beseech you, where is it that I have so freely disclaimed the Grotian
Religion as you say I have. Not in my letter I am sure, there is no such
matter. All that I say in that, is no more then this, that I could have wished
you had spared my name (in that Preface of yours) unless you could have proved
me to have been one of that Religion, as I think you cannot. Which
notwithstanding I may be one of that Religion, and yet may warrantably think
that you cannot prove it; you being so great a stranger to my private
discourses, and finding nothing to that purpose in public writings. But
whether I positively am, or really am not of the Grotian Religion, (that is to
say, of that Religion of Hugh Grotius, of which M. Baxter has given us a
description by his opinions) I am not bound to tell you now, finding my self
unwilling by such an unnecessary declaration to engage my self with fresh
disputes, with any one of either party, who finds himself unsatisfied with it,
may involve me in. But so far I assure you, I am of the Religion of Hugh
Grotius, that I wish as heartily as he did, that the breaches in the walls of
Jerusalem were well closed up; that the Puritans submitting to the Church of
England, and the Church of England being reconciled with the Church of Rome, we
might unite and center in those sacred truths, those undeniable principles, and
established Doctrines, which have been universally received in the Church of
Christ, and in which all parties do agree; and then I little doubt but that
the Lutheran Churches in Germany, Denmark, Sweden, and Norway, and the
Calvinian party in their several Countries, would not unwillingly take the
benefit of a public peace* leaving all doubtful disputations to be managed in
the public Schools, not pressed with so much heat and with so little edification
to the weak in faith in the common pulpits. This I am certain is no more then
what is taught us in the prayer for the good estate of Christ's Church militant
here upon the earth. In which we do beseech the Divine Majesty, to inspire
continually the universal Church with the spirit of truth, unity, and concord;
and to grant that all they which do confess his holy name, may agree in the
truth of his holy word, and live in unity and godly love: which godly and most
Christian prayer, I do most heartily recommend to your consideration; and not
unto your consideration only, but your practice also; as I do you, and all that
do delight in the spirit of unity, to his heavenly blessings, who is the Author
of Peace and the Lover of Concord. And this I do with that affection which
becomes

Your very humble Servant, and Christian Brother in Jesus Christ to be
commanded Peter Heylyn.
Lacies Court in Abingdon, December. 10. 1658.

50. When I had finished this Answer and found it to amount to a greater bulk
then was first desired* I was in some conflict with my self by what means it
might so come to M. Baxter that it might also be communicated to such others,
as had took notice of the injury done me, and might expect to have some notice
also of the right I had done my self. I had some reason to believe that M.
Baxter had imparted the Contents of his Letter to some or other of his friends
before it was dispatched to me; to the end that they might see, and know, and
relate to others of that party, to what a sad reckoning he had called me. And
how, unable I must prove to render an account of those several charges, which
he had justly laid upon me. And I had reason to suspect, that when he had
perused my answer, and seen how little he had gotten by the Provocation, it
might be secretly kept by him, or perhaps, committed to the fire for the
greater security; that on the one side he might be held to be invincible by
those who look upon him as the Atlas which supports the cause, and on the other
side I might be condemned for an (...), by my silence had declared my self
guilty of a self: conviction. There was somewhat also to be done in reference
to the conformable clergy and the Prelatical Divines, as also* to the turgid
and persecuting sort of Prelates; who otherwise could not but admire that I who
had been so active in vindicating the fame and reputation of other men, should
be so lame and negligent in preserving my own. And other way I could find none
to satisfy all parties and right my self, then to publish these passages
betwixt M. Baxter and my self; and so to publish them that coming, from the
press as M. Baxters first provocation had done before, it might be universally
dispersed over most parts of the Land. If any shall conceive my Answer to be
too long, he shall conceive no otherwise of it then I do my self. But I was
willing to take some pains with him to satisfy him word by word, and line by
line, where I found any thing considerable in it self, or capable of receiving
satisfaction from me. And to say truth, I have been the more punctual and exact
in all particulars, that M. Baxter having sufficient measure, pressed down, if
not running over also, might rest himself contented with that satisfaction, and
supercede all further troubles to himself or me. And being he has pleased to
conclude his Letter with a complemental desire of pardon for the displeasing
plainness of it: I shall also conclude this discourse between us, with an
assurance to him of my kind acceptance of that Letter; there being nothing
which can be more agreeable to me then an honest plainness. And as for pardon,
there needs none where there is no injury complained of, as by me there is not.
And therefore I shall shut up all in these words of S. Jerome to S. Augustine,
on the like intercourse between them; viz. Non tam stultus sum, ut diversitate
explanationum tuarum, me ladi putem, quia nec tu laesiris, si nos contraria
senserimus.

A POSTSCRIPT To the former Answer: Containing The Exchange of Letters between
Dr. Heylyn and Dr. Barnard, tonching the intended burning of the book called
Respondit Petrus: With that which followed thereupon.
51. MY Answer long enough before, must be made longer by this Post script;
because I would not leave you (M. Baxter) without full satisfaction to every
point you have objected in your Letter, or keep you longer in suspense then
needs I must. You gave some glances in your Letter of the burning of Books for
which you had no ground in either of the places you refer me to, where you find
nothing at all touching the burning of the books of the Sabbatarians, but only
of the suppressing and calling of them in, which made me apt enough to think
(as I told you then) that you intended that for a private nip relating to a
book of mine called Respondit Petrus, which was publicly noised abroad to have
been publicly burnt in London ( as indeed the burning of it was severely
prosecuted, though it escaped the fire. A full account whereof being too long to
be incorporated into the body of that Answer I promised then to give you in a
place by it self. And therefore I have writ this Postscript to make good that
promise. I wish you too well to suffer you to remain long in any error which I
am able to remove, or to be wrought upon by any false rumors and reports which
I am able to disperse; and as I have endeavored the first in all my
applications to you, so I shall now endeavor the last, that I may disperse the
others also. And this I shall the rather do, that I may, Duos parletes una
fidelia dealbare, as in the Latin, or, Kill two birds with one Stone, in the
English Proverb. My satisfying you in this public manner will much contribute
to the undeceiving of such others also, who either out of too much credulity in
themselves, or dis-affection toward me, have been as apt to report as they were
easy to believe it. Many such I have had the chance to meet with, as well at
London as elsewhere, in whom this Fame had taken so deep a root that I could
hardly pluck it up; Some of them whom I endeavored to persuade to a dis-belief
of that false report, conceiving rather that I rather spoke favorably for my
self, then advantagiously and impartially for the truth of the fact. And if
those persons whom I met with were so hardly satisfied, when they heard the
story from my self, how much more hardly could such others receive satisfaction
who live farther off, and could have it only from my friends But beside this
there was another motive to induce me to it, and that is the preventing of all
such as possibly may make use of that report to my disadvantage; For whereas
Mr. Sanderson (in the end of his Post Haste, scurrilous Pamphlet called the
Reply, etc. has used some threats, That, whenever I shall appear armed
again, he will be ready to meet me at my own weapon, be it sharp or smooth) he
will be apt to catch at any thing which may serve his turn, without examining
the truth, or enquiring into the certainty of it. The like measure I may chance
to have from some others also, who speak as big, and threaten me as much as he,
but threatened men live long, they use to say, so perhaps may I, and sure I am,
that none of these threatenings will prevail so far upon me, as to shorten the
number of those days I have to come, for your sake therefore and for theirs, I
have drawn up a full and perfect Narrative of the whole business in this manner
following.

The Intercourse of LETTERS, Between D. Heylyn and D. Barnard, Touching the
intended burning of the Book called Respondit Petrus.
52. Philosophers tell us of a Meteor, called Ignis fatuus, whose property it
is to lead men out of their way, and draw them many times into dangerous
precipices; and such an Ignis fatuus has of late deceived and abused many in
all parts of the Land, whom therefore I shall endeavor to unundeceive, and
bring them back into the way of truth and knowledge.

The fame is, and it is made a common fame by the, spreading of it, That the
Book called Respondit Petrus has been publicly burnt, and burnt by the order
of the Council: A fame which has little truth in it, though it has more
color for it, and appearances of it, then many other charges which have lately
been laid upon me. Concerning which the Reader, may be pleased to know, That on
Saturday the 26. of June last past, intelligence was given to a friend of mine,
that an Order was sent by the Council to the Lord Mayor of London, requiring
him to see the Book called Respondit Petrus, to be called in and publicly
burnt. Notice whereof being given to me, who was then in London, I was advised
by some of my friends to neglect the matter, it being a thing that would
redound unto my honor (as they pleased to say) considering it might be
rationally concluded by all knowing me, that the Book could not other wise be
confuted then by fire and faggot. I knew full well what sentence had been
passed by Facitus, upon the order of the Senate or great Consul of Rome, for
burning the Books of Cremutius Cordus the Historian, Neque aliud externi Reges,
aut qui eadem sevitia usi sunt, nisi dedecus sibi, a* que illis gloriam
peperere, that is to say, that such who formerly had exercised that kind of
severity, gained nothing but ignominy to themselves, and glory to all those
whose Books they burnt. But for my part I was rather of Sir John Falstaffs
mind in that particular, and did not like such grinning honor, and therefore
chose rather to prevent the obloquie, then to glory in it. In order whereunto,
I thought fit to apply my self to D. Barnard of Grays Inn, who as he first
began the quarrel, in publishing the Book Entitled, The Judgment of the late*
Lord Primate, etc. so was he supposed to have moved the first wheel in the
Engine, although he stood behind the Curtain, and appeared not in it;
conceiving that if he might be taken off, the whole business would soon come to
nothing, without any more ado; upon which ground I wrote the following Letter
to him on the Monday morning, and received his answer to the same in the
afternoon; the Coppies of which Letter, and the answer to it I shall here
subjoyn.

Dr. Heylyn's Letter to Dr. Barnard.
SIR,
53. WIth what unwillingness I entered upon my answer to that Book of Yours,
Entitled, The Judgment of the Late Lord Primate, etc. I doubt not but you have
found before this time, both in the Preface to it, and the two first Paragraphs
of it. In handling of which argument, as I kept myself within the bounds of
Modesty and Christian Charity, so I expected I should have been encountered with
no other weapons then such as I brought into the field out of the Magazines and
Storehouses of the ancient Fathers, and some of the most Learned Writers of
these latter times. But contrary to my expectation I was advertised on Saturday
night, that certain Articles have been presented against that Book to the Lords
of the Council, and that it is ordered thereupon by some of their Lordships,
that the Lord Mayor of London, and one Mr. Weeler of Westminster shall seize
upon the said books and see them burnt. I have so much charity as to think that
this is done without your privity and consent, but I cannot but conceive
withal that if the business be carried on to such extreamities, the generality
of men will not be so persuaded of it; but that it will be rather thought, that
since the matter of that book was not otherwise to be answered, it was thought
fittest to confute it by fire and faggot. How little such a course may possibly
redound to your honor amongst men of ingenuity and learning I leave you to
judge. And though I am no fit Counselor for such a business, in which I am
concerned as the principal party; yet if you please to take the matter into
your serious consideration, you will perhaps find no council more fit to be
followed, then that you presently appear in putting some stop to those
proceedings; which though for the present they may end with some disgrace to
me, will bring no credit to your self. If there be any thing in that Book
either for matter or expression, which you stumble at, try it ou^ with me by
the Pen, or by personal conference, as becomes a Scholar and Divine; and if you
bring better reason on your side, then I have on mine, I shall be your Convert;
if not, the burning of the Book will neither suppress the Argument, nor confute
the Author; but only show how passionately some men are carried to their
private ends, under the pretense of public justice. Your answer hereunto
shall be attended in the afternoon: In the mean time, I recommend these my
desires to your consideration, as I do you unto the grace and blessings of
almighty God, with the affection which becomes,

SIR, Your very humble Servant, and Christian Brother, Peter Heylyn.
Land. Jun. 28. 1658.

D. Barnard's Letter to D. Heylyn.
SIR,
54. FOr that Order mentioned in your Letter, I find your charity prevented me,
in any further assurance of you, that I was not the mover of it. Since your
Servant was here, I have further enquired after the ground of it; and this I am
told, That it was not in relation to the Primate, or me, or any disputes
between us; but only to the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons, Anno 1644. For
the better observation of the Lords day; wherein there is such a clause as
this, That whosoever have or shall write against it, the Books shall be burned
by the hands of justice.

For my part, I have no mind either by personal conference, or the Pen (as you
write) to have any disputes or contentions with you, in that or any other
subject; neither do I intend to give any answer to your last Book: And had I
been acquainted with you, I should have advised you, as a friend, for your own
sake, not to have shown so much disaffection to that eminent and pious Primate;
for which I find you condemned by most, if not by all sorts of persons, as the
sole man so declared against him: and as he is too high in the esteem of the
world to receive any injury by you; so what liberty you have been pleased to
take in some expressions concerning me, either in your former Book or this, I
can easily pass it over in silence, without the least breach of Charity; and
notwithstanding, shall be ready to do you what service may lie within my
compass: But for the Order, seeing I was no mover of it to the Lords of the
Council, and that it does no ways concern me, it is not proper for me to
interpose in it. I rest,

SIR, Your very humble Servant, and Christian Brother, N. Barnard.
Grays Inn, Jun. 28. 1658.

55. Having received this Letter, and considered the contents thereof; I found
it no way necessary nor convenient for me, to trouble my self with a reply: for
first, I was unwilling to be brought under a new temptation, in having more to
do in any thing which related to the late Lord Primate, but where extreme
necessity should compel me to it; though D. Barnard very unadvisedly (that I
say no way) endeavored in the last part of his Letter, to put me upon fresh
engagements; to what else tended those upbraidings of my disaeffction to that
eminent and pious Prelate, from which I had cleared my self before, and that
twice for failing? His reproaches of my being condemned, for I know not what,
by most, if not by all sorts of persons? Whereas I have reason to believe, that
he has spoke with very few upon that subject, and therefore cannot know the
mind of the most, and much less of all sorts of men; or the reiteration of the
high esteem in the world, which the Lord Primate had above me, being so
willingly acknowledged by me in the beginning of that Book which was then in
question. Had I not tied my self to this resolution, I could have directed D.
Barnard to a passage in the Preface of a Book, called Canterburys Doom, by
which he might be satisfied, that as I was not the first, so I am not the only
one who had declared against his eminent pious Prelate, as he says he was. But
howsoever, had he been greater then he was, and I less then I am, I should not
have been terrified from writing in my own defense, or doing the best service I
was able to the Church of England, whose Doctrine, Government, and established
Order I found so openly opposed. And secondly, I had the less reason to make
any reply, because I found no hopes that D. Barnard would be persuaded to do
himself or me any right in either of the ways proposed: For first, he had
declared before hand, when he published the Lord Primates Papers, that he would
not take upon him the defense of any thing contained in them: For thus he tells
us in his Preface, If (says he) the Readers opinion shall descent any of the
abovenamed, or swell into an opposition, let him not expect any defensive arms
to be taken up by me, it being my part to declare his judgment as I find it,
etc. By which it seems that D. Barnard had no other intention, then to add more
fuel unto those combustions, which had so long embroyled the Church; and not
to bring any water to quench the flame. Secondly, He declared in this present
Letter, That for his part, he had no mind, either by the Pen or personal
conference, to have any disputes or contentions with me, in that or any other
subject: and finally (which most concerned me in relation to the present
business) he had apparently declined to appear in any thing, for the reversing
of that Order, which was supposed to have been made by the Lords of the
Council; it being improper, as he says, for him to interpose therein, with the
Lords of the Council, to whom he had been no mover in it, and no more concerned
in that Order then he says he was; so that I found my self necessitated to
tack about, and try if I could stere my course by another compass; Hac non
successit, alia tentandum est, via, as it is in the Comedy.

56. For D. Barnard having thus left the field, without so much as looking
toward it at all, and left the business in the same state in which he found
it; the next morning I addressed some few lines unto the Lord Mayor, Sir
Richard Chiverton, a person of known prudence and moderation; beseeching him,
that if any such Order had been sent unto him, from the Lords of the Council,
he would be pleased to respite the execution of it for a day or two, there
being little doubt on my part, but that I might be able within that time, to
procure an Order from the Council for the reversing of that Judgment, if any
such judgment had been given in the case before: to which Letter, the Lord
Mayor returned this answer, by word of mouth, That he would not be over hasty
in a business of that nature; and that he had committed the Book to the perusal
of some grave and learned Divines about the City, and that having received
their opinions of it, he should be better able to resolve what he had to do. On
the return of which answer, I presently applied my self to a chief Personage in
the Council of State, from whom I might assure my self of all lawful favors:
But there I found I had been in an error all this while, as to that particular;
that honorable Person giving me to understand, that no such Order had been
made by the Council, as to the burning of the Book; that information had been
made by the Council, as to the burning of the Book, that information had been
made to the Bar against it, with no small importunity by him that followed the
imformation: For having Order from their Lordships for the burning of it,
according to the Ordinance mentioned in the Doctors Letter; finally, that the
Council did no more in it, then to commit the whole matter to the Lord Mayor of
London, to be proceeded in according to his discretion.

57. Being thus assured from all fear and danger on that side, I made it my
next business to enquire after the names of those to whom the Lord Mayor had
committed the perusal of it; and understanding who they were, I was less
solicitous then before: For well I knew, that men of so much modesty as I knew
some of them to be, would not be easily moved to pronounce any thing rashly,
either of the Book, or of the Author; especially considering, that if that Book
should be condemned to the fire, not only many of the Ancient Fathers, but even
Calvin, Beza, Zanchius, Vrssin, and many other leading men of the Reformation,
must have suffered in the same flame also; being all cited by me, for the
confirmation of my judgment, as to that particular. And so this busine^s having
made so great a noise at first, began as suddenly to repose, and in short time
to come to nothing, there being nothing effected by it, but a continuation of
the fame, made greater by the spreading of it, and findthe more credit the
farther it went, according to the nature of such reports; which we have thus
described by Ovid, in his Metamorphosi^, where he lays down the Character of
the House of Fame.

Ovid. Metamorph. lib. 12. -- lata est ex are sonanti,
Lata fremit, vocesque refert iteratque quod audit, etc.
Atria turba tenet, veniunt l^ve vulgus exeuntque.
Mixtaque cum veris, passim commenta vagantur, etc.
Hi narrata ferunt alio, mensuraque ficti;
Crescit, and auditis aliquid novus adjicit Author.
Which with the rest, are thus translated by George Sandys.

All built of ringing brass, throughout resounds,
They hear reports, and every word rebounds, etc.
Hither the idle vulgar come and go;
Millions of rumors wander too and fro:
Lies mixed with truths, in words that vary still,
Of these, with news unknowing ears some fill;
Some carry tales; all in the telling grows,
And every Author adds to what he knows.
58. According to this Character of the House of Fame, the report of burning
the Book aforesaid, being taken thence, flew far, and grew the greater by the
flying; affirmed so confidently to be true, by some whose business it was to
disperse the fame; as if the very flame and smoke of the fire which burned it,
might easily have been discerned at High-Gate, or from Shooters-Hill: But false
fires are of short continuance, so has this been also; the sooner quenched, if
by my satisfying you, I may give satisfaction unto all the rest who have been
abused in the report. Had D. Barnard done me right, or consulted his own credit
in it, I might have saved the pains of writing, and you the trouble of reading
this present Narrative, But being as it is, we must thank him for it, who
having so imprudently begun the quarrel, refused to justify it by the pen, or
a personal conference, which had he done, there would have been no need of any
such fame, which might either never have been conceived, or else might have
been strangled in the birth, without the least wrong to any: But D. Barnard
thought himself secure enough from falling into any such disgrace, for
publishing the Lord Primates Judgment, etc. as was intended to the Book and the
Author of it, by which he found it to be answered; and therefore pleads it
fitter for him to take his ease and let things happen as they would. In that
point not so equal and impartial as the Heathen Orator, who held it most
agreeable to the rules of Justice, Vt qui in eadem causa sint, in eadem item
essent fortuna, That they who were partakers in any cause, should be partakers
also in the fortune which did follow on it. But I hope of more equality (or
impartiality rather) from you, then I did from him: And therefore if your zeal
transport you, to execute such a private judgment upon that Book, as it has
not suffered in the public, because you like not the opinions therein
contained, you may do well to let D. Barnard's Book consume in the same fire
also, as having given the first occasion to these new disturbances, which are
the grounds of your dislike. And so I leave you unto that Dilemma which I find
in Ausoniu^, viz.

Vel neutrum stammis ure, velure duos. December. 14. 1658.
Certamen Epistolare, Or The Letter Combat. PART. II. Containing the
Intercourse of Letters between Peter Heylyn, D. D. And Mr. Hickman of Magd.
Coll. Oxon. Relating To the Historical part of a Book Entitled The
Justification of the Fathers and Schoolmen, etc.

Vell. Puterc. Histi. Lib. 2. Ubi semel a recto deerratum est in preceps
pervenitur, nec quisquam sibi turpe putat, quod aliis est Fructosum. I Would. ibid.
Familiare est hominibus, omnia sibi remittere, nihil aliis; Et invidiam non ad
causam sed advoluntatem personasque dirigere. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1659.

To His much Respected Friend, Thomas Pierce, Master of Arts, and Rector of
Bringhton in the Diocese of Peter-burrough.
SIR,
1. BEfore you had writ your Letter of the 8th of March, I had received another
from an unknown hand, by which I was made acquainted that your Antagonist of
Magdalen Coll. had published his Pamphlet a second time, and made bolder with
me in the second then the first Edition. And having given me some account of
the Book, (which I could find no time of sufficient leisure to Enquire much
after) he makes this request, that I would undertake an answer to the
Historical part thereof, in which he labors to Evince, that the Calvinistical
opinions were the avowed doctrines of this Church. I had then some other work
in hand, from which I was not willing to be taken off, by this diversion, and
therefore desired him to excuse me from that engagement, which he so zealously
(but very modestly withal) recommended to me. It was not long before I had
received the like Advertisement from a friend nere London, which I past over
with as little Apprehension of the indignities and affronts which were done
unto me, as I did the other. But yours of the Date above mentioned, following
close upon them, I began to consider with my self, that there was somewhat
more then ordinary in this invitation, in which so many men concurred of such
different dwellings, without communicating their designs and thoughts unto one
another. I found many Reasons in my self to decline the business; my growing
into years, my decay of Sight, my want of necessary helps, the disparity
between the persons; and that having Adversaries enough already, it would be a
great imprudence in me to increase their number, and make them swell into an
Army. But on the other side, I considered also, the multiplicity of your
Employments, the Charity which might be shown in easing you of some part of
your burden, the bitterness of the man against persons of Eminence, on whom he
ought not to have looked without veneration; but most especially, that as I had
appeared in defense of the Church in my younger days, so it might ill become
me to desert her now, being as yet in some Capacity of doing that service which
you and others have so earnestly desired of me. Defendi Rem publ. Adolescens,
non deseram senex, was Cicero's Resolution once, and shall now be mine. And
because it was your Letter which prevailed upon me more then any other, I have
made bold to render my account to you from whose hand most especially I
received the charge. First laying down the narrative of such preparatory
Intercourse as passed betwixt me and your Antagonist, before I settled
positively on the undertaking; and then descending to the satisfaction of so
many good friends, as far as I am able to serve them, and the Church in
performance of it. Give me your patience for a time, whilst I address my lines
unto you in my own behalf, and I shall little doubt of it, when I write of him,
who has made one Enemy of both. Alterum a te p^to, ut me, pro me benign;
Alterum ipse Efficiam, ut contra illum cum dicam attente audias, in the Orators
words. But it is time to end my preamble, and begin my story, which is thus.

2. It was by accident that Mr. Baxters Book of the Grotian Religion was
unexpectedly offered to me, with intimation that I should find somewhat in the
preface, which concerned my self. By the like accident, and with the same
intimation also I came to know of Mr. Hickmans late Book in Justification of
the Fathers, and Schoolmen, etc. It is not to be wondered if my Curiosity, or
desire of self satisfaction, first carried me to the consideration of my own
concernments (as before it did) or that I should be much amazed to find my self
so coursely handled by a person I never heard of, nor perhaps never might have
done, but on that account. The Positivity of Sin might be a Paradox or a
truth, and so declared on either side without drawing me into the Quarrel, who
have not hitherto engaged on the one side or the other. But Mr. Hickman that
thinks so well of his own abilities, as to conceive no one man was to be looked
upon as a competent Adversary, on whom to exercise his Pen, and therefore must
raise up another who had not the least thoughts of contending with him. And
that he might be sure to sharpen me to the Encounter he does not only touch
upon me and so pass it over, as Mr. Baxter did before, but spends the best part
of a leaf in loading me with Reproach and infamy. He had before given this
unhandsome Character of you, whom he looks on as his principal Adversary; that
you are one that drinks up scorning like water, and knows not how to mention
the worthiest man alive, if of a different judgment, without contempt; which he
concludes with this smart Expression, that rather then you will not fight, you
would contend with your own shadow. Which said, he calls me a Bird of the same
feather, makes me to take my flight from the Angel in Ivy-lane, intitles it to
no small wonder that a Doctor in Divinity should so unworthily handle a
Reverend Person, (it is the Lord Primate whom* he means) and finally declares,
that a Book of mine had received the desert of its bitterness, in being burnt
(for so he says he was informed) by the hand of the Hangman. But let not these
vinegar expressions be a trouble to you, which I assure you stir not me, who
have long learnt with him in the old Historian, civili animo laceratam
existimationem far, to bear with an undisturbed mind, the greatest Calumnies
which either the tongues or pens of malicious men can lay upon me.

3. For though this provocation might have been sufficient to have awakened one
of a duller spirit, yet I resolved to sleep on still, and looked no otherwise on
this passage then as the inconsiderable Phantasme of an Idle Dream. I had
before resolved not to put my hand to any controversy in which the Lord
Primate was concerned, and so far satisfied Mr. Baxter in the not burning of
the Book, that I conceived all further answer to that scandalous charge, to be
altogether as unnecessary as the Charge was false. In satisfying him I should
have sati^fied all others who had taken up the information or vulgar Hear-s^y,
without inquiring into the falsity or malice of the first Report, if Mr.
Hickman would have had the patience to have stayed so long.

4. But long I had not lain in this quiet slumber, when I was rouzed by your
Letter of March 8. informing me of a second Edition of that Book; in which I
did not bear a part in the Prologue only, as in that before, nor was made one
of the Actors only in the body Tragi-Comedy, but that the matter of the whole
Epilogue was of my mistakings: All which I could have slept out also, if the
same Letter had not directed me to page 23, 24. where I should find a passage
to this effect, viz. That Dr. Holland had turned Dr. Laud (the most Renowned
Archbishop of Canterbury) out of the Schools with disgrace, for but
endeavoring to maintain, that Bishops differed in order, not only in Degree
from inferior Presbyters. A son of Craesus which was dumb from his very birth
could find a tongue, when he perceived his Father in danger of death, whom no
extremity of his own might possibly have forced on so great a Miracle: And
therefore I conceive, that it will not be looked upon in me as a matter of
Prodigy, that the Dishonor done to so great a Prelate, who in his time was
one of the Fathers of this Church, and the chief amongst them, should put me to
a Resolution of breaking those bonds of silence, which had before restrained me
from advocating in my own behalf. I was not willing howsoever to engage my
self too rashly with an unknown Adversary, without endeavoring further to
inform my self in his Grounds or Reasons. In which respect I thought it most
agreeable to the ingenuity which I had shown to Mr. Baxter on the like
occasions, to let him see how sensible I was of the injury done unto my self,
and the indignity offered to the fame of so great a Person, before I would
endeavor the righting of my self, or the vindicating of his honor, in a
public way. To which end I addressed unto him these ensuing Lines.

Dr: Heylyn's first Letter to Mr. Hickman:
SIR,
5. YOur Book of the Justification of the Father^, etc. was not long since put
into my hands, with a direction to a passage in the Preface of it. It was not
long before I consulted the place; in which I found mention, that a Book of
mine had received the desert of its bitterness, in being burnt by the hand of
the public Hangman. It seems you were so zealous in laying a Reproach upon
me, that you cared not whether it were true or false: It was thought a
sufficient warrant to you, that you were informed so, without any further
enquiring after it: Which pains if you would please to take, you might have
learned, that though such a thing was much endeavored, yet it was not
effected, i. e. that it went no further then noise and fame, which served to
some instead of all other proofs. I was advertised yesterday by several
Letters, that the Book is come to a second Edition, in which you have not only
made bold with me (which I can easily contemn) but have laid a fouler Reproach
on the Late Archbishop of Canterbury, in being disgracefully turned out of the
Schools by Dr. Holland. But Sir, however you may please to deal with such a
poor fellow as I am, you ought to have carried a greater Reverence toward a
Prelate of such eminent Parts, and Place, whose Memory is more precious amongst
all that love the Church of England, then to suffer it to be so defamed, and by
such a person. You pretend Information for the ground of your other error, but
for this I believe you would be troubled to produce your Authors. And if there
be no more truth in the other parts of your Book, in which you deliver points
of Doctrine, then you have shown in these two passages, in which you relate to
matters of fact; you had need pray to meet with none but ignorant Readers, such
as are fit to be abused, and not with any knowing and intelligent man. Excuse
me if my love to truth, and my tenderness to a name which I so much honor,
have extorted from me these few lines, which are most heartily recommended to
your consideration, as you are to the grace and blessings of Almighty God, by

Your very affectionate friend, and Christian Brother Peter Heylyn.
Abingdon. March. 19. 1658.

6. By this time I had got the Book, which I caused to be read over to me, till
I came to page 38. where I found my self as much concerned as before in the
Preface, and the integrity of Dr. Burlow once Dean of Chester, and afterward
successively Bishop of Rochester, and Lincoln, to be more decryed, then Dr.
Laud the late Archbishops, was dishonored in the former passage. This put me
to a present stand, and I resolved to go no further till I had certified the
Author of my second Grievance, which I did accordingly. I had waited somewhat
more then a week since I had writ my other Letter, without receiving any
answer. The shooting of a second Arrow after the first might possibly procure a
return to both, and so it proved in the event. But take my second Letter first,
and then we may expect his answer unto both together. Now the second Letter was
as follows.

Dr. Heylyn's second Letter to Mr. Hickman.
SIR,
7. SInce the writing of my former Letter, the last Edition of your Book has
been brought unto me. In which I find p. 23. that you ground your self upon the
Testimony of some who are still alive, for Laud's being disgracefully turned
out of the Dinity Schools by Dr. Holland. I find also p. 38. that Dr. Burlow
did upon his deathbed with grief complain of the wrong he had done to Dr.
Reynolds, and those who joined with him in mis-reporting some of their Answers,
and certain passages therein contained. And of the truth of this you say that
you are able to give a satisfactory account to any person of ingenuity, who
shall desire it. Sir, I am not ashamed of having so much of a Suffenus, as to
entitle my self to some ingenuity, and therefore think it not amiss to claim
your promise, and to desire a more satisfactory account in that particular then
your bare, affirmation. This with your nomination of the parties, who are still
alive, and able to testify to the truth of the other, I desire you would
please to let me have with the first convenience. If no speedy opportunity does
present it self, you may send to me by the Preacher who comes hither on Sunday.
I expected that my former Letter would have been gratified with an answer; but
if you send me none to this, I shall think you cannot And so commending you and
your Studies (so far forth as they shall cooperate to the peace of the Church)
to God's heavenly Blessing, I subscribe my self,

Your very affectionate Friend, to serve you, Peter Heylyn.
Abingdon, Mar. 28. 1659.

8. This Letter being sent after the other, it was no hard matter to divine of
the answer to it, if any answer came at all. I might have learned by my address
to M. Baxter, that there was nothing to be gained by such civilities, but one
reproach upon another, men of that spirit being generally for quod scripsi
scripsi (as we know who was) seldom accustomed to retract or qualify what they
once had written: But as my own ingenuity invited me to write the first, so to
the sending of the second, I was directed in a manner by the Justificator, page
15. where he complains, that you, M. Pierce, did not endeavor to purge the
peccant humor by a private Letter, before you made the passionate adventure, of
calling him obstinate: This made me not without some thoughts, that a private
Letter might prevail upon such a person, who desired not to be accounted
obstinate in his own opinions; from which modesty I might collect a probable
hope, that he would not persevere in any error when he was once convinced of
it, but rather make amends to truth, and reparation to the parties which were
injured by him: The least I could expect (if he vouchsaft me any answer) was to
learn the name or names of those, by whom the young man had been abused in the
information, which might entitle me perhaps to some other adversary, whom I had
more desire to deal with: But if no answer came at all, as perchance there
might not, I should be able to conclude, that he had neither proof nor Author
for either calumny; which whether he had or not, will evidently appear by the
following Letters; which, though unlookt for, came at last, to make good the
Proverb, and are here subjoyned verbatim, without alteration.

M. Hickman's Answer to D. Heylyn's first Letter.
SIR,
9. YOu are pleased to honor me with a Letter, and to subscribe your self, my
very loving Friend, and Christian Brother; I take it for a great favor, and
shall be heartily glad, if my Answer may procure a good understanding betwixt
us, and prevent any further trouble. Your charge is threefold. 1. That in the
Preface to my first Edition, I say, That your Book had, as I was informed,
received the desert of its bitterness, being burnt by the hand of the common
hangman. I deny not the words, nor can I see any reason to be ashamed of them:
For 1. There is an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons still in force,
commanding that all Books of the complexion yours is of, should be seized, and
publicly burnt. 2. It was commonly noised, that your Book against the
Archbishop of Armagh was actually burned. 3. I proceeded not barely upon
common report, but had my intelligence from one of no mean employment, who has
his constant residence at White Hall; and I am pretty confident your Book had
been de facto so disgraced, if the sickness and death of the late Protector,
had not put the Privy counsel upon minding matters of higher concernment. And
will you now say that I was so zealous in fastening a reproach upon you, that I
cared not whether it were true or false. You have in your own Books printed
many matters of fact, with more confidence, for which you cannot pretend so
much ground. 2. You charge me that I have made bold with you in my second
Edition, Novum crimen and ante haee tempora inauditum: You had in your Examen
Historicum bestowed some ugly words upon a College, never to mentioned without
honor and I, by a true relating the whole business, against which you so much
exclaim, labor to vindicate the credit of the Society, and for this I must be
accounted bold: Who can help it? 3. You charge me for laying a fouler reproach
on the late Archbishop of Canterbury, because I intimate, that he was
disgracefully turned out of the Divinity Schools by Dr. Holland; and for this
you say, I would be troubled to produce my Author: It may be you and I are not
agreed what it is to be disgracefully turned out of the Schools; but if this be
it, to be publicly checked for a seditious person, who would unchurch the
Protestant Churches beyond the Sea, and sow division betwixt us and them, by a
novel Popish Position: You cannot sure think, that it will be any trouble to me
to produce my Author: For you censure, and therefore I presume have read M.
Prinne's Breviate, in which all this is extant totidem verbis; That Author
having laid such a charge, and none of the Archbishops friends having all this
while pleaded not guilty, I might take it pro Confesso: yet I must tell you, M.
Prinne's is not the only Ground on which I proceed, though what my other
Grounds be I shall not declare, till I well understand what use you intend to
make of my Letters.

And now, Sir, I hope that lamentable jeer of my standing in need to pray for
Ignorant Readers, and such as are fit to be abused might have been spared, (and
been bestowed upon some Temporizer, whose design it is to ingratiate himself
with great ones, who can complement a Prince so Highly, as to style himself
his Creature, and the workmanship of his hands; For my own part, Favor, and
Riches, I neither want nor seek: I have so much of a man in me, to be very
subject to Errors, but I hope I have not so little of a Christian in me, as not
to be very willing to recall any Error, which by any learned man shall be
discovered to me. The Design of the Historical part of my Book, is to prove
that till Bishop Laud sat in the Saddle, our Divines of prime Note, and
Authority, did in the Five points deliver themselves consonantly to the
determinations of the Synod of Dort; and that they were enjoined Recantation,
who were known either to Broach or Print that which now is called Arminianism:
Can any one deny this? In my Doctrinal part, I assert that malum morale qua
tale non est Ens positivum. In which I promise my self, that I shall not have
you (who profess to take your Opinions from the Fathers) an Adversary. I deny
not whose name you so much honor, has in many things deserved well of the
University, but that his name should be so precious as you intimate to all who
love the Church of England, I am not yet convinced* Me thinks the Character
Isidor. Pelus* gives of Eusebius, lib. 2. Epist. 246. does too well suit him.
That whole Epistle is most heartily recommended to your Reading, and so are you
to the Grace of Jesus Christ by

Your most humble Servant, Henry Hickman.


Mr. Hickmans Answer to Dr. Heylyns second Letter.
SIR,
10. THis Letter was drawn up the last week, and had been sent but that I was
necessitated to be absent from the University for two or three days: I have now
received a second Letter, wherein you desire (by virtue of a promise made in my
second Edition) to know what Grounds I had had to affirm, that Dr. Burlow, did
declare his trouble for some wrong done to Dr. Reynolds, etc. in relating the
Hampton Court Controversy. Sir, I will not censure you to have no Ingenuity;
but yet you must pardon me if I refuse to give you any further account of the
matter till I understand, first, whether you will deal as plainly with me about
some things contained in your own Examen Historicum. Will you send me word what
the names of those men are, who said two of your Sermons about the Tares had
done more mischief to the Papists, then all the Sermons that ever Dr. Prideaux
preached against them, and what the name of that man is, who did by Bishop
Williams his appointment, give a pension out of his place for the maintenance
of a Scholar. 2. I would gladly know whether you intend what I write, only for
your own private satisfaction, and not for public view. 3. I would willingly
be informed what you would take for satisfaction, whether it will suffice if I
prove the business from the mouth of one, who was a lover of the English
Prelacy, Liturgy, and Ceremony. When you have satisfied me, you may suddenly
expect an answer from him, who again subscribes himself

Your humble Servant, Henry Hickman.
Magd. Coll. Ap. 1. 1659.

11. These Answers leaving me as unsatisfied as before I was, I found that I
had lost both my hopes, and labor, for the declining of a business which I was
not willing to appear in, if any satisfaction had been given me otherwise* And
therefore since he was not pleased to declare himself so freely to me in a
private way, as to beget between us such a right understanding, as might
prevent all further trouble (which his first Letter seemed to wish) I see not
how I can avoid the making of a more public business of it then I first
intended, unless I should betray my self unto scorn, and censure: My Letters
being in his hands cannot be recalled, and if I should not now proceed, to give
the world that satisfaction which I looked for from him, in the retracting of
his Calumnies, and salfe Reports; he and his friends might think I could not.
In the pursuit whereof I purposed, to have gone no further, then the
vindicating of my self, and those whose names are dear unto me, from the
obstinacy of his Reproaches. But he has hinted me, I thank him, to another
Argument, relating to the Historical part of his discourse; of which perhaps I
may render you an account also before we part. Beginning at the lowest step I
shall ascend at last by leisure, to the top of the Stairs; that having answered
for my self, I may be credited the more when I speak for others.

The Answer of P. Heylyn D. D. to Mr. Hickman's Letters of April 1. Relating to
some Passages in a Book called, The Justification of the Fathers, etc.
11. IT was good Council which Demaratus of Corinth gave to Philip of Macedon,
when he advised him to settle all things well at home, before he intermedled in
the differences, amongst the Grecians. In correspondence whereunto I shall
first do my best Endeavor, to acquit my self from those Reproaches, which the
Justificator with a Prodigal hand has bestowed upon me; and thereby fit my
self the better for advocating in behalf of those eminent persons, of whose
Renown I am more solicitous then my one Concernments. Beginning therefore with
my self, in the first place I must take notice of his practice to make me clash
with the Lord Primate, whose Rest I desire not to disturb upon any occasion.
He should have first reconciled those two passages which I proposed to D.
Barnard. p. 103. 104. of Respondit Petrus, before he had made it such a wonder
that a Doctor of Divinity should so unworthily handle a Reverend person, and
fasten upon him a dissent from the Church of England, in a matter wherein he
does so perfectly agree with her. If so, if he agree so perfectly with the
Church of England, how comes he to differ from himself, and speak such
contradictions as D. Barnard, nor no other of his great Admirers can find a way
to reconcile to the sense of the Church? Or if they can, or that they think
those contradictions, not considerable for making his Agreement the less
perfect with the Church, of England, you have gained the point which you
contended for, in your dispute which M. Bu^le, and D. Barnard labored to
deprive you of in his Book of the Lord Primates Judgment, intended against none
by name, but your self and me, though others be as much concerned in the
General Interess.

12. Much good may the Concession do you. What comes after next? the burning of
the Book by the common Hangman. I thought that Ignis fatuus had had been
quenched sufficiently by the assurance, which I gave him to the contrary in my
Letter of the 19th of March. But his desire to have it so is so prevalent with
him* that he neither does deny the words, nor can find any Reason to be ashamed
of them, be they never so false. And what Ground can we find for so great a
confidence? 1. He appeals unto an Ordinance made in the year 1646. Which
Ordinance he pretends to be still in force* but whether it be so or not, is a
harder Question then a greater Lawyer can determine. That Ordinance making ^o
Report* he flies next to a common noise, which Rings still in his Ears, and
must gain credit, either as a noise or common, or as both together; though for
the most part, the louder the noise is, and the more common it grows, the less
credit to be given unto it. You know well what the two great Poets say of Fame,

-- Fama malum velox -- quae veris addere falsa,
Gaudet, and Eminimo sua per mendacia crescit.
But yet not seeming to lay much strength upon common Fame (though it be one of
his best Authors in some other cases) he pretends unto a special Revelation
from the Privy Council, and grows so confident upon the strength of the
intelligence, that he holds at White Hall (which all great Statesmen must
pretend to) that he is sure the Book de Facto had been so disgraced (though
whether disgraced by being so burnt is another question) if the sickness and
death of the late Protector, had not put the Privy Council upon minding matters
of higher concernment. The contrary whereof my Postscript unto M. Baxter has
most clearly Evidenced.

13. The second charge wherein I stand single by my self, is only touched at in
the Letter, where I am said to have bestowed some ugly words upon a College
not to be mentioned without honor; insisted on more largely in the fag end of
the Book without the least coherence or relation to it. And there this man of
brass makes me worse then a Tinker (a rude Expression, which declares him to be
better studied in his Metaphisicks, then his Moral Philosophy) in committing
more and fouler Errors then those I find in Mr. Fuller. Not universally I hope,
but in that particular passage touching Magdalen College; but whether so or
not, we shall see anon; first taking notice of the Proverb, Concerning Birds
which defile their own nests, as he thinks I do. But (be it spoken in good
time) there is an observation or tradition amongst Country people, that the
Cuckoo lays her Eggs in the Hedge. Sparrows nest, where they are hatched and
cherished till they grow so strong, as to drive the poor Sparrows out of their
nest, and keep it wholly to themselves. Now, Sir, if any of the old Sparrows,
should discover the Rapacity of these young Cuckowes* and signify the same to
the rest of the Birds; could they be properly accused for defiling their own
nest in so doing? I believe they could not, and I conceive all understanding
men will believe so to. In this particular I stand condemned, but not
convicted, for being injurious to the Reformation, and to Magdalen College,
for disquieting the Ashes of a Reverend and most pious professor, by telling
the world so long after his death, that he had the infelicity of being joined
to an unthrifty wife; and finally for uttering as much uncharitableness and
partiality as could well be contained in so few lines.

14. But first where is it to be found, that I impute this act of Rapine to the
Reformation. The Reformation may be good, and the Alteration to the better for
any thing that can be found in that Animadversion, though some that had the
benefit of it intended more their private gain then the public honor If any
were injurious to the Reformation, it must be they that took the purse, and not
the officers who follow the Hue and Cry, to bring back the money. I confess
Magdalen College is a name by me never to be mentioned without honor, and I
should be more ashamed of my self then the Justificator, had I bestowed any
ugly words* upon that foundation. But the Cuckowes do not make the nest, nor
can some Vsu-Fructaries, though they pretend a jus in re, (as you know who
says) affirm themselves to be the College. As little injury then is done to
the name and memory of that Pious Professor, D. Humphries, of whose unthrifty
wife, it is he that tells the world, not I. He distinguishes frequently in his
Book, betwixt a Negation and a Privation, betwixt Positivum, and Privativum;
and therefore cannot choose but know that there is a difference, betwixt my
Character, and his. The Gentlewoman might be no provident Housewife, which is
all I say, and yet not be unthrifty neither, as the Phrase is varied, which of
the two has more disquieted the husband, or been more injurious to the wife,
may be easily judged without putting the difference to a trial in the Court of
Honor. And for uncharitableness and partiality, I would fain know, in what
respect I can be charged with either of them* unless it be, in speaking more
favorably of the Fact, then it has deserved; and passing by in silence the
offense it gave to the Right Learned Seldom, which as is said (but I am sure
not said by me) did hinder him from bestowing his Library on the University.

15. Let us next see whether the Brasier or the Tinker, make the foulest work.
The Tinker charges it no farther then to be a Tradition, that some considerable
sum of Money had been left by the Founder, for the ends there mentioned. The
Brasier has produced a Statute for it, to which all those of that Society
ought to take their Oath, and consequently in excusing them of Rapine, he
condemns them of perjury. The Tinker takes no notice of any but the Fellows who
had the division of the spoil, of no more then thirty double Pistolets to every
Fellow; and of no greater Exchange for every Pistolet then 16 s. 6 d. In which
particulars he had as good intelligence as some Friends whom he employed in the
Enquiry, could return unto him. The Brasier acknowledges, that every Pistolet
was exchanged for 18 s. 6 d. at the least, some of them for 19 s. and some for
20 s. that every fellow had 33 pieces for his single share, and that the booty
was so Rich, that even the under graduate Choristers had their part therein;
Which as it makes the crime the greater, and the more diffusive, so is the
guilt thereof increased by the Distribution. The Tinker says as he was
informed, that the Old Doctor had no fewer then 100 pieces for his part of the
spoil, of which the Brasier does assure us, that little justice, if not great
injustice has been done her in it. How so? because says he, That he first
denied his consent. For taking the Gold out of the Tower. Secondly, Because the
Doctor, said once at a public meeting* That all money must be restored. And 3.
because he continued in the same mind, when he lay on his death bed. All which
might be, or might not be, it is no matter which; and yet he might have no fewer
then 100 of those pieces for his part of the spoil; which with so little
justice or great injustice is imputed to him. If any General Restitution has
been made of the Money, it was well done of them that did it, of which as I
never heard before, (D. Cross excepted) so I am glad to hear it now; though if
the sum should be made up it will not be preserved with such care and
conscience, as in former times. The secret being once discovered, will be a
strong temptation to some itching fingers, when any color of necessity may
disguise the sacrilege. If this be all he has to say, in the defen^e of the
society, for which he fears to have provoked me to become his adversary, I
shall absolutely free him from that fear, as I shall do a common Lawyer that
speaks for his Client, with better title to his Fee, then this Advocate can
pretend unto for the present service, for Causa Patrocinio, and the rest that
follows, proves plainly, that a broken cause is made much worse by often and
unskilful handling.

16. But for all that the Brasier is the better trade he makes all things new,
a fine New Nothing touching the Miraculous discovery of this Golden Mine, not
to be parralell'd by Purchase his Pilgrims. Joskpha Costa his Navigations, or
Hackluit's Voyages. Necessitated by a vast debt of 1600 l. contracted by the
old Sparrows with the Great Rush of Madagascer, of which huge bird Mr. Buvechus
tells us out of Paulus Venetus lib. 7. cap. 2. Which if it were false, why
was it told to the Demites; if true, why told to no body else. This vast debt
paid, and 500*. laid up in the common Treasury, and that too in so ^hort a
space, that the Fellows and Scholars must be ^hought to live in the mean time
upon air, or hope, ^r somewhat of as thin a nature, an arrear of 700*. being
also lost, like King John's Bag and Bagga^^, ^n the Fenns of Lincolnshire. The
mistaking of a ^iberal sum in old French Pistolets, unknown to any of the
society for a mutuum annually borrowed, and repaid in good English Silver, the
apprehensi^n of their danger, left the Soldiers garrisoned in ^he Town, and
looking on themselves as Lords of the soil should lay some claim unto the money
as Treasure trou-ve though it were only locked up in a chest, not under the
ground. But the strange manner how they found it goes beyond all this, Porcede
luck on it. Hilkiah the High Priest by searching into the treasures of the
Temple, found the book of the Law; but these good Fellows looking after a book
of the Law, must find the treasures of the Temple. What pity was it, that such
a heap of dainty Gold should be spoiled with rust, whilst so many Purses
languisht under a vacuity, then which there could be nothing more abhorrent
from the Rules of Philosophy. I had before read over the Legenda Aurea, and
some part of the Legenda Lignea also. But row behold, Tertia post illam
succ^ss^^ Ahenea. See here a brazen legend to be added to the other two, but
more worth then both.

17. But your Adversary will not leave me yet; he has two questions to
propose. 1. Whether he that takes money for the Resignation of a fellowship be
bound to restore. And 2. Whether he that is married, and carries it so
clancularly, that the house can make no just proof of it, be not bound to
restore all the benefits that he received from his place, after his half year
is expired. And here I might take leave to follow your Adversaries way of
Disputation, in answering one Question with another, and standing for some
satisfaction to two Queries of mind before I return any to his. And my two
Queries shall be these. 1. Whether the taking away of the Almes-Basket and the
suppressing of so many Gaudies, and Pie-Gaudies, to the destruction of the
hospitality and charity of the noble f^undation, do not tend more unto the
profit of the present Fellows then to the credit of the Society? 2. By what
Rule of Equity they can dep^ive the Demies and Choristers (whose dinners were
too small before) of that unlimited allowance of bread and beer which of old
they had, reducing them at first to an allowance of 2s 6d by the week, and
afterward retrenching that to two shillings only. I might defer the satisfying
of his Questions till he answer these; but I shall deal more freely with him,
and content him presently. First then for answer to the last. Mime adsum qui
feci. This reflects on me, who held my Fellowship above a twelve month more
then his allowance. But first it was no clandestine or clancular marriage, but
carried openly enough* The College Chapel was set out by my appointment with
it is richest Ornaments, the Marriage was performed on St. Symons and Judes day,
between 10 and 11 of the clock in the morning, and in the presence of a
sufficient number of Witnesses of both Sexes, according both to Law and
Practice. The wedding dinner kept in my own Chamber, some Doctors and their
wives, and five or six of the Society invited to it. My wife placed at the head
of the Table, and by me publicly desired to make much of the company* the Town
Music playing, and my self waiting at the Table the most part of the Dinner,
no old formality wanting to my best remembrance which was accustomably required
(even to the very giving of Gloves) at a solemn wedding. No clancular carriage
in all this, no deceit put upon the College, and therefore no necessity of a
Restitution; the College saving my diet, and the Fellows getting my Minor
Dividents for the greatest part of the time till I left the house. And for the
other, admitting I should determine in the Affirmative, what would the College
get by that; For granting that he who takes money for a Resignation, be bound
to restore it; yet must it be restored unto the parties, and to their
Relations, of whom he received it, and not to the Society or corporation of
whom he received it not. And therefore granting, that those who have taken
money for a Resignation should be bound to restore it, the College Chest would
prove so far from being fuller then the Founder left it, that it would still
remain as empty as these Confounders made it. If he has any more questions to
propound unto me he shall not take me unprovided of as ready Answers.

18. In the mean time I must desire you to take notice how Eagle-ey'd he is in
his own concernments, and how blind in others. He tells you p. 14. that if you
had been a Resident at the University, Mr. Vice-Chan. had been bound upon his
complaint to have punished you with banition, or at least with incarceration or
public Recantation, for bestowing some smart speeches and expressions on him:
and therefore I may tell him, on far better Reasons, that if I were a resident
in Magdalen College* the President had been bound to put him out of Commons,
upon the Local Statute of Verba Brigosa; or the Vice Chancelour obliged to
inflict the same punishments on him which he finds for you, or the next Justice
to have bound him to his Good Behavior, for offending contra bonos mores, in
using to a Doctor of Divinity such reproachful words as he does in the
Preface, and giving him the odious name of Tinker in the end of his Pamphlet.
But I leave him to Gods mercy, and your Castigation, saying no more of him at
this present time, then Bishop Jewel did of Cartwright, when he first took up
arms against the Church, viz Stultit^a est in cord p^eri, sed virga
disciplinae fugabit eam.

19. In the next charge I cannot separate my own interest from that of the
right Reverend Father in God, D. William Burlow, once Lord Bishop of Lincoln;
though there be somewhat in it which concerns my self, and some which relates
only to that Reverend Prelate. In reference to my self alone, he tells me in
his second Letter, That though he will not censure me to have no ingenuity, yet
I must pardon him if he refuse to give me any account of that particular, which
I conceived by virtue of a promise he was bound to give me: Where you may see,
that though he will not censure me to have no ingenuity, yet he does not grant
me to have any; which whether it be a negative or a privative condemnation, I
leave to be disputed at the next encounter in the School of Complement. And
secondly, you may see what shifts he has to avoid the satisfying of the debt,
which he cannot pay, but by putting such Conditions on me as are not to be
found in the Obligation: I am charged also in the Book, for lashing the Church
Historians for any expression that is in the least favorable to the poor
Puritans (as he calls them) of which let him that feels the smart seek out for
remedies. That which concerns me in relation to Bishop Burlow, is my acquitting
him from showing any partiality, in summing up the conference at Hampton Court;
a matter never charged upon him by the Puritan faction, more then twenty years
after his death, and more then thirty years after the publishing of that Book;
which as the Church Historian says, to have been complained of, so does he
only say, not prove it; and affirmations or complaints are no legal evidences,
where there are any reasons of strength to evince the contrary; but what he
wants shall be supplied by the Antagonist; who fearing to be prevented in it,
puts the best leg forwards, crying out with more have then good speed, That he
will Answer the Doctor: Admit him to his Answer, and he will tell us, That the
times were evil, that the prudent did think themselves obliged to be silent,
and that God did so order the matter, that they lost no credit by a quiet
committing their cause to him. How so? Because (says he) D. Burlow lying on
his death bed* did with grief complain of the wrong which he had done to D.
Reynolds, and others that joined with him in that conference. If this be
prooved, we will admit of all the rest; but if this be not proved, all the rest
is nothing: And for the proof of this he is able (as he says) to give a
satisfactory account to any person of ingenuity, who desires it of him: I would
have took him at his word, desiring earnestly to be satisfied in the truth
thereof, presuming that I might lay claim to so much ingenuity, as would
entitle me to a capacity of obtaining that favor*

20. But in this point I reckoned without my host; for though I pressed my
desire so far, as to conclude that if he did not gratify me with an Answer, I
should think he could not; yet I am still as far from satisfaction as at first I
was: I must first gratify him, in answering such demands as he puts unto me,
impertinent to the cause in hand, and such as the nature of the point in issue
cannot bind me too, by any Rule of Disputation in the Schools of Logic, or
else the evidence desired must not be produced. I gave some reason why I was
not willing to name the parties who received or paid the pension, given by
Bishop Williams* toward the maintenance of a Scholar; two of the parties to my
knowledge, and the third for any thing I know to the contrary, being still alive
otherwise I could not only name the men, but produce the acquittance. And for
the words relating to Bishop Prideaux, they were spoke at a great Table in the
Court in the hearing of many; and being spoken in the Court, must refer only to
such Sermons as were preached at the Court, and not to all which had been
preached elswhete, by that learned Bishop: The Sermons will be shortly
published, if not done already, and will be able to speak as much for
themselves, as can be desi^ed of me to do. The witness in the cause touching
Bishop Burlow, may appear securely, without drawing danger to himself, and will
be heard, no Question, both with love and freedom: For if he be a lover of the
English Prelacy, Liturgy, and Ceremonies, who is to attest unto this truth, I
know of none who can refuse to give credit to it; but if he take up the report
at the second hand* from one who told him that he took it from the Doctors
mouth, and not from the man himself that spoke it, his witness may be liable to
just exception, and then we are but as we were, without proof at all. He vaunts
it somewhere in his Book, That he is furnished with a cloud of Witnesses, to
justify his cause against you; but in this point, and the next that follows,
his Witnesses are all in a cloud (shadowed as Aeneas and his followers were
from the sight of Dido) so that no mortal eye can see them. Et idem est non
esse et non apparere, was the Rule of old.

21. Upon no better grounds then this, he lays a fouler reproach on the late
most Reverend and still Archbishop of Canterbury, as being turned out of the
Divinity Schools with disgrace by D. Holland, in publicis, commitiis, for but
endaevouring to maintain* That Bishops differed in order, and not in degree
only, from inferior Presbiters. I reproved him for this in my first Letter,
and told him how much he would be troubled to produce his Author; he shifted it
off, by saying that he means no otherwise by being turned out of the Schools
with disgrace, then that he was publicly checked by the said D. Holland, for
maintaining the said opinion; and having M. Prinnes Breviate for the truth of
this, he thinks it a sufficient proof* also to confirm the other: but is it
possible that any man, who pretends but to a grain of ingenuity or learning,
should dare to lay so base a calumny on so great a person, and hope to salve
the matter by such a ridiculous explication, as may justly render him
contemptible to the silliest Schoolboy: Assuredly if he received a public
check, be that same with being disgracefully turned out of the Schools, there
must be more turned out of the Schools with as much disgrace, because as much
reprehended and checked as he, of whom the foulest mouth could never raise so
lewd a slander. The Doctor of the Chair in the Divinity Schools at Oxon, would
be more absolute in his decisions and determinations, were this once allowed
of, then all the Popes that ever sat in Peter's Chair, since they first laid
claim to it.

22. But he goes on, and adds that this disgrace was put upon him, for
maintaining such a novel Popish Position, as that before. Not Novel I am sure:
for the ancient Writers call the solemn form of consecrating a Bishop by no
other name then that of Ordinatio Episcopi; and if the Bishop at his
Consecration does receive no Order, his consecration ought not to be styled an
Ordination. And if it be not Novel, then it is not Popish, (for id verum quod
primum, as they Father it) unless he will be pleased to make Popery Primitive,
and entitle it to the Eldest times of Christianity. But Popish if it needs must
be, then must the Form of Consecration of Archbishops, Bishops, etc. be
accounted Popish, for which it stands acquitted by the Book of Articles, and
the two Parliaments of K. Edw. 6. Queen Eliz. must be Popish also, by which
that Form of Consecration was confirmed and Ratified. Twice in the Preface to
the Book, we find mention of three Orders, of Ministers in the Church of
Christ, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, and this distinction made as ancient as
the very times of the Apostles. And in the Book it self, besides the three
distinct forms of Ordination; the one for Bishops, the other for Priests, and
the third for Deacons, in one of the Prayers used at the Consecrating of a
Bishop, it is distinctly called an Order; all which he could not choose but see in
that very Chapter of the Book called, Respondit Petrus, in which he finds me
questioning the Lord Primates Judgment, touching the universality of
Redemption by the death of Christ. The Books confirmed by Act of Parliament in
the 5th. and 6th. of Edw. 6. Repealed in the first year of Queen Mary,
continuing notwithstanding in use and practice for the first seven years of
Queen Elizabeth, and reconfirmed by Parliament the next year after, upon
occasion of a difference, between Bon^er the late bloody Bishop of London, and
Horn then Bishop of Winchester. His Grace had therefore very good Reason not to
change his judgment, and to press very hard on Bishop Hall not to wave that
point (for which he stands censured by our Adversary, p. 24.) and to insist
upon it more then at other times when the Scottish Presbyterians had began to
revive the question, for which he stands condemned also. p 25.

23. But see the Candor of the man, and how like he seems to Aesops Dog when he
lay in the Manger; not giving the Archbishop a good word himself, nor
suffering any other to do it without snarling at him. I had signified in my
first Letter, that the Archbishops memory was too precious, amongst all that
loved the Church of England, to suffer him to be so defamed, and by such a
person. Your Adversary does not deny, because he cannot, that in many things he
had deserved well of the University, but will not yield himself convinced, that
his memory should be so precious, (as my Letter intimates) to all that love the
Church of England. And a squint eye he casts on some body for a Temporizer,
whose design it was to ingratiate himself with great ones, and could complement
a Prince so highly, as to style himself his Creature, and the workmanship of
his hands. But who it is whom he so decyphereth, or whether he means any one
man or not, but only casts abroad his censures (as Boys throw their stones)
without any proper aim* or object but the love of the sport; I am not able to
find out, in my best remembrance. Passing by therefore such Aenigma's as I
cannot unriddle, I must needs take notice, how he applies the Character to him,
of which Isidore Pelusi. gives unto one Eusebus a wretched fellow of those
times, and one who took upon himself the name and office of a Bishop; The
Character to be found in the 24. Epistle, of his second Book; and the Epistle
recommended to my diligent Reading.

23. He tells me that the Character contained therein* does two well suit with
the Archbishop; but I find it otherwise. Eusebius (as the Author tells us)
would not know the difference between the Temple and the Church, between the
place of the Assembly, and the Congregation; sparing no cost to build, repair,
and beautify the one; but vexing, disquieting and expelling the righteous
soul, to many of which, he had given great matter of offense or scandal, dum
multis offendiculis causam prebet, probos viros expellere, etc. The same he
florisheth over again in the following words, concluding with this Observation,
That in the Primitive times when there were no Temples, the Church was
plentifully adorned with all heavenly Graces; but that in his time the Temples
were adorned beyond Moderation; Ecclesia vero, Canviciis and Cavillis in
cessitur, but the poor Church reproached and reviled upon all occasions, such
is the Character which Isidore gives to this Eusebus. But that this Character
should suit too well with the late Archbishop, is a greater scandal then ever
Eusebus gave to the weak brethren of the Church of Pelusium. For will your
Adversary confine the Church (as some wild Affricans did of old) intra partem
Donati, within the Conventicles and Clancular meetings of the Puritan Faction?
Or has he confidence to aver, that any Righteous and Religious person was
expelled this Church (understand me of the Church of England) whom either
Faction or Sedition, in conformity or disobedience, spiritual pride, or fear of
punishment did not hurry out of it. H. B. for Gek. p. 127.
Just so it was Railed out by Brother Burton, in his Libel falsely called a
Sermon, where he affirms that the edge of Dscipiline was turned mainly against
Gods people and ministers, even for their virtue, piety and worth; and because
they would not conform to their (the Bishops) impious Orders. Just so it was
once preached in a Latin Sermon at St. Maryes in Oxon, by Bayley one of the
old brood of Puritans in Magdalen College, that good and Godly men were
purposely excluded from preferments there, ob hoc ipsum, quod pii, quod boni,
only because they were inclined to virtue and piety. With spite and callumnie
enough, but not to be compared with his who so reproachfully has handled this
Renowned Prelate, and the poor sequestered, and ejected Clergy of the Church of
England. But Judas did the like before to his Lord and Master. And thereupon
St. Cyprian very well inferres, nec nobis turpe esse pati* quae passus est
Christus, nec illis gloriam facere, quae f^cerat Judas.

24. And here I would have ended with your puissant Adversary, but that his
Letter carries me to a new engagement. He tells me there, that in the
Historical part of his discourse he has proved, that till D. Laud sat in the
Saddle, our Divines of prime Note and Authority did, in the five points,
deliver themselves consonantly to the determination of the Synod of Dort, and
that they were enjoined Recantation, who were known either to preach or print
that which is now called Arminianism, and thinks that no body can deny it for a
truth infallible. But first if we allow this for a good and sufficient
Argument, it will serve as strongly for the Papists against all those who
labored in the Reformation. For what one point do we maintain against those of
Rome in which the Divines of prime Note and Authority in the Church of Rome did
not deliver themselves as consonantly to the preceding Doctrines of the
Schoolmen there, and to the subsequent determinations of the Council of Trent;
and for opposing which manner of Persons, were constrained to a Recantation,
who either preached or printed in defense of that which is now called
Protestantism. And 2dly, if we behold the constitution of our University, when
D. Humphrys a moderate nonconformist (but a nonconformist howsoever) as M.
Fuller is pleased to call him, possessed the Divinity Chair, for almost forty
years; and D. Reynolds, a Rigid Nonconformist, publicly read a Divinity
Lecture, founded by Sir Francis Walsingham (the principal Patron of the Sect)
as you will find in the beginning of his Lectures on the Books Apocriphal; it
is no marvail if we find that the Doctrine and Discipline of Calvin, should be
so generally received by the Students there; or being so generally received,
that they should put all manner of disgraces upon all or any of those that
opined the contrary. The like may be affirmed of Cambridge, when D* Whittakers
sat in the Divinity Chair, and M. Perkins great in the esteem of the Puritan
Faction, had published his Book, Entitled, The Golden Chain; which Book
containing in it the whole Doctrine of the Supra-Lapsarians, was quarrelled
first by Arminius in the Belgicks Churches, and sharply censured afterward by
D. Robert Abbot in his Book against Tompson. By these two first, and after on
the coming down of the Lambeth Articles (of which more anon) as hard a hand was
kept upon all those who embrace not the Calvinian Rigors, as was done at Oxon:
the Spirit of that Sect being incapable of opposition, in the least degree.
Under which two General Answers, but the last especially, we may reduce all
Arguments which are drawn from the severe proceedings of those Professors, and
their adherents against all such as held any contrary opinion to them; that is
to say against Bishop Laud, by Doctor Holland, and D. Abbot; by the last
against D. Houson also, and by D. Prideaux against Mr Bridges; and in the other
university by D. Whittakers against M. Barret, by the whole faction there
against Peter Barrow; and finally, by the two Professors then being against M.
Simpson. And yet those times were not without some Eminent men, (and men of
prime Note and Authority, as he calls their opposites) which bear witness to
the genuine Doctrines of the Church of England now miscalled Arminianism; who
never were subjected to the ignominy of a Recantation. Amongst which I may
Reckon, D. Hursnet for one, Master of Pembrook Hall in Cambridge, afterward
successively Bishop of Chichester, Norwich, and Arch Bishop of York. Whose
Sermon a^ St. Paul's Cross, the 27 of October. 1584. sufficiently declares his
judgment in those points of Controversy. And I may Reckon D. Buckridge for
another President of S. John's College, etc. and Tutor unto Bishop Laud at his
first coming to Oxon; who carring these opinions with him to the Sea of
Rochester, maintained them in a public conference at York house, against D.
Morton Bishop of Lichfield, and D. Preston Master of Emanuel College in
Cambridge, Anno 1626.

25. I have already written, a full discourse showing upon what Principles and
Positions, the Church of England did proceed at her first Reformation. But this
being designed as an Ingredient to a larger work now almost finished, I must
not wrong that work so far, as to make use of it at the present, and therefore
you must needs have patience till a further time. In the mean season I shall
endeavor an answer to all those Arguments, which your Adversary has made use
of to evince the point he chiefly aims at; leaving the positivity of Sin to
your abler hand. Where by the way give me leave to tell you, that one who seems
to wish me well, though known no further to me then by the first Letters of his
name, signified in his Letter to me of the 3d. of March, that Mr. Hickman was
not the Author, but the Compiler of the Book, which is now before us, having
all the Assistance (as he was credibly informed) which the University could
afford him. But in this I cannot be of his opinion, far less assistance being
needful to this petty performance, then the united Councels of an university:
Though my Eyes be very bad, and unuseful to me in this way, yet I am able to
trace the steps of this young Serpent in all the Cliffs and precipices of the
Rock upon which he glideth; not only as to follow him in his Proofs and
arguments, but many of his Phrase^ and florishes also. I could direct you to
the Authors from which he borrows his faining, and his failing in the
Advertisement at the End of his Book; his charging you with tumbling in your
Tropes, and rolling in your Rhetoric, p. 4 his dealing with you as Alexander
did with his Horse Bucephalus, taking him by the Bridle, and leading him gently
into the Sun, that other men may see how lustily you lay about you, though your
self do not* p. 7. I could direct you also to the very pages in M. Prinns book
of Anti-Arminianism, and that called Canterburies Doom* out of which (without
acknowledging his Benefactor) he takes all his Arguments, Except that of
Gabriel Bridges in Oxon, and M. S^mpson in Cambridg, and perhaps these also.
But being they are made his own, (as some unhappy Boys mak^ knives when they do
but steal them) I will Answer them one by one in Order as they come before me.

26. In the first Entrance to his proofs he begins with Wicklife, concluding,
that because the Papists have charged it on him, that he brought in fatal
necessity, and made God the Author of sin, therefore it may be made a
p^obable Gu^ss, that there was no disagreement between him and Calvin. The
Course of which Argument stands thus, that there being an agreement, to these
points betwixt Wickliffe and Calvin, and the Reformers of our Church, embracing
the Doctrins of Wickliff, therefore they must embrace the Doctrine of Calvin
also. But first it cannot be made good that our Reformers embrace the Doctrine
of Wickliffe, or had any Eye upon that Man; who though he held many points
against those of Rome, yet had his field more tares then wheat, his Books more
Heterodoxies then sound Catholic Doctrines. And secondly admitting this
Argument to be of any force in that present case, it will as warrantably serve
for all the Sects and Heresies which now swarm amongst us, as for that of
Calvin, Wickliffe affording them the Grounds of their several dotages, though
possibly they are not so well studied in their own concernments. For they who
have consulted the works of Thomas Walde^sis, or the Historia Wiclesiana, writ
by Harpfield, will tell us that Wickliffe amongst many other Errors maintained
these that follow. 1. That the Sacrament of the Altar is nothing else but a
piece of Bread. 2. That Priests have no more Authority to Minister Sacraments
then Lay men have. 3. That all things ought to be common, 4. That it is as
lawful to Christena child in a Tub of water at home, or in a ditch by the way
as in a Fontstone in the Church. 5. That it is as lawful a^ all times to
confess unto a Layman, as to a Priest. 6. That it is not necessary or
profitable to have any Church or Chapel to pray in, or to do any divine
service in. 7. That buryings in Church Yards be unprofitable and vain. 8. That
Holidayes ordained and instituted by the Church (taking the Lords day in for
one) are not to be observed and kept in Reverence in as much as all days are
alike. 9. That it is sufficient and enough to believe, though a man do no good
works at all. 10. That no humane Laws or Constitutions do oblige a Christian,
and finally, that God never gave Grace or knowledge to a great person or Rich
man, and that they in no wise follow the same. What Anabaptist, Brownist,
Ranters, Quakers, may not as well pretend that our first Reformers were of
their Religion, as the Calvinists can; if Wicklif^ doctrines be the Rule of our
Reformation.

27. It is alleged in the next place, that the Calvinistical Doctrines in
these points may be found in the writings of John Fryth, William Tyndall, and
Dr. Barnes, collected into one Volumne* and to be seen the easier (as he knows
who says) because it was printed by John Bay 1563. Who as they suffered death
for their Religion in the time of King Hen. 8. so Mr. Fox in his Preface to the
said Book, calls them the Ringleaders of the Church of England. But first, I
do not take Mr. Fox to be a fit Judge in matters of the Church of England, the
Articles of whose confession, he refused to subscribe, being thereto required
by Archbishop Parker; and therefore Tyndal, Fryth, and Barnes, not to be
hearkened to the more for his commendation. Secondly, If this Argument be of
any force, for defense of the Calvinists, the Anti-Sabbatarians may more justly
make use of it in defense of themselves against the new Sabbath speculatio^s of
Dr. Bound, and his Adherents, embraced more passionately of late then any one
Article of Religion here by Law established. For which consult the History of
the Sabbath, lib. 2. c. 8. Let Fryth and Tyndal be admitted as sufficient
Witnesses when they speak against the Sabbath Doctrines, or not admitted when
they speak in behalf of Calvin; and then the Brethren I am sure will lose more
on the one side then they gain on the other. Thirdly, taking it for granted
that they maintained the same opinions in these points which afterward were
held forth by Calvin, yet they maintained them not as any points of Protestant
Doctrine in opposition to the Errors of the Church of Rome, but as received
opinions of the Dominican Friars, in opposition to the Franciscans; the
doctrine of the Dominicans, by reason of their diligent Preaching, being more
generally received in England then that of the other. Fourthly, it is to be
considered that the name of Luther at that time was in high estimation* as the
first man which brake the Ice, and made the way more easy for the rest that
followed; who concurring in judgment with the Dominicans, as to these
particulars, drew after him the greatest part of such learned men as began to
fall off from the Pope. And so it stood till Melancthon (not underservedly
called the Phaenix of Germany) by moderating the rigours of Luther, and
carrying on the Reformation with a gentlier hand, became a pattern unto those
who had the first managing of that great work in the Reign of King Edward.
Fifthly, it is Recorded in the 8th of St. Mark, that the blind man whom our
Savior at Bethsaida restored to sight, at the first opening of his eyes saw
men, as trees walking, v. 24. that is to say, that he saw men walking as trees;
quasi dicat homines quos ambulantes video, non homines sed arbores mihi
videntur* as we read in Maldonate. By which words the blind man declared (says
he) so quidem videre aliquid, cum ante nihil videret, imperfecte tamen videre,
cum inter homines and arbores distinguere non posset. More briefly Estius on
the place, Nondum ita clare and perfect video, ut discernere possim inter
homines and arbores; I discern somewhat said the poor man, but so imperfectly,
that I am not able to distinguish betwixt trees and men. Such an imperfect
sight as this the Lord gave many times to those whom he recovered out of the
Egyptian Darkness, who not being able to discern all divine truths at the
first opening of the eyes of their understanding, were not to be a Rule or
precedent to those that followed, and lived in clearer times, and under a
brighter beam of illumination then the others did.

28. In the third place he referres himself to our Articles, Homilies,
Liturgies, and Catechisms, for the proof of this, that the Calvinistical
opinions were the established doctrines of the Church of England; and if his
proof holds good in this he has gained the cause. But first he directs us to
no particular place in the Catechisms, Homilies, or Liturgies, where any such
matter may be found, but keeps himself aloof, and in generals only; and we know
who it was that said, Dolosus versatur in gener^libu^. When he shall tell us
more particularly what he would insist on, I doubt not but I shall be able to
give him a particular answer. Secondly, skipping over those passages of the
Liturgy and Cat^chisms, which maintain the Universality of Redemption by the
Death of Christ; and taking no notice that the possibility of falling from
grace is positively maintained in the 16th Article, and the Cooperation of man's
will with the Grace of God, as clearly published in the tenth; he sets up his
rest on the 17th. Article, touching Predestination and Election, as if the
Article had been made in favor of Calvin's Doctrine.

But first the Papists have observed two Reformations in the Church of England,
the one under King Edward the 6th. which they called the Lutheran, and the
other under Queen Elizabeth, which they called the Calvinian. And thereupon we
may conclude that the 17th Article, as well as any of the rest, being framed,
approved, and ratified under Edward 6. was modelled rather in relation to the
Lutheran then Calvinian doctrines; the Reformers of the Church of England, and
the Lutheran Doctors, holding more closely to the Rules of Antiquity, and the
practice of the Primitive Church, then the Zuinglians and Calvinists were
observed to do. Secondly, The 17th. Article does visibly presuppose a curse or
state of Damnation in which all Mankind was presented to the sight of God,
which overthrows the Doctrine of the Supra-lapsarians* who make the Purpose and
Decree of Predestination to precede the Fall, and consequently also to precede
the curse. Thirdly, It is to be observed, that the Article extends
Predestination to all those whom God has chosen in Christ out of Mankind, that
is to say, to all true Believers. For so the phrase Ephesians. 1. 4. is generally
interpreted by the ancient Fathers. For thus St. Ambrose amongst others. Sicut
eligit nos in ipse, as he has chosen us in him; Prescius enim Deu^, omnes scit
qui credituri essent in Christum; for God (says he) by his general Prescience
did foreknow every man that would believe in Christ. The like says Chrysostom
on that Text. And that our first Reformers did conceive so of it, appears by
that of Bishop Latimer in his Sermon on the third Sunday after the Epiphany.
When (says he) we hear that some be chose^, and some be damned* let us have
good hope that we be amongst the chosen, and live after this hope, that is,
uprightly and godly, then shall we not be deceived. Think that God has chosen
those that believe in Christ, and Christ is the book of life. If thou believe
lievest in him, then art thou written in the book of life, and shall be saved.

29. In the last place we are to note, that there is a clause in the end of the
Article, viz. that we are to receive Gods promises in such wise as they be
generally set forth to us in holy Scripture; then which nothing can be more
contrary to the Doctrine of the Supralapsarians, which restrains Election unto
life to few particulars without respect had to their Faith in Christ, or
Christ's death for them; and extends the Decree of Reprobation to the far
greatest part of Manking without relation to their incredulity or unbelief. And
though your adversary tells us, that he who reads the common Prayer Book with
an unprejudiced mind, cannot choose but observe diverse passages which make for a
personal and eternal Election; yet I find but little ground for the
affirmation, the Promises of God as they are generally set forth unto us in
Holy Scripture, being the ground of many Prayers and Passages in the Public
Liturgy; for in the General Confession it is said expressly that the Promises
of God, in Christ Jesus our Lord, are declared (not to this or that man
particularly) but to all mankind; declared to all, because first made to all
mankind in Adam, in the promise of Redemption by the seed of the woman, Genesis 3.
15. Secondly, it is said in the Te de um, that when our Savior Christ had
overcome the sharpness of Death he did open the Kingdom of Heaven to all
Believers. Thirdly, we find a Prayer for the day of the Passion, commonly
called Good Friday* which is so far from pointing to any personal Election,
that it brings all J^ws, Turk^, and Infidels within the possibility and
compass of it, Morciful God (so the Church teaches us to pray) who host made
all men, and hate nothing which thou have made, nor would the death of a
sinner, but rather that he should be converted and live, have mercy upon all
Jews, Turks, Infidel^, and Heretics, and take from them all ignorance,
hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word, and so fetch them home (blessed
Lord) to thy flock, that they may be saved amongst the remnant of the true
Israelites, and be made one fold under one Shepherd Jesus Christ our Lord, who
lives and reigns, etc. Can your Antagonist read this Prayer, and observe
those passages, and think the Liturgy so contradictory to it self, as to afford
him any proof, that such a personal Election from all Eternity, as an
unprejudiced mind may desire to meet with. If not, why does he talk so
confidently of diverse passages which a careful Reader cannot choose but observe
in the Common Prayer Book which enclines that way; yea, let him direct us to
those passages, and reconcile the differences which he finds betwixt them.

30. And though it was not my intent to produce any arguments at this time in
Justification of the Doctrine of the Church of England, as by you maintained;
yet since your Adversary stands so much on the 17th. Article, and thinks it
makes so strongly for defense of the Calvinists. I will here lay down the
Judgment of two Godly Martyrs, who had a chief hand in the Great Work of this
Reformation, and therefore must needs know the meaning of the Church therein
more then any of us. The first of these shall be Bishop Hooper, who in the
Preface to his Exposition on the ten Commandments has expressly told us, That
Cain was no more excluded from the Promise of Christ, till he excluded himself,
then Abel, Saul, then David, Judas, then Peter, Esau then Jacob; that God is
said to have hated Esau, not because he was dis-inherited of Eternal Life, but
in laying his Mountains and his Heritage waste for the Dragons of the
Wilderness, Mal. 1. 3. that the threatenings of God against Esau (if he had not
of his own wilful malice excluded himself from the Promise of Grace) should no
more have hindered his Salvation then Gods threatenings against Nineve, etc. That
it is not a Christian man's part to say that God has written Fatal Laws as the
Stoic, and with necessity of destiny violently pulls the one by the hair
into Heaven, and thrusts the other headlong into Hell, that the cause of
Rejection or Damnation is Sin in man, which will not bear neither receive the
Promises of the Gospel, etc. And secondly we shall find Bishop Latimer in his
Sermon on the third Sunday after the Epiphany, speaking in this manner, viz.
That if the most are damned the fault is not in God but in themselves; For,
Deus vult omnes homines salvos fieri, God would that all men should be saved;
but they themselves procure their own Damnation, and despise the passion of
Christ by their own wicked and inordinate living. He tells us also in his
fourth Sermon preached in Lincoln shire, That Christ only, and no man else,
merited Remission, Justification, and sound felicity for as many as will
believe the same; that Christ shed as much blood for Judas, as for Peter; that
Peter believed, and therefore was saved; that Judas did not believe, and
therefore was condemned; the fault being in him only and in no body else. More
to which purpose I have elsewhere noted (as before was said) and give you this
only for a taste to stay your stomach. And though Archbishop Cranmer, the
principal Architect in the work, spent his endeavors chiefly against the
Papists; yet that most holy Martyr tells us somewhat in his fifth Book against
Gardener, fol. 372. which does directly look this way. Where speaking of the
sacrifice which was made by Christ, he lets us know, That he took unto himself
not only their sins that many years before were dead, and put their trust in
him; but also all the sins of those, that until his coming again, should
truly believe in his Gospel, so that now we may look for no other Priest nor
sacrifice to take away our sins, but only him and his sacrifice; that as his
dying once was offered for all, so as much as pertained unto him, he took all
men's sins unto himself. In all which passages, and many others of like nature
in the other two: there is not any thing which makes for such a personal,
absolute, and irreversible decree of Predestination, as Calvin has commended
to us; and therefore no such meaning in the 17th. Article, as his Disciples and
adherents (in defense of themselves, and their opinions) would obtrude upon it.
For if there were, your Adversary must give me some better Reason then I think
he can, why Cranmer, Ridly, Hooper, and the rest that labored in this
Reformation, should command the Paraphrases of Erasmus to be translated into
English, studied by Priests, and so kept in Parish Churches to be read by the
People, whose Doctrines are so contrary in all these particulars to that of
Calvin and his followers.

31. But I return again unto your Adversary, who in the next place remembers
us of a Catechism, published by John Poynet Bishop of Winton, which he sets
forth with many circumstances to indear it to us; as namely, that it was
public in the next year after the passing of the Book of Articles in the Reign
of K. Edw. 2dly. That being by that King committed to the perusal of certain
Bishops; it was by those Bishops certified to be agreeable to the Scriptures,
and Statutes of the Realm. and 3dly, That upon this Certificate the King
prefixed his Royal Epistle before it, charging their moral Schoolmasters within
his dominions, that diligently and carefully they should teach the same. Thus
have we seen the Mountain, now comes out the Mouse; for having thus swelled our
expectation, we had reason to look for some great matter but find none at all.
Instead of laying down some clear passages out of Poynets Catechism, which
might evince the point he aims at: he asks the Question, (answer him any man
that dares) How do the Master and the Scholar plainly declare themselves to be
no friends to any of the Tenants M. P contends for? A Question which a very
well studied man may not easily answer, that Catechism being so hard to come
by, that scarce one Scholar in 500. has ever heard of it, and hardly one of a
thousand has ever seen it. But your Antagonist has good reason for what he
does, there being somewhat in that Catechism, which more confirms the points M.
Pierce contends for then he is willing to make known, witness this Passage of
the Catechism in the Anti-Arminianism (from which your Adversary makes the
greatst parts of his proofs and evidence) p. 44. After the Lord God (faith the
Catechism) had made the Heaven, Earth he determined to have for himself a most
beautiful Kingdom and holy commonwealth. The Apostles and ancient Fathers that
wrote in Greek, called it Ecclesi^, in English, a Congregation or Assembly,
into the which he has admitted an infinite number of men, that should be
subject to one King, as their sovereign and only head: him we call Christ,
which is as much as to say, anointed, etc. to the finishing of this
Commonwealth belong all they, as do truly fear, honor, and call upon God,
duly applying their minds to holy and Godly living, and all those that putting
all their hope and trust in him, do assuredly look for bliss of everlasting
life. But as many as are in this faith steadfast were fore-chosen, predestinate
and appointed to everlasting life before the world was made. For though he
seems to make such only to be the members of the Church, as were predestined
unto life from all Eternity, yet we must understand it of them chiefly (as
being the most Excellent Members of it) not of them alone: For afterward he
enlarges the acception of the word Ecclesia, according to the natural and
proper construction of it* telling us that the Church is the company of those
who are called to eternal life by the Holy Ghost; The company of all those
which are called to Eternal life, and therefore not of those only which are
chosen or elected out of the number; For many are called but few are chosen,
says our Lord and Savior. Secondly, it is not said, that such as are Members
of this Church were chosen to this end and purpose, that they might be steadfast
in the Faith, and being steadfast in the faith, might in the end obtain
everlasting life; but that being steadfast in the faith, that is to say
considered and beheld as such in the eternal Prescience, or foreknowledge of
Almighty God, they were predestinate and appointed to eternal life before the
beginning of the world. And Thirdly, if these words or any other which he finds
in Poynet, may be drawn to any other construction, which may serve his turn, he
must be made to speak contrary, to the three Godly Bishops and Martyrs before
remembered, who being men of greater age and more experience in the affairs of
the Church, the chief Architects in the Great work of Reformation, and withal
being three for one, are more to be relied on for delivering the true sense of
the Church, then any one single witness who speaks otherwise of it. 31. For
whom speaks Poynet in this place, for M. Pierce or Mr. Hickman? If he had spoke
for M. Hickman, we should have heard of it more at large, as in that which
follows out of Nowel; and if he do not speak for him, it must speak for you
more plainly, speak the Answers unto certain Questions, to which M. Prinne
directs him in the end of the Bible Printed by Robert Barker, Anno 1607. But
the worst is they signify nothing to the purpose which they were produced for.
For I would fain know by what Authority those Questions and Answers were added
to the end of that Bible? If by Authority, and that such Authority can be
proved, the Argument will be of force which is taken from them; and then no
question but the same Authority, by which they were placed there at the first,
would have preserved them in that place for a longer time then during the sale
of that Edition. The not retaining them in such Editions as have followed
since, show plainly that they were of no authority in themselves, nor intended
by the Church as a Rule to others; and being of no older standding then the
year 1608. they must needs seem as destitute of Antiquity as they are of
Authority. So that upon the whole matter your Adversary has limited me with a
very strong argument, that they were foysted in by the fraud and practice of
some Emissaries, of the Puritan Faction, who hoped to have them pass in time
for Canonical Scripture, such piae Frauds, as these are, we have too many,
were those once allowed of; some prayers, were also added at the end of the
Bible in some Editions, and others at the End of the public Liturgy; which
being neglected at the first and afterward beheld as the authorized prayer of
the Church, were by command left out of those Books and Bibles, as being the
Compositions of private men, not the Acts of the Church, and never since added
as before.

32. In the next place it is said, That the Composers of the 39. Articles were
the Disciples and Auditors of Martin Bucer, and Peter Martyr; or at least such
as held consent with them in Doctrine: none of them their Disciples, and but
few of them their Auditors, I am sure of that: Our first Reformers were too old
(Bishops, and Deans most of them) to be put to School again unto either of
them. And as for their consent in points of Doctrine, it must be granted in
such things, and in such things only in which they joined together against the
Papists, not in such points whe^^in those learned men agreed not between
themselv^^; Bucer being more inclined to the Lutheran Doctrines, and Martyr (as
it afterward appeared) unto those of Calvin. Besides it is to be observed,
that the first Liturgy of K. Edw. 6. which was the Key to the whole Work, was
finished, confirmed, and put in execution before either of them was brought
over; dispatched soon after their arrival to their several Chair'es, Martyr to
the Divinity, Lecture in Oxon, and Bucer, unto that of Cambridge where he lived
not long. And dying so quickly as he did, vix salutata Accademia as my Author
has it, though he had many auditors there, yet could he no^ gain many
Disciples in so short a time* And though Peter Martyr lived to see the death of
King Edward, and consequently the end of the Convocation, Anno, 1552. in which
the Articles of Religion were first composed and agreed on; yet there was
little use made of him in advising, and much less in directing any thing which
concerned that business. For being a stranger, and but one, and such an one as
was of no Authority in Church or State; he could not be considered, as a Master
builder, though some use might he made of him as a Labourer to advance the
work. Calvin had offered his assistance, but it was refused. Which shows that
Cranmer, and the Rest, to whom he made offer of his service, ( Si quis mei usus
esset, as his own words are) if they thought it needful were not so favorable
to the man, or his Doctrines either as to make him or them the Rule of their
Reformation.

33. Pass we next to Alexander Nowel, Dean of St. Paul's, and Prolocutor of the
Convocation. An. 1^^2. in which the Articles were Revised, and afterward
ratified, and confirmed by the Queens authority. In which capacity I must needs
grant it for a truth, that he understood the conduct of all affairs in that
Convocation, as well as any whosoever. But then it is to be observed, that your
Adversary grants their 17. Articles to be the very same verbatim, which had
before passed in the Convocation of King Edw. 6. No new sense being put upon it
by the last establishment: And if no new sense were put upon it, (as most sure
there was not) it must be understood no otherwise then according to the
Judgment of those learned men, and Godly Martyrs before remembered, who
concurred unto the making of it. From which if M. Nowels sense should differ in
the least degree, it is to be looked upon as his own, not the sense of the
Church. And secondly, it cannot rationally be inferred, from his being
Prolocutor in that Convocation, and the knowledge which he needs must have of
all things which were carried in it; that therefore nothing was concluded in
that Convocation, which might be contrary to his own judgment as a private
person; admitting that he was inclinable to Calvin in the points disputed,
which I grant not neither. For had he been of his opinions, the spirit of that
Sect is such as could not be restrained from showing it self dogmatically, and
in terms express, and not occasionally only, or upon the by; and that too in
such general terms, that no particular comfort for your Adversary can be
gathered from them. And it were worth the while to know, first, why your
Antagonist, appealing to his Catechism, should decline the Latin Edition of it,
which had been authorized to be publicly taught in all the Grammar Schools of
England, and the English translation of the same by a friend of the Authors,
1572. both still in use, and both reprinted in these times since the year 1647
And secondly, what it was which moved him to fly for succor to the first
draught of it in the English Tongue, out of which the two last were extracted;
that first draught or Edition being laid aside many years ago, and not approved
by any such public Authority as the others were, somewhat there must be in it,
which brought that first Edition so soon out of credit, and therefore possibly
thought fit by your Adversary for the present turn: and thought to let us know
which Catechism it is he means, he seems to distinguish it from the other by
being dedicated to the two Archbishops, yet that does rather betray his
ignorance then advance his cause; the Authors own Latin Edition, and the
English of it being dedicated to the two Archbishops as well as that*

34. But since he has appealed to that English Catechism, to her English
Catechism let him go* In which he cannot find so much as one single question
touching the Doctrine of Predestination, or the points depending thereupon; and
therefore is necessitated to have recourse unto the Articles of the Catholic
Church, the members, and ingredients of it. from thence he does extract these
two passages following; the first whereof is this, viz. To the Church do all
they properly belong, as many as do truly fear, honor, and call upon God,
altogether applying their minds to live holily and Godly, and with putting all
their trust in God, do most assuredly look for the blessings of Eternal life,
they that be steadfast, stable and constant, in this faith, were chosen and
appointed, and (as we term it) predestinate to this so great felicity. The
second which follows not long after (as his Book directs) is this that
follows, viz. The Church is the body of the Christian Commonwealth, i. e. the
universal number and fellowship of the faithful, whom God through Christ has
before all beginning of time appointed to everlasting life. And here again we
are to Note, that the First of these two passages not being to be found in the
Latin Edition, nor the English Translation of the same, is taken almost word
for word out of Poynets Catechism, and therefore to be understood in no other
sense then before it was: And that the second makes the Church to consist of
none but the Elect, which the nine and tenth Article makes in a more
comprehensive signification. So that to salve this sore, he is fain to fly to
the destinction of a visible, and invisible Church, fit for his definition unto
that which he calls invisible; making the visible Church of Christ to consist
of such as are assembled to hear the Gospel of Christ sincerely taught, to call
on God by prayer, and receive the Sacraments. Which persons so assembled
together, are by the Article called a Cong egation of faithful men, as well as
those which constitute and make up the Church invisible. And yet I doubt your
Adversary will not not grant them all to be in the number of the Elect. But
granting that the Church does consist of none but the Elect, that is to say, of
none but such who have been through Christ appointed to everlasting life from
before all time, as is there affirmed; yet there is nothing in all this, which
justifies the absolute and irrespective decree of the predestinarians, nothing
of Gods invincible workings in the hearts of his chosen ones, which your
Antagonist maintains; or which does manifestly make for such a personal
Election, as he conceives is to be found in many passages of the Common Prayer
Book; though what those passages are, and where they are to be found; he keeeps
as a secret to himself for some new discovery.

35. For M. Nowel* who sat Prolocutor in the Convocation Anno 1562. he takes a
leap to the year 1587. in which he finds a Book published by D. John Bridges,
Dean of Salisbury (and afterward Lord Bishop of Oxon) Entitled, A Defense of
the Government established in the Church of ENGLAND: And that he might come to
it the sooner, he skips over the admission of Peter Barro a French man, to the
Lady Margarites Professor-ship in the University of Cambridge, Anno 1574* who
constantly held these points in a contrary way to that of the Calvinian
platform, and relinquished not that University, till after the year 1595. of
which more hereafter. And he skips over also Doctor Hars^ets Sermon at Paul's
Cross, October. 27. 1584. in which he so declared himself against the
Calvinistical Doctrines of Predestination, that neither Mountague, nor any that
have writ since him, did ever render them more odious unto vulgar cars: But
being come to him at the l^st, what finds he there? Marry, That D. Bridges was
of opinion, That the Elect fall not finally and totally from Grace; and so did
D. Overal also (of whom more anon) who notwithstanding, disallowed the Doctrine
of Predestination, as maintained by Calvin, and puts not any such Comment on
the 17. Article as your Antagonist contends for. The like he finds in M.
Hookers Discourse of Justification; from whence he concluded no more, but that
M. Hooker was of a different opinion from you, in the point of falling away
from Grace* Which point he might maintain as D. Overal, D. Bridges, and some
others did, and yet not be of the same judgment with the Calvinistical party,
either sub or supra, touching that absolute and iresistable decree of
Predestination, the restriction of the benefit of Christ's death and passion to
particular persons, and the invincible or rather irresistible operations of the
grace of God, in the conversion of a sinner, which were so rigidly maintained
in the Schools of Calvin. I see then what is said by D. Bridges, and what is
said by M. Hooker; but I see also what is said by the Church of England, in the
16. Article, in which we find, That after we have received the holy Ghost, we
may depart from Grace given, and fall into sin, and by the grace of God, we may
arise again and amend our lives. No such determination as either totally or
finally to be found in the Article, nor suffered to be added to it when it was
motioned and desired by D. Reynolds, in the conference at Hampton Court; that
old saying, Non est distinguendum, ubi lex, non distinguit, being as
authentical as true, and as true as old. Howsoever I am glad to hear from your
adversary, that M. Hooker could not tell how to speak Judicially, as he says
he could not; and then I hope he may be brought in time to approve of all
things, which he has written so judiciously, in behalf of the Liturgy, and
all the Offices, Ceremonies, and Performances of it, which whenever he does,
I make no question but but that he may come to like the Episcopal Government,
and by degrees desert the Presbiterians, both in Doctrine and Discipline, as
much as he. Certain I am, that M. Hooker maintained no such determination of
humane action, by any absolute decree or prelimitation, as the Calvinists do,
and declared his dislike thereof in Cartwright, the great Goliath of that Sect,
who had restrained all and every action which men do in this life, to the
preceding will and determination of Almighty God. Even to the taking up of a
straw, a fine piece of Dotage.

36 But he demands, How the Church came to dispose of the places of greatest
influence, and trust to such as hated Arminianism as the shadow of death? If
she her self consented to those opinions, which he calls Arminian; amongst
which reckoning the Arch Bishops till the time of Laud he first leaves out Arch
Bishop Cranmer, the principal instrument under God, of this Reformation; which
plainly shows, that Cranmer was no favourer of those Opinions, which your
Antagonist contends for, and consequently that the Articles were not fitted in
these points unto Calvin's fancy* And secondly, he brings in Parker and
Grindal, whom M. Prinne (whose diligince few things have escaped which serve
his turn) has left out of his Catalogue; in which he has digested all our
English Writers, whom he conceived to be Antiarminianly inclined, in a kind of
Cronologie. Thirdly, he brings in Bishop Bancroft, as great an enemy to the
Predestinarian and Puritan Faction, as ever sat in the Sea of Canterbury; he
had not else impeacht the Doctrine of Predestination, as it was then taught by
the Calvinians for a desperate Doctrine. You have the whole passage in the
Conference at Hampton Court, impartially related by D. Burlow, though your
Adversary has some invisible vileness or other to affirm the contrary: Whereon
a motion made by D. Reynolds, about falling from Grace, The Bishop of London
(this very Bancroft whom we speak of) took occasion to signify to his Majesty,
how very many in these days, neglecting holiness of life, presumed too much of
persisting Grace. If I shall be saved, I shall be saved, which he termed a
desparate Doctrine, showing it to be contrary to good Divinity, and the true
Doctrine of Predestination: Wherein (says he) we should reason rather
ascendendo, then descendendo, thus; I live in obedience to God, in love with my
neighbor, I follow my vocation, etc. therefore I trust that God has elected
me and predestined me to salvation: Not thus, which is the usual course of
argument, God has predestined and chosen me to life, therefore though I sin
never so grievously, yet I shall not be damned: for whom he once loves, he
loves to the end; so little a friend was this great Pralate to the Calvinian
Doctrine of Predestination, and persisting Grace.

37. But your Adversary not content with this, has found some proofs, as he
conceives, That Bancroft hated that which he calls Arminianisme like the shadow
of death, he tells us that in his time came out the Book called, The Faith,
Religion, Doctrine, professed in the Realm of England, and Dominions thereof.
In this as much mistaken as in that before, that Book being published in the
time of Archbishop Whitgift, Anno 1584, as he might have found in Mr. Fullers
Church History lib. 9 fol. 172. being twenty years almost before Bancroft came
to the Sea of Canterbury, and 12. at least before he was made Bishop of London.
And being then published, was (as he says) disliked by some Protestants of a
middle temper, whom by this his Restrictive Comment, were shut out from a
concurrence with the Church of England whom the discreet ^uxity of the Text
admitted thereunto. And if disliked by Protestants of a middle temper, as he
says it was, there is no question to be made, but that it was disliked much
more by all true Protestants (such as your Adversary calls Arminians) who
constantly adhered to the determinations of the Church of England, according to
the Literal and Grammatical sense, and the concurrent Expositions of the first
Reformers. I grant indeed that the Book being afterward reprinted was
dedicated with a long Epistle to Archbishop Bancroft. But that intituleth him
no more to any of the propositions or opinions which are there maintained, then
the like Dedication of a Book, to an Eminent Prelate of our Nation in denial of
Original Sin, entitled him to the maintenance of the same opinion, which he as
little could digest (they are your Adversaries own words in the Epistle to the
Lecturers of Brackley) as the most rigidly Scotized Presbyterian. Nor stays he
here; for rather then lose so great a Patron he will anticipate the time, and
make Dr. Bancroft Bishop of London almost 18 months before he was, and in that
Capacity agreeing to the Lambeth Articles. An error which he borrowed from the
Church Historian, who finding that Richard Lord Elect of London contributed his
Assent unto them, puts him down positively for Dr. Richard Bancroft, without
further search, whereas he might have found upon further search, that the
meeting at Lambeth had been held on the 26th of November, 1595. that D. Richard
Flesher Bishop of Worcester, was then the Lord Elect of London, and that D.
Bancroft was not made Bishop of that See, till the 8th of May, Anno 1697.

38. The next Considerable preferments for learning the Clergy, he makes to be
the two Chairs in the Universities, both to be occupied by those who were
professed Enemies to such Doctrines as he calls Arminianism. Which if it were
granted for a truth, is rather to be looked on as an infelicity which befell
the Church, in the first choice of those Professors, then to be used as an
argument, that she concurred with them in all points of Judgment. That which
was most aimed at in those times in the preferring men to the highest dignities
of the Church and the chief places in the Universities, was their zeal against
Popery, and such a sufficiency of learning, as might enable them to defend
those points, on which our separation from Rome was to be maintained, and the
Queens interess most preserved. The Popes supremacy and the Mass, with all the
points and niceties which depended on it justification by faith the marriage of
Priests, Purgatory, and the power of the civil Magistrate, were the points most
agitated. And whosoever appeared right in those, and did withal declare himself
against the corruptions of that Church in point of manners, was seldom or
never look into for his other opinions, until the Church began to find the sad
consequents of it, in such a general tendency to innovation both in doctrine
and discipline as could not easily* be redressed. From hence it was that we
find a nonconformist* though ^ moderate one in the chair at Oxon; a Mother,
but a violent Patron of in-conformity* in a Professorship in Cambridge, so many
hankering after Calvin in almost all the Headships of both Universities. And it
was hardly possible, that it should be otherwise; Such of the learned
Protestants as had been trained up under the Reformation made by King Edw. 6.
and had the confidence, and courage to stand out to the last in the Reign of
Queen Mary; were either martyred in the flames, or consumed in prisons, or worn
out with extremity of Grief, and disconsolation. And most of those which had
retired themselves beyond the Seas returned with such a mixture of outlandish
Doctrines, that it was hard to find amongst them, a sufficient number of men so
qualified, as to fill up the number of Bishops, and to be dignified with the
Deanrys of Cathedral Churches. By means whereof there followed such an
universal spreading of Calvinism over all parts of the Church* that it can be
no matter of wonder if the Professors of the University should be that way
biased. And yet as much as the times were inclined that way: I believe it will
be hard, if not impossible for your Antagonist to prove that those Professors
did agree upon such a platform of Gods decrees, as he and others of the same
persuasions would fain obtrude upon us now. In Cambridge, D. Whitaker
maintained the supra-Lapsarian way of Predestination, which D. Robert Abbot of
Oxon condemned in the person of Perkins. And I have heard from persons of very
good Esteem, that Dr. Abbot himself was as much condemned, at his first coming
to the Chair, for deviating from the moderation of his Predecessor, D. Holland;
who seldom touched upon those points, when he might avoid them. For proof
whereof it may be noted, that five only are remembered by Mr. Prynne in his
Anti. Arminianism, to have maintained the Calvinian tenants in all the time of
that Professor, from the year 1596. to the year 1610. whereas there were no
fewer then 20. who maintained them publicly in the Act (as the others did) in
the first six years of D. Prideaux. And as for D. Overal (one D. Overal as your
Adversary calls him in contempt) afterward Dean of S. Paul's, Bishop of
Lichfield, and at last of Norwich, that his opinion were not that for which you
are said to stickle: I am sure it was not that for which he contends, that he
did not Armintanize in all things, I am sure he Calvinized in none.

39. Proceed we next to the Consideration of that Argument which is derived
from the censures inflicted in either University upon such as trod the Arminian
path, so soon as they began to discover themselves Exemplified in Cambridge by
the proceedings there against Barret, Barrow, and Simpson, in Oxon by the like,
against Laud, Houson, and Bridges. Of Barret, Simpson and Bridges, I shall now
say nothing, referring you to the 23. Section of this discourse, where you will
find a general answer to all these particulars; In the case of Dr. Laud, and
Dr. Houson, there was somewhat else then that which was objected against the
other. Your Adversary tells us of D. Housons Suspention for ^^urting only
against Calvin. If so the greater the injustice, and the more unjustifiable the
suspension; for what was Calvin unto us, but that he might be flurtad at as
well as another, when he came cross unto the discipline or Doctrine of the
Church of England. But Mr. Fuller tells you more particularly, that at a Sermon
preached in St. Mary's in Oxon, he accused the Geneva Notes, as guilty of
mis-interpretation touching the divinity of Christ and his Mesiah-ship, as if
symbolizing with Arrians and Jews against them both* and that for this he was
suspended by D. Robert Abbot, propter Conciones publicas minus Orthodoxas and
offensione plenas: Which though it proves this Reverend person to be rufly
handled, yet it makes nothing to the purpose of your mighty Adversary, which
was to show that some such Censures of Arminianism might be found in Oxon, as
had been met withal in Cambridge; nor does he speed much better in his instance
of D. Laud, inveighed against most bitterly in a Sermon preached by the said D.
Robert Abbot, then Vice Chancellor, on Easter Sunday, does affirm it was. For
in that Sermon there is nothing charged upon him in the way of Arminianism
(which was the matter to be proved, but that under Color of preaching against
the Puritans he showed himself so inclinable to some Popish opinions, that he
seemed to stand upon the brink, and to be ready on all occasions to step over
to them; a Censure which has little truth and less charity in it; that
Renowned Prelate, giving a greater testimony of his aversness from the Romish
Religion at the time of his death, then any of his persecutors, and accusers
did in the best Act of their lives.

40. More pertinent, but not more memorable is the case of Peter Bar^e,
Professor for the Lady Margaret in the University of Cambridge; a forrainer by
birth, but one that better understood the Doctrine of the Church of England;
then many of the Natives, his Contemporaries in the University: Some
differences falling out between him, and Whitakers, in the Predestinarian
points, the whole Calvinian Faction rose in Arms against him; Tyndal, Some,
Willet, Perkins, Chatterton, and the rest of the tribe siding with Whitaker in
the quarrel. But not being able altogether to suppress him by Argument, they
resolve to work their Ends by power, apply themselves to Archbishop Whitgift,
to whom they represent the danger of a growing Faction which was made against
them, to the disturbance of their peace, and the disquiet which might happen by
it to the Church in general. By their continual complaints and solicitations
they procure that Reverend Prelate to advise with such other Bishops as were
next at hand, that is to say, the two Elected Bishops of London and Banger,
with whose consent some Articles were drawn up and sent down to Cambridge for
the appeasing of the controversies which were then on foot. These Articles
being nine in number, contained the whole Calvinian Doctrine of Predestination
with the concomitants thereof, received at Cambridge for a time, and again
suppressed, rejected by King James, in the conference at Hampton Court, Anno
1603. inserted by D. Usher, afterward Archbishop of Armah, in the Articles of
Ireland, Anno 1615. and finally suppressed again by the Repeating of those
Articles in a full Convocation, Anno 1634. Concerning which your Adversary
tells us many things which must be examined.

41. For first he tells us, that his Arminianism did not only lose him from his
place but lost him the affections of the University. But I must tell him, that
his Arminianism, as he calls it, caused not the losing of his place; for I am
sure he held his place till the expiring of the term, allowed by the Lady
Margarets Statute, whose professor he was; Which term expired, he left it in a
just disdain, of seeing himself so overpowered, and consequently exposed unto
contempt and scorn, by the Arts of his Enemies. Secondly, If he lost the
affection of the university, which is more then your Adversary can make proof
of, unless he mean it of that part of the university only which conspired
against him, yet gained he as much love in London, as he lost in Cambridge. For
dying there within few years after, it was ordered by Bishop Bancroft, that
most of the Divines in the City should be present at his interment, which may
be a sufficient argument that not the Bishop only, but the most eminent
Divines of London were either inclinable to his opinions, or not so much averse
from them, as not to give a solemn attendance at the time of his Funeral. In
the next place he quarrels with Bishop Mountague of Chichester, for saying that
those Articles were afterward forbid by Authority, and brings in M. Fuller,
making himself angry with the Bishop for the when and the where, thinking it
strange that a Prohibition should be conspired so softly that none but he alone
should hear it. But first the Bishop living in Cambridge at that time, might
hear it amongst many others, though none but he were pleased to give notice of
it, when it came in question. And Secondly, the noise thereof did spread so
far, that it was heard into the Low Countries; the making of these Articles,
the Queens displeasure, when she heard it, her strict command to have them
speedily suppressed, and the actual suppression of them, being all laid down
distinctly in a Book, published by the Remonstrants of Holland Entitled,
Necessaria Responsio, and Printed at Leyden, 1618. almost seven years before
the coming out of Mountague's Book.

42. And now I am fallen upon this Bishop, I cannot but take notice of your
adversarys most unequal dealing against him and you; in his discrediting that
part of your Argument, which contains K. James's Judgment of him, the
encouragement he gave him to proceeed in his appeal, and his command to have it
Dedicated unto him; to which you might have added, for further proof of the
Kings concurring in opinion with him, that he had given him his discharge or
quietus est from all those calumnies of his being a Papist or Arminian, which
by the two Informers had been charged upon him. And secondly, that the appeal
being recommended by that King, to D. Fr. White, then Dean of Carlisle
(exceedingly cried up at that time, for his zeal against Popery) was by him
licensed to the Press, as containing nothing in the same, but what was
agreeable to the public Faith, Doctrine and Discipline,, established in the
Church of England. And whereas your adversary does not think, that the King
should command any Book, written by a private Subject to be Dedicated to
himself (which to my knowledge is a matter not without examples) he does not so
much clash with you, as put a lie into the mouth of the Reverend Prelate, from
whose hand you took it. That Bishop certainly must be a man of an unheard of
and unparalleld impudence, in putting such an untruth on the King deceased, to
gain no greater favor from the King then Reigning, then what of ordinary
course might have been presumed on.

43. For other points, which are in difference between you upon this account, I
leave them wholly to your self, advertising you only of these two things;
First, that when King James published his Declaration against Vristius, in
which there are so many bitter Expressions against Arminius, Bertius, and the
rest of that party, he was much governed by the Counsels of Dr. James Montague,
who having formerly been a great stickler against Barnet and Baroe, in the
stirrs at Cambridge, was afterward made Dean of the Chapel, Bishop of Bath
and Wells, and at last of Winton; an excellent Master in the art of
insinuations, and the Kings Ecclesiastical Favorite till the time of his
death, which happened on the 19th. of July 1618. Secondly, that the Reason why
King James so branded the Remonstrants in the Declaration, That if they were
not with speed rooted out, no other issue could be expected then the curse of
God, in making a perpetual rent and destruction in the whole body of the state,
page 39. was not because they were so in and of themselves, but for other
Reasons, which our great Masters in the Schools of policy, called Reason of
State. That King had said as much as this comes too, of the Puritans of
Scotland, whom in the second Book of his Basilicon Doron, he calls the very
pests of a Commonwealth, whom no deserts can oblige, neither Oaths nor Promises
bind, breathing nothing but sedition and calumny, etc. Advising his Son Prince
Henry then Heir of the Kingdom, not to suffer the Principles of them to brook
his Land, if he list to sit at rest; except he would keep them for trying his
patience, as Socrates did an evil wise. And yet I trow your adversary will not
grant, upon these expressions (though he might more warrantably do it in this
case then he does in the other) that Puritans are not to be suffered in a State
or Nation, especially in such a State, which has any mixture in it of
Monarchical Government. Now the Reason of State which moved King James to so
much harshness against the Remonstrants, or Arminians, call them which you
will, was because they had put themselves under the Patronage of John Olden
Barnevelt, a man of principal authority in the Commonwealth, whom the King
looked upon as the professed Adversary of the Prince of Orange, his dear
Confederate and Ally, who on the other side had made himself the Patron and
Protector of the Rigid Calvinists. In favor of which Prince, that King did not
only press the States to take heed of such infected persons, as he styles them,
which of necessiry would by little and little bring them to utter ruin, if
wisely and in time they did not provide against it; but sent such of his
Divines to the Synod of Dort, as he was sure would be sufficiently active in
their condemnation. By which means having served his own turn, secured that
Prince, and quieted his neighboring provinces from the present distemper, he
became every day more willing then other to open his eyes unto the truths which
were offered to him, and to look more carefully into the dangers, and ill
consequence of the opposite Doctrines, destructive in their own nature of
Monarchial Government; a matter not unknown to any, who had acquaintance with
the Court in the last times of the King. No^ makes it any thing against you
that his Majesty's repeating the Articles of the Creed two or three days before
his death, should say with a kind of sprightfulness and vivacity, that he
believed them all in that sense which was given by the Church of England, and
that whatsoever he had written of this faith in his life, he was now ready to
seal with his death. For first the Creed may be believed in every part and
article of it according as it is expounded in the Church of England, without
reflecting on the Doctrine of Predestination, and the points depending
thereupon. And secondly I hope your Adversary does not think that all the
bitter speeches and sharp invectives which that King made against Remonstrants,
were to be reckoned amongst those Articles of his faith which he had writ of in
his life, and was resolved to seal with his death; no more then those
reproachful speeches which he gives to those of the Puritan Faction, in the
conference at Hampton Court, the Basilicon Doron (for which consult my answer
to Mr. Baxter near 29.) and elsewhere, passim in his Writings.

44. The greatest part of his Historical Arguments being thus passed over, we
will next see what he has to say of his Late Majesty's Declaration, printed
before the Articles, An. 1628. and then proceed unto the rest. He tells us of
that Declaration, how he had learned long since that it was never intended to
be a two edged Sword, nor procured out of any charitable design to setle the
Peace of the Church, but out of a Politic design to stop the mouths of the
Orthodox, who were sure to be censured, if at any time they declared their
minds, whilst the new upstart Arminians were suffered to preach and print their
Heterodox Notions without control. And for the proof hereof, he voucheth the
Authority of the Late Lord Faulkland, as he finds it in a Speech of his
delivered in the House of Commons, Anno 1640. In which he tells us of these
Doctrines, that though they were not contrary to Law, yet they were contrary to
custom, that for a long time were no ofter preached then recanted. Next he
observes that in the Recantation made by Mr. Thorn, Mr. Hodges, and Mr. Ford,
it is not charged upon them, that they had preached any thing contrary to the
Doctrine of the Church, according to the ancient Form of the like Recantations
enjoined by the ancient Protestants (as he calls them) but only for their
going against the Kings Declaration, which but only determined, not having
commanded silence in those points. Thirdly, that the Prelatical oppressions
were so great in pressing this Declaration, and the other about lawful Sports,
as were sufficient in themselves to make wise men mad.

45. For answer to these Arguments, if they may be called so, I must first tell
you that the man and his Orator both have been much mistaken, in saying that
his Majesty's Declaration was no two edged sword, or that it tied up the one
side and let loose the other; for if it wounded Mr. Thorn and his companions on
the one side, it smote as sharply on the other against Dr. Rainford, whose
Recantation he may find in the Book called Canterbury's Doom, out of which he
has filched a great part of his store. He is mistaken secondly in saying that
this Declaration determined nothing; for it determines that no man shall put
his own sense or Comment to be the meaning of the Article, but should take it
in the Literal and Grammatical sense, which Rule if the Calvinians would be
pleased to observe we should soon come to an agreement. Thirdly, if the
supposition be true, as I think it be, that the Doctrines which they call
Arminianism, be not against the Law, but contrary to custom only, then is the
Law on our side, and nothing but custom on theirs; and I think no man will
affirm that Custom should be heard or kept when it is against Law. But
fourthly, if the noble Orator were mistaken in the supposition, I am sure he
is much more mistaken in the proposition, these Doctrines being preached by
Bishop Latimer, and Bishop Hooper, in King Edwards time, by Dr. Harsnet and
Peter Baroe in Queen Elizabeth's time, by Dr. Howson and Dr. Laud in King James
his time, none of which ever were subjected to the infamy of a Recantation.
Fifthly, if the Recantation made by Mr. Thorn and his companions imported not a
retracting of their opinions (as he says they did not) it is a strong argument
of the mildness of his Majesty's Government, and the great Moderation shown by
Bishop Laud in the use of his power, in not compelling men to say or do any
thing against their Conscience; a moderation which we find not amongst those of
the Sect of Calvin, when any of the opposite party fell into their hands:
Sixthly, whereas it might be thought, that the Ancient Protestants (as he
merrily calls them) had past many such severe censures upon those whom he
styles Arminians, he instanceth in none but in Barret and Bridges, which make
too small a number for so great a bragg. Quid dignum tanto, and the rest. And
finally for answer to the Prelatical oppressions, I shall refer you to my
former Discourse with Mr. Baxter (number. 20, 21, 23) repeating only at the
present, that the Proceeding of the Bishops were mild and gentle compared with
the unmerciful dealings of the Presbiterians; by whom more Orthodox, Learned,
and Religious Ministers, were turned out of their Benefices within the space of
three years, then by all the Bishops in England since the Reformation.

46. But the King must not think to carry it so, the Puritan Faction being
generally Calvinistical in Doctrine as well as in Discipline, prevailed so in
the House of Commons, Jan. 28. 1628. that they agreed upon this Counterpoise or
Anti-declaration following, viz. We the Commons now assembled in Parliament, do
claim, profess and avow for truth the sense of the Articles of Religion, which
were established in Parliament, 13. Eliz. Which by the public Acts of the
Church of England, and the general current Exposition of the Writers of our
Church have been delivered to us; and we reject the sense of the Jesuits and
Arminians, and all other wherein they differ from us. Which counterpoise made
in direct opposition to the Kings Declaration, your adversary makes a product
of the Civil Authority; whereas the House of Commons was so far at that time,
from being looked on as the Civil Authority of the English Nation, that it was
of no Authority at all, nor could make any Order to bind the Subject or declare
any thing to be Law, and much less Religion, till it was first countenanced by
the Lords, and finally confirmed by the Royal assent. But this he does in
correspondence to the said Protestation, in which the Articles of Lambeth, are
called the public Acts of the Church of England, though made by none but the
Arch Bishop of Canterbury, two Bishops (of which only one had actually
received Consecration) one Dean, and half a dozen Doctors, and other Ministers,
or thereabouts, neither empowered to any such thing by the rest of the Clergy,
nor authorized to it by the Queen. And therefore their determinations, can no
more properly be called the Acts of the Church, then if one Earl, with the
eldest Sons of two or three others meeting with half a dozen Gentlemen in
Westminster Hall, can be affirmed to be in a capacity of making Orders, which
must be looked on by the Subject as Acts of Parliament.

47. Your Adversary begins now to draw toward the Lees, and in the Dreggs of
his discourse offers some Arguments, to prove that those doctrines and opinions
which he calls Arminianism were countenanced to no other end but to bring in
Popery. And for the proof hereof, he brings in Mr. Prinn's Report to the House
of Commons in the Case of Montague. An. 1626. In which it is affirmed, that the
whole frame and scope of his book was to discourage the well affected in
Religion, and as much as in him lay, to reconcile them unto Popery. He gives us
secondly a fragment of a scattered Paper, pretended to be written to the Rector
of the Jesuits College in Bruxels. In which the Writer lets him know that
they had strongly fortified their Faction here in England, by planting the
Sovereign Drug Arminianism, which he hoped would purge the Protestants from
their Heresy. Thirdly, he backs this paper with a clause in the Remonstrance
of the House of Commons, Anno 1628, where it is said that the hearts of his
Majesty's Subjects were perplexed in beholding the daily growth and spreading
of the faction of Arminianism, that being as his Majesty well knew (so they say
at least) but a cunning way to bring in Popery. All which he flourishes over by
a passage in the Lord Faucklands Speech before remembered, in which it is
affirmed of some of the Bishops, that their work was to try how much of a
Papist might be brought in without Popery, and to destroy as much as they could
of the Gospel without bringing themselves in danger of being destroyed by the
Law, etc. To all which, being but the same words out of diverse mouths, I shall
return one answer only, which is briefly this. Your adversary cannot be so
ignorant, as not to know that the same points which are now debated between the
Calvinians and the Old Protestants in England, between the Remonstrants and
Contra-remonstrants in the Belgic Churches, and finally, between the Rigid and
Moderate Lutherans in the upper Germany, have been as fiercely agitated between
the Franciscans and Dominicans in the Church of Rome; the old English
Protestants, the Remonstrants, and the moderate Lutherans, agreeing in these
points with the Franciscans; as the English Calvinists, the
Contra-Remonstrants, and the Rigid Lutherans, do with the Dominicans: So that
there is a compliance on all sides, with one of the said two parties in the
Church of Rome. And therefore why a general compliance in these points with the
Friars of St. Dominick (the principal Sticklers and Promoters of the
Inquisition) should not be thought as ready a way to bring in Popery, as any
such compliance with the Friars of St. Francis, I would fain have your
Adversary tell me when he puts out next.

49. The greatest of the storm being over, there remains only a few drops which
will make no man shrink in the wetting, that is to say, the permission of some
books to be frequenly printed containing the Calvinian Doctrine; and the
allowance of many questions to be maintained publicly in the Act at Oxon,
contrary to the sense of those which he calls Arminians. Amongst the Books so
frequently printed, he instanceth in the Practice of Piety, Perkins his
Principles, Balls Catechism, etc. which being incogitantly licensed to the
Press at their first coming out, could not be afterward Restrained from being
Reprinted (notwithstanding the many inconveniences which ensued upon it) till
the passing of the Decree in Star Chamber, July 1637. concerning Printing; by
which it was ordered (to the great grief and trouble of that Puritan faction)
that no Book whatsoever should be reprinted, except Books of the Law, till they
were brought under a review, and had a new License for reprinting of them. And
though D. Crakanthorps Book against the Archbishop of Spalato was but once
printed, yet being called Defens^o Ecclesiae Anglicanae; it serves your
Adversaries turn as well as if it had been Printed an hundred times over. How
so? because Dr. Abbot said of that Treatise, that it was the most accurate
piece of Controversy which was written since the Reformation: If you are not
affrighted with this Apparition, I dare turn you loose to any single Adversary
made of flesh and blood. These words if spoken by D. Abbot, being spoken by his
Ghost, not the Man himself. For D. Abbot dyed in March, Anno 1617. And
Crakanthorps Book dedicated to King Charles (as your Author no^eth) came not
out till the year 1625. which was eight years after. Nor can your Antagonist
help himself by saying he means the other Abbot, Archbishop of Canterbury who
lived both at and after the coming out of the Book; for he speaks positively
and by name of that Dr. Abbot whom King James preferred to the Sea of
Salisbury. At the Ridiculousnes of which passage now the the first terrible
fright is over, you may make your self merrier, if you please, then Mr Fuller
is said to make himself with the Bishop of Chichester.

49. To set out the next Argument in the fairer Colors, he tells us of some
Act Questions were appointed by the Congregration to be disputed of at the
Public Acts which were maintained by the Proceeders in a Calvinistical way.
And this he ^sher^th in with this Interrogation. Whether the University did not
know the opinions of the Church of England, or would countenance any thing
which had so much as the appearance of a contrari^ty thereunto? Had this
Question been particularly propounded, voted and allowed in the General
Convocation of that University (as M. Prinne affirms they were) it might be
Logically inferred (as M. Prinne concludes from those faulty premises) that the
Judgment and Resolution of the whole University is comprised in them as well
as of the men that gave them; For which see Anti-Armin. p. 241. But I hope your
Adversary will not say the like of the Congregation (in which only those
Articles are allowed of, consisting of no other then the Vice Chancellor, the
two Proctors, the Regent Masters, and some Regents ad pla^itum, few of which
(the Vice Chancellor* and Proctors Excepted only) are so well studied in those
Deep points of Divinty, as to be trusted with the Judgment of the University.
If any be now living, as no doubt there be, who heard this Question maintained
negatively by D. Lloyd, Anno 1617. viz: An Ex Doctrina Reformatorum sequatur
deum esse Authorem Peccati: He may perhaps be able to tell what satisfaction
the Calvinians received in it. But he must be as bold a Man as your Antagonist,
who dares affirm, That the Arminian Doctors showed themselves rather Angry then
able Opponents. Howsoever you have here some Arminian Doctors, in the year,
1617. At what time D. Laud was so far from sitting in the Saddle, (as your
Author words it) that he had scarce his foot in the stirrup, being at that time
advanced no higher then the poor Deanery of Gloucester.

50. And as the Bishop, so the Duke was but Green in favor, when those
Arminian Doctors showed themselves such unable Opponents; his first honors
being granted to him but the August before, and his Authority at that time in
the blossom only: so that I must needs look upon it as an act of impudent
injustice in your Antagonist to ascribe the beginning of those doctrines, which
he calls Arminian, to Laud and Buckingham; and a high degree of malice in him
as to affirm, that the last had so much of an Herod, as would not have suffered
him so long to continue with friendship with the former, if he had not had too
little of a St. John Baptist. And yet not thinking he had given them a
sufficient Character, he tells us within few lines after, that their ^^^rishing
was the decay of Church and State, that neither body could well recover but by
spewing up such evil instruments. Whether with more Puritanical Passion, or
unmannerly zeal, it is hard to say. Methinks the fellow which dares speak so
scandalously of such eminent persons, should sometimes cast his eye on those,
who have suffered condign punishment for such libellous language. Scandalum
magnatum being a crime, which the most moderate times have published in most
grievous manner. For my part, I must needs say to him, as Cicero once did to
Marcus Antonius, Miror to quorum facta immittere, earum exitus non per
horrescere; that I admire he does tremble at the Remembrance of the punishments
of so many men* whose facts he imitateth. But as Abigal says of the Churl her
Husband* that Nabal was his name, and Folly, was with him; so I may say, that
there is somewhat in the name of your Adversary which betrays his nature, (and
shows him to be. I will not say (as she did) a man of Belial, but) a man of
scorn. For if Hickman in the Saxon Tongue signify a Scorner, a man of scorn,
or one that sits in the seat of the scornful (as I think it does) this fellow,
whom a charitable man cannot name with patience, has showed himself abundantly
to be vere scriptor sui nominis, as the Historian once affirmed of the Emperor
Pertinax. Let me beseech your pardon for these rough expressions, to which my
pen has not been accustomed, and which nothing but an invincible indignation
could have wrested from me. And then for his part let the shame and sense
thereof work so far upon him as to purge out of him all Envy. Hatred* Malice,
and uncharitableness (from which good Lord deliver us) for the time to come.

51. And here I might have took my leave both of him and you, in reference to
the Historical part of his tenpenny trifle which we have before us, so far
forth as it concerns your self, and your particular ingagings. But finding
some other passages in it relating to the late Archbishop, and the other
Prelates which require Correction, I shall not let them pass without
endeavoring to rectify his Errata in them. And first he asks, How was the
late ArchBishop an obedient Son of the Church of England, who put Mr.
Sherfield a Bencher of Lincoln* Inn, and Recorder of Salum, to so much cost,
and a disgraceful acknowledgement of his fault, and caused him to be bound to
his Good behavior, for taking down a Glasswindow, in which there were made no
less then seven Pictures, God the Father in form of a little old Man clad in a
blew and red Coat, with a Pouch by his side about the bigness of a Puppet? A
question easy to be answered, and my Answer is, that the Archbishop did
nothing in it but what became a true Son of the Church of England, and more
then so, that he had not showed himself a deserving Father in this Church, if
he had done otherwise. For take the story as it stands apparelled with all its
circumstances, and we shall find such an encroachment on the Episcopal power
and jurisdiction, as was not to be expiated with a gentler sentence. They had a
Bishop in the City, continually Resident amongst them, and one that hated the
Idolatries and superstitions of the Church of Rome, with a perfect hatred. This
Reverend Father must not be consulted in the business, for fear it might be
thought, that it was not to be done without him. A Parish Vestry must be
called, by which M. Sherfield is enabled to take down the offensive Pictures,
and put new white Glass in the place, though he be transported with a fit of
unruly zeal, instead of taking it down breaks it all in pieces, Here then we
have an Eldership erected under the Bishops nose, a Reformation undertaken by
an Act of the Vestry, in contempt of those whom God and his Majesty, and the
Laws had made the sole Judges in the case. An example of too sad a consequence
to escape unpunished, and such as might have put the people upon such a Gog, as
would have le^t but little work to the late Long Parliament. Non ibi consistent
Exemplaubi ceperunt sed in tenuem recepta tramitem latissime evagandi sibi viam
faciunt* as my Author has it.

52. But he proceeds according to his usual way of asking Questions, and would
fain know in what respect they may be accounted the obedient Sons of the
Church, who study by all their learning to take off that ignominous name of
Antichrist from the Pope of Rome, which had bin fastened on him by King James,
Archbishop Whitgift, Bishop Andrews, and the late Lord Primate; and finally, by
the whole Clergy in their Convocation, An. 1605. In the recital of which Proof,
I find not that the name of Antichrist was ever positively and and in terminis,
ascribed unto the Popes of Rome by any Article, Homily, Canon, or injunction,
or by any other public Monument of the Church of England, which leave it to
the Liberty of every man to conceive therein according as he is satisfied in
his own mind, and convinced in his* understanding* Archbishop Whitgift, the
Primate, and Bishop Andrews conceived the Pope to be Antichrist, and did write
accordingly; Archbishop Laud, and Bishop Mountague were otherwise persuaded in
it, and were not willing to exasperate those of the Popish Party, by such an
unnecessary provocation, yet this must be accounted amongst their crimes: For
aggravating whereof he tells us* that the Pope was proved to be Antichrist by
the Pen of King James, which is more then he can prove that said it. K. James
used many Arguments for the proof thereof; but whether they proved the point or
not, may be made a question* Assuredly the King himself is to be looked on as
the fittest Judge of his own intentions and performance. And he declared to the
Prince at his going to Spain, that he writ not that discourse concludingly, but
by way of Argument, to the end that the Pope and his Adherents might see there
was as good Arguments to prove him Antichrist, as for the Pope to challenge any
temporal Jurisdiction over Kings and Princes. This your Antagonist might have
seen in his own Canterburies doom, fol. 264. Out of which Book he makes his
other Argument also which proves the name of Antichrist to be ascribed unto the
Pope by the Church of England because the Lords spiritual in the upper house
and the whole Convocation in the Act of the subsidy, 3. Jacobi, so refined ^^*
If so* If any such Definition passed in the Convocation, it is no matter what
was done by the Lords Spiritual in the upper House of Parliament (for that I
take to be his meaning) as signifying nothing to the purpose. Wherein Gods
name, may* such an unstudied man as I find that definition? not in the Acts of
Convocation, I am sure of that, and where there was no such point debated and
agreed upon; all that occurs is to be found only in the preamble to the Grant
of Subsidies, made at a time when the Prelates and Clergy were amazed at the
horror of that Divellish plot for blowing up the Parliament Houses, with the
King, Prelates, Peers Judges, and the choicest Gentry of the Nation by the fury
of Gunpowder. But were the man acquainted amongst Civilians, they would tell
him that they have a Maxim to this Effect, that Apices juris nihil ponuns. The
Titles and preambles to Laws are no definitions, and neither bind the subject
in his purse or Paternoster,

53. As for the rest of the Bishops, I find two of them charged particularly,
and the rest in General. Mountague charged from* D. Prideaux, to be merus
Grammatius, and Linsel charged from M. Smart to have spoken reproachfully of
the first Reformers on the Book of Homilies. But as Mountague was too great a
Scholar to be put to School to D. Prideaux in any point of Learning of what
kind soever; so Linsol was a Man of too much sobriety to use those rash and
unadvised speeches which he stands accused of. And as for Mr. Smart, the
apology of D. Cosens speaks him so sufficiently, that I may very well save
myself the labor of a Repetition. More generally he tells us from a speech of
the late Lord Faulkland, that some of the Bishops, and their adherents have
destroyed unity under pretense of uniformity, have brought in superstition and
scandal under the title of Reverence and decency, and have defiled our
Churches, by adoring our Churches etc. p. 40. and not long after, p 64. That
they have so industriously labored to deduce themselves from Rome, that they
have given great suspicion, that in Gratitude they desire to return thither, or
at least to meet it half way. Some have evidently labored to bring in an
English, though not a Romish Papacy; not the out side and dress of it only,
but equally absolute a blind dependence of the People on the Clergy, and of the
Clergy on themselves* and have opposed Papacy beyond the Sea, that they might
settle one beyond the water But these are only the evaporations of some
discontents which that noble Orator had contracted. He had been at great
charges in accommodating himself with necessaries, for waiting on his Majesty
in his first expedition against the Scots, in hope of doing service to his King
and Country, and gaining honor to himself, dismissed upon the Pacifiation (as
most of the English Adventurers) without thanks of honor; where, he made
himself more sensible of the neglect which he conceived he suffered under, then
possibly might consist with those many favors which both Kings had showed unto
his Father. But no sooner had that noble soul dispersed those clouds of
discontent which before obscured it, but he brake out again in his natural
splendour, and showed himself as zealous an advocate for the Episcopal order, as
any other in that house, witness this passage in a speech of his not long
before the dismissing of the Scottish Army. Anno 1641. viz. The Ground of this
Government by Episcopacy is so ancient, and so general, so uncontradicted in
the first and best times that our most laborious antiquaries can find, no
Nation no City, no Church, no Houses under any other, that our first
Ecclesiastical Authors tell us of, that the Apostles not only allowed but
founded Bishops; so that the Tradition for some Books of Scripture, which we
receive as Cunonical, is both less ancient, less General, and less
uncontradicted then that is. We have lived long happily and Gloriously under
this form of Government, it has very well agreed with the Constitutions of our
Laws, with the disposition of our people: How any other will do I the less
know, because I know not of any other, of which so much as any other Monarchy
has had eperience, they all having (as I conceive) at least superintendents
for life; and the mere word Bishop I supposed, is no man's aim to destroy, nor
no man's aim to defend, etc. so that if we should take away a Government which
has as much testimony of the first Antiquity to have been founded by the
Apostles, as can be brought for some parts of Scripture to have been written by
them, my fear is least this may avert some of our Church from us, and rivit
some of the Roman Church to her. So he when he was come again to his former
temper, and not yet entered or initiated into Court Preferments.

54. And thus at last I shall end my trouble and your own, having performed as
much as I proposed to my self in answer to the Historical part of your
Antagonists discourse, in which he labors to evince that the Calvinian
Doctrines by you opposed, are no other then the established Doctrines of the
Church of England. In the managing whereof I could wish he had carried himself
with more Respect toward some great persons whom he ought not to have looked
on but with eyes full of Duty and reverence; and that he had not given me so
just cause to think that by his speaking Evil of Dignities, he may be also one
of those who despise Dominion, I could have wished also, that both M. Baxter and
himself would have given me leave to have worn out the remainder of my days in
peace and quiet* without engaging me in any of those disputes by which they
have given so much trouble to themselves and others. For your part (happy man
be your do^e) I see there is a way chalkt out for your Redintegration. It is
but going over to your Adversary in the point of Election* and Gods invincible
working on the hearts of his chosen ones, and then he does asture you of a
speedy agreement, or at the least, that you should easily bear with one another
in the present Differences. Can M. Pierce remain so obstinate, as not to
hearken to a Pacification, on such easy terms, as giving to his Adversary the
right hand of fellowship, and captivating his own judgment to the sense of
Calvin, the great Dictator, in the Churches of the Reformation, to whom so
many* knees have bowed, and much tribute of obedience has been paid both with
heart and hand? Why do not you offer the same terms, to so kind an adversary,
and tempt him to a Reconciliation on the like conditions; which if he be not
willing to accept when offered, you may then keep your self at that honest
distance, which hitherto has made you unaccessible to all approaches, and kept
you out of the reach of their shot, whether bolts or shafts. What fortune will
befall my self upon this encounter, I am not able to determine; having done
nothing to deserve the just displeasure and little hoping to obtain the favor
of those men, who shall think themselves concerned in it, some men are so in
love with their own opinions, that they do not only hate to be Reformed in the
Psalmists Language, but carry an evil eye toward those who have labored in
it; looking upon them with as much disdain and indignation as Hanun the King of
Ammon did on David's Messengers when he returned them to their Masters with
their beards half shaven, and their Garments cut off in disgrace to their very
buttocks, 2 Samuel 10. 4. But be my fortune what it will, it will, be a most
infinite content unto me, that by my weak endeavors I have contributed any
thing to the Glory of God, the vindication of the truth, the edification of the
Church, and the satisfaction of those pious souls who heartily do pray for the
peace of Jerusalem, and most effectually endeavor to promote the Work. Amongst
which number there is none who can more possionately desire to be entertained,
then

Your most affectionate friend and Brother in Christ Jesus, Peter Heylyn.
Lacies Court in Abingdon, April 15. 1659.

A POSTSCRIPT To the former Papers.
SIR,
AFter I had dispatched the Papers foregoing to the Press, I called to mind a
passage in a Letter, sent from Dr. Ridley, then Bishop of London, to Mr.
Hooper, Bishop of Gloucester (which you shall find, amongst many others, in the
Acts and Monuments) in which he signifies unto him, that though they had
sometimes differed in matter of Ceremony, yet there had been an uniform consent
between them in matter of Doctrine: So that unto the testimonies of Arch Bishop
Cranmer, Bishop Latimer, and Bishop Hooper in maintenance of the cause which
you contend for: you may add also the concurrence of Bishop Ridley; whose
judgment in carrying on the Reformation, was of such Authority, that Canmer
more relied on him then on any other.

I have been also further advertised of two Letters, which are to be seen of M.
Barrets own hand writing, the one to D. Goad, Master of Kings College* the
other to Mr. Chatterton, Master of Emanuel College in Cambridge; in which he
plainly lets them know, That he would never yield to make that recantation, to
which for fear of losing his fellowship, and being expelled the University,
endeavored to draw him; as also that D. Cosens and D. Martin, making a
diligent search into the Registers of the University, could never find any such
Recantation, to have been made by the said Barret, as is exemplified unto us in
the Anti Arminianism, and from thence taken by M. Hickman, though he do not so
much as once acknowledge by whom he profits: and I am the more apt to believe,
that Barret never made the Recantation, which is fathered on him; because it
appears clearly by the Acts themselves, that though he did confess the
Doctrines wherewith he was charged, to have been positively and expressly
delivered by him, yet he averreth as expressly, Quod contenta in iisdem
Religione Ecclesiae Anglicanae omnino noti repugnant, That they contained
nothing contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England.

All that I find in the said Acts, is the enjoining of a Recantation, the
drawing of it into form, and the delivering of it to Barret on the 5. of May,
by him to be published in S. Mary's Church on the Saturday after; and all this
done, when neither the Margaret Professor, was of the same judgment with
Barret, nor the Vice Chancellor himself, whom it concerned as much as any, were
consulted in it: But that Barret ever made this Recantation, or that this
Recantation was the same in all particulars with that which he was required to
publish, depends upon the credit of a scattered Paper; those which have most
insisted on it, appealing rather to private Authors for the proof thereof, then
to the authentic Records of that University: So that when it is said so
positively by M. Prinne, that this Recantation was made by M Barret, on the
10th of May, 1595. in the University Church of S. Marys in Cambridge, and out
of him repeated by Mr. Hickman with as great a confidence, they do both wrong
the dead, and abuse the living. For it appears by a Letter sent from the
heads of Cambridge, to the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, then being Chancellor of
that University, that Barret had not made that Recantation on the 8 of March,
which was full ten months after the said 10 of May, in which the publishing of
this Recantation is affirmed of him. About a year past, say they, (amongst
diverse others, who here attempted publicly to teach new and strange opinions
in Religion) one M. Barret more boldly then the rest, did preach diverse Popish
Errors in St. Marys, to the just offense of many, which he was joined to
retract, but has refused so to do in such sort as has been prescribed him.
Out of which Letter bearing date the 8th of March, 1595. exemplified by M.
Prynn in the Anti-Arminianism (254) and therefore seen by M. Hickman in the
course of that Book, I conclude three things. 1. That M. Prinne, and M. Hickman
have said a Defamation upon Barret, which they cannot justify, as being
contrary to their own knowledge in that particular. 2. That besides Barret
there were diverse others who preached the sad new and strange opinions in
Religion, as the Letter calls them, though not so confidently and boldly, as
Barret did; and 3. That it is not said in the Letter, that Barrets Doctrines
gave offense to all, or the greatest part, but that they gave offense to many;
and if they gave offense but to many only, there must be many others (and
possibly the greatest part) in that University, to whom they gave no offense at
all.

I find also in the Title to this Recantation as it stands in the
Anti-Arminianism (p. 56.) that M. Harsenet of Pembrook-Hall, is there affirmed
to have maintained, the supposed Errors for which Barret was condemned to a
Recantation: And it is strange that Harsnet should stand charged in the Tiltle
of another man's sentence, for holding and maintaining any such points as had
been raked out of the Dunghill of Popery and Pelagianism, as was there affirmed;
for which he either was to have been questioned in his own person, or not to
have been condemned in the title to the Sentences passed on another man. Which
circumstance, as it discredits the Title, so the title does as much discredit
the reality of the recantation: Adeo mendaciorum natura est, ut coherere non
possint, said Lactantius truly. Besides it is to be observed, that Harsnet did
not only maintain the said Opinions in the University, but preached them also at
S. Paul's Cross, Anno 1584. not sparing any of those dious aggravations, with
which the Calvinian Doctrines in those points has been charged by others; and
yet we cannot find that any offense was taken at it, or any recantation
enjoined upon it, either by the High Commission, or the Bishop of London, or
any other having Authority in the Church of England, as certainly there would
have been, if the matter of that Sermon had been contrary to the rules of the
Church, and the appointments of the same: And thereupon we may conclude (were
there no proof else) that where Doctor Baroe had for 14. or 15. years (as is
said in that Letter) maintained those Opinions in the Schools, which M.
Hickman noveliseth by the name of Arminians; and such an able man as Harsnet,
had preached them without any control, and the greatest Audience of the
Kingdom did stand to him in it, There must be many more Barrets who concurred
in the same opinions with them in that University, though their names through
the envy of those times are not come unto us.

And this appears more fully by that which followed on the death of D.
Whitacres, who died within few days after his return from Lambeth, which the
nine Articles so much talked of: Two Candidates appeared for the Professorship
after his decease, Wotton of Kings College, a professed Calvinian, and one of
those who wrote against Mountague's Appeal, Anno 1626. Competitor with Overal
of Trinity College, as far from the Calvinian Doctrine in the main platform of
Predestination, as Baroe, Harsnet, or Barret are conceived to be. But when it
came unto the vote of the University, the place was carried for Overal by the
major part, which plainly shows, that though the Doctrines of Calvin were so
hotly stickled for by most of the heads, yet the most part of the members of
that learned body entertained them not.

And thereby we may guess at another passage, which I find in yo^ Adversary,
where he declares that Peter Baroe's Arminianism c^^ him the loss of his place,
and which was worse, lest him the affect ons of the University. Where first, it
may seem very strange, the Baroe should loose his place for Arminianism, An.
1595. when as t^^ name of Arminianism was not known in England til the year
16^^ Secondly, that he should loose the affection of the University, ^^
maintaining those Doctrines, in which there was such a good compliance betwixt
him and Overal. And therefore thirdly, it is ver^ improbable, that Baroe should
be put out of his place by those wh^ ha^ brought Overal in, after no less then
twenty years experience ^^ his pains and studies: In which respect it is more
likely that he relinquished the place of his own accord, in which he found his
Doctine crossed by the Lambeth Articles, his peace disturbed by sever^
Informations, preferred against him by some of the Calvinians, an^ thereupon a
Letter of complaint presented to the L. Treasurer Burleigh of whose affections
toward him, he seemed more diffident then there was good cause for; so that
the most that can be said, is no more then this, that he was willing to depart
from that place in peace, in which ^e saw he could not live without
disturbance; and therefore that he rather left the place, then the place left
him, though possibly he might see that he could not keep it without loosing
himself.

I began this Postscript with Bishop Ridley. and shall end it with a note
relating to Bishop Laud: Reproached by your Antagonist, for justifying the
picturing of God the Father in the form of an old man, out of that place of
Daniel, where he is called the Ancient of Days; and this (says he) I have from
a Gentleman of good repute, though that Gentleman must not be named, for fear
of being taken notice of for his best Benefactor; the story you may find at
large in Canterburies Doom, fol. 102. 103. where that Author mentions the
censure past upon M. Sherfield, in the Court of Star Chamber, for defacing the
Pictures in one of the windows, in S. Edmunds Church, in the City of Salisbury:
What I have said in this case, as to Sherfields censure, you have seen already;
I shall now add what I then hastily passed over, that is to say, that the
Bishop did not justify the picturing of God the Father in that or any Form
what soever, but only touched upon the reasons which induced some Painters to
that representation, which they grounded on Dan. 7. 9. where God the Father is
not only called the Ancient of Days, to fignifie his Eternity before all time
(which was so much insisted on by the Earl of Dorset) but described after the
similitude of an old man, whose garments were as white as snow, and the hair of
his head like the pure wool, as the Text informs us.

Certamen Epistolare, OR, The Letter Combat. PART. III. Containing a
Decertation about Forms of Government, the power of the Spartan Ephori, and the
Jewish Sanhedrim. Managed Letter-wise between Peter Heylyn, D. D. And J. H. of
the City of Westminster Esquire

Tacit Annal. Lib. 1. Suspecto, Senatus Populique imperio ob certamina
Potentium, and Avaritiam Magistratuum, invalido legum auxilio, quae vi, Ambitu,
postremo Pecunia turbabantur. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1659.

To his ever Honored Friend, S EDWARD FILMER of Sutton, in the County of KENT.
SIR,
HOw great a loss I had in the death of my most dear and honored Friend, your
deceased Father, no man is able to conjecture, but he that has suffered in the
like. So affable was his conversation, his discourse so rational, his Judgment
so exact in most parts of Learning, and his affections to the Church so
exemplary in him, that I never enjoyed a greater felicity in the company of any
man living, then I did in his: In which respects I may affirm both with safety
and modesty, that we did not only take sweet counsel together, but walked in
the House of God as Friends, I must needs say, I was prepared for that great
blow, by the loss of my preferment in the Church of Westminster, which gave me
the opportunity of so dear and beloved a neighborhood; so that I lost him
partly before he* dyed, which made the misery the more supportable, when I was
deprived of him for altogether. But I was never more sensible of the
infelicity, then I am at this present, in reference to that satisfaction, which
I am sure he could have given the Gentleman whom I am to deal with: His eminent
abilities in these Political Disputes, exemplified in his judicious
observations on Aristotle's Politiques; as also in some passages on Grotius,
Hunton, Hobbs, and other of our late Discoursers about Forms of Government,
declare abundantly how fit a Man he might have been, to have dealt in this
cause, which I would not willingly should be betrayed by unskilful^ handling:
And had he pleased to have suffered his Excellent Discourse called Patriarcha
to appear in public, it would have given such satisfaction to all our great
Masters in the Schools of Polity, that all other Tractates in that kind, had
been found unnecessary: But since he cannot be recalled, and that he did not
think it fit while he was alive, to gratify the Nation in publishing that
excellent Piece (which might have served for a Catholicon or General Answer to
all Discourses of this kind) I have adventured on that work, which the
Consciousness of my own inability might deter me from, if the desire of
satisfying the expectation of such a modest and ingenious Adversary, had not
overruled me: Whatsoever I have done therein, as it is now left to the
public Censure, so do I submit it more particularly to your equal Judgment,
in whom there is so much of the Father, as renders you a competent Judge in the
case between us. Which trouble I had sooner given you, but that the Papers lay
so long with a friend in London, before they could find the way to the Press,
that I was put upon the necessity of another Encounter, which was to have
precedence of it in the course of the Book. But it comes time enough to
interrupt your studies and affairs of greater Moment, to be a Testimony of the
confidence I have in your favorable opinion of me, and finally to serve as a
public acknowledgment of those many undeserved civilities, which your Father,
your self, and the rest of your Family, have been from time to time vouchsafed
unto,

SIR, Your most affectionate Friend and Devoted Servant. Peter Heylyn.
Lacies Court in Abingdon, April 20. 1659.
The Answer of P. H. D. D. to the Letter of J. H. Esquire; The Introduction of the
whole.
SIR,
AT my coming to London about Midsommer last, I found some Papers left for me
in the way of a Letter (at my accustomed Rendezvous) with this following Title,
viz. The Stumbling Block of Disobedience and Rebellion, cunningly imputed by P.
H. unto Calvin; Removed in a Letter to the said P. H. from J. H. By which Title
of Superscription, it was easy to know whom you had designed for your Adversary
in the two first Letters; and it was not hard for me to find by the two last
Letters, with whom I was to deal, having received some advertisment of it from
a friend in Oxon, before I set forwards on my journey. The Papers being put
into my hands, I could no longer defer the curiosity of having them read over
to me, then the withdrawing into a more convenient room must of necessity
admit; and having had them read over to me. I found my self pressed with this
Dilemma, that either I must return an answer to you, or confess the whole Book
to be answered by you. I found no reason for the last, and therefore thought it
more convenient to give you content in the first with as much convenience as I
could. But I had then other fish to fry, whereof perhaps you may have tasted
before this time. Nor was I without other businesses, which as they brought me
to the City, so they occasioned a longer stay there then I first intended. In
the mean time a book of one Mr. Baxter's was by chance offered to my perusal,
in which I found my self concerned, and so concerned, that I thought it safer
to venture somewhat on your patience, then to sink under those Reproaches which
were laid upon me. In which till I had satisfied both my self and him, I could
not give my thoughts the leisure of rendering you that satisfaction which you
had required. But having now dispatched with him, I shall be the betterable to
attend your Motions; and shall therefore follow after you step by step as you
move before me. I must confess you are an Adversary whom I looked not for, Non
expectato vulnus ab host venit. In the Poets words; but then I must confess
withal that I am fallen into the hands of a generous Adversary, of whom I am
sure of fair quarter, if I should be vanquished, and no reviling Language (as I
have had of late from others) should I win the day; and to be overcome by such
an enemy, is a kind of Victory. With this encouragement I put my self into the
lists, notwithstanding all those disadvantages which appear against me; You
coming fresh into the field, well seconded, and daily exercised in those
Political Disputes, which either I have never managed, or (being tired and
broken with other businesses) have long since dis-used.

2. But first I am to purge my self (according to the old known Laws of Duel)
from having about me any spells, any charms or Magical spells, from being
guilty of that cunning and indirect proceedings which you put upon me. Those
two words, cunningly imputed, which I find in your Title, are many in effect,
though few in number, and tend to render me shspected of fraud and forgery, as
if I had laid a stumbling block before Calvin's doors, which bind no Grammatical
Construction, or by any Logical inference can be gathered from them. But if you
look upon us both with a single and impartial eye, you will find no such
cunning in me, (for I am not of his mind) who said, Dolus an virtus quis in
boste requirat. Nothing but plain and down* right dealing, nothing but what the
Scots Commissioners collected from those words of Calvin to justify their
disobedience and rebellion against their own most rightful Queen, whom they had
persecuted, and deposed, and driven out of her Kingdom; a full account whereof
I have given elsewhere, both in the Preface to that book of which you have
undertaken the Confutation, and in the 128th Section of my answer to Mr.
Baxters Letter, in either of which you may consult it. And secondly, I must
crave leave according to the Laws of Duel, to take the length of your weapon,
that I may fit my own unto it. I mean, that with your leave and liking, I may
take the measure of your Letter, transcribing it line for line, and word for
word, as it came unto me, that my answer may be fitted and proportioned to it.
Without which I can neither manage the Combat, as I ought to do, nor the
spectators be delighted with the sight thereof as they ought to be; Nor such as
are to judge between us can be enabled to determine as of right they ought, to
whom the victory belongs. Hanc veniam petimusque damusque vicissim. as you
know who said. Now the Copy of your Letter is as follows.

The Letter of J. H. to P. H.
SIR,
I Gave my Judgment upon your late Book (that I mean against Calvin) in such
manner among some Gentlemen, that they desired me to write something in answer
to it, which if there happen to be need, I may; In the mean time, it will
perhaps be enough, if I acquaint you with as much as I have acquainted them. In
this Book of yours, you speak some things as a Politician only, others as a
Politician and a Divine too. Now to repeat a few, and yet as many I think as
are needful of each kind, I shall begin with the former.

The Rise, Progress, and Period of the Commonwealth of Lacedemon is observable
in Authors by these steps.

1. The insufficiency of the Monarchy. 2. The Form of the Commonwealth. 3. An
infirmity in the Form, and a cure of it. 4. The corruption and dissolution of
the whole.
All which happened within the compass of 800 years.

To the first you say, That the Spartan Kings were as absolute Monarchs as any
in those times, till Eurytion or Eurypon to procure the good will of the
Rascal-rabble page 39, 40, 41.
(so you commonly call the People) purchased nothing by the loss of Royalty
besides an empty name unto his family, thence called the Eurypontidae.

It is true that Plutarch in the life of Lycurgus says that Eurypon was the
first, who to obtain favor with the people, let loose the reins of Government;
and this he says there without showing any necessity that lay upon the King so
to do; Nevertheless that such necessity there was, is apparent in Agis, where
he affirms, that a King of Lacedemon could never come to be equal unto any
other King, but only by introducing equality among the people; forasmuch as a
Servant or Lieutenant of Seleucus or Ptolemy, was worth more then ever were all
the Kings of Sparta put together. Which latter speech, if a man consider the
narrowness of the Laconick Territory, being but a part of Peloponesus, must
needs evince the former action to have been not so voluntary in Eurypon, as in
prudence unavoidable. But Eurypon having by this means rather confessed the
infirmity of the Monarchy, then introduced any cure of the Government, it
remained that the people, not yet brought under fit orders, must needs remain
in disorders, as they did, till the Institution of the Commonwealth.

The Monarchy that is or can be absolute must be founded upon an Army planted
by Military Collonies, upon the overbalance of Land, being in the Dominion of
the Prince, and in this case there can neither be a nobility, nor a people to
gratify, at least without shaking the foundation, or dis-obliging the Army.
Wherefore the Spartan Kings having a Nobility or People to gratify, were not
absolute. It is true you call the Kings of France absolute, so do others, but
it is known that in the whole world there is not a Nobility nor a People so
frequently flying out or taking Arms against their Princes, as the Nobility and
people of France.

The Monarch that is founded upon a Nobility, or a Nobility and the People (as
by the rise and progress of the Norman Line in our Story is apparently
necessary) must gratify the Nobility, or the Nobility and the People, with
such Laws and Liberties as are fit for them, or the Government, as we have
known by experience, is found in France, and no doubt was seen by Eurypon,
becomes tyrannical, be the Prince otherwise never so good a man.

Thus Caril^^s (in whose Reign the Commonwealth was instituted by Lycurgus) is
generally affirmed to have been a good man, and yet said by Aristotle to have
been a Tyrant; It remains therefore with you to show how a good man can
otherwise be a Tyrant then by holding Monarchial Government without a
sufficient balance, or if you please* how he that shall undertake the like (be
he never so good, or well deserving a man) can be any other; or confess that
not the favor of Princes (by which if they be well balanced they lose
nothing) nor the usurpation of the people (by which without a popular balance
they get nothing) but the infirmity of the Monarchy, caused the Commonwealth
of Lacedemon. And what less is said by Plutarch, or thus rendered by your self:
Not the people only sent Messages to Lycurgus for his counsel, but the Kings
were as desirous he should return from his travels, in hope that his presence
would bridle and restrain the people; but Lycurgus applied not himself unto
either, being resolved to frame both into one Common wealth.

To the form of this Commonwealth you say, That whatsoever the King lo^^, the
people got little by this alteration, being left out of all employment in
affairs of State, and forced to yield obedience unto 30. Masters, whereas
before they had but two: A strong affirmation, seeing the Oracle containing the
Model of Lacedemon, is thus recorded by your Author. When thou have divided the
people into Tribes and Lineages, thou shall establish the Senate, consisting
with the two Kings, of thirty Senators, and assemble the people as there shall
be occasion, where the Sena^e shall propose, and dismiss the people, without
suffering them to debate. Now who sees not, that the people having no right to
debate, must therefore have had the right to resolve, or else were to be
assembled for nothing? But the ultimate result is the sovereign Power in every
Government: It is true, the Greek of the Oracle is absolute and abstruce; but
then it is not only interpreted by Plutarch, in the sense I have given; but by
the verses of the Poet Tyrteus, which the Kings themselves, though they would
have made other use of, acknowledged unto the people to be Authentic.

They having of Apollo sought,
This Oracle from Delphos brought,
Unto the Spartan Kings, among
The Senators, it does belong
To moderate in Royal Chairs,
And give their votes in all Affairs;
And when they have proposed these,
The people choose what are they please.
Of many other testimonies, I shall add no more then one, out of Isocrates: I
am not ignorant (says he to the Areopagites) that the Lacedaemonians flourish,
for this cause especially, that their Government is popular. To the infirmity
of this form, and the cure of it, you say, That the Royalty and power of page
45.
the Kings being thus impaired, the people absolutely discharged from having
any hand at all in public Government, and the Authority of the Senate growing
every day more insolent and predominant, by reason that (albeit the Senators
were elected by the people) they had their places for term of life; the Kings
resolved upon a course of putting the people into such a condition, as might
enable them to curb and control the Senators) to which end they ordained the
Ephori. Magistrates to be annually chosen out of the body of the people.

In which first you make that to be a practice of the Kings against the Senate,
which by your Author is plain to have been a combination of the Kings and the
Senate against the people; for the people upon the insolency and predominancy
of the Kings and the Senate, fell, as in that case, the inevitable nature of
them, upon counsel how to defend themselves, and so assumed the power of
debate. Hereupon the Kings Theopompus and Polidore would have added unto the
tenor of the Oracle, that if the people went about by debate to change the
propositions of the Senate, it should be lawful for the Kings and Senate to
null the result of the people, which practice if it had past, must have made
the Kings and the Senate altogether uncontrollable. Wherefore the people
incensed at it, put a bitt into the mouth of the Senate by the institution of
the Ephori. This is the clear sense of Plutarch which he takes out of Plato,
who affirms the de lege 3. Pol. l. 2. de leg. 31.
Ephorate to have been set up against the Hereditary Power of the Kings, with
whom agree both Aristotle and Cicero; the former affirming in as much as the
people have obtained it, were quiet, and the latter that the Ephori in
Lacedemon were so opposed to the Kings, as the Tribunes in Rome to the Consuls.
Now if other Authors attribute the institution of Ephori unto the Kings, and
there be a story as well affirmed by Plutarch as others, that Theopompus having
created the Ephori, and being told by his Queen, he had done that which would
leave narrower power to his children, answered well, that it would leave
narrower but longer. This is neither any riddle nor kind of contradiction to
the former sense, seeing, when we say, that Hen. 3. instituted, the Parliament
to be assistant to him in his Government, we do no more doubt of that then how
it is to be understood, nor if his Queen had said, as she of Lacedemon, and our
King had made the like answer, would that have altered any thing or proved the
woman to have been (as you well have it) the better Prophet, seeing either
Government lasted longer for either Reformation, nor came to alter, but through
the alteration of the Balance, which was nothing to the woman's Prophecy.

The ruin of this Balance, and corruption of the Common*wealth you wholly
omit, to the end, that picking up your objections against the Government in
vigor. Out of the rubbish and dissolution of it, you may cast dust in men's
eyes, or persuade them, that the Ephori trusting to the power and interest they
had in the Commonalty, came to usurp upon the Kings, and to be Tyrants as they
are called by Plato and Aristotle, so you affirm.

But the truth is thus recorded by Plutarch in the life of Agis. So soon as the
Lacedaemonians having ruined Athens, became so full of gold and silver, the
Commonwealth began to break; Nevertheless the lots and division of Lands made
by Lycurgus yet remaining, the equality of the foundation held good till
Epitadeus an ill natured fellow became Ephore, and having a mind to dis-inherit
his son, got a Law to pass, whereby any man might dispose of his lot as he
pleased: This by him pursued of meet malice to his son, was hurried on by the
avarice of others whose riches came thus to eat the people out of their lands,
that in a short time there remained not above an hundred Free holders in all
Sparta. This he shows to have been the rise of the Oligarchy. The Oligarchy
thus balanced totally excluded the people, and murdered Agis the first King
that was ever put to death by the Ephori, and to these times (about which Plato
and Aristotle lived) relates that tyranny which they who (as was shown)
commended the Ephorate in the Commonwealth, now laid unto it in Oligarchy. Thus
have you fetched an argument against a Commonwealth that are nothing to it.
Again, whereas Agis and Cleomenes, by the restitution of the lots of Lycurgus,
were Asserters of popular power, you insinuate them to have been Asserters of
Monarchy, such is your play with humane Authors, or as a Politician: Now let us
see, whether you have dealt any thing better with Scripture, or been more
careful as a Divine. In order to this Discovery I shall repeat that piece of
Calvin, which you call the stumbling block of disobedience. Calvin having
preached obedience Call. Just. l. c. 20. Sect. 31.
to your good approbation, comes at length to this expression. But still I must
be understood of private persons; for if there be now any popular Officers
ordained to moderate the licentiousness of Kings (such as were the Ephori, set
up of old against the Kings of Sparta. The Tribunes of the people against the
Roman Consuls, and the Demarches against the Athenian State, of which perhaps
a^ the world now goes, they three estates are seized in each several Kingdom,
when solemnly assembled) so far am I from hindering them to put restraints upon
the exorbitant power of Kings as their office binds them, that I conceive them
rather to be guilty of perfidious dissimulation, if they connive at Kings when
they play the Tyrants, or wantonly insult on the people; in that so doing they
betray the Liberty of the Subject, of which they know themselves to be made
Guardians by Gods own Ordinance.

What Calvin says of the Athenian Demarches (they having been Magistrates of
another nature) is a mistake, but such an one, as destroys no other part of his
assertion, the rest of the Parenthesis, or that which he says of the Ephori
and the Tribunes, being confirmed, as has been already shown, by Plato and
Aristotle, by Cicero and Plutarch. Wherefore of the Ephori and the Tribunes
enough; Now why the Estates in a Gothic Moddel should be of less power, no
Politician in the world shall ever show a reason; the Estates are such by
virtue of their Estate, that is, of their overbalance in Dominion: You are
then either speculatively to show, how the overbalance of Dominion should not
amount unto Empire, or practically, that the overbalance of Dominion has not
amounted unto Empire, and that in a quiet Government, or can it be no otherwise
in a quiet Government then that the overbalance of Dominion must amount unto
Empire. This principle being now sufficiently known is the cause it may be why
you choose in this place to speak rather like a Divine, as you suppose, then a
Politician, for you would fain learn, you say, of Calvin, in what part of the
world we shall find any such Authority given to such popular Magistrates as he
tells us of.

To which by the way I answer, that God founded the Israelitish Government upon
a popular balance, that we find the people of Israel judging the tribe of
Benjamin, and by the Oracle of God levying War against them, which are acts of
sovereign power, therefore a popular balance even by the Ordinance Judge. 20.
of God himself expressed in scripture, amounted unto Empire.

But you (when you have asked in what part of p. 29.
the word of God we shall find any such Authority given to popular Magistrates)
Answer, Not in the Old Testament you are sure; For when Moses first ordained
the seventy Elders, it was not to diminish any part of that power which was
invested in him, but to ease himself of some part of the burden lying upon
him, as you will have to appear plainly by the 18th of Exodus, where Moses upon
the advice of Jethro, chose able men out of all Israel, made them Rulers of
thousands, Rulers of Hundreds, Rulers of fifties, Rulers of tens. Now I am sure
that about this time, the number of these men of Israel was above 6 hundred
thousand, and so any man may be sure that the Elders Number. 1. 46.
thus chosen (should we count but the Rulers of the thousands only) must have
come at the least to six hundred, wherefore you cannot be sure that this makes
any thing to the election of the 70. Elders.

Well, But out of these (say you) God afterward, in the 11th of Numb. willed
Moses to choose the seventy Elders.

You may do me a greater favor then you can suddenly imagine, to tell me
really for what cause or upon what Authority your speech is so positive, that
God willed Moses to choose the seventy Elders out of those that were chosen in
the 18. of Exodus; for whereas Moses is willed to choose them out of such as he
knew to be Elders, such there were in Honor among the people, though not in
power before the Election of those advised by Jethro, as appears, Exodus 3. 16*
and 4. 29. But had this been as you would have it, what is the necessity, that
because there lay an appeal unto Moses from those in Exodus (that is from the
Jethronian Elders, or Courts which sat afterward in the Gates of the Temple,
and of every City) therefore there must needs lie an appeal from the seventy
Elders, or the Sanhedrim unto Moses; Especially while the whole stream of
Jewish Writers, or Talmudists (who should have had some knowledge in their own
Commonwealth) unanimously affirm that there was no such thing: whereupon to the
Election of the former Elders, says Grotius, In the place of these Gro. ad Ex.
18. 21.
came the Judges in the Gates, and in the place of Moses, the Sanhedrim. Nor
need we go further then the Scripture, for the certainty of the Assertion,
where the seventy are chosen, not to stand under Moses, but with him not to
diminish his burden, or bear it under him with an appeal in difficult cases to
him, as is expressed in the Election of the Jethronian Elders, but to bear the
burden with Number. 21.
him, and without any mention of such appeal. Moses before the Election of the
Jethronian Judges, had the whole burden of Judicature lying upon him, after
their Election the burden of the Appeals only: Wherefore if the seventy
Elders were indeed instituted to bear the burden with Moses, there thenceforth
lay noappeal unto Moses, which is yet clearer in this precept; If there arise a
matter of Controversy within thy Gates (which is plainly addressed unto the
Jethronian Courts) too hard for thee in Judgment, then shall thou come unto
the Priest, and the Levite, (by which in the sense of all Authors, Jewish and
Christian, is understood the Sanhedrim, or to the Judge that shall be in those
days (the Suffes or Dictator) and they shall show thee the sentence of Deuteronomy.
17. 8.
Judgment; whence by the clear sense of Scripture, all matter of appeal in
Israel lay unto the Sanhedrim. Your next Argument, that there must be nothing
in all this but easing the supreme Magistrate of some part of the burden,
which was before two heavy for him, without any diminution, in the least
respect of his power, is that when God had taken of the spirit which was upon
Moses, and put it upon the seventy Elders, the spirit yet rested upon Moses in
as full a measure as it did at first: I grant in a fuller, for I believe his
wisdom was the greater; for this diminution of his power, it being through the
nature of the balance, apparently impossible that he could be any more then a
Prince in a Commonwealth; but your Argument can be of no force at all, unless
you will have him to have been less wise, for not assuming sovereign power,
where without confusion it was altogether impossible he should have held it. A
Prince in a Commonwealth subsisteth by making himself, or being made use of
unto the free course of Popurall Orders; but a sovereign Lord can have no other
substance or security, then by cutting off and tearing up all roots that do
naturally shoot and spring up into such branches. To conclude, if the
Congregation of the People, in law to be made, had such power as was shown, and
in the law, so made, the ultimate Appeal lay unto the Sanhedrim; why are not
here two Estates in this Commonwealth, each by Gods own Ordinance, and both
plain in Scripture? Well, but when they came (you will say) to make unto
themselves Kings, what ever power they had formerly was now lost; this at best
were but to dispute from the folly of a people against an Ordinance of God, for
what less is testified by himself in those words to Samuel, They have not
rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them.
The Government of the Senate and the people, is that only which is or can be
the Government of Laws. The Government of Laws is that only which is or can
be the Government of God, and not of men. He that is for the Government of
Laws; Arist. Pol. 3. c. 12.
is for the Government of God; and he that is for the Government of Man, is for
the Government of a Beast. Kings no question, where the balance is
Monarchical, are of divine right, and if they be good, the gr^atest blessing,
the Government, so standing, can be capable of: but the balance being popular,
as in Israel, in the Gretian, in the Scicilian Tyranny, they are the direst
curse that can befall a Nation. Nor are Divines, who will always have them to
be of divine right, to be hearkened too, seeing they affirm that which is clean
contrary to Scripture; for in this case, says Hosea, They have set up Kings,
and Hos. 8. 4.
not by me they have Princes, and I knew it not Pharaoh may impose the making
of Brick without the allowance of straw, but God never required of any men, or
of any Government, that they should live otherwise then according to their
Estates: It is true, if a Man want, make him a servant, there are rules in
Scripture that enjoin him the duty of a servant; but show me the rule in
Scripture, that obliges a man who can live of himself unto the duty of a
servant. Has God* less regard unto a Nation then a man? yet the people of
Israel continuing upon a popular Agrarian, though God forewarned them, that by
this means they would make themselves servants, would needs have a King; whence
says the same Prophet, O Israel thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is
thine help, I will be thy King, (which foretells the restitution of the
Commonwealth) Where is any other that may save thee in all thy Cities? and thy
Judges of whom thou said, give me a King and Princes; I gave th^e a King in
mine anger (that is in Saul) and I took him away in my wrath (that is in the
Captivity) so at least says Rabbi Bechai, with whom agreed Nachmony Gers^ho^e,
and others. Kimchy it is true, and Maim^^ides are of opinion that the people
making a King, displeased God not in the matter, but in the form only, as if
the root of a Tree, the balance of a Government, were form only and not
matter; nor do our Divines yet, who are divided into like parties, see more
then the Rabbis: Both the Royalists and the Common*wealths men of such sort,
that is, whether Divines or Talmudists appeal unto the letter of the Law, which
the Royalists (as the translators of the Bible) render thus, When they shall
say, the Commonwealths men (a^ Diodatus) thus) If thou come to say) I will set
a King over me, like all the Nations that are about me, thou shall in any wise
set him King over the^, whom the Lord thy God shall choose. The one party will
have the Law to be positive, the other contingent, and with a mark of
detestation upon it, for so where God speaks of his peoples doing any thing,
like the Nations that were about them, it is every where else understood; but
let these which are no niceties be as you will, who sees not that to argue from
this place, for the necessity of the King, is as if one from that foregoing
should argue for the necessity of the Judges. The words are, these, Thou shall
come unto the High Priest and to the Levite, (which as was said was unto the
Sanhedrim) and (that is or) to the Judge that shall be in those days; yet that
the Judge not by any necessity employed in these words, but through the mere
folly of the people, came to be set up in Israel, is plain by Josephus, where
he shows that the Israelites B^. 5. c. 2
laying by their Arms, and betaking themselves unto their pleasures, while they
did not as God had commanded, root out the Canaanites from among them, but
suffered them to dwell with them, suffered also the form of their Commonwealth
to be corrupted, and the Senate to be broken, the Senators nor other solemn
Magistrates being Elected as formerly, which both in word and fact is also
confirmed by the Scripture: In words, as where it is thus written; When Josuah
had let the people go, (that is, had dismissed the Army, and planted them upon
their popular balance) the children of Israel went every man unto his
inheritance to possess the Land, and the people served the Lord all the days of
Josuah* and all the days of the Elders that out lived Josuah, (that is, while
the Sanhedrim continued after him; but when the Elders hereof came to dye, and
the people elected them no successors) they did evil in the sight of the Lord
(and having broken their civil Orders, forsook also their Religion, the
Government whereof depended upon the Sanhedrim) and served Baalim. And for the
matter of fact included in these words, it farther appears, where Judah says
unto Simeon his brother, Come up with me into my lot, that we may fight against
the Canaanites, and I Judge. 1. 3.
likewise will go with thee into thy let; so Simeon went with him. By which the
Tribes leaguing at their pleasure one with another, it is plain, that the
Sanhedrim their common ligament was broken: now except a Man shall say, that
this neglect of Gods Ordinance was according unto the Law of God, there is no
disputing from that Law to the necessity of the Judge, which happened through no
other then this Exigence ( quippe aut rex, quod abominandum, Pacuvi^^ ap. Livi.
lib. 23.
aut quod unum liberae civitatis consilium est, Senatus habendus est) wherefore
the judge of Israel was not necessitated by the will of God, but foreseen only
by his providence, not imposed by the Law, but provided by it as expedient in
case of necessity; and if no more can be pleaded from the Law, for the Judge,
against whom God never declared, much less is there to be pleaded from the same
for the King, against whom he declared so often. There is nothing more clear
nor certain in Scripture, then that the Commonwealth of Israel was instituted
by God, the Judges and the King no otherwise then through the imprudence and
impotency of the people; But you who have no better name for the people in a
Commonwealth, then the Rascal Rabble, will have Kings at a venture to be of
Divine right, and to be absolute, where as in truth, if divine right be derived
unto Kings from these of the Hebrews, only it is most apparent that no
absolute King can be of Divine right: For these Kings if they were such by the
Law alleged, then by the same Law they could neither multiply Horses, nor
wives, nor Silver, nor Gold, without which ^o King can Dan. 1. 7.
be absolute; but were to keep all the words of this Law, and these Statutes,
and so by consequence were regulated Monarchs; nay could of right Enact no Law,
but as those by David, for the reduction of the Ark, for the regulation of the
Priests, for the Election of Solomon, which were made by the suffrage of the
people, no otherwise then those under the Kings of Rome, and ours under the
late Monarchy, what then is attributed by Calvin unto popular Magistrates, that
is not confirmed by Scripture and reason? yet nothing will serve your turn, but
to know what power there was in the Sanhedrim to control their Kings* to which
I answer, that both Skickardus and Grotius, with the full consent of the
Talmudists have assured you, that in case the King came to violate those Laws
and Statutes, it was in the power of the Sanhedrim, to bring him unto corporal
punishment. Moreover it is shown by the latter out of Josephus, that Hircanus
when he could De jure Blac. p. lib. 1. chapter 1.
not deliver Hierom from the Sanhedrim by power, he did it by art: Nor is your
evasion so good as that of Hircanus, while you having nothing to say to the
contrary, but that Herod when he was questioned was no King, shuffle over the
business without taking notice as to the point in controversy, that Hircanus
who could not save Herod, from the question was King.

The manner of the restitution of the Sanhedrim made by Jehoshaphat, plainly
shows, that even under the Monarchy* the power of the Sanhedrim was
coordinate with that of the King, at least such is the judgment of the Jewish
Writers; for says Grotius, the King (as is rightly noted by the Talmudists)
was not to judge in some cases, and to this the words of Zedekiah seem to
relate, whereto the Sanhedrim demanding the Prophet Jeremiah, he said, Behold
he is in your hands, for the King is not Jer. 38. 5.
he that can do any thing without you; nor (except David) had ever any King
Session or vote in this Council: to which soon after he adds, that this Court
contiued till Herod, the Great, whose insolency, when exalting it self more and
more against the Law, the Senator had not in time as they ought, suppressed by
their power, God punished them in such a manner for the neglect of their duty;
that they came all to be put to death, Herod except Sameae only, whose
foresight and frequent warning of this or the like calamity, they had as
frequently contemned: In which words Grotius following the unanimous consent of
the Talmudists (if they knew any thing of their own orders) expressly
attributes, the same power unto the Sanhedrim, and charge them with the same
dury in Israel, that is attributed unto the three Estates in a Gothic Moddel,
and charged upon these by Calvin.

Thus that there never lay any appeal from the Sanhedrim unto Moses (except
when the Jews were in captivity* or under provincial Government) to any other
Magistrate; as also that they had power upon their Kings, being that your self
say, I^ the objection paramount, and which not answered, you confess that the
three Estates convened in Parliament, or any other papular Magistrate Calvin
dreams of, notwithstanding any discontinuance, or non-usage on p. 289
their parts, or any prescription, alleged by Kings to the contrary, may
resume and exercise that authority which God has given them, when ever they
shall find a fit time for it. And this letter showing plainly that you have in
no wise answered this objection; it remains that your whole Book (even
according to your own acknowledgement) is confuted by this letter, Or if you be
of another mind, I shall hope to hear further from you.


3. These are the very words of that you Letter to which an answer is required,
though to no part thereof, but that which does concern the Spartan Ephori, and
the Jewish Sanhedrim, I can (by any rules of disputation) be required to answer
the rest of your discourse, touching the balancing or overbalancing of such
degrees and ranks of men, of which all Government; consist, is utterly
Extrinsecally and extravagant unto my design; which was not to dispute the
several forms of Government, and in what the differences between them did most
especially consist; but only to declare that neither the Spartan Ephori; nor
any such popular Magistrates as Calvin dreams of, had any authority originally
invested in them to control their Kings, much less to murder or depose them.
Howsoever I shall not purposely pass by any thing, which by your self or any
indifferent Reader shall be thought material, without giving you my judgment
and opinion in it.

Some things (you say) I writ as a Politician (a silly one I am, God help me)
and some things as a Politician, and divine too. And as a Politician* I am
charged by you to have affirmed, that the Spartan Kings were as absolute
Monarchs as any in those times, till Euripon the 3d. King of the Race of
Hercules, and the 2d. King of the younger house, to procure the favor and good
will of the Rascal rabble loosened the raigns of Government, and thereby much
diminishing the Regal power. This I affirm indeed, and this you deny; but you
neither Answer my Authorities nor confute my Reasons; my Authorities I derive
from Plutarch first, who speaking of the said Euripon, whom he calls Eurition
affirms, that till his time the Government of Sparta was, (...), sufficiently
Monarchical, if it were not more. (And secondly, from Aristotle, who calls the
Government of Charilaus, the sixth King of that House (who as you say was
generally affirmed to be a good man) by the name of a tyranny. And if it might
be called a Tyranny then when the Regal power was under such a diminution by
the folly of Euripon, there is no question to be made but that the Spartan
Kings were absolute Monarchs before any such diminution had been made. To these
two proofs you answer nothing, nor say you any thing at all in confutation of
the Reason by me brought to prove it: Which is, That having acquired the Estate
by conquest, and claiming by no other title then by that of Armies, there was
no question to be made, but that they Governed in the way of absolute Monarchs;
it being not the guise of such as come in by conquest, to covessant and
capitulate with their Subjects, but to impose their will for a Law upon them:
This being the custom of all Kings who claim by conquest, it must belong to
you to prove the contrary, and tell me why the Spartan Kings should not observe
the same rule in the Acts of Government as all others did. Crowns which are
purchased by the Sword seldom sit fast upon the head of the Conquerors, if
they deliver up that Sword by which they were purchased: And therefore it was
noted for a great error in Julius Caesar (a man of greater parts and power then
a King of Sparta) to hope that he might hold that supreme Authority by love of
the people, which he got by force of Arms, and was so to hold it.

Against this you object, First, That the Spartan Kings could not be absolute,
because they had a Nobility and People to gratify. But then you should have
told us by what rule in Government, the Spartan Kings who preceded Eurypon,
could be obliged to gratify either the People or Nobility of that Country,
which they had conquered by the Sword. And whereas you allege in defense of
Eurypon, That his letting loose the Reins of Government, to obtain favor with
the people, was a confession of the infirmity of the Monarchy, and that his
Action in so doing, was not so voluntary in it self, as unavoidable imprudence.
It was indeed a plain confession of the infirmity of the Monarch, in not being
able to hold the Kingdom in the same Estate, in which it had been held by his
Father and Grand father: Of the infirmity of the Monarchy, that is to say, the
form of Government by them established, and to which the Spartans formerly had
been accustomed, I cannot think it to be any confession at all; nor can I see
how that imprudent Act of his, can be affirmed to have been unavoidable in
point of prudence, by that which you produce from the words of Agis, the five
and twentieth King of Sparta of the younger house, where he affirms, that a
King of Sparta could never come to be equal unto any other King but only by
introducing equality among the people. But first a King of Sparta might be as
absolute in his own Dominions as any other King whatsoever of a larger
Territory, with whom he could not be thought equal in power and Riches: The
absoluteness or Autocraty of Kings (if I may so call it) depending not upon the
greatness of their revenues, or extent of Empire, but only in their form of
Government. And secondly, I would fain know how by the introducing an equality
among the people, could render a poor King of Sparta equal to any other King,
either of any greater power or larger Territory. It was not possible for Agis
(a^ he said himself in his address unto his Mother) se alios reges pecunia
aquare posse, to equal other Kings in wealth and riches; and therefore he
resolved upon some exploit by which his name and reputation might grow great in
the sight of the people; and no exploit seemed in his eyes so probable to
obtain that name and reputation which he aimed at, then by introducing equality
among the people, which probably might make him a great King in the love and
estimation of the common people (for I must no longer call them the Rascal
rabble) though in no bodies else. Nor could the low condition of the Kings of
Sparta impose any such necessity upon Eurypon to change the Government, as you
say it did; neither Eurypon nor any of his Successors increasing either in
power or riches, by the alteration; and finally, whereas you seem to justify
this necessity by those words of Agis, in which he told his Mother, That a
Servant or Lieutenant of Selinus or Ptolomey was worth more then ever were all
the Kings of Sparta put together. First, Agis speaks not of any of the
Lievtenants of those two Princes, who possibly might amass more treasures then
all the Kings of Sparta had done before, but only of the Servants of those
Leivtenants; for it is Satraparum famuli, and servi Procuratorum, in the
translation of Xyland, with which (not having the Greek by me) I content my
self. And secondly, these words being spoken of the Servants of such
Lievtenants, and of the Servants of such great Persons, which lived under
either of those two Kings, must needs have more of Rhetorique in them then of
real truth: For Agis did not only tell the people, when he came to put this
project in execution, that he would devide amongst them his own Fields and
Pastures, of which he had very many in his own possession; but that he would
deliver up ten thousand Talents, to be put into the common Treasury: And if
this one King were so rich in Lands, and so stored with Money ( Dives agris,
dives positis in soenore nummis) it must be very strange to think that a
Servant of any of the Princes, or Lievtenants of either of the said two Kings,
should be worth more then all the Kings of Sparta, were they put together.

4. But here before we can proceed, I must clear my self from that Parenthesis
of yours, in which you say, that I commonly call the people by the name of
Rascal rabble, as in another place you tell me that I have no better name for
them then that; but I hope you do not, and I am sure you cannot gather out of
any such words, that I bestow that title on the people generally, which either
make up the main body of a Common wealth, or comprehend all sorts of people
which are not in the Rank and order of titular Nobility. There is a great
difference in the ellegancy and propriety of the Latin tongue, between Plebs
and Populus, Populus signifying sometimes the agregative body of a State, as,
Irasci populo Romano nemo sapienter potest, in the words of Livie. Sometimes all
such of a State or Nation that are not in places of command, as, Senatus
populusque Romanus, in the vulgar style of Republic: But Plebs is of lower
alloy, relating unto none but those of inferior quality, as Laborers,
Handicrafts, Artificers, which commonly make up the greatest part of a State or
Nation, and yet pass under the account of the Rout or Rabble: And such are they
of whom Aristotle tells us in his Books of Politiques, That they are not only
base or wicked Judges in their own Cases, and that many of them differ little
from Beasts. You may do well to quarrel him for the one, or not me for the
other.

5. In the next place you let us know, That the Monarchy that is or can be
absolute, must be founded upon an Army planted by military Colonies upon the
over balance of Land being in the Dominion of the Prince. And so far I concur
in opinion with you, (seeing it proved by late experience amongst our selves)
that no Prince can be an absolute Monarch without an Army; that is to say
without some standing Forces, to be ready at command upon all occasions. But
then what reason have you to think that Aristodemus having conquered the Realm
of Sparta, did not withal keep up his Army to secure the conquest, and that
this Army or some other was not kept on foot, till the time of Euripon, who
being either of weaker parts, or more apt to be wrought on, or else unwilling
to be at the continual charge of paying an Army; might suppose it an high point
of Husbandry, to disband his Forces, and cast himself entirely on the love of
the people. And secondly, Admitting that of the two former Kings, what reason
can you give me why that Army should be planted in Colonies; the territory of
Sparta (as you say your self) being very narrow, and consequently not much
room, nor any necessity at all for many such Colonies to be planted in it. A
standing Army answerable to the extent of the Country, and the number of the
old inhabitants, disposed of in their Summer Camp, and their Winter Quarters,
would have done the work, and done it with less charge and greater readiness,
then dispersed in Colonies. And therefore when you say in such general terms,
That the Monarchy that is or can be absolute, must be founded upon an Army
planted by military Colonies upon the over balance of Land being in the
Dominion of the Prince; I must profess my self to differ in opinion from you.
For then how could a Prince possessed of his Kingdom from a long descent of
Royal Ancestors, and exercising absolute power upon his people, be said to be
an an absolute Monarch, because his standing forces cannot be settled or
disposed of in any such Colonies, upon the over balance of Land within his
Dominion. In Countries newly conquered, or far remote fom the chief residence
of the Prince, or the seat of the Empire, such Colonies have been thought
necessary in the former Ages; the wisdom of the Romans not finding out any
better or more present way to serve their Conquest. But then such Colonies
wanted not their inconveniences, and may in time produce the different Effect
from that which was expected of them. For being possessed of City, and endowed
with Lands, and challenging a property in those Lands and Cities, they came in
tract of time by intermariages and alliances to be all one with the old Natives
of the Country, and stood as much upon their terms against the encroachments of
those Princes under whom they served, and by whose Ancestors they were planted.
A better Evidence whereof we can hardly find then in those English Colonies
which were planted in Ireland at the first conquest of that Kingdom; many of
which by mutual correspondency and alliances became so imbodied with the Irish
that they degenerated at the last, from the manner and civility of the English
Nation, and (passing by the name of the English-Irish) proved as rebellious (if
not more then the Irish themselves. What therefore has been found defective in
Colonies, in reference to the first intent of their plantation, the wisdom and
experience of these last ages, have supplied in Garrisons: Which consisting for
the most part of single persons, or otherwise living on their pay, and suddenly
removed from one place to another, as the nature of the service leads them, are
never suffered to stay long enough in any one Town by which they may have
opportunity to unite themselves with those of the Neighborhood or Corporation,
in design and interess.

6. But for a further proof of your position, that is to say, that there can be
no absolute Monarch who has a Nobility and People to gratify, you first
instance in the Kings of France, which I as well as others, (and others then as
well as I) do account for Absolute: But it is known (say you) That in the whole
world there is not a Nobility; nor a People, so frequently flying out, or
taking Arms against their Princes, as the Nobility and People of France. This I
acknowledge to be true, but affirm withal, that the frequent flyings out of
that Nobility and People against their Kings, proceed not from any infirmity in
the Monarchy, but from the stirring and busy nature of the French in general,
who if they make not Wars abroad, will find work at home; so that we may affirm
of them as the Historian does of the Ancient Spaniaras, Si for as hostem non
habent, domi quaerunt. And this the wise Cardinal of Richelieu understood well
enough, when having dismantled Tachel, reduced such Peers as remained in the
hands of the Hugonets, and crushed the Faction of the Monsieur now Duke of
Orleans, he presently engaged that King in a War with Spain; that so the hot
and fiery spirits of the French might be evaporated and consumed in a foreign
War, which otherwise had they stayed at home, would ever and anon have inflamed
the Kingdom. For otherwise that the Kings of France were Absolute Monarchs,
there be many reasons to evince; For first, his arbitrary Edicts overruled the
Laws, and dispose sovereignty of the chief concernments of the State, which by
the Parliament of Paris, the supreme Judicatory of that Kingdom (and looked on
as the chief supporter of the Rights and Liberties of the subject) seldom or
never are controled though disputed often. And if the Observation be true which
we find in Justine, that in the Monarchies of the first ages, Abitria principum
pro legibus erant be of any truth; or if the Maxim which we find in Justinians
Institutes, viz. Quod principi placuerit legis habet vigorem, be any badge or
cognizance of an absolute Monarch; the Kings of France may as well portend to
such an absoluteness, as any of the Roman Emperors or preceding Monarchs; (ar*
tell est nostre plaisir, with which formal words he concludes all his Royal
Edicts, are as significant as that Maxim in Justinians Institutes, or the said
observation which we find in Justine. Nor is his absolute power less visible in
the raising of Moneys, then in the passing of his Edicts; it being in his power
without asking the consent of his people in Parliament, to levy such sums upon
the subjects (besides his Gabells, Aides, and accustomed Taxes) as his
Treasurers under-Treasurers, or other Officers of his Revenue shall impose upon
them. From the patient bearing of which burdens, the King of France is
commonly called Rex Asin^rum, or the King of Asses. Nor does he want such
standing Forces, as are sufficient to preserve his power and make good his
actions; it being conceived by some, and affirmed by others, that he is able to
bring into the field for a sudden service, no less then sixty Companies of Men
of Arms, twenty Cornets of light Horse, and five Companies of Harque Bushiers
on Horseback, which amount to 10000 in the total, together with 20 Ensigns. of
French Horse, and 40 of Swisses, and yet leave his Garrisons well manned, and
his Forts and Frontiers well and sufficiently defended. By all which laid
together, it is clear and manifest, that the French Kings are absolute
Monarchs, and that their Government is as sufficiently Dispotical as a man
could wish; the frequent flyings out of the Nobility and People, during the
Minority of Lewis the 13th. and the omni-regency of his Mother (for I think
there be not many other instances of it) being no sufficient argument to prove
the contrary. And this you could not choose, but see (though it seems you will
not) when you tell us within few lines after, that the Government of France,
for want of Gratifying the Nobility and People with such Laws and Liberties as
were sit for them, did become Tyrannical; and if it be Tyrannical, it, must
needs be absolute.

7. You instance secondly, in the rise and progress of the Norman li^e within
this Kingdom, concerning which you first suppose that their Monarchy here was
founded on a Nobility, or a Nobility and the People, that is to say (for so I
am to understand you) upon the love and good affections of the Nobility and
people of England: And secondly, that being so founded, they were to gratify
the Nobility, or the Nobility and the people with such Laws and Liberties as
are fit for them; or else there Government in this Land had become Tyrannical.
But first the Monarchy of Normans was not founded here on the Nobility, and the
people conjunct or separate. The greatest part of the Nobility, were either
lost or forfeited at the battle of Hastins. And most of those that were not
engaged in Battle, were either outed of their Estates, which were immediately
distributed amongst the Normans, according to their several Ranks and
qualities; or forcedly to take them back on such terms and tenures, as the
Conquerors was pleased to give them. And that he might make sure work with
them, he compelled some of them to fly the Land, and wasted others in his Wars
against the French; so that the poor Remainders of them were both few in
number, and inconsiderable in power. And then as for the common people, they
were so bridled by his Soldiers Garisoned up and down in several Castles (some
old, and others of his own erection) that they could never stir against him,
but the Soldiers were presently on their backs; and though dispersed in several
places, were ready to unite together upon all occasions. Nor staid he here but
to prevent all practices and contrivances which might be hammered in the night
(which the eye of no humane providence could be able to see into or discover)
he commanded that no light or fire should be seen in any of their Houses after
the ringing of a Bell at eight of the clock, called thence the Cover*few, or
the Cur*few Bell, as it is called to this very day. Which rigorous courses were
held also by the Kings succeeding, till there was no male Prince surviving of
the Saxon race, and that King Henry ^. had married a daughter of that line; by
means whereof the people seeing no hopes of bettering their condition in the
change of time, became obedient to that yoke which was laid upon them, and
looked upon their Kings of the House of Normandy as their natural Princes.

8. Nor is your inference better grounded then your suposition; the Norman
Kings not gratifying the Nobility and people wi^h such Laws and Liberties as
were fit for them, for fear least otherwise the Government ( which (you say) we
have known by experience, and no doubt was seen by Eurypon) might be thought
tyrannical. What you intend by these words ( we have known by experience) as I
am loath to understand, so I am not willing to enquire. What had been seen by
Eurypon (though you make no doubt of it) I believe you know as little as I; but
what was practiced by the Normans, I may perhaps know as much as you; and if I
know any thing of them and of their affairs, I must needs know this, that the
first Norman Kings did never Court the Nobility or the people of England, by
gratifying them with such Laws and Liberties as you speak of here, but governed
them for the most part by the Grand Customeiur of the Normans, or in an
arbitrary way, as to them seemed best: For though sometimes for quietness sake,
they promised the abolishing of Dane gelt, and the restoring the Laws of King
Edward the Confessor; yet neither was the one abolished till the Reign of King
Steven (who came in upon a broken Title) nor the other restored, though often
promised, till the time of King John, and then extorted from him by force of
Arms; so that by this account, the Government of the first sinking of the
Norman Race, must become Tyrannical, because they gratified not the people with
such Laws and Liberties, as (in your judgment) were fit for them: For having
gained the Magna Charta, with the other Charta de Foresta in the time of King
John, and being frequently called to Parliaments by the Kings which followed,
they had as much as they had reason to expect in those early days. Where by the
way (that I may lay all things together which relate to England) I would fain
know what ground you have for the position which you give us afterward, that
is to say, That King Henry 3. instituted his Parliament to be assistant to him
in his Government. Our ancient Writers tell us, that Parliaments or Common
Councils, consisting of the Prelates, Peers, and other great men of the Realm,
were frequently held in the time of the Saxon Kings; and that the Commons were
first called to these great Assemblies at the Coronation of King Henry 1. to
the end that his succession to the Crown being approved by the Nobility and
People, he might have the better color to exclude his Brother: And as the
Parliament was not instituted by King Henry 3. so I would fain know of whom you
learnt, that it was instituted by him, to be assistant to him in his
Government, unless it were from some of the Declaration of the Commons in the
late long Parliament, in which it is frequently affirmed, That the fundamental
Government of this Realm was by King, Lords and Commons: For then what did
become of the Government of this Kingdom under Henry 3. when he had no such
Assistants joined with him; or what became of the foundation in the intervals
of following Parliaments, when there was neither Lords nor Commons, on which
the Government could be laid: And therefore it must be apparently necessary,
either that the Parliaments were not instituted by King Henry 3. to be his
Assistants in the Government, and that the Lords and Commons were not a part of
the foundation on which the Government is built; or else that for the greatest
space of time since King H. 3. the Kingdom has bin under no Government at all
for want of such Assistants, and such a Principal part of the fundamentals as
you speak of there. The Government of such times must be in obeisance at the
least, as our Lawyers phrase it.

But because you make your Proposition in Geneneral terms, and use the rise and
progress of the Norman line, for an instance only: I would fain learn who
should be Judge, touching the fitness or unfitness of such Laws and Liberties,
by which the people, or the Nobility and the People, are to be gratified by
their Kings. For if the Kings themselves must judge it, it is not like that
they will part with any of their just prerogatives, which might make them less
obeyed at home, and lesser feared abroad; but where invincible necessity, or
violent importunity might force them to it. And then the Laws and Liberties
which were so extorted, were either violated or anulled, whenever the Granter
was in power to weaken, or make void the grant; for malus diuturnitatis est
custos metus, as you know who said, But if the people must be judges of such
laws and liberties as were fittest for them, there would be no end of their
demands, reasonable in their own nature, and in number infinite. For when they
meet with a King of the giving hand, they will press him so to give from one
point to another, till he give away Royalty it self; and if they be not
satisfied in all their askings, they will be pleased with none of his former
Grants.

9. But you go on, and having told us that in such cases, as before, the
Government becomes tyrannical, be the Prince otherwise never so good a man, you
prove it, first by instancing in Carilaus, King of Sparta, in whose reign the
Commonwealth was instituted by Licurgus, who is generally affirmed to have
been a good man* and yet is said by Aristotle, to have been a Tyrant, and then
conclude, that it remains with me to show how a good man can otherwise be a
Tyrant then by holding Monarchical Government, without a sufficient balance.
But certainly no such thing remains to be shown by me, there being no occasion
given you to require it of me, in the Book against Calvin (by which name you
call it) which your letter undertakes to answer. The difference between us is,
whether the Ephory were ordained by the Kings of Sparta, to curb the Senate, or
by the people to oppose and control their Kings; of which hitherto you have
said nothing; If you put an hundred questions on the by, I am not bound by any
rule of Disputation to make answer to them, or so much as to any one of them as
it comes in my way. But in this point I shall not leave you without
satisfaction, In order whereunto you may do well to call to mind, that the word
Tyrant at the first was used to signify a just and lawful King ( qui postquam
tecta Tyranni intravere sui, as we find in Ovid) though afterward more
frequently used to signify such Princes only, who having suppressed the popular
Government, in some Cities of Greece, assumed the power unto themselves, or
otherwise rerestrained the people from running in to such disorder to which
they had formerly been accustomed, but at the last to signify such merciless
men, who having unjustly gained the supreme Authority by blood and violence,
continued in the same with the like cruelty and injustice. Thus in the second
sense and signification of the word, we find mention of the Tyrants of
Syracuse, (though some of them were just and moderate Princes) as also of Nabis
the Tyrant of Lacedemon, of Alexander the Tyrant of Pherae; And finally the 30.
Magistrates which were sent from Sparta, to govern the affairs of Athens (which
was before the most Popular and Democratical Government that ever was) are best
known by the name of the 30. Tyrants till this present time. And in this second
sense of the word, the Government of Carilaus, is by Aristotle said to be a
Tyranny, not because he suppressed any popular Government, which had before been
settled in Lacedemon, but because he restrained the people from having their own
wills as before they had in the time of some of his predecessors, or from
living under such an Anarchy as they most desired. And in this sense and
signification of the word, any good Prince may be called a Tyrant, if he
gratify not his people, or his Nobility and People with such Laws and
Liberties as they conceived to be fittest for them; or shall endeavor to
retain so much of that sovereign power, derived upon him by a long descent of
Royal Ancestors, by which he may be able to defend and protect his subjects.
But when you press me to this point, that if I do not grant the former, I must
needs confess, that not the favor of the Princes, nor the usurpation of the
People, but the infirmity of the Monarchy caused the Commonwealth of Lacedemon,
I shall in part confess it, and in part deny it. For I shall willingly confess
that the infirmity of the Monarchy might occasion the institution of the
Commonwealth, looking upon the Monarchy, as it was broken and unsettled during
the reign of Carilaus; and yet shall absolutely deny that there was any such
infirmity or insufficiency in the Monarchy, till the reins of Government were
let loose by the folly of Euripon.

10 More then this is not said by Plutarch, where he tells us that both Kings
and People agreed upon the calling home of Licurgus, for remedying such
disorders as were grown amongst them. And less is not said by Plutarch then is
said by me, where I affirm that whatsoever the Kings lost, the people got
nothing by the alteration, as being left out of all employments in affairs of
State, and having thirty Masters instead of two, which you pronounce to be a
strange Affirmation, because, say you, it was ordered by the Oracle, that when
the people were assembled. The Senate should propose and dismiss the people
without suffering them to debate; and if they were not suffered to debate such
businesses as were propounded by the Senate, what other employment could be
left them in affairs of State, praeter obsequii gloriam, besides the Reputation
of obedient Citizens: But for this sore you have a plaster, and tell us that
if the people had had no right to debate, they must therefore have had the
right to resolve, or elsewhere to be assembled for nothing. It may be neither
so nor so, but that the common people of Sparta were called unto the public
assemblies, as the Commons of England were anciently and originally summoned to
the Court of Parliament, that is to say, Ad consentiendum, and faciendum to
give consent and yield obedience to those Laws and Ordinances, which by the
Great Council of the Peers and Prelates ( de communi consilio regni nostri) as
the Writ still runs) should be concluded and agreed on. So that you might
have spared the Oracle, and Plutarchs Explication of it, or the destant of
Tyrteus upon the same; unless you could conclude from any of them, or from
altogether, that the people of Sparta were possessed of a negative voice, and
therewith of a power to frustrate the proceedings of the Kings and Senate,
which if they had, the ultimate Result (as you truly say) and consequently the
sovereign power in Government must remain in them: And then the Government of
Sparta, had been as merely Popular and Democratical, as of most other Cities in
Greece; but by no means to be accounted for an Aristocratie, by which name
Aristotle himself, and most of our great Masters in the Schools of Polity do
most commonly call it. And therefore when Isocrates says, (as here cited by
you) that the Lacedaemonians flourished for this cause especially that their
Government is Popular. The word ( Popular) is not to be understood in the
stricter sense, as differing the Government from that which they called an
Aristocratie, consisting of some part of the people, though the wealthier,
better, and more understanding men amongst them, but as it did distinguish them
from the Regal or Monarchical Government in which neither the whole body of
the People, nor any of the better, wealthier, and more sober men could pretend
a share.

11. And now at last you come to the institution of the Ephori, affirmed by me
(and I had Plutarch for my Author) to be ordained by Theopompus the 9th. King
of the second House (with the consent of Polydorus his Colleague) to curb the
insolences of the Senate, in which (you say) that I make that to be a practice
of the Kings against the Senate which by your Author is plain to have been a
combination of the Kings, and the Senate against the people: If so, my Author
must contradict himself, I am sure of that, For positively, he ascribes the
institution of the Ephori to no other end but the controlling of the Senate,
nor unto any other person or persons, then to Theopompus, as out of my Book
against Calvin, you relate the story: That which you tell us out of Plutarch in
another place, is told by Plutarch upon another occasion; which was indeed a
combination of the Kings and Senate against the people, and a just one too. For
as your self relates the passage out of Plutarch, the people upon the insolency
and predominancy of the Kings and the Senate fell upon council how to defend
themselves, and so assumed the power of Debate; and that hereupon the Kings
Theopompus and Polydore would have added unto the tenor of the Oracle; that if
the people went about by debate to change the Propositions of the Senate, it
should be lawful for the Kings and the Senate to null the Result of the people.
This I acknowledge to be true. But this makes nothing to the institution of the
Ephori, of which Plutarch speaks nothing in that place, though he did soon
after. But whereas you subjoyn that the people incensed at the practice, put a
bit into the mouth of the Senate by the institution of the Ephori, you make
therein a grosser addition to the words of Plutarch, then the two Kings and the
Senate did to the words of the Oracle: And then whereas you tell us out of
Plato, that the Ephorate was set up against the haereditary power of the Kings;
you either do mistake your Author, or else must make him contradict himself as
much in this place, as you did Plutarch in the other: Plato affirming in the
place which you find cited in the Margin of the Book, against Calvin, (so you
please to call it) that Lycurgus did not only ordain the Senate, but that he
did also constitute the Ephorate for the strength and preservation of the Regal
power. But granting, that it may be said by Plato in his 3 de legibus (as you
cite the place) that the Ephorate was set up against the Hereditary power of
Kings; what reason have you to believe, but that Plato might as well be
mistaken in the end and purpose, for which the Ephori were ordained, as in the
first Author of that institution, which he makes to be Lycurgus himself,
contrary to Aristotle, Plutarch, and all other writers. And finally, whereas
you tell us, That Cicero (agreeing in this point with Plato) has affirmed,
that the Ephori in Lacedemon were so opposite to the Kings, as the Tribune in
Rome to the Consuls: You make therein an Argument against your self; and I
prove it thus. As the Tribunes of Rome were first ordained to oppose the
Consuls, so were the Ephori of Sparta instituted to oppose the Kings; but the
Tribunes of Rome were not ordained at first to oppose the Kings, but only to
interpose in behalf of the people; therefore the Ephori of Sparta were not
instituted to oppose the Kings.

12. The conference between Theopompus and his Queen, touching his
unadvisedness in ordaining these popular Officers, and that which might ensue
upon it, you relate them no otherwise then I do; but that you slight the woman's
foresight into business, as not worth the noting; indeed it had not been worth
the noting, if she had reproved that in the King, which was the fact of the
people only: nor have you made any Answer to the other two Arguments, by which
I prove that the Ephori were instituted by the Kings, and by none but them;
which might make a credulous man believe, that they are unanswerable, because
unanswered: And therefore being of such weight, I shall add nothing to them, to
make them more weightier then they be, but an explication of the second: That
second Argument I derive from the words of Cleomenes (as they stand in
Plutarch) in which he lets the people know, that one reason why the Ephori were
instituted by the former Kings, was, that the Kings being engaged in foreign
wars, might have some certain friends to sit in judgment in their stead, whom
they called Ephori. And hereupon I may very well infer thus much, That if the
people had first instituted this Ephori (as you say they did) they would have
chosen them out of such of their own number whom they might confide in; and not
have chosen them out of those, who being the Kings especial friends, must have
a different interest from that of the people.

13. Your discourse about the Ephori drawing toward an end, you charge me with
omitting as well the ruin of the Balance, as the corruption of the Common
wealth, which did thence arise; and you charge it on me to this purpose, That
picking up my objections against the Government in vigor, out of the rubbish
and dissolution of it, I may cast oust in m^ns eyes. or persuade them that the
Ephori ( trusting to the power or interest they had in the Commonalty) came to
usurp upon the Kings, and to be Tyrants, as they are called by Plato and
Aristotle. The first of which two charges is against all Reason; for why should
I be charged with omitting that which was extrinsecal unto my project and
design, it being no part of my intent, to take notice of the several changes
and corruptions in the State of Sparta; but only of the institution of the
Ephori, their insolences toward their King, and their final ruin. And the
other of these charges is against all truth; for how does it appear, or
possibly can be made apparent, that I have used any Article for casting dust
into men's eyes, the better to persuade them to give credit to any thing which
may serve my turn; when I have said nothing in all this business about the
Ephori, but what is justified by the Authority of the most famous Statesmen,
and renowned Writers, who have committed to our knowledge, the true condition
of Affairs in that Commonwealth; so that you might have spared the story of
Hipitadeus, the selling of his lot or his portion of Lands, contrary to the
Laws of Lycurgus; the following of that bad example by other men, and the
reducing of all the Freeholders in that Commonwealth, to the number of 100.
only, unless you had found any thing in that Book of mine, which had sounded
contrary unto it: But whereas you infer in that which follows, That the
engrossing the Lands of that Common wealth into such few hands, altered the
Government into an Oligarchy, that by this it was no Oligarchy that Agis was
murdered, and that in reference to this Oligarchy, Plato and Aristotle called
the Government of Sparta by the name of Tyranny; in all these things you may be
said to cast dust into the eyes of the Readers, that they may not see the light
of truth: For certainly the Government of the State of Sparta, consisting in
the Kings and Senate, remained only as it was before by the Laws of Lycurgus
(the superinduction of the Ephori being added to it) not altered any thing at
all, by the engrossing of the Lands of that Commonwealth into those few hands:
Nor was it by the Authority of those ingrossers (whom you call the Oligarchy)
though possible enough at their instigation, that Agis was murdered by the
Ephori: nor was it finally in relation to these Ingrossers that the Government
of Sparta was called a tyranny (there was no reason why it should) both by
Plato and Aristotle; but only in reference to the unparaleld cruelties and
abominable insolences of the Ephori, committed on and against their Kings; it
being said by Aristotle in as plain terms as may be (...), that the Ephorate
(and not the Oligarchy of Ingrossers) was an absolute Tyranny. Thus have you
fetched Arguments against an Oligarchy in the State of Sparta, which you find
not in it: And for the close of all, you say, That whereas Agis and Cleomenes,
by the restitution of the Lots of Licurgus, were assertors of popular power,
they are insinuated by me, to have been assertors of Monarchy. But first, the
restitution of the Lots of Licurgus, by the industry and endeavors of those
two Kings, improved not at all the power of the people, who were still kept
under as before, but only reduced them unto that equality in respect of Riches,
which might secure them from being trampled on, and insulted over by their
fellow Commoners. And secondly, it appears by Plutarch, that the design of
those two Kings in that restitution, was to get glory to the one, and
preservation to the other; which could not be effected, but by gaining the good
will of the common people, and make them sure unto their side, whenever they
should be ready for that great design of destroying the Ephori. And so much in
Answer to that part of your Letter, which concerns the rise, insolences, and
destruction of those popular Villains, which Calvin makes his first example for
opposing Kings.

14. Such being my play (no foul play I am sure) with humane Authors, or as a
Politician; you will next show me whither I have dealt better with the
Scripture, or been more careful as a Divine: But first you must look backwards
upon somewhat which was said before. And having laid down the words of Calvin,
which occasioned this discourse between us. you cannot but confess that what he
says of Demarchy of Athens, is a plain mistake, they being officers (as you
truly say) of another nature; and then why he may not be as much mistaken in
the Spartan Ephori, and the Roman Tribunes, as in the Athenian Demarchy you can
show no reason. For if he be of a fallible spirit in one point, he can be
infallible in none. Which mistake, notwithstanding it betrays his ignorance in
the Greek Antiquities, you tell us not to be such an one, as destroys no other
part of his Assertion.

First, The supereminent Authority of the Ephori over the Kings, and of the
Tribunes over their Consuls, standing good however: The contrary whereof (to
use your own words) has been already proved by Plato, Aristotle, and Plutarch,
though you would willingly persuade the Reader that they speak for you. Which
said, you put me to it once again as a Politician, and tell me that no
Politician in the world can show a reason, Why the Estates in a Gothic Moddel,
should be of less power then either the Spartan, Ephori, or the Roman Tribunes.
So much I shall be willing to grant, that the Estates in a Gothic Moddel, have
as much power in the public Government, and over the persons of their Kings;
as the Ephori had over their Kings, and the Tribunes over their Consuls, at
their first institution. But that they had the like power in either case, as
the Ephori and the Tribunes exercised by violence and usurpation in their
several Cities, no Politician in the world can be able to show me. And this we
may the better see by looking on their power in matters which concern the
public, in the Realm of Spain; the Kings and people whereof (those of
Portugal excepted only) are of Gothic race, and therefore likely to retain
most of the Gothic Moddels: And looking on it, we shall find first, that their
Curias or General conventions consist there (as in other places) of the three
Estates, Prelate, Peer, and People.

And secondly, that though the Government of that King, be not so Arbitrary
Despotical as it is in France; yet, he both rules and manageth those
Conventions to his own contentment. For neither can they meet together but by
his appointment; nor are their acts and consultations of any effect, further
then as they are confirmed by the Kings consent; nor finally can they sit any
longer, or depart any sooner, then as it may stand most with the Kings
convenience. But Bodin goes a little further. And having showed us with what
Reverence and Devotion, the the three Estates of France addressed themselves to
Charles the 8th. in a convention held at Tours, (at what time the Authority of
the Assemblies was greater and more eminent then it has been since) affirms
expressly, Majorem etiam Obedientiam and majus obsequium Hispanorum regi
Exhiberi. The King of Spain has more obedience and observance from his three
Estates, then that which was afforded to the King of France. The General
conventions of both Kingdoms being much alike, may seem to have been cast in
the same mould (for the French neighboring the Goths, who then possessed those
Provinces in the Realm of France which lie on the west side of the Loire, could
not but know the manner of those Assemblies which Charles Martel thought good
to introduce, and settle in the Realm of France, that giving them some
influence in the public Government, and binding them unto him by so great a
favor, he might make use of their Authority to preserve his own, as his Son
Pepin after did to obtain the Crown. But that the. Assembly of Estates in
either Kingdom did take upon them to fine, imprison, or to depose or murder any
of their Kings, as the Tribunes sometimes did the Consuls, and the Ephori did
the Kings of Sparta, you cannot easily prove out of all their stories.

15. But you go on (and tell me first, that the estates in a Gothish Moddel,
are such by virtue of their estates, that is of their over balance in
dominion; and then you put it upon me to show both why the over balance in
dominion should not amount to Empire, and practically that it amounts not to
Empire in quiet and well governed times. But this, by your leave, is a strange
way of Disputation, by cutting out what ^work you please, and sending it to me
to make it up as well as I can: But being sent to me, I am bound to dispatch it
out of hand for your satisfaction.

I say then first, that the Estates in a Gothish Moddel, are not such by virtue
of their Estates, that is to say, by being above the rest of the people in
titles of Honor and Revenue, which you call an over balance in Dominion. For
were it so, they were of power to exercise the same Authority, as you suppose
the Tribunes and the Ephori to have done before them in all times alike, and
not when they are called together by the Kings command. For being Masters of
their Estates, as well out of as in those General Assemblies and Conventions,
and consequently in all times alike; what reason can you show me that they
should make no use of that Power which belongs to them in right of their
Estates, but in those General Assemblies and Conventions only.

Secondly, If they have that power by virtue of their Estates, and yet cannot
exercise, but in such Conventions; how does it come to pass that such
Conventions are not of their own appointment, but only at the pleasure and
command of their several Kings?

And Thirdly, If they hold and enjoy that Power by virtue of their said
Estates, you may do well to show some reason, why all that are above the rest
of the people in Titles of Honor and Revenue, should not be called to those
assembly of Estates, but only some few out of every Order, (as in France and
Spain) to represent the rest of their several Orders: For being equal or
somewhat near to an equality with one another in Estates and Honors, those
which were pretermitted have the greater wrong, in not being suffered to make
use of that natural power which their over balance in dominion has conferred
upon them. And then I would be glad to right whether this over balance in
Dominion be ascribed unto them, in reference to the King or the common people:
If in relation to the King, you put the King into no better condition then any
one of his subjects by making him accomptable to so many Masters; who may say
to him whenever they shall meet together, Read rationem villicationis tuae,
and tell him plainly, That he must give up an account of his stewardship, for
he shall be no longer steward. And then have Kings done very ill in raising so
many of their subjects to so great a Power, and calling them together to make
use of that power, which they may make use of if they please to his
destruction. And if they have this overbalance of Dominion, in reference
only to the common people, above whom they are raised in Estates and Honors;
what then becomes of that natural liberty of Mankind, that underived Majesty of
the common people which our great Masters in the School of Polity have so much
cried up. The people must needs take it as ill as the King, to be deprived of
their natural Liberty, without giving their consent unto it, or to be deposed
from that Majesty which is inherent in themselves, without deriving it from any
but their first Creator. But on the other side, if the three Estates in a
Gothic Moddel, receive that power, which they enjoy in those Conventions
either from the hands of the King, as the Lords Spiritual and Temporal (which
make up two of the three Estates) did here in England, or from the hands of the
People, as the 3d. Estate have done in all Kingdoms else, (which is the
general opinion and practice of all Nations too) you must stand single by your
self in telling me that they have that power by virtue of those Estates which
they are possessed of. And this may also serve to show you, that an over balance
in Dominion, or the greatness of Estate which some subjects have above the
rest, amounts not to such an Empire as may give them any power over Prince or
people, unless it can be showed as I think it cannot, that the King does not
over balance them in the point of Dominion, as they do the rest of their
fellow subjects, or that the whole body of the people cannot as well pretend to
Dominion over themselves, as any of their fellowsubjects can pretend to have
over them: And then if this Dominion do amount to an Empire also, we shall have
three Empires in one Kingdom; that is to say, the King, the three Estates, and
the Common people.

I must confess, I have not weighed all Orders and degrees of men in so even a
scale as to resolve which of them ballanceth, counter-ballanceth, or
over-ballanceth the other; which must be various and uncertain, according to
the Laws of several Countries, and the different constitutions of their
several Governments. And I conceive it altogether as impossible to make a new
Garment for the Moon, which may as well fit her in the full, as in her wainings
and increasings; as to accommodate these Metaphisical speculations to the rules
of Government, which varying in all places must have different forms: And
having different forms, must have different balances according to the Laws
and constitutions of each several Country. And yet I am not altogether so dim
sighted as not to see what these new Notions (which otherwise indeed would
prove new Nothings) do most chiefly aim at; the chief design of many of the
late Discourses, being apparently no other then to put the supreme Government
into the hands of the common people, or at least into the hands of those whom
they shall choose for their Trustees and Representors; which if it could be once
effected, the underived Majesty of the common people would not appear so
visibly in any one person whatsoever, as in those Trustees and Representors,
and then the King or supreme Magistrate being thus out shined, would seem no
other then a Star of the lesser Magnitude, which though moving in an higher
sphere, should neither give the light nor impart such influences to the world,
as the two Great Luminaries (such as you fancy the Estates in a Gothic Moddel)
in case he prove not rather a falling Star, as perhaps he may. But hoping you
will pardon this irruption in me, I proceed unto the second part of your
Letter, in which I am said to speak rather like a Divine then a Politician: And
yet not like a Divine neither, but like a Divine as I suppose, and no more then
so.

17. But letting all things be as they may, you tell me that I ask of Calvin,
in what part of the word of God we may find any such Authority given to
popular Magistrates as he tells us of. And for an answer hereunto, you prepare
the way by laying down the constitution of the Government of the people of
Israel, which you affirm to have been founded on a popular balance. And were
it so, there is no question to be made, but that a popular balance even by the
Ordinance of God himself in Scripture, both did and may amount to Empire; for
who ^rt thou O man, which disputest with God, or call in question any of the
Divine Acts of that heavenly providence. The Question will be only this,
Whether the Government of the Israelites was founded in a popular balance,
which you say it was, and I think rather that it was not: The reason why I
think so I shall show anon, and in the mean time I will look upon the Argument
which you suppose it to be proved, We find (say you) the people of Israel
judging the tribe of Benjamine, and by the Oracle of God leavying War against
them; Which being an act of sovereign power, declares that Government to be
founded on a popular balance. But first, it appears not by the text, that all
the people of Israel did sit as Judges on the tribe of Benjamine, the judgment
might be passed (for what you can say to the contrary) by the Elders only,
that is to say, the heads or chiefs of the several families of the tribes of
Israel; and nothing but the execution of the sentences by them committed to the
people.

Secondly, It appears not by the Text, that the War was leavied against the
Benjamites by any Oracle of God, but the contrary rather; For it is said, that
the children of Israel were gathered the other as one man, at a place called
Mizpeh, that they resolved upon the War, and concluded how to have it carried
before they asked Council of the Lord, Judge. 20. 18. And when they asked
council of the Lord, it was not whether they should proceed in the War or not,
(that being a thing resolved before hand) but which of the tribes should go up
first to the battle again the children of Benjamin, as in the Book of Judges,
Cap 20. 18. which probably might be the cause of their ill success in the first
encounter, as having engaged themselves in a bloody War against their brethren,
before they sought for council at the Oracle of God, as they should have done.
And therefore, Thirdly, this rather shows the people of Israel to be under no
Government at all, then to be governed by a Democratical or popular form; and
serves as a most excellent commentary on the last words of the book of Judges,
viz: In those days there was no King in Israel: every Man did that which was
right in his own eyes. Had it been under any one form of Government; ( Popular
or Democratical, call it what you will) every man durst not to have done that
which is right in his own eyes, though there had been at that time no King in
Israel. And as they were not under any popular Government, by which they might
have been restrained from doing what was right in their own eyes; so you
confess that they were not at that time under the Government of the Sanhedrim;
for speaking of that passage in the first of Judges, where Judah said unto
Simeon (...) Brother, come up with me into my lot, that we may fight against
the Canaanites and I likewise will go with thee into thy lot, so Simeon went
with him, etc. you thereupon infer, that by this leaguing at their pleasure one
with another, it was plain the Sanhedrim, their common Ligament was broken, so
that the Sanhedrim being broken, the Kings not instituted, nor any form of
popular Government set up among them by common consent; nothing remains, but
that they must be governed by the Heads or Chiefs of the several Families into
which the Tribes were Generally divided in those times. Had there been any such
Council, or established body, as that of the General Estates of the united
Provinces; or that of the Cantons and their Confederates amongst the Switzers,
they might have been said to have been under such a popular Government as those
people are, though every Tribe had a distinct Government of its own, as those
Provinces and Cantons have.

18. And here I should proceed to the Examination of that part of your Letter
which concerns the Sanhedrim, as being the point of greatest difference between
us in the present business. But considering that you have spent so much of your
Paper, about the Original institution and authority of the Kings of Israel, and
consequently of all those who have enjoyed that power and dignity in their
several Countries; I shall first lay all together which you have delivered on
that subject, with my opinion in the same as it comes before me. In order
whereunto, I am first to say, that the Government of that people, when they
were in Egypt, was under the Heads or Chiefes of their several families, who
by a paternal right derived on them from their first Father Adam, challenged
and enjoyed a Fatherly authority over all those who descended of them: And unto
these did Moses address himself, when he was to communicate from the Lord that
most joyful news of their deliverance out of Egypt, called by the name of
Elders in the Book of Exodus, 3. 16. and 4. 29 not called so only, because
they were in honor only amongst the rest of the people* (as you seem to say)
but because they were above them also in this point of power. The people else
had had no remedy in any differences and debates which might rise amongst them,
but suing in the Courts of Egypt; which it was as unfit for them to do, as it
was amongst the Primitive Christians, to go to Law with one another in Emergent
differences, and that before the unbelievers. But this dispersed authority
being united in the person of Moses, (as many lines united in one Center from a
large circumference) the whole Government of the people did remain in him till
by the advice of Jethro, they were divided and sub*divided into several
Companies. Each of them having over him their appointed Rulers; By Gods
appointment afterward, a standing Court of 70. Elders, which they called the
Sanhedrim, were chosen to bear part of the public Government (but whether
chosen out of the Jethronian Judges or not, we shall see anon) Moses being
dead, and Josuah who succeeded in the supreme Authority, being also gathered by
his Fathers, the authority of the Sanhedrim dying also with them, as your self
confesses; the Ordinary Government returned again to the heads of the several
Families, as before in Egypt, the extraordinary being vested in those several
Judges, whom God raised up from time to time, to free them from the power of
those cruel Enemies, from whose Tyranny they were not able otherwise to have
freed themselves. And in this state they stood till the time of Samuel, when
being vexed by the Philistines with con^inual Wars, the Ark of God was taken
not long before, and their condition no less miserable under the times of
Samuel, then it was at the worst, they desire to have a King to fight their
Battails, and to go in and out before them, like to other Nations. And that
their future King might settle on the surer foundation, he had not only the
approbation of the Lord, 1 Samuel 8. 22. and the acclamations of the people, chap
10. v. 24. but the Heads and Chief^ of the several Families devolved their
whole power upon him; the motion being made to Samuel by the Elders of the
people, as well in their own names, as in the names of all the rest of the
Tribes, as appears, 1 Samuel 8. 4.

19. Before this time, that is to say, after the deaths of Moses and Joshua
(who were Kings in fact, though not in title) the Israelites had no King to
Reign over them but the Lord himself; from whom they first received their Laws,
from whose mouth they received direction in all cases of difficulty, and from
whose hands they received protection in all times of danger: And when they had
any visible Judge or supreme Governor, God did not only reign in their
persons, in regard of that immediate vocation which they had from him; but also
of the gifts of the Spirit, and the cooperation of his Grace and Power: In
which respect, the Government of the Israelites, during that interval of time,
is called by many learned Writers, by the name of Theocratie, or the immediate
Government of the Lord himself: And this the Lord himself not obscurely
intimates, when he said to Samuel, They have not rejected thee, but they have
rejected me, ne regnem super eos, that I should not reign over them. I know the
general stream of Writers, do understand these words as words of dislike and
indignation, in that the people seemed to be weary of his Government, in their
desire of having a King, like to other Nations; but I conceive (with all due
reverence unto those who opine the contrary) that God spoke these words rather
to comfort Samuel, whom he found much displeased and troubled at the
Proposition of the Elders, as if a greater injury had been offered to himself,
then was done to the Prophet; then out of any dislike which he had of the
matter: For if he had disliked the matter, that is, that they should have a
King like other Nations; he neither would have fore signified it as a blessing
on the seed of Abraham, Genesis 17. or as prerogative of Judah, Genesis 49. nor have
foretold the people, that when they should desire a King, they should set him
to be King over them, whom the Lord their God shall choose, Deuteronomy. 17. nor would
he have commanded Samuel to give them a King as they desired, nor have directed
him particularly to that very man whom he had designed for the Kingdom. But on
the contrary say you, we find it otherwise in the Prophet Hosea, where the Lord
said unto the people, That he had given them a King in his anger (that is (as
you affirm) in Saul) and that he took him away in his wrath (that is (say you)
in the Captivity) Hos. 13. 11. And to this purpose you allege another passage
in the same Prophet, chapter 8. v. 4. where it is said, They have set up Kings, and
not by me; they have made Princes and I knew it not: But for all this, your
explication of the one Text, and your application of the other, are alike
erroneous. The Prophet Hosea lived in the time of Jerohoam, son of Joah, King
of Israel, and directed the words of his Prophesy to the people chiefly, as
they were separated and abstracted from the Realm of Israel. And first,
beginning with the last, it appears plainly by the verse foregoing, that the
words by you cited, are addressed particularly to the house of Israel; and it
had been hard dealing in the Prophet, to charge the ten Tribes with setting up
of Kings, but not by him, had it been so understood of Saul, as you say it was;
when it was the fault (if it were a fault) of all the twelve; and therefore
says S. Hierome, Potest hoc quod dicit (ipsi regnaverunt, and non, etc.) Etiam
de Jeroboham acc^pi filio Nabath, and de ceteris principibus, qui ei in imperio
successerint. More positively some learned Writers in the Church of Rome, by
whom it is affirmed, Hun^ locum pertinere ad Reges Israel, quorum primus erat
Jeroboham, qui tempore Reaboham, filii Salamonis, Regnum december Tribuum invasit.
And to the same effect says Deodati amongst the Protestants, viz. The people
of their own proper motion, without enquiring after Gods will, or staying for
his command or permission, have chosen and made Kings of their own heads,
separating themselves from the lawful Rule of David' s posterity, 1 King. 11.
31. And then the meaning of the other Text will be plainly this, I gave thee
(or I gave thee leave to have) a King in mine anger, that is to say in
Jeroboham the Son of Nebat, who by withdrawing the people from the worship of
God, to worship the golden Calves of Dan and Bethel, is said to have made
Israel sin, and thereby plagued them irremediously (without repentance) into
the heavy anger and displeasure of the Lord their God: And I took him away in
my wrath, that is to say, in the person of Hosheah, the last King of Israel,
carried away captive, together with the greatest part of his people, into the
land of Assyria; the people being dispersed in the several Provinces of that
Empire, never returning since that time, to their native Country, nor having
any King of their own to reign over them as before they had. Not to say any
thing of many of the Kings of Israel treacherously slain by their own subjects,
out of an ambitious desire to obtain the Kingdom; of whom it may be justly
said, That God took them away in his wrath, before they had lived out their
full time in the course of nature. Nothing in these two Texts which relates to
Saul, and the captivity, that is to say, the Captivity of Babylon as you
understand it. Such is your play with holy Scripture, when you speak ( as you
suppose) like a Divine.

20. But you have another use to make of the Prophet Hosea, whose words you
cite unto a purpose that he never meant, namely to prove that Kings are not of
Divine Right: For having said, that such Divines who will always have Kings to
be of divine right, are not to be hearkened too, seeing they affirm that which
is clean contrary to Scripture; you add, that in this case, said Hosea, they
have set up Kings, and not by me, they have made Princes, and I knew it not.
But first, these words are not spoken by the Prophet touching the institution
of Kings in General, but only of a particular fact in the ten Tribes of
Israel, by with drawing themselves from the house of David, and setting up a
King of their own without consulting with the Lord, or craving his approbation
and consent in the business. Secondly, If it may be said that Kings are not of
Divine Right and institution, because God says here by the Prophet, that some
Kings have been set up, but not by him, you have more reason to affirm, that
Kings are of Divine Right and institution, because he says in another place,
less capable of any such misconstruction as you make of this) by me Kings
reign. All Kings are said to reign by God, because all reign by his
appointment, by his permission, at the least. And yet some Kings may be truly
said not to reign by him, either because they are set up by the people in a
tumultuous and seditious way, against the natural Kings and Princes; or else
because they come unto their Crowns by usurpation, blood, and violence,
contrary to his will revealed, and the established Laws of their several
Countries. Which Argument if it should be good, we could not have a stronger
against such Papists as hold always (for it seems no matter if they did hold so
but sometimes) that the Pope by Divine right is head of the universal Church;
then by showing them out of their own Histories, how many Popes have raised
themselves into that See, either by open faction, or by secret bribery, and by
violent and unjust intrusion. Of whom it may be said, and that not improperly,
that though they pretend to be Christ's Vicars, and the successors of St. Peter,
yet were they never placed by Christ in St. Peter's Chair. Now to dispute from
the persons to the power, and from the unjust ways of acquiring that power, to
the original right and institution of it, is such a sorry piece of Logic, as
you blaming those who dispute from the folly of a people against an Ordinance
of God. For upon what ground else do you lay the foundation of the legal
Government (especially amongst the Hebrews) but on the folly of the people. p.
11. the imprudence and importunity of the people p. 14. upon which ground also
you build the supreme authority of the Judges, who only by the meet folly of
the people came to be set up in Israel, p. 13. But certainly if their desires
to have a King were folly, and imprudence in them, it must be felix fatuitas, a
very fortunate imprudence, and a succesful folly, I am sure of that, that
people never live in a settled condition till they come to the Government of
Kings. For was it not by the fortunate conduct of their Kings, that they
exterminated the rest of the Canaanites, broke the Amalekites in pieces, and
crushed the power of the Phylistins, growing by that means formidable unto all
their Neigbours? Was it not by the power and reputation of their Kings, that
they gained some strong Towns from the Children of Ammon, and enlarged their
Territories by the conquest of some parts of Syria; that they grew strong in
shipping, and managed a wealthy trade from Esion-Geber, in the streights of
Babel-Mandel, to the Land of Ophir, in the remotest parts of India?
Prosperities sufficient to justify and endear such burdens, as by the
alteration of the Government might be said upon them.

21. From such Divines in General, as will always (I must keep that word) have
Kings to be by divine Right, you come to me at last in my own particular,
charging me that at a venture I will have Kings to be of Divine Right, and to
be absolute; whereas in truth (say you) if Divine Right be derived unto Kings
from these of the Hebrews only, it is most apparent that no absolute King can
be of Divine Right.

And first to answer for my self (for having sometime been a Parson, (I shall
take leave to Christen my own Child first) I think that I was never so rash,
nor so ill advised, as to speak any thing at aventure in so great a point, as
the original institution and divine right of Kings.

Secondly, I am sure I have not so little studied the Forms of Government, as
to affirm any where in that Book against Calvin, as you call it, that all Kings
be absolute. The second Sect. of the sixth Chapter, of that Book, being spent
for the most part, in showing the differences between conditional Kings, and an
absolute Monarch.

And Thirdly, They must be as sorry Divines, and as bad Historians as my self,
who ascribe the* absolute Power, or the Divine right of Kings, to the first
institution of a King amongst the Hebrews. For who knows not (if he know any
thing in that kind) that there were Kings in Egypt, and Assyria, as also of
Scycionia in Peleponesus, not long after the Flood; Kings of the Aborigines,
and the Trojan race in Italy; in that of Athens, Argos and Micenae amongst the
Greeks, of the Parthians, Syrians, etc. in the Greater, and of Lydia in the
lesser Asia, long time before the Reign of Saul the first, King of the Hebrews:
all which were absolute Monarchs in their several Countries. And as once Tully
said, Nulla gens tam barbara, that never Nation was so barbarous, but did
acknowledge this principle, that there was a God; so will you hardly find any
barbarous Nation, who acknowledge not the supreme Government of Kings: And how
then all Nations should agree in giving themselves over to the power and
Government of Kings; I believe none cannot show me a better reason, then that
they either did it by the light of natural reason, by which they found that
Government to be fittest for them, or that the first Kings of every Nation,
were the heads and families that retained that paternal right over all such as
descended of them, as might entitle their authority to divine institution. For
proof whereof, (since you have such a prejudice against Divines) you need look
no farther then your self, who tells us p. 12. That Kings no question, where
the balance is Monarchical, are of Divine right; and if they be good, the
greatest blessing that the Government so standing can be capable of; or if you
will not stand to this, then look on the first Chapter of Aristotle's Politics,
where he makes the Regal Government to stand upon no other bottom then
paternal Authority. Initio civitates regibus parebant, etc. At the first (says
he) Cities were Governed by Kings, and so still at this day are such Nations,
as descended of men accustomed to the King by Government. For every household is
governed by the eldest, as it were by a King, and so consequently are the
Colonies or Companies multiplied from thence, governed in like sort for
Kindreds sake. Which words of Aristotle seconded by the general practice of all
Nations, I look on as a better Argument of the Original institution and Divine
Right of Kings (that great Philosopher in the 4th. Book of his Politics, cap.
2. giving unto the Regal Government the attribute of Divinissima, or the most
Divine) then to fetch either of them from the institution of the first King
among the Hebrews, so that you might have spared the labor of showing the
inconsequences, of arging from a contingent case to a matter of absolute
necessity (as from the making of the first King amongst the Hebrews, to the
necessity of making Kings in all other Nations) unless you could have found
some adversary to contend withal. And with like thrift you might have saved
your self the trouble of proving that the words of Moses in Deuteronomy. 17. v. 18.
touching recourse to be had unto the Judge (which should be in those days) in
some certain cases, inferred not a necessity, of having any such supreme Judge
as God raised up from time to time, to govern and avenge his people in their
greatest misery, unless you have met with any (which I know not of) which trust
as much to that Text of Scripture for those supreme Judges, as you rely upon it
for the Court of Sanhedrim, of which more anon. The corollary wherewithal you
close this passage; I like well enough, had you grounded your discourse on some
clearer Text: For I conceive as well as you, that those Judges are not
necessitated by the will of God, but foreseen only by his providence, not
imposed by the Law, but provided by i^ as an Expedient in case of necessity.

22. But before I come to examine the Text of Scripture, on which you ground
both the Authority of the Sanhedrim, and those supreme Judges which governed in
their several times the affairs of Israel; I must first see what form of
Government it is which you chiefly drive at, and in comparison whereof you so
much vilify and condemn the Regal. And first the Government you drive at,
mus^ be plainly Popular, and such Popular estate call i^ Timocraty, or a
Democratie, or what else you please, into which the old Agrarian laws must be
introduced, for the better settling of equality amongst the people. And such a
Commonwealth as this, you fancy to be most agreeable to the natural liberty of
Mankind, and Divine institution; There is nothing (say you) more clear nor
certain in Scripture, then that the Commonwealth of Israel was instituted by
God, p. 14. and settled on a popular Agrarian, p. 12. And that the Restitution
of their Commonwealth was fore-signified in these words of the Prophet, Hosea,
I will be thy King, cap. 13. 10. But if you have no better grounds for the
Institution, then for the Restitution of this Commonwealth, they are too weak
for foundation of so great a building. The Prophet speaks in that place
particularly to the house of Ephraim, v. 1. the people of the Realm of Israel
v. 9. as appears more distinctly by their kissing the Calves (the Golden Calves
of Dan and Bethel) v. 2. Of whose reduction to their native Country after their
being carried away captive by Salmanasser King of Assyria, there is nothing
signified in the Scripture in the way of prophecy, nor no relation of it as a
matter of Fact. Nor can you show me any clear and evident text, by which I may
be sure that this Commonwealth was instituted by God, considering that Moses
during the whole time of his life governed authoritatively and supreamly
without any appeal unto the people, or unto any other power either coordinate
with him, or superior to him; which I believe is more thenyou can show me in
any Duke of Venice, or any State-holder of the Netherlands, or any other Prince
in a Commonwealth, which only serve as second Notions in a State, to put their
business into form, and give date to all public instruments, as the Keepers of
the Liberties, not long since in England. Nor do I find that Josuah abated any
thing of that power which Moses had, advising sometime with the Elders of the
people, but not governed by them; so that the first Government amongst the
Israelites, had more in it of the Regal, then the popular Forms; to which they
did desire to return again, upon the apprehension of the Anarchy, and confusion
under which they lived, when there was no King in Israel, as in other Nations.
And as for your Agrarian laws (your Popular Balance, as elsewhere) upon which
this Commonwealth is supposed to be settled; I conceive it will be very hard
for you to prove that also. For though the Land of Canaan was divided by Lot
amongst the Tribes, yet neither had the Tribes themselves their equal portion,
nor every family in those Tribes, their equal shares in those unequal portions
with one another; some of the Tribes enjoying little or nothing of the lot
which had fallen unto them, and some of the Families of those Tribes, being
scattered up and down the Country, as Jacob had prophesied of Simeon in the
Book of Genesis which utterly destroys that popular Agrarian on which this
Commonwealth is supposed to be founded, and in which (you say) they might have
continued, but that they desired to have a King like other Nations.

23. Your second Argument for a preferring a popular Estate before a Monarchy
is derived from reason, and that reason grounded on the natural liberty of all
mankind; which cannot better be preserved them in popular Governments. God
never required (as you say). of any Man, or any Government, that they should
live otherwise then according to their estate, that there are rules in
Scripture to show the duty of a servant to such whose wants have made them
servants; but that there is no rule in Scripture that obliges a man unto the
duty of a servant, which can live of himself. And finally having asked this
question, whether God has less regard of a Nation, then he has of a man; you
tax the Israelites for making themselves servants by desiring a King to be set
over them, when they might have continued as they were in a free condition. But
first that natural liberty of Mankind, which our great Politicians so much talk
of, has no ground in nature, for as servants are bound by positive Laws to
obey their Masters, so* women are bound by the law of Nature to submit
themselves unto their Husbands, and children by the same law to be obedient to
their parents; This if the Scripture had not taught you, you might have learnt
from Aristotle, as he did from Homer, who in the ninth Book of his Odyssees,
gives this Aphorism, viz Vxori and natis jus dicit quisque virorum, That every
man gives law to his wife and children: And though the children come to such a
condition both of age and fortunes, that they are well enough able to live of
themselves, yet do they still continue servants to their natural parents, (for
Iu^a patris naturalis, minime solvantur, sath the civil Lawyers) and therefore
are required by God to do the duty of servants, till either their Fathers free
consent, or the Constitution of the Government under which they live, shall
lease them from it. Secondly, Admitting this natural liberty of all mankind
which our late Politicians so much dream of, yet man in his depraved nature is
such a violent headstrong and unruly beast, that he stands as much in need of
a ^it or bridle, as the Horse or Mule, least otherwise he run headlong to his
own destruction. And therefore if he will not have a King, he must be under the
command of some other Government, aut R^x, au^ Senatus habendus est, as once
Pacuvius said unto those of Capua; and whether he live under the command of a
King, or the power of a Senate, he must be servant unto either; though
otherwise he pretend to the ability of a self-subsistence, for unto whomsoever
you give your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are unto whom ye obey,
says the Great Apostle. And then the question will be this, whither the
natural liberty of mankind may be best preserved under a Monarchical
Government, where he has but one Master to observe, whose tempe^ and
affections he may without much difficulty comply withal, under the Government
of a Senate or popular State, where he must serve some hundred^ of Masters, to
every one of which, or to the greater part of which it is impossible for the
wisest man to give any contentment? Supposing Thirdly, That the Q^estion be
resolved, in favor of the Popular Government, yet every popular Government is
to be ordered by some Laws, and every Law is the restraining of the use of
this pretended liberty, and binds the subject to observance. ( Lex, being so
called a Ligando, say the old Grammarians) in all such cases, concerning which
the Laws are made by what power sover.

24. But then say you, these laws are of their own making, not imposed by
others, which makes no alteration in the case at all; my fetters not being the
easier to me, because they are of my own making, then if they were made by the
next Smith, or provided for me by some others: Besides which you your self have
told us, that all such Kings as claim by Scripture can be but regulated
Monarchs, and could of right enact no Law, but by the suffrage of the people,
page 15. Which is as notable a preservative of the peoples liberty, as ever was
enjoyed by them in a popular Government. O but say you, the people in a popular
Government have a power to choose the Senate, which they have not in choosing of
their King, and that the people with such a Senate, have power to make what
Laws they please; and what can follow thereupon, but that a Government so
settled in a Senate and people must be accounted for a Divine Institution, and
be called the Government of God, because it is the Government of Laws and not
of men, as you tell us, page 11.

But first, how may we be assured, That a Senate so established will not Lord
it over the people with greater insolency, and put more heavy pressures on them
then ever they suffered under Kings; for being many in number, and all equal in
power, every one of them will endeavor to enrich himself, and serve their turn
upon the people, there being no superior power to control them for it.

And next, how may we be assured, That the people (I mean the whole body of the
people) have any power to choose their Senate, or that the Senate being chosen,
they have a power in voting with them for the making of Laws. The Famous Senate
of the Romans, was ordained by Romulus their first King, their number doubled
by Tarquinius Priscus, and a third hundred added by Brutus, which continued in
the first times of the Consular Government, the people having no hand at all in
the nomination: nor was it otherwise at Athens, though that was the most
popular and Democratical Estate that ever was in the World; the main body of
the people in each City, having as little to do in the choice of the Senate,
as they had in making of their Laws.

And first, in the making of their Laws, none of the City of Athens were
permitted to vote (or to give their voices) but such as were accounted and
enrolled for Citizens; and none were either so enrolled or reckoned but the
Chief of the City, all Servants, Laborers, Handicrafts-men, and Artificers
(which make the far greater part in every City) not passing in account for
Citizens, and consequently having no voice nor power, either in making Laws, or
electing Magistrates.

And secondly, as it was in the Democratie of Athens, so was it in the
Timocratie of Rome; the infinitely greatest part of the Inhabi^an^s having no
hand at all in the making of Laws, or in any other Act of Government, of what
kind soever: For if a Law were past in Senate, none of inferior Order had a
suffrage in it: If it were made in the general Assembly of the Centuries, those
of the Nobility agreeing together, might pass a Law without the rest; and
whither they agreed or not, the Law was always p^ssed by the other Centuries,
before it came to the sixth, consisting of the poorer sort, which were never
called unto the vote: They did in number far exceed all the other five
Centuries.

And finally, if the Law were made in the Assembly of the Tribes, as all the
poorer sort (which made up the far greater part of the City) could never make
any use of their voices in the Assembly of Centuries, so the Nobility (which
made up the most considerable part of the City) were quite excluded from having
any suffrage or voice at all in the Assembly of the Tribes. Admitting finally,
that all the Inhabitants of Rome, Athens, Syracuse, etc. had vote in the
Election of their Magistrates, and in the making of their Laws; yet what makes
this unto those multitudes of people, which live dispersed in the Territories
of those mighty Cities, or in any of the remoter Provinces which were subject
to them; who being infinitely more in number then the Inhabitants of those
several and respective Cities, unto which they were subject, had neither voice
in the Election of the Senate, or in the making of their Laws, or in any matter
of concernment to their several Nations; but will they, nill they, they must
submit to the will and pleasure of their great Masters in those Cities, under
whom they served, though otherwise as able to subsist of themselves, as any of
the common sort of people in those Commonwealths. The like may be observed
also, in some Commonwealths of a later standing, in which the greater part of
the people have no voice at all, as to the making of their Laws, or choosing
such as are to make them for the use of the public; and therefore are so far
from having any part in the public Government, that for the most part they
are Governed against their wills. Such an imaginary speculation, such an empty
nothing, is the supposed liberty of the people in a popular Government.

25. We must next see (notwithstanding all that has been said) how much you
vilify and contemn the Regal Government, in respect of that popular, which you
chiefly drive at: For having told us, That the Government of the Senate and the
people, is that only which is or can be the Government of Laws, and not of men;
and that the Government of the Laws, and not of men, is the Government of God,
and not of men; You tell us out of Aristotle's Politiques, That he that is for
the Governmens of Laws, is for the Government of God; and he that is for the
Government of a man, is for the Government of a Beast: But Aristotle's words
must be understood according to Aristotle's time, Cum arbitria Principum pro
legibus erant, when the Subjects were Governed by no other Law, then the will
of the Prince, and cannot be aplied to any King or Monarch in the Christian
world, which have not only the Law of God for a rule in Government; but many
positive Laws of their own establishing, for the well ordering of the people in
their several Kingdoms.

You tell us secondly, That when the balance is popular, as in Israel, in the
Grecian in the Scicilian Tyrannies, Kings are the direst curse that can befall
a Nation.

But first (to pretermit the extreme harshness of the expression) so far were
Kings from being a curse to the people of Israel, that (admitting the former
Government to have been settled on Popular Agrarian, as it never was) they
proved the greatest temporal blessing to them, as before was said, that ever
the Nation did enjoy.

And Secondly, you fall from such Kings, as exercise no other, then a lawful
power to the Grecian and Scicilian Tyrannies, as if the case in setting up a
King over the people of Israel, not only by Gods approbation, but their own
consent, were to be paralelled with those Tyrannies which were erected in some
Cities of Greece and Sicily, by Dy^nisius and other Monsters of those ages,
infamous for their lusts and most barbarous cruelties. For had the change been
made by persons of sobriety and moderation, (as that in Rome from a Democraty
to a Monarchy, by Augustus Caesar) the alteration might have been for the
benefit of the common people, by bringing them from that which Aristotle calls
the worst kind of Government, to that which comes nearest to the Government of
Almighty God, and is therefore called the most Divine. Nor had the people lost
any thing by such change in the point of liberty, which never is enjoyed more
peacefully and securely ( nunquam libertas gratior extat, quam sub Rege pio, as
it is in Claudian) then under the Government of a just and merciful Prince,
witness the difference in the Government of the state of Florence, between the
tranquillity which all sorts of People do now enjoy under the protection of the
Princes of the House of M^dices, and those confusions and disorders to which
they were continually subject in the popular States.

In the Third place, you tell us that a King or sovereign Prince, can have no
other subsistence or security, then by cutting off or tearing up all roots that
do naturally sheat or spring up into such branches: that is to say, to the free
course of Popular Orders; which may perhaps be true in some of the Scicilian
and Gretian Tyrannies, where every obstacle was removed, which was conceived to
stand in the Tyrants way; yet cannot this possibly be made good in any
Christian Kings and Princes in these parts of the World, in which we find not
any example of cutting off* or tearing up such popular Orders (or any roots
which branch unto them) as have been settled and confirmed in the times
foregoing. Nor are you satisfied with that distinction of the Rabbis, (whose
Authority, when it serve^ your turn, you do much insist on) viz. that the
people of Israel making a King, displeased God not in the matter, but the forms
only, that is to say, in desiring to have a King like other Nations; which is
no more then what generally is affirmed by such Christian Writers as have
discoursed on this subject. Take this of Peter Martyr among the rest* who
tells us that the peoples sinned in this request by desiring of a King after
the manner of all other Nations, and not according to the rule of Gods word.
Deuteronomy. 17. and in that they desired a King without consulting with the Lord, or
having direction or order from him in that business. All which may be, and yet
the balance of a Government may not be only form but matter: the main matter
of their request (which is the root of the tree you speak of) being to change
the Government, and to have a King: the form of their Request (or the formal
words in which they made it) being to have a King like other Nations.

26. Finally you conceive so poorly of the Kings of the Hebrews (and in them,
of all other Kings for ought I can see) that they were but regulated Monarchs
when they were at the best: And in case of Mal-administration, obnoxious unto
corporal punishment from the hands of the Sanhedrim: To prove the first, you
tell us they were so tied up to the Rules of Government prescribed in Deuteronomy. 17.
that they could neither multiply Horses nor Chariots, nor Silver nor Gold; nay,
could of right enact no law (as in those by David) but for the reduction of the
Ark for the regulation of the Priests, (for the Election of Solomon) which were
made by the suffrage of the people. To answer first unto the last, David might
gratify the People in some popular actions, as in the Reduction of the Ark,
and gratify himself by the power of the people, as in settling the succession
in the person of Solomon; and yet not be obliged to it by that place in Deuteronomy.
or any other fundamental law, which required it of him. And so the first place
is answered, that the Kings of Israel were by that rule prohibited from
multiplying Gold and Silver, and Chariots, and Horsemen, in a greater measure
then what was necessary for the support of their Estate, and the protection of
their people against foreign invasions. And to this very well agrees, the Gloss
or Exposition of Diodati, in which we find that the end thereof was, that the
King of Gods People should not exalt himself in pride and Tyranny; nor put his
confidence in humane means; or be corrupted with pleasures. Which if it were
not thus, the rule of Government prescribed by God in Deuteronomy. 17. must b^
directly contrary unto the manner of the King, (that is to say, the customary
practice of those Kings in the course of their Government) which God himself
describes, 1 Samuel 8. 17. And yet this manner of the King, being told by Samuel
unto the People, was so far from terrifying them, from having a King as they
desired, that they cried out the more vehemently, Nay but we will have a King
over us, etc. And which is more, Samuel having again informed ihem at the
auguration of Saul, touching the manner of their King; it follows in the Text,
that Samuel wrote it in a Book, and laid it up before the Lord, 1 Samuel 20. 25.
Which to what purpose it was done, unless it were to serve for a standing
measure both of the Kings power, and the peoples obedience, it is hard to say:
And if you look upon the practice of David and his posterity, we shall find how
little they conceived themselves to be circumscribed within those limits which
you have assigned them; of which you cannot take a better survey then what is
given you by the excellent, but unfortunate Sir Walter Rawleigh in his
conjecture of the causes hindering the reunion of Israel with Judah, during the
troubles of that Kingdom, Hist. of the World. Part. 1. cap. 19. Sect. 6. Where
having first told us, that the dis-affection of the ten Tribes (if we look upon
humane reason) was occasioned by desire of breaking that heavy yoke of bondage,
wherewith Solomon had galled their necks; discourses further of the
hindrances of a reunion of the Kingdoms, in this manner following. Surely
(says he) whosoever shall take the pains to look into those examples, which
are extant, of the differing courses held by the Kings of Israel and Judah in
the administration of Justice, will find it most probable, that upon this
ground i^ was that the ten Tribes continued so averse from the line of David,
as to think all adversity more tolerable then the weighty Scepter of that
House. For the death of Joab and Shimei was indeed by them deserved, yet in
that they suffered it without form of judgment they suffered like unto men
innocent. The death of Adoniah was both without judgment and without any crime
objected other then the Kings jealousy, out of which by the same rule of
Arbitrary justice (under which it may be supposed, that many were cast away) he
would have slain Jeroboham, (if he could have caught him) before he had yet
committed any offense, as appears by his confident return out of Egypt, like
one that was known to have endured wrong, having not offered any. That which
comes after in that Author, being a recapitulation only of the like arbitrary
proceedings of Jehoram, and other of the following Kings. I forbear to add,
marvelling only by the way, that the Sanhedrim did not take these Kings to
task, for violating the standing rules of their Government laid down (as you
affirm) in Deuteronomy. 17. and lay some corporal punishment on them, as you say they
might.

27. This leads me on to the institution of the Sanhedrim, their power, and
period: In the two first whereof you place the greatest part of your strength
for defense of Calvin, though possibly you may be mistaken in all three alike.
In the first Institution and authority of the Jethronian Judges, there is no
difference between us; The first thing you accept against is, that I make the
70. Elders to be chosen out of the Iethronians; concerning which, you tell me,
that I may do you a greater favor then I can suddenly imagine to tell you
really, for what cause, or upon what Authority my speech is so positive, that
is to say, that God willed Moses to choose the seventy Elders out of those that
were chosen in the 18th of Exodus. If I can do you any favor in this, or in
any thing else, I shall not be wanting in any thing which I can do for your
satisfaction; And therefore you may please to know that my speech is grounded
on those words in Numbers 11. v. 1. viz. And the Lord said unto Moses, Gather
unto me seventy men of the Elders of Israel* whom thou know to be Elders of
the people, and officers over them; And bring them unto the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, that they may stand there with thee, etc. By which you may
perceive, that the 70. were not to be chosen out of the Elders only, but out
of the Elders and Officers, and other Officers at that time there were none to
be found, but those which were ordained by Moses in Exo. 18. to be Rulers of
thousands, Rulers of Hundreds, Rulers of fifties, and Rulers of ^ens, for the
determining of such smaller differences, and suits in Law that might arise
among the people. And Secondly, it is consonant with reason that it should be
so, that none should be admitted into the number of the 70. but such of whose
integrity and abilities, there had been some sufficient trial in the lower
Courts. Concerning which, take here the Gloss of Deodati on the former words,
viz: Elders] viz. chosen out of the greater number of the other heads of the
people, Exo. 18. 25. (that is to say, Rulers of thousands, Rulers of hundreds,
etc. for to make up the great Council or Senate. Thou knowest] viz. those thou
have thy self chosen into office, or known and approved of in the exersising of
it. Would you have more, (for I am willing to do you any favor within my
power) then know that Ainsworth, a man exceedingly well versed in all the
learning of the Hebrews, has told me in his Notes or Comment on the former
Text, that by Officers in this place, it seems to be meant of such Elders and
Officers as were well known, and had approved themselves for wisdom and good
carriage, for which they might with comfort be preferred to this high Senate:
For they that have Ministered well, (as the Apostle says) Purchased to
themselves a good degree, 1 Timothy 3. 13. And more particularly thus, Our wise
men have said, that from the great Sanhedrim they sent into all the Land of
Israel, and made diligent enquiry, whomsoever they found to be wise, and afraid
to sin, and meek, etc. They made him a Judge in his City. And from thence
they preferred him to the Gate of the Mountain of the House (of the' Lord) and
from whence they promoted him to the Gate of the Court, (of the Sanctuary) and
from thence they advanced him to the great Judgment Hall, for which he cites
Maimony (one of the chief Rabbines in all that part) in his Book of the
Sanhedrim, cap. 2. Sect. 8. (which gives me very good assurance that the
seventy were first chosen by Moses out of the Iethronian or Ruling Elders which
were afterward called Judges in the Gates, because they were chosen out of
that body in the times succeeding.

28 But granting this to be as you say, I would have it, you ask me what
necessity there should be in it, that because there lay an appeal to Moses,
from those in Exodus, (that is from the Iethronian Judges) therefore there must
needs lie an appeal from the seventy Elders the Sanhedrim unto Moses also.
Which seems to me to be a contention de non Ente. For neither does the
Scripture say in the 18th of Exodus, that there lay any appeal from the
Iethronian Judges to the 70. Elders; nor do I say any where (as I can remember)
that there lay any such appeal from the Sanhedrim or 70. Elders to Moses
himself, though I think that such appeals might be brought unto him. All which
the Scripture says concerning the Iethronian Judges, is only this, That they
shall bring every greater matter unto Moses, but that they should judge in
every small matter amongst themselves, v. 22. which they are said to have done
accordingly, v. 26. But what makes this unto appeals? Appeals are made only by
the party grieved, not by the inferior Courts themselves to the Courts above
them; and therefore when it was said, that they should bring the greatest
matters to M^ses, and keep the smaller to themselves, it is to show the bounds
and limits of their jurisdiction which they might not pass. Just as the
practice is in England, in which the Sheriffs turn, and the Courts of the
particular Hundreds determine not in any action above the value of 40 s. (as
here in Abingdon, not above five pounds) All greater causes of what weight or
value soever they be, being referred unto the Courts or Judges in Westminster
Hall. Nor say I any where, that I can remember) that there lay an appeal from
the Sanhedrim unto Moses himself, though I make no question but there did, and
you have said nothing to prove the contrary. For what makes this unto the
purpose, that because ome of the Jewish Rabbines and the learned Grotius out of
them, have told us, that as in the place of the Jethronian Judges, succeeded
their Judges in the Gates, so the Sanhedrim succeeded in the place of Moses;
therefore there lay no appeal to Moses from the Sanhedrim or 70. Elders. For
first, this may be understood, no otherwise, then that they came into the place
of Moses, after his decease, or rather after the death of Josuah, who succeeded
Moses till the first 70 were deceased. And Secondly, it may be understood, that
they succeeded in the place of Moses, during that interval of time which past
between the destruction of the Temple, and the captivity of the People, until
the settling of the Government in the Race of the Maccabees: and that which
happened from the Reign of Herod the Great, to the final rooting out of that
Nation by the Emperor Aerian, of which times most of your great Rabines seem to
speak, and in which times neither any of the Kings of Judah, after their
reftitution by Iehoshaphat, or any of the Maccabeans were in place and power.
Moses had otherwise made himself of no significancy in the public Government,
and stood but for a Cipher in the Arithmetic of State, if he had not kept unto
himself the Dernier Resort in receiving any just appeals from that higher
Court, as that both lawfully might, and did from the Courts beneath them. Which
solecism in the Arts of Government had been committed by Jehoshaphat also, if
he had left the Sanhedrim an unlimitted power, from which there could be no
appeal (either Agrarimine or Sententia) to the Kings themselves.

29. But then you say, That we need not go further then Scripture for the
certainty hereof, where the seventy are chosen, not to stand under Moses, but
with him; not to diminish his burden, or bear it under him, with an appeal in
difficult cases to him; as is expressed in the Election of the Jethronian
Elders; but to bear it with him, with out any mention of such appeal: On which
distinction, between bearing the burden with him, and under him, you raise this
conclusion, That if the seventy Elders were indeed instituted to bear the
burden with Moses, therefore thenceforth lay no appeal unto him. But this
foundation is too weak, for any Argument of weight to be built upon it; there
being no such difference betwixt the terms, but that by bearing the burden
with him, they might also bear it under him, as indeed they did. When Romulus
ordained the Senate of Rome to be Assistants to him in the Government, and to
bear part of the burden with him, did they not bear it also under him, as well as
with him? And when a King elects some principal persons to be of his Council,
and to bear some part of that great burden which is laid upon him, do they not
therefore bear their part of the burden, as inferior Ministers or Counselors
of Estate, but as equals to him? I believe not so; I might enforce this matter
further, but that the Scripture is so evident and express against you. You
grant that the Jethronian Judges did bear their part of the burden under Moses,
and yet the Scripture says expressly, Exodus 18. 22. that they did bear the
burden with him; and therefore it must follow also, that though the Sanhedrim
was said to stand with Moses, and to bear part of the burden with him, yet they
did bear it under him also, as the others did; which notwithstanding you
conclude, That if the seventy Elders were indeed instituted to bear the burden
with Moses, there thenceforth lay no appeal unto Moses. But then you hope to
mend the matter, by telling us, that Moses gained in wisdom what he lost in
power, and so the change was for the better: For whereas it was said by God to
Moses, in Number. 11. viz. And I will take of the spirit which is upon thee, and I
will put it upon them; these words are so interpreted by all sorts of
Expositors, as not to tend unto the diminution of the power of Moses, God's
Spirit resting on him in as full a manner as before it did: This you are
pleased to grant, and more; for you say it rested in a fuller. How so? Because
(say you) you do believe, his wisdom was the greater for this diminution of
his power: Where first you take for granted, that the power of Moses was
diminshed by the institution of the seventy Elders, which hitherto you have not
proved; and then believe that his wisdom was the greater for it, which is as
hard to prove as the other is, For if the Spirit of God, which before rested
upon Moses, was not diminished by any communication of it to the seventy
Elders, as the text does not say it was, you have no reason to believe, that
any such comunication of it to others, to so many as seventy, should make it
rest upon him in a fuller measure then it did before; or if you mean that his
wisdom was the greater, because he had so many able Assistants in the
Government with him, you should then turn the Text, and say that God took of
the Spirit which was upon the seventy Elders, and put it upon Moses; for
otherwise his wisdom cannot be said to have been greater, for having so many
wise Assistants, no more the personal valor of a Prince may be said to be
greater then it is, by having many men of valor in his Council of War, or the
beauty of a Queen said to be greater then before, by having many beautiful
Ladies attending on her. And so your argument against apealing from the
Sanhedrim, as the supreme Court, to Moses, as the supreme Prince, is brought to
nothing: Which notwithstanding you conceive so highly of the Sanhedrim, because
it has some resemblance to the Senate in a popular estate, that you make it to
be a State distinct from the rest of the people; and all this to no other
purpose, but to multiply the number of estate in every Nation, that Kings, and
such as have the power of Kings, may not be ridden only with the bitt and
bridle, but a Martingal also: For if the Congregation of the people, in Law to
be made, had such power as was shown (but whither it be shown in your Papers or
any where else, I am yet to seek) and that in Law so made, the ultimate appeal
lay unto the Sanhedrim (as you can never prove it did, when there was any King
in Israel) you ask this Question, Why are not here two Estates in this Common
wealth each by Gods own Ordinancce, and both plain in Scripture? Which Argument
or Question needs no other Answer, but that, a male suppositis ad non valet
Argumentum. ad ^ejus concessa (as the Logicians use to tell us). You must have
plainer Texts of Scripture to prove this Ordinance of God, which here you speak
of, or else the Sanhedrim and the people could not make two distinct Estates in
that Commonwealth, as you say they did.

30. Now for the clearer proofs of this, that is to say, that there lay no
appeal to Moses from the seventy Elders, you have recourse to those words in
Deuteronomy. 17. 8. where it is said, That if there arise a Controversy within thy
gates, too hard for thee in judgment; then shall thou come unto the Priest and
to the Levite, or to the Judge that shall be in those days, and they shall show
thee the sentence of Judgment; upon which Text you first deliver this gloss,
viz. that by the Judge which shall be in those days, we are to understand those
supreme Judges which governed the affairs of Israel, from time to time, betwixt
the death of Joshua and the reign of Saul. Secondly, That by the Priests and
Levites, we are to understand the Sanhedrim, according to the sense of all
Authors, as they stand, both Jewish and Christian. And thirdl^, by these words
within thy Gates, the Jethronian Judges, because they sat and gave judgment in
the Gates of their Cities. And thereupon you raise this Conclusion, without
doubt or hesitancy, That by the clear sense of Scripture, all matter of appeal
in Israel lay unto the Sanhedrim: And yet perhaps it may be said, that the
sense of that Text of Scripture is not so clear as you would have it, the words
being otherwise glossed, and therefore otherwise to be understood then you seem
to do.

For First, How may we be assured, that the Pri^sts and Levites made such a
considerable number in the Sanhedrim, as to be taken in this place for the
woole Court; Some which are skilled in all the learning of the Hebrews, telling
us that the 70. Elders were first chosen by six and six out of every Tribe
which make up 72 in all. And yet say they, they passed by the name of the 70.
Elders, ad retundationem numeri* for the evenness and roundness of the number;
even as the 72 Disciples, ( Post haec autem designavit dominus and ali^s
Septuaginta duos, says the vular Latin, Luke 10. 1.) are for the same reason
called the seventy. If so there could but six Priests and Levites be chosen
into that great Council, admitting that the Tribe of Levi were at that time
reckoned to be one of the Twelve; and therefore it is very improbable, that the
Priests and Levites should stand here for all the Sanhedrim; but if the Tribe
of Levi were not accounted, at that time amongst the Twelve (as they were not
afterward) then could there be no Priests or Levites in that Court at all, at
the first institution of it; though afterward when Ten of the Twelve Tribes
were fallen from the house of David, the Priests and Levites might be taken in
to make up the number. And thereupon it needs must follow, that Moses i^ that
place did not intend the whole Sanhedrim, by the Priests and Levites, or looked
upon the Priests and Levites as the greatest and most considerable thereof.

Secondly, It is affirmed by some Christian Writers, that the Priests and
Levites here mentioned, are to be understood in their single capacities, and
not as parts and members of the Jewish Sanhedrim; for when a matter seemed too
hard to be determined by the inferior Judges, they are enjoined (says
Deodat.) to go to the Priests by way of consultation and Enquiry, to be
informed of the true sense and meaning of Gods Laws: The Priests (being great
Lawyers among the people) understanding and experienced in the meaning of Gods
Law, according to which judgment was to be given in all the cases comprehended
therein; for which we cannot have a better proof then that of the Prophet Mal.
cap. 2. 7. where it is said, that the Priests lips should keep knowledge, and
they should seek the Law at his mouth; for he is the Messenger of the Lord of
Hosts. Nor is it so certain as you make it, that by the Judge who should be in
those days, we are to understand, the supreme Judge or Judges, or any of them,
who governed the affairs of Israel, as aforesaid. For Ainsworth who had well
studied the Jewish Rabbines, understands these words of the Sanhedrim it self:
By the Judge (says he) is understood the high Council or Senate of Judges,
which were the Chiefs or Heads of the Fathers of Israel. And this he does not
only say, of his own Authority, but refers himself in general to the Hebrew
Records, and more particularly to Rubbige Maimony in his tract of Rebels, ca.
1. Sect. 4. By both it is agreed, that this direction is not given to the
parties themselves, who had any suit or controversy depending in the low
Courts, but to the Judges of those Courts, and to them alone; for which I must
confess I can see no reason in the Text or context.

31. For if you look into the first words of that chapter, we shall find it to
be a general direction to the people of Israel, by which they are commanded not
to sacrifice to the Lord their God any bullock or sheep wherein is blemish or
any ill favouredness, etc. which no man can conceive to relate only to the
Judges of the lower Courts. Nor find I any variation in the rest that follows,
no nor in that which comes after neiher, v. 14. where those directions do begin
which concern the people (and not the Priests or Judges only) in the Election
of their King. And therefore give me leave to think, (and laugh not at me I
beseech you for my singularity) that there is no other meaning in that Text but
this, i e. That if a doubt or scruple should arise amongst them in their
several dwellings in matters which concerned Religion, and the right
understanding of the law of God, they should have recourse to the Priests and
Levites, for satisfaction in the same, according unto that of the Prophet
Malachy, that the people were to seek the Law from the mouth of the Priest, as
before we had it. But if it were a civil controversy, matters of difference,
which they could not end amongst themselves, and by the interposition of their
friends and Neighbors, they should refer it to the Judge or Judges, in whose
times they lived to be finally decided by him. And for this Exposition I have
not only some authority, but some reason also: My Authority shall be taken
from the words of Estius, who makes gloss upon the Text, viz. Haec sententia
modo sacerdotem modo judicem nominat propter duplicem magistratum qui erat in
populo dei; sacram and civilem; quamvis contingeret aliquando duplicem
magistratum in eandem personam concurrere. My reasons shall be taken first from
that passage in the 12. verse, in which it is said, that the man that will do
presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the Priest (that stands to Minister
there before the Lord thy God) etc. Where the Priest seems to be considered in
personal capacity, as he stands ministering before the Lord at his holy Altar,
not as he sits upon the bench, and acts ^with other of the Judges in an open
Court. But whether that be so or not; certain I am, that many inconveniences
must needs happen amongst the people, if the Text be no otherwise to be
understood, as you would have it. It is confessed on all hands, that there was
some intervall of time from the death of every one of the supreme Judges and
the advancing of the next, though in Chronologies the years of the succeeding
Judges are counted from the death of his Predecessor. And you your self
confess, p. 14. that the Sanhedrim did not continue long after Josuah: And I
can find no restitution of it till the time of Iehoshaphat. For though you tell
us, p. 16. that never any King, except David, had Session or Vote in this
Council, by which you intimate, that the Sanhedrim was on foot again in the
time of David. Yet you have showed us neither reason nor authority for it. And
therefore you may do me a greater favor (as your own words are) then you
suddenly imagine, to tell me really in what Book of Scripture, or in what other
Author I may find it written, that either the Sanhedrim was on foot again in
the time of David, or that David did at any time sit and vote amongst them.
Hereupon I conclude at last, that if the Text be to be understood as you would
have it; and as you say it is understood in the sense of all Authors both
Jewish and Christians, then must the people be without remedy (at the least
without remedy of Appeal) in their suits and controversies during the interval
of time betwixt the Judges, and without remedies also in their doubts and
scruples touching the meaning of the Law, for the whole space of time which
past betwixt the death of Iosuah, and the reign of Iehoshaphat, which comes to
511. years, or there abouts, which I desire you seriously to consider of.

32. And yet the matter were the less, if having given the Sanhedrim the
Dernier Resort, or the supreme power in all appeals; you did not ascribe to
them an authority also to control their Kings. For proof whereof you tell us
that both Skickardus and Grotius, with the full consent of the Talmudists, have
assured you, that if the King came to violate the Laws and the Statutes, it was
in the power of the Sanhedrim to bring him unto corporal punishment. How far
Skickardus has assured you I am not able to say, not being directed by you to
any Book or Books of his where it may be found. But if you find no more in
Skickardus then you do in Grotius, you will have little cause to brag of this
discovery. For Grotius in his first Book, de jure belli etc. cap. 3.) and not
cap. 1. as is mistaken in the print) first tells us thus, viz. Samuel jus
regum describens satis ostendit adversus Regis injurias nullam in populo
relictam potestatem, etc. Samuel, says he, describing the power of the King of
Israel shows plainly, that the people had no power to relieve themselves from
the oppressions of their Kings, according unto that of some ancient Writers on
those words of David, Against thee only have I sinned, Psalm. 51. And to show
how absolutely Kings were exempted from such punishments, he presently subjoyns
the testimony of Barnach monus an Hebrew. In dictis Rabinorum titulo de
judicibus, which is this nulla creatura judicat regem sed benedictus; that is
to say, that no creature judges (or can judge) the King, but only God for
ever blessed. According unto which I find a memorable Rule in Bracton, an old
English Lawyer, relating to the Kings of England, viz. Omnem esse sub rege, and
ipsum sub nullo, sed tantum sub deo, That every man is under the King, but the
King is under none but God. Betwixt which passages, so plainly destructive of
the power ascribed to the Sanhedrim; Grotius interlopes this following passage
from some Jewish Writers, viz. Video consentire Hebraeos regi in eas leges quae
de officio regis scriptae extabant, peccanti inflicta verbera, sed^a apud illos
infamia carebant, and a rege in signum penitentiae sponte suscipiebantur;
ideoque non a lictore, sed ab eo quem legisset ipse probatur, and suo arbitrio
verberibus statuebat modum. I have put down the words at large, that the
learned and judicious Reader may see what he is to trust to in this point. The
sense whereof is this in English, viz. that stripes were inflicted on the King,
if he transgressed those Laws which had been written touching the Regal
office; But that those stripes carried not with them any mark of infamy, but
were voluntary undergone by him in testimony of his repentance; upon which
ground, the said stripes were not laid upon him by a common Officer, but by
some one or other of his own appointment, it being also in his power to limit
both the the number and severity of those stripes which they were to give him.
Nothing in all this which concerns the Sanhedrim, nothing which speaks of such
a power as the bringing of the Kings unto corporal ^punishment; this punishment
being only such as the Kings had condemned themselves unto in the way of
penance, for their transgression of the Laws: This is enough to show how little
credit is to be given to the full and general consent of the Talmudists, whom
Grotius builds upon, for proving the supreme power in the Sanhedrim, in
bringing their Kings to corporal punishment which they never had. And yet to
make the matter clearer, he presently subjoyns these words unto those before
(but whether they be his own words, or the words of some of his Hebrew Writers,
let them judge that list) viz. a paenis autem coactivis adeo liberi erant
reges, ut etiam excalceationis lex quippe cum ignominia conjuncta in ipsis
cessaret. There Kings (says he) were so far exempted from the coactive power
of Law, that they were not liable to the penance of going barefoot, because it
carried with it a mark of infamy. If there be any other place in Grotius, which
may serve your turn, you must first direct me where to find it, before you can
expect it should have an answer.

33. The Talmudists having failed you, you have recourse unto the Scripture,
and to the Authority of Josephus, a right good Historian, but with no more
advantage to the point in hand, then if you had never looked upon them: You tell
us of a Restitution of the Sanhedrim was made by King Jehoshaphat, as I think
it was, for so I find it, 2 Chronicles. 19. v. 8. Moreover (says the Text) in
Jerusalem did Jehoshaphat set of the Levites, and of the Priests, and the chief
of the Fathers in Israel, for the judgment of the Lord, and for controversies
when they return to Jerusalem. But how can you infer from hence, that by the
manner of this Restitution, (admitting that it relates unto the Sanhedrim, as I
think ^it may, though other Writers make it doubtful) does so plainly show that
ever under the Monarchy the power of the Sanhedrim was coordinate with that of
the King, which consequent if it can be rationally collected from that text of
Scripture, or any which depends upon it, I have lost my Logic. Jehoshaphat,
though a just King, and a godly man, could neither be so unskilful in his own
affairs, or so careless of the regalities of his posterity, as to erect another
power which might be coordinate with his own, and might hereafter give a check
to himself and them in all Acts of Government; But then supposing Jehoshaphat
to be so improvident, as to erect a power which was to be coordinate with him;
yet being but a coordinate power, it gave them no Authority to bring their
King to corporal punishment, as you say they did. I know it is a rule in
Logic, Coordinate se invicem supplent, that one coordinate does supply the
defects of another. But I never heard of any such Maxim, as, Co-ordinata se
invicem tollent, that one coordinate power may destroy the other; and if it
has no power to destroy the other, then can it pretend to no power correcting
the other, which is the next degree to a total destruction. For, par in parem
non habet potestatem, as the saying is; Besides all which, if any such power
had been given the Sanhedrim either at the first institution of it* by Almighty
God, or at the Restitution by Jehoshaphat, there is no question to be made, but
that we should have either found it in the Original Grant, or by some
exemplications of it in point of practice; but finding neither of the two in
the Book of God, or in any approved humane Authors, I take it for a very strong
Argument, that no such power was ever given them, Non apparentium, and non
existentium, eandem esse rationem, was a good maxim in the Schools, and I
build upon it.

34, But on the contrary, you hope to help your self by two examples, one of
them being taken out of the Prophet Jeremiah, the other out of the Jewish
Antiquities; you instance first in Zedekias, who to the Sanhedrim demanding the
Prophet Jeremiah, made answer, Behold he is in your hands; for the King is not
he that can do any thing without you. Out of which words you would infer,
First, that the King (according to the opinion of some of the Talmudists) was
not to judge in some cases; which whether he was or not, is not much material;
most Kings conceiving it most agreeable to their own ease, and the content of
their Subjects, to divolve that power upon their Judges, obliged by oath to
administer equal Justice betwixt the King and his people. You infer secondly
from those words, that the Sanhedrim were coordinate with the Kings of Judah,
though there be no such matter in them. My answer unto this objection, and my
reasons for it, you must needs have met with in the Book against Calvin, as you
call it; of which since you have took no notice, I am forced to bring them here
to a repetition. My answer is, That Calvin (whom it most concerned to have it
so) finds fault with them who did expound the place, to that end or purpose
which you most desire, or though the King did speak so honorably of his
Princes, ac si nihil iis sit negandum,, as if nothing was to be denied them;
whereas he rather does conceive that it was, amarulenta Regis quaerimonia, a
sad and bitter complaint of the poor captivated King against his Counselors,
by whom he was so over-ballanced, ut velit nolit cedere iis cogeretur, that he
was forced to yield to them, whether he would or not; which he punctually and
expressly calls, inexcusabilem arrogantiam, an intolerable piece of sawciness in
those Princes, and an exclusion of the King from his legal rights. This makes
the matter plain enough, that the Princes (by whom you understand the
Sanhedrim) had no such power in Calvin's Judgment, as might make them equal to
the King, or legally enable them to control his rections; but the reason which
I there give makes the matter plainer; and my reason is, that Calvin, who is
said by some, to have composed his Expositions on the Scripture according to
the Doctrine of his institutions, would not have lost so fair an evidence, for
the advancing of his popular Magistracy, and consequently of the three Estates
in most Christian Kingdoms, had he conceived, he could have made it
serviceable to his end and purpose: for then how easy had it been for it, in
stead of the Demarchy of Athens, in which you say he was mistaken to have
understood the Jewish Sanhedrim, in which he could not be mistaken, if you
judge aright: Besides we are not very sure, that the Princes mentioned in that
place, did make up the Sanhedrim, or came unto the King in the name of
Council, of which some of them might be members, but rather that they were the
Peers and most powerful men of the Realm of Judah, out of whose Families the
Kings did use to choose their wives. Who being incensed* against the Prophet,
and knowing that the King was not able to dispute the point with them, as the
case then stood, preferred the executing of their malice against the one,
before their duty to the other. But granting that by Princes here, we must mean
the Sanhedrim, and that the Sanhedrim taking the advantage of those broken and
unsettled times carried some things with an high hand against that King, yet
this is no sufficient proof, that either by the rules of their institution, or
their Restitution, they were coordinate with their Kings, or superior to
them. Great Councils, commonly are intent upon all advantages, by which they
may improve their power, as in the minority of Kings, or the unsetledness of
the times, or when they meet with such weak Princes, who either for want of
natural courage, or a right understanding of their own affairs, suffer them by
little and little to get ground upon them. But then I hope you will not argue a
facto adjus, that because they did it therefore they might lawfully do it; that
maxim of the Civil Lawyers, id possumus, quod jure possumus; being as
undeniably true in the case of the Sanhedrim, or any other public Council, as
in that of any private person.

35. Your second example is that of Herod and Hircanus, which you found also in
the Book against Calvin, by which name you call it; but press it quite beyond
my purpose. Baronius had affirmed of the Sanhedrim, (as you also do) Eorum
summam esse potestatem qui de lege cognoscerent, and Prophetis and simul de
regibus judicarent, that they had power of judicature over the Law, the
Prophets and the Kings themselves, which false position he confirms by as false
an instance, affirming in the very next words, horum judicio Herodem regem
postulatum esse, That Herod being then actually King of Jurie, was convented by
them, for which he cites Josephus with the like integrity, so that I had no
other business with Baronius, then to prove that Herod was not King, when he
was summoned to appear before the Sanhedrim; and having proved that point, I
had done my business without any shufflings and Evasions as you put upon me.
But since Hircanus must be brought in also to act his part in a controversy of
which I was not bound to take any notice. I must let you know, that if Hircanus
could not by power save Herod from the hands of the Sanhedrim, and therefore
shifted him away, as you say by art; it was not for want of power in the King,
but for want of spirit in the man. For first, Hircanus at that time was no more
King of the Jews then Herod was, though he be sometimes called so by my self,
and others, because he succeeded in the Kingdom, and was actually in possession
of it, upon the death of Alexandra. But having afterward relinquished the
Kingdom to Aristobulus, and not restored again by Pompey, when the differences
betwixt them came to be decided, he was forced to content himself with the
Dignity and Title of High Priest, and was no other at such time as this
business happened. But granting that he was then King, yet living in a broken and
distracted time, and being a Prince of little judgment and less courage, every
one had their ends upon him* and made him yield to any thing which was offered
to him. So that this Argument comes into as little purpose as that before of
Zedekias; and therefore for a further answer to it, I refer you thither,
without giving any more trouble to my self or you. But when you add, and add it
out of Grotius, that this Court continued till Herod the G. who caused them all
to be put to death except Sameas only; it must needs follow hereupon, that
Herod did not only destroy the Members of that Court, but the Court it self.
For when you say, that this Court continued till Herod the Great, you tell us
in effect that it contiued no longer; and by so doing, you must either
contradict the four Evangelists, who make frequent mention of this Council, as
Mat. 5. 22. Joh. 11. 47. etc. or the general current of Interpreters which have
written on them. Nor am I much moved with that which you say from Grotius
(supposing that he has the Talmudists or his Au^hors in it) that is to say,
that God punished the Sanhedrim for neglect of their duty, in not supressing by
their power, (as they ought to have done ^ he insolences of Herod, in exalting
himself against the Laws For I believe that neither Grotius, nor the
Talmudists, or any who depends upon them, were of Gods council in the business,
or can tell us any more of it then another man: And therefore if the three
Estates in a Gothish Moddel, have no better legs to stand upon then the
authority of the Talmudists, and the power of the Sanhedrim, they can pretend
to no such power after the persons, or actions of sovereign Princes, as Calvin
has ascribed unto them.

36. But you draw toward a conclusion, and so do I, you tell me upon
confidence of your former Arguments, and take it as a matter proved, that there
never lay an appeal from the Sanhedrim unto Moses, nor to any other Magistrate
(excepting only when they lived under the Provincial Government of some
foreign Princes) as also that they had power upon their Kings. You tell me that
I must confess that the three Estates concerned in Parliament, or any other
Popular Magistrate Calvin does dream of, are to be left in that condition in
which Calvin finds them. And so perhaps I may when I see this proved, which as
yet I do not, though there be no necessity on my part to make such confession,
and much less to acknowledge that the whose book is answered, by your endeavor
to make answer to some passages in it. Had it been proved (unanswerably that
the Ephori of Sparta, by the first Rules of their institution, had a
jurisdiction over their Kings, and the Sanhedrim also over theirs, which are
the only two points to which you have endeavored to return an answer) you have
no more reason to expect that I should acknowledge the whole Book to be fully
answered, then that you or any man may be said to have confuted all the Works
of Cardinal Bellarmine, because he has confuted two or three of his chief
Objections. And thus in order to your expectation of hearing further from me,
which you seem to hope for, rather then out of any desires engaging my self
either with fresh Adversaries or new disputes. I must needs say, that I look
upon you as a generous and ingenious Adversary, as before I did: Of whose
society and friendship I should count it no crime, to be ambitious, had not my
great decay of ^ight, (beside other infirmities growing on me) rendered me more
desirous of a private and retired life, then of such an agreeable conversation.
But the window of my shop being almost shut, and almost all my Wares plundered
with the loss of my Library, it is high time for me to give over this trade,
leaving to nimbler Pens the managing of these Political Discourses, wherewith
mine has been already dulled.

P. H.
Lacies Court in Abingdon. December 24. 1658.
AN APPENDIX To the former Papers in Answer to some passages in M. FULLERS late
Appeal, for INJURED INNOCENT.
1. IT is observed of Cicero that renowned Orator, that having spent the
greatest part of his life, in the service of the Commonwealth, and in defense
of many of the principal Citizens whose cause he pleaded, when they stood in
need of so great an Eloquence: there was none found to advocate in his behalf,
when his occasions most required it, Cum ejus salutem nemo defendisset qui per
tot annos, and publicam civitatis, and privatam Civium defenderat, as
Paterculus has it. An infelicity, which I have some reason to expect, though I
do not fear it: when after so many services to the Church in General, and
appearing in defense of so many particular persons of most note and eminence, I
shall be loaded with reproach by some, and contempt by others. Two adversaries
I have lately drawn upon me for my love to truth, my zeal unto the Church, and
the injured Clergy: By one of which (notwithstanding my Respectful usage of
him) I have been handled in so rude and scurrilous a manner, as renders him
incapable of any honest correction, there being no Pen foul enough to encounter
with him, which would not be made fouler by engaging in so foul a subject. From
the other (though more exasperated) I have received a well studied Answer,
composed with ingenuity and judgment, not standing wilfully in an Error of
which he finds himself convinced, though traversing many points in debate
between us, which with more honor to the truth might have been declined. And
in the end thereof, I find a Letter directed or superscribed unto me, tending
especially to the begetting of such a friendly correspondence betwixt us, as
may conduce to the establishment of a following Peace. Which Letter I shall
first lay down, and after some considerations had and made on the book it self,
I shall return as fair an Answer. Now the words of the Letter are as follows.

To my Loving Friend, Dr. Peter Heylyn.
2. I Hope, Sir, that we are not mutually unfriended by this difference which
has happened betwixt us. And now, as Duellers, when they are both out of breath,
may stand still and Parley, before they have a second Pass; let us in cold
blood exchange a word, and mean time let us depose, at least suspend our
Animosities.

Death has crept into both our Clay-Cottages through the Windows; your Eyes
being Bad, mine not Good, God mend them both; and sanctify unto us those
monitors of mortality, and however it fares with our corporal Sight, send our
Souls that Collyrium and Heavenly Eye Salve mentioned in the Scripture. But
indeed, Sir, I conceive our Time, Pains, and Parts, may be better expended to
Gods Glory, and the Churches Good, then in these needless Contentions; Why
should Peter fall out with Thomas, both being Disciples to the same Lord and
Master. I assure you, Sir, (what ever you conceive to the contrary) I am
cordial to the Cause of the English Church, and my Hoary Hairs will go down to
the Grave in sorrow for her sufferings.

You well remember the Passage in Iliad. p. 254.
Homer how wise Nestor bemoaned the unhappy difference betwixt Agamemnon and
Achilles. I am forced to omit the Greek verses because my Amanuensis is not
Scholar enough to transcribe them distinctly for me.


O Gods! how great the grief of Greece the while,
And Pryams self, and Sons do sweetly smile,
Yea all the Trojan Party swell with laughter,
That Greeks with Greeks fall out and fight to slaughter.
Let me therefore tender you an expedient intendency to our mutual agreement.
You know full well, Sir, how in Heraldry, two Lioncels Rampant endorsed, are
said to be the Emblem of two valiant men, keeping appointment, and meeting in
the Field, but either forbidden to fight by their Prince: whereupon, Back to
Back, neither Conquerors nor Conquered, they depart the Field several ways,
(their stout stomachs not suffering them both to go the same way) least it be
accounted an injury, one to precede the other.

In like manner I know you disdain to allow me your Equal in this Controversy
betwixt us, and I will not allow you my Superior. To prevent further trouble,
let it be a drawn Battle, and let both of us abound in our own sense, severally
persuaded in the truth of what we have written. Thus parting, and going out
back to back (here to cut off all contest about Precedence) I hope we shall
meet in Heaven Face to Face, hereafter. In order whereunto, God willing, I will
give you a meeting, when and where you shall be pleased to appoint, that we,
who have Tilted Pens, may shake hands together.

S. Paul, writing to Philemon concerning Onesisimus, says, For perhaps he
therefore departed for a season, that thou might receive him for ever. To
avoid exceptions, you shall be the Good Philemon, I the Fugitive Onesimus. Who
knows but that God in his providence permitted, yea ordered, this difference
to happen betwixt us; not only to occasion a Reconciliation, but to
consolidate a mutual friendship betwixt us, during our lives; and that the
survivor, (in Gods pleasure only to appoint) may make favorable and
Respectful mention of him, who goes first to his Grave, The desire of him who
Remains,

SIR, A Lover of your Parts, and an Honourer of your Person, Tho. Fuller*


3. This Letter I must needs confess to be very civil, and the add^ess
agreeable enough to my disposition; so that I am obliged, both in point of
manners and good nature, to return such an answer to it, as may sufficiently
declare that my contentions rather aim at Truth, then Victory, or Victory no
further, then it triumphs in the vindication of an injured truth. But first I
am to enter into consideration of some particulars relating to the late Appeal,
my Adversary, my self, and finally to some few differences which remain between
us.

4. And first concerning The Appeal, (for by that name he calls his Answer to
my Animadversions) I cannot make a fitter Resemblance of it, then to a well
digested Answer to a Chancery Bill, which for the most part ends with these
formal words, viz. Absque hoc, that any matter or thing material, or effectual,
for him the defendant to make Answer unto, in this his Answer, is not
sufficiently Answered, confessed, or avoided, traversed or denied to the best
of his knowledge. Many particular Errors which were charged upon him, he has
ingeniously confessed, and promised to correct them in the next Edition; so
that I must needs think that I have not bestowed my labor in vain, in case it
produce no further good effect upon him, as I hope it will, some he
endeavors to avoid, and seeks all Subterfuges which wit or cunning can
devise to save himself from the sense and guilt of a conviction. In which
Respect as the Lord Chancellor Egerton was wont to say of Dr. Day, (then being
Dean of Windsor, and Provost of Eaton) that he was the best at creeping out of
the Law of any that ever came before him; so it may be affirmed of the present
Appealant, that he has an excellent way of avoiding that Argument, the
strength whereof he cannot Master, as will appear to any equal and judicious
Reader. And other Arguments there are, which he ^o avoideth, as to make no
Answer to them at all, of which sort most especially are those Charges in the
Adnimadversions, as that about the British Laws, a Copy whereof was desired
from Luciu^ by Pope Euleutherius, number. 14 His bringing the H^ns and Vandals out
of the Cimbrick Chersonese, the first whereof inhabited beyond the Fennes of
Meotis in the Greater Asia, the oaths in the Dukedom of Mertlenburg, on this
side of the Bullich, number. 49. His bringing of the British Laws into the
Collection made by K. Edward the ^onfessor, number. 53. that about St. Stephens
Chapel, number. 64. His making of Cardinal Beawfort to be the founder of the
Hospital of S. Owsse, near Winchester, number. 106. His skipping over the Head of
Henry of Albret, the second Husband of the Duchess of Alanzon, sister to King
Francis the first of France, number. 108. His making Cain to be one of the four
primitive persons in the beginning of the world (which must be understood of
the time when he killed his Brother) number. 129. His not distinguishing between
the first Liturgy of K. Edw. the 6th. and a form of administering the Communion
made the year before. And numb. 136. his not Answering to the Argument in
behalf of the Articles agreed upon in Convocation, An. 1552. nor numb. 141. to
that against Conning of Loyalty by Heart out of the Statute of succession,
derived from the short time which intervened between the making of that
Statute, and the Reign of Queen Mary: And number. 143. His making Callis not to be
worth the charge which it cost in keeping, number: 150. His Ascribing the
precedings of some Bishops to a power given them by the Canons, at what time no
such Canons were made as the Author dreams of, number. 165. His passing over the
Statute, 23. of Eliz purposely made for suppressing the impetuosities of the
Puritan faction, number. 175. His two mistakes in making Bancroft Bishop of
London, to be present at the framing of the Lambeth Article: and number. 189. and
the Lady Margarets Professor in Cambridge, to continue in his place from three
years to three years, number. 190. Thesulri, his placing the Earl Marshal before
the Constable, as if the one had gone before the other in that Royal Pomp, when
as they march by two and two, number. 229. Some he cuts off with an etc as numb.
130. in Baulking the Discovery of such Lands as are held Tith free under color
of belonging to the Cistercians, Templers, and Hospitalers, and number. 135, about
the sitting of the Lords of the Council on Sundays as well as others
Holy Days, for affairs of State, and number. 144. about the Privileges granted in
the Convocation by Act of Parliament; and number. 855. touching the reasons which
induced Queen Elizabeth not to commissionate the Clergy in her first
Convocation, to treat of any thing which concerned Religion, besides diverse
others. And many Paragraphs there are in the Animadversions which he has
totally preter*mitted, without taking any notice of them at all, as, viz. Number.
130. 135. 138. 140. 158. 163. 176. 177. 178. 182. 197. 201. 202. 204. 207. 208.
209. 210. 212. 218. 275. 278. 279. 280. 282. 297. 312. 320. to which for
brevity sake I refer the Reader; and to his Judgment also, I refer the
consideration of all those particulars, whether he thinks them pretermitted as
unanswerable, or not worth the answering.

5. Such being his Avoidings in matters which relate to the story only, we must
next see how he does traverse such Indictments as had been brought against
himself. He stands suspected in the Animadversions, for harboring some
disaffection to the Regal and Episcopal Government, the power and Rulers of the
Church, and the Orders and the members of it: First being touched in point of
Loyalty, for laying down a dangerous Doctrine in reference to the person of
King Henry 6. Lib. 4. to 190. he pleads the benefit of one of the Erratas in
the Animadversions, where fol. 109. is mistaken for 190. and finding nothing to
the purpose in the place mistaken conceives himself to be discharged by
Proclamation, from the Crime objected: But when it comes to be considered in
its proper place, he maks so sorry a defense, that the last words of it, though
but few, viz. The less we touch this Harsh-string the better Music, make the
best part of the Answer, page 2. fol. 52. In the beginning of the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, he advocates i^ behalf of some violent spirits, who being
impatient to attend the leisure of Authority, fell before hand to beating down
of some superstitious Pictures and Images; and several reasons are alleged for
their justification, without pretending unto any other Author, out of whom he
had them; and this he traverseth, by saying, that he subjoyned somewhat in
confutation of their extravigancies; and somewhat is subjoined indeed, but that
which rather speaks the sense of others then his own: Others (says he)
condemned their indiscretion herein, because although they might reform the
private persons and families, yet public reformation did belong to the
Magistrate: Where first, those others whom he speaks of, are of a different
sense from him, who puts such tempting reasons into the mouths of those violent
hot-spurs; and then he makes those others to be so indifferent, as to condemn
them only of some indiscretion, and no higher Crime, page 2. fol. 53.

6. Being indicted for pleading so coldly for the Hierarchy of Bishops, as if
he had a mind to betray the Cause, he traverseth the point and tells us, that
possibly he might do it weakly, for want of ability, but not coldly, for want
of affection; and therefore that from thence-forward, he would stand by and
resign his place at the Bar, to better pleaders then himself: More fully thus
in the Church History, fol. 143. I will now (says he) withdraw my self, or at
leastwise stand by as a silent Spectator, whilst I make room so for my betters,
to come forth and speak in the present controversy of Church Government; call
it not cowardice, but count it caution in me, if desirous in this difference to
ly at a close ward, and offer as little play as may be on either side: which
words of his, whether they do not argue rather a coldness for want of
affection, then any weakness or want of ability, is left to the verdict of the
Jurie. Acoused for mitigating the scandalous offenses of the Martin
Mar-Prelates, in their reviling of the Bishops, by passing no other censures on
them then this, viz. That wits will be working, and such as have a Satirical
vane, cannot better vent it, then in lashing of si^: He complains of being
dis-ingeniously dealt with by the Prosecutor, because he lets us see in the
following words, that whatsoever his own judgment and opinion was, yet the most
discreet and devout sort of men, even of such as were no great friends to the
Hierarchy, did condemn the practice, page 2. fol. 89. His disaffection to the
Church and the power thereof, being urged against him in his congratulation,
for taking away the High Commission and the Oath Ex Officio, which had been
formerly the greatest curbs of the Puritan Faction, and the strongest Bulwarks
of the Church; he pleads no otherwise to the first part of the charge, then by
praying, That God would please to restore the Church, in his good time, so her
just rights, and give her wisdom moderately to use it: And to the second part
thereof, that he desires from his heart, that no such analogical Oath (that is
to say, no Oath which carries any analogy to the Oath Ex Officio) may be
offered to him, but giving the Animadvertor leave to have it to himself if he
does desire it. Ibid!

7. Impeached for reckoning the Cross in Baptism amongst the Popish trinkets,
the Episcopal Ornaments for trifles, the Le^any, Surplice, and other Ceremonies
in Service and Sacraments, counted both as superfluous and superstitious: He
answers to the 1, that though he call the Cross in Baptism a Popish trinket*
yet it is not called so simply and absolutely, that he holds it for an ancient
and significant Ceremony, though it be neither essential to or completory of
the Sacrament; but that it is high time to term them superstitious trinkets,
when that or any others Ceremonies, shall intrude themselves as necessary and
essential, page 1. page 155. neither of which (I mean necessity nor
essentiallity) has hitherto been ascribed to the Cross in Baptism, by any of
the greatest Trinketers in the Church of Rome: So that he might have spared
those words (in reference at least to the Church of England.) A Chain of Gold
is an eminent Ornament about the neck; but it may be drawn so close, as to
choke and strangle the wearer thereof. And in like manner, Ceremonies, though
decent and useful, when pretending to essentiality become (as Luther says)
carnificinae conscientiae, and therefore justly may we beware thereof, page 2*
fol. 9. The second part of that charge, for calling the Episcopal Ornaments by
the name of ir^fles, he exonerates on the Duke of Northumberland, as better
able to bear it, page 2. fol. 78. though the words plainly are his own. And in
full Bar, to the third, he appeals to all such as knew his conformity in the
College Chapel, Country Parishes, and Cathedral of Sarum for his
compurgators, page 2. fol. 80.

8. And finally, (not to descend to more particulars) having reproacht the
sequestered Clergy by the name of Baals Priests, unsavory Sal^, not fit to be
thrown upon the a^nghil, and charged them with such foul offenses, as did not
only cry to ^^sti^e for punishment, but were too shameful to b^ ^^ported; He
Traverseth the point, and says, That his Pen and Tongue has been, and shall
be tender of their Reputation, p. 3. fol. 56. And this is such a kind of
Protest, as the Civilians call Protestation contraria facto, when the
Protestation made of a Man's own innocenc^es, is evidently contrary to the fact,
against which he protests; though for the clearer proof hereof, as in the
former part of the charge, he had fathered his own words on the Duke of
Northumberland; so in this last, he assumes those de^ences upon himself, which
in his Histo* he ascribes to the Oxford Royalists, alleging many just
exceptions for their sequestered Friends, against the proceedings of the Houses.
Which Traverses of his, whether they will hold good or not, must be left to the
judgment of the Court. Certain I am, that by these Vell. Pater. Hist. 121.
Traverses on the one side, and his Avoydings on the other, he seems to be as
much distracted betwixt Science and Conscience, as was Medea in the Aliudque
cupido, men's aliud suadet video melioraproboque deteriora s^equor
Poet, betwixt judgment and Passion; rather Resolved to plead not guilty to
the Bill whatsoever it be, then to stand mute, or to be taken pro confesso, and
have a verdict pass against him* by a nihil Dicit.

9* The General Avoidings, and particular Traverses, which (together with the
Points or Articles confessed) make up the greatest part of The Appeal, being
thus passed over, I should proceed according to the method and style before
remembered to the Considertion of those few Charges which in the Answer are
denied, and so remain in difference between us, as at first they did. But first
I must prepare my way, by taking notice of such Ma^^^^^s and Things, as most
especially relate unto my Adversary and my self. And if I do begin with my
self, I shall refer it to my Adversaries Determination, whether I do it in
reference to the old Rule in the Accidence, That the first person is more
worthy then the second, and the second more worthy then the third; or to the
Proverb which instructs us, That charity begins at home, or Egomet proximus sum
mihi, as the Latins have it. First then, he charge me with Cavils. Cavils
without cause, and Cavils without measure, and yet observes it to be so easy a
piece of work, that a Pigmy may be a Giant; enough for such a purpose. p. 1. If
so, then either I must be a Pigmy, compared to such a Giant, such a Son of
Anak, in Historical matters; or such an easy piece of work must be much
beneath me, whom he is willing to acknowledge to be of abler parts and
Learning, then indeed I am, in hope to gain the greater Honor by his victory
on me. But my exceptions are too just to be called Cavils* too few to be
reckoned without measure, and too well grounded to be accounted without cause;
for otherwise what need was there on his part for so many confessions, such
frequent Traverses and Avoidings of those Accusations, from which he could not
clear himself by a positive Answer: And yet he makes the ca^sless Cavils so
frequent in me, and the humor of Cavilling so Predominant in my affections, as
to be able to affright all those from writing Histories, who have both
commendable Inclinations, and proportionable qualifications, for such
undertakings. * Ap. p. 23.
For saving to my self the benefit and advantage of exception, now and at all
times hereafter against the injustice of such a false and undeserved calumny;
I do hereby assure the Appeallant, and all others whosoever the^ be, who shall
apply themselves to writing of Histories, that my Pen shall never be employed
about them to the disgracing of their persons, or the discountenancing their
performance in what sort soever. And in persuance hereof, I shall be somewhat
better natured then the Lady Moore; of whom my Author knows a tale, that coming
once from Shrift, she pleasantly says unto her Husband, be merry Sir Thomas,
for I have been well shriven to day, and mean to lay aside all my old
shrewishness: yea, Madam, (says he) and to begin again afresh.

10. But so it shall not be with me* that which my adversary takes for a
shrewishness in me, shall be laid aside, never to be resumed again upon any
occasion, when I am not personally concerned. In which case, if either my
spirit prove so eager, or my style so tart and smart, as he * Ap. p. 2.
says it is, I hope the natural necessity of self preservation will excuse me
in it. Where by the way, I must needs think my self unequally dealt with by the
present Appeallant, who is not pleased with my humor, be it Grave or Pleasant:
If I am Grave, and serious in my Animadversions, he ascribes it ever and anon
to my too much Morosi^y, as if I were the Morose himself in Ben Johnsons
Epicaene. I^ smart and jocular, I shall be presently accused o^ Railing as if I
had been bred in Billings-Gate College. I can not make my self merry with a
mess of Fullers, but I must have a Rail laid in my Dish, and a quail to boot;
especially if I touch on our Author himself, who will behold me for so doing,
with no other eyes, then the servants of Hezekiah looked on Rabsecah, p. 2.
fol. 95. And if I do but speak unhappily of a Waltam Calf, the application of
the Harmless Proverb without more a^o, must be Railing also, and such a railing
as is like a To^d swelled with venom, as much beneath a Doctor as against
Divinity. p. 3. fol. 33. But let not my Author be too Angry upon this account,
my Title to the Calf being like to prove as good as his, especially if our
Contentions be so needless, as his Letter intimates. For i^ our Quarrels only
be, de lana caprina, the equal Rider may bestow the Calf upon both alike; Et
vitulo tu dignus and ^ic est, as said the Umpire in the Poet. And in all this I
hope there is is nothing of the snarling dog, to which he i^ pleased to compare
me within few lines after, though he knows well that I can Bite, as well as
Bark, if I set my self to it.

11. But now I am to change my weapons, or rather, to throw down the Sword and
take up the Buckler, that I may save my self the better from those furious
blows which the Appealant le^s fly at me. He charges m^ in General, first with
not being over dutiful to the Fathers of the Church fol. 2. Dutiful then I am
to the Fathers of the Church, though not over dutiful, which I believe is more
then all men, who have read his History canaff^^m of him* and next
particularly, for writing against the two Archbishops of York, and Armah, Dr.
Prideaux, Dr. Hackwell, and Calvin (who against all the Rules of Heraldry, must
be marrialled first) my engaging with M Lestrange, with D. Barnard and his
Squire not being forgotten. Of which the first four might have slept in Peace
in the Bed of Rest, without any disturbance on my part, if three of them had
not been conjured up, by Dr. Barnard, fol. 20.
and his Squire to begin the Quarrel; and the fourth raised by M. Lestrange,
when I least looked for him. And as for Calvin, who must needs lead the Van in
this General Muster; I know no reason which can hinder me, or any other who
have subscribed unto the Government of the Church of England, or have taken the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance to the Kings thereof, from taking him to task
if he com^ ^n our way, as well as any other foreign o^ Domestic Writer of what
name soever.

12. But my ^ndutifulness has transported me beyond the Fathers of the Church.
And I am next accused, for waving my Loyalty and Discretion together, in having
so ^au^ily and unsubject-like counted how often King Charles waved his Crown.
p. 1. fol. 56. Somewhat is also intimated within few lines after, concerning
some of those whom he calls ^igh Royalist^, who maintaining that all the Goods
of the subjects are at the Kings absolute dispose, have written of him in a
base and disparaging language, since the time of his death. If any were faulty
in this last kind, let them speak for themselves, neither my Tongue nor Pen
shall ever be employed in their behalf. Certain I am, that I am free enough
from the accusation; my nearest kindred being persons of two fair a Fortune to
be betrayed by one of their own blood to a loss of that Property, which they
have by Law in their Estates. And no less certain am I, that no flattery or
time-serving, no preaching up the Kings Prerogative, nor derogating from the
property of the English subjects, could be found in any of my Sermons before
his Majesty, had they been sifted to the very Bran. In confidence whereof (as
in the way of Anticipation has Epist. Ded. before the Sermons on the Tares
been said elsewhere) I offered the Committee of the Courts of Justice, (before
whom I was called in December 1640. on the complaint of M. Prinne) to put into
their hands all the Sermons which I had either preached at Court, or in
Westminster Abbey to the end that they might see how free and innocent I was
from broching any such new Doctrines as might not be good Parliament proof,
whenever they should come to be examined. The 2d crimination for waving my
Loyalty and discretion together, in speaking something freely, (let it be
called saucily to please my Author) of the Kings waving of hs Crown, is already
answered, und the Appeallant might have found it in my Answer to the Observator
Observed, where the like Objection had been made. My Answer is; That Errors in
conduct of affairs, and effects in Councels, are not unprofitably noted by the
best Historians, and that too in the greatest Princes; Their successors might
be else to seek in the knowledge of some things of weight and consequence, and
such as most nearly do concern their own preservation. He that sows Pillows
under Ob. Rese. p. 8.
the Elbows of Great Princes, when they are alive, shall be termed a flatterer;
and he that flatters them being dead, to the prejudice and wrong of their
Posterity, deserves not to pass for an Historian. That wit is always better
cheap, which is purchased with the price of another man's Errors, then with the
feeling of our own. So that my Adversary in these Criminations does but Actum
agere, and therefore is to be content with such former Answers as have been
made unto his hands.

13 Now as I stand accused for two little Loyalty to the King, so I am charged
with two much doting on the Queen, even the Great Queen and Empress of this
world, called Regina Pecunia; whose Letter must be made more prevalent with me,
for publishing the Animadversions, then all the other considerations pretended
by me. And for proof hereof, he calls the Book it self to witness. Offered to,
and Refused by some Stationers, because that by reason of his Hi^h terms, they
could not make a saving Bargain to themselves, fol. 57. For Answer whereunto I
must let him know, that the Animadversions when they stood single by themselves
in the first draught of them, were offered to M. Roycro^t the Printer for a
piece of Plate of five or six pounds, and a quartern of Coppies, which would
have cost him nothing but so much paper, conditioned that he should be bound to
make them ready b^ Candlemas Term, 1657. but he not performing that condition,
I sent for them again, enlarged them to a full third Part, and seconded them
with the Advertisements on Sandersons Histories; and having so done, offered
them to M. Royston, and M Marriot, who had undertook the Printing of the Book,
called Respondit Petrus, after my old friend had refused it, whose Propositions
(for I reserved the offer to be made by them) being very free and ingenuous,
were by me cheerfully excepted. But M. Marriot afterward declining the
business, it was afterward performed by M. Royston and M. Seyle, his said old
friend, on no better conditions then had been offerred at the first. And now I
am forced upon this point, I shall add this also, that for the Observations on
the Hist. of H. L. Esquire; and the defense thereof against the Observator
Observed, the Help to History (which now I shall boldly take upon me being thus
put to it) my Commentary on the Creed, and the Book called Ecclesia Vindicata,
I never ma^e any conditions at all; and for the four last never received any
consideration but in Copies only, and those too in so small a number, that I
had not above seven or eight of the three first, and but twelve of the last.
And for the Printing of these Papers, so far am I from making any Capitulation,
that it remains wholly in the ingenuity of the Stationer to deal with me in it
as he please^; so that I scrible for the most part, as some Cats kill M^se,
rather to find my self some Recreation, then to satisfy hunger. And though I
have presented as many of the said Books, and my large Cosmographies within
seven years past, as did amount at the least unto twenty pound, I never
received the value of a single ^^^thing, either directly or indirectly, either
in money or any other kind of Retribution of what sort soever. When my
Adversary can say the like, let him upbraid me with the Love of Regina Pecunia,
but till then be silent.

14. But he goes on and charges me with addressing my History of St. George, by
several Letters to the Earls of Danby, Lindsey, etc. And it is fit that he
should have an answer to that Charge also. And therefore be he pleased to know,
that when I first came came to the Kings service, I was very young, a stranger,
and unpractised in the ways of the Court; and therefore thought it necessary
to make my self known to the Great Lords about his Majesty, by writing that
History, having presented it to three or four of the Lords, which were of the
Order of the Garter; the Earl of Rutland would needs force upon me, the taking
of two twenty shilling pieces in Gold. The sense and shame whereof did so
discompose me, that afterward I never gave any one of them with my own hands,
but only to the Earl of Sommerset, whom I had a great desire to see, and from
whose condition I could promise my self to come off with freedom. But
afterward addressed them with several Leters by some one or other of my
servants; with whom I hope my Adversary will not think that I parted stakes, as
many Country Madams are affirmed to do in the Butlers Box. And though I
dedicated two of my Books since his Majesty's death, to two great Peers of this
Realm; yet for avoiding all such sinister interpretations which otherwise might
have b^^n made, I sent the one of them with a Letter into Wiltshire, and
another unto High-Gate, by one of my Sons not above 15: years of age; receiving
from the one a civil acknowledgment in courteous language; but from the other
not so much as a verbal thanks: And give me leave to add this also, that I have
found more civility in this Kind, from a Noble Lady of Hertfordshire whom I
never saw, and unto whom I never made the least application of this nature,
then from all persons, of both Sexes, that ever I addressed my self unto, since
this scribbling humor seized upon me. I thank God I never was reduced to such a
necessity, as to make the writing of Books any part of the trade which I was to
live by; for if I had, I should have found from it such an hungry subsistence,
as would not have given a chick its breakfast when first out of the shell. If
the great Queen Regina Pecunia, had not been better courted by some of our late
Scripturients, then she has hitherto been by me, they might have put up all
their gettings into a Sempsters Thimble, and not filled it neither.

15. These Charges being thus blown aside, I must be told of many Errors in my
Cosmography, and the brief view of the Reign of King Charles, not long since
published, the not discovering whereof, my Adversary imputes unto himself for a
work of merit. In reference to the first, I must needs confess, that in the
last Edition of my Cosmography there are many Errors, but they are rather
Errors of the Press, then of the Pen. And the Appeallant cannot choose but know,
since he pretends to have read that Book, that I complain more then once or
twice for want of true intelligence in the discribing of some remote Countries
(and India amongst the rest) which were but little known to Ancient Writers,
and have been so imperfectly discribed by our modern Travellors, that no
certainty in History or Chorography can be gathered from them. If any person
shallbe pleased to improve my knowledge, and certify me of the Errors which I
have committed, I shall not spurn against him as the Appeallant does at me, but
thankfully acknowledge their humanity in it, and cheerfully reform what is
found amiss. In the composing of this Book, he is pleased to tell me, that the
extravagancies by me committed are as great as his, that 16. parts thereof in
20. are merely Historical, alien from the subject in the strictne^s thereof.
The Ped^grees of so many Princes, not being reducible to the subject which I
have in hand, fol. 37. But if he h^d been please^ to consult the Title, he
might have found that the History of the whole world, and all the principal
Kingdoms, Seas, and Isles thereof, is as much promised in that Book, as the
Chorography, or Topical Description of the several places; and therefore
neither Alien, Extrinsecal, or Extravagant to my first design. And whereas he
is pleased to tell us a merry tale of a Gentleman who bespoke a Carp for his
Dinner when he was in Geneva, because he had read in that Cosmography, that the
Lemm^n Lake had plenty of that Fish, the best and biggest of that kind, p. 3.
fol. 4. Let me subjoyn a word or two for my just^fication: And first it is not
there affirmed as a matter of certainty, but with a sie serunt, (as some say)
lib. 1. fol. 159. And Secondly, the Author out of whom I had it, is no worse a
man then Guiovanni Botero, an Italian Writer, in whose Relations ^f the W^rld,
tra slated into English with some Enlargements, lib. 2. p. 197. 198. of the
Edition of the year 1616. he shall find this passage, viz. The River and the
Lake (near and on which the City stands) affords diverse sorts of fresh Fish; as
Pike, Roch, Carp, Tench, etc, and above all the best and biggest Carps of
Europe; so many are my Extravagancies, and so unpardonable the mistakes which
the Author has found out to upbraid me with in so great a volume.

16. Let us next look upon those errors which he pretends to have discovered in
the Short View of the Life and R^ign of King Charles, which he p^omiseth calmly
to discover, in his Answer to the Animadversions, fol 7. The first mistake
which he objects in that short view is, That King James design^d the Spanish
match in order to the recovery of the Palatinate, whereas that match had been
projected for Prince H^nry, and after his death for the P^int^ then being,
before the Elector Palatine's accepting the Crown of Bohemia, page 2. fol. 103.
This is no more then what I very well knew before, having by me a Co^py of the
Instructions, which King James gave to John Lord Digby. for his resuming the
treaty of this match, the said Instructions being signed at Linco^n, in his
Majestys progress toward Scotland, Anno 1617. But the business having been
coldly m^nnaged for three or four years, without any visible advance, it was
more hotly followed and negotiated in o^der to the Recovery of the lost
Palatinate, then it had been formerly; and therefore the negotiating of it is
ascribed to that point of time, which gave most life to it, and was the sole
occasion of the Princes voyage. Being in Spain, he was necessitated (says the
short view of his Life) to hold a plausible correspondence with the Catholic
Par^y, p. 2 fol. 15. which Title I therefore gave them there, that I might show
some fair compliance with him in relating the story. And if I give the like
Title any where to our English Papists, as he says I do, there can be no such
ill use made of it (the term being taken in late times for a second notion) as
in giving Bellarmine or Pits, or any other Learned Papists, the name and
Appellation of a Catholic Writer. More reason is there in the next though it
be but little. I must be charged for saying that Laughorne, Powel, and Poyer,
the three Welsh Commanders, submitted to that mercy which they never tasted,
because forsooth, Poyer only suffered death, as the others did not, which
though it be undoubedly true, yet the Proposition stands good howsoever; it
being as undoubtedly true that they submitted to that mercy which they never
tasted* if one of them never tasted of that mercy unto which he submitted. But
the next Error exceeds all that ever was committed by the Pen of an Historian,
discovered in these words of the short view, viz. that Prince Charles being
taken from the care of his Women, was committed to the Pedagogy of M. Thomas
Murrey, a Scot by Nation, sufficiently qualified for that service, but
otherwise ill principled in the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England.
Not so, says he, but S^r James Full^rton had the charge also of his Education
as well as Murrey; and yet that charge which Fullerton had in his education,
was not to be called a Pedagogy, but a super-intendency; he being placed as
Governor over the young Duke, in which capacity Sir Thomas Challoner served
King James in the Education of Prince Henry, not as his Pedagogue, or Tutor,
far greater is the injury done to M. Murrey, in taxing him as disaffected to
the English Church, of whom he tells us, that when he was made Provost of
Eaton, he took his Oath, and therein professed his good liking of our
discipline, as appears by the Cabala. p. 2. fol. 1. But what if no such thing
do appear in the Cabala, but the contrary rather: Then certainly M. Fuller is
more out of the way then he was before, and cannot but give us a taste of his
old zeal to the Puritan Party upon all occasions. We find a Letter in his
Cabala, from the Lord Keeper Williams to the Marquess of Buckingham, p. 66.
wherein he makes many just objections against Murreys preferment to that place,
suspecting him to be averse from the Church Government, and adding, that if it
should be so, his advancement to that place (considering the number of Fellows
and Students there) would be the greatest blow which had been given to the
Church in 50. years. In a Postscript to which Letter he subjoyns this Note,
that M. Murrey had since come to him, and that he had schooled him soundly
against Puritanism, which he dissavowed, though somewhat faintly. Call you me
this the taking of an Oath, or the prosessing in it of a good affection to the
English discipline? An Oath he possibly might take at his admission, to keep
the Statutes of the College; but there is no such oath as binds him to profess
a liking of the English Discipline. And these being all the knots which he can
find in this Bulrush, are neither proved so many, nor so hard to unty, as the
Reader might have been persuaded, by the first overture which was made of this
Calmne Discovery.

17. I could not so much forget my self to be a Parson, as not to Christian my
own child first; which chare being done, I am the most at leisure to attend my
Adversary, of whose parts and praise I shall not speak, because I would not
take a work our of his hands, which he thinks no man so fit to do as himself.
And therefore I shall only take such a measure of him as he makes of himself
in this Appeal; where he spends much more time in justification of the Errors,
falsities and mistakes which are charged upon him, then would have served to
have written a far better History. In order whereunto we find a preparation
couched in fourteen Chapters, to smooth the way before his favorable Readers,
that they might judge the more indulgently of his slips and failings. Such care
and pains for bespeaking friends in his excuse, argues him conscious to himself
of far more Errors then he is willing to confess in the face of the World. The
like may be collected also from the fear he had of falling into the hands of
the Animadvertor, which takes up the whole second Chapter of his Apparatus; and
where there is a fear, there must be some guilt, some doubt at least that all
is not well as it should have been* The Animadvertor was not of such eager
spirit, as to let fly at every one which came in his way, and possibly might
never have heard of this Church History, (living far of, and no such trading in
the Books of the time) if the frequent clamours of the wrongs done to the
Church and Clergy had not come to his ears before the Book it self had been
brought to his hands. And when it was brought into my hands, it found me so far
unresolved to do any thing in it, that nothing but invincible importunity could
have drawn me to the undertaking. The Appealant therefore may be sure, that I
never sent him any such message, as that if I had not been visited with
bl^ndness, I would have been upon his bones before that time; of which,
whosoever did it from him, he knew as little of my corporal blindness, which I
thank God is not yet fallen on me, as he did of my secret intentions, as to
that particular, so far as I was from sending anysuchmessage to him, that I
resolved not to be known for the Author of those Animadversions, whenever
they should come abroad, and to disguise my self the better, related in the
Margin to a passage in my own Cosmogrophy, fol. 19, which now the Appealant
charge on me, as a solecism in point of Heraldy, in laying metal upon
metal, p. 2. fol. 12.

18. My Authors first fears being fallen upon him, he finds himself brought
under a new debate, whether he should return an Answer to the Animadversions,
or sit down in silence. The cause being pleaded on both sides, he resolves at
last to return a plain full and speedy Answer, fol. 3. Full enough I confess of
needless questions and disputes, which rather showed a Resolution not to bear
the Quarrel, then an ability to maintain it. I remember I have somewhere read
of a famous Wrastler, who being many times overthrown, who did suddenly start
up, and by an Eloquent Oration, persuaded the people, that he rather fell by
the slip of his own foot, then by the strength of his Adversary: Such a
wrastler I have met with in the present Appealant, who imputes all his faults
to slips, slips of the Pen, slips Pretal (as he words it) and slips of memory.
To which three heads the Greatest Errors and mistakes which occurs in the
faltiest and falsest writing, may notunfitly be reduced, so much the fuller in
regard he has incorporated the greatest part of the Animadversions into the
body of his Book; which if abstracted from the rest of the Authors, one would
make the Greater Book of the Law (upon a just a perfect Calculation of the line
and folio's) by one part in five, Fuller then otherwise it needed, or could
have been by making use of such of the additionall Notes intended more for
supplement and illustration, then the disparagement of the Author, or disgrace
of the work. But my Adversary thinks his work so perfect, as to stand no more
in need of Illustration, then it does of Correction; supplements supposing some
defects, as Corrections presuppose some Errors. Only I hope the Animadversions
will be well paid for before all is done, the Authors being so well paid for
the first Original (as is said before) and the Appealant better paid by the
Booksellers, and his many Patrons (to whom they are presented like the prayers
of some old Mendicants at the doors of their good Masters and Dames) for the
transcript of them.

19. But whether it be full or not, I am sure it is more full then speedy: For
though the Appealant would be thought to be furnished with the Pen of a ready
Writer; yet had he time and leisure more then enough for a greater Work,
considering what helps he had to set it forward, and therefore I may say in the
words of Sampson, that if he had not ploughed with my heifer, he must have asked
more time (though otherwise he had time enough) to have read my Riddle. If
Mason, one of the Correctors to some Presses in London, had not falsely and
unworthily communicated the sheets to him as they came from the Press, we might
have heard of this Appeal about Michaelmas next, in case it had not cooled in
the heats of Summer, and been retarded by the leisure of a long vacation. But
making use of this Advantage, and having all such other helps as the Libraries
and shops in London, the use of his own hands and eyes, the contribution of his
friends, and an excellent memory to boot could supply him with, it could not
come abroad against Easter term, without the Midwifery of three Presses to
assist at the Labor: The making of a full and speedy Answer (for it must be
both) could not else have agreed with that want of leisure, his many various
employments, and coming twice a Lords day to the Pulpit, (which without
oftentation, he pretends to in that very Chapter) But some like Aesops fellow
servants (whom he tells me of) presumes so much upon themselves, as to promise
that they can do all things, and that whatever thing they do shall be full and
speedy, though there be little speed and less fullness in them.

20. So much being said of the Appealant in reference to his engaging and
dispatch; let us behold him next in his qualifications. One of the fellow
servants of the Animadvertor, a fellow sufferer with him in the cause of the
King, and one of the same party in the Church. All this I am very glad to hear
of, and am sorry I did not hear it sooner, especially if there be any truth (as
I hope there is) in the insinuation. My fellow servant if he were, it must not
be in the capacity of a Chaplain in Ordinary (for I never saw his name in the
list of the forty eight) accompanied with his fixed times of Attendants, as the
others were, but supernumerary and at large, of whom there is no notice taken
in the Court, though they may make some noise in the Country. And a sufferer he
could not be, because he willingly relinquisheth both his cure and prebend,
which he advances by the name of none of the worse Benefices, and one of the
best Prebends in England; not holding both or either of them, till they were
forcibly taken from, him as well as from the rest of his brethren, fol. 2. no
suffering where no injury or wrong is offered, and there can be no injury done
in disposing that which he so willingly abandoned, as he says himself; for
volenti non fit injuria, as the saying is, never applied more aptly then on
such emergencies: And if he were of the same Party in the Church; (as he says
he was) he would have showed some greater zeal in maintenance of the intress
and concerments of it, some greater measure of compassion toward those poor
men, who being spoiled of their Goods and Livings by the infelicity of the
times, must afterward be spoiled of their good name, and living fame, by such
undeserved reproaches as he lays upon them. He speaks unto us now in the voice
of Jacob, but in the History he handles both the Church and Churchmen, even
from the highest to the lowest with the hands of Esau, so that it might be said
two justly, quid verba audiam, cum facta videam? What credit may be given to
words, when they are confuted by our Actions.

21. But whatsoever suspicions and sinister opinions might formerly have been
conceived of him, he either is not the same man he was, or has been hitherto
mistaken for the man he was not. At the least intimation of disloyal thoughts,
he flies out into an open defiance, fol. 55. and wishes that the Ravens of the
valley (who he beholds as Loyal subjects) would in vindication of the Eagle
their sovereign, pick out his eyes. If any such Rebellious Doctrine can be
found in his book, as he conceives himself to be charged withal by the
Animadvertor, fol. 45. He now professes that he does not derogate in the least
degree from the power of the Church, fol. 55. and wished (without Pharisaical
pride) that his Mother would not only spit in his face, but spew him also out
of her mouth, if either by his Pen or practice, he had done any thing
unworthily (to the best of his knowledge) to the destroying of her interess by
his Pen or his Practice, fol. 14. He now declares himself so well affected to
the late Archbishop, as to have spoken two and twenty lines in his
commendation, fol. 46. Referring us to the places in his History, where they
are to be found and rancking them under four Heads in as many Columes, in
reference to his Naturals, Morals Intellectuals, and spirituals, fol. 67. so
much affection he expresses for the sequestered Clergy, that he appealeth to
the searcher of all hearts, if he did not desire to do them all just favor, as
he hoped to find favor from him when he most needed it; so far forth as it
might be done without running himself into apparent danger; assuring all who
chance to read him, that his Tongue and Pen has been, and shall be tender of
their reputations, p 3. fol. 56. He now declares that he does cordially wish
well to the cause of the Hierarchy, fol. 46. and affirms absolutely not only
that he has not in any place of his Books declared himself for a Presbyterian
in point of Government; but that if ever he had scattered such a syllable which
might countenance such presumption, he would presently snatch it up again, for
fear (if I rightly understand him) of giving scandal to himself, and offense to
others, p. 2. fol. 91. Yet as Basurius in the Comedy, said of Captain Bessus,
that he was none of those that believed his conversion from Coward; so I much
fear that very few will believe any conversion in our present Appealant, as the
former passages and protestations do pretend unto. But for my part, I have such
an easiness of nature in me, as to give credit to so many asseverations,
though many passages in this Appeal might incline me otherwise, not being
willing to force any man out of the Church (as was Tertullian by the continual
clamours and reproaches of the Roman Clergy) as long as he desires to remain in
the bosom of it. All therefore I shall say at the present time, is that which
he himself has said of Dr. Theodore Price, (with a little variation only)
that is to say, That if he be a true Son of the Church, it is the better for
him; but the contrary has been generally reported, Printed, and believed, p.
3. fol. 79.

22. These preparations being thus laid down, the points which he denies still
remain in difference between us will be very few. His Confessions being all
allowed (as of common course) be Traverses submitted to the Rule of the Court.
His first Avoidings being offered to the judgment, and his last presented and
directed to the Eye of the Reader. And first beginning with the Britains, the
Arguments which he has offered, against the judgment of Bishop Goodwin, and
Mr. Cambden, two Right Learned Antiquaries, prove nothing to the contrary of
that which I have affirmed; that is to say, that though the Britains had many
Topical and Tutelar Gods; yet that the Druides instructed them in the knowledge
of one supreme deity, as had been taught by many of the learned Gentiles both
Greeks and Romans, no more then it may be truly said of the present Papists,
that they acknowledge and adore but one supreme God, notwithstanding their
superstitious worshipping of so many National, Typical, and Tutelor Saints,
whom they embrace as Patrons of their persons, and their several Countries. And
as for his Derivation of the name of London, from the western Llan-dian, it
stands but as it did before as a fancy only; no proof being made that Diana
was known by that name amongst the Britains, before the coming of the Romans.
p. 2 p. 52.
The great Welsh Antiquary whom he speaks of, might say well enough, that the
Britains called Diana by the name of Dain, but proves not that she was so
called before the Romans came amongst them; the Argument which he brings from
Guarthey Demol, that is to say, Diana's Castle, being so far fetched
(considering the little or no Analogy) betiwixt Dain and Demol that nothing can
be built upon it. Nor finds he any countenance in it from the Annotations of
the famous Seldom and the Polyol bion. For Seldom was not Seldom, when he made
those Notes, which were were written in the year 1612. as one of the first
Essays of his Great Abilities. And being that the whole depends on the story
of Brute, which all our learned Antiquaries have exploded as an idle fiction,
the Derivation from Llan-Dian, falls together with it. For Seldom does
otherwise plead for the story of Brute for to come up to the design of Drayton;
or to show rather how much he could be able to say in defense of a truth, who
has delivered so much Learning, in defense of a Fable, as commonly men spend
their greatest wits in maintaining Paradoxes, When M. Fuller can point me out
to that Isle of Largeria, where Bruit is said to make his Prayers unto Diana; I
shall not only entertain the story of Bruit, and the Etymology of London from
Llan-dian, but shall give that Island some fit place in my Cosmography,
whenever it shall come to a new Edition; till then I must behold it as one of
those Islands, which is not to be found in all or any of our Mapps, as Don
Quixot said right truly to Sancho Pancha.

23. Next coming to the time of the Saxons deviding Gloster-shire into three
chief parts, * p. 2. fol. 6.
laying the parts beyond the Severn to the Welsh or Brittanes, those on this
side the Severn to the Realm of West-Sex, and Cotswald, with the Vail adjoining
between Glosester and Worcester, to the Kingdom of Mercia, makes not that place
were Augustine gave a meeting to the British Bishops, to be in the confines of
the Wiccians and West Saxons, as he says it was: that part of Glostershire
which lay on the other side the Severn, and some part of the Cotswald division
of it being interposed: And as for the mistake, * p. 1. p. 67.
in making Jeffery of Monmouth (who was brought in for a principal witness) to
be the foreman of the Grand Inquest impannelled at the arraignment of the said
Augustine, for murdering the Monks of Banchor (which in a man who wholly
trusts to the eyes of a mother, may be easily pardoned) it makes no difference
in the case for which it was produced by the Andimadvertor; rather it makes for
confirmation of the point which is there delivered, Jeffery of Monmouth being
brought in as the principal witness, by whom the Jurors were to be directed in
the course of their evidence. The conversion of the Saxons being thus passed
over, the Author speaks of the beginning of the several languages, how truly,
let the Reader judge, by comparing the Animadversions thereupon, with the
Answer to them; and in particular affirms, that the Hebrew was the common
tongue of all the world, before it was enclosed into several Languages, Chapter
Hist. lib. 2. fol. 65. Which proposition seeming groundless to the
Animadvertor, he took occasion to discourse upon these four Questions. First,
Whether the Hebrew were the tongue which was spoken in Paradise. Secondly,
Whether it were the common language in all the World, before the confusion.
Thirdly, whither it were appropriated to Heber and his Posterity, as the proper
Language of that line. Fourthly, Whether Abraham brought it into the Land of
Canaan with him, or found it spoken by the Natives at his coming thither? The
two first of these four Questions, are held in the affirmative by the Church
Historian, and for the proof thereof he pretends unto some Authorities; which
whether they be strong enough to conclude the point, is left (as all the other
points betwixt us) to the Readers Judgment. But the Appealant being unwilling
to take any information from the Animadvertor, and yet not able to confute the
Arguments by him alleged, against the common opinion in the other two, he is
fain to shift off that Dispute in such a way, as would have been called a
tergiversation in another man: For mark the weighty reasons which induce him to
decline that Controversy, and not to * p. 2. fol. 14.
gratify the Animadvertor with a better Answer, till either it should come in
his way or make for his wish, which happy conjuncture we may hear of at
New-years-tide next: The first whereof is to show his liberty, that he is
freeborn, and not bouod to Lacquey after the Animadversions, when he has
other business of his own. The second is to wean the Animadvertor from his
moreseness, by not indulging too much to his humor therein. The last to time
his own and his Readers pains, that he may more seasonably spend them hereafter
on matters of more importance. Our Author here like Captain Bessus, skips over
the fight, or rather runs plainly ou^ of the field, leaving the Animadvertor
the sole Master of it. With how much greater care of preserving his credit,
might he have cut of this unluckie section with a thrifty etc. as he does some
others, or totally pretermitted it as not worth the looking after; which
prudent omission he makes use of frequently, when he meets with any knot which
he cannot untye: Or rather how happy had it been, if he had entered on these
considerations, before he ventured on the work; and in like manner passed over
all the rest of the Animadversions; by doing which he might have more gratified
himself, by sparing so much precious time to a better purpose, then he has
gratified the Animadvertor in the want of an Answer: But he proclaims himself
freeborn, and may therefore speak both when he list, and what he list, by his
Fathers Copy.

In the mean time I must change my own, and instead of finding fault with the
Appealant for some sins of omission, must save my self as well as I can from a
sin of commission; I mean from a supposed error which he lays upon me, in
making the small River of Lech to fall into the Thames near Lechled, whereas
Thames says he, * p. 2. fl^. 15.
is more then eighteen miles from Lechled by land, and thirty by water, not
taking the name until the confluence of Them with Isis, nere to Dorchester in
Oxfordshire. But by his leave, though our great Critiques call that part of
this River which arises in Glocester-shier by the name of Isis, yet it is
known to all the people inhabiting on each side thereof, in the Counties of
Gloucester, Wilts, Berks, and Oxford, by no other name then that of Thames: Our
Author having lived seventeen weeks in Oxford, as he says himself, cannot
choose but know, that it is called there by that name, and by no name else; and
should he travel from Dorchester to the head of that River, and enquire of any
whom he met with for the River of Isis, it would be as hard for them to direct
him to it, as it is for him to point me to the Isle of Largeria, or for Dame
Miso to find out the Oudemian street in Mantinaea; whereas the name of Thames
is so known amongst them, that every child of seven years of age which lives
near the River, can direct him to it. The nominations by the rules of Logic,
are taken commonly from the Name of the principal part; and by that rule this
River may properly be called the Thames, before the confluence or meeting of
Them and Isis: Nor am I so much mistaken as he makes me in K. Haralds Mother,
whom out of Cambden p. 2. p. 24.
he calls Githa, and I call Theyra out of Reusner, one of the most exact and
painful Genealogists that ever traveled in those studies. And therefore
probably, that Lady might have two names which was no rare matters in those
times, or might be called Theiras, by the Danes, and Githa by the Saxon
Writers; and so both Authors being reconciled, the Animadvertor may be in the
right, though the Appealant be not in the wrong. And as for Harolds Title by
his Mother to the Crown of England, I doubt not but I may be able to prove that
his Title to it as brother by the whole blood, to Harald, Hartiger, and by the
half blood to Canulus the second, was little worse then that of Edward the
Confessor, as the Son of Elthdred.

24. Proceed we next unto the Kings of the Norman Race, and the first thing he
quarrelleth in me, is my denying Richard Duke of York to be Earl of Cambridge,
p, 1. fol. 34. And I conceive I had good reason so to do, not finding them
amongst the Earls of Cambridge in Glovers Catalogue of Honor, published by
Mills of Canterbury, a right knowing man, not finding this amongst the other of
his Titles in the Tables of the Dukes of York, or the Capitulations made
betwixt him and King Hen. the 6. nor in any one of his many Children, though
Edmund his third Son was made Earl of Rutland; which Title had been formerly
conferred on Edward Duke of York in his Fathers life time. And though I give no
credit to Ralph Brook whom I have found to be as full of Errors as our Author
himself; yet the Authority of Augustine Vincent shall prevail for the present,
and so let it go. But then our Author might have found in the Animadversions,
that admitting Richard Duke of York to be Earl of Cambridge, he must have been
the seventh not the eighth Earl of it, as he says he was, and then that Errors
lies before our Authors Doors as before it did. And then again whereas our
Authors tells us. p. 2. fol. 49. that it is questionable whether his Father
(that is to say, Richard of Conningburg Earl of Cambridge, were Duke of York) I
must needs look upon it as a thing unquestionable, and so must all men else
which are skilled in Heraldry; that Richard being executed at Southampton by
King H^n. the 5. before Edward Duke of York, his elder Brother had been slain
at the Battle of Agen-Court.

25. But whereas our Author thinks it not only difficult, but impossible to
defend a Title of the House of Lancaster to the Crown of England, except I can
challenge ^the privilege of the Patriarch Jacob, by crossing my hands to
prefer the younger child in the succession before the Elder. p. 2. fol. 43.
admitting Richard the Second to resign the Crown, or dying without children by
course of nature. For I behold Hen. of Bullingbrook, Duke of Lancaster, as
Cousin German to that King, and consequently his nearest Kinsman at that time,
wherein Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March, in whom remained the Rights of the
House of Clarence, was but Grandchild to the Lady Philip, Daughter and sole
Heir of Lionel, Duke of Clarence, and consequently more remote by two degrees
from King Richard the Second then the other was. By which proximity of blood,
as Edward the Third laid claim to the Crown of France, and Philip the Second
carried the Crown of Portugal; and Robert Bruce the Crown of Scotland against
the Balions; so I am confident of some ability to prove, that Henry of
Bullingbrook, Duke of Lancaster, had a better Title to this Crown, then the
house of Mortimer. For thoughby the common Law of England he may find it
otherwise, yet there are many things in the common Law, which cannot extend to
the succession of the Kings of England; as in the case of Aliens, which was
that of King James, or in the case of Parseners, as in that of the two
Daughters of King Hen. the 8. or in that of the half blood in the case of the
sisters of King Edw. the 6. and finally in that of the tenure by courtesy in
the case of King Philip the 2d of Spain, admitting that Queen Mary had been
Mother of a living Child. And now I am fallen on these matters of Heraldy, I
will make bold to take in a Remembrance of the House of the Mountagues,
descended in the Principal branches of it, from a Daughter of King Edw. the
Third, concerning which, our Author tells us, that I have made up such a heap
of Errors as is not to be paralelled in any Author, which pretends to the
emendation of another, p. 2. fol. 37. How so? because forsooth I have made Sir
Edward Mountague the Grandchild of the Lord chief Justice, and the first Lord
Mountague of Broughton, not to have been the elder Brother of Henry Earl of
Manchester, and James Bishop of Winton, but their Brothers Son. But first this
Error was corrected in a Postscript to the Examen Historicum, before he could
accuse me of it, and consequently he does but Actum agere, and fit a Plaster
for that sore, which had before been cured by a better Chyrurgion; Secondly,
This can be at the most but a single Error, in case it had not been retracted,
and therefore no such heap of Errors, as is not to he paralelled in any other.

And Thirdly, It appears by another passage in this present Appeal, p. 2. fol.
96. that he had seen the Postscript to the said Examen, which rendereth him the
more inexcusable, by raising such an outcry on no occasion. In which passage he
taxes me with sallery in my third endeavor, touching the late Barons of that
House, in making the said Sir Edward Mountague, to be Lord Mountague of
Broughton in Northamptonshire, which acknowledged for one of his Manors, but
not his Barronie. For I knew well that Broughton, and not Broughton gave the
nomination to this branch of that Family (having never heard before of any
Estate they had in Broughton.) And therefore I must needs charge this Error,
which he so triumphs at, as one of the Errata's which were made at the Press,
though not observed when the sheets were read over to me, and so not Printed
with the rest. Less heartily deals he with me in another place, about the
mistaking of a number, that is to say, 1555. for 1585. p. 1. fol. 41. The
Errors being merely pretal (as is own phrase is) And this he could not choose
but see, though he can winck sometimes when it makes best for his meeting of
that precedent once again, on a more particular occasion then was given at the
present, where the time thereof is truly stated, and where he spends some few
lines in relation to it, so that the motion was direct, not Retrograde, but
that he had a mind to pull me a little back, seeing how much I had got the
start of him in the present race. And as for the Error in the Errata, I know
not how it came; but a friend of mine in reading over the first sheets as they
came from the Press, had put a Quere in the Margin, whether Melkinus, or
Felkinus; and that afterward by the ignorance, or incogitancy of my
Amanuensis, it might be put in amongst the rest of the Errata, which is all
that I am able to say, as to that particular.

26. Our Author had affirmed, that St. David's had been a Christian some hundred
years, whilst Canterbury was yet Pagan. The contrary whereof being proved by
the Animedvertor, he flies to Caerleon upon Vsk. p. 2. fol. 29. by which
instead of mending the matter, he has made it worse. Mistaking wilfully the
point in difference between us. For if the Reader mark it well, the question is
not whether St. David's or Canterbury, were the Ancienter Archi-Espiscopal See,
or how many hundred years the one was elder then the other; but for how long
time Canterbury had continued Pagan, when the other was Christian, which he
acknowledges to be no more then 140 years, as was before observed by the
Animadvertor. And though Caerleon upon Vske had been an Archi-Episcopal See,
some hundreds of years, before that honor was conferred on the City of
Canterbury; yet Canterbury might be be Christian as soon as Caerleon upon Vske
(for any thing our Author can affirm to the contrary, and was undoubtedly such
at the first coming in of the Saxons) though afterward for the space of 140.
years, as before is said, it remained Pagan, so that our Author might have
spared his pains in proving the Metropolitans of St. David's, to be successors
unto them of Caerleon (which was never denied) unless he could infer from
thence, that Caerl on was Senior in Christianity unto Canterbury for four
hundred years (as he expressly says it was) as well as in the Metrapolitical
Dignity invested in it. And this if he can do, I shall conclude him willingly
for a subtle Logitian, though I shall hardly ever allow him for a sound
Historian.

27. The like imperfect defense he makes about the time when Lillies Grammar
was imposed by King Hen. the 8. on all the Grammar Schools of England, placed
by him in the 11th year of that King, Anno 1619 which was full eleven years
before it was ordered by the Convocation of the year 1630. ut una edatur
formula, Authoritate hujus sacrae Synodi, etc. that one only form of Teaching
Grammar should be enjoined from thenceforth by the authority of the Convocation
to be used in all the Grammar Schools of the Province of Canterbury. And
questionless the Clergy in their Convocation would not have troubled
themselves, in ordering one only Form of Grammar to be taught in all the
Schools of the Province of Canterbury, if the King so many years before had
commanded Lillies Grammar to be used in all the Schools of England. Considering
therefore, that this order of the Convocation, preceded the command of King
Henry the 8. and that Lilly dyed some years before the making of this Order (as
our Author plainly Appeal. p. 2. f. 56.
proves he did) the difference between us may be thus made up, that Lillies
Grammar being one of those many, the multiplicity whereof had been complained
of in that Convocation, was chosen out of all the R^st, by the Convocation, as
fittest for the public use, and as such Recommended by the King to all the
Grammar Schools within his Dominions. The Animadvertor was mistaken, in making
Lilly to be living after the Convocation, who was dead before. And yet he
discovers no such indiscretion, not made any such cavelling at a well timed
truth in the Authors Book, as the Appealant lays upon him; the time of the
imposing, and not the making of Lillies Grammar, being the matter in dispute,
in which the Appealant must be found as much mistaken for the Reasons formerly
laid down, as the Animadvertor in the other.

28. His next defense is worse then this, because he finds not any shift to
convey himself out of the Reach of the Animadversion, For finding it so clealy
proved from the words of the instrument, that the payment of the 100000. for
the Province of Canterbury, was to be made in five years, and not in four,
which he held most probable, he hopes to save himself, by saying, that not
reckoning the first ^ 2. f. 59.
sum which was paid down on the n^il, they had just four years assigned them
for the payment of the remaind^r. And so indeed it must have been, if the first
twenty thousand pound had been paid down upon the nail, as he says it was, but
indeed was not; the instrument of that Grant bearing date the 22. of March,
1530. and the first payment to be made at Michaelmas following. As bad an
Auditor he is in casting up the smaller sum of Pilkintons pension, as in the
true stating of this payment, making no difference, no great difference betwixt
taking away 1000 l. yearly from the Bishopric, and charging it with an annual
pension of 1000 l. For he that has 1000 l. per annum, in Farms and Manors,
may pay p. 2. f. 70.
a 1000 l. pension yearly out of it to a public use, and reserve a good
Revenue out of it for his own occasions, by fines and casualties in the
Renovation of E^^ates, and in such services and provisions for domestic uses
as commonly are laid upon them.

29 Our Author tells us of the Homilies, as a Church Historian, That if they
did little good, they did little harm; but he avows as an Appealant, that he
has as high an esteem of them as the Animadvertor. p. 2. fol. 87. And then I
am sure he must needs acknowledge them to be in a capacity of doing much good,
and no harm at all, which is directly contrary to his first Position. That the
Homilies had been Reproached by the name of Homily Homilies, by many of the
Puritan faction; I have often heard, but never heard before, that they had been
called so by any of the same party with the Animadvertor, and am as far as
ever I was from knowing whom that one man should be who did call them so, he
not being named by the Appealant, Where by the way the Author has uncased
himself, and appears in his own proper person, without any disguise: for having
first told us in the second Chapter of his Apparatus, that he was one of the
same party with Dr. Heylyn, he now declares himself to be of the other, and
well it had been, says he, for the peace and happiness of the Church, if the
Animadvertor, and all of his party had as high an esteem as the Author has,
etc. where if the Author has not plainly declared himself to be of a
different party from the Animadvertor (his many protestations and pretenses
notwithstanding) I must needs think my self as much darkened in my
understanding, as in my Bodily sight, when he can extricate himself out of
this entanglement, I may perhaps think fit to enter on a set discourse, whether
the Images of God and his Saints may be countenanced in Churches (I know by the
word Countenancing whom he chiefly aims at) without a visible opposition to the
second Homily of the second Book, but till then I shall not.

30. As little am I bound to return any answer to his Argument taken, Acts 2.
27. against the Local descent of Christ into H^ll; this being not a fit time
and place for such set discourses. The question and dispute between us, relates
unto the judgment of the Church of England touching this particular, in which
he cannot concur with the Animadvertor, that any such Local descent has
constantly been maintained by the Church of England. But that this is the
positive Doctrine of the Church of England, appears first, by giving that
Article a distinct place by its self, both in the Book of Articles published
in the time of King Edward the 6. Anno 1552. and in the Book agreed upon in the
Convocation of the 5. of Queen Eliz. An. 1562. In both which it is said
expressly in the self same words, That as Christ dyed for us and was buried, so
is it to be believed that he went down into Hell, which is either to be
underderstood of a Local descent, or else we are tied to believe nothing by it
but what explicitly and implicitly is comprehended in the former Article, in
which there is a particular mention of Christ's sufferings, crucifying, death
and Burial. This appears secondly, by the exposition of this Article, in the
Catechism of Mr. Alexander Nowel, Dean of St* Paul's, who being Prolocutor of
the Convocation, Anno 1562. (when this Article by reason of those words of S.
Peter, touching Christ's preaching to the spirits in prison, (which before was
in it) was brought under debate) is not to be supposed to be ignorant of the
Churches meaning in that point: And he accordingly in that Catechism (commanded
to be taught in all the Schools of this Kingdom) does declare expressly, ut
Christus corpore in terrae viscera, ita anima corpore separate ad inferos
descendit, etc. that is to say, (according to the English Translation of it,
published in the year 1512.) as Christ in his body descended into the bowels of
the Earth, so his soul severed from the body, he descended into Hell, and that
therewith also the virtue of his death so pierced through to the dead, and to
very hell it self, that both the souls of the unbelieving felt their painful
and just damnation for infidelity, and Satan himself the Prince of Hell felt
that all the power of his tyranny and darkness, was weakened, vanquished, and
fallen to ruin. And thirdly it appears by the learned and laborious work of D.
Thomas Bilson. Bishop of Winton, a co^temporary for the greatest part of his
life, which the said M. Nowel, and a stout assertor of this Doctrine of a Local
descent; against: the new sense put upon the Article, by the Sect of Calvin,
not to descend to ^any instances of a lower date. Which Arguments if they do
not seem sufficient to make good the point, let our Author answer them; and
then, as he now confesses himself to be one of that party, I shall so
afterward account him for Pars Magna too, one of the principal pillars and
supporters of it.

31. He tells us in his History of a Statute made in the thirteenth of the
Queen against covetous conformists, by which it was provided, That no Spiritual
person, College, or Hospital, should let a Lease other then for twenty one
years, or three lives. For which being justly taxed by the Animadvertor, there
being no such thing as covetous Conformists to be found in that Statute; he
justifies himself by saying, That if the Animadvertor will say they were
Conformists (as indeed they were) he then dares swea^ (if called hereunto) that
they were covetous, as who by unreasonable Leases (as the Statutes call them)
w^ste^ the Lands of the Church, till they were seasonably retrenched by that
wholesome Law. But first, the Animadvertor will not say (because he cannot) that
they were Conformists, having already said the contrary in his Animadversions;
for there it may be found expressly, that the Nonconformists by that time had
got a great part of the Church Preferments, and were more likely to occasion
those delapidations, then the regular and conformable Clergy, this latter
looking on the Church with an eye to succession, the former being intent only
on the present profit: And thereupon he ads this note that covetousness and
inconformity (if we mark it well) are so married together, that it is not easy
to divorce them, though here the crime of Covetousness be wrongfully charged on
the Conformists to make them more odious in the eye of the vulgar Reader. All
which the Appealant cunningly cuts off with an etc. p. 2. so. 88. And then
cries out with admiration, how much he wondreth at the Animadvertor, advocating
for their actions so p. 1. f. 47.
detrimental to the Church, who though otherwise they might be Regular in other
things, were in this one Regular to the Rules of Avarice. So tender is our
Author of his non-^onformists, as not to bring them to the light, or suffer
there name to come in question, a^ Parcel Guilty at the least, if not obnoxious
altogether to the acculation: and thereupon to mend the matter, he tells us,
that if the Epithet of Covetous be so offensive, he will change it in his next
Edition into sacril^gious, as in a line or two before, that though conformity
did not make them Covetous, yet Covetousness, perhaps, might make them
conformable; which dashes more disgrace upon them (though he seem studiously to
decline it) then any thing that ever was laid upon them by any whelp of old
Martins Litter, when the Heats were greatest.

32. This Passage with some other, which are next to come, begin to stagger me,
and make me very apt to think that the Lord Bacurius was in the right, when he
delieved there was no such conversion from coward in Captain Bessus, as report
made of it. For look upon him in his judgment about the power of the Church,
and we should find but little cause to give much credit to his protestations,
and Declarations, as to that particular. He tells us, p. 1. fo. 45. that he
never deprived the Church of her authority, and fo. 53. that he derogates not
in the least degree from the power of the Church; and p. 2. fo. 55. that if his
Back would Buttress it up, it should not be wanting, wishing (as formerly was
noted) that if by his Pen or practice he had done any thing unworthily to the
betraying of the Church of England, that the Church would not only spit in his
face, but spew him out of her mouth, fol. 14. But for all this he still
persists in his own Error, in denying any power to the Church of making Canons,
which are of force to bind the subject till confirmed in Parliament. In
defense whereof, he mustereth all his strength together, p. 2. fo 28 as
afterward, fo. 67. 68. 69. Declaring plainly, fo. 67. in that in all the
Animadvertors long discourse upon that subject, he finds very little that he
has learnt thereby, and less (if any thing) which he is to Alter. And
notwithstanding all that has been said by the Animadvertor, touching the not
expiring of the Convocation, An. 1640. by the death of the Parliament; yet he
resolves upon the question, that after the dissolution of the Parliament, the
Clarks thereof elected for their several Cathedrals, and respective Diocesses,
desisted from being public persons, and lost the notions of Representatives,
and returned to their private conditions. In which capacity they might have
given for themselves what sums they pleased, but could not vote away the
estates of other Clergymen, except the respective Cathedrals and Diocesses, had
re elected them; which had it been done, they might no doubt have justified the
giving away of Subsidies, as authorized thereunto, though the Parliament had
been dissolved.

33. So the Appealant has resolved it, and if old Nicholas Fuller of
Grays-Inne, whom he so much magnifieth (that Fuller of Devotion, if I much
mistake not, of whom I find such honorable mention in the Verses on the
Parliament F --) were alive again, he could not have mooted on the point with
more zeal and ignorance. A writing is subscribed on the 10th of May, by Finch
Lord Keeper, Manchester Lord Privy Seal, Littleton Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas, Banks Attorney General, Witsield and Heath his Majesty's Sergeants at
the Law, in which it was declared expressly, that the Convocation being called
by the Kings writ, ought to continue till it was dissolved by the Kings Writ,
notwithstanding the dissolution of the Parliament. But what makes this unto the
purpose? Our Author, a more learned Lawyer then all these together, has
resolved the contrary, and throw it out as round as a boul, that after the
dissolution of the Parliament, the Clarks of Diocesses and Cathedrals desisted
from being public persons, and lost the notion of Representatives, and thereby
returned to their private condition. The Animadvertor instanced in a
convocation held in the time of Queen Eliz. An. 1585. which gave the Queen a
Benevolence of two shillings in the pound to be raised on the Estates of all
the Clergy by the mere censures of the Church, without act of peachment*
Against which not able to object as to the truth and realty of it in matter of
F^ct, he seems to make it questionable, whecher it would hold good or not in
point of Law, if any turbulent Clergyman had proved Recusant in payment: and
having slighted by the name of a bl^ck ^wan, a single instance of an
unparliamented inpowred Convocation; he imputes the whole success of that ^ash
adventure, rather unto the popularity of so Peerless a Princess the necessity
of her occasions, and the tranquillity of the times, then to any efficacy or
validity in the act it self. And to what purpose all this pains? but to expose
the poor Clergy of the Convocation* An. ^640. to the juster censure for
following this unquestioned precedent in granting a more liberal benevolence to
a gracious sovereign, by no other authority then their own.

34. If the ^ppealant still remain unsatisfied in this part of the Churches
power, I shall take a little more p^ins to instruct him in it, though possibly
I may tell him nothing which he knows not already, being as learned in the
Canons, as in the common Law. In which capacity I am sure he cannot choose but
know how ordinary a thing it was with Bishops to suspend their Clergy not only
ab officio, but a Beneficio; and not so only but to sentence them, if they saw
just cause for it to a deprivation. Which argues them to have a power over the
property of the Clergy in their several Diocesses; and such a power as had no
ground to stand on, but the authority of the Canons, which conferred it on
them. And if our Author should object, as perhaps he may, that though the
Canons in some cases do subject the Clergy, not only to suspentions but
deprivations of their cures and Benefices, ^in which their property is
concerned; yet that it is not so in the case of the Laity, whose Estates are
not to be bound by so weak a thread: I must then lead him to the Canons of 1603
for his satisfaction. In which we find six Canons in a row, one after another,
for providing the Book of Common Prayer, the Book of Homilies, the Bible of the
largest Edition; a Font for Baptism, a fair Communion Table, with a Carpet of
Silk, or other decent stuff to be laid upon it; a Pulpit for Preaching of Gods
Word, a Chest to receive the alms for the Poor, and finally for repairing of
the Churches or Chapels, whenever they shall fall into any decay; all these
provisions and reparations to be made at the charges of the several and
respective Parishes, according to such rates as are indifferently assest upon
them by the Church wardens, Sides men, and such other Parishioners as commonly
convened together in the case, which rates if any did refuse to make payment
of, they were compellable thereunto, on a presentment made to the Ordinary, by
the said Churchwardens, and other sworn Officers of the several and respective
Parishes. And yet those Canons never were confirmed by Act of Parliament, as
none of the like nature had been formerly in Queen Eliz: time, though of a
continual and uncontroled practice upon all occasions. The late Lord Primate,
in * Judgment of the L P. p. 112.
a Letter more lately published by D. Barnard, assures the honorable person
unto whom he writ it, that the making of any Articles or Canons at all to have
ever been confirmed in that Kingdom by Act of Parliament, is one of Dr. Heylyns
Fancies. And now it must be another of the Doctors Fancies, to say that never
any Articles or Canons, had ever been confirmed by Act of Paliament in England,
though possible they may relate unto the binding of the subject in point of
Poperty.

35. But our Author has a help at Maw, and making use of his five fingers,
has thrust a word into the proposition in debate between us, which is not to
be sound in the first drawing up of the issue. The Question at the first was no
more then this, whether such Canons as were made by the Clergy in their
Convocations, and authorized by the King under the broad Seal of England, could
any further bind the subject, then as they were confirmed by Act of Parliament.

And Secondly, Whether such Canons could so bind, either at such times as the
Clergy acted their own Authority, or after their admission to King Hen. the 8.
in such things as concerned Temporals or temporal matters, otherwise then as
they were confirmed by national Customs; that is to say, as afterward he
expounds himself, until they were consirmed by Act of Parliament. Which points
being so clearly stated by the Animadvertor in behalf of the Church, that no
honest evasion could be found to avoid his Argument; the Appealant with his
five fingers, lays down life at the stake; and then cries out that the
Animadvertor arrogates more power unto the Church then is due unto it, either
by the laws of God or man; maintaining, (but he knows not where) that Church
men may go beyond Ecclesiastical Censures, even to the limbs and lives of such
as are Recusants to their Constitutions, p. 2. so. 53. And having taken up the
scent, he hunts it over all his Book with great noise and violence, assuring us
that such Canons were constantly checked and controlled by the Laws of the Land,
in which the temporal Estate, life and limbs of persons were concerned, p. 2.
fol. 27. As also, that the King and Parliament, though they directed not the
proceedings of Ecclesiastical Courts in cases of Heresy (which is more then
his History would allow of) yet did they order the power of Bishops over
declared Heretics, without the direction of the Statute, not to proceed to
limb and life, p. 2. fol. 45. And finally reduces the whole Question to these
two Propositions, viz. 1. The proceedings of the Canon Law, in what touched
temporals of life, limb, and estate, was always limited, with the secular Laws
and national Customs of England. And 2ly. That the King by consent of
Parliament, directed the proceedings of Ecclesiastical Courts, against declared
Heretics, so that they could not punish them in life or limb, but as directed
by the statute, p. 2. fol. 69. In confutation of which Proposition, the
Animadvertor is cunningly tempted to write two or three sheets, upon assurance,
that it will be richly worth the Writers and the Readers pains, and the hope of
having an answer to it from no worse a hand then that of the Appealant
himself. This I shall be ready to do, whenever he shall show me in what
place of my Animadversions, or any other Book of mine whatsoever, I have
maintained that the Church has power of making Canons, which may extend either
unto the life or limb of the English subject. Certain I am that no such thing
ever past my hand, or come into my head sleeping or waking, sick or sound: and
therefore this must be a device of his to render me as distastful to all sorts
of people, as he has made himself to all the true Sons of the Chruch of
England, whether they be High-Royalists, or covetous Conformists, as our Autho^
words it.

36. He puts it to the Readers Judgment, whether p. 2. f. 43:
any man alive can from these words, viz. The right lay not in this Henry, but
in Mortimer Earl of March, in for an insinuation that Kings may legally be
deposed. And I confefs as readily, as any other man whatsoever, that no such
insinuation can be gathered from those words of his, as they are laid down in
the Appeal. But then the Appealant should have took his rise a little higher,
where it is said, as positively and plainly as words can speak it, that
granting King Richard, either deservedly deposed, or naturally dead* without
issue, the Right to the Crown lay no^ in this Henry, but in Edmond Mortimer Ea
of March etc. for which consult, Chapter Hist. lib. 4 fo 153. And therefore let the
Reader judge, whether without more Perspicacity in the Organ, or perspicuity in
the Object, any man may not easily perceive such an Insinuation in the words
foregoing, that Kings deservedly or legally, may be deposed. All further
meddling in which point as I then declined, so I have greater Reason to decline
it now. And on that reason I shall spare to press him whether another of his
Inferences, Apothegmes, and Maxims of State, in reference to the person of King
Hen. 6. and the calami^ous death of that religious but unfortunate Prince,
which I find him willing to shift off with this one evasion (which the change
of times has made more passable then before)* that the less we touch on this
harsh string, the better the Music, p. 2. fol. 53.

37. These points relating to the King and the Church, being thus passed over,
the residue of the things or matters material and effectual to be Answered, and
by him denied are neither very many, nor of any great consequence; though truth
be as much violated in a matter of the smallest moment, as in that of the
greatest. That which comes first, and I must fetch a great leap to it, (a great
part of the intervening Animadversions, being either out off with a^ etc. or
otherwise avoided without making any answer to them at all) as far as to the
middle part of Queen Eliz. Reign, where I found our Author advocating in behalf
of Peoples sidings, as they were used in those times, and show the dangerous
consequents and effects thereof, not only in the apprehension of King James,
but of Queen Eliz. All which the Appealant shifts aside, and thinks to satisfy
all expectations, in changing only one of his expressions, which made those
peoplefidings to be grounded on the words of S Paul. And therefore if you read
in the next Edition, that those people sidings were but pretended to be
grounded on the words of St. Paul, we mu^^ then think the Archbishop Gryndal
did well in pleading for them to the Queen, that the Queen did ill in causing
them to be suppressed, and that King James was more miserably our, in dreaming
of so many dangers in that Apostolical Institution (which our Father I see a
Lamb in his own can be a Lion in Gods and the Churches cause. Chapter Hist. l. 9.
f. 130.
entitles plainly by the name of Gods and the Ghurches Cause) as were not to be
found in it at any rate.

In the Historians relating the story of Martin Mar-Prelate, and the great
injury done to the Bishops by those scandalous Libels, an occasion is taken by
the Animadvertor, to put him in remembrance of a rule of his to this effect,
That the fault is not in the Author, if he truly cite what is false, on the
credit of another: Which rule so dangerous in it self, and so destructive to
the truth, so advantatageous to the slandering of the godliest men, and
mis-reporting the Occurrents of all times and ages, is very justly faulted by
the Animadvertor; and thereupon he thus proceeds in his Animadversions, That
this rule whether true or false, cannot be used to justify our Author in many
passages, though truly cited, considering that he cannot choose but know them to
be false in themselves; and he that knowing a thing to be false, sets it down
for true, not only gives the lie to his own Conscience, but occasions others
also to believe a falsehood: And from this charge I cannot see how he can be
acquitted, in making the Bishops to be guilty of those filthy sins, for which
they were to be so lashed by Satirical wits, or imputing those base Libels unto
wanton wits, which could proceed from no other fountain then malicious
wickedness: All which the Appealant passes over without taking the least
notice of it; and to say truth, he had good reason so to do, knowing that
dangerous rule to be so recessary for his justification and indemnity upon
every turn. And thereupon fixing himself upon this Rule. That the W^iter is
faultless, who truly cites what is false on the credit of another; he thinks he
has sufficiently confuted the Animadvertor, by telling him, that if this Rule
should not be true, he must needs have a ^ard task of it* in making good all
things in his own Geography on his own knowledge, p. f. 2. 19.
who therein has traded on trust as much as another.

I must have been a greater Travellor then either the Greek Ulysses, or the
English Mandivile, all Purchase his Pilgrims, many of our late Jesuits, and Tom
Corriot too, into the bargain, if it had been otherwise; if in describing the
whole world, with all the Kingdoms, Provinces, Seas, and Isles thereof, I had
not relied more on the credit of others, then any knowledge of my own; if the
Appealant could have charged me with citing any thing for truth, which I know
to be false, and justified my so doing upon the credit of any Author whom I
know to be mistaken in his information, he had said somewhat to the purpose.
And when he can say that I desire no favor, either from him or any other
whatsoever. In the mean time if any Gentleman, Merchant, or other Travellor,
shall please to let me understand in what such Authors as I trusted have not
well informed me, let it be done in jest or earnest, in love or anger, in a
fair manner or a foul, with respect or disrespect unto me in what way soever, I
shall most thankfully receive the instruction from him, and give him the honor
of the Reformation when that Book shall come to another Edition. I am not of
the humor of the Appealant, or my Doughty Squire, either in kicking against
those who rub upon such sores as I have aboutme, or flinging dirt on them who
shall take the pains to bestow a brushing on my Coat. I was trained up when I
was a child to kiss the Rod, and I can do it, I thank God, now I am a man, Cur
nescire pudens pravae quam discere mallem? rather to be ashamed of mistaking in
any thing I have written, then to learn of any body what I was to write, was
taken up by me both for a rule and resolution, in the very first putting out of
my Geography, and I shall be at the same pass to the very last.

39. In the Reign of King James; there remain only two passages which are to
be brought under consideration, all the rest, being either confessed,
Traversed, or Avoided, as before is said. The first relates to Dr. Hackwel,
whom he affirms to have been put out of his Chaplains place, for opposing the
Spanish Match when first tendered to Prince Henry: But p. 2 f. 101
by his leave, Dr. Hackwel was not put out of his Chaplains place for opposing
the Match, but for some indiscretion in the managing of it, for having written
a well studied piece against that Match, not without some reflections on the
Spaniard, which could not be pleasing to the King* he to whom he presented it,
the King soon undermined him, and blew him up. For finding it to be transcribed
in a very fair Character, he gave the Doctor thanks for it within few days
after; adding that he had seen few great Scholars which were Masters of so good
a hand. To which when the Doctor modestly answered, that it was none of his own
handwriting, but that he was fain to make use in it, of another man's; the King
replied in no small choler, that he that would commit a matter of such weight
and secrecy to the trust of a Clark or common Scrivener, was not fit to live
about a King, and so dismissed him of his place without more ado. The second
Relates to Dr. Davenant, Bishop of Salum, whom he affirms to have received
consecration from Archbishop Abbot, notwithanding the Irregularity under which
he was supposed to lie, by some squemish and nice conscienced Elects, which
before refused it. But our Author is as much out in this, as in any thing else:
for first we find in the late. Archbishops Breviat published by M. Prinne, An
1644. that he (the said Bishop Laud) was consecrated Bishop of S. David's at the
Chapel in London House, November. 18. 1621: the solemnities of the Consecration
being performed by the Bishops of London, Worcester, Chichester, Ely, Landaff
and Oxford, the Archbishop being thought irregular for casual Homicide. Then
look into the continuation of Godwins Catalogue of Bishops, and we shall find
it thus expressed. November. 18. 1621. Johannes Davenant, Sacrae Theologiae Doctor,
etc. ad hanc sedem, (that is to say, the Sea of Salisbury) Consecratus est una
cum Exoniensi, and menevensi Electis. And certainly, if he were consecrated on
Sunday, together with the Bishops of Exeter and St. David's, as he says he was,
he must be consecrated in the same place, and by the same hands also, as the
others were. Whereof see more in the said Continuation, for Laud and Carry.

40. Proceed we next unto the Reign of King Charles, where the first thing in
which I am to grapple with him, relates unto his making dependence of the Kings
Coronation upon the sufferage of the People. Disproved by such passages as
occur in the same particular in the Coronations of King James, and King Edward
the 6. But neither being willing to acknowledge the dangerous consequences of
that Error, nor able to deny their words, with which he was charged, he hopes
to reconcile all parties, by making little or no difference, betwixt the
peoples acknowledging their Allegiance to their Sovereign, when required to do
it at the Solemnities of the Coronation of the said two Kings, and the asking
of their consent unto it, as is affirmed by our Author p. 3. f. 5.
in the case of King Charles. Which words or Phrases he finds to incline to an
agreement, there being, as he says, not only a vicinity, but an affinity
betwixt them, and much condemns the Animadvertor for endeavoring to make the
difference to be vast, exceeding vast, and utterly against the will of the
words. But fearing that these Grammatical speculations would be no fit plaster
for the sore, he hopes to salve the help of an old Receipt taken out of Mills,
but in what age he has not told us; in which it is recorded, That after the
King had a little reposed himself in the Chair or Throne, erected upon the
Scaffold, then the Archbishop of Canterbury shall go unto the fore-squares of
the Scaffold, and with a loud voice ask the good liking of the people,
concerning the Coronation of the King To which it will be easily answered, that
when the good liking or consent of the People, was publicly required to a
Coronation, it was at such times only, and in such cases, when the Kings came
in by broken Titles, for maintenance whereof the favor and consent of the
people seemed most considerable; which consent I find to have been asked at the
Coronations of King Hen. 4. and K. Rich. 3. to whose times it is very possible
that the old precedent found in Mills is to have relation; such arts were used
by Otho in the Roman story, scattering abroad his Complements, distributing his
Embraces, prostituting the most affectionate pledges of love and friendship,
and omnia serviliter pro dominatione, as it is in Tacitus. Courses not used by
any of the Kings of England, who claimed the Crown in their own Right, as their
lawful inheritance, and not as Tenants to the people.

41. The next particular which we meet with, is the substituting of Viscount
Doncaster, whom he makes to be assisting at his late Majesty's Coronation, Feb.
2. 1625. by virtue of an office which his p. 3. f. 4.
Father, is affirmed to have had in the Wardrobe. But I must needs confess my
self to be much unsatisfied in the one and the other, the charge of the
Wardrobe being at that time in the E. of Denbigh, and Viscount Dorchester two
young to perform that service. When I have more of Assurance of the truth
hereof, I shall conceive the place to be rightly mended, but till then I shall
suspend my belief therein. The next thing which occurreth, comes in upon
occasion of Bishop Andrews; the footsteps of whose moderation are proposed as a
part of those who so much admire him; content with the enjoying, without p. 3.
f. 7.
the enjoining their private practices and opinions in others; Conceived in
this to have a fling at Archbishop Laud, he disclaims all reflecting on him in
that passage, confessing that he had an eye in that expression to another
person, relating unto Bishop Andrews; whom since he does forbear to name, I
shall not force him to it by my Reply, being as well able by this short
Character to find out the name, as he is to direct me to him. But then the
Reader is to know, that though the Appealant has transferred the charge, from
one man to another, yet it lies as heavy where he leaves it, as it did before,
and that person whosoever he is, must be Reproched with enjoining his own
private Practices and Opinions upon other men. And this he is so far from
retracting, and thereby making Reparation to the party wronged, that he
resolves to stand his Ground. To which end he tells us, that the controversy
in hand is about additional Ceremonies, enjoined by no Canons. (save some men's
over imperious commanding, and others ^ver officious complying) justly
deserving the censure of private Practices. Take him Bacurius to thy charge,
for I begin to find my self deceived in my expectation.

42. But he will make the Archbishop a large amends and having disclaimed all
Reflections on him in the former charge, prefers him to be of the Quorum, in
the commission granted to the five Bishop^ for exercising the Archi-Episcopal
Jurisdiction of the Province of Canterbury. Being certified of the mistake
which he might have seen rectified before in the Observations, he makes it more
rediculous by his learned Gloss, telling us, p. 3. fol. 10. that he used the
word Quorum, not in the legal strictness thereof, but in that passable sense
in common discourse, viz. for one so active in a business that nothing is
(though it may be) done without him therein, which Exposition of the word
(never heard before) deserves for the excellency and significancy of it, to
have a place in the next Edition of Cowels Interpreter, and there I shall
bespeak one for it, or else in Minshaws Dictionary (who has filched all his
Law terms from that learned Doctor) if that first come out. As much
unprofitable pains he takes in making Mr. Prinne to be born (about Bath) in
Glocestershire; And unto this expression he resolves to stand, though satisfied
that Bath, is a chief City in the County of Sommerset, accusing the
Animadvertor to have dealt disingeniously with him touching that particular.
But I do not mean to quarrel with the Appealant about M. Prynne, and hope that
the two Counties of Gloucester and Sommerset, will not fall out about him
neither, as the seven Cities once contended for the birth of Homer. For my
part, I always took Mr. Prynne to have been born in Sommersetshire, but if he
prove a Glocestershire man, (as I doubt he will not) he will be so much nearer
to me then he was before.

42. He has informed us in his History, That Orders made by some of the Judges
for supprespressing of Wakes and Revels in their several Circuits, had been
enjoined the Churchwardens to deliver Copies thereof to the Minister of every
parish; * C. Hist. l. 11. p. 147
which Ministers, were to publish the same on the first Sunday in February, and
the two first Sundays before Easter, every year, (but how the two Sundays
before Easter every year, can be both called the first Sundays, I believe would
puzzel the most learned Constable that ever served any such Order upon the
Minister of his Parish) pressed by the Animadvertor that the Bishop might as
lawfully command the Ministers in the several Diocesses, to publish his
Majestie^ declaration about lawful sports, as the Judges, to make publication
of their several, p. 3. f. 15.
orders; he now demurs upon the point, not knowing whether the said orders were
mandatory, or, by way of Advice, by which the Ministers were desired to do that
which might be advantageous to Religion: From which doubt being desirous to
free him, I shall subjoyn so much of the said Order, as concerns this business,
viz. And to the end that this order may be better observed, it is further
Ordered, that the Clark of Assize shall leave a a Copy hereof with the Clark of
the Peace, and the under Sheriff; and from them, or one of them, every
Constable shall take a Copy for his several Hundred and Liberty, and shall
particularly deliver a copy to the Minister of every Parish within his several
Hundred and Liberty: and shall take a Note of every Minister under his hand, of
the day upon which he received it from him; and that every Minister which so
receives it, shall publish it yearly in his Parish Church the first Sunday in
February. And it is likewise further Ordered, that every Constable shall at
every Lent Assize, present to the Judges of this Circuit, a note of the Receipt
of the said Order, under the hands of the Minister. I shall make no Gloss upon
this Clause, but present it nakedly as I find it to the Eye of my Author: who
though he will not not take upon him to judge the Judges, (and I know no man
who desires he should) for laying any such command upon the Ministers; yet he
will take upon him to condemn the Bishops, for requiring no more of them in
their several Diocesses, then the Judges did: so strongly is he hurried by the
transport of his own affections, as to make that a crime in the one, which may
be justified in the other.

44. But never did he make a clearer discovery of himself, then he does now
upon occasion of the contest about placing the Communion Table. Whereas (says
he) the Animadvertor says, That an Expedient would not have tended to that
uniformity, that was designed herein, before God and man, I will speak out my
thoughts. That multiformity, with mutual charity, advances Gods p 3. f. 20.
Glory, as much as uniformity it self in matters merely indifferent; which, as
the Pipes of an Organ may be of several length and bigness, yet all tuned into
good Harmony together. And if the Organs did not make a better Harmony, then
our Authors Pipe is like to do, which is so tuned, that every man may dance his
own dance after it, we should have very sorry Music, and such a face of
confusion over all the Church, as could not find a parallel in the worst of
times. For what can else ensue upon it but a possibility, that every ward in
some great City, and every street in that ward, and every Family in that
street, and perhaps every person in that Family; might use his own way of
worshipping his Lord his God, which whether it would prove the means to make
Jerusalem preserve the name of a City, and much less the honor of being a City
which was at unity within it self, I leave unto the Judgment of the equal and
unbiassed Reader: But whereas for a proof of this strange assertion, he
instanceth in that great contention between the Eastern and Western Bishops, in
the Primitive times, about the day on which they were to celebrate the Feast of
Easter: I must needs say he could no^ instance in a worse, or find out any
other example for this inconformity, which could be more destructive of the
hopes which he builds upon it: For though he verily believes, as he says he
does, that God was equally honored by both, by such as religiously observed it,
I cannot think but that he also does believe, that the contention much
redounded to the dishonor of God, the disgrace of Religion, the renting of the
Church into Schisms and Factions, the grief of many sober and pious Christians,
and the great rejoicing of the Gentiles; that difference begetting such
animosities between the Churches, and proceeding from one heat to another, they
fell at last to mutual Excommunications of the opposite parties. One thing I
must confess I am glad to hear of, that is to say, that God is honored by such
men who do religiously observe the Feast of Easter; but what offense he may
give by it to some others, as I cannot guess, so neither shall I make it any
part of my care: And therefore I shall leave him as he does the Judges, as best
skilled in his own faculty, to make good his own Acts.

44. Charged by the Animadvertor, for making the distractions and calamities
which befell this Kingdom, to be occasioned primarily by sending a new Liturgy
to the Kirk of Scotland, he positively denies that he ever said any such word,
as that the Liturgy did primarily occasion the war with Scotland; Rather
(says he) the clean contrary may (by charitable Logic) be collected from my
words; when having reckoned up a compliaction of heart burnings among the
Scots, I thus conclude, Chapter Hist. Lib. 11: 163: Thus was the Scottish Nation
full of discontents, when this Book being brought amongst them, bare the blame
of their breaking forth into more dangerous designs; as when the Cup is brim
full, the last (though least) superadded drop, is charged alone to be cause of
all the running over; and then he adds, Till then that the word primarily can
be produced out of my Book, let the Animadvertor be held primarily as one
departed from truth, and secondarily, as a causless accuser of his brother. I
have stood behind the Curtain all this while, to hear the Appealant rant
himself out of breath, without fear of discovery; and that being done, I shall
take him gently by the hand, and walk him to the beginning of the Scottish
tumults, where we find thus, viz. But now we are summoned to a sadder subject,
from the suffering of a private person, to the miseries and almost mutual ruin
of two Kingdoms, England, and Scotland; miseries caused from the sending of a
Book of Service, or new Liturgy thither, which may sadly be termed a Rubric
indeed, dyed with the blood of so many of both Nations, slain on that occasion,
Chapter Hist. Lib. 11. fol. 159. 160. And now I would fain know with what
charitable Logic, any thing else can be collected out of those words, but that
the miseries and calamnities which befell the Kingdom of England were occasioned
primarily by sending a new Liturgy to the Kirk of Scotland,: For first, in
Marshaling the Causes of those miseries and ruins in which both Kingdoms were
involved, he makes the sending of the Book of Service and new Liturgy thither,
to be the prime cause both in order and nature, of the whole disturbance.
Secondly, he speaks plainer in these words to confute himself, then had been
formerly observed by the Animadvertor; the Animadvertor charging him for no
more then saying, that those calamities and miseries were occasioned by sending
the new Liturgy thither, which now he plainly does affirm to be caused by it.
And thirdly, though the word primarily be not found in that passage, yet he
must be a very charitable Logician, who will not find it in the order and
method of Causes, which are there offered to his view; deduced they may be from
his book, though it cannot be produced out of it; and therefore he may take the
departure from the truth on himself alone, and send for the accuser of the
Brethren to keep him company.

45. Concerning the release of the twelve Bishops (for now he grants them to be
twelve, which before he did not) he hopes to have me upon some advantage, for
denying them to have continued eighteen months in the Tower, without any
intermediate discharge, pro tempore; but not being willing out of his abundant
charity, to have me persist wilfully in any error, he directs me to be
informed by Bishop Wrenn, that none of them were released before May 6. And
from that reverend Prelate I could as willingly take my Information, if I had
any convenient opportunity to ask the Question, as from any other whosoever;
but being I am at such a distance, I must inform my self as well as I can by my
Lord of Canterbury, who in his Breviate tells us this. That on February 14.
1641. there came an Order, that the twelve Bishops might put in bail if they
would, and that they should have their hearing upon Friday, and that on
Wednesday the 15. they went out of the Tower: Assuredly my Lord of Canterbury
cannot be thought to be so ignorant in the affairs of his Brethren, being then
fellow Prisoners with him, as not to understand their successes, whether good
or bad, or to be of such a careless Pen, as to commit so gross an error in
matter of fact, especially in such things as were under his eye; and therefore
I resolve as before I did (till I shall see some better reason to the contrary,
then I have done hitherto) that there was a general Order for the discharge of
the twelve imprisoned Bishops, on Feb. 14. and that they were remanded back
again, by the power and importunity of the House of Commons, upon the reasons
formerly laid down in the Animadversions.

46. And here I would have left the Bishops to enjoy their liberty, but that I
am called back again to congratulate with the Archbishop of York, for p. 3. f.
54.
holding the Deanery of Westminster in commendam, on so good an account. I
thought till now that he received it as a favor, not an act of Justice; but
the Appealant has enlightened my understanding with a clearer notion, telling
me that King Charles confirmed that Deanery upon him for three years, in lie^ of
the profits of his Archbishopric, which the King had taken, sed^ vacant: If
so, his Majesty must be either more just or more indulgent to Bishop Williams,
then he had been to Bishop Neil, his old trusty Servant, whom I find not to be
gratified with any such commendam or compensation, either when he was promoted
from Durham to receive Winchester, or translated from Winchester to the Sea of
York; and yet the King had taken the vacant profits of those Sees for a longer
time, that is to say, from the death of Bishop Andrews and Archbishop Hars^et,
then he had taken those of York on this last occasion: But I hope on^ Author
was somewhat more then half asleep when this note fell from him; for otherwise
me thinks he could not be so much a stranger to the affairs of the Church, as
not to know, that ever since the time of William the second (for so long that
ill custom has continued) nothing has been more ordinary with the Kings of
England, then to enter on the temporalities of all vacant Bishoppricks, whether
it be by death, promotion, or what way soever, and to receive the mean profits
of them, till the new Bishop after the doing of his homage, has taken out a
writ for their restitution.

47. Our Author now draws toward an end, and for a conclusion to his Book
(contrary in a manner to all former Precedents) addresseth an Epistle, To the
Religious, Learned, and judicious Reader. In which he feeds himself and his
Reader also, with the hopes of this, that there are no more Errors to be found
in his History, then those which have been noted in the Animadversions. This I
will add, says he, (for thus he does bespeak his Reader) for my comfort, and
thy better confidence in reading my Book, that according to the received rule
in Law, Exceptio firmat Regulam in non exceptis; it follows proportionably,
that Animadversio firmat Regulam in non Animadversis. And if so, by the Tacit
consent of my Adversary himself, all other passages in my Book are allowed
sound and true, save those few which fall under his reproof. But if so (as it
is much otherwise) the passages which fall under the Reproof of the
Animadvertor, are not so few, as to give the Reader any confidence, that all
the rest are to be allowed for sound and true. Non omnem molitor quae fluit
unda videt, as the Proverb has it; The Miller sees not all the water which
goes under his Mill, much of it passing by without observation, and if the
blind eat many a fly, as the English Adage says he does, he may swallow many
an Error also, without discovery, when he first finds them in his dish. And so
it was with me in the Review of our Authors History, the second perusal whereof
presented many Errors to my consideration, which had not been noted in the
first. And since the publishing of the Animadversions, I have fallen
accidentally upon diverse others, not observed before, of which I shall
advertise him in a private way, whenever he shall please to desire it of me.

48. And here I thought I should have ended, but the Appealant puts me to the
answering of two Objections against the Bishops, having place in Parliament as
a third Estate. Which two Objections may be Answered without being heard, as
being made against the clear letter of the Law, the express words of several
Statutes and Records of Parliament, as also against the positive determination
of Sir Edward Cook, the most learned Lawyer of our times, whose judgment in
that point, may seem to carry the authority of a Parliament with it, because by
Order of this Parliament his Books were appointed to be Printed; But since the
Appealant does require it in the way of courtesy, I will serve him in it as
well as I can, at the present, without engaging my self in any further enquiry
after those particulars. And first as to the Bishop of Man, the reason why he
has no vote in Parliament, is not because he does not hold his Lands per
integram Baro^iam, as is employed in the Objections, but because he does not
hold his Lands of the King at all. The Bishop of Man is Homiger to the Earl of
Darby (as the chief Lord of the Island) of his sole nomination and dependence;
and therefore there could be no reason which might induce the King of England
to admit those Bishops to a place and vote in Parliament, who held nothing of
them, and of whose duty and affections they could promise little. And so much
I remember to have read in the learned Work of Francis Mason, de Ministerio
Anglicano, building therein (if my memory do not too much fail me) upon the
judgment and authority of the learned Andrews, in his Elaborate Apology
against Cardinal Bellarmine.

To the second Objection, That some Statutes have been made, absente, or
Exclus^ clero, which notwithstanding are esteemed to be good and valid,
therefore that the Bishops sit not in the Parliament, as a third Estate: I
shall for brevity sake refer the Appealant to my answer, to the Book called,
The stumbling Block, etc. cap. 5. Sect. 7. 8. etc. where he shall find the
point discoursed more at large then these short Remembrances can admit of. I
shall only now add thus much, that in the Protestation made by the twelve
Bishops, which was enrolled amongst the Records of that house, they thereby
entered their Protest against all such Laws, Orders, Votes, Resolutions, and
determinations, as in themselves null and of none effect, which in their
absence since the 27th. of December, 1641. as were already passed; and likewise
against such as should hereafter pass in that most honorable house during the
time of their forced and violent absence from it, etc. Which certainly so many
Grave, Learned, and Judicious men would never have done, if they had not looked
upon themselves in the capacity of a third Estate, according to the Laws of the
Realm, expressed in several Acts and Records of Parliament. And whereas he
requests me when my hand is in, to answer an Objection taken from a passage in
the Parliament at Northampton, under Hen. the second, in which the Bishops
claimed their place not as Bishops, but Barons ( Non sedemus hi^ Episcopi, sed
Barons, etc.) it must be understood with reference to the case which was then
before them; in which they thought themselves better qualified to pass their
judgments in the capacity of Barons, then in that of Bishops. For that the
Bishops sat in Parliament in a double capacity, will be no hard matter to
evince; considering that they sat as Bishops in all public Councels, before
the entrance of the Normans; and that when William the Conqueror changed their
tenure, from Frank Almoigne, to B^r^nage, he rather added some new capacity to
them, which before they had not, then took any of their old Capacities from
them, which before they had. But this dispute is out of doors, as the case now
stands, which makes me willing to decline all such further trouble, which the
Appealant seems desirous to impose upon me.

50. That which I have already done in Order to his satisfaction, is more then
he can challenge in the ordinary course of Disputation, or has deserved at my
hands in the managing of it. He tells us in the Third Chapter of his Apparatus,
that finding himself necessitated to return an answer to the Animadversions,
he was resolved first to abstain from all Railing, that being a sick wit, or
the sickness of wit, as he truly notes; And secondly, not to be bitter against
the Credit of the Animadvertor, though perchance he may have something tart to
quicken the Appetite of the Reader. As for the credit of the Animadvertor, it
has past through too many trials, both public and private, to be foiled by
such an empty insinuation; Fama velim credas, crimine n^stra caret, in the
Poets words. If he can find any hole in my Coat, let him make it wider if he
can; I do not hold my credit of him, either as Tenant at will, or Tenant by
courtesy; nor as the Bishops anciently held their Lands of the Crown, as
Tenant in Frank Almoigne, by Alms or Charity. It is my hope that I have
acquired a free hold in it, a good Estate for term of life, of which a st^onger
Adversary then this Appealant, shall never be able to disseize me. But how
far he is infected with that sickness of wit, that sick wit of Railing,
against which he seems to be resolved, two many passages in his Book, are
sufficient symptoms. In his Examination of the general Preface, that my
Antidote against his Book has more of poison then of Cordial in it; and that I
envenome many plain and true passages, with my false Glosses, forced
Inferences, and pestilent Applications, p. 1. fol. 20. as afterward calls me a
Deforming Reformer, fol. 19. An Adventurous Emperick, fol. 22. upbraids me with
my flouncing and flattering, fol. 59. accuses me of Don-Quixotism, p. 2. fol.
49. Gives me the name of Rabsecah, fol. 95. brings me to sit down in the seat
of the scornful, p. 1. fo. 20. reproacheth me with Railing, such railing as not
only beneath a Doctor, but against Divinity, making me to be bred in
Billings-Gate College, p. 3. fo. 33. and in the same calls me by craft (as we
poor Country folk use to say) a snarling Dog, and in plain terms, a very
Malignant indeed, p. 49. I must confess I have found some worser language from
the hands of others, though this be more then may comport with that Declaration
of his declining all expressions which might savor of Railing, to which how
near he comes in all these particulars, and how far he has dipped his Pen in the
Gall of bitterness, is not mine to Judge.

51. But his fine Masterpiece of wit, is that which he conceives to be an
Anagram of his own making in the name of Heilin, out of the which Letters
whereof being transposed, he makes Nihili, that is to say, Nothing worth; a
conceit not of his discovery, for it was found out long since, when I was a
School boy; And I had thought we should have had no boys play revived between
us. But since he has led the way unto it, I hope he will give me leave to
follow, and ^ub up some of the first fancies of my younger days. In confidence
of which leave, on the first scanning of his name with my bad eyes, I was able
to disc^^n an Halter in it, and some full Halter too, to make up the Anagram.
But I shall not doom the man to so sad an End, or leave him to the mercy of a
second Miracle, from King Hen. the 6. the Tutelar or Patron Saint of old Thomas
of Hammer-smith, for which consult the Animadversions, p. 176. and the Appeal,
p. 3. fol. 32. Rather I shall content my self with such ^a moderate
retaliation as the letters of his name will give me without any such
stretching; which in relation to his frequent Haltings, betwixt State and
Monarchy, Episcopacy and Presbytery, the Common Prayer Book, and the Directory,
will set forth Thomas Fuller for a fulsome Halter, and so let him pass.

52. I must beseech the Reader to excuse this Levity, which nothing but
invincible indignation could have forced upon me: and in the next place, not to
wonder that I have made so short a Replication to so long an Answer; For first
it is to be considered, that three parts in five of the Appeal are the very
words of my Animadversions; and I do not yet find my self reduced to any
necessity, being an (...), or a condemner of my self for any thing by me
delivered in that Book. And in the two parts which are remaining as the Authors
were, there are many things in which he confesses himself to have been
formerly mistaken, of which he has promised Reformation in the next Edition of
his History, if ever it shall come to a second birth; whereof I had no reason
to make a particular repetition in this short Appendix. Some other passages
there are in the Animadversions, to which the Traverses of the Appealant are so
slight and perfunctory, that they are tantamount to a plain acknowledgement,
and therefore are to pass in the account of Confessions also. But his
Avoydings* as they make up the greatest part of his own discourses, so I
conceive they will appear no otherwise to a learned and judicious Reader, then
as Subterfuges and Avoydings only, not to be qualified by the name of
satisfactory, and sufficient answers; and therefore no especial Replication to
be needful to them, which might occasion a Rejoyner, and consequently spin out
the cause to an endless length. Which being the general Anatomy of the whole
Appeal, there remains only some few parts to be dissected, in which the
Appealant stands too stiffly, though erroneously to his first opinions; or
fathers the mistakes of his own begetting on the Animadvertor; or otherwise
creates new Errors in laboring too sollicitously to palliate and defend the
old.

53. Till this was done, I could not think my self in a condition to embrace
any of those civil and ingenious overtures which are made in the Appealants
Letter. And yet there was some other reason, which made this short answer seem
so necessary, as not to be honestly avoided; A report being spread abroad and
printed in one of Squire Sandersons bald and scurrilous Pamphlets, that I had
begged pardon of the Appealant by a supplicatory and submissive Letter, for my
writing against him, which base and scandalous Report might have found belief
(notwithstanding my laboring to decry it in the general Preface to this book,
before the Appealants was sent to me) if I had not showed my self in this
short Reply, to be as free from any fear of Mr. Fuller, as I conceive my self
to be out of his Danger. But whether I be out of his danger or no, must be
referred to the equal and impartial Reader, whom I beseech not to be wanting to
himself in a diligent comparing of the Animadversions, with this Answer to it,
in every branch and clause of either as they lie before him; And then I shall
not doubt of such a favorable sentence, as on an equal hearing, can be given
in Chancery to an honest cause. Which brief account being offered to
Examination, will prove, I hope, as satisfactory in the summa Totalis, as if
the several Items had been specified, and summed up particularly, whenever
any equal and judicious Auditor, shall trouble himself in casting up the
Reckonings which are between us. And in this hope I shall apply my self to
Answer Mr. Fullers Letter, whom I thus salute.

To my Loving Friend, Mr. THOMAS FULLER.
SIR,
AT the End of your Appeal (which came not to my hand till Friday the sixth of
this month) I find a very civil Letter directed to me, in which you propose a
breathing time, after some weariness in the encounters which have past between
us; and the suspending of such Animosities as we may be supposed to harbor
against one another. But for my part as I have had no such long breathing time,
(since those Papers which relate to you first past my hands) as might make me
the more ready for this second onset; so you may take as long or little time,
as you please, to consider of it, before you return to the encounter.
Animosities I have none against you, and therefore none to be suspended in this
Inter-Parleance: My affections being fair to your person, though not to the
cause, for which you seem most to have appeared in the whole course of your
History: And if you had appeared so, only to my apprehension, I had been the
more inexcusable both to God and Man; and the more accomptable to you, for
conceiving otherwise of you, then you had deserved. But I am confident there
are very few true Sons of the Church of England, who could make any other
judgment of you, out of your History, then was made by me; and therefore you
must thank your self, if any greater noise has been made about it, then you
could willingly have heard* You know what Caesar's Resolution was about his
wife, for having her as free from the suspicion, as the crime of Incontinency;
and therefore if your Conscience do acquit you, from the crim it self, in
Acting any thing against the Interest of the Church your Mother, you had done
very well, and wisely, had you kept your self free from the suspicion also of
such disaffections.

You tell me, that you are cordial to the Cause of the English Church, and
that your hoary hairs will go down into the Grave in sorrow for her sufferings.
But then as 1 Samuel 15. 14.
Samuel said to Saul, What means this bleating of the sheep ^in my Ears, and
the lowing, of Oxen which I hear. What mean those dangerous Positions, and
those many inconvenient expressions (that I may give them no worse name) which
occur so frequently in your Book, and which no man, who is cordial to the Cause
of the English Church, can either read with patience, or pass over with pardon.
If you would be believed in this, you must not speak the same Language in your
second Edition, as you have done in the first, or leave so much in it of the
former Leven as may sour the whole lump of your performance. Nor would I have
you think it to be any dishonor to cast aside those sour Grapes, whenever
they shall come to a second gathering, at which so many of the teeth of your
Mothers Children have been set on edge: there being no greater Victory to be
gained in the World, then what a Man gets upon himself. You have said as much
as could be in your own defense, and therefore may come off with satisfaction
to your self and others. In altering all or any of those passages, which have
given occasion of offense to the most of your brethren. And you may take this
occasion for it, not as necessitated thereunto by the force of Argument, but as
Sylla resigned his Dictator-ship, rather out of his good affections to the
peace and happiness of the Commonwealth, then compelled by Arms.

You are pleased to take notice of some Parts that God has given us, thinking
we might have used them better, then in these Pen Combats; and that the
differences betwixt us will occasion such Rejoycings in the common Enemy, as
was amongst the Trojans, on the fallings out of Agamemnon and Achilles. But I
hope you do not think in earnest, that either of us are so considerable in the
sight of our Enemies, as those Great Commanders were in theirs, or that any
great matter of Rejoycings can be given them by our weak contentions. In which
what satisfaction you are able to give your self for spending so much of your
Parts, Pains, and Time, in the drawing up of your Appeal, is known only to God
and your own Conscience. But for my part, I am not conscious to my self of any
mispendings in that kind, in reference to the writing of my Anim^dversions; in
which as I had no other end, then the vindicating the truth, the Church, and
the injured Clergy; so I can confidently say, that I have writtten nothing in
the whole course of that Book (to the best of my knowledge) which was not able
to abide the touchstone of truth, whenever it was brought unto it. The
smallest truth is worth the seeking, and many truths are worth the finding: No
loss of time, or mis-imployment of our parts or pains, to be complained of in
that pursuit. And therefore I shall say in the Words of Judicious Doctor
Hackwell, That such is the admirable Beauty and Sovereignty of truth in it
self, and such infinite content does it yield the soul being found and
embraced; that had I proposed no other end to my self in this present Treatise
then the discovery and unfolding thereof, I should hold it alone a very ample
recompense and sufficient reward of my labor. Fracta, vel leviter imminuta
Auctoritate veritatis, omnia dubia remanebant, as S. Augustine has it.

You tell me also, that as you know, I will not allow you to be my equal, so
you will not acknowledge me to be your superior; whereby you tacitly conclude
your self for the better man, as much above me in the fortune and success of
the present Duel, as Caesar was above Pompey in the War between them: In which
though I may suffer you to enjoy the jollity of your own opinion; yet it is
more then probable, that such as have observed the conduct of the action on
either side, may think otherwise of it: Which being referred to the final
sentence of those only who are made Judges of the field, I shall not be
unwilling to shut up the Quarrel, upon such conditions as are propounded in
your Letter, one only of my own being added to them: and I conceive, that
having offered these short notes to the public view, I might do it without any
disadvantage of reputation. By some passages in your Book and Letter: I find
that you take notice of a remediless infirmity, and decay of sight, which is
fallen upon me, rendering me almost wholly unfit for further engagements of this
nature; and I find also on the other side that you have many advantages above
me, both in friends and Books, of both which by the plundering of my Library,
and the nature of a Country life, I am almost totally unfurnished: Which though
it may give you many fair and flattering hopes of an easy victory, whenever
you shall enter the Lists again; yet as unfurnished as I am of all humane
helps, but such as I have within my self, I little doubt of making good the
cause against you, if every point thereof should stand in need of re-examining,
as I think none does: However I have learned of Christ our common Master, to
agree with mine Adversary while I am in the way with him, especially where it
may be done, not only salva Charitate, but salva Veritate also; where the
agreement may be made, as well without any loss to truth, as improvement to
charity. I must needs say you have offered me very fair conditions, whereby I
am put into the way toward this agreement, which I shall follow with the
greater cheerfulness (you may call it passion if you please) when I shall see
some good effects of your Protestations, such reparation made to INJVRED
INNOCENCE, as is professed in your Appeal. Which happy hour whenever it
comes, I shall not only give you the right hand of Fellowship, as the Apostles
did to Paul, when from a Persecutor of the Church, he became one of the chief
Pillars in it, but the right hand of precedence G^. 48. 14
also, which the old and dim-sighted Patriarch gave to Ephraim, though the
younger Brother. We shall not then enter into the Dispute, which of us goes
first out of the field, or turn our backs toward one another, according to your
Emblem of the two Lions endorsed (which you have very well noted out of Gerrard
Leigh) for avoiding contentions in the way; but hand in hand together as
becomes Brethren, the Sons not only of the same Father, but of the same Mother
too. Nor shall we then enter into a Dispute, which of the two shall be reputed
for the good Philemon, or which the Fugitive Onesimus; there being as great a
readiness in me, to submit unto you in all points of civility, as there can be
aversness in you to acknowledge me for your Superior by way of Argument. So
doing we shall both be Victors, though neither can be said to be vanquished,
and shall consolidate a friendship, without the intervening of a reconcilement.
And on these terms none shall be readier to preserve either a valuable esteem
whilst we live together, or a fair memory of you, if you go before me, then

SIR, The most unworthy of your Brethren, amongst the true Sons of the Church
of England Pet. Heylyn.
Lacies Court in Abingdon, May 16. 1659.
The Contents of this Book.
1. AN Exchange of Letters with Mr. Baxter, occasioned by a passage in the
preface to his Grotian Religion, page 1. 2. An Exchauge of Letters with Dr.
Barnard, relating to the Book called Respondit Petrus, and the supposed burning
of it. p. 97. 3. The Intercourse with Mr. Hickman, in answer to some passages
in his Justification of the Fathers and Schoolmen, etc. p. 113. 4. A
Declaration about Forms of Government, the power of the Spartan Ephori, and the
Jewish Sanhedrim managed Letter-wise with J. H. Esquire p. 205. 5. An Appendix to
the former Papers in Answer to some passages in M. Fullers late Appeal for
Injured Innocence. p. 311.
An Advertisement touching the Errata.
THe Reader is to be Advertised touching some mistakes which have occurred at
the Press, and are desired to be corrected with his Pen, before he set himself
to peruse these Papers. As first, p. 159. for these words, viz. Should command
the Paraphrases of Erasmus, to be translated into English, studied by Priests,
etc. read thus, viz. Should commend the Paraphrases of Erasmus translated into
English, to be studied by Priests etc. And p. 183. for which but only
determined, not having commanded silence in those points, read thus, which
determined nothing, but only commanded silence, etc. p. 108. dele. these words
that information had been made as to the burning of the Book. The rest of
Erratas being only literal, may be mended thus:

Page 2. l. 10. for described, r. ascribed, p. 10 l. 1. for difference, r.
distance. p. 23. l. 8. for instancing r. in standing, p. 27. l. 4. for our r.
of our, p. 29. l. 30. f. lay, r. lay not, p. 40. l. 5. f. any r. to, p. 50. l.
3. f. Spirator, r. Spirans, p. 53. l. 8. f. no r. any, p. 54. l. 19. f. baser
r. border, p. 68. l. 18. f ensue r. be true, p. 86. l. 15. d. owning. p. 87. l.
1. f. 29. r. 25. p. 95. l. 26. f. Fame r. Tame, p. 96. l. ult. f. laesives, r.
Laeseris, ibid l. 9. f. Consul r. Council, 105. l. 16. f. way r. worse, p. 109.
l. 2. and 3. f. lata r. tota. In the Second Part, f. Burlow, r. Barlow ubique
p. 126. l. 34. f. whose r. but he whose, p. 130. l. 13. f. Burle, r. Barlee. p.
135. l. 21. f. Burechus r. Purchase, p 145. l. 4. f. 24. r. 246. p. 147. l. 10.
f. manner. r. all manner, ibid l. 19. f. supra r. Sublapsarians. p. 148. l. 19.
f. Barrow r. Baroe, p. 167. l. 13. f. nine and ten r. ninteen and twenty, p.
174. l. 3. for a Mother r. another. p. 238. f. Tachee r. Rochel. p. 243. l. 5.
f. sinking r. six Kings. p. 244. l. 17. r. Abeyance. p. 251 l. 8. f. Kings r.
Consuls. p. 253. l. 14. d. it was no. p. 258. l. 30. f. right r. know. p. 292.
l. 3. Agraramine. p. 297. f. Rubbige r. Rabine. p. 310. l. 1. to new disputes,
ad. you have had my Answer. p. 316. for Bullick r. Ballick. p. 317. l. 16. d.
Thesulri.

FINIS.

