A TRUE NARRATIVE (IN A LETTER Written to Col. B. R. and Honorable Member OF
PARLIAMENT:) OF THE APPREHENSION Of the Grand TRAITOR, Thomas Scot: Wherein is
shown, His Arrtifice and subtle Endeavors to shun his Apprehension, and
wherein he has judged himself not worthy of any Mercy for that detestable
Murder of His late Majesty of everblessed Memory.

Published by AUTHORITY.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Inman, and are to be sold by James Magnes in Russel
Street in Covent Garden, 1660.

To the ever honorable Col. B. R. an honorable Member of the House of Commons.
SIR,
THe Discourse we held at our last interview, wherein by your words I
discovered a sense of some honorable Member of the House of Commons, seeming
to mittigate the penalty due to the guilt of that impious Villain SCOT, by his
pretense of rendering himself to his Majesty's Resident in Brabant, according to
the tenor of the Proclamation made to that effect, has obliged me to make
diligent search after Capt. Comb, whom I understood by several persons of
Honor, to have been the first man that apprehended him and who coming for
England to inform his Majesty thereof, received a most gracious reward and
thanks for his service therein: And the relation of the whole business which I
here sent you, I have both his Faith and Honor not to exceed in the least
circumstance, the truth of the passage thereof, and the good qualities I find
in him, especially his mavelous zeal to his Majesty's service, so perfectly
well answering the Character. I had before received of him, gave me confidence
enough to believe that the publishing of this Relation to the view of all,
might somewhat conduce to the dis-abusing of that promptitude which in some
persons might have raised a propension against the common cry for Justice, in
vindication of God's glory, his Majesty's Honor, and the satisfaction of the
whole Kingdom, upon one of the bloodiest Monsters that nature has produced in
many ages.

Upon the fifth of June last past, according to the calculation of those
Countries, the said Scot was discovered by an honorable Knight, called Sir
William Persal (walking in the Park at Bruxels, to take the evening air, and as
it is to be believed that that Hell which he carried within him, as never
wanting attendant to such notorious consciousness) was always active to make
him circumspect; whom he met, he no sooner perceived Sir Williams eye to be
fixed upon him, but to divert his acquaintance (which could not but be
troublesome) he turned himself to gaze upon the Trees; an action better suiting
to confirm a man, who (by the inconveniences he had received in the knowledge
he had of him in England) knew him but too well, then to distract the notice he
had taken of him in an other Country, where he had no power to harm him: Sir
William very skilfully accepted this feint; but with a resolution to answer it
with another which might wound Scot to the heart; and therefore passing on his
way without any stop or seeming surprise, so soon as he perceived Scot to
hasten toward the Park Gate, he accosted a certain Dutch man, and gave him a
piece of money to dog that man (pointing at him) to his lodging, with promise
of as much more to come and inform him of it at his lodging: This was readily
undertaken, and as effectually performed. He having received this Light from
the Dutch man, imparted this his discovery to some Officers of his Majesty's
Regiment of Guards, (at that time, and (...) residing in Brabant) who
considering the difficulty that might arise in so important an undertaking,
thought meet to communicate it to Capt. Comb, (as a man by his long service in
that Country, in all likelihood to be better versed in what Method was most
fit to be taken for the carrying on of a design which promised something of
difficulty to them themselves:) This was done accordingly; and upon their
consult with him, their first resolution was, with all possible skill that very
night to endeavor to pry into his hants, and the time of his arrival thither,
whereof they found means to be satisfied from the Maid of the House where he
lodged; but in such sort as she could not gather any the least sign of design
against him. His arrival unto that place was about six days before all the
visits he made to Don Allonso de Cardenas, the Spanish Ambassador, who had so
long resided here in England, and all the Company he kept, was one White a
servant to the said Ambassador, and his sworn spy into all places, especially
into England, having immediately before been employed by him to the backing of
Lamberts traitorous design in his last attempt, which to his eternal confusion,
and the general joy of all Christendom, was so succesfully and timely crushed.
Scot was at that instant upon a visit to this preposterous Ambassador, and was
seen by Capt. Comb and another Gentleman, to come forth of his house at eleven
of the Clock that night, and to go into his own lodging, accompanied by the
said White. The business being thus far carried on without any noise, before
the opening of the Gates next morning, such order was taken by placing secret
Sentinels in every corner of the street, that Scot was in a net, without
dreaming of his misfortune, while Capt. Comb, by reason of what they all might
justly apprehend possibly to occur in an illegal proceeding, made his Addresses
to the He bears the same Authority there, as the Recorder does in London.
Aman of Bruxels; who being a Gentleman that upon all occasions had testified
sufficiently his zeal unto his Majesty of England, his service when he resided
in those parts, persuaded him he might hope from him, if no assistance, yet so
much connivance as might be necessary in that case, to avoid any popular
tumult, (the only obstruction to be feared) for the ruining of the design; the
whole matter being opened to the Aman, he answered, that he had always been,
and was still most ready, and ambitions of any service wherein he might be
thought worthy to employ his endeavors for the satisfaction of his Majesty of
Great Britany; but that he might be called to a sure account, if he did him
any, to the prejudice of his Masters Authority, by whose only power he was to
act, and by whose rules, and no others, they were all to live; that although
from his heart he did abhor, and would gladly see brought to condign
punishment all those that combined, and more especially those that acted his
late Majesty of Englands destruction: Yet he knew not how this Fugitive, who
was accused to be one, should become responsible in that Country for crimes he
committed in another. And upon Capt. Comb his answer, that he desired him not
at all to act therein, but that his connivance only was that he petitioned
for, which will be so grateful, and so well received (said he) by the King, my
Master, that in all occasions where his acknowledgement might be expected, you
shall never sail to find a return. He replied, that that would yet prove more
irregular; for I had rather (said he) answer an error committed, where my
Authority was mistaken, then the suffering of another, which has no pretense
in my Jurisdiction, and in my view to execute: what immediately is contingent
to my charge; and that except there were command from the higher Powers, (which
neither was likely, there being no Ambassador of the King of England's, as yet
to move the Court in such a business, with that credit and skill that might
well be thought suiting to the expedition requisite thereunto: He knew no way
of proceeding, but what was too hazardous either to undertake, or to connive
at, and therefore seemed very much troubled by being necessitated to the denial
he gave him: Capt. Comb after a little pause, with much earnestness
represented, that he could never likely expect a more just occasion to testify
his desire of gratifying the King of Great Britain, then that which so highly
concerned his Honor, that when there were difficulties which himself was
likewise sensible of, that his endeavors in that act would bear proportion
unto them, by the sense his Majesty would entertain of the service done, and
that he referred the conduct thereof unto his prudence, which he doubted not
(if well applied) would be able to dissipate whatsoever-impediments seemed most
obvious; adding, That he conceived little danger in securing this Monster for a
time, who at worst might he releast if Higher Powers should interpose in his
favor. But when he received his final Answer, that the first motion in such a
case must be from those Higher Powers, and that himself as an inferior
Magistrate, durst not attempt to restrain any man suspected of falseness to a
foreign Prince, to the Prejudice of those, with more vehemence then before, he
resolutely told him, That himself was the last to be valued of many Gentlemen
now present in town, who were resolved rather to run the hazard of racks and
Gibbets, then to suffer the Murderer of their Prince to be un-interrupted in a
Country where they had any being; and that the same sense which bore the
English Nation with the hazard of their Lives and Fortunes to dis-involve
themselves from the fetres which held their King and Country in slavery, would
furnish them with such Resolutions against this Traitor, that perhaps might lay
an unhappy ground of a fatal misunderstanding (which God forbid) between the
two Crowns, there wanting not spirits on both sides too prone to such
distempers, as might endanger the happiness to be hoped for in their mutual
friendship; and therefore since nothing (said he) is of consideration in your
Office, but the service of the King of Spain (your Master) for the prevention
of such inconveniences which might possibly turn to his disservice, give me
only under your hand a permission to seize him, and secure him in some of the
Town-Prisons till further Order, and I engage my self unto you, there shall be
no outrage offered him. The Aman revolving in his thoughts, that what was
inferred bore show enough not to be thought impossible; and making a short
reflection upon what happened at the Hague in Holland, and at Madrid in Spain,
upon the persons sent thither by that treacherous Conventicle, (their Master)
to avoid what inconveniency might arise there by the like forces disorder,
consented to give him this ensuing License, the Original whereof I have yet in
my hands, and which my self translated out of the French word for word.

The Copy of the Order for the seizing of SCOT.
I Underwritten give leave unto Capt. Comb, belonging to the Regiment of his
Majesty of Great Britany, to apprehend for some Reasons he has declared unto
me, a certain English man in this Town, and to send him to what prison he shall
think meet; commanding the Masters of the Urunt and Steenport to receive the
said English man into their prison respectively, when by the said Capt. Comb
they shall be required so to do.

Dated at Bruxels this sixth of June, 1660. Signed, George de Brimeen.

Amen de Bryard.
Capt. Comb being well satisfied with the permission he had thus wrested from
the Aman, hasted to his friends; but upon his communicating unto them the
fruits of his negotiation he found some of them a little distracted in their
resolutions, having been by some there persuaded, and were already bent to
proceed after another manner, telling Cap. Comb it was but just to defer the
apprehension of this man til they knew his Majesty's pleasure, which they were
already considering how to procure; he knovving them all to be such who were
as jealous of his Majesty's Honor as any men living, was not a little amazed at
this their change, but remembering that this Imp of Hell might as well learn
Witchcraft, as Rebellion, from his infernal Master; he only told them, that he
was now more concerned then any, and that having removed the main obstacle, he
now was not to fear lesser ones; and therefore leaving them all a little
abruptly, he invited one Major Shaw, a very ancient man, and no less zealous
toward his Majesty's service to accompany him, and so upon pretense of
speaking with a Gentleman who lodged in the same house where Scot did, leaving
two Soldiers in the street, he entered with the said Sergeant Major, and found
Scot at dinner: The Gentleman to whom he excused his boldness upon so slender
an acquaintance; after he had caused them both to fit, told him he was to take
notice of that Gentleman (which was Scot, a Countryman (said he) of yours)
whereupon being right over against him at the Table, he gave him him a Salute,
telling him he was glad to see any of his Country, Scot seemed little taken
with the Discovery, and answered little or nothing: But the Captain who had
more business with him then he was yet sensible of, was willing to hear him
speak a little plainer; and that he might, began to congratulate this our happy
late deliverance, which would (said he) make us all friends now, whereas for
these 19 years past we have all groaned under such intestine quarrels as have
raised defiances betwixt the nearest relations. Scot coldly answered, It is so.
He asked him, Whether there was any Immediately upon (...) defeat.
preparation for his Majesty's reception before his coming over? To which Scot
answered, That he had been * twenty days out of England; but that there was
speech before his departure of preparing White Hall, St. James, and
Hampton Court. Captain Comb answered, that those indeed were very famous
Houses, but that they had been profaned by most vile actions, and such, that
were it his case, as it was the Kings, he knew not whether he should ever
delight to live in them; because (said he) in the one they kept his Royal
Father Prisoner, and before the Gate of the other (to the astonishment and
horror of the whole world) so barbarously butchered him. To which Scot remained
silent. What course (said Capt. Comb) did those Villains omit, better suiting
to have wrought despair in his late Majesty, then what they took, in case his
Royal soul had not been fortified with Divine Grace. Surely (added he) their
malice aimed at his eternal, as well as his temporal destruction, whereunto he
received no answer: But now urged he further upon this turn of the Kings
Fortune: Do any of those insulting Wretches, falling into his Friends hands,
deserve any favor? Whereat Scot began to look untowardly, but replied not, till
having itterated the same three times, he peremptorily asked him the 3d. time,
What his sense was of them? And then Scot answered, Truly they deserve none.
Truly then (replied Capt. Comb) your self must expect no Here Scot judges
himself.
greater a measure; for you are accused by a man of Honor within this City, to
be one who has been as prodigal of that detestable malice that wrought the
ruin of his Royal Person, and the whole Kingdom, as any in England: I have
here, (said he) an Order to seize you, and there is a Guard in the street; but
because my Opinion of the man of this House, induces me to believe, that had he
known you, he would never have suffered your breath within his doors for fear
of a contagion. I contented my self to come in only accompanied by this sole
Gentleman; but you are my Prisoner, sit still and make no disturbance. Scot so
soon as he could recall his Reason, which was leaving him to shift for himself,
asked who he was there taken for, and was answered, For oue Scot, of the number
of those imparaleld Rebels who qualified themselves with the title of being
Judges to their natural Prince. Oh Sir, (answered he) upon my word you are
abused, upon my word you are; my Name is not so, neither do I know the man: And
being asked his Name, he said his Name was Allison, his Country was Essex,
born he was at a place called Durmow, and his Profession a Merchant; and that
by reason of shipwracks, and some other crosses that he had sustained, he was
now become so far short of his wont, that he was constrained to keep himself
close; which he judged the only thing that had there brought him into
suspicion; but he thankt God he came not into those parts without a Pass, which
he was ready to produce: The pass being demanded, was produced accordingly,
and indeed was signed by the Marquess of Caracena, (Capt. Genesis of those
Countries) for Allison a Merchant freely to have egress and regress in, and out
of the Ports and Cities of that Jurisdiction, without any let or disturbance;
but he was like to fall into a second trance For the space of six Months.
when Mr. Comb told him that his Pass being surrepted upon a false Name from
the King of Spain's Ministers, would only by the forfeitures he had incurred
in the surreption of it, be useful to furnish him with a Gallows there, if he
failed of one in England; but howsoever he strugled out this Answer; Well Sir,
proceed legally, and I fear not to clear my self. To which was returned, I
shall indeed; I will not do by you as you did by your Master: Sir William
Persal is the man who justifies you to be Scot, and will presently be here with
you face to face. During this debate, Scot having his Quarter in the Jews
Street, as near to Don Allonso, as the convenience of his Scot lodged in the
Jews street near to Don Allonso, a sine Emb^cde^ ^.
close visits to him, did require. Capt. Comb is of opinion, that his man
perceiving his Masters restraint, ran over to give information to the said Don
Allonso thereof; for immediately came the foresaid White from him in
vindication of Scot, deeply protesting him not to be the man: But when he saw
that no persuasion was of use, and that nothing but the hand of Authority would
ever be able to remove what was so well founded; he betook himself to
entreaties that he That upon his Masters and his parole for his forthcoming.
might not be stirred from his lodging. Whereunto Captain Comb (well knowing
the Embassador's power there.) answered, That since his Excellency thought the
Prisoner worthy his consideration; he would that night leave him in his
lodging, but that he hoped he would be no ways offended with him if he took
care of his security: And thereupon leaving the Sentinels with such
instructions as were fitting, the man of the House likewise engaging that the
Prisoner should not stir, he went in search of Sir William Persal, whose task
was a very hard one indeed, to persuade a Traitor to know himself; at his
coming thither, though his Discourse was constant and consonant to what he
first deposed, remembering Scot of Particulars, as his committing him at such a
time, from such a place, after he had examined him upon such and such points,
Scot would in no wise be Scot, but still a broken Merchant, whose only crime
was misfortune; and therefore Combs troubled himself with nothing more that
night, then to take care of what he had promised the Ambassador, and not
exasperate him by seeming over-hot in the prosecuting what was so little
pleasing to him; but on the morrow early in the morning, he coming accompanied
by some Officers of his Majesty's Regiment of Guard, now resolved to send Scot
to a place where less care and trouble might be responsible for him; he found
this following Letter written by the Mediation of the Ambassador, from the Aman
of Bruxels unto him in revocation of the permission and order he had already
granted him.

To Capt. Combs, belonging to the Regiment of his Majesty of Great Britany.
Bruxels this 8th of June, 1660.
SIR,
I Understand that the man which you desire to stop in this Town, came into
those parts with a Pass from his Excellency; so that he is not arrestable. I
am likewise credibly informed, that the said person is not he whom you take him
to be, wherein you have been abused. Hereupon I find my self obliged to revogue
the Permission I gave you to seize him in this Town, for the Reasons you were
pleased to declare unto me, which I do hereby revogue, together with the Order
I gave you for the Masters of the Urunt and Steenport: I pray be pleased to
regulate your self accordingly: otherwise you will offend his Excellency, and
incur his indignation. Kissing your hands, I remain, Sir, your humble servant,
George de Brimen.

Hereupon the Traitors heart began to bloom, and thinking (as indeed he had
reason) that Don Allonso's patronage, the revocation of the Order for his
arrest, together with Whites activity, was subject enough for him to receive
some impression of comfort, he began to feast himself at the surprise of his
honest Enemy, finding so powerful a support in an abominable friend. Comb
notwithstanding would not yet release him; revolving with himself that, by how
much the more he strugled in the difficulty; if the worst happened, he might
with the more facility give an account thereof, as well in order to his Masters
satisfaction, as in its due time, to the accusing of such who were the authors
of so great a neglect to his greatness, in favor of his mortal enemy. He
therefore left those Gentlemen at the house where Scot lay, and went himself to
speak with the Aman, to dispossess him (if possible) of that Goblin that (as he
thought) frighted him from owning a good work; encountering with him upon the
way to his house, the Aman after a civil salute, (readily throwing down the
Boot of his Coach, and inviting Capt. Comb in, asked him whether he had the
Letter he sent him? He answered him, Yes, and am very sorry to see you
repenting of a good action. The Aman answered, Sir, you are abused; the
Protection that this man has here, could never answer the notorious guilt of
such horrid crimes as you mark him with; for I cannot believe that so great a
Statesman, so eminent a person, and so pious a Christian as he, from whom I
have my discharge, is universally judged to be, should ever be brought so much
to derogate from himself, as in his bosom to shroud a man who had himself so
far extmguisht the Laws of Charity; that for him to hope any protection from a
man of honor, seemed a new crime: And therefore (Sir, added he) as it is an
oversight in you, it would be a notable fault in me to believe it; and you
cannot do better then in consideration of the fright and disgrace you have
brought the Gentleman to, who by the Protection he has, appears to be an
innocent man, to repair what has rashly been done to his prejudice, by some
civil acknowledgement, which is no more (said he) then I believe your own
inclination will advise you to: To this was opposed the circumstance of this
man's leaving England in this conjuncture of time, his close lurking in Bruxels,
with his hants only to such as maugre their shows of piety and splendid
greatness, were for many years (not without sufficient ground) highly
susspected of the greatest disservice to the King of England, but above all,
the honor and integrity of Sir William Persal, who (said Capt. Comb) if you
will please to make a visit to any English in town, you will find not to be a
man falsely to brand an innocent neighbor with such scandalous and dangerous
imputations. The Aman coldly replied, That having already his discharge from
one whose greatness was too formidable to suffer him to contest with, he was
not minded to take any further trouble upon himself, nor to put any more upon
him. Capt. Comb then seeing him balk in good earnest, entreated him, that for
the prevention of such disorders that he had hinted to him at his first visit,
as well as for his own honor, he would be pleased to suffer the Guards to
continue till himself went to Trerence, where the Marquess of Caracena who was
Governor of those Provinces, and to whose Authority the state of the business
did more immediately appertain, was at that time by reason of the death of one
of his children, retired; which the Aman most willingly consented to, telling
him, That he was very glad he had thought upon it; and that he would in this,
stretch his Authority to its utmost bounds, and to show how much he was a
servant to the King of Great Britany, do in that more then he was well able to
justify. Thanks being duly returned, Capt. Comb after he had taken order for
securing him afresh, hastened to the Marquess of Caracena, where he found White
walking in the Court-Hall with some Irish Gentlemen, expecting the time of
audience. White seeming somewhat surprised at his arrival thither, began to
court him to a conference; but he (openly) in presence of Sergeant Major
Geraldin, and two more Irish Gentlemen, told him, that being now upon a
business so important to his Majesty's service, he should have care enough not
to blemish himself by entertaining any proposals from one whom the King had
already an ill mark upon; he told him further, that he might upon his Masters
score to which effect he well knew he was sent thither) pursue the Liberty of
the most abominable Traitor, but that he should have a care not to do it with
any dis-respect to himself, who came thither for his Maj. vindication, and that
therefore he was (notwithstanding his Masters great credit, and his own silken
ship) to suffer him in time of audience, to speak both before and after him, or
to endure the worst affront that possibly he could invent to cast upon him in
the face of the Court. White answered, That he would in no wise interrupt him
in it, but that he might do well not to be so far transported. The time being
come, Capt. Comb pressed for audience in the first place; and having performed
his respects to the Marquess, he told him that he came to petition his
Excellency in the behalf of all the King of Englands Subjects in those parts,
in a matter which he doubted not would by himself be judged well beseeming
their Allegiance, and a fit subject for his favor. But when he had made a short
Narrative of the business, the Marquess seemed so astonished, that he was seen
by way of admiration to cross himself two or three times crying out, Is it
possible! Such a man at Bruxels! Yes Sir, (answered Capt. Comb) and more, he
has your Excellency's Pass: Whereat the Marquess hastily stepping back, asked;
How so? It is (Sir) said he, upon a false Name, procured for him by a mighty
man within your Excellencies Jurisdiction, who has since which seizing him at
Bruxels, endeavored his Release might and main, and now has sent to protect
him with your Excellency: Who (said the Marquess) should protect such a man?
There (Sir, said he) is his Instrument, (pointing to White) that does it; It is
Don Allonso de Cardenas: But I have reason to hope less hard measure from your
Excellency, then to be discountenanced in my endeavors, to nearly relating to
my Masters service: This Traitors Liberty is (said he) repugnant to the spirits
of all such that wish his Majesty well, that had I not applied much industry,
which I did rather for fear of displeasing your Excellency, then for any safety
I intended him, his case had (since Don Allonso's opposing his Arrest) been
already concluded; but I am most glad that I have found time to expect his
sentence from your Excellency, which I doubt not (if favorable to his Majesty,
his Fortune being not answerable to his inclination) will be bountifully
repaid, humbly beseeching him to take it into his serious consideration. The
Marquess answered, That for his part he never intended either Pass on
Protection to such a man, that if he had by surprise obtained one in another
man's Name, he should be very much obliged to the English in those parts, that
every one of them would have the same sense of it as himself; and assured him,
that he would take such course therein, that his Majestey of Great Britain
should have a good account thereof, and that he would immediately think of it.
Mr. Comb according to his first intention to speak last, was well contented to
break off here, as well knowing that White must have audience, having bin sent
from the Ambassador, out of consideration to whom, the Marquess might chance to
totter into some remissness, which the more opposed, would in all likelihood
prove the less valued, to give way to others, withdrew himself a little.

The Prince of Barbanson, the Earl of Walfeuse, and Monsieur de Bascourt,
having imperfectly taken notice of his pretense with the Marquess, invited him
so soon as he was withdrawn, to give them a more perfect relation of it; he was
very willing to satisfy their curiosity, and not doubting that the more it was
noised in the Court, the more detestable it Compliance with the Rebels.
would (by detecting Don Allonsoes) make him in the eye of all, was well
pleased to give them this satisfaction, which done, he protested it would have
drawn tears from any honest English man's eyes, to consider in the earnestness
of this Prince, and these Lords, what influence his Majesty's Royal beams had
wrought upon the hearts of strangers abroad, whilst our frantic Sectaries
deprived us of that felicity at home, having expended his just pursuance of
what they all concluded to be so important to the King of England, they offered
him all the assistance that in them lay; and notwithstanding that Don Allonso's
Greatness was considerable enough to such, as were less then himself, to be
sparing of too much freedom in delivering their sense against him; yet the
strength of his Majesty's interest did so oversway that retentiveness which
humane policy might have furnished less noble souls with, that they frankly
enveigh'd against the vileness of his proceeding therein.

White, after he had delivered his letters from the Ambassador, and seconded
them with all possible importunity in the behalf of Scot, retired with as
little satisfactionas (in the judgment of those who stood at a distance)
Spanish shougs and frowns could afford him. Cap Comb giving way to two or
three more to take their audience, (of purpose to give his Excellency time to
cool) approached once more, telling him that he doubted not but he would think
this obligation a very worthy one, to be added to the number of those his
Master had already to his Catholic Majesty, to his Excellency, and the State
of that Country; and therefore having already the honor of a favorable
audience, he came now to kiss his hands, and receive the confirmation of his
favor; the Marquess ansvver'd, that he was sorry that in a matter of that
nature which himself was sensible was of consideration to the King of Great
Britain; it did not so directly depend upon him, as he thought both himself and
others would judge, the whole affairs of England being by the Counsel referred
to Don Allonso. Mr. Comb replied, We are all the more unfortunate, and his
Majesty the more dis-obliged. Is there any one (said the Marquess) has an ill
sense of Don Allonso? To which was returned, I have not (most Excellent Lord)
what sense the Court of Spain has of him, neither am I of sufficiency to be
his accuser; but from any that relate to his Majesty of England, I never heard
any words but what savoured of the greatest distaste, it he most notorious
disservice to their Master, could animate them with all against him; and
therefore your Excellency (under correction) cannot employ your Authority more
nobly (said he) then by interposing it for the rectification of other Ministers
errors, to prevent a misunderstanding, which might unhappily produce
inconveniences. There is (said the Marquess) but one thing to be done of two,
either to deliver him into the King's hand, or to banish him the country; the
first I know not whether without my own Masters command I may dare to do, to
which Cap. Combs a little hastily ansvver'd, Oh Sir, be only pleased to have
him penned till the King be informed thereof, and I dare engage that his
Majesty will never expect his delivery upon any terms that may bring prejudice
to you. Whereupon the Marq. laying his hand upon his, assured him he would do
what lay in him, and that he would that night send about it. This being all
he was able to obtain, he hastened back to Bruxells, where having reported the
Marquesse's promise to the Aman, he conjured him to suffer the guards yet four
and twenty hours, assuring him that, in that time there would be some order
issued out: the Aman embracing him in his arms, most courteously answered, Sir
you would pity the clamors that I have endured since upon the retarding of this
man's liberty, you went to Trereure; but to show you how I value his Majesty of
great Britains satisfaction above my own repose, I assure you that for twice 24
hours they shall not be disturbed; but then when it appears that I have done
more then I well could, you will pardon me if I excuse my self from attempting
my absolute ruin. M. Comb with very many thanks acknowledging the assistance
he really had found from him, took his leave. This is all he is able upon oath
to aver, it being unknown to him whether the Marquess performed his promise
or not, or if he did, whether Don Alonso smothered it so as the Aman could have
no news thereof: However the Aman punctually performed his, insomuch as for 2
days and 2 nights longer Scot to his no little astonishment still remained
under custody; but the third night at or about eleven of the clock the guards
were removed, and he guarded (as it was certified to Captain Comb) by one of
the town Officers at that time of the night out of the gates toward the
principallity of Liege; this last is only his presumption drawn from the
report of another, but whether he were only removed to another lodging, or upon
an escape to another Country, by the help of the convoy given him by Don
Alonso, imports not much, since nothing is more certain, then that in all this
time Scot had never either spoken to, or so much as seen Sir. Harry Deuick (his
Majesty's Agent there) and it is in no wise to be thought that such a clamor of
running, riding negotiating, and threatening, was necessary to be employed for
the liberty of a man who had a mind to render himself: Captain Comb hereupon
had no other course left unattempted, but to publish in every place as well in
Don Alonso's house as else where, his intention to come and inform his Majesty
of the outrage done him; which to effect he with all speed prepared for his
journey, and ere he arrived at London, Scot was delivered up to the said Sir
Harry Deuich (his Majesty's Agent) and so sent over, therefore not tendered
himself according to Proclamation,

Sir, Your most humble servant C. H.


