A DISCOURSE Concerning the Queries proposed by the House of Commons to the
Assembly of Divines; about the divine right of Church Government in answer to
two main Questions.

First, whether it be expedient to the State and Church, that the Assembly of
Divines should answer those Questions yea or no?

Secondly, in case it be expedient; How they should be answered satisfactorily
both to the conscionable and unconscionable Disputer of the matter.

SHOWING

First, the necessity of giving an Answerr.

Secondly, some necessary Requisites to make that Answer satisfactory to all,
and without exception.

Written for the private satisfaction of a friend, Anno Dom. 1646.

And now published for more common use, by an unpartiall Lover of TRUTH and
PEACE.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Wodenothe at the sign of the Star near Saint
Peter's Church in Cornhill, 1648.

The Publisher to the impartial READER.
READER,
THis Discourse, gentle and impartial Reader, was written long ago, that is,
soon after the Queries were proposed to the Assembly of Divines by the House of
Commons. And the reason why then it was not put forth by him to whom it was
written, was perhaps the same which occasioned the stopping of the Answer which
the Assembly of Divines was then preparing to the Queries; namely, an Order of
the House sent to the Assembly, bidding them forthwith to proceed to the
Confession of Faith and Catechism, till they should finish the same. It seemed
by the Order that the Divines were taken off from answering those Queries, and
it is likely that thereupon the Authors friend to whom this Discourse was sent
thought it needless to publish it to the world.

But I having lately seen it; and knowing the Order (that an Answer should be
given to the Queries) to be renewed; because I thought the Discourse worthy of
the consideration of all that lay the Queries to heart, have used means to
advance it to the Press. My design is chiefly to provoke such as are in love
with Truth, to follow the temper of this man's Spirit in the search thereof. And
then also to call upon the Author himself, who has offered these Advices unto
others, that seeing he has convincingly showed that a settled rule and method
of interpretation is so necessary to find out the true sense of the Scriptures,
that therefore he would (if he has any Talent in this kind) discharg his
conscience by holding forth unto the children of Truth, that which he perhaps
does further know or has elaborated concerning that Rule and Method then any
other, it being a thing so far beyond either the thought or hope of most men.
And certainly nothing can be more useful to the composure of our Scriptural
controversies then this Rule, if it can be gained. Therefore such as know the
Author, and have any interest in him, should press him to enlarge himself
upon this Subject; but especially in my humble opinion the hono rabble house it
self should be moved in some particular manner by their call to set him apart,
and to enjoin him thereunto, and give him all possible encouragement for the
perfecting of it, as a thing of great concernment, wherein he is a debtor to
the Church of God, and to Them, and to the public course of spiritual Learning.

W. H.

Imprimatur

John Downame.

Errata.
Page 1. line 17. Universal r. Universal, p. 5. l. 2. of those truths, r. of
those main truths, p. 6. l. 31. be bound r. bound, p. 7. ancienst r. ancient,
l. 22. and answer, r. an answer, p. 8. l. 7. faith. r. belief, l. 11. which be
proposed, r. which shall be proposed, p. 9. l. 24. entrance r. envy, p. 10.
which they proceed to discover, r. they discover Truths, l. 29. held forth, r.
hold forth. p. 11. l. 25. proceed universally sit, r. proceed would be
universally fit. p. 12. l. 14. from these, r. them. l. 33. answerably, r.
answerable, p. 13. l 4 so different r. so many different, l. 27. who were, r.
that are, l. 28. doubts in, r. doubt an, l. 28, 29. by which men, r. by which
all men l. 30. my decision, r. any decision. l. 33. particular. r. particulars.
p. 14. l. 10. simple, r. single. l. 11. as that, r. as the, l. 20. of the one,
r. in the one, l. 21. in their, r. by their.

A DISCOVRSE Concerning the QUERIES proposed by the House of COMMONS, to the
Assembly of Divines.
WOrthy Sir, This State would be happy, if all that manage public affairs did
mind the true interest thereof with zeal and simplicity, as you do. The
great cause of our misery is, that men of public employments have no public
spirits, few there are that walk in the light openly, according to the Royal
Law of Liberty; for almost all are snared in holes, and hid in prison houses.
The holes are their private Interests, and Ends, without which, nothing,
almost, is done for the Public by any body, and the prison houses are the
Parties to which they are engaged, for most men act by the rule of prejudice,
rather to cross an opposite party, then to advance the Universal good of all.
Therefore matters which are named public, are carried rather by strife and
debate then in a peaceable way, and destruction is found to be the path of
many, rather then edification in love. But seeing you are enabled to raise your
mind above the thoughts of such, as are led by the sense of their flesh to run
into parties, and do not enquire so much after the miscarriages of others, to
lay them open, and to clamor against them before the World; as after the ways
of righteousness, whereby all may come unto the acknowledgement and
apprehension of that truth which is after godliness, seeing, I say, this is
your commendable endeavor and study, I think it my duty to contribute what I
can to your furtherance therein; and for this cause, shall be at this time,
willing to let you know my true sense of the doubts which you make; concerning
the Questions which are offered by the Parliament unto the Assembly of Divines
to be resolved.

The Queries whereunto you seek an impartial Answer, are two.

First, Whether, yea or no, it be expedient for the Church and State, that the
Divines of the Assembly should answer these Questions.

Secondly, If it be expedient that an Answer should be given thereunto, then
your further Question is, of the manner how that Answer should be made: Namely,
what must be intended to make it such, as will give to those who doubt of the
matter, conscionably just satisfaction; and will take away from others who
desire no satisfaction, but rather pretenses of cavilling, all just occasion of
contradiction, and of multiplying new Questions in infinitum? For you do
prudently and justly conceive that no answer will be better then one that is
not satisfactory, because it may be the end of some Statists and Lawyers is, to
make the Question endless: for seeing they have not been able to gain either
the whole power over the Church, therein to rule all at their own will; or the
privilege to be exempt from all rule of the Church, by an express Ordinance
of Parliament; it is not unlikely that they will endeavor to gain it some
other way, namely, by the unsettlement of all, and by Argument; in denying to
the Church that which is due to it: and this perhaps they will attempt by some
endless dispute about the points of right, to make the Civil and
Ecclesiastical pretenses of Right unto power, clash together irreconciliably.
For so long as the matter is not decided, they will pretend to a liberty to do
what they list; and without control will cast the cords of Christ from them,
which is all the World aims at in this controversy, as is clear by Psalm. 2.3.

Now then although this inconvenience may seem unavoydable as matters now
stand with us; and although the remedy which you enquire after is somewhat
difficult to be found; yet I shall briefly open my thoughts thereof unto you,
if perhaps something from hence may be hinted to your self, or others for the
facilitating of the work.

Therefore to the first Question I say, that it will be very expedient for the
Divines to Answer the Question proposed unto them for these three principal
causes. 1 Because the matter is of such consequence in respect of Christ and
his Kingdom, that in conscience they are bound to give a resolution thereof so
far as they are able. 2 Because the constitution of this State and Church, is
such at this time, that except this matter be satisfactorily decided, there is
no settlement at all to be expected therein; and the whole guilt of our public
confusions will be imputed unto the Divines. 3 Because their call and
engagement to give an Answer, is so public and Obligatory, that if they
decline to do their duty, they will not only lose their reputation in this
Cause, and most of their Authority in the Ministry, and give their Adversaries
matter of triumph over them; but they will prejudge extremely the Rights of all
the best reformed Churches to their disadvantage.

If these Reasons be well considered, it will appear not only expedient, but
even necessary, that an Answer be given to the Questions which I shall briefly
endeavor to let you see.

First, The Importance of the matter is such that to the fundamental
constitution and complete being of a true Church nothing is more necessary then
to know by what Right the Officers thereof stand in their Charges; and how they
are authorized to execute the government and judicatures belonging thereunto.
And if the Royalty of Christ power in government and in Spiritual Judicatures,
is so highly concerned in this matter; that except this plea be maintained, his
prerogative over the souls of men will be disclaimed, and given up to the will
of worldlings; then certainly no faithful Minister, who does believe him to be
the only King of souls, can with a good Conscience be silent when this his
right is called into Question: for seeing their calling is to bear witness
unto him; their silence in such a matter would be a great breach of trust. And
if Christ in that good confession which he made before Pontius Pilate Joh.
18.35, 36, 37. Did profess that he was indeed a King, but that his Kingdom
was not of this world: how can any of his Officers in that Kingdom be counted
faithful unto him, if they suffer the world to incroach upon the Rights of his
Jurisdiction? For if they are not of the world; they cannot be given up unto
the world: for the Rule is; give unto Caesar what is Caesar's, and unto God what
is Gods. Therefore if the Divines of the Assembly lay this matter to heart, as
believing it to concern mainly Christ's Royal Prerogative; I cannot see how
their Conscience will suffer them to be silent in the vindication of his Right:
for Christ when he himself was questioned before a worldly judge concerning
the point of Right to his Kingdom; attested the Truth thereof although it was
laid to his charge as a matter of high treason. And having plainly declared
that he was a King; he does add immediately these words. To this end was I
borne; and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness
unto the Truth: thereby intimating that this was one of those Truths which he
was to manifest unto the world, although it might be with the peril of his
life: and if this was of such importance for him to declare; sure it is of no
less importance for us to know, and in Case of doubt to be resolved of. For as
it does concern on the one side: the Right which Christ has to his Spiritual
Crown that his Title may be cleared; and all worldly pretenses of power over
it taken away: so on the other side it does concern our Consciences to be
informed under whom they must stand in point of Judicature; and what Christ's
will and appointment is (who is the undoubted King of souls) for the settlement
of the same in doubtful matters.

And as the matter is thus important in respect of Christ, of his Kingdom, and
of our Conscience in order to him; So it is of that Consequence to this Church
and State; that it brings with it no less then the to tall dissolution, or
happy establishment thereof. For if this matter be clearly determined according
to the Word God; then the Churches of this Kingdom may be ordered and settled
in Peace; and by this means the foundation of the State will be settled also,
which now is shaken by reason of this un-settlement: for it is Christ, that
does bear up the pillars of the earth, Psalm. 75.3. And to him is the gathering
of the people, Genesis 49.10. (now they cannot be gathered to him without a
government, nor can the pillars of the earth stand without order) and if the
matter be not determined one way or other, nothing can possibly ensue but
endless continuance of divisions and strife, which being remediless without
the decision of these doubts; will at last produce inevitable ruin both to
Church and State, and the reason of this is clear; because the relations which
men have unto God in respect of Conscience; not being settled, all other
relations will be dissolved, for if Christ's will be not known or regarded in
his government of spirits, no man's spirit will regard the will of any other
government and power, further then he is either by fear constrained, or for
his own ends, he thinks good to comply with others to serve his own turn of
them: for naturally thus far, and no further one man does yield unto another.
So that for want of that Rule whereby men's Consciences may be wrought upon, and
spirits directed in the concernment of Religion, to prevent or remedy Scandals:
all other Rules will be broken and cast off; because every man being left to
his own arbitrament to do without the controulement of true spiritual
government whatsoever he pleases in matters of Conscience; will frame his
Conscience to his own will, and intending only to please himself, will not
regard any other, by any other Rule, then that of his own conveniencie: and if
in the greatest matters, the spirits of men will be let loose, thus to run
riot; what shall restrain or direct them in matters of lesser concernment?
Thus till the Higher Sphere of Government relating the Worship of God, be in a
right frame, all the lower relating the Outward Man in Civil conversation will
be out of order: and where no Order is settled in worldly matters; there
naturally every one will order himself, according to his strength and other
advantages to the prejuduce; and in the end, to the oppression of his neighbor.
For naturally he that is strongest will make use of his strength to over rule
the weaker and subject him in all things to his own will; except his Conscience
be overawed by the Rules of Religion, and be bonnd up thereby, and made willing
to deny himself. For where this is not inwardly, and no Government settled
outwardly, there every one will be oppressed by his neighbor; Isa 3.5.
and the child will behave himself proudly against the ancienst, and the base
against the Honorable. Therefore seeing the setlement of this higher Sphere of
Government cannot be brought to pass, in this State, at this time without the
determination of these Questions; the guilt of all the evils that will ensue
upon our continued un-setlement; will lie at the Door of the Divines of the
Assembly if they decline to give their Answer so far as they are able
thereunto.

Thirdly, Their engagement is such, that except an Answer be given they will
deservedly lose their credit in the loss of the Cause, and that to the
prejudice of all the Reformed Churches of Europe.

For seeing the Divines have declared by their Petition to the Houses that the
Judicature of Scandals, is intrinlecall to the Church residing in the Officers
thereof by Divine Right: and this Declaration not being believed, but a proof
thereof demanded, and to make the proof more full and satisfactory, Questions
being framed to state the point of doubt rightly, and they called upon and
required by the Parliament to give and Answer thereunto from the Word of God:
seeing I say upon their Petition the matter is come to this issue; their credit
will be lost if they show not the grounds of their judgment: for they are
accused to affect an Arbitrary Power of Judicature; and if they make it not
apparent that the Judicature which they challenge is not Arbitrary but
Subordinate and Legal in the Kingdom of Christ; they shall justly fall before
their Accusers; and may be counted Presumptuous and Tyrannical in their
places; and consequently, lose the Right whereunto they pretend.

And although they had not by any Declaration thus engaged themselves in the
Cause: yet the Supreme Magistrates call, by whose Authority they sit; and the
end wherefore they are called together, does fully obliege and necessitate them
to give an Answer. For they are commanded by God to be ready to give an Answer
to every one that does ask a reason of them of their hope, 1 Pet. 3.15. And if
of their Hope then also of their Faith and judgment, whereof they have declared
this to be a part.

And if to every one then far more to their Magistrate, who has set them
apart, and authorized them to declare their judgment in matters which be
proposed unto them. It is then a clear and undoubted duty, whereunto they are
bound in Conscience to apply themselves: and if they should decline it, it
would not only open the mouths of all their Adversaries, who already begin to
give out that they cannot Answer the Questions, and therefore have quitted the
plea of a Jus Divinum: but pre-judge all the Protestant Churches Rights, which
else where they enjoy under their Civil Magistrates without control, which
by this occasion would become doubtful and questionable. And finally this
silence, as it would betray the cause of the Church to the world, and involue
all into confusion; so it would no doubt bring some exemplary judgment both
upon these that decline so necessary a duty in such a time of Reformation; and
upon the whole Ministry of this land, which justly would become for this cause
more contemptible, then any in all the world besides.

For these Reasons I conceive it not only expedient, but even necessary that
the Divines of the Assembly should set themselves as one man to Answer the
Questions satisfactorily, so far as God shall enable them.

But now to speak to the second Question, how this may be done both
satisfactorily to the conscionable, and also fully to the unconscionable, so as
to prevent cavilling and multiplying of new Questions, is a matter of no small
difficulty to determine: yet let us try what may be said unto it.

I suppose then to resolve any doubt satisfactorily, two things are requisite.
First, the mind must be free from all prejudicate opinions. Secondly, some
evident and undeniable rules must be known and followed, by which the matter in
doubt may be determined. For if the mind be not free from prejudice, it is not
capable of any rule, and although it be free from prejudice, if it want a sure
rule to walk by in the search of truths, it will never be satisfactorily
resolved of doubts: but if both it be free from all forestallment and
partiality: and has also a sure directory to lead it unto the discovery of
hidden matters then it may be able both to find out and hold forth the
resolution of doubts demonstratively: for to prevent Cavilling it is necessary,
both that the way of finding out and of holding forth Truth be Demonstrative.

If therefore the Divines being free from all partiality, and minding nothing
but the simple manifestation of the truth in their heart (as I am persuaded
they will do according to the Protestation which they made at their entrance
into the Assembly) can show an undeniable Rule by which the truth of doubtful
matters in Divinity may certainly be found out, and can make it apparent; that
in the search of a Resolution to these Questions they have followed that rule
without wavering from it: then I suppose, that the thing which you require to
be done, may be effected; namely, that the conscionable will be satisfied, the
unconscionable cut off from cavilling pretenses, because all matters of doubt
(if they hold fast received Principles, and will not fall to Scepticisme) will
be reduced to these two neads: namely, to the sufficiency of the rules by
which they proceed to discover Truths; or to the right application of those
rules, unto the Questions to be resolved, for if no exception can be made,
neither against the Rules of the discovery of Truth in themselves, nor at the
use which is made of them, for the determination of matters in hand; then I
suppose all Objections will be prevented.

Therefore if I might have my wish, I could desire that all Divines or
conscionable men, before they set upon any Questions, to resolve them in
particular: would set down the Rules by which they do order themselves in
their meditations, for the impartial decision of Scripturall doubts. This I
would have them to do, that they may be able to make it appear upon due
search, that their way in answering doubts is clear before them; that they are
not swayed by any interest of their own, or by any forestallment of received
opinions from other men of their own side, or by any other thing in the course
of Humane Learning, which might have any influence upon them to byas their
thoughts, and take them off from the simplicity of the Gospel; but that their
light does come clearly from the Word it self alone, by a Scientificall way of
truth, demonstrable unto all men of capacity to be such, and rising from such
undeniable principles of interpretation, which all understanding Christians do
acknowledge and receive as undoubted, for when men can give an account unto
themselves, by a search of their own intellectual proceedings; that the light
which they held forth from the Word unto others is thus begotten in them; they
need not fear to be much contradicted, if they can but make themselves to be
understood in what they hold forth; or seriously minded and considered in the
way by which they hold it forth in doubtful cases. And truly, because the way
of Scripturall interpretation is not agreed upon amongst Divines, therefore
most men are led rather by opinion to deliver the meaning of the Text
conjecturally, then by Scientificall grounds demonstratively: But if the
Christian World could once be made so happy, as to be taught a clear and plain
rule of Scripturall interpretation, and a method to apply plain Scripturall
truths unto doubtful cases of conscience, for the resolution of the same, and
if these two things should be published to the Christian World, and made upon
sufficient trial demonstrable to all men of capacity; then a ground would be
laid for a greater matter then the resolution of these Parliamentary Questions,
namely, for the ending of all vain janglings and confused disputes about
matters Doctrinall and Practical in Divinity.

For if these two Rules can be found out and made use of in these Queries, not
only all obloquie would be prevented in this matter; but a Way found to direct
all men that are impartially rational, to enlarge the knowledge of Scripturall
truths from the Scripture it self, and Scripturall grounds; so as to avoid the
intanglements of mere humane and Philosophical notions; and the deceits of a
Science salfly so called, because the Rules, by which they in this matter
should proceed, universally sit to determine other doubts of the same kind, so
far as by the opening of the sense of holy Scriptures, and by the application
thereof unto humane cases, they are determinable. And that some such Rules may
be found; and must be fought after, if ever we should receive satisfaction in
Scripturall doubts, may thus be made apparent. First, we all confess that
nothing is to be received as a Divine Truth, but that which is attested by the
Word, or consonant unto the Testimonies thereof. Now it is clear that the Word
cannot be said properly to attest any thing to us, except we understand the
meaning thereof. Nor can we be said to understand the meaning thereof, except
we know a reason why we co^ceive it to be so as we apprehend it to be, and not
otherwise; nor can such a reason be known without some Rules of Interpretation
and Meditation, which are demonstrable to lead the minds of those that use the
same, into Truth. Nor can these Rules be demonstrable, except they arise from
such Common and undeniable Principles which all Rational men in matters of
that kind do take as granted, seeing I say these things are so; it follows
that if there be such Principles, then from these Rules may be taken to lead
the doubting mind unto the apprehension of Truth: and if such Rules may be had
they should be held forth: for if they can not be held forth, no reason can be
given of any Scripturall interpretation; and all interpretations are alike to
be received; but this being absurd and destructive to all common Principles and
to the Analogy of Faith, it follows evidently that Rules may be had, and must
be sought after and known and received before any Scripturall doubts and
disputable matters can be resolved satisfactorily.

Therefore the only true Means to prevent contradictions and endless
debates, will be to show the method of intellectual proceedings, unpartially
regulated toward the decision of doubts, and sufficiently fitted without all
exception, to discover and find out truths, as well in these as in all other
doubts of the same kind, for except the Rules and method be universal to hold
in all, it cannot be trusted in any particulars, for we know that it is the
ordinary course of most men in controversall points: first, to conceive a
position answerably to their capacity and interest; and then to seek out
places of Scripture by which it may be made good. This is to build the wall
first, and then to fit the Rule unto it; whence it is that the Scripture is
made to speak so different senses, as men for the maintaining of their
several Opinions can probably wrest it unto. But if we would know the truth
indeed; we should look upon our own opinions as doubtful matters; and having
no aim but to examine them by the Word; we should come to the meditation of
the word by a clear Rule; and having found the truth attested by the Word it
should be made a line and plummer, by which all particular opinions in debate
should be squared; for in so doing the wall would be fitted to the Rule. And
except men be willing to lay down the love of their own tenants, and to suspect
themselves that they may be led out of the way by their own forestallments; or
fail to enter rightly upon the way, or stray from it after they are entered, for
want of constant and sufficient light; except I say they will suspect that they
may err some of these or all these ways; they will never be careful to
prevent the deceits of their own thoughts unto which men are liable; and if
they be not careful of this they will never be sure that they have found the
Truth.

Therefore in this doubtful matter which is of such main concernment, as that
unto this particular Church and State I know nothing of greater or equal
importance at this time; I could wish that amongst those who were in doubts, in
agreement were made of the Rule; by which men should proceed to Answer
doubtful Questions satisfactorily, and before my decision should be given to
any Queries or cases of Conscience, I would have them always to declare their
whole Method of proceeding by way of Prolegomenon or Preface. And if in these
particular my advice could be taken; the Method should be this; first to
collect out of the whole Scripture, but chiefly out of the New Testament, all
the places of Scripture which speak clearly of the Church of Christ and of the
Government thereof. These places they should Analyze each by themselves to
find the true sense thereof, and demonstrate the the same by a Rule of
Interpretation, which should be undeniable.

Having found the sense of every place, they should cast the matter of Truth
gathered from them into so many simple or compound Propositions as that matter
will conveniently afford, distinguishing them into several heads. These
Propositions should be set a part as Rules fit to be made use of for the
determination of the doubts proposed. Having found all the Rules, which the
Scripture does yield; they should Analyze the Questions also and show the point
of doubt distinctly which should be determined; then they should proceed to
compare the matter questionable with that which the Scripture has already
determined, and from the proportion which shall be found of the one to the
other, in their Agreement or Disagreement, a conclusion will result to
determine the whole matter: and to show that the inference of the conclusion is
according to truth, the Reason of the Method of the Application might be
declared; That when it shall appear that nothing is done Magisterially; but by
a Rule, directing the mind unto the the discovery of Truth; all exceptions may
be cut off: for in case no fault can be found, neither in the Rules of
proceeding: nor in the proceedings according to Rules, cavilling will be
prevented, and the danger of endless debates incident to these and all other
matters, will be taken away, which I beseech the Lord at last to bring to pass
for his own name sake. Amen.

FINIS.

