Extraneus Vapulans: OR THE OBSERVATOR RESCUED FROM The violent but vain
Assaults OF Hamon L'Estrange, Esquire. AND The Back-blows of Dr. Bernard, an
Irish-Deane.

By a Well-willer to the Author of the Observations on the History of the Reign
of King Charles.

Amicus Socrates, Amicus Piato, Magis amica veritas.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Richard Lowndes at the White Lion, near the
little North-door of St. Paul's Church. 1656.

To the Reader.
Good READER,
I Am to give thee notice, that in one week of the last Term, I was plundered
twice, first of my name, and secondly of my good name. First, plundered of my
name by one William Leak a Bookseller, who publishing a Discourse of mine,
under the title of France painted to the Life, (but publishing it by a false
and imperfect Copy) has fathered it in the Stationers Hall on one Richard
Bignall, a fellow to me utterly unknown. Next, plundered of my good name by Mr.
Hamon L' Estrange, the Author of the History of the Reign of King Charles, who
taking me to be the Author of the Observations on his History, not long since
published, has loaded me, both in my own person, and in that of the
Observator, to whom I am made the Alter Idem, or the same man with him, with
many foul, unworthy, and opprobrious names, not more unfit for me to take,
than for him to give. Reproached in my own person by the name of a
Theologaster, called in the way of scorn a Doctor in Cosmography, impeached for
impudent forging and falsifying Records, accused for loving the world, none
like me, with many things of like odious nature; which with the like titles of
Honor, conferred upon me in the person of the Observator (too many and too
long to be here repeated) thou shall find briefly summed together in c. 2. and
p. 40, 41. of this present Book.

I must confess I was somewhat the more amazed at this strange proceeding,
because I had not been of late accustomed to such Billingsgate language. There
was indeed a time when my name was in almost every Libell, which exercised the
patience of the State for seven years together; and yet I dare confidently say,
that all of them together did not vomit so much filth upon me, as has
proceeded from the mouth of the Pamphleteers, whom I have in hand. But then I
must confess withal, that I had been much more amazed at this strange alarm,
had I not been prepared beforehand to receive the charge. For being informed,
that the Historian looked upon me as the Author of the Observations, that he
was hammering out an Answer, and that he would not handle me with over^much
tenderness, when once he had me on the Anvill; I used some means, to get into
my hands, the printed, but unpublished sheets of his first Edition, whereof
thou shall hear more in its proper place. I found there, that the Gentleman
had a personal malice, an old grudge against me, and was resolved to make his,
History do the drudgery of his own despite; though in the Preface to the
Reader, he profess* the contrary. I found my self there called, The bold
Champion of the Prelates, a Dr. in Cosmography, a Theologaster, accused of
Ignorance, and Virulence in a Book bungled up (for so he words it) against the
Bishop of Lincoln, on whom I am after said to fawn, and to cringe to him, no
man more, etc. Evident Arguments, that his quarrel is not with the Observator,
but with Dr. Heylyn; though I was still to seek (not without some trouble) quid
vel in vita, vel in gratia, vel in hac mea mediocritate despicere posset, what
there might be in one of my mean parts, and meaner fortunes, that might
provoke the mightiness of his Indignation.

Not being Oedypus enough for so dark a Sphinx, he sends me in good time, his
Pamphlet, called, The Observator observed; which when I had perused, I
perceived the grounds of his displeasures, and needed not that any body should
tell me, where the Shoo did wring him. For finding him to be stiffly principled
in the Puritan Tenets, a Semi Presbyterian at the least, in the form of
Government, a Non con^ormist in matter of Ceremony, and a rigid Sabbatarian in
the point of Doctrine, as ill a looking a Fellow as he makes me, I could easily
see, that my known Contrariety in Opinion, had raised this Storm: it being the
humor of too many of the Stoicall Sect, neither to treat their Opposites, with
that Civility which belongs to them, as men, nor with that Charity and
meekness which becomes them as Christians. Parcius Andromachen vexavit Achaia
victrix, in the Poets language. Our Historian was not so uncivilly dealt with
by the Observator, and he seems much displeased at it; the intemperancy of his
own pen, being thereby made the more apparent, and the less excusable. If the
Observator tell him, that he has his parts and person in an high Esteem, he is
wished to spare that cost of complement, his Bits being as little cared for, as
his Knocks. If he give him the commendation (as he does) of a good Historian,
when he proceeds upon the grounds of true intelligence, then -- Out upon this
Observator, shall be all his thanks. If he direct his lines to him, with the
tile of worthily esteemed, it shall be sent back again, as not worth the
keeping. What should a poor man do to get a good word from him, if this will
not do it?

Thou may perhaps expect, Good Reader, that after so many neglects and
provocations, I should cause him to be paid in the same coin which I have
received; and if I should, I have a good example for it, from these words of
Cicero, Non tractabo illum ut Consulem, nec ille quidem me ut Consularem; but I
have so much power on the hand which writes this Tractate, as to hold it back
from any unbecoming language, considering rather what is fit for me to give way
unto, than what he deserves. And besides, our Author may pretend unto some
especial privilege, of which both the Observator and his Alter Idem, may be
thought incapable; there being some creatures mentioned by Laertius, in the
life of Socrates, which are not to be kicked again, kick they never so often.
Indignation may sometimes transport him beyond his natural disposition, but
never hurry him beyond the bounds of Wit or Manners, which both the Observator
and my self are affirmed to want, and therefore sent to school to learn them.

Lastly, I am to let thee know, that though our Author does pretend to have
written Animadversions on the Observations, yet he has done it but in part,
more than half of the Observations being left untouched. And as for those which
he has pleased to touch upon, they are but touched, not cured of any of the
evils, of which he has rendered them suspected. The whole body of the
Observations, and every branch and clause thereof (not above one or two
excepted) remaining in the ^ame condition in which he found them, as the
discourse ensuing, will sufficiently evidence. And as for the discourse
ensuing, that it may look more like to a methodicall, and well-composed
discourse, I have not bound my self to the tract and method of the Pamphlet,
but digested all the scattered limbs thereof under several heads, to the end
thou may peruse them with the more content and satisfaction. Yet so, that
there is not any one Paragraph, or any one part or member of it, which in some
place or other, of this following Tractate, is not fully answered. Our Author
shall find no cause of complaint, as to that particular; nor any just reason
to give out, that any thing which has passed his pen (be it great or little)
has not been fully taken into consideration. In that respect more justly and
exactly dealt with, than is accustomed in these cases, or that he has reason
to expect by the unquestionable prescript of his own example. The points in
difference by this means will be brought more punctually and succinctly under
thy perusal. Judge thou according to the truth, and God bless thee in it: So
wishes he, who would not with the loss of Truth buy the greatest Victory;

P. HEYLYN.
Lacies Court in Abingdon, June 7. 1656
Peter Heylyn Dr. in Divinity, To Hamon L'Estrange, Esquire.
SIR,
ON Saturday May 17. I received a Pamphlet from you, called The Observator
observed, enclosed in a paper superscribed with your own hand, To the worthily
Esteemed the Observator, PETER HEYLYN No title added of Degree, Profession, or
any other mark of discrimination, no, not so much as D. in Cosmography, which
out of your abundant bounty you have elsewhere given me, and that twice for
failing. The Strangeness of the Present, and the more than ordinary disrespect
in the Superscription, put me upon a sudden perusal of it; which having done
(and indeed before it was half done) I was both sorry and ashamed, to see so
much of the Coat, and so little of the Gentleman in it* intituling me unto the
Observations in your Superscripti^n, and (...) from it in your Pamphlet* (where
you call it a groundless suspicion, by me professedly disavowed) fol. 25. you
make your self an Adversary of you know not whom, and then proceed in handling
him you care not how. But let them pass for mine this once, because the
general drift of your discourse, will have it so; and the design will fall to
ground, of raising Trophies to your self, on the promised victory, without this
concession. But then it seems, you take me for a man of so dead a courage,
that nothing but the sense of Smart can quicken me to accept your Challenge;
and therefore lay upon me the worst kind of blows, even reproachful words,
as scurrilous and unbecoming, as Scorn and Envy can suggest, or Impatience
utter.

Nor stay you here. The challenge of your Superscription, being sent in
private, no body being able to testify the delivery of it, might have been
pocketed up in silence, without any engagement on my part, or satisfaction on
yours. You have therefore added to the first a more public and more bold
defiance, to provoke an Answer. Proclaiming in the Pamphlet, fol. 25. how
scarce credible it seemed unto you, that this Doctor of all men durst be so
bold, as to meddle with you: that is to say, so bold as to find fault with any
thing, which had passed your Pen, or to presume to rectify the Story in such
particulars, wherein either your intelligence or diligence failed you. I was
not wont to sit down tamely under such, and so many provocations; nor find I
any thing to affright me, from taking up the Bucklers against such an Enemy,
whose tongue has pro^ed his sharpest weapon. Yet were it otherwise, I durst
have said with Cicero in another case, Catilinae gladios contempsi, non
pertimescam tuos; I have not feared the swords of more dangerous enemies, and
therefore shall not now shrink back at the sight of yours; nor needed you to
have given me so much Gall and Vinegar, to quicken me to an encounter; had you
conceived I might have gotten any thing from such an Adversary, whom nothing
but a few hard words, could render formidable.

And therefore if I have withdrawn my self from the present action, put out
the work to some bold Champion, as you know who phrased it, and left the
quarrel to be managed by a quicker hand; I would not have it charged upon me,
as a tergiversation, a turning back (as those of Ephraim did of old) in the day
of battle. There are so many interessed in your bold defiances, that I could
neither want hands to fight this combat, nor you be disappointed of the
satisfaction which you chiefly aim at.

Only, I fear, you will be somewhat disapointed of your expectation, and not
of your own only, but of that which you have raised in others, by promising a
Rejoinder, added at the latter and of your Volume; and that, both in the Title
of your History, and the Pamphlet too. Great men love nothing more than to be
attended, and are commonly better known by their train of followers, than by
any other outward bravery. But in this you have made your self too large a
promise, and presume more upon your greatness, than you have just ground for.
The Rejoinder, whosoever writes it, will not march in the rear of your ragged
Regiment, or fill up the list of your Attendants, or be dragged after your
triumphant Chariot, like a conquered Captive, and much less serve as an
Apocrypha, to your pure Canonical. We poor Cavies have all somewhat in us of the
Independent, and love to stand and go alone, without such weak Crutches, as
either the countenance of your Name, or the fag end of your Reply, can afford
unto us.

I hope you will not find here any such reproachful language, as you stand
justly charged withal; not only in the whole course of your Pamphlet, but in
much of the History it self, as it was first printed, and intended for the
public view A good Cause need not be so managed, though by interdicting all
civil addresses to you by the name of Complement, there be less cost bestowed
in Holy Water, than may possibly stand with your contentment. I deny not, but
that the writer hereof may now and then incur the guilt of some Luxuriances
(you shall call them Follies, if you please) and sport himself with greater
liberty, than the gravity of a severe Judgment can dispense withal. But I
desire, you would impute it, rather to an honest zeal unto his friend, than to
a purpose of detracting any thing from you, when either the solidity of your
discourse, or the weight of your arguments, might have required a more solid
manner of proceedings, than such serious vanities. How my Adventurer will come
off, must neither be left to your opinion nor to mine, both of us being too
much interressed to determine in it. The Reader is made Judge between us, and
to him I leave it. Only I shall crave leave to say in the Poets words (and I
hope it may be said without any of the selfe-deceivings of love or flattery)

Haec mala sunt, sed tu non meliora facis.

Lacies Court in Abingdon, June 7, 1656.
Extraneus Vapulans, OR, THE OBSERVATOR RESCUED From the vain (but violent)
Assaults of Hammond L' Estrange.
CHAPT. I.
The Laws of History, verified by Josephus, but neglected by our Historian.
His resolution to content himself with saving truths; the contrary resolution
of the Observator. The Observator charged unjustly for writing against King
Charles, and enveighing against King James. King Charles affirms not any where
that he did well in excluding the Bishops from the Parliament. The Observator
justified in the second passage which concerns that King. Our Authors intended
bitterness against the general government of King. Charles. The Observator is
no inveigher against King James. Our Authors smart and un^ustifiable censure of
King James. The Queen abused by our Author for Bishop Lands indulgence toward
the Catholic party. His advocating for the Fame against the Countess of
Buckingham; his uningenuous censure of the Duke of Buckingham, the Lord Deputy
Wentworth, the Earl of Portland, Mr. Noye, and the Courtiers generally, not
sparing Mr. Prynne and the Presbyterians; then censureth Scandalously and
uncharitably of the Clergy, and Prelates in the general, and in particular,
the Court-Clergy, and the late Archbishop. The Bishops Neile, Juxton,
Williams, Mountague, Manwaring, and Wren, etc. The faint Amends made by him
unto two of that number; his mischievous intent in an unnecessary Advocating
for Bishop Potter.
THere were two Cautions given anciently to those who undertook the composing
of Histories, that is to say, ne quid fals^ audeant, ne quid very non audeant;
that they should neither dare to write any thing which was false, nor fear to
write any thing which was true. To these Josephus adds a third, touching the
beautifying of the Style, and from him take them all together in these
following words. Nam qui Historiam et rerum propter antiquitatem obscurarum
expositionem, etc. for they (says he) that make profession to write
Histories, and to recite such things as are observed by antiquity, ought not
only studiously to conform their style, but also to beautify the same with
ornaments of Eloquence; to the intent the Reader may converse in their writings
with the more delectation. But above all things they must have an especial
care, so exactly to set down the truth, that they who know not how these things
came to pass, may be the more duly and fitly informed and all this, to the end,
as before he tells us, that we neither omit any thing through ignorance, nor
bury ought in forgetfulness. And certainly, if History be the great Instructor
of succeeding times, the concealing of necessary truths, will as much conduce
to the misunderstanding, or not knowing the true State of things, as any
unnecessary falsehoods (and I conceive no falsehood can be counted necessary) are
presumed to do. But our Author was not of this mind when he writ his History,
and therefore came resolved, as his Preface tells us, to content himself with
saving truths; the first Historian, I dare confidently say it, which ever
published a profession so contrary to the nature and rules of History. For he
that is resolved to write nothing but saving truths, must of necessity conceal
much Truth, which he ought to write, and consequently subduct from the eye of
the Reader, the greatest part of those instructions, which the true
representing of affairs would afford unto him. And therefore it was well said by
Mr. Fuller in his Church History newly published, that though it be dangerous
to follow a Truth too near the the heels, yet better it is that the teeth of an
Historian be struck out of his head for writhe Truth, than that they remain
still, and rot in his jaws by feeding too much on the sweetmeats of Flattery.
Lib. 9. fol. 232. The Observator (as it seems) was resolved thus also,
professing, that as he undertook that business, with a mind free from love or
hatred, or any of those other affections, which pre-engagements in a party do
possess men with, so he would carry it all along with such impartiality and
considence, as might witness for him that he preferred truth before interess:
without respect to fear, selfends, or any particular relation of what sort
soever.

But my Author, though he will not be thought to love the world so well, as the
Observator is said by him to do, yet knows he much better how to save his
stake, than twenty such Observators, and Church-Historians; and therefore is
not only content to enjoy himself in writing nothing but Saving truths, but
falls upon the Observator, for writing truths which are not saving. How so?
marry says he, the Title of his Pamphlet, might rather have been formed into
the Observations against King Charles, than Observations upon his History. Fol.
First. What, all or altogether against King Charles? I presume no^ so, for Fol.
the fourth, he tells us of the Observator, that he falls foul upon King
James, inveighing against, and withal detracting from his King-craft, and for
that sends him to Squire Sanderson to learn wit and manners. Squire Sanderson;
with scorn and contempt enough. Squire Sanderson, for ought I know, may be as
good a Gentleman as Squire L 'Estrange, there being at this time one Lord, and
some Knights of that Family, which is as much as the Historian, or any of his
Fathers House can pretend unto. Now to the matter of the charge, he tells us,
that the Observations are not so much upon his Narrative, as against King
Charles, and yet takes notice only of two passages, which seem to him, to be
upon or against that King. Had there been more, my Auth or was the more to
blame to keep the Observators counsel, and conceal the crime, rendering himself
thereby an accessory to the fact, and at least parcel-guilty of it, if not as
guilty altogether as the Observator. The first of these two passages is, that
the Bishops had sat longer (in the house of Peers,) in their Predecessors,
than any of the Lay Nobility in their noblest Ancestors, having as much right
of voting there, as either the Prerogative Royal, or the Laws could give them;
and therefore, it was ill done of our Author to exclude them then, and not well
done (by him that should have kept them in) to exclude them afterward. For
this the Observator is called Canis Palatinus, a Court-cur at the least, a
Fellow unconcerned in the business, and therefore not to snarl at the Kings
heels now his back is turned. And why all this? Fol. 19. Marry because the King
has told us, that he did it out of a firm persuasion of their contentedness to
suffer a present diminution in their hights, and honor, for his sake. Our
Author herexsupon undertakes for the contentedness of almost all (not for all)
the Bishops in suffering that diminution for their Sovereigns sake. But what
makes this unto the purpose? Does the King say he did well in it, or does he
not rather say elsewhere, (in his Declaration, as I take it, of the 12 of
August) that he gave way unto the Bill for excluding the Bishops from sitting
in the House of Peers, in hope by that means to preserve their Station in the
House of God. Two evils being laid before him, he made choice of that which
seemed the least, and yet affirms not any where (for ought I can find) that he
did well in choosing either. So as the King not saying that he did well in it,
nor my Author proving that he did, my Author has no reason to deal thus with
the Observator, but that some men have so much in them of the Curre, that they
will be always barking though they cannot bite.

The other passage charged upon the Observator, is taxing the King and the
Lords of the Scottish council for Oversights, great oversights, in not
punishing the principal Authors of the tumuls of Edinburgh, my Author thereupon
infers with disdain and scorn, how gallantly all things will he ordered, when
the Observator comes to be of a (...) of State, Fol. 30. But Sir, The
Observator did not only say it, but he proved it too, and it had shown more
judgment in you to confute his reasons, than to fall foul upon his person.
Errors in conduct of affairs, and Effects in council are not unprofitably
noted by the best Historians, and that too in the greatest Princes. Their
successors might be else to seek in the knowledge of some things of weight and
consequence, and such as most nearly do concern their own preservation. He that
sows pillows under the Elbows of great Princes, when they are alive, shall be
termed a Flatterer; and he that flatters them being dead, to the prejudice and
wrong of their posterity, deserves not to pass for an Historian. That wit is
always better cheap, which is purchased with the price of another man's errors,
than with the feeling of our own.

And here I might have left King Charles, would my Author let me, who though he
tell us in his Preface, that the very failings of Kings have been in former
times accounted, like their persons, so sacred, that to touch them, though
never so tenderly, has been esteemed petty treason; yet at the present he
makes bold to touch him, and to tax him too. For in those printed sheets of
his, which were not thought fit to go abroad with the rest of the book, he
tells us, That he never reflected upon his late Majesty, otherwise than upon
a man that was within the incidence of fra^lty; that he miscarried in his regal
Ministration, by departing to arbitrary power; that he and his Father failed
extremely, in congesting and heaping honors upon so incredible a crowd, yet
not more ill advised in the number than the choice of the men; that mo^^ was
the main, if not the only Turn-key to promotion, and Honors as vendible at
Court, as Coals at Newcastle; that though Kings might by their prerogative make
as well leathern Lords, as leathern money, yet make such Noble men they could no
more, than transubstantiate leather into gold. His aiding the Rochellers is
taxed by him as not sufficiently warranted, either by their communication with
us, in Divine Principles (as he words it) that is to say in being of the same
belief or persuasion with us, or by the French Kings breaking his faith with
them in the demolishing of Fort Lewis, according to the conditions granted at
this Kings instance, and mediation, adding withal, that he could have no
Christian license to draw his sword for those, who in his own opinion wanted it
for themselves; that as there was little Christianity in it, in regard of the
premises, so there was less policy in it, with reference to Monarchical
interess: and finally, that standing thus a supin^ and negligent Spectator in
the defection of the Subjects of other Princes, but much more by abetting and
siding with them, he could expect nothing, but a total desertion of all his
friends, when he most should need them. He renders him inexcusably guilty, in
advancing such as had been censured in open Parliament, which Act (says he)
could in a literal construction mind nothing else, but the defiance of his
people; as also in his effuse and liberal indulgence to Recusants, not only
convicted, but condemned remitting to them the Penalties of their offenses,
notwithstanding the epidemical and general Outcries against them. His
Majesty's Declaration about Lawful sports upon the Sunday, he calls a
Sacrilegious robbing of God, a maculating of ^is own honor, a Profane Edict.
And finally ^he tells us of him, that he was wondrous slow, no man living
more, to believe amiss of those he trusted, which confidence not only
followed, but led him to the fatal block; that no King (setting Solomon aside)
was ever able to give better, or ever followed worse advice; and that being
swayed by supine and implicit faith, in the either wisdom or integrity of those
who seemed to advise him, he was precipitated upon designs which could promise
nothing but confusion, there being nothing more easy than to impose upon the
incuriosity of the Kings Faith. All this and more than this in the printed, but
not published sheets of my Authors History, a History as 'twas intended not so
much of, as agaitxsst that King, the grand concernment of his Annals, as the
Preface calls him; which renders him a most unfit Censurer of that innocent and
modest freedom, which is taken by the Observator, whose observations are
entitled, Oblique Descants, not only upon his Narrative, but against King
Charles. But it is usual with most men, Omnia sibi remittere, nihil aliis, to
condemn that in others which they allow in themselves; not verified so much in
any, as my present Author.

Next for King James, he tells us (...) the Observator, that he falls foul on
him inveighing against, and withal detracting from his King-craft. This is a
general charge, and answers not to any of those particulars, in which tha^
King is thought to have failed in the Act^ of Government; and therefore without
more ado may be remitted by the Observator to the former passage, in which he
clears himself from the like charge or crimination about King Charles.
Besides, our Author cannot choose but know, who tells us, that the noble Verulam
has not violated those Laws of History which he gave to all the world, by
signifying, tha^ one of the wisest of our English Kings had his Empson, and
Dudly, and treated the Ear^ of Oxford most disagreeably. It seems by this, that
even our wisest Kings, may fail sometimes in the Arts of King-craft; and that
those failers may be also signified as Documents to succeeding times, without
violating the Laws of History, or being sent to School to learn wit and
manners, there being no reason in the world why that should be allowed of in
the noble Verulam, which is so sharply taxed, so severely censured in the
Observator. Assuredly a man would think that our Historian was a professed
Champion for defense of the honor of the two last Kings, whereas indeed the
Gentleman is only troubled, that any man should usurp upon his prerogative of
taking the two Kings to task, or noting any thing ^misse in their several
Governments. Qui ^alterum incusat probri, seipsum intueri opor^et, is a good
old Rule, learnt by our Author in his Grammar, but forgotten now, he had not
else enveighed so much against King James, and detracted also from his
King-craft, as he after does, and then accuse the Observator of the self-same
crimes: For has he not told us in his History, as it is now extant? That in
Religious exercises, where the extern Demeanor is a grand part of that sacred
homage, he was somewhat too incurious and irreverent; that he was too indnlgent
to his Palate, and had a smack of the Epicure in him; that being over-studious
in pursuit of Peace, he incurred the note of Pusillanimitie, which made the
thought of war be so terrible to him, that he was Cajolled, and kept in
Delusory chat with specious fallacies by the Austrian Faction, whilst his
children were exterminated from their lawful Patrimony; that in the several
negotiations of Carlisle, Belfast, Bristoll and Weston, he spent so vast sums,
that the moiety thereof disposed in military levies, would have totally
dissipated all the forces of those usurpers, and re-estated the Palsgrave; that
there could be no stronger evidence of defect of courage, than his tedious
courting the Alliance of Spain, whom his Predecessors had so often baffled. And
finally, that by his faint-heartedness on the one side, and his undue levies on
the other, he grew into such disaffection and contempt with his people, that
though those dismal calamities which befell his Son, were ampliated by a
superfetation of causes, yet was their first and main existence, derivative
from the grounds which were laid by the Father. Thus also has he told us, in
his printed, but not published sheets, that never any treaty was by a wise
Prince so bungled up (the treaty with Spain it is he means) upon concessions
so imprudent, so inconsistent with the welfare of his dominions, by making such
an ample resignation of the Protestant interess; and that his excessive
indulgence in pursuit of those Articles mightily exasperated, nothing more, the
acute distempers, and irritated the bilious animosities of his people against
him. What has been said of him, touching his liberal and promiscuous bestowing
of Honors, we have seen before; take this now for the close of all, that by his
luxury and dissolute pastimes, which were the only delights of his times, he
wasted and decocted the public treasury; and by his most extravagant Largesses
to his minions, he entailed a perpetuity of indigence upon his posterity,
squandring his wealth, till he had given away even liberality herself, etc.
What call you this my most dear Historian? is not this an inveighing against
King James, and a detracting from his King-craft? greater I think, but I am
sure with less excuse, than any thing which you have found in the Observator.
Your hand then, gentle Sir, for the Observator, and get you gone together to
Squire Sanderson to learn wit and manners, or let him rather stay at home, as
not worth the teaching. Vel neutrum flammis ure, vel ure duos, as you know who
said.

Follow this Game a little further, now we are on the ^ents, and we shall find
no sex, no order or degree of men, no persons of eminent employment in Church
or State, who are not brought under the censorious lash of our Authors pen. And
first the Queen, notwithstanding all the miseries which have fallen upon her,
must be made the more miserable in bearing the blame of that indulgence, which
the late Archbishop showed to them of the Romish Faction. The Observator gives
two reasons why that Archbishop might afford some favors to the Catholic
par^y, the one grounded upon point of State, the other on prudentiall
considerations. But our Author not content with these, he subjoyns a third, and
that which he conceives to be the very true cause thereof, Fol. 33. and so
conceives not upon dubious reports, as formerly, but upon certain information;
that is to say, that it was done to please the Queen. Assuredly, if it had been
so, the Archbishop was not of such weak parts, and so ill a keeper of his own
counsel, as to make any such preclaration of his reason for it; that being a
readier way to displease than to please the Queen, who although she were
willing that all offices of grace and favor should be extended to that party,
yet was not willing, that the burden of it should be laid upon her shoulders.
And besides this our Author cannot choose but know, that at such time as the
Archbishop made his complaint unto the King, at the Counsel Table, against Mr.
Walter Mountague, and Sir Toby Matthews, the Queen was almost at the highest of
her power and greatness, and therefore had the Archbishop favored the Romish
Factions on a'desire to please the Queen, when her power was only in the
increase, he would not have hazarded her displeasure when it was at the full.
This therefore only serves to accuse the Queen, not to justify him, or
otherwise might have been spared at this time, when there was no necessity or
occasion for it, but that our Author had a mind to fly at the whole Covy, as he
knows who says; and therefore having made so bold with the King, as we saw
before, he thinks it fit the Queen, like a loving wife, should bear him Company.

But being so great a person as the Queen must not go alone, without some
Ladies to attend her; the Countess of Buckingham comes in next, of whom our
Author told us in the first Edition of his History, that (if fame belied her
not) she loved the Bishop of Lincoln better than was fit. Reproved for this
impudence by the Observator, he has left that passage out of his new
impression: But fearing lest the Lady might come off with too much honor, he
pleads very strongly for the Fame, which, though not always an infallible
Informer, some rumors being begot by malice, and nursed up by credulity, yet
true it is, (says he) that she is sometimes a public testimony, and the wise
Tacitus does many times present her in the like concernments, Fol. 9. And this
(I take it) is not a righting of the wronged Lady, but an authorizing rather of
the scandal which was laid upon her. Nor will he have her Innocence as to that
particular to be grounded on her own virtue, but the Bishops impotency: Not
that the Bishop was ^unuchus ab utero, as was ridiculously affirmed by Brother
Wilson, who went too far in that, as my Author tells us; but that he was made
impotent when he was a Boy, by falling on a Stake, as it after follows. Of
this the Observator is not pleased to inquire any farther, nor is there reason
why he should; only I can assure our Author, that Welden (another of the same
tribe) was persuaded otherwise, as is apparent in the Pamphlet called the Court
of King James, Page 130. which I had rather you should look for in the Author,
than expect from me.

On from the Mother to the Son, from the Countess to the Duke of Buckingham,
accused of Luxury and Witchcraft; of Witchcraft first, telling us in the
unpublished and suppressed papers, that by the Diabolical practices and
fascinations of Dr. Lamb, he won and preserved the high esteem he possessed in
the Affections of both his Sovereigns: And next of Luxury, affirming that he
was a great sensuallist, giving his appetite free scope, and taking the greater
pleasure in repletion, because it was subservient to the pleasure of evacuation
in venereal excursions ( a little Rosewater, some good Body for my Authors
mouth) to which excessivly addicted, being in that as in all other points a
perfect Courtier. He tells us of the Lord Deputy Went^worth, that he rather
frighted than persuaded the Convocation in Ireland to re^eal, (much against
their wills) the Sy^teme or Body of Articles formed by that Church, Anno 1615
and in their place ^o substitute the 39 Articles of the Church of England, and
that upon no other design than to advance the Arminian Tenets, and to cry down
the honor of the Lords day, though uniformity of liberty was pretended openly.
Of the Earl of Portland it is said, that being at first of a slender fortune,
it was thought he did not reflect with so much intention of spirit upon the
Kings profit, as the advancing of his own estate; Of Mr. Noye the famous
Attorney General (besides those uningenious passages of him which are still
left standing) he tells us also, that he became so servilely addicted to the
Prerogative, as by ferretting old penal Statutes, and devising new exactions,
he became for the small time he enjoyed that power, the most pestilent vexation
to the Subjects that this latter age produced. Finally he assures us of all
Courtiers generally, that they are to be cleared from all imputation of pretio,
as being incompatible with Court-qualifications, the most part of which tribe
resigning themselves to Debauchery, and dissoluteness, abandon Religion as too
rigid and supercillious a Comptroler over them. Nay Mr. Prynne himself cannot
escape the hands of our Historian, of whom though he borrow the whole Story of
the Discovery made by Andreas ab Haberfeild (which make up three whole Sheets
of his History) yet he disdains to be beholding to his Author for it, whom he
esteems of little credit, saying expressly, that he inserts it, not on the
account of Mr. Prynnes faith, who first made it extant, but because he was
further assured of the truth of it by a more credible person, and one of
principal relation to to Sir William Boswell: And that Mr. Prynne may have some
Company of his own to go along with him, he tells us of the Presbyterians,
that by their demure formality, and supple mildness, they prevailed daily on
the affections of such, who little thought such out side Lambs had claws and
asperities (so cunningly did they conceal them) far more sharp and terrible
than the Prelates had, whereof they gave some years after sensible
Demonstration. Our Author cares not much who knows it, Tros, Tyriusque mihi
nullo discrimine habentur, that all men are alike to him when they come before
him. A man would think our Author were that John Kinsaider mentioned in the
Comedy, called The Return from Parnassus, who lifted up his leg, and pissed
against all the world, as it is there said, the Vice in an old English Play, or
some Turkish Santo, whose port and privilege it is to snap at every one he
meets, and yet no hurt done: But he is neither of all these, no such matter
verily. Our Author (he does not care who knows it) is a Gent. every inch of
him, except his tongue; A man at arms, or lineally descended from the house of
knocking, so furiously does he deal his blows on all sides of him, that without
any trouble to the Herald, one may find his Pedigree; But for a further proof
hereof, we will see how he lays about him when he comes to the Clergy, of
whom in general he assures us in the unpublished pages before mentioned, that
there is nothing so sordidly base, which will not find Partisans amongst the
professors of sacred Orders, whose portly pride, portly ambition, or
indiscretion at the best, all so mainly conduced to Englands Miseries, and
their own ruin. The like of the Prelates, that they were many of them
notoriously wicked Blasphemers of Gods sacred name, addicted to drunkenness,
lasciviousness, and such enormities; some of them also guilty of a turgid
swelling Pride, and intolerable insolency, all of them charged with obtruding
extravagancies, and erecting an arbitrarinesse in holy things, as others did in
civil, whose actions and proceedings he calls afterward prelatical whimzies,
the Fictions and Chimeraes of their giddy brains. Of the Court-Clergy more
particularly he assures us this, that they were deeply tinctured and stained
with the Massilion and Arminian Errors, and withal vehemently inclined to
superstition. But most particularly he tells us of the late Archbishop of
Canterbury, that he was of a pragmatical and factious spirit, a bold As^^rtor
of some dangerous and superstitious Tenets, that being by the Kings
extraordinary goodne^se promoved to that dignity, he thought he was now
plenipotentiary enough, and in full capacity to domineer as he listed, and to
let his professed Enemies feel the dint of his Spirit, that impetuously
pursuing his over vast, and vain desires of rearing a specious Throne,
agreeable to his projected Models, he put both Church and State into
combustion, he being the man who most eminently moved the King to obtrude upon
the Scots that unsavory Liturgy, and to order the dissolution of the
Parliament on the fifth of May; Finally, that he was too undiscreet, too full
of fire, and too pragmatical for so great trust, whose acting in things
exorbitant, and out of the Sphere of his both cognizance and calling, ruined
all. The most reverend Archbishop Neile, he calls most disgracefully an
empty Tub, and fathers that phrase upon King James, who being a very able
discerner of men, had questionless never raised him to so many Bishoprics (
Rochester, Leichfield, Lincoln, Durham) if he had not found in him some
especial merit. Thus gives he unto Bishop Williams, the title of an insolent
and ungrateful person. To Mountague and Manwaring Bishops both, the scornful
appellation of unworthy wretches. Doctor fuxon the Lord Bishop of London,
censured for none of the best Scholars, though he might pass in a throng for
one of the worst Bishops; and Bishop Wren condemned of turgid, swelling Pride,
and intolerable insolency, in which he carried away the Garland from all the
rest, a simple man, and elevated by a petit blaze of mistaken honors to an
height of Frenzy. And though our Author be a high flyer, and loves to fly at
none so much as high Peers and Prelates, yet he will play at small game rather
than sit out, there being one (and but one) of the inferior Clergy whom he
has in choice, and that is Peter Heylyn Dr. in Cosmography ('it is well he will
allow him to be Dr. in somewhat yet) as he calls him there a Theologaster, as
with scorn and disdain enough he is called there also; of him he tells us in
those printed but unpublished sheets, fol. 131. That the Court Bishops netled
with this Antithesis, this opposition (he means that which was made by the
Bishop of Lincoln against placing the Communion Table Altar-wise) to their
grand design, labored as vehemently to maintain their own proceedings, and put
out the work to their bold Champion Dr. Heylyn, who thereupon undertakes the
Bishop, and bungleth up a reply to him full of ignorance and virulence, so much
the fiercer because he thought the Bishop not in the state of operating any
thing considerably noxious to him. But the next luster this Bishop became for a
while illustrious, and then he did fawn upon and cringe to him, on whom he had
formerly trampled, no man more.

What a Goliath have we here stretching himself upon his Tiptoes, and bidding a
general defiance to the Host of Israel! The Blatant Beast broke loose again,
and no Sir Laniorack, or Sir Calidore to hunt him back unto his Den, and there
tie him up. A second Mar-Prelate at the best, fit to be dealt withal by none,
but Tom Nashes ghost, and to that I leave him. The honor he has done the Dr.
in giving him a place amongst so much good company, requires from any friend
of his, a more gentle usage, then Pap with anhatchet in those times to the
elder Martinists. And though it is to be confessed, that much of this strain
stuff died under the Press, and never was permitted to come abroad (whether
upon the second and more sober thoughts of the Author himself, or the care and
modesty of some friends who perused the sheets, does not concern me to enquire)
yet does our Author stand convicted in his first intention, and may be counted,
voto saltem si non opere, as guilty of the crime of defamation, as any other
whatsoever in these last ill times: great pity certainly, that such a two-hand
sword as this, should be kept in the scabbard, and that he was persuaded not to
draw it out, though he had only fenced and flourished with it (like a Whiffler
in my Lord Majors show) to delight the multitude.

And yet (a blessing on him for it) he would be sain thought to write some of
them, but leaves them at the last in a worse condition, then he had brought
them to at first. He is content to leave out the first part of that character,
which he h^d given my Lord of London, whom he had formerly affirmed to be none
of the best Scholars; and now stands only to the last that he was none of the
worst Bishops, not that he finds himself to be fully satisfied with the
Observator touching the abilities of that Prelate, but that he was loath to
abide any misconstructions, finding the Historians noate verified, Virorum ut
magna admiratio, ita censura difficilis est, Fol. 26. and therefore he stands
to it still, that he saw no reason, why he might not safely say, that this
Bishop was none of the greatest Scholars, without disparagement to his
function, Scholarship, or his own prudence, entering upon a wild discourse,
touching the measure of learning, required to the qualification of a Bishop,
and so resolves upon the point, that a Bishop may be Scholar sufficient for his
place, though he be none of the greatest magnitude. Which, whether it be a
righting of the person, or rather a wronging of the Bishop, I leave unto the
consideration of the critical Reader. And for that part of the Character which
he has left standing by it self, without that Deleatur which he seems to brag
of, it is such a sorry piece of commendation, as the Historian gives us of a
noble Roman, of whom he says, that he, was magis extra vitia quam cum
virtutibus, rather not guilty of any notorious vices, than adorned with any
eminent virtues. No hearty commendations, this, according to the old style of
England, but a cold negative commendation, a commendation Stylo novo, and such
a one as I conceive our Author would not be well pleased with from another man.
None of the worst Bishops, and none of the worst Historians, may seem to
intimate, that neither are positively good in their several kinds, or though
amongst so many bad ones (as almost all the Bishops are by him presented) they
may pass for tolerable; and therefore I desire our Author, if either the
History or Pamphlet live to another edition, that he would pass a deleatur upon
this part also, leaving this reverend person unto that amends which our Author
hopes he has made in the rest that follows.

Less heartily does he deal with the other Bishop, accused for saying (in his
Pontifical ruff, as he elsewhere phraseth it) that he hoped to live to see
the day when a Minister should be as good a man, as any Iack-Gentleman in
England. For, though he does confess, that his information was not then so
good as it has been since, and has therefore corrected that expression
according to the Observators (for so I think he means by that Authors own
Copy) and added Vpstart to Jack-Gentleman in the new Edition, yet will he not
allow that the Observators vindication of him, from any such distemper in his
words or actions, as he freeth him from; or that the expression so corrected,
does argue much of that temper or wisdom, which the Observator cries up in
him. Fol. 29. This is hard dealing in our Author, first to expose a man, one of
the Fathers of the Church, for words which were never spoken by him, and not so
spoken as presented to the eye of the Reader, to the public hatred, and after
when the expression stands so qualified and corrected in the Author himself, as
to admit a justification with all sober men, to keep him still under the same
uncharitable terms of reproach and obloquy. For why a Minister should not be as
good a Man as any Vpstart Jack-Gentleman in all the Pack, I can see no reason;
the dignity, office, function, and the civillity of his breeding, with other
necessary qualifications required in him, being well considered.

With greater zeal, but with as mischievous intention, does he advocate for
Bishop Potter, of whom the Observator tells us, that his preferment unto the
Bishopric of Carlisle, could not get the King any love in the hearts of his
people. Our Author hereupon infers, Fol. 14. That this must necessarily
signify something of abominable quality, in either the person or Doctrine of
Dr. Potter, or both, to be efficatious to obstruct and impede the affection of
the Subject. The Gentleman tells us, Fol. 35. That really there are many
better Historians than himself, which I readily grant, but adds withal, that
there are some worse Disputants also, which I more than doubt. For who can say
which has but the least smattering in the rules of L^gick, that the
Observators Premises about the Bishop, must necessarily infer any such
Conclusion as our Author makes? he might as well conclude from that passage in
the Observator, (and perhaps more truly) that there was something of
abominable quality, in the Kings calling in of Montagues book, as in the person
and Doctrine of Dr. Potter, which might obstruct the affection of the Kings
Liege people, both being joined together by the Observator to rove this
Aphorism, That it never falls out well with Christian Princes, when they make
Religion bend to policy; there being no reason eminently visible why that
Doctor (being a Thorow-paced Calvinian, and otherwise unqualified for so great
a charge) should be made a Bishop, but only ad faciendum populum, to gain the
King some reputation and esteem with the rest of that party. But the
vindication of this Bishop is not the main point which our Author drives at.
For taking an occasion by the word Calvinian, he tells us, that though a man
be never so great a Scholar, never so pious, never so conscientious in all his
actions, he must (if he pass under the notion of a Calvinist) be said to dote,
or to be an Hypocrite, or be called a Knave, with all which titles of honor
(as our Author says) he has known the gallantest men in this Nation dubbed.
He had done well to have specified the names of those, who have given any of
those vile terms to such gallant persons, and not to leave it as a brand on all
those of the contrary persuasion, so much the more odious and uncharitable,
because delivered in the general.

Thus I have laid together such particular passages as serve best to discover
our Authors temper, and the ill spirit which does guide him in all his
Characters and censures; that when it comes either to the Doctors turn, or the
Observator to be arraigned (but not convicted) before his Tribunal, it may not
seem any wonder to a charitable and Judicious Reader, to see them charged so
frequently with the like reproaches. Which Premonition being given, I shall
proceed in order to the rest that follows.

CHAPT. II.
Our Authors affecting of hard words no part of eloquence. The sorry plea made
by him for his justification. His incorrigibility therein, and a course
prescribed for his cure. Neither the Observator nor the Dr. so ignorant in the
meaning of the word Stylus as the Pamphleter makes them. Titles of honor given
by the Pampleter to the Observator, and the Dr. also. A general view of the
five charges laid upon them. The Observator freed from falsifying the Authors
Preface, and vindicated in his credit from the Pamphleters scandals. The
Authors faint plea for calumniating the English Clergy. The Dr. vindicated from
that extreme love of the world, which the Pamphleter has charged upon him. The
Answer to his second charge, deferred to the Chapter of the Sabbath. The Dr.
freed from any servile fawnings on the Bishop of Lincoln. A true Relation of
the Drs. carriage toward that Bishop, and the Committee of Parliament at the
time of these supposed fawnings. The Author corrupts his own Text, to make it
justify his Pamphlet in these four particulars, viz. First in the matter of
the Kings power. 2ly. In the Jurisdiction of the Vice Admiral. 3ly In the
Informations about Arminianism. And 4ly. touching the Repeal of the Articles of
the Church of Ireland.
IT is the Counsel of Josephus, as before is noted, that they who make
profession to write Histories, should beautify the same with ornaments of
Eloquence, to the end that the Reader may converse therein with the more
delectation. Our Author likes this counsel well, but thinks all eloquence to
consist in the affectation of new-minted and outlandish words, which rather
seem to astonish and confound, than delight the Reader. For which being
admonished by the Observator in a friendly and ingenuous way he labors more
to justify than refor^ the error. And first he tells us for himself that
being conversant with Authors (...) the noblest and chief remarque in several
languages, not only their Nation^ but their very words, especially being (...)
the most elegant import, became a^ length so familiar with him, as when he
applied himself to that present work, he found it very difficult to renounce
his former acquaintance with them. Fol. 2. Assuredly I cannot doubt but that
many others are as conversant in writers of several tongues, and as familiar
with their words and phrases, as our Author is, who yet disdain to diaper their
style with such in Inckhorn Terms, as none but Rhombus or Rhomboides (that is
to say the son of old Father Rhombus) would vouchsafe to use. But our Author
has borrowed his plea from Ignoramus, who could not speak out of the Dialect
of the Law, and therefore urged these words for his justification, viz. linqua
mea vadit ad verba accustumata, that is to say in our Authors English, that
they were grown so familiar to him, that he found it very difficult to renounce
his former acquaintance with them. He tells us next, that Livy and Salust,
two Historians, lie under the same censure; the first for his Patavinity, as
Asinius called it, the oother for his obsolete words extracted from Cato de
Originibus, as Augustus said. But Sir, the censure under which Livy ^ay was not
for affectation of new-minted words extracted from the Tyrian, Gallick, or
Greek originalls; but for the flourishing Verdure of his Style, agreeable in
some sort unto the fertility and redundancy of the soil of Padua, his
Patavinity, as for that cause Asinius called it. And for the obsolete words
which are found in Salust, they are but very rarely used, nor were so Obsolete,
but that the Romans very well understood their meaning, without any such
interpreter to be sent along with them, as our Author has been fain to send
with some hundreds of foreiners. I know Sir Philip Sidney in his defense of
Poesy has for the same cause, blamed Edmund Spencer, our chief English Poet,
for affecting in his Pastorals the like Obsolete words, considering that
neither any of the Greeks or Latins in their Eclogues, or Bucolicks, did
affect the like. Nor did Spencer, though he lived long after it, endeavor to
justify himself, as our Author does: the affectation of new words never heard
before, and of old words, worn out of use by long tract of time, being equally
faulty and ridiculous. And though our Author promises (twice for failing) to
reform this error, yet I see little reformation in the new impression of his
History, wherein the greatest part of those new-coyned Terms, are still left
remaining: as one that rather seems resolved as well in this, (as many other
things besides) not to alter any thing, than to take any hint for it from such
an inconsiderable fellow as the Observator, or one of so mean parts, as his
alter idem, Doctor Heylin must be thought to be. I see our Author is past cure
by any ordinary means and applications. No way to bring up these hard words,
but that prescribed by Ben Johnson to his Poetasters, and practiced by Coln,
and Cupes on their Ignoramus, and to that I leave him. And first with reference
to his style, so high, as the Observator noted, that no English Reader could
climb over it he tells us, that it is a wooden conceit made by as wo^den an
Observator, who had not his Head (all but the face) been made of blocks, or had
he consulted with ancient Authors, he might have known that the word Style used
by writers was not made of wood, as this Observator supposes, but of metal,
the very same with his own face, etc. Fol. 2. Now the Thunder-Thumping Jove
transfund his Dotes into the Pericranion of our learned Author, who seems like
Rhombus in Sir Philip (old Father Rhombus, well may the bones rest of that good
old Father) to be even gravidated with Child until he has endoctrinated our
Plumbeus Cerebrolities in the ad^equate sense, and perceptibility of the word
Stylus, which neither that unconcerned fellow, the Observator, whose head is
made of blocks and his face of brass, nor that Dull piece of ignorance the poor
Dr. of Cosmography (of whom we shall hear more anon) ever heard before. But
Sir, in good earnest can you think, that neither the Doctor or the Observator
could understand the meaning of a common ordinary word (with the help of a
Dictionary at the least) until they were instructed by your learned
commentary. Assuredly, but that the Gentleman lies continually at rack and
manger with my Lady Philologie, and is so conversant with Authors of the
noblest remarque in several languages, that a poor English writer cannot get a
good look from him, he might have known that in the first Edition of his
Cosmography, writ but when 20 years of age, or not much above, the Doctor
understood the meaning of the old word Stylus. It is an Instrument (says he,
pagina 741. of the Book called Micorocosm.) with which they wrote, and was a
sharp-pointed Iron, which they called Stylus, a word now signifying (the
original hence taken) the peculiar kind of Phrase which any man used, as
negligens Stylus in Quintilian, and exercitatus Stylus in Cicero. And if the
Doctor and the Observator make but the same one person, as our Author tells
us, the Observator is as free from this piece of ignorance, as the Author
himself, how poorly and scornfully soever he is pleased to think and speak of
the one, and the other.

To clear our way to that which follows, I think my self obliged to present
the Reader with a Catalogue of those scornful names, and reproachful charges,
which he has laid upon the Observator and the Doctor too, that I may show what
manner of man we have to deal with; and what necessity there is of wiping off
those slanders and calumniations which with a prodigal hand he bestows upon
them. For if they be such men as our Author makes them, the very truth will
prove unwelcome for their sakes; little credit being commonly given unto any
such thing, as is commended by the Pen of unworthy Persons. Dividing therefore
all these slanders and calumniations which are merely verbal, from such as
carry with them some charge of consequence, we will only make a general muster
of the first, and so pass them over, knowing full well, convitia spreta
exolescunt, that obloquies of this nature have been better contemned than
answered by the wisest men. And for such charges as our Author has reproached
them with, we doubt not but we shall be able to wipe them off, and to retort
the intended imputation on the Authors head. First then, he tells us of the
wooden Observator, that his head is made of blocks, and his face of metal, Fol.
2. Sends him to Squire Sanderson to learn wit and manners, Fol. 4. Gives him
the name of an impudent Observator, Fol. 9. Of Canis Palatinus, Court-curre, a
fellow so unconcerned, etc. Fol. 12. of This man in the Moon, Fol. 15. of
Doctor Coal whom the Bishop of Lincoln carbonadoed, Fol. 27. of one between
Hawk and Buzzard, Fol. 30. of the light-fingered Observator, Fol. 35. of a
modern Poet, and a wit every inch of him, Fol. 36. of an ill-looking Fellow,
Fol. 36. of as arrant an errant as ever was, Fol. 39. accuses him of
metaphysical whimwhams, Folio 5. of failing and forging foully, Fol. 9. of
notorious corrupting and falsifying, Fol. 45. of juggling and supposititious
foistings, Fol. 10. of being more shamefully out than ever man was, out of the
story beyond all measure, and out of charity beyond all Religion, Fol. 41. Then
for the Doctor he honoreth him with no other title than that of a Doctor in
Cosmography, Fol. 22. the which he so vehemently affected, that though it was
damned in one of the unpublished sheets, yet he must needs vent it in this
second Pamphlet: in which unpublished sheets he makes him amends indeed (and we
thank him for it) by calling him the bold Champion of the Prelates, or
Prelalatical party, to all which they need say no more (but that the
accusations shall be answered in their proper places) than as a wise man once
did upon the like provocations, viz. Tu linguae nos aurium domini sumus, that
is to say, that they have as much command of their ears to hear with patience,
as our Author has of his tongue to speak his passions, our Author being like
those who love to say, with our tongue we will prevail, our lips are our own,
who is Lord over us? Psalm. 12. v. 4.

Then, for the charges they stand thus, First for the Obsetvator, that he has
foully forged and failed, in leaving out a word in the Authors Preface, Fol. 9.
for which called impudent Observator there, and taxed with notorious corrupting
and falsifying in the latter end of this present Pamphlet. And 2ly. That the
Observator does save him part of his labor, (that is to say in naming any of
those men whom he had accused of being vicious even to scandal) in naming
himself for one of them, Fol. 28. Then of the Doctor it is said, that
Cosmography was a work very proper for him, there being none fitter to describe
the world than he, who all his life has loved the World, none like him, Fol.
22. 2ly. That in the business of the Sabbath he has falsified the words of
Pareus by changing quando into quomodo; it being submitted thereupon unto all
the World, to consider what it is for a Doctor of Divinity, for so great a
Champion of Antiquity against noveltie, not in an idle circumstance, but in the
grand concernment of a controversy, to forge and falsifye a Record so boldly,
the modest Gentlemam not daring (as he tells us) to say, so impudently, Fol.
24. 3ly. That having, as all the World knows, most insolently trampled and
insulted upon this Bishop, (the Bishop of Lincoln he means) he no sooner heard
of his enlargement, but instantly he came creeping and cringing, and crawling,
and crouching to him so servilely, as made his Lordship merry at the uncouth
sight, and all this to stand his friend, or at least not appear his foe at that
time, when that Doctor was in a most sorry plight, Fol. 40. Somewhat to this
effect occurs in the unpublished sheets of our Authors History, which has been
touched upon already in their proper place, and therefore do not stand in need
of a repetition.

These are the charges which our Author has drawn up against his adversaries,
and unto these in general, we shall say with Phaeton.

-- Pudet haec appropria nobis
Est dici potuisse, et non potuisse refelli.
That is to say, Foul shame it were, should he such men defy,
And we stand mute, not able to reply.


First then, it is charged on the Observator, that he has foully failed and
forged, in leaving out a word in the Authors Preface. How so? marry because our
Author having expressed himself in these very words, viz. Confident I am, I
stand secure against any substantial falsehoods, and I hope against
circumstantiall also; The Observator in trimming or abbreviating these words of
the Author, leaves out I hope, making the whole sentence to run thus, viz. that
he is confident he stands secure, not only from substantial falsehoods, but
even from cercumstantial also; and this he calls a notorious corrupting and
falsifying of his Preface, Fol. 45. With pride and insolence enough, parturiant
montes etc. you have showed us the mountain gentle Sir, but pray you Sir where
is the mouse? For though you seem to qualify your confidence in standing
secure against circumstantial falsehoods, especially in point of Temporalities,
with this word, I Hope; yet you are bold to say, in the following words, that
no one thing or action, is so in those Annals of yours mislaid, as to
super-Annuate; no hoping here in referrence unto superanuating (as you please
to phrase it) but an absolute confidence, as absolute a confidence as these
words of yours, I will be bold to say, can express or signify, and it is in
reference to your superannuating, if you mark it well, that the Observator puts
you in mind of your confident Preface, For thus it follows word for word in
the observations, that is to say, This is a very strange Hysteron proteron,
setting the Cart before the Horse, as we use to say, For certainly the articles
at Lambeth, being made part of the confession of the Church of Ireland, Anno
1615. as indeed they were, could not before that time be sent to the Assembly,
or Synod of Dort, which was not held till three years after, Anno 1619. and
this I take to be somewhat more? than a super-annuating as he calls it in his
temporalities, though he be confident in his Preface, that he stands secure,
not only from substantial falsehoods, but even from circumstantiall also, in
assigning all, both things and actions, their proper places. How ill this
confidence is grounded we have seen in part, and shall see more hereof
hereafter, as occasion serves. What think you now on the whole matter, my most
precious Pamphleter? Do not those words you quarrel in the Observator follow
immediately upon so gross a super-annuating, as you stand convinced of, and was
it not of your not super-anunating that you speak so boldly, without that
qualifying hope, which though it may save your credit in some other
circumstantiall falsehoods, cannot d^ it here? Take therefore back unto your
self, your failing and your forging, your notorious falsifying and corrupting,
and your impudence too, into the bargain; the Observator has no title unto
either of them.

It is charged next on the Observator, that he saves our Author part of his
labor (that is to say) in nameing any of those men whom he had accused of
being vicious even to scandal, in naming himself for one of them. This is good
Fish indeed if it were well fried, but who shall have the cooking of it? It
must sure be some Cook of the Devils sending, one who is accusator fratrum, a
slanderer or Calumniator of the Brethren, as before was noted: for this charge
he grounds himself on these words of Jerome, Quando sine nomine contra vitia
scribitur, qui ir^scitur accusator sui est, that is to say, When vices are
declamed against, and no person named, he who is angry, accuses himself. A
very saving maxim, I assure you that; as saving and advantageous to our Authors
purpose, as all the saving truths which are found in his History. And should
that use be made of the Fathers maxim, which our Author mak^s of it in this
case, any men might ponere Os in coelum, libell Archbishops, Bishops, a whole
national Clergy, proclaim them guilty of a vitiousnesse to the height of
Scandal, and lay unto their charge even things they know not, in the Psalmist
language; yet none must dare to advocate for the common innocence, for fear of
being (...), or a Felo de se, as our Lawiers call it, a self condemnor at the
least, and in this case a murderer of his own good name. The Pamphletter seems
to have some knowledge of the Observator, telling us Fol. 45. That he has met
him in the same shop near a hundred times, and not less than ten times after
the publication of this doubty History; and questionless has inquired with a
diligent malice into the whole course of his life and actions. If therefore he
can prove him guilty of any one vicious qualy, either in the habit or the
disposition if at the least our Author be so conversant amongst the Moralists,
as to know the difference between them) let him speak out, and do it boldly,
none shall blame him for it. But to talk thus of vitiousnesse even to scandal,
and not be able to name any one (when invited and required to do it) but by the
saving inferences of a general maxim, makes him unworthy of any further
answer, than what Michael the Archangel gave unto you know whom. And whereas
our Author pleads after for his justification to this particular, that
History is not only, the repository of the virtues of Heroic spirits, but ^he
testimony of the vices of bad men; And therefore that he could do no less than
^ake some notice of this exorbitancy of some of the Clergy; he should have
named as well the vices, as the men, that so (as it was hinted to him by the
Observator) the rest of the Clergy might have ^een discharged of that foul
reproach, Fol. 2. But we know who it was that said, Do^olosus versatur in
generalibns, that fraudu^ent and deceitful men keep aloof in generals, that
being a more saving way to preserve themselves from the danger of a ^tricter
examination, than if they should ^lescend to particular instances. Nor do I
^hink our Author was indeed afraid of ^eing accused of I know not what, had he
^mitted this calumniating of some of the Clergy, as he seems to be; but rather
that it had conduced very much to his honor, either in leaving it quite out of
^he first Edition, or suppressing it wholly ^n the second.

The third in course, but first in order ^f these charges which he lays on ^he
Dr. the Dr. of Cosmography, in his ^aunting language, is, That Cosmogra^hy was
a work very proper for him, there being none fitter to describe the world, than
he who all his life loved the world, none like him. None like him? that were
strange indeed; what more Philargurous (one of your fine words dear Sir) and
more addicted unto fil^hy lucre than the Presbyterians, according to your
character of them in both Editions? If so, the Cavaliers will be ashamed of
him, and send him home to these men, with whom you make him to agree in such
base affections. But good Sir do you speak in earnest? has he lost such a fair
Revenue, above 800 l. per annum in Ecclesiastica^ preferments, 1000 l. at the
least in Books^ Plate, and movables, for the testimony of a good conscience?
has his poor tempora^ estate been first brought under Sequestration, under a
Decimation since, onl^ for his adhesion to those sacred verities to which he
has been principled by education, and confirmed by study, and ca^ he be
challenged notwithstanding, for loving the world all his life, and loving i^ in
such a measure, as no man like him? the^ Frange leves calamos and scinde Thalia
li^bellos, in the Poets language; It will b^ high time for him to burn his
books, and gi^ over his studies, to abandon his forme^ interess, like a right
time-server, to assert none but saving truths, as our Author does, and so to
settle and apply himself to the love of the World indeed. When the Pampleter
shall give as great, and as many testimonies of his not loving the world as the
Dr. can, I may perhaps think fit to tell him, that I am confident as many men
(not being Domestiques) have eaten of the Doctors Bread, and drunk of his Cup,
during the whole time of his constant Housekeeping, as ever did of his who
objects this to him. But being as it is, the Doctor, though a Doctor of
Cosmography only, may not unfitly use the words of a modern Poet, and one that
was a wit every inch of him, as you know who said, a little being altered in
the close to make it fit and suitable to his purpose; thus.

Have I renounced my faith? or basely sold
Salvation, or my Loyalty for Gold?
Have I some former practice undertook
By Poison, Shot, sharp Knife, or sharper look
To kill my King? Have I betrayed the State
To Fire, or Fury, or some newer Fate?
If guilty in these kinds I am content
To be thus branded for my punishment.
4 The 2 charge laid upon the Doctor, and the 4th. in order, is said to be the
falsifying of the words of Pareus, by changing quando into quomodo, in the
great business of the Sabbath, which with the inference thereupon shall be
considered of at full, in its proper place: Let the Reader keep it on account,
and when we come to that Chapter (which relates to the Sabbatarian Quarrels) I
shall quit that score.

5. The 3 charge laid upon the Doctor, and the fifth in course, is a matter of
fact, viz. That having, as all the world knows, most insolently trampled and
insulted upon the Bishop when he was down, he no sooner heard of his
enlargement, but instantly he came creeping and cringing, and crawling, and
crouching to him so servilely, as made his Lordship merry with the uncouth
sight, and all this to stand his friend, or at least not appear his foe at that
time, when that Doctor was in a most sorry plight. A pretty Tale, whether a
Winter Tale, or the Tale of a Tub, ^is no matter now, our Author having no
ground for it, but a tris^ing heresay, without producing his Tales-master to
make it good, he only says that he has been told, and told it by some credible
persons, but who those credible persons were is a great State-secret, though
many times it may so happen, that credible persons may be over credulous, and
being such, may be as forward in divulging incredible things, and consequently
both may and do, mendacium dicere, re^ort a thing that is not true, though
they think ^^t be; but since he has desired the Reader, courted him by the
name of the Gentle Reader, and conjured him ( if thou love me) to put the Dr.
to the question whether so or not; I have accordingly asked the question, and
am answered negatively, no, not a word true in all the ^able, so that I might
here end with these words of Cicero, Quid m^nus est non dico Oratoris, sed
hominis, quam id ob^icere ^adve^sar^o, quod si ille verbo negaver it, long
progredi non possis? A bare denial is a sufficient Answer to a groundless
slander. But since he lays it home to the Observator, and would gladly know
of him, whether so or no, partly to satisfy in behalf of the Observator, and
partly to vindicate the Doctor from the scorns of contempt and laughter, I
shall lay down the whole story from his own mouth, not only in reference to
that Bishop, but to the sorry plight which the Pamphleter tells us he was in,
at the time of the supposed crouching and cringing. The Reader (if he please)
may pass it over, as a thing impertinent, being written principally to
undeceive, and disabuse our present Author, who otherwise taking it (as he does
many things else) on the credit of Hearsay, may give it some place in the next
Edition of this famous History; The most part of it being offered to the world
already, in the printed but unpublished sheets so often mentioned. To him it
only is intended, and to him thus dedicated, Sed tibi quando vacat, quando est
jucunda relatu,
Historiam prima repetens ab origint pandam.


That is to say, Your leisure serving, and the story fit,
From the beginning I will open it.


Know then, that the Doctor having done his service to the King at the opening
of his last Parliament, November. 3. An. 1640. retired himself into the Country,
that being far off, and out of sight, he might the less provoke the
indignation of some turbulent men, who were resolved to bear all down that
stood before them; Not startled with the stones thrown at him in the Speeches
of Sir Benjamin Rudyard, and some others, he continued there, till the news,
that Dr. Bastwick, Mr. Burton, and Mr. Prynne were sent for from their several
Prisons, brought him back to Westminster, there to abide such fortune, whether
good or ill, as that conjunction of ill Planets, which seemed destructive to so
many, should portend to him. No sooner was he come, but he was advertised, that
his retreat into the Country, was taken by most men for a flight from England;
and wagers offered to be laid, that he should be seen no more while the
Parliament lasted. The better to cry down this clamor, and satisfy all such
as conceived so of him, He went the next morning in his Gown and Tippet into
Westminster Hall, showing himself with no less confidence than courage to the
eyes of many, who would have been much better pleased with his Room than his
Company. To the Bishop of Lincoln, then released from imprisonment, he gave no
attendance at all, in his private lodging or elsewhere, till meeting him one
day in Jerusalem Chamber, where the Prebends were then met together, he gave
him in as few words as might be the common civility of a complement, for his
return unto the College. The Doctor knew that Mr. Bagshaw, and Mr. Prynne, had
been in private with the Bishop some two days before; and he knew too much of
that Prelate, and his exasperations, either to look for aavour from him, or
rely upon him. Summoned to attend before the Committee for the Courts of
Justice, about the beginning of December, on the complaint of Mr. Prynne, who
had joined him in a Petition with the Lord Archbishop, as the chief Agents and
contrivers of all his sufferings, he appeared accordingly. In what a sorry
plight he was, or rather how far from being in any such sorry plight, how
little dijectednesse there appeared in his Spirits, with what vivacity of
countenance, and with what readiness of speech, he behaved himself in the
several times of his attendance, not only Mr. Prynne himself, but several
Members of that Committee, who are still alive, are best able to testify. The
sequel of the whole was this, that though he made his first appearance with all
those disadvantages of prejudice and prepossession, which commonly obstruct the
way to an equal hearing, yet got he so much ground of them, by his own modest
confidence on the one side, and want of fit* roofs on the other, that in the
end he was dismissed, not only with cheerful countenance from them all, but
with expressions also of esteem and favor from diverse of them. And whereas it
was ordered and resolved upon the Question, on Tuesday April 20. 1641. That the
Sentences against Mr. Prynne in the Star Chamber were illegal, and without just
ground, that he should be released of his impris^nment and fine, that
reparation should be made him by all those Lords of his Majesty's Council,
whose names were to the warrant for his Commitment; It was ordered at the same
time that the charge against the Doctor should be transmitted to the Committee
for Religion, to be considered of with such other charges and complaints as
were come against him. So Mr. Prynne relates the business in the story of his
own proceedings, Page 142, and 143. After which time the Doctor never heard
more of this business, nor of any other which did or might create any trouble
to him from the Houses of Parliament, or any of the committees or members of it.

It hapened in the mean season, that the Doctor preaching in the Abby-Church at
Westminster, on the next Sunday after his first appearance before that
Committee, was interrupted in his Sermon, (after a very unusual manner) by the
Bishop of Lincoln, knocking with his Staff upon the Pulpit, and saying aloud,
No more of that point, no more of that point, with which Alarm the Doctor was
so little disturbed, that without any haesitance in speech, or change of
countenance, He addressed himself unto his auditors, telling them, that he had
not much to come of the present point, but being that he was commanded not to
press it further, he would proceed unto the next, which he did accordingly. No
sooner was he brought back to his Stall, but the Bishop calling one Doctor
Wilson (another of the Prebendaries) to bear witness of that which passed
between them, required the Doctor to deliver a Copy of the Sermon by him
preached, to which the Doctor cheerfully yielded, and presently gave his
Lordship the whole book of Sermons which he had then with him: a thing, in
which it was much feared by some of his friends, that he had been suddenly
surprised, and gi^en thereby a great and notable advantage to a dangerous enemy
But the Doctor knew well enough on what grounds he went, expecting without any
trouble the success of that days adventure. The same day, as they came from
the evening Service, the Bishop sent one of his Gentlemen, to desire the
Sub-Dean, Doctor Wilson, and Doctor Heylyn to come to his lodging, to which it
was answered openly, and in a full Cloister, by Doctor Heylyn, that he would
not go: that he would meet his Lordship in either of the Houses of Parliament,
or any of the Courts in Westminster Hall, or the public Chapter House of the
Church, and would there answer any thing he could charge him with, but that he
would never shuffle up the business in the Bishops lodging, or take a private
satisfaction for a public Baffle. Scarce had he put off his Churchvestments,
when his most honored friends the Lord Bishop of Peterborough, and Sir Robert
Filmer (who had heard all that passed before) came to spend an hour with him,
and not long after comes the Subdean, from the Bishop of Lincoln, with the Book
of Sermons, assuring him that the Bishop meant him nothing but well, that he
had read none of the Sermons but that which had been preached that morning,
that he professed himself much beholding to him for committing into his hands
so great a trust, and finally, that since the Doctor would not come to receive
the Book, he had sent it to him. To which the Dr. made reply, that the Book was
taken from him in the sight of hundreds, and that he would not otherwise
receive it, than either in the same place, or a place more public, that
therefore he should carry back the Book to him that sent it, to the end that he
might read over all the rest of the Sermons, and pick out of them what he could
to the Doctors disadvantage; that as he did not court his favors, or expect
any thing from him, so neither did he fear his frown, or any further mischief
which he could do to him, equal to what he had done already; And finally, that
he was more ashamed of the poorness of this prostitution, than at the
insolences of the morning, which being the best answer that the Sub-dean could
at that time obtain from him, He threw the Book into the Room, and so went his
way. The carriage of this business on the Drs. part was variously censured the
next day, as men stood affected, Laudatnr ab his, culpatur ab illis: some
thinking that he had carried it with too high a hand, others, that he had done
no more, than what he was obliged to do for his own justification. What think
you my most precious Author, where is the creeping and cringing, the crawling
and crouching which your Pamphlet speaks of? where that servility of carriage
which made his Lordship merry at the sight thereof? though possibly as the case
then stood, and in that very nick of time when the Bishop might either stand
his Friend or appear his Foe, a little cringing in the Doctor had not been
scandalous as the Gentleman makes it. Nor did the Doctor only consult his Fame,
but he took order to provide for his safety also. And therefore understanding
what reports had been spread abroad upon the accident, some saying that the
Bishop had interrupted him for preaching against the Scots (some of whose (o^
nissioners were then present) others, for preaching in defense of
Transubstantiation and others for Arminianism, and I know not what, he gave an
account thereof to the King, and then transcribed a copy of the whole passage,
which had been and was to have been spoken, and sent it in a letter to Mr. John
White of the Temple, whom he observed to be at the Sermon, desiring him to
communicate it at the next sitting of the Committee, that when he was to appear
before them the second time, they might be satisfied in all things touching
that particular. Which address took so good effect, that Mr. White (though
most eagerly bent against the Doctor at his first appearance) did the business
for him, reading the whole passage to that Committee, and testified what he saw
and noted when he was at the Sermon; and thereupon it was declared by the
unanimous voice of all then present, that there was nothing in that passage
which did not become an honest man to speak, and a good Christian to hear; and
not so only, but that the Bishop was transported beyond his bounds, and failed
in his accustomed prudence. And this perhaps both smoothed the way unto the
Doctor for his next appearance, where he found better entertainment than he did
at the first; and drew the Bishop unto gentler; and more moderate Counsels.

But to proceed, matters continuing between them in this State till aftre
Candelmas, the Sub-dean finds the Doctor! walking in the Common Orchard,
persuades him to apply himself to the Bishop, as being better able to help or
hurt him than any other whatsoever, pressing the point with such a troublesome
importunity, that the Doctor asked him at the last whether that Proposition
came from himself, or the Bishop of Lincoln? If from himself, it would no
otherwise be looked upon than a fruitles motion; if from the Bishop, it would
require some further time of consideration. Being assured that it came from the
Bishop, and that he should not doubt of a fair reception, he took some time to
consider of it, and to acquaint some friends therewith, for removing of all
such umbrages and misapprehensions, as otherwise that interparlance might have
occasioned, which having done, he signified to the Subdean about 2 days after,
that he would wait upon his Lordship in the evening following, being Saturday
night, when he conceived his Lordship would be most at leisure from the
business and affairs of Parliament. His Lordship being thus prepared, the Dr.
went accordingly to perform his visit, but finding some company in the room,
whom he knew to be of the Scottish Nation, he recoyled again, followed
immediately at the heels by a Gentleman, whom the Bishop sent after him, to let
him know, that the Company was upon the parting, and that he should find his
Lordship all alone, at his coming back, as indeed he did; Being returned, he
was presently taken by his Lordship into his private Gallery, his Servants
commanded to withdaw, and the Doctor left in private with him, where after some
previous expostulations on the one side, and honest defenses on the other, they
came by little and little unto better terms, and at the last into that
familiarity and freedom of discourse, as seemed to have no token in it of the
old displeasures; the Bishop in conclusion, accompanying the Doctor out of the
Gallery, commanding one of his Servants to light him home, and not to leave him
till he brought him to his very door. After which time the Doctor never saw him
more (except at the Church) till his second commitment to the Tower; whither
the Doctor going on some other occasion, resolved to pay unto him the homage of
a dutiful attendance, l^st else his Grace (for then he was Archbishop of York)
hearing that he had gi^en a visit to the rest of the Bishops committed at the
same time for the Protestation, might think the former breach between them, was
not well made up. And at this time I trow, there was no need of creeping, and
^ringing, and crouching; The Doctors affairs being at that time and ^ong before
^n a good condition, and that Archbishops in as bad as the fury of a popular
^atred could expose him to. This is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, as to the Doctors carriage in this particular, and to the sorry
plight, which ^he Pamphleter makes him to be in, at ^he time of these supposed
cringings and ^servile crouchings. The Readers pardon being asked (if any shall
vouchsafe to read it) for this long but not unnecessary digression, I go on
again.

The Observator being freed from those failings and forgings, those falsifyings
and corruptings, which the Pamphleter had charged upon him, it will be worth
our time to see, whether our Author be not truly guilty of the self same crime,
which he falsely lays unto his charge, in falsifying and corrupting the Text of
his own History, by soisting many words into it, to make his quarrel with the
Observator the more just and rational. For as I have some where read of Calvin,
that having first made his Book of Institutions, he did afterward so translate
and expound the Scripture as to make it speak agreeable to the sense and
Doctrine which he had published in that Book: so I may very safely say, that
our Author having framed his answer to the observations, as much to the
disadvantage of the Observator as he possibly could, did after change and alter
the very sense of his History, to make it speak agreeable to the words of his
Pamphlet; as for example.

1. The Observator faulted it in the Historian, for saying, that as a man
without a female consort, so a King without his supreme Council, was but a
half-formed sterill thing, the natural extracts of the one, (for so it
follows in the Author) procreated without a wife, being not more spurious,
than the politic descendents of the other, without the Caution of a
representative. This looked on by the Observator, as a Paradox most dangerous
to supreme Authority, in making Parliaments so necessary to all acts of State,
as if that Kings, or they that have the power of Kings, could do nothing
lawfully, but what they do with their assistance, and by their consent. What
says the Pamphleter to this? marry he hopes, (for he still saves himself by
hoping) that no man of any ingenuity, can so much as question, but that his
politic Descendents imply Statute Laws, which no King of England has power
to make without Common consent in Parliament, Fol. 7. and that the text may
speak agreeably to the words of this comment, he has foisted the word Laws
into it, where before it was not; as may appear to any man who will be pleased
to compare the Editions.

2ly. The Historian had affirmed for certain that Sir Robert Mansell as
Vice Admiral had an unquestionoble right of the chief conduct of that
enterprise (against the Spaniard) upon the Dukes default. For which being
contradicted by the Observator, grounding himself on the authority and common
practice of our Kings, in granting those commands to any, as they see cause for
it; The Pamphleter stands still to his former error, upon this ground, that
many men of wisdom and experience, hold it for a Rule, not only in this
particular, but in all such as have vicariam potestatem, Fol. 7. But yet to
make sure work withal, he has thrust these words, as they thought, into the
text of his History, and thereby made his own position, that Sir Robert Mansell
had an unquestionable right to the chief comduct in that enterprise, to be the
opinion of those many men of wisdom and long experience, whom the comment
points too. New if we ask what these men were, who thought so of it, we find
them in some lines before to be the Mariners; men (I confess) of long
experience, but of no great wisdom, and such as better understand the
Jurisdiction of their Masters-place, than of the Vice Admiral of England, and
what such men as these may hold, touching the Powers and privileges of such as
have vicarium potestatem, is so inconsiderable, that I shall not trouble my
self to insist more on it.

3ly. The Historian had declared, that for Armianism, the informations were
very pregnant, etc. For which being blamed in many things by the Observator, he
puts off the odium from himself, to Mr. Pym and the Committee for Religion,
professing that he only recited, what that Committee declared as the product of
their enquiries, and with this answer he conceives he might easily avoid no
less than 25 pages of the Observation, Fol. 15. So he, and that it may be
thought so by the Reader too, he has thrice foisted in these words, they said,
into that part of his Narrative, which concerns this business, as Fol. 97. l.
27. for, Arminianisn, they said, informations were very pregnant, etc. and Fol.
98. l. 12, 13. the hazard conceived from Rome, etc. flowed, they said, partly
from the uncontrouled publishing of several points tending and working that
way, and ibidem ^ine 19, 20. the greatest danger was from Popery direct, and
from this, the danger they said appeared very great, etc. Here have we dicnnt,
ferunt, aiunt, these words they said, no less than thrice, in half a leaf,
foisted in the text, to make it suitable to the Pamphlet. And we had a
praedicant in it too, (that you may see, I have still some smattering of my
Grammar,) an accusation of some men for their uncontrouled preaching of several
points tending and warping toward Popery, though now upon an admonition from
the Observator, he has turned preaching into publishing, as appears, fol. 98
line 14. guided thereto, by the illustration of his comment, and a desire to do
some right to Doctor Cozens, which I thank him for, whom he had formerly
accused for preaching many things which warped toward Popery, but now agrees
so far with the Observator, as to excuse him from publishing and direct Popery,
in his Hours of Prayer.

4. The Observator had declared, that the Primate had conceived a displeasure
against the Lord Deputy for abrogating the Articles of Religion established by
the Church of Ireland, and settling in their place the Articles of the Church of
Enggland, to which the Pampleter replyeth, that the Articles of Religion
established in the Church of Ireland were never abrogated, though those of
England were received and approved by that convocation, Fol. 42. For proof
whereof he has produced a Certificate under the hands of Doctor Barnard, and
one Samuel Pullain, whose title and degree I know, and therefore am not to be
blamed, if I give none to him. Whether this Superinduction of the Articles of
the Church of England amount not to an abrogation of those of Ireland, shall be
considered of hereafter in that Chapter which concerns Armianism. Now I shall
only tell you this, that whereas our Author had it thus in his first Edition,
Fol. 132, viz. that in the Synod assembled in Ireland, the body of Articles
formed by that Church, Anno 1615. were repealed, and in their places were
substituted the thirty nine Articles of the Church of England: Now to conform
his text to the former Comment, he has left out the word repealed in his new
Edition, Fol. 137. and tells us a clean contrary story to that before, which
shall be looked upon in the place before mentioned, as more proper for it.

And so I close this Chapter, intended chiefly for the justication of the
Observator, and the retorting of some Foistings, on the Authors head; withal
confuting many of the Pamphleters Answers, which could not be so well
considered of in an other place.

CHAP. III.
The affairs of the two Kings considered. Of the impowering or not impowering
the Earl of Bristol, by Letters of Proxy. The Proxy granted to the King of
Spain; and Don Charles his Brother. Our Author qualifieth the word ever, to
make it serve his turn, and yet cannot do it. The Letter of Philip the 3. to
Olivarez: nothing contained in it against the restoring of the Palanate, but
the contrary rather. King James communicated not with the Parliament in the
Breach with Spain: our Author pleads a Demonstration, but produces none. Our
Authors nicety between taking Coach to and for White Hall, and the vanity of
it. Some solid Grandeur, contributed to the throne of Kings in their
Coronations. His Catholic Majesty how concerned in our Authors scoffs. That
heretofore some Kings in Spain have been Crowned and anointed; though of late
those ceremonies be disused, and upon what reasons. The Pamphleters weak
defenses for our Authors mistake, about taking the Great Seal from the Bishop
of Lincoln, and the Observator justified, as to that particular. Our Authors
Annuating and Superannuating, in his Temporalities. His Superannuating, or
subtertriennuating rather, in the ^ynod of Do^t, how weakly justified and
excused. The Observators running leap made good, and his Reasons for it. A
transition to the following Disputes about the Sabbath or Lords day.
WE are now come to the main body of the Pamphlet, in which we shall begin
(and good reason for it) with such particulars as do relate to the two Kings,
and such of their personal affairs as our Author treats of.

The first exception made by the Observator, is the impowering of the Eat^ of
Bristol, to celebrate by Proxy in the Princes name, the marriage with the Lady
Infanta. That so it must be understood, appears by the words foregoing. The
Spaniard (says he) importunately moves his Highness (the^ ready to depart for
England) that b^ would be pleased to assign in his absence some Proxy to
contract with the Infanta, after a new Dispensation ha^ from Rome, to whom the
Prince returned answer, that he would empower the Earl of Bristol, to give his
Majesty all satisfaction in that particular, which accordingly he did. The
Gentleman seems much displeased, that any such inference should be made from
the former words, as the impowering of the Earl by Proxy, to proceed to the
celebration of the Marriage, and calls it An ado about nothing. How so? Because
(says he) the Observator might have found his meaning in the page next
following, where he speaks of the Earls delivering of the Proxy, clearly
importing, it was only in his custody to consign to another, Fol. 3. But gentle
Sir, men that write Histories, must write both properly and plainly, and not
post off the Reader from one place to another, to find out their meaning, or
else be forced to put such a sense and understanding on their words, as they
will not bear, whereof we shall speak more anon on another occasion.

In the mean time he proceeds to tell us, first that the Proxy was to be
consigned to the King of Spain only, not to him and Don Charles, as the
Observator says; And secondly, that he would gladly know, who this Don Charles
was, he being the first Don Charles, as he, or any body else he thought had
ever heard of, Ibid. To reply first unto the last, he need not be desirous to
know who this Don Charles was, the Observator having told him positively and
plainly enough, that he was the King of Spains Brother; and though the
Gentleman pretending to the Spanish Tongue (as his Encuerpoes, and Accollados
do most plainly fignifie) conceives the Observator should have called that
Prince by the name of Don Carlo, as the Spaniards do: yet, if he please to look
into the general History of that Kingdom, written in French by Lewis de
Mayerne, and translated into English by Grimstone, he shall not fail of finding
there the name of Don Charles many scores of times. But for his confident
asseveration that the Proxy was made, or consigned only to the King, and not
unto the King and his Brother, or to either of them, as the Observator has
informed him; if that prove true, I must renounce my knowledge in all other
Languages, but my natural English. For in the instrument of the Proxy, it is
said expressly, that the Prince, personam nominaturus magnitudini rei, ita
praeexcelsae parem, and quae nomine suo, seque ipsum repraesentando, qua per
est dignitate, and authoritate actui adeo solenni, henorifico and sumno possit
satisfacere, and praedictum mat^imonium celebrare, and ad exitum perducere;
serenissimi regis Catholici Philippi 4. majestatem eligit, item and Carolum
Hispaniarum infant^m ejus fratrem, unicuiqs eorum in solidum vices suas
committendo, prout de facto and cum effectu, and melioribus via and forma
commisit and dedit, and utrumquemq, eo um facit and constituit suum verum and
legitimum and indubitabilem procuratorem, concedens unicuique etc. ut praedicto
serenissimo Carolo Walliae principe, and ejus nomine, propriamque illius
personam referendo, repraesentando, nuptias and matrimonium contrahat etc. cum
praedicta serenissima domina Maria Hispaniarum infant etc. Th^se are the very
words of the public instrument, which if they do not prove, and prove most
undeniably, that the Proxy was made unto the King of Spain, and his Brother
Charles, or to either of them, the Pamphleter must have more knowledge in the
Latin Tongue, then all men else that ever learned it.

The next thing faulted in our Author, is, his affirming, that England had ever
found the Spaniard a worse friend then Enemy. The contrary whereof being proved
by the Observator, the Pamphlet tells us, that any fair mannered man, would
understand the word ever, with reference to the State of Reformation, Fol. 3.
and then the meaning must be this, that the Spaniard has ever been an ill
friend to England, that is to say, ever since the time of her Reformation. This
was perhaps the Gent. meaning, but we poor men that cannot search into his
thoughts, must know his meaning by his gaping, by what he speaks or writes, not
by what he thinks: and sure I am, the words can bear no such Grammatical
construction as he puts upon them. Nor is his proposition true, with that
limitation which he gives us of it; the Spaniards never troubling our
proceedings in the Reformation in the reign of King Edward, nor in the first
beginnings of Queen Elizabeth (of whose life next under God himself he was the
principal preserver) till first by an underhand fomenting, and after by
appearing visibly in the broils of the Netherlands, he was in forced to arm
against her: reasons of State, and not the interests of Religion, being the
motives of the long war which after followed. But he goes on and tells us,
that the Observator seems to confess it. He does but seem so them, that is
one thing, and he does not seem so, that is another: the Observator saying
only, that if upon the provocations given by Queen Elizabeth in supporting the
Netherlands, the Spaniard took up arms against us, he had all the reason in
the world for his justification; which certainly is not so much as a seeming
confession, that either Religion or Reformation, was any cause of that quarrel,
on the Spaniards part.

Next for the business of the Pal^tilate, the Observator tells us from some
Letters of the Earl Bristols, that the Spaniard really intended the restoring
o^ it. Our Author does oppose to this, a Letter of the King of Spain to the
Count of Olivarez his especial favorite, in which it may be found (says he)
that neither the match it self, nor the restitution of the Palatinate, was
sincerely intended, but delays merely sought for by the Spaniard to accomplish
his pe^fidious ends. Now how he has abused this Letter, in making it to speak
of things which he finds not in it, will best be seen by looking on the
Letter it self, which is this that follows.

Philip the 3. to the Conde of Olivarez.
The King my Father declared at his death, that his intention never was to
marry my Sister the Infanta Donna Maria with the Prince of Wales, which your
Uncle Don Balthaser well understood, and so treated this Match ever with an
intention to delay it; notwithstanding it is now so far advanced, that
considering withal the averseness unto it of the Infanta, as it is high time
to seek some means to divert the Treaty, which I would have you find out, and
I will make it good whatsoever it be, but in all other things procure the
satisfaction of the King of Great Britain, who has deserved very much, and it
shall content me, so that it be not the match.


This is that letter in the Cabala, to which the Author does direct us, and
refer himself, in which it is to be observed, first, that there is not one word
in it touching the Palatinate, that being a point which the Spaniards would not
hear of in that long Treaty, and without which the match was finally agreed on,
as was plainly shown by the Observator: which makes it evident how ill credit
is to be given to our present Pamphleter citing this Letter for a proof, that
the restoring of the Palatinate, was never sincerely intended by the Court of
Spain. This Letter rather seems to prove, that the Spaniard would not stick at
the Palatinate, if he could come off handsomely from the Match it self. The
King commanding Olivarez, in all other things to procure the satisfaction of
the King of Great Britain; and therefore why not amongst other things, in the
restitution of the Palatinate to the Prince Elector? In the next place we are
to know that this Letter was written before the Prince went into Spain: where
by the gallantry of his carriage, and his prudent conduct of the business, he
not only overcame all those difficulties, which had before been interposed, but
conquered the averseness of the Lady Infanta, who became afterward extremely
affectionate to him. And for the Rupture which ensued, it is most clear and
evident, that it proceeded from the English, not from the fraudulency or delays
of the Spanish Counsels.

After this follows the Negotiation of the Match with France, communicated by
King James (as the Historian would inform us) to his Houses of Parliament, by
whom it was entertained with unanimous consent. The improbability of which, is
proved by the Observator, by the averseness of that King from parting with such
a special branch of his Royal Prerogative, and the disdain with which he
entertained the like proposition from them, a few years before. To this the
Pampletter replieth, That it was no more lessening of his Prerogative, to
communicate with them in the entrance into, then in the breach of a treaty of
that nature, as he did in that of Spain, which was the main business debated
in the Parliament of the 21. of King James. But Sir, who told you that King
James communicated with his Houses of parliament, in the Breach with Spain? I
trow you find not any such thing in the Journals of either of the Houses, with
which you seem at other times to be very conversant; and doubtless would have
vouched them now, had he found this in them. That King had no design or purpose
of breaking off his correspondence with his Catholic Majesty, and could not
communicate those counsels with his Houses of Parliament, which he never had.
In the course of that business, he was merely passive, forcibly drawn to yield
unto it at the last, by the continual solicitation of the Prince, and the Duke
of Buckingham, and an importunate Petition of the Lords and Commons, presented
by Dr. Abbot then Archbishop of Canterbury, a principal Agent in promoting the
intended Breach. It follows by our Authors Logic, the King communicated not
with his Parliament in the Breach with Spain; Ergo (which is in English
therefore, as we know who said) he did not communicate with them neither in his
Treaty with France.

Of the Observators not inveighing against King James, we have spoke already,
and of King James his stickling against the Arminians (so far forth as the
Pamphleter leads me to it) I shall speak hereafter. The error about the day of
that Kings interment, and the new Kings marriage is confessed and mended by the
Author, but so that he would fain have the first error accounted but a st^p of
his pen, Fol. 6. and puts on some reasons, signifying nothing, to conclude
it for him. And for the second error, that about the marriage, he confesses
that he was mistaken. But says withal, he could insallibly demonstrate, that
it was designed upon the 8. concerning which I would first know, whether this
demonstration were a Priore, or a Posteriore, as the Logicians have
distinguished, or that it was not rather some such sorry Argument, drawn from
the common Topic of Heresy, as he commonly builds on, or possibly some fallacy
put upon him, a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter, or some such like
Elench. But let it be the first for this once, and then I shall next ask him,
why he communicated not the infallible demonstration to us, which he says he
had, since otherwise we are not bound to believe him in it; he being no niggard
of his story, when there is less occasion for it, then was given him now. And
we know the Rule in Logic to be very true, viz. non existentium and non
apparentium, eadem est ratio, A Demonstration not produced, is as good as none.

In their Majesty's goings to Whitehall, the Pamphleter still adheres to his
first expression, and seems displeased, that the Observator should not have
so much ordinary capacity, as to discern the difference between the taking
Coach to and for Whitehall, Fol. 6. But Sir, a good Historian (amongst which
number you would fain count your self for one) must write both properly and
plainly, as before was said, and not trouble and torment the Reader, in drawing
dun out of the mire, in a piece of English. And he that shall compare those
words, with the rest that follow, will find no reason to collect any thing out
of them, but that their Majesty's went all the way by Coach, till they came to
London. He that shall say, that any Gent. of Grays-Inne, takes Coach for
Westminster, when he alighteth out of the Coach at the Temple-gate, walks on
foot to the stairs, from thence takes Boat to the Kings Bridge, and so walks
on foot again till he come to the Hall, must needs be thought to speak
improperly at the least, that I say not worse: no man of ordinary capacity
being able to understand him otherwise, but that the Gent. went by Coach all
the way to Westminster, and not the least part of it only. But our Author will
not yield himself to be out in any thing, whereof we have had many examples
already, and have more to come.

Of restraining the Kings power in Acts of State to the will of Parliaments,
and the wrong supposed to be done to Sir Robert Mansell, with our Authors
falsifying his own Text on those occasions, we have spoke before. The next
thing which occurs de novo, is the scorn, put by our Author on the Coronation
of Kings, which he plainly calls a serious vanity, affirming that they cannot be
i^le to better purpose. Reproved for this by the Observator, and those solemn
Inaugurations being proved, to be very ancient, directed by the holy Spirit in
the Book of God, exemplified not only, in David, and many other Kings of Judah,
but also in the Son of David, the chief King of all: our Author stands unto
it still, because (says he) it conferreth no one dram of solid Grandeur to the
Throne, Kings being perfect Kings, and qualified fully to all intent of Royalty
without it, Fol. 7. Igrant indeed, that Kings are perfect Kings without this
solemnity. The Case of Clark and Watson in the first year of King James, and of
many Murderers and Felons in the first year of King Charles, make this plain
enough: all of them being indicted for their several Felonies and Treasons,
committed by them against the peace of those several Kings, their Crowns and
dignities, they neither of them crowned at the time of those trials, so that I
shall not trouble my self with looking into the case of the Post-nati, as to
that particular. But yet I cannot yield unto him, that these solemnities confer
not so much as a single dram of solid Grandeur to the Throne. For certainly the
Kings* entry into a Cognizance or stipulation with his people, to govern them
according to their several Laws, and their Atturning Subjects to him, or
acclaiming him to be their King, in our Authors language, must needs contribute
much to the establishment of the Regal Throne. Were it not thus, King Charles
had been very ill advised, in putting himself to such immeasurable charges for
receiving the poor Crown of Scotland; and the Scots, not more advised then he,
in threatening him, that if he long deferred the duty of a Coronation, they
might perhaps be inclined to make choice of another King. For which consult our
Author, Fol. 125. It seems by this, that neither of them did esteem it a
serious vanity, and that the King conceived it to have somewhat in it of a
solid Grandeur; and this our Author saw at last, and therefore is compelled by
the light of Reason, and the convicting of his judgment (whether by the
Observator, or not, shall not now be questioned) to conclude thus with him,
that there is something of a solid signification in those serious vanities.

But then he adds withal, that all Christian Kings are not concerned in it, as
is affirmed by the Observator, his Catholic Majesty not being touched in it,
because not Crowned. Nor does this inference hold good by the Rules of Logic,
that because his Catholic Majesty is not crowned at all, therefore the Rites
of Coronation are not accounted sacred by him, or that he is unconcerned in
those scoffs and scorns, which are put upon it by our Author. Betwixt all
Kings there is that sacred correspondence, that the violating of the Rites or
person of one concerns all the rest: and though the Catholic King has not
been Crowned in these last ages, yet do they still retain a solemn initiation
into Regality, as our Author calls it, at their first entrance into State.
Not Crowned, I grant in these latter Ages, though they were of old; that which
our Savior spoke in the case of Marriage between man and woman, viz. Non fuit
sic ab initio, that it was not so from the beginning, being true in the
Political Marriages of these Kings and Kingdoms. For in the History of Spain
written by Lewis de Mayerne, it is said of Inigo Arista the 6. King of Navarre,
that he was anointed and crowned, after the manner of the Kings of France (of
which he i^ said to have been a Native) that custom being afterward observed
in the following Kings. And though it be believed by some, that this custom
came only into Navarre, after they had Kings of the House of Champagn, yet that
will give it the antiquity of Four hundred years, and prove withal that
Crowning and Anointing, was observed by some Kings in that Continent. Nor was
it thus only in Navarre, but in Castile also, Alfonso the third of that name,
King of Castile and Leon (fortunate in his wars against his Neighbors) causing
himself to be Crowned Emperor of Spain in the Cathedral Church at Leon, with
the solemnities and ceremonies requisite in so great an Act, receiving the holy
Unction, and the Crown from Don Raymond Archbishop of Toledo: performed in
Leon, anno 1134. and afterward iterated in Castile (as some writers say) for
the Crown of Toledo as a distinct and different Kingdom. The chargeable
repetition of which solemn Act in so many Kingdoms, as now and of long time
have been united in the persons of the Catholic Kings, may possibly be the
reason of the discontinuance of it in these latter days: each Kingdom in that
Continent, being apt to think it self neglected (as the Scots did here) in case
the King received not a particular Coronation for it. Considedering therefore
that one Coronation could not serve for all, it was the thriftiest way in
respect of charges, and the way most like to please the particular Nations, not
to receive the Crowns of any of them, in that solemn way, which was and is
observed to this day in most Christian Kingdoms.

The Coronation being past, the King prepares for the Parliament approaching;
also in the way of preparation, he thought it fit, that some who in the last,
had been uncivil toward the Duke, should be made examples; upon which account
(says our Historian) the Lord Keeper Williams fell, and his place was disposed
of to Sir Thomas Coventry. From which what can be possibly concluded by a
knowing man, but that the displacing of the Lord Keeper Williams, must fall
between the Coronation and the following Parliament? And then our Author will
not yield, that he was out in this Temporality. How so? because (says he) I
never intended it, to be in that moment of time to which that Paragraph
relates, Fol. 8 Is not this like to prove a brave historian think you, who
professes openly that he writes one thing and intends another? Is not the
Reader like to be very well edified by such reservations, as the Author keeps
unto himself, and are not to be found, either positively, or by way of
inference, in the Book he reads. Our Author certainly is put hard to it, when
he can find no other way to ev^de the errors of his pen but these silly
shifts. And yet Solamen miseris, as the old verse has it. It is some comfort
to him, that the Observator should be out himself, in saying that the Great
Seal was taken from him in October, whereas it is said by Mr. Howell, that he
departed from the Seal in August, Fol. 8. But what if Mr. Howels intelligence
fail him, who though a very honest man pretends not to the Spirit of
infallibility, as our Author does? then certainly the Observator is not out,
nor my Author in. But that we may not spend more time in tossing this debate
like a Tenice Ball, from one hand to another; the Pamphleter may be pleased to
know, first, that the committing of the Great Seal to Sir Thomas Coventry, is
placed by the Continuator of Stowes Chronicle after the 25. of September, which
makes it very near October if it were not in it. Secondly, it is affirmed by
those who have cause to know it, that the Seal was committed to that Gent.
precisely on the first or second Sunday of October, neither sooner nor later.
And Thirdly, I am very certain, that whenever it was given to Sir Thomas
Coventry, it was taken from the Bishop of Lincoln but a day or two before, the
news of taking it from the one, and giving it to the other, being brought to
Oxford in the same Letters. But then admitting fourthly, that the Bishop parted
with the Seal in August, yet what makes this to our Authors justification?
makes it not to his further condemnation rather? Who places it after
Candlemas, and makes it one of those things in which the King thought fit to
prepare himself (the Coronation being ended) for the following Parliament.
Never had writer such ill luck, or so little modesty; such ill luck, in calling
after any thing which comes in his way, but finding nothing that will keep him
up from sinking in his own mistakes; so little modesty, in yielding to no
evidence which is brought against him: our Author being like the bold Wrastler,
I have somewhere read of, who though he had many falls, and was often foiled,
would still persuade the company that he had the better.

But yet he makes us some amends in the next that follows, Confessing that he
was mistaken in making Dr. Laud Bishop of Bathe and Wells, when he officiated
at the Coronation. But then withal, he slights the error, calling it
scornfully Grande nefas, an horrid crime no doubt, Ibid. Not noted by the
Observator as a crime, or a horrid crime, but as an error or mistake in his
Temporalities; concerning which he says, and will be bold to say it, in the
end of his Preface, that no one thing or action is so mislaid, as to
superannuate, and not many to vary from the very day of their prime existence.
Not from the very day of their prime existence! that were brave indeed, but
braver if it were good in the course of the History. Some variations from the
very day of their prime existence, being seen already. We have here a
super-semi-annuating (a fine word of our Authors new fashion) in making Doctor
Laud Bishop of Bathe and Wells, seven months at least before his time: a
superannuating in the great rout given to Tilly by the King of Sweden placed by
our Author in the year 1630. whereas that battle was not fought till the year
next following; a super-triennuating in placing the Synod of Dort, before the
convocation of Ireland held in the year 1615. that Synod not being holden
until three years after, and if I do not find a super-supe-annuating (that is
to say, a lapse of six years) either in the Pamphlet or the History, I am
content, our Author shall enjoy the honor of a public triumph; he must take
greater pains then this to relieve his Preface, from the purgatory of the
Observator, of which he tells us Fol. 9. or otherwise it is like to lie
there, till the next general Jail-deliver by a Bull from Rome.

Now for the superannuating in the business of the Council of Dort, (a
subterannuating called in the true sense of the thing) our Author has very
much to say, though little to the purpose, in his own defense; for he resolves
to act the Wrastler above mentioned, and will not yield himself foiled, fall he
never so often. And first he flies as formerly to his private intentions,
telling us, that he intended his not superannuating of such things and actions,
as have reference to the sixteen years of King Charles, whereof he treats in
that History, not of such things as antecedently occurred, and were taken in by
the By, Fol. 8. And this is like an help at Maw, kept in his hands to turn the
fortune of the game, when it seems most desperate. But besides this
subtersuge of his private intentions, he not only tells us, that in things
taken in by the By, he never will, nor did ever mean, to warrant the truth to
every particular year; but that this error being extravagant, and out of the
bounds of his principal Narrative, may come within the confidence of his not
superannuating. A rule and resolution no less saving then the truths he
writes, and such as ill-becomes the mouth of a good Historian; who if he please
to walk abroad into foreign Countries, or look back into former times, must have
as great care in the circumstances of time and place (his Temporability and
localities in our Authors language) as in relating the ^ansitions and affairs
at home, though these h^s principal concernment. But lest this should not serve
the turn, he has a trick to make all sure above all dispute, which is by
fathering this mistake on the Committee for Religion, whose report, he there
did, or at least intended (he will be sure that his intentions shall not fail
him) to complete. But dares he stand to this? dar^s he stand to any thing? no,
we find the contrary. For though he tells us, that the Observator would be
wondrous blank, at his Ridiculus mus, and after such a ranting triumph, if the
error should be found to be none of his, but the infallible Committees, yet in
the end it will appear, that it was infallibly his own, himself confessing,
that thinking fit to contract the Report of that Committee to a narrow
scantling, not minding the words, so he secured the substance, he failed in the
transcript of his copy, which did erroneously (he grants) present the Articles
sent to Dort, before those of Ireland, which makes it on the whole matter the
greater wonder, that the man having made this ingenuous account as himself
entituleth it, should reckon as a defense of his not superannuating in this
particular; which is ind^^d a plain confession of the Fact, a taking to
himself, or his own copy of the Report, the mistake committed, and clearing of
the Committee for Religion, upon which he had laid it. Or granting that the
copy was not of his own transcribing, but the copy rather of some others, the
broken fragments, and loose notes of that Report, wherewith some mercenary
penman had abu^ed his credulity; yet how can this be justified before that
Committee; that such a bold affront should be offered to their infallibility,
by laying this mistake on them: or that Gent. Mr. Pym* should be conjured from
the Royal Sepulchers like Samuel by the Witch of E^dor, to bear witness to it?
But our Author will not leave it so. The Observator must be charged for
fetching a running leap to page 96. rather then not find another mistake (sor
so I think he means) in the History which is now before us. I thought the
Observator had in this deserved a more fair acknowledgement, in laying these
mistakes together, then if he had took them one by one, as they came in his
way, especially considering that he gives a good reason for it, that is to say,
that he might not trouble himself with the like observation at another time:
and did I think the Pamphleter would be ruled again by reason, I could give him
another reason for it: that he was now to take his leave of those Observations
which personally related to the two Kings, in their several and distinct
capacities: This of King James in sending the Articles of Lambeth to the
convocation of Ireland, and the Assembly at Dort being the last point in which
he was concerned in his own particular, without relation to King Charles, and
not seconded by him. It Is true, we find them acting afterward in the same
design, but in several times; King James first setting out the Declaration
about lawful sports, and King Charles seconding the same by a more strict
command, to have it punctually observed throughout the Kingdom. Which giving
the occasion to some observations, and those Observations occasioning a sharp
and uncivil Answer in our Authors Pamphlet; I shall here take another leap to
fetch in those Controversies before we do proceed to the examination of the
rest that follows: though the Debates touching the spreading of Arminianism,
and the supposed growth of Popery, according to the course of time, and the
method of our Authors History do occur before it.

Only I must crave leave to hoop in here the Duke of York as a considerable
Member of the Royal Family, before I close this present Chapter. Of him our
Au^hor tells us in his printed but unpublished sheets, that he was by
Birthright Duke of York; but to avoid the Scilla of that mistake, he falls into
the Charybdis of another as bad, telling us in that leaf new printed, (but not
new printed only, if at all, on that occasion) that he was after styled Duke of
York. For which, being reprehended by the Observator, as one that did
accommodate his Style to the present times, the Gent. seems much distressed,
and in the agony of those distresses, asks these following questions: 1. How it
is possible to escape the Observators lash? 2. What shall an honest Historian
do in such a case? Fol. 25. In these two doubts I shall resolve him, and
resolve him briefly, letting him know, that an honest Historian should have
said, he was after created Duke of York, and not styled so only: And 2. That if
our Author showed himself an honest Historian, the Observator has no lash for
him, and so it will be possible enough to escape it. Which said, we shall go on
to that grand concernment, in which our Author spends his passions to so little
purpose.

CHAP. IV.
The Pamphleters mistake, in making discontinuance equal to a calling in. The
uncharitable censure of H. B. and our Historian, upon the first and second
publishing of their two Majesty's Declarations about lawful sports. The
Divinity of the Lords Day not known to Mr. Fryth, or Mr. Tyndall, two eminent
Martyrs in the time of King Henry 8. nor to Bishop Hooper, martyred in the time
of Queen Mary. The opinions of those men, how contrary to this new Divinity.
This new Divinity not found in the Liturgies, Articles, or Canons of the Church
of England; nor in the writings of any private man before Dr. Bound, anno 1595.
The Observator justified in this particular by the Church Historian. The
Authors ill luck in choosing Archbishop Whitgift for a Patron of this new
Divinity; and the argument drawn from his authority, answered. An Answer to the
Pamphleters argument from the Book of Homilies; the full scope and Analysis of
the Homily, as to this particular. The Pamphleters great brag of all learned
men on his side, reduced to one, and that one worth nothing. The Book of
Catechestical Doctrine ascribed to Bishop Andrews, neither of his writing, nor
approved of by him. Our Authors new Book in maintenance of this new Divinity.
The Doctor vindicated from the forgings and falsifyings objected against him by
the Pamphleter. Proofs from the most learned men of the Protestant and reformed
Churches, (1) That in the judgment of the Protestant Divines, the sanctifying
one day in seven, is not the moral part of the fourth Commandment. (2) That
the Lords Day has no other ground on which to stand, then the authority of the
Church. And (3) That the Church has power to change the Day, and to translate
it to some other.
WE are now come unto the business of the Lordsday, in which our Author shows
himself a stiff Sabbatarian, taking his rise from the Kings Declaration about
Lawful sports, first published by King James at Greenwitch, May, 24. anno 1618.
and by King Charles at Westminster, October. 18. anno 1633. when published first,
it raised so many impetuous clamours, as our Author told us in his first, that
the Book was soon after called in; in which being otherwise informed by the
Observator, and so far satisfied in the point that the Book never was called
in, though the execution of it (by the remissness of that Kings Government) was
soon discontinued, will notwithstanding keep himself to his former error, and
thinks to save himself by this handsome shift, that the discontinuance of the
execution of it, (no matter upon what occasion, for he leaves that out) was a
tacit suppressing and calling of it in, Fol. 22. This is a piece of strange
State Doctrine, that the discontinuance of the execution of any Law, Ordinance,
Canon, or Act of State, should be equivalent unto the calling of them in. Our
Author has not found it so in the Act for Knighthood, nor have the Subjects
found it so in such penal Statutes, as having lain dor^ (...) many years, were
awakened afterward; nor can it be inferred from hence, that any of the Laws
against Priests and Jesuits are at the present, or have been formerly
suppressed, and tacitly called in, because by the clemency of King James, the
prudence of King Charles, and the temper of the present Government, there was
and is a discontinuance of such Executions, as only are to be commended, when
they may not, then when they may possibly be spared. What the occasion was in
publishing of this Declaration, the Observator tells at large from the Books
themselves. But H. B. in his seditious Sermon (most undeservedly) entitled,
For God and the King, gives another reason for the publishing of it by King
James, which, being not pertinent to my business with our present Author, I
forbear to mention, that being already canvassed in another place. But the
design of the re-publishing of it in the reign of King Charles, was by our
Author in the first draught of his History, as it was sent unto the Press, and
printed, though suppressed with others of like nature spoken of before,
affirmed to be a plot to gall and vex those godly Divines, whose consciences
would not vail to such impiety, as to promote the work; and for the not
promoting of it to compel them to desert their Stations, and abandon their
livings, in which their very vitality and livelihood consisted, Fol. 127. Then
which there could be nothing more uncharitably, or untruly said. This as he
makes there the first project of exasperation which Archbishop Laud and his
confederates of the same stamp pitched upon, to let his professed Enemies feel
the dint of his spirit; so does he call it in the King a profane Edict, a
maculating of his own honor, and a sacrilegious robbing of God. All which,
though afterward left out, declare his willingness to make both Prince and
Prelates, and the dependants of those Prelates (the poor Doctor of Cosmography
among the rest) feel the dint of his spirit; and pity 'twas he was not suffered
to go on in so good a purpose.

Our Author having intimated in the way of a scorn or j^ar that the Divinity of
the Lords day, was new Divinity at the Court; was answered by the Observator,
that so it was, by his leave, in the Country too, not known in England till
the year 1595. etc. The Observator said it then, I shall prove it now, and
having proved it in the Thesis, or proposition, will after return answer to
those objections which the Pamphleter has brought against it. And first it is
to be observed, that this new Divinity of the Lords day was unknown to those,
who suffered for Religion, and the testimony of a good conscience, under Henry
8. as appears by John Fryth (who suffered in the year 1533) in a tract by him
written about Baptism. Our forefathers, says he, which were in the beginning
of the Church, did abrogate the Sabbath, to the intent that men might have an
Ensample of Christian Liberty, etc. Howbeit because it was necessary, that a
day should be reserved, in which the people should come together, to hear the
word of God, they ordained in stead of the Sabbath, which was Saturday, the
next day following, which is Sunday. And though they might have kept the
Saturday with the Jew, as a thing indifferent, yet they did much better. Next
to him follows Mr. Tyndall, famous in those times, for his translation of the
Bible, for which, and for many of his Doctrines opposite to the Church of Rome,
condemned unto the flames ann^ 1536. in the same Kings reign, who in his Answer
to Sir Thoma^ More, has resolved it thus: As for the Sabbath, we be Lords over
the Sabbath, and may yet change it into Monday, or into any other day, as we
see need, or may make every tenth day holiday only, if we see cause why,
neither was there any cause to change it from the Saturday, but to put a
difference between us and the Jews: neither need we any* holy day at all, if
the people might be taught without it. The same Doctrine publicly defended in
the writings of Bishop Hooper, advanced to the Miter by King Edward, and by
Queen Mary to the Crown, the crown o^ Martyrdom, in a Treatise by him written
on the Ten Commandments, anno 1550. who resolves it thus: We may not think
(says he) that God gave any more holiness to the Sabbath, then to the other
days. For if ye consider, Friday, Saturday, or Sunday, in as much as they be
days, and the work of God, the one is no more holy then the other, but that
day is always most holy, in the which we most apply and give our selves unto
Holy works. No notice taken by these Martyrs of this new Divinity: The first
speaking of the observation of the Lords day, no otherwise then as an
institution grounded on their forefathers, a constitution of the Church; the
second placing no more Morality in a seventh-day, then in a tenth-day Sabbath;
and the third making all days wholly alike, the Sunday no otherwise then the
rest.

As this Divinity was new to those godly Martyrs, so was it also to those
Prelates, and other learned men who composed the first and second Liturgies in
the reign of King Edward, or afterward reviewed the same in the first year of
Queen Elizabeth, anno 1558. in none of which there is more care taken of the
Sunday then the other Holydaies; no more divine offices performed, or diligent
attendance required by the old Laws of this Land upon the one, then on the
other. No notice taken of this new Divinity in the Articles of Religion as they
were published, anno 1552. or as they were revised and ratified in the tenth
year after; no order taken for such a strict observation of it, as might
entitle it unto any Divinity, either in the Orders of 1561. or the
Advertisements of 1565. or the Canons of 1571. or those which ^ollowed anno
1575. Nothing that does so much as squint toward this Divinity in the writings
of any learned man of this Nation, Protestant* Papist, Puritan, of what sort
soever, till broached by Dr. Bound, anno 1595. as formerly has been affirmed
by the Observator.

But because the same truth may possibly be more grateful to our Author, from
the mouth of another, then from that of the ignorant Observator, I would desire
him to consult the new Church History, writ by a man more suitable to his own
affections, and so more like to be believed. About this time (says he)
throughout England, began the more solemn and strict observation of the Lords
Day (hereafter both in writing and preaching commonly called the Sabbath)
occasioned by a book this year set forth by P. Bound Dr. in Divinity (and
enlarged with additions, anno 1606.) wherein the following opinions are
maintained. 1. That the Commandment of sanctifying every seventh day, as in
the Mosaical Decalogue, is moral and perpetual. 2. That whereas all other
things in the Jewish Church were taken away ( Priesthood, Sacrifices, and
Sacraments) his Sabbath was so changed as it still remains. 3. That there is
a great reason, why we Christians should take our selves as strictly bound to
rest upon the Lords day, as the Jews were upon their Sabbath, it being one of
the moral Commandments where all are of equal authority. lib. 9. sect. 20.
After this, he goes on to tell us, how much the learned men were divided in
their judgments about these Sabbatarian Doctrines; some embraced them as
ancient truths consonant to Scripture, long disused and neglected, now
seasonably revived for the increase of piety; others conceived them grounded on
a wrong bottom, but because they tended to the manifest advance of Religion,
it was pity to oppose them, seeing none have just reason to complain, being
deceived into their own good. But a third sort flatly fell out with these
positions, as galling men's necks with a Jewish yoke against the Liberty of
Christians. That Christ as Lord of the Sabbath had removed the rigor thereof,
and allowed men lawful Recreations: that his Doctrine put an unequal luster on
the Sunday; on set purpose to eclipse all other Holy days, to the derogation
of the authority of the Church: that this strict observance was set up out of
Faction to be a character of difference, to brand all for Libertines who did
not entertain it. sect. 21. He tells us fin^lly, that the Book was afterward
called in and command^d to be no more printed. The Doctrine opsed by the
Archbishop, and the maintainers of it punished by Judge Popham; though by the
diligence and counterworking of the brethren it got ground again.

This being said, we shall proceed unto the answering of the Pamphleters
arguments not more remarkable for their paucity, then they are for their
weakness. He tells us first that Archbishop Whitgift in his defense of the
Answer to the Admonition, says, in the present tense, that the Sabbath is
superstitiously used by some, and speaks soon after of a Sabbath, then
commanded by the fourth Precept. The Pamphleter hereupon infers that he
could not mean the Jewish Sabbath, and if not that, it must of necessity be the
Lords day, Fol. 23. Here is a stout argument indeed, able to knock down any man
which thinks the contrary; for mark the inference thereof. Archbishop Whitgift,
gives unto the Lords day (in a Metaphorical and figurative sense) the name of
Sabbath, Ergo, which is in English, therefore, it must be kept with all the
rigors and severities which were ^equired unto the observation of the Sabbath
by the Law of Moses: or therefore, which is in Latin Ergo, there is as much
divinity in the Lords day now by whomsoever it was ordained, as had been
heretofore ascribed to the Sabbath Day of Gods own appointing. And then again,
the Lords day is by him called a Sabbath, and said to be there commanded by the
fourth precept, therefore there is such a Divinity in it as Dr. Bound ascribes
to his Lords days Sabbath, according to his Articles and petitions laid down.
Did ever man so argue in a point which he makes to be of so great concernment,
or make so ill a choice both of the Medium and the Author, which he groundeth
upon? First of the Medium; for may we not conclude by the selfsame Logic that
there is a Divinity in all the holydaies of the Church; because all grounded
on, and warranted by the fourth commandment, as all learned writers say they
are? and that there is a Divinity in Tithes and Churches, because both places
set apart for sacred Actions, and maintenance also for the persons, which
officiate in them, as the Pamphleter afterward alleges, are included also in
this precept? If there be a Divinity in these, let our Author speak out
plainly, and plea^ as strongly for the Divinity or divine Institution of Tithes
and Churches, as he has done (or endeavors to do at least) for the Divinity of
the Lords days Sabbath. If none in these, and I conceive our Author will not
say there is, though grounded on the warrant of the fourth Commandment, let
him not d^eam of any such Divinity in the Lords day, because now kept by virtue
of that precept also. But worse luck has the G^nt in the choice of his Author,
then in that of his Medium; there being no man, that more disrelished and
opposed this new Divinity of the Sabbath, and all the Sabbatarian errors
depending on it, then this most reverend Prelate did, insomuch that he
commanded Bounds Book to be called in, upon the first discovery of the
Doctrines delivered in it: which cert^inly he had not done, if he had been of
the same Judgment with that Doctor, or had meant any such thing in his defense
of the Answer to the Admonition, which our Pamphlete^ has put upon him.
Assuredly unless the Pamphleter had been bribed to betray the cause, and
justify the Observator, he would have passed over the debating of this new
Divinity, or else found more then one man in the space of 36 years (so long it
was from the first of Queen Elizabeth to the coming out of Bounds Book) to have
spoken for him; and such a man, as had not showed himself so professed an enemy
to the newness of it, by causing the Book to be called in, that the Brethren
commonly used to say, that out of envy to their proceedings, he had caused such
a pearl to be concealed.

Let us next see what comfort he can find from the book of Homilies, of which
he says, that there was not any thing more especially taught in them, then the
Divinity of the Lords day. This he affirms, but they that look into that Book,
will find many points more specially taught, and more thoroughly pressed, then
this Divinity he talks of; witness those long and learned Homilies, upon the
peril of Idolatry, against disobedience and rebellion (of these last six at
least in number) besides many others. But if it can be proved at all, no matter
whether specially or more specially, that shall make no difference, and that it
may be proved he tells us, that they say [ God in that Precept (speaking of
the ^ourth) commands the observation of the Sabbath, which is our Sunday]
Fol. 23. If this be so, and to be understood of such a Divinity, or such a
divine institution of the Lords day, as our Author would fain put upon it:
first then we must have some express warrant, and command from God himself,
altering the day, from the seventh day of the week, on which he commanded it to
be kept by the Law of Moses, unto the first day of the week, on which it is now
kept by the Church of Christ. But secondly that Homily (I mean that Of the time
and place of prayer) does inform us thus: That the goldly Christian people
began to follow the example, and commandment of God, immediately after the
Ascension of our Lord Christ, and began to choose them a standing day of the
week to come together, yet not the seventh day which the Jews kept, but the
Lords day, the day of the Lords Resurrection, the day after the seventh day,
which is the first day of the week etc. And thirdly, it is said in the same
Homily, that by this commandment we ought to have a time, as one day in the
week, wherein we ought to rest, yea from our lawful and needful works, etc.
Which passages being laid together, will amount to this, first that the Homily
does not say that by the fourth Commandment we ought to have one day in the
week, which is plainly peremptory; but that we ought to have a time, as one day
in the week, which is plainly Arbitrary. Secondly, that being Arbitrary in it
self, and so esteemed of by the Christians in the Primitive times, they thought
it good, immediately after Christ's ^scension, to choose a standing day of the
week to come together in, namely the Lords day, or the day of the Resurrection.
Not that they were required so to do by the fourth commandment, which limited
the Sabbath (the ordinary time of worship) to the day foregoing; nor commanded
so to do by Christ, this choice of the day not being made till after his
ascension, and no command of his approving in the holy Scripture; nor finally
by any Precept or Injunction of the holy Apostles: of which as the Scriptures
are quite silent; so the Homily ascribes it wholly to the voluntary choice of
godly Christian people, without any mention made at all of their authority. So
the then meaning of those words, produced by our Author, for the ground of this
new Divinity, will be only this, that as God rested on the seventh day, and
commanded it to be kept wholly by the Jews, so the godly Christian people
after Christ's Ascension, following his example, and warranting themselves by
his Authority, did choose a seventh day of the week, though not the same which
had been kept holy by the Jews for the day of worship. And this is all we are
to trust to for the Divinity, or Divine institution of the Lords day Sabbath,
from the Book of Homilies; neither so positively, nor so clearly rendered, as to
lay a fit or sure foundation for so great a building.

In the next place, the Pamphleter quarrels with the Observator, for making it
a prodigy and a paradox too, that neither the order nor revenues of the
Evangelical Priesthood, should have any existence, but in relation to the
Divinity of the Lords day. But Sir the Observator does not only say it, but he
proves it too, and proves it by the authority of the holy Scriptures,
mentioning the calling of the Apostles, of the seventy Disciples of S. Paul and
others to the work of the Ministry, and pleading strongly in behalf of an
Evangelical maintenance, as belonging to them; at such time as the Lords day no
such existence, no such Divinity of existence, as our Author speaks of. In
stead of answering to these proofs, the Pamphleter tells us, that there is
not a man of note, who treats of the 4. Commandment (himself especially for
one, and the chief one too) that owneth not this prodigious opinion; and
therefore aske^h, where this Observator ha^h been brought up, that this Tenet
of his, ye^ of all learned men, should be so wondered at to be called a
prodigy. Fol. 23. But the reply to this will be very easy. For first, all the
men of note which write upon the 4. Commandment, all learned men (our Author
too into the bargain) are no fit balance for S. Paul, nor able to counterpoise
the express and clear Authority of the holy Scriptures. And secondly, the
Pamphleter after his great brag, that all learned men, almost all men of note,
which write upon the 4 Commandment, are of his opinion, is fain to content
himself at the present with only one, and such an one, who though he be insta^
omnium with the Pamphleter, is not so with me, nor with the Observator neither.
Not that we fail in any part of due honor to that Reverend Prelate, whose name
he uses to make good the point which is in question, but that we think the
work imputed to him by the Pamphleter to be none of his, never owned by him in
his life, nor justified for his by any of relation or nearness to him,
therefore to undeceive so many, as shall read these papers, they may please to
know, that in the year 1583. Mr. Andrews was made the Catechist of
Pembrook-hall, for the instruction of the younger students of that house in the
grounds of Divinity; that though he was then but a young man, yet his abilities
were so well known, that not only those of the same foundation, but many of
other Colleges in that University, and some out of the Country also, came to
be his Auditors; that some of them taking notes of his Lectures as well as they
could, were said to have copies of his Catechizing, though for most part very
imperfect, and in many points of consequence very much mistaken; that after his
coming to be Bishop he gave a special warrant unto one of his Chaplains, not to
own any thing for his, that was said to have been taken by notes from his
mouth. And finally that hearing of the coming out of that Catechism, as in
discourse with those about him he would never own it, nor liked to have it
mentioned to him, so he abolished (as it seems) his own original Copy, which
they that had command to search and sort his papers could not find in his
study: and though this Catechism came out since in a larger volume, yet not
being published according to his own papers (although under his name) it can no
more be said to be his, then many false and supposititious writings foisted
into the works of Ambrose, Augustine, and almost all the ancient Fathe^^, may
be counted theirs. Of all this, I am punctually advertised by an emin^nt person
of near admission to that Prelate, when he was alive, and a great honourer of
him since his death, and have thought fit to signify as much upon this
occasion to disabuse all such whom the name of this most reverend Prelate might
else work upon: which said, there needs no Answer to this doughty argument,
which being built upon a ruinous and false foundation, falls to the ground,
without more ^doe, as not worth the answering. We see by this that all the
learned men which our Author brags of, are reduced to one, which one upon
examination proves as good as none, if not worse then nothing.

But the Pamphleter may be pardoned for coming short in this present project,
in regard of the great pains he had taken in writing a Book of the Doctrine of
the Sabbath, or Divinity of the Lords day, published in the year 1640. unto
which Treatise he refers all men who shall desire his judgment in that
subject, that Book being never yet answered by any, as he gallantly braves it,
Fol. 24. In this there are many things to be considered. For first it is
probable enough that this Treatise to which we are referred for our
satisfaction, was either so short lived, or made so little noise abroad, that
it was not heard of. For had it either moved so strongly, or cried so loud,
that it entitled our Author (the dear Father of it) to any Estate of
Reputation for term of life, as Tenant by the courtesy of the gentle Reader;
it is not possible, but that we should have had some tale or tidings of it in
so long a time, and therefore I conceive that it was still-born, and obscurely
buried, and perhaps buried by the Man-midwife, I mean the Bookseller or
Printer, who gave it birth, before the Godfathers and Godmothers, and the rest
of the good Gossips could be drawn together, to give a name unto the In^ant, or
at the best like the solstitial herb in Plautus, quae repentino orta est,
repentino occidit, withered as soon as it sprang up, and so came to nothing.
Secondly, if it were not answered, I would not have the Gent* think, that it
was therefore not answered, because unanswerable (though he were apt enough to
think so without this Praecaution) but for other reasons. For first the year
1640. was a busy year, and brought so much trouble and encumbrance on the
English Clergy, as gave them neither list nor leisure to answer all impertinent
scribbles, which by the liberty of that time, and the audaciousnesse thereby
prompted unto several men, did break out upon them: Securi de salute, de
gloria certemus, as you know who said. Men have small edge to fight for honor,
and undertake unprofitable and fruitless quarrels, when unsecure of life and
safety, and all things else which are most near and dear unto them. But
secondly, taking it for granted, that some men were at leisure to attend those
services, how may we be assured, that there was any thing in the book which was
worth the answering, or that any credit could be gotten from the work or
Author? For it is possible enough, that every man might not have such opinion
of you, as you say the Observator had, who did therefore (if you judge aright
of his intentions) profess an high esteem of your parts and person, only to
make the world believe, that you were worthy the overcoming. And if they did
not think so of you, they had all the reason in the world to decline a combat,
ubi and vincere inglorium esset, and atteri sordidum, in which to overcome, or
to be conquered, is like inglorious.

But whatsoever opinion the Observator had of you, you have not the like
opinion of his Alter idem, the Doctor in Cosmography, as you please to taunt
him, whom you accuse, for forging and falsifying a Record so boldly, the modest
Gent. will not say so impudently, and that too not in an idle circumstance, but
in the grand concernment of a controversy with spite and calumny enough. And
why all this? Marry say you in the second book and 6. Chapter, of his History
of the Sabbath, published in the year 1636. he has misreported the words of
Pareus in putting down quomodo for quando, adding withal, in vindication
whereof, he never attempted any thing as yet, Fol. 24. This I confess is grave
crimen, and ante hoc tempus inaudi^um, a grievous c^ime, the like to which was
never charged upon him by his greatest enemies. In answer whereunto, I must
tell you for him that being plundered of his Books, and keeping no remembrances,
and collections of his Studies by him, he cannot readily resolve what Edition
he followed in his consulting with that Author. He always thought, that Tenure
in capite, was a nobler and more honorable tenure, then to hold by Copy, and
therefore carelessly neglected to commit any part of his readings unto notes and
papers, of which he never found such want as in this particular, which you so
boldly charge upon him. Or were it so as you inform us, both he and I have
cause to wonder why our learned Author did not rather choose to confute that
whole History of the Sabbath, then spend his time in hammering some petit
Tractate; of which the world has took no notice; that being a work, which
might have rendered him considerable, and made more noise then all the Geese in
the Capitol to the awakening of the dull Doctor, and the drowsy Clergy: or if
he thought this task too great, and the burden too heavy for his shoulders;
why did he let these falsifyings and forgings sl^p 20 years together, and never
call to an account for it till this present time, when it may justly be
supposed, that not your zeal unto the truth, but secret malice to his person
did ex^ort it from you? Thirdly, I am required to tell you that if there be
such a mistake in the citation, which he more then doubts, it was not willingly
and wilfully committed by him, and therefore not within the compass of those
forgings and falsifyings which you tax him with. For he would fain know cui
bono, or cui malo rather, to what end, whether good or bad, he should use those
forgings or falsifyings, in that Author, when he was compassed about with a
cloud of witnesses, attesting positively and plainly to the point in hand; or
what need there should be of practicing on Pareus to appear fair for him, when
more then a whole Jury of learned and Religious men, as learned and as good as
he, had given up their verdict in the case? Now that this may appear to be so
indeed, and that withal the Render may understand the true state of the
Question, I will lay down that Section which the Pamphleter does refer us to,
together with the next before it and the next that follows, and so submit the
whole controver^ie to his better judgment. This only is to be premised, that
the 5. section shows, that the Reformators found great fault, both with the new
Doctrine of the Papist, about the natural and inherent holiness, which they
ascribe to some days above the rest, and the restraints from Labor on the
Lords day and the other holy days; upon which it follows in these words, viz.

(6) Indeed it is not to be thought, that they could otherwise resolve and
determine of it, considering what their Doctrine is of the day it self; how
different they make it from a Sabbath day: which doctrine, that we may perceive
with the greater ease, we will consider it in three propositions, in which most
agree: 1. That the keeping holy one day of seven, is not the Moral part of the
fourth Commandment, or to be reckoned as a part of the Law of Nature. 2. That
the Lords day is not founded on divine Commandment, but only on the authority
of the Church; And 3. That the Church ^ath still Authority to change the day,
and to transfer it to some other. First for the first, it seems that some of
Rome (considering the restraints before remembered, and the new Doctrine thence
arising, about the natural and inherent holiness, which one day had above
another) had altered what was formerly delivered amongst the Schoolmen: and
made the keeping of one day in seven, to be the Moral part of the fourth
Commandment. This Calvin (Instit. l. 2. c. 8. 11. 34.) charge them withal,
that they had taught the people in the former times, that whatsoever was
ceremonial in the fourth Commandment, which was the keeping of the Jews
seventh day, had been long since abrogated: Remanere vero quod morale est,
nempe unius diei observationem in hebdomade, but that the moral part thereof,
which was the keeping of one day in seven, did continue still. Which what else
is it, as before was said, then in dishonor of the Jews to change the day;
and to affix as great a sanctity thereunto, as the Jews ever did? As for his
own part he pro^esseth, that howsoever he approved of the Lords day meetings:
Non tamen numerum septenarium ita se morari, ut ejus servituti ecclesias
astringeret; yet stood not he so much for the number of seven, as to confine
the Church unto it. If Calvin elsewhere be of another mind, and speak of
keeping holy one day in seven, as a matter necessary; (which some say he does)
either they must accuse him of much inconstancy, and forgetfulness; or else
interpret him, with Rivet (In Decalog.) as speaking of an Ecclesiastical
custom, not to be neglected; non de necessitate legis divinae; and not of any
obligation laid upon us by the Law of God. Neither is he the only one that
has so determined. Simler (in Exodus 20.) has said it more expressly, Quod dies
una cultui divino consecratur, ex lege naturae est; quod autem haec sit
septima, non octava, nona, aut decima, juris est divini sed ceremonialis: That
one day should be set apart for Gods public worship, is the Law of nature, but
that this day should be the seventh, and not the eighth, ninth or tenth, was
not of divine appointment, but ceremonial. Aretius (Loc. 55) also in his common
places distinguished between the substance of the Sabbath, and the time
thereof: The substance of it, which was rest, and the works of piety, being in
all times to continue; tempus autem, ut septimo die observetur, hoc non fuit
necessarium in Ecclesia Christi, but for the time, to keep it on the seventh
day always, that was not necessary in the Church of Christ. So also Francisc.
Gomarus, that great undertaker against Arminius, in a book written purposely,
De origin and institutione Sabbati, affirms for certain, that it can neither
be made good by the Law of Nature, or Text of Scripture, or any solid argument
drawn from thence, unum e septem diebus ex vi praecepti quarti ad cultum Dei
necessario observandum, that by the fourth Commandment, one day in seven is of
necessity to be dedicated to Gods service. And Rivet as professed an enemy of the
Remonstrants, though for the antiquity of the Sabbath, he differs from the
said Gomarus; yet he agrees with him in this: not only making the observance
of one day in seven, to be merely positive, as in our first part we observed;
but lays it down for the received opinion of most of the reformed Divines,
Vnum ex septem diebus non esse necessario eligendum, ex vi praec^pti, ad sacros
conventus celebrandos; (in Exodus 20. p. 190.) the very same with what Gomarus
affirmed before. So lastly for the Lutheran Churches, Chemnitius makes it part
of our Christian Liberty, quod nec sint allegati, nec debeant alligari ad
certorum vel dierum, vel temporum observationes, opinione necessitatis in Novo
Testamento, etc. That men are neither bound, nor ought to be, unto the
observation of any days or times, as matters necessary, under the Gospel of
our Savior: Though otherwise he account it for a barbarous folly, not to
observe that day with all due solemnity, which has for so long time been kept
by the Church of God. Therefore in his opinion also, the keeping of one day in
seven, is neither any moral part of the fourth Commandment, or parcel of the
Law of Nature. As for the subtle shift of Amesius (Medull. Theolog. l. 2. 15.)
finding, that keeping holy one day in seven, is positive indeed, sed
immutabilis plane institutionis, but such a positive Law, as is absolutely
immutable; and does as much oblige, as those which in themselves are plainly
natural and moral: it may then serve, when there is nothing else to help us.
For that a positive Law should be immutable in it self; and in its own nature,
be as universally binding as the moral Law; is such a piece of learning, and of
contradiction, as never was put up to show in these latter times. But he had
learnt his lirry in England here; and durst not broach it but by halves amongst
the Hollanders.

(7) For the next Thesis, that the Lords day is not founded on divine
Commandment, but the Authority of the Church: it is a point so universally
resolved on, as no one thing more: And first we will begin with Calvin, who
tells us ( Institut. l. 2. c. 8. n. 3.) how it was not without good reason, that
those of old, appointed the Lords day, as we call ^it, to supply the place of
the Jewish Sabbath. Non sine delectu Dominicum quem vocamus diem, veteres in
locum Sabbati subrogarunt: as his words there are. Where none, I hope, will
think that he would give our Savior Christ, or his Apostles, such a short come
off, as to include them in the name of Veteres only: which makes it plain, that
he conceived it not to be their appointment. Bucer resolves the point more
clearly: ( in Mat. 12.) Communi Christianorum consensu Dominicum diem publicis
Ecclesiae conventibus ac requieti publicae dicatum esse, ipso statim
Apostolorum tempore; viz. That in the Apostles times, the Lords day by the
common consent of Christian people, was dedicated unto public rest, and the
Assemblies of the Church. And Peter Martyr upon a question asked, why the old
seventh day was not kept in the Christian Church; makes answer, That upon that
day, and on all the rest, we ought to rest from our own works, the works of
sin. Sed quod is magis quam ille, eligatur ad externum Dei cultum, liberum fuit
Ecclesiae per Christum ut id consuleret quod ex re magis judicaret: nec illa
pessime judicavit, etc. ( in Genesis 2.) That this was rather chose then that, for
Gods public service, that, says he, Christ left totally unto the liberty of
the Church, to do therein what should seem most expedient; and that the Church
did very well, in that she did prefer the memory of the Resurrection, before
the memory of the Creation. These two I have the rather thus joined together,
as being sent for into England in King Edwards time, and placed by the
Protector in the Universities, the better to establish Reformation, at that
time begun: and doubt we not, but that they taught the self-same Doctrine (if
at the least they touched at all upon that point) with that now extant in their
writings. At the same time with them lived Bullinger, and Gualter, two great
learned men. Of these, the first informs us, Hunc diem, loco Sabba^i, in
memoriam resurgentis Domini delegisse sibi Ecclesias. (in Apoc. 1.) That in
memorial of our Saviors Resurrection, the Church set apart this day, in the
Sabbaths stead, whereon to hold their solemn and religious meetings. And after,
Sponte receperunt Ecclesiae illam diem; non legimus eam ullibi praeceptam. That
of their own accord, and by their own authority, the Church made choice thereof
for the use aforesaid; it being no where to be found that it was commanded.
Gualter ( in Act. Apost. Hom. 13) more generally, that the Christians first
assembled on the Sabbath day, as being then most famous, and so most in use:
But when the Churches were augmented, Proximus a Sabbato dies, rebus sacris
destinatus, the next day after the Sabbath was designed to those holy uses, If
not before, then certainly not so commanded by our Savior Christ: and if
designed only, then not enjoined by the Apostles. Yea Beza, though herein he
differ from his Master Calvin, and makes the Lords day meetings, Apostolicae
and verae divinae traditionis, ( Apoc. 1. 10.) to be indeed of Apostolical and
divine tradition: yet being a tradition only, although Apostolical, it is no
commandment. And more then that, he tells us in another place ( in Act 20.)
that from St. Paul's preaching at Troas, and from the Text, 1 Cor. 16. 2. Non
inepte colligi, it may be gathered not unfitly, that then the Christians were
accustomed to meet that day; the ceremony of the Jewish Sabbath, beginning by
degrees to vanish. But sure the custom of the people makes no divine
traditions; and such conclusions, as not unfitly may be gathered from the Text,
are not Text it self. Others there be, who attribute the changing of the day to
the Apostles; not to their precept, but their practice. So Mercer (in Gen.)
Apostoli in Dominicum converterunt, the Apostles changed the Sabbath to the
Lords day. Paraeus attributes the same Apostolicae Ecclesiae, unto the
Apostolical Church, or Church in the Apostles times: Quomodo autem facta sit
haec mutatio, in Sacris literis expressum non habemus: but how, by what
authority such a change was made, is not delivered (as he confesses) in the
Scripture. And John Cuchlinus, (in Thesib. page 733.) though he call it
consuetudinem Apostolicam, an Apostolical custom; yet he is peremptory, that
the Apostles gave no such commandment: Apostolos praeceptum reliquisse,
constanter negamus. S. Simler (de Festis Chr. p. 24) calls it only consuetudinem
tempore Apostolorum rec^ptam: a custom taken up in the Apostles time. And so
Hospinian, Although, says he, it be apparent, that the Lords day was
celebrated in the place of the Jewish Sabbath, even in the times of the
Apostles; Non invenitur tamen vel Apostolos, vel alios, Lege aliqua and
Praecepto, observationem ejus instituisse: yet find we not, that either they,
or any other did institute the keeping of the same, by any Law or Precept, but
left it free. Thus Zanchius (in 4. praecept.) Nullibi legimus Apostolos, etc.
We do not read, says he, that the Apostles commanded any to observe this Day:
we only read what they and others did upon it; Liberum ergo reliquerunt: which
is an argument, that they left it to the Churches power. To those add Vrsin in
his Exposition on the fourth Commandment, ( in Catech. Palate.) Liberum
Ecclesiae reliquit alios dies eligere, that it is left unto the Church, to make
choice of any day; and that the Church made choice of this, in honor of our
Saviors Resurrection: and so Aretius in his common places: Christiani in
Dominicum transtulerunt: that by the Christian people the Sabbath was
translated to the Lords day. Gomarus and Ryvet, in the Tracts before remembered,
have determined further, viz. That in the choosing of this day, the Church did
exercise as well her wisdom, as her freedom: her freedom being not oblig^d
to any day, by the Law of God: her wisdom, Ne majori mutatione Judaeos
offenderet; that by so small an alteration, she might the less offend the
Jews, who were then considerable. As for the Lutheran Divines: it is affirmed
by Dr. Bound, That for the most part they ascribe too much unto the liberty of
the Church, in appointing days for the assembly of the people: which is plain
confession. But for particulars; Brentius, as Dr. Prideaux tells us, calls it
Civilem institutionem, a civil institutionem, and no Commandment of the
Gospel: which is no more indeed then what is elsewhere said by Calvin, when he
accounts no otherwise thereof, then ut remedium retinendo ordini necessarium,
as a fit way to retain order in the Church. And sure I am, Chemnitius tells us,
that the Apostles did not impose the keeping of this day as necessary upon the
consciences of Gods people, by any Law or Precept whatsoever: sed libera fuit
observatio ordinis gratia; but that for orders sake, it had been voluntarily
used amongst them, of their own accord.

(8) Thus have we proved by the Doctrine of the Protestants, of what side
soeever, and those of greatest credit in their several Churches, eighteen by
name, and all the Lutherans in general, of the same opinion; That the Lords day
is of no other institution then the Authority of the Church: which proved the
last of the three Theses. That still the Church has power to change the day,
and to transfer it to some other: will follow of it self, on the former
grounds: the Protestant Doctors before remembered, in saying that the Church did
institute the Lords day, as we see they do; confessing tacitly, that still the
Church has power to change it. Nor do they tacitly confess it, as if they
were afraid to speak it out: but some of them in plain terms affirm it, as a
certain truth. Zuinglius, the first reformer of the Switzers, has resolved it
so, in his discourse against one Valentine Gentilis, a new Arrian Heretic (
Tom. 1. p. 254. a.) Audi mi Valentine, quibus modis and rationibus, Sabbatum
Ceremoniale reddatur. Hearken now Valentine, by what ways and means the
Sabbath may be made a Ceremony: if either we observe that day which the Jews
once did, or think the Lords day so affixed to any time, ut nefas sit illum in
aliud tempus transfer: that we conceive it an impiety, it should be changed
unto another; on which, as well as upon that, we may not rest from labor, and
hearken to the word of God: if perhaps such necessity should be, this would
indeed make it become a Ceremony. Nothing can be more plain then this: yet
Calvin is as plain; when he professes, That he regarded not so much the number
of seven, ut ejus servituti Ecclesias astringeret, as to enthral the Church
unto it. Sure I am, Doctor Prideaux ( in Orat. de Sab.) reckons him, as one
of them, who teach us, that the Church has power to change the day, and to
transfer it to some other. And that John Barclaie makes report, how once he had
a consultation, de transferenda Dominica in Feriam quintam, of altering the
Lords day unto the Thursday. Bucer affirms as much, as touching the Authority:
And so does Bullinger, and Brentius, Vrsine and Chemnitius, as Doctor Prideaux
has observed. Of Bullinger, Bucer, Brentius, I have naught to say, because the
places are not cited; but take it, as I think I may, upon his credit. But for
Chemnitius, he says often, that it is libera observatio, a voluntary
observation; that it is an especial part of our Christian liberty, not to be
tied to days and times, in matters which concern Gods service; and that the
Apostles made it manifest by their example, Singulis diebus, vel quocunque die:
That every day, or any day, may by the Church be set apart for Religious
Exercises. And as for Vrsine, he makes this difference between the Lords day
and the Sabbath (Catech. qu. 103. 2.) That it was utterly unlawful to the
Jews, either to neglect or change the Sabbath, without express commandment
from God himself, as being a ceremonial part of divine worship: but for the
Christian Church, that may design the first, or second, or any other day to
Gods public service; so that our Christian liberty be not thereby infringed,
or any opinion of necessity or holiness affixt unto them. Ecolesia vero
Christiana primum, vel alium diem, tribuit Ministerio, salva sua liberate sine
opinione cultus vel necessitatis; as his words there are. To these add
Dietericus, a Lutheran Divine, who, though he makes the keeping of one day in
seven, to be the Moral part of the fourth Commandment; yet for that day, it may
be Dies Sabbati, or Dies Solis, or Quicunque alius, Sunday, or Saturday, or any
other, be it one in seven. ( Some. 17. post Trinit.) And so Hospinian is
persuaded: Dominicum diem mutare, and in alium transfer licet, etc. That if
the occasions of the Church do so require, the Lords day may be changed unto
any other: provided it be one of seven; and that the change be so transacted,
that it produce no scandal or confusion in the Church of God. Nay, by the
Doctrine of the Helvetian Churches, every particular Church may destinate what
day they please to Religious Meetings, to public prayers, Preaching the Word,
and Ministering the Sacraments. For so they gave it up in their confession (cap.
2.) Deligit ergo quaevis Ecclesia sibi certum tempus ad preces publicas, and
Evangelii praedicationem, nec non Sacramentorum celebrationem. And howsoever
for their own parts, they kept that day, which had been set apart for those
holy uses, even from the time of the Apostles; yet, that they conceived it
free, to keep the Lords day, or the Sabbath; Sed and Dominicum, non Sabbatum,
libera observatione celebramus. Some Sectaries since the Reformation, have gone
further yet, and would have had all days alike, as unto their use, all equally
to be regarded: And reckoned that the Lords day, as the Church continued it,
was a Jewish Ordinance; thwarting the Doctrine of S. Paul, who seemed to them
to abrogate the difference of days, which the Church retained. This was the
fancy or the frenzy rather of the Anabaptist, taking the hint perhaps from
something which had formerly been delivered by some wiser men; and after them,
of the Swinckfieldian, and the Familist: as in the times before, of the
Petro-Brusians, and (if Waldensis wrong him not) of Wicklef also.

By this it will appear, that the Doctor had no reason to forge and falsify
Pareus, as the Pamphleter says he did, when the whole current of Protestant
and reformed Divines do affirm that point for which Paraeus is produced. A
greater vindication needs not in a case so clear; and sooner had this
vindication been made, if this foul charge had sooner come unto his ears. The
Pamphleter finds fault with the Observator, in that he did not, viva vo^e, by
conference, or by letters, hint those mistakes to him which were found in his
History, as fit considerations for a second impression. Fol. 44. The Dr. finds
the same fault in him, by whom he stands accused of forging and falsifying a
Record, and thinks it would have represented him to be a man of more Christian,
yea moral principles, to have given him a private admonition touching that
mistake (if it prove such upon the search of all Editions, then lay so soul a
charge upon him in so great a controversy. By this it also will appear, 1.
That in the judgment of the Protestant Divines, the sanctifying one day in
seven, is not the moral part of the 4. Commandment. 2. That the Lords day has
no other ground on which to stand, then the Authority of the Church. And 3.
That the Church has power to change the day and to transfer it to some other.
Crack me these nuts my most learned sir, and when you have broke your teeth
about them, as I doubt you will, throw me your never-yet-answered piece of 640.
and if the Doctors eyes and leisure will not serve to do it, it is ten to one
but I will find some friend or other that shall kick you an Answer.

CHAP. V.
Our Authors opinion touching the Divine right of Episcopacy; and his intention
doubted in it. Bishops and Presbyters not always of equivalent import in Holy
Scripture. Proofs that the word Bishop in the first of Tim. c. 3. is taken
properly and restrictively, drawn, 1. From the word there used in the singular
number. 2. From his fitness for Government. 3. From the Hospitality required in
him; And 4. From his being no Novice, but of longer standing in the Church.
Presbyters there included, under the name Diaconi, more properly in that place
to be rendered Ministers. The like acceptions of the word in other places.
Proofs that the Author speaks his own opinion under that of others; 1. From
the word Asserted, which is here explained. 2. From some passages in the
published and unpublished sheets. (...) not rendered Senior (as the Pamphleter
would fain have it) in all learned Authors. The word Presbyter fitter to be
used then Elder in our English Translations. Mr. Seldom no good friend to
Bishops, and the reason why. The reason why King Charles his Testimony in
behalf of Episcopacy was not produced by the Observator. The Pamphleters rage,
for being said to make Episcopacy but a thing of indifferency; That so he must
be understood proved from the History it self, and the weak arguments brought
by the Pamphleter to the contrary; An Answer to those Arguments.
HAving thus vindicated the Declarations of the two Kings about lawful Sports,
satisfied the objections of the Pamphleter, and cleared the Dr. from the
forgings and falsifyings, so maliciously imputed to him; and therewithal laid
down the true state of the Controversy, touching the Lords day, out of the
writings of the most learned men of the Protestant and reformed Churches: it is
high time we should proceed to the rest that follows, and free the Bishops and
their Actions, from those odious Calumnies, which are charged upon them.

Our Author fol. 36. and 37. has not unhandsomely stated the whole point of
Episcopacy, ascribing a Divine Right to it, and thinks it as demonstrable out
of Scriptures, as any thing whatsoever not fundamental. That there was a
Prelacy or Superiority, of some one over other Presbyters, within some certain
Walks and Precincts; that this Superiority was appointed by the very Apostles,
to be exemplary, and to give law to succeeding times. Concerning which and many
other good expressions, which follow after, I may justly say, as Bellarmine did
of Calvin in another Case; viz. Vtinam sic semper errasset, would he had never
erred otherwise, then he does in this. Only I could have wished, that for the
better clearing of his own intentions, and satisfaction unto others, he had
expressed himself more fully as to this particular, viz. whether the Superiority
of such persons over such Presbyters in the Church Apostolic, was fixed in
them during life; or that passed from one to another in their several turns
like the M^deratorship, in the general Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, or
the Chairman, in the Conferences, and debates of Council in the rest of the
Calvinian Churches. For if he mean in this last sense, as I hope he does not,
Episcopacy is no more beholding to him, then it was to Beza; who
notwithstanding he maintained a party of Ministers without any fixed
Superiority which one may claim above another, yet he allows a moveable
Presidency to be not unusual, nor unfrequent in the very times of the
Apostles. And yet that some such secret meaning may be gathered from him by
such as have a mind to interpret all things to their own advantage, will be
made not improbable by his standing to this Proposition, That there is no place
in Holy Text, wherein Presbyters import not Bishops, and Bishops Presbyters.

Considering therefore that he still stands to his former Principle, that
Bishops and Presbyters in Scripture phrase are of equivalent import, and denote
the self same persons without the least distinction, and requires it of the
Observator, or of any man else 36. to tell him where such persons in Holy Text,
are distinguished so really, that a Bishop does not import a Presbyter, and a
Presbyter does not import a Bishop. I think my self as much concerned as the
Observator, to make answer to it. First, then say I, that though those words
may be sometimes, though but rarely used promiscuously, the word Presbyter
denoting a Bishop, and the word Bishop importing nothing but a Presbyter, yet
that more frequently and in other places they are used in a more limited and
distinct sense, as in times succeeding. And 2. I say that the word Episcopus, 1
Timothy 3. 2. and the description of a Bishop which is therein made, is meant
of a Bishop truly, and properly so called, according as the word was used and
appropriated by the Ancient writers, and not appliable to the Presbyters or
inferior Ministers. For proof whereof, I shall offer some few considerations,
out of the Text it self, leaving them to the judgment of the sober and
intelligent Reader. And first, St. Paul speaks of a Bishop in the singular
number, but of inferior Ministers in the Plural. One Church, or City, though
it had many Presbyters, had one Bishop only. And therefore we may reasonably
conceive, that the Apostle speaking of a Bishop in the singular number, speaks
of him in his proper and true capacity, as one distinguished from, and above
the Presbyters. 2. The Apostle seems to require in him an Act of Government,
as being a man, that is to take care of the Church of God: and thereupon gives
order for an Inquisition to be had upon him, whether he has ruled his house
well, etc. A charge of too transcendent, and sublime a nature, to be entrusted
unto every common Presbyter, or discharged by him, who as our Hooker well
observes, though he be somewhat better able to speak, is as little able to
judge as another man. And if not fit to judge, no fit man to govern. 3. St.
Paul requires in a Bishop, that he be given to Hospitality, i. e. that he
receive the Stranger, entertain the Native, and in a word, admit all Comers.
Hierom does so expound it, saying, that if a Layman entertain but two or
three, Hospitalitatis officium implebit, he has exceeding well complied with
all the Rules of Hospitality; Episcopus nist omnes receperit, inhumanus est,
but that the Bishop is accounted a Churl or Niggard, if his House be not open
unto all. Which howsoever it might possibly agree in those ancient times to the
Condition of a Bishop, who had the keeping and disposing of the Churches
Treasures; yet I can see no possibility, how it could be expected from the
Presbyters, that out of his poor pittance from the sportula, he should be able
to perform it. For I believe not that the Lord intended to work miracles daily,
as in the lengthning and increasing the poor woman's oil. Fourthly and lastly,
it is required by St Paul, that his Bishop must not be neophytus, a novice, as
our English reads it, and exceeding rightly; that is, as Chrysostom, and out of
him Theophylact expound the word: one newly Catechized as it were, lately
instructed in the Faith. Now who knows not, but that in the beginnings of the
Church, some of these new plants, these Neophyti, must of necessity be taken
into holy orders, for the increase and propagation of the Gospel? The
Presbyters were many, but the Bishops few. And therefore howsoever there must
be found sufficient Standards, upon the which to graffe a Bishop; yet I can
hardly find a possibility of furnishing the Garden of the Church, with a fit
number of Presbyters, unless we take them from the Nurserie.

It then it be demanded, whether St. Paul has utterly omitted to speak of
Presbyters, I answer no; but that we have them in the next Paragraphe, Diacones
similiter; which why it should not comprehend the Presbyters, and all inferior
Ministers under the degree of Bishops; I can see no reason, there being no
qualification requisite in or to the Presbyter, which is not found in the
Apostles Character of these Diaconi. And though the word in our last
translation, be rendered Deacons: yet in our old translation, and in that of
Coverdale, we read it Ministers, according to the general and native meaning
of the same. An exposition neither new, nor forced. Not new, for Calvin does
acknowledge alios ad Presbyteros refer Episcopo inferiores, that some
referred those words to Presbyters, subordinate or inferior to the Bishop. Not
forced, for if we search the Scriptures, we shall there perceive, that
generally Diaconus is rendered Ministers, and that not only in the Gospel,
before that Deacons had been instituted in the Church of God; but also in St.
Paul's Epistles, after the planting of the Church, when all the Officers therein
had their bounds and limits. Thus Tychicus is called, (...), a faithful
Minister, Ephesians. 6. 26. and Col. 4. 7. and so is Epaphras entitled, Col. 1. 7,
etc. And hereunto I shall further add, that I can see no convincing reason why
the Episcopi, and Deacons, or the Bishops and Deacons mentioned in the first
words of St. Paul's Epistle to the Philippians, may not be understood of the
Bishops (properly so called) of Philippi and the bordering Cities, and of the
Presbyters or inferior Ministers under their authority. Not to say any thing
of the Subscription of the Epistle to Titus, and the 2. to Timothy; in which
the word Bishop is taken in this proper and limited sense, because (whatsoever
opinion I have of them) the Pamphleter perhaps may not think them to be
authentic. Next that the word Presbyter is used sometimes in the same strict,
and limited sense, as it denotes a person inferior to the Bishop, and subject
unto his authority and jurisdiction, appears plainly, by that Text in the
first of Timothy, c. 5. v. 19, 20. where it is said, Adversus Presbyterum
accusationem noli recipere, etc. Against a Presbyter, and Elder (as our English
reads it) receive not an accusation, but before two or three witnesses. But if
they be convicted, them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear.
In the declaring of which power, I take for granted, that the Apostle here by
Elder does mean a Presbyter, according to the Ecclesiastical notion of that
word, though I know that Chrysostom, and after him Theopbylact and Oecumenius,
do take it only ^or a man well grown in years. And then the meaning of St. Paul
will be briefly this, that partly in regard of the Devils malice, apt to
calumniate men of that holy ^unction; and partly to avoid the scandal which may
thence arise; Timothy, and in him all other Bishops should be very cautious in
their proceedings against men of that Profession. But if they find them guilty
on examination, then not to smother or conceal the matter, but censure and
rebuke them openly, that others may take heed of the like offenses. The
Commentaries under the name of Ambrose, do expound it so, Quoniam non facile
credi debet and Presbytero crimen, etc. because a crime or accusation is not to
be credited against a Presbyter; yet if the same prove manifest and undeniable,
St. Paul commands that in regard of his irregular conversation, he be rebuked
and censured publicly, that others may be thereby terrified. And, says he,
non solum ordinatis sed and plebi proficit, will not be only profitable unto
men in Orders, but to Lay people al^o. Herewith agrees, as to the making of
these Elders to be men in Orders, the Comment upon that Epistle a^cribed to
Jerome. Presbyters then are subject unto censure; but to whose censure are they
subject? not unto one another surely, that would breed con^usion, but to the
censure of their Bishop. See to the same purpose also Epiphanius adversus
Haeres. 75. n. 5. and Theophylact upon the place; not to say any thing of Lyra
and some others of a later standing. And in this limited sense, I understand
those Presbyters ordained by St. Paul in many of the Churches of his
Plantations, whom we find mentioned in the Acts; some of which he afterward
made Bishops, and over other placed such Bishops as he thought most fit.

Thus having satisfied our Author, in telling him where Presbyters import not
Bishops, and Bishops Presbyters; we next proceed to answer those objections
which are made against the Observator. And first, it is objected, that our
Author does not at all deliver his own opinion in this particular, but what
many did then assert, fol. 35. To which I answer, First, that our Author puts
the opinion down so savourly, and with such advantages, as any man would easily
take it for his own, or at the least, that he himself was also of the same
opinion. This not improbably to be gathered from the word assered, which
plainly intimates that those many whom he speaks of did not only affirm or say,
that Bishops and Presbyters in Scripture phrase were of equivalent import, etc.
but had proved it too. For thus be understands the word in another place, where
speaking of the Bishop of Lincoln, he tells us that he published a Book,
asserting positively, that the holy Table was to stand in Gremio or Nave of the
Quire, fol. 137. By which if he means only a bare affirming of the thing, it
then signifies nothing, and concludes as little to his purpose. For the word
Assero (if he be critic enough to understand the true meaning of it) not only
signifies simply to affirm, or say, but to confirm that affirmation, and make
good that saying. Once for all take this out of Ovid in his Metamor. lib. 1.

At tu, si modo sum coelesti stirpe creatus,
Ede notam tanti generis, meque assere Coele.
That is to say, But if I be descended from above,
By some known sign, make good my birth from Jove.
2. Though he tells us that if the Observator had not been an ill looking
fellow, he might with half an eye have discerned, that he does not at all
deliver his own opinion in this particular; But I have a bird in a corner which
sings the contrary. For fol. 137. of the printed but unpublished papers, it
is said expressly that the truth contended for, touching the right on which the
Hierarchy was founded was (as his late Majesty has (no man better)
sufficiently demonstrated) to be awarded to the Prelates; which speaks more
plainly for Episcopacy, then the reservedness of your last expressions, which
in your Pamphlet you have given us for your full sense in this Controversy,
enough (you say) to satisfy Spirits of the most modest and sober temper. Fol.
37. But in the Book as it comes published to our hands, these words are totally
left out, which shows as plainly, that you have either altered your opinion (if
you ever were of that opinion) or else for fear of offending the weak Brethren,
dare not own it now. What means else, this bleating of the Sheep in mine
ears, and the lowing of the Ox which I hear? as you know who said; that is to
say, your placing Episcopacy amongst those things of indifferency, for the
establishing whereof, to exact an Oath, was (as you say Hist. fol. 185.) an
aff^ont to the very fundamentals of Government; your positive declration, that
the truth contended for, between the Bishops and those of the Puritans party,
lay then so deep as few had perspicacity enough to discern ti. f. 185. adding
in your unpublished sheets, that in the generality of votes, the Bishops were
much worsted in that Contest; which lays a greater prejudice upon them, then
you found them in; your quarrels with the Observator, for disproving the
Identity or sameness of Name, of Ordination, of Office, etc. which is affirmed
to be in Presbyters and Bishops without any distinction, telling him that his
Arguments are nothing ad rem, and clear besides the cushion, fol. 36. which
laid together, make up a clearer and fuller evidence, that you are but half
Episcopal, and the worst half too, then all the fine flourishes you have given
us in the present Pamphlet can persuade to the contrary.

Your next quarrel with the Observator, is a mere (...) a strife and quarrel
about words, because forsooth he does not like that the word Presbyter, when it
signifies one in Holy Orders, should be rendered Elder. To which the Pamphleter
objects, that all Latin Expositors, and Greek Lexicons, translate (...)
Senior, fol. 25. What all Expositors, all without exception? so I hear you say,
and so you must be thought to mean too, in case you have not here (as
elsewhere) your most secret intentions. What think you of the Author of the
vulgar Latin, a man as learned I believe, as any of those whom you have
consulted in the point? Yet he translateth not the word (...), (when it is used
to signify a man in Orders) by that of Senior, but by that of Presbyter; as,
Et cum constituissent illis per singulas ecclesias Presbyteros, etc. Act. 14.
23. qui be^e praesunt Presbyteri, etc. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Adversus Presbyterum
accusationem noli admittere, 5. 19. as on the other side, when the word (...)
is used to signify a man in years, and not in orders, he renders it by
Senior, and not by Presbyter-Seniorem increpaveris, sed obsecra ut patrem, 1 Timothy 5. 1. and this is that which the Observator faulted in our English
Translators, viz. that they did not keep the word Presbyter, as the Latins
did, which in short time would have been as familiar to an English ear (in the
Ecclesiastical notion of it) as those of Bishop or of Deacon, being both of
them Greek of the same Original, whereas the word Elder being of ambiguous
sense, has given occasion to the factiousness of the troublers of Israel, to
grub up by the roots those goodly Cdars of the Church the Bishops, and plant
their stinking Elders in the place thereof. But you go on and say, that you
believe it will puzzle the Observator, to find any one who ever interpreted
Senior by Priest, fol. 35. But Gentle Sir, the Observator never told you that
it was so rendered; so that you need not trouble him to prove what he never
said, or charge him with any vast difference in this particular from Dr.
Heylyn, unless you can find in him, that the ancients did not call the
Minister of the Sacrament of the Altar, sometimes Presbyter, Elder, and
sometimes Sacerdos, Priest, as I think you cannot. If you come off no better in
your other criticismes, then you do in this, your best way were to keep your
self to plain Grammar learning, and leave my Lady Philology to more learned
Mercurists to whom contracted by Martianus Capella, before you made love to her.

You quarrel next with the Observator, first, for bringing in Mr. Seldom
amongst his Lay Champions for Episcopacy, who (as the Pamphleter says) seems
clear of another mind, in his Book De Synedriis, where he extols Salmasius,
and Wal^ Massalinus (both enemies to the Episcopal order) a note above Ela for
their pains in this Argument, etc fol. 37. But had the Observator been observed
here, as he should have been, he might have found that the learned Mr. Seldom
is not brought in by him, as a Champion ^or Bishops, but as not totally against
them. And this he proves by the Retortion made to Mr. Grimstons double argument
in the House of Commons. The Observator knew as well as the Pamphleter, that
Mr. Seldom was no friend to Bishops, as constituted and established in the
Church of England; and he knew too, which perhaps the Pamphleter does not, what
moved him to appear against them, when by the Complexion of affairs, he might
safely do it. For being called before the High Commission, and forced to make a
public acknowledgement of his error and offense given unto the Church, in
publishing a Book entitled The History of Tithes, it sunk so deep into his
stomach, that he did never after affect the men, or cordially approve the
calling, though many ways were tried to gain him to the Churches interest.

The Pamphleters quarrels against Churchmen (perhaps as good a man as himself,
or, I am sure, as true) I shall defer unto a time and place more proper;
keeping my self here to those he has with the Observator. And the next quarrel
is, that he finds not King Charles amongst his Assertors for Episcopacy. Of
whose performance in that Argument he makes indeed a very fair and ingenuous
declaration, fol. 38. though all that he has said can add nothing to him. But
Sir, if you will look but with half an eye on the Observations, you will find
there, that in the naming of his Lay Champions as you call them, he made choice
of such only, as were not likely to be suspected of partiality, men no ways
interessed (but only by their good affections) in the Churches quarrels.
According to which choice, he could not make use of that Royal pen, which gave
the deaths wound to Henderson in the town of New Castle, and foiled the
Presbyterians in the Isle of Wight. It was the interess of King Charles to
maintain Episcopacy, as one of the chief Supporters of the Regal Throne. No
Bishop, no King, the known old maxim of King James, in the sad events thereof,
has been found Prophetical. And therefore if the Observator had produced his
testimony, the Pamphleter might have objected (as perhaps he would) that the
Kings judgment was corrupted by Partiality, and swayed with interess, which
rendered him no fit witness in the present Trial.

And to say truth, if all be Oracle which com^s from the deserts of Cyrene,
there is good reason for saving all advantages of exception, against the
Testimony of that King, had it been produced. The Pamphleter telling us, that
he did not only employ the Pen, but took up the Bucklers in good earnest to
defend Episcopacy, fol. 38. But Sir, who told you in good earnest, that his
Majesty either drew the sword, or took up the Bucklers in that quarrel, or on
that occasion? His Majesty in all his messages, and declarations, professed
solemnly, that he was forced to take up Arms to preserve himself: His Forts,
Castles, Royal Navy, and the Militia of the Kingdom, being taken from him.
His Negative voice denied, his Magazine at Hull employed against him, his
faithful Servants threatened under the name of evil Counselors, and nothing
left unto him but the name of a King. Episcopacy not so much as touched on for
a ground of that quarrel; nor was there reason why it should. The King by
former Acts had yielded up their place and vote in the House of Peers, and
abrogated the Coercive power of their Jurisdiction: that which remained being
then thought so inconsiderable, that in the 19. Propositions, containing the
whole demand of both Houses, the Abolition of Episcopacy was not touched upon.
So that there is not any thing more falls, then that the King took up the
Bucklers to defend Episcopacy. But I know well enough what the Author aims at.
The wars designed by this King against the Scots, is by our Pamphleter in his
History, called the Bishops wars, and he has laid some grounds here, to have
the long wars raised in England, called by that name also, the Bishops war, no
doubt of that, if he should fortune to go on with the rest of the story. Of
which the Reader may take notice, and our Author too.

His last quarrel with the Observator, with reference to the point of
Episcopacy, is that he makes our Author take it for granted, that the
Government of the Church by Bishops is a thing of indifferency, and thereupon
was much agrieved that the Clergy should bind themselves by Oath not to
consent to any alteration of it. On this occasion the Pamphleter flies out
against them with no less violence and fury, then Tully against Cataline in the
open Senate, crying in these great words, Quousque abuteris patientia nostra,
how does this Observator provoke us? Assuredly the Gentleman is extremely
moved; his patience much off the hinges, and Patientia laesa fit furor, as the
saying is. One cannot tell what hurt or mischief he may do us now he is in this
rage and fury, and therefore Peace for the Lords sake, Harry, lest he take us,
And drag us back, as Hercules did Cacus.


It Is best to slip a side a while and say nothing, till his heat be over, and
the man in some temper to be dealt with; and then we will not fear to tell him,
that his own words shall be the only evidence we will use against him. The
introduction which he makes to his discourse against the Oath required by the
new Canons instruct us, That many asserted in good earnest, that Bishops and
Presbyters in Scripture phrase were of equivalent import, and denoted the self
same persons, without the least distinction, etc. That thereupon, the Prelates
seeing their deer Palladium so deeply concerned, and heaved at, did first cause
the Press to swarm with Books, setting forth the right upon which Episcopacy
was founded; and finding how little this advantaged them, they took measure
from their professed Adversaries the General Assembly of Scotland, and by
their example framed the Oath as an Anti-Covenant. This is the substance of the
Preamble to those objections, but that I would not stir the man's patience too
much, I had called them Cavils, which our Author makes against that Oath, that
some things were expressly to be sworn to which were never thought to have any
show or color of sacred right, but were conceived Arbitrary, and at the
disposition of the State; and to exact an Oath of dissent from Civil
establishments, in such things of indifferency, was an affront to the very
fundamentals of Government. Now the Oath being made for maintenance of the
Doctrine and Discipline, or Government, established in the Church of England,
the Doctrine being confessed on all sides to be signanter, and expressly pointed
at, and the discourse driving at the Government of the Church by Bishops; who
can conceive but that his Argument or Objection must tend that way also, and
that Episcopacy must be reckoned in the number of those things of indifferency
for which there was no reason to require the Oath? And though the Pamphleter
would fain have it that Episcopacy is not in those things of indifferency, but
excluded rather, yet this will do him as small service, as the Press when it
was said to have swarmed with Books, had done the Bishops. For first he does
not say that Episcopacy was not pointed at, at all, in those things of
indifferency, but not signanter and expressly; our Author keeping a reserve, or
secret intention to himself, upon al occasions. Nor does it help him, secondly,
to say, that the things there spoken of are such, as never had any show or
color of sacred right, whereas Episcopacy in the very account of its
adversaries, has some color and show of it, fol. 39. Where first, he pleads
but very coldly for Episcopacy in giving it only some show and color which all
Heresies, Enthusiasticks, and Fanaticall fancies, all that have set up any
other Government, Papal, Anarchicall, Presbyterian, do pretend unto. And
secondly, it is not true, has any such color or show in the account of its
adversaries. Episcopacy, as it stood in the Primitive times, being by Beza
called Humanus, and Diabolicus, as it stood in these latter ages. An Humane
invention in the first, a Diabolical institution in the last times of the
Church; and therefore questionless without any show or color of sacred right.
Nor does he help himself much by the little Army raised out of the Northampton
and Kentish forces under the command of the Lord Digby; which is so far from
putting the matter out of all dispute in the sense he means, that it rather
does conclude against him. For if the Northamptonshire and Kent Exceptions
limit themselves to Archbishops, Archdeacons, etc. our Author certainly is to
blame in these two respects: First, that he did not limit his things of
indifferency as they did before him; And secondly, that speakin such general
terms as he should think to help himself in the Postfact by their limitations.
It Is true, the History renders the Lord Digby as friend to Episcopacy, when the
London Petition came to be considered of in the House of Commons, before which
time he had begun to look toward the Court, but tells us not that he was so
in the very first openings of the Parliament, when the Oath required in the
Canon was in most agitation. And this I hope is fair for a Senior Sophister (as
you please to call the Obfervator) who could have pressed these answers
further, but that the Gentleman's patience must not be abused, nor himself
provoked. We must take care of that, though of nothing else. And so much for
ou^ Authors flutterings in the point of Episcopacy; we will next see, whether
the persons be as precious with him, as the calling is.

CHAP. VI.
The light excuse made by the Pamphleter for our Author in pretermitting Bishop
Bancroft: not bettered much in showing the differences, between the Doctrine of
St. Augustine and Calvin. Our Authors learned ignorance in the word Quorum. The
Observator cleared from foisting any thing into the Text of the History; with
our Authors blunderings in that point. The disagreement between the Comment and
the Text in the unfortunate accident of Archbishop Abbot. Foisting returned
upon the Author, no injury done to Bishop Andrews by the Observator. Of Doctor
Sibthorps Sermon, and whether the Archbishop were sequestered from his
Jurisdiction for refusing to license it. The Pamphleters nice distinction
between most and many, in the repairing of St. Paul's, and that these many did
keep off in reference to the work it self. The war against the Scots not to be
called the Bishops war; not undertaken by the King in defense of their
Hierarchy, nor occasioned by Archbishop Laud. The Scots Rebellion grounded upon
some words of the King touching Abby-Lands in the beginning of his reign;
hammered and formed, and almost ready to break out before the Liturgy was sent
to them. The Archbishop neither the principal nor sole Agent in revising that
Liturgy. Good counsels not to be measured by success. On what grounds the
Liturgy was first designed to be sent to the Scots. Disusing implies not an
abrogation. Abeiance what it is in the common Law. The Communicants by what
authority required to come unto the Ray^e to receive the Sacrament. The 82.
Canon explained and regulated by the Kings Declaration, anno 1633. The
Pamphleters Ipse dixit no sufficient ground for his London measure. Our Author
satisfied in placing the Communion Table Altar-wise, and adoration toward the
East; the liberty granted by the Church in the last particular. The Bishops
charged with the undiscreet practice of some private persons. The Gloria patri
an Epitome of the Apostles Creed. Why kneeling is required at the saying of
Gloria in excelsis. The Pamphleters etc. Our Author miserably out in the
meaning of the Statute 1. Eliz. c. 2. That Statute opened and expounded, in the
case alleged. The Pamphleter in danger of the Statute by out-running
Authority. His excellent proof that standing at the Gloria patri had been
obtruded by the Bishops anno 1628. because inquired into in Bishop Wrens
visitation anno 1636. The Pamphleter confuted by our Author, and our Authors
Panegyric by himself. The Clergy freed from Doctrinal Popery by our Author
himself. The scandal since given unto the Church by Bishop Goodman.
FRom Episcopacy pass we to the Bishops, where the first thing we meet with is
the rectifying of a mistake about Archbishop Whitgift, whom our Author had made
the predecessor penultime, or next predecessor but one to Archbishop Laud. This
he confesses for an error, but puts it off, not as a want of diligence (he
will by no means yield to that) but a lapse of memory, Fol. 35. A privilege
which if all other writers of History should pretend unto as frequently as our
Author does, we should find little truth among them, and not much assurance of
any thing upon which to rest: This not being the first time in which our Author
has been forced to use this remedy, as in these words (as is beforesaid) is
here acknowledged. We had the same excuse before in the mistake about Marriage
of the one King, and Funeral of the other, as also in that Hysteron proteron in
placing the Synod of Dort before that of Ireland; so that by this time this
defense must needs be worn as thread bare as the Observators coat, Fol. 37.

Of Dr. Abbot, the immediate predecessor to Archbishop Laud, the Historian
tells us, that he was stiffly disciplined in the Doctrine of St Augustine,
which they who understand it not call Calvinism. Charged for this by the
Observator, and some points produced in which Calvinism and the Doctrine of St.
Augustine, do extremely differ; he answers that he makes them not to be all
one in all concernments, but only in opposition to the Massilian and Arminian
Tenets, Fol. 23. And this I look on as another of our Authors privileges, who
when he has given us any things in general terms, thinks all is well if he
can make it hold good in a few particulars. Whereas if he had limited his
proposition to those points alone, and told us that he was stiffly principled in
that part of St. Augustines Doctrine, which was in opposition to the tenets
before remembered, there had been no occasion given to the Observator to except
against him. But the best is, that seeming to make a question of that which is
out of Question, viz. Whether St. Augustine and Calvin differ in the point of
Episcopacy, he tells us, that they differ in the point of the Sabbath or
Lords day, which is more then the Observator had observed, and for which we
thank him.

In the story of the Sequestration of Archbishop Abbot, there are four mistakes
noted by the Observator, 1. That in the Commission granted to the 5 Bishops
Bishop Laud is said to be of the Quorum. 2. That the declared impulsive cause
of it was a supposed irregularity. 3. That this supposed irregularity was
incurred upon the casual killing of the keeper of his (the Archbishops) game.
And 4. That the irregularity is said to be but supposed only, and no more then
so. To this the Pamphleter first answers in his usual way, that he should
keep his own supposititio^s foistings at home, and that by the same art of
juggling his own words into the Text, he that made them four, might have made
them four hundred, Fol. 10. Why so? because (says he) I never said that Bishop
Laud was of the Quorum more then any other, but only that he was of the Quorum,
meaning thereby that he was one of the five. Auditum admisse risum teneatis
amici? Can any man hear this fine stuff and abstain from laughter? Such a
ridiculous piece of intelligent nonsense, as might make Heraclitus grin, and
put Democritus into tears, producing contrary operations on their several
humors. I thought before I read this passage, our Gent. had been one of the
right Worshipful of the Bench, in commission for the Peace at least, if not one
of the Quorum but I see now that he is not so well skilled at it, as a Justices
Clerk. Did the man ever hear of any Commission in which five or more persons
were nominated, of which one or two are named to be of the Quorum, and by that
word understand, with such an abundant want of understanding, that nothing more
was meant in it, but that the said one or two, were to be of the number?
Confident I am (and I think may confidently say it) that we have not had such a
learned piece of ignorance, since Jack Mayor of Brackley being by his place a
Justice of the Peace, and one of the Quorum by the public charter of that
Town, threatened to bind a poor country fellow (who had carried himself
somewhat sawcily to him) not only to the Peace, but to the Quorum too.

Pass we on to the next that follows. And there, or no where, we shall find
one of those many supposititious Foistings which are charged upon the
Observator. The Historian having said that the Archbishop was sequestered from
his Function, and a Commission granted by the King to five Bishops (Bishop Laud
being of the Quorum) to execute Episcopal jurisdiction within his Province;
adds presently in the very next words, that the declared impulsive to it, was
a supposed irregularity in him by reason of a Homicide committed by him per
infortunium etc. Can any intelligent Reader understand otherwise by these
wo^ds, but that the impulsive to this Sequest^ation, whatsoever it was, was
declared, or supposed to be declared in that Commission? For who but the King,
that granted the Commission, should declare the impulsive causes to it? or
wh^r^ else should they be declared but in that Commission? Yes, says the
Pamphleter, the King granted the Commission, and common Fame, our Author, or I
know not who, declared the Impulsives to it. What pity it is our Author had not
served seven years to the Clerk of the Crown, before he undertook the History
of a King of England, that so being better versed in all kind of Commissions
he might the better have avoided these ridiculous errors which he falls into?
And yet this is the only thing, namely, that the irregularity or supposed
irregularity of the said Archbishop, was not touched upon in the Commission as
the impulsive cause unto it; for which not one alone, but many (no man knows
how many) supposititious foistings are charged with so much noise and clamor
on the Observator.

Somewhat more modestly in the third, but with as little thought of rectifying
any thing, as in those before. Told by the Observator, that the person whom
this Archbishop so unfortunately killed, was not the keeper of his own Game,
but a keeper of the Lord Zouches in Bramzill Park; he acknowledges his error
in it, Fol. 44. and yet not only keeps it in the Text of his new impression, as
before it was; but stands unto the truth of it in the very same Pamphlet, Fol.
11. and this he stands to on the authority of Aulicus C^quinariae, and Mr.
Prynne; Men elsewhere of no credit with him, though here they be, but both
mistaken in this point on uncertain hearsay. Confessed for an error in the
Pamphlet, because upon a further inquiry he could do no otherwise; justified
for no error in the very same Pamphlet, because he must not yield (as
inconsistent with his credit) to be out in any thing; And finally retains
still, in the Text of the History, because he loves not to walk single in those
paths of error, but must have many followers for the greater State.

The fourth thing noted by the Observator, namely, that some pio^s and learned
men being nominated and elected Bishops, refused to be consecrated by him, in
regard that they conceived that there was more incurred by that misadventure,
then a supposed irregularity only, is by the Pamphleter passed over; in place
whereof he foists in another, which he thinks may be more easily answered, that
is to say, his vouching Bishop Andrews for a vin^icator of the Archbishops
Regularity, Fol. 11. Might I not here f^ll foul upon the Pamphleter, and pay
him home in some of his own Billingsgate language, for falsifying so boldly, I
will not say so impudently (as you know who did) the plain and manifest words
of the Observator; who is so far from vouching this amongst the rest of his
errors, that he affirms it to be true, that the learned Bishop Andrews (as
our Author tells us) did do the Archbishop very great service in this
business. Here is no fair dealing in this to begin withal, and far more
sophistry then ingenuity in the rest that follows. For though the whole scope
of that Commission, was to inquire into the matter of Fact, and to resolve
whether the Archbishop (notwithstanding that mischance) was regular or not
regular, as the Pamphleter tells us, fol. 11. Yet Bishop Andrews in the
executing of that Commission, might proceed with favor, and was not bound to
press the point to the utmost extremity, when he saw what further
inconveniences might ensue upon it. That learned Bishop might do this, and did
really do it, without drawing blame upon himself, or being belied in it by the
Observator, as in the ordinary eloquence of the Pamphleter he is said to be.

But stay a while, we have another impulsive found out for this irregularity,
and found out chiefly (as it seems) because the Observator so dislikes the
other, fol. 46. And yet I trow the Observator never manifested any such
dislike, as to the cause impulsive of his (the Archbishops) irregularity; no
such matter verily, but only showed that the unfortunate accident which our
Author speaks of, was not the declared impulsive cause in the commission for
sequestring him from his Jurisdiction, and granting it to the five Bishops
which are therein named, as indeed it was not. The impulsive cause it might be,
though not there declared; the Commission only saying in the general, That the
said Archbishop could not at that present, in his own person, attend those
services, which were otherwise proper for his Cognizance and Jurisdiction; not
rendering any certain impulsive cause, whereby he was conceived incapable of
performing his office. And now what new impulsive will he give us in exchange
for the other? marry he tells us, that though it was not publicly declared,
yet it was by knowing men in those affairs beheld as the real and genuine
cause of this commission; that the Archbishop had refused to license Dr.
Sibthorps Book, Fol. 47. The Book here meant, was a Sermon preached at
No^thampton by that Doct^r before the Judges of Assize anno 1627* and after
printed with the name of Apostolical obedience. A Sermon made of such a temper,
that if our Author be in the right, and Mr. Prynne be not in the wrong, it has
pleased all parties. Refused to be licensed by Archbishop Abbet, as our Author
tells us, though he does not tell the reasons of it; but if it were refused
to be licensed by him, it was because it had too much of the Court, as tending
partly to the justification of the general L^an which was then required of the
the Subjects. Not suffered to be licensed by Bishop Laud, because it had too
little of the Court, till some passages which seemed offensive in it touching
the profanation of the Sabbath, and toleration of Popery (as we are told by Mr.
Prynne) had been first expunged. But whatsoever the Sermon was, the Archbishops
refusal to license it (if it were brought to him to be licensed) could be no
such crime, as to draw after it both his removing from the Court, and
sequestring from his Jurisdiction, if other things of greater moment had not
then concurred.

Pass we unto the next Archbishop, of whom, being then Bishop of London, our
Author tells us, that many had no fancy to the work (the repairing of St.
Paul's Church) merely because he was the promoter of it. But the contrary being
proved by the Observator, most of the Clergy, Nobility and Gentry, contributing
very largely to it, because he promoted it, he only answers, that many, and
most, may be consistent, and that many may be opposite to the major vote, Fol.
21. but proves not that any of those many, did dislike it in respect of the
the Bishop, or that it was not rather disliked by them in regard of the work,
which was there proved from a base and scurrilous passage in Bastwicks Letany.
And to this last, our very Author himself has hinted somewhat in his History,
Fol. 124. where he affirms, that some did not forbear to cry, what needs this
cost to decore a superstitious Relic? This the chief cause, why the work went
so slowly forward, that at length the distempers of the State spoiled the
temper of the mortar, as our Author there.

Next look upon him as Archbishop, in which capacity we shall find him made by
our Historian, a principal occasion of the Scottish war; Reproved by the
Observator for calling the war against the Scots, the Bishops war, he now
stands to it that it was, and might be so called for these reasons following:
First, because not the Covenanters only, but many an English Protestant did so
call it also, Fol. 30. Some English Protestants! I believe not so. The English
Protestants were otherwise persuaded of it, though the Puritans were not, and
'twas the English Puritan, not the English Protestant, who joined with the
Covenanters in Scotland in the main design, and gave it consequently the name
of the Bishops War. He asks us secondly, If it were not a war undertaken at
first for defense of their Hierarchy. Which question being equivalent to an
affirmation, does amount to this, that the war was first undertaken in the
Bishops quarrel, and in defense of their Order. This is well said indeed, if it
were well proved; but this the Pamphleter does not prove, I am sure he cannot:
the King who best knew the reasons of his taking Arms, and published a large
Declaration of the proceedings of the Scots, imputes the causes of the war to
their continuing the Assembly at Glascow when by him dissolved, ejecting such
of the Clergy, as had refused to subscribe to the Acts thereof, then commanded
to do, suspended and repealed Laws without his Authority, putting the Subjects
into Arms, seizing upon his Forts and Castles, and intercepting his Revenues.
All which, or any one of which might have moved the King to undertake a war
against them, without consulting with our Author how to bring the poor Bishops
into that engagement, and make it rather seem their quarrel, then the Kings
own interesse, which enforced him to it.

But he says thirdly, That one of that Order (he means the late Archbishop of
Canterbury) was the main cause of that war, by introducing the Liturgy amongst
them, and thereupon he does conclude, that the war which the Archbishop
occasioned, and which was entered into for maintaining that Hierarchy, may, he
hopes, without offense, be called the Bishops war. And now we are come to that
we looked for, a very pretty tale indeed, and one of the finest he has told
us; none of the Hundred merry Tales, nor such a tale as made his Lordship
wondrous merry, which we had before, but a new Canterbury Tale, and the
Esquires tale too. Our Author, a more modederate and sober Gent. then the
Pamphleter is, has told us, that the Kings demand of the Abbey Lands in
Scotland, in the first year of his reign (made by the Observator) was the true
cause of the war, and the bug-words spoke by the Scottish Lords on that
occasion, first generated a mutual and immortal distance between them, which
being in the unpublished sheets, Fol. 18. is seconded in the Book now extant,
where we are told that those discontents (upon which the war was after
grounded) did break out in Scotland, anno 1633. four years before the Liturgy
was commended to them; that the next year after, these discontents began to
contract a little more confidence in his absence, and to attempt his patience
by a most malicious plot against his Fame, as preambulatory to another against
his person: That the first work and operation in the method of Sedition, being
to leaven the mass of the peoples minds with mischievous impressions, they
first whispered and instilled into them close intelligence of some terrible
plot against their liberties; and after sent abroad a venomous libel, in which
amongst other things, they suggested formidable fictions of his tendency to the
Romish Belief, Fol. 133. And finally, that for the Liturgy* it self, there was
a purpose in King James, to settle such an one amongst them, as might hold
conformity with that of England; and that King Charles in pursuance of his
Fathers purpose, gave directions to the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of
Ely, and to diverse Bishops of that Kingdom, to revise, correct, alter, and
change as they pleased, the Liturgy compiled in his Fathers time; and finally,
that the Book so altered, was by the King sent by the Counsel of that Kingdom,
with order to proclaim the Reading of it upon next Easter day, Fol.

By this we see that sacrilege and rapine was the first ground of these
discontents, these discontents brake out into sedition, and that sedition ended
in an open war, to which the introducing of the Liturgy could not be a cause,
though it might be made use of by those factious and rebellious spirits for a
present occasion: and so much is confessed by the Pamphleter himself, in that
there was no doubt, but many of them had other then Religious designs, as
hoping to obtain that honor and wealth in a troubled State, which they were
confident they should never arrive at in a calm, Fol. 31. Adeo veritas ab
invitis etiam pectoribus erumpit, said Lactantius truly. By this it also does
appear, that the Archbishop had not the sole hand in the Scottish Liturgy, the
Book being revised by many, by the Kings directions, and sent by him to the
Lords of his Council in that kingdom, with order and command to see it
executed accordingly.

But the best is, that the Pamphleter has not only his tale ready, but his
Tales master too, fathering it on the ingenious Author of the Elenchus motuum,
in which he finds the Archbishop named for the main cause of introducing that
Liturgy among the Scots, and that he did it spe quidem laudabili, eventu vero
pessimo, with a good intent, but exceeding ill success, fol. 30. I have as
great an esteem for the Author of that Book (whosoever he was) as any
Pamphleter can have of him; but yet could tell him of some things in which he
was as much mistaken as in this particular, but since the Pamphleter has made
that Authors words his own, and seems to approve of the intent, though the
success proved not answerable; I shall only put him in mind of a saying in
Ovid, viz.

-- Careat successibus opto,
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putat.
That is to say, Ill may he prosper in his best intents,
That measures Counsels by their sad events.


But to satisfy both the Pamphleter, and the ingenuous Author by him
alleged, I shall say somewhat here of the business of the Scottish Liturgy,
which is not commonly observed, and tends both to the justification of the King
himself, and of those whom he entrusted in it. Know then that when the Scots
required aid of Queen Elizabeth (in the beginning of their Reformation) to
expel the French, they bound themselves by the Subscription of their hands to
embrace the form of worship, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of
England. Religionis cultui, and ritibus, cum Anglis communibus, subscripserunt,
as Buchannan, their own Historian, and no friend unto the Anglican Church,
informs us of them. But being cleared of the French Forces, and able to stand
on their own legs, they broke their faith (it is hard to say they ever kept it)
in this particular, and fell on those extemporary undigested prayers, which
their own Fancies had directed, or were thought most agreeable to Knoxes
humor. The confusion, inconveniences, and sad effects whereof being well
known to King James, he thought himself concerned (I will not say obliged) to
bring them back again, to that first subscription; or to commend such a
Liturgy to them, as might hold some conformity with that of the Church of
England. To this end having restored the Bishops, and settled the five Articles
of Perth, as necessary introductions to it, he gave order to the Bishops, and
the rest of the Clergy then assembled, to compose a Liturgy for that Church,
desiring it might be as near the English forms as they could conveniently.
Wherein as he did little doubt of their ready obedience, so questionless, it had
been finished by the sitting of the next Assembly, if the long and dubious
expectation of the match with Spain, and the Kings death not long after had not
laid it by. So that King Char. had not only the general subscription of the
nation never yet lawfully reversed, but the order of King James registered in
the Acts of the General Assembly, to proceed upon; and he proceeded on it
accordingly, as soon as by the Coronation, and the ensuing Parliament he had
given contentment to that people. And therefore they who can conclude that the
Liturgy first grounded on their own subscription, designed by their own
general Assembly, revised by their own Bishops, and confirmed by their own
natural and native King, was or could be the ground of their taking Arms (for
I must not say the Scots rebelled, though the Irish did) may by the same Logic
conclude as well, that the Doctrine of Luther, was the cause of the
Insurrections of the Boors in Germany, or that Tenterden Steeple was the cause
of Goodwins sands.

We left the late Archbishop acquitted (as we hope) from being a principal
occasion of the Scotch war, we must next free him and the rest of the Bishops
from introducing Innovations, Popery, Arminianisme, and I know not what. And
first, our Author told us of him, that be tampered to introduce some Ceremonies
bordering up on superstition, disused by us, and abused by them, that is to
say, by those of Rome. And being told by the Observator, that if they were
disused only, they were still in force, as appeared by the case of Knighthood;
the Pamphleter answered thereunto, the word disused does not at all imply, that
those Ceremonies were in force, but rather laid aside by the Reformators,
observing how much they were abused by the Church of Rome, and therefore not
fit to be retained, fol. 33. A piece of Law like this we had in the former
Chapter, where the Pamphleter had broached this Doctrine, that the
discontinuance of the execution (that is to say, of the Declaration of King
James about lawful sports) was a tacit suppressing and calling of it in. To
that we refer the Reader for an Answer to this. I add now only by the way,
and ex abundanti, that many things may be in abejance (as your Lawyers phrase
it) which are not utterly lost, and irrecoverable, but carry with them a hope
or longing expectance, that though for the present they be in no man, yet be in
the hope and expectation of him who is next to enjoy them. For as the Civilians
say of Haereditas jacens, that goods and lands do Jacere whilst they want a
possessor, and yet not simply because they lately had one, and may shortly have
another; so the common Lawyers do say, that things in like estate are in
Abejance. Thus Dr. Cowell has defined that word in his Interpreter. And this I
take to be the case of those ancient Ceremonies, which were reduced into the
Church by the Arch-bish. though a while disused: and this may serve for answer
to the last Objection of this Pamphleter in the present point, viz. that things
abused may be lawfully restored to the Primitive use; but then it must be
(says he) by lawful authority, and in a lawful manner. Which Rule of his I
hold to be undoubtedly true in the Proposition, but of no use at all in the
application, the Archbishop having in himself a lawful power of restoring
such ancient Rites and Ceremonies, as had been formerly disused only, and not
also abrogated, and what he had not in himself, was made up by the Kings
authority, of which more anon.

But next our Author tells us of this Archbishop, that he commanded in his
metropoliticall visitation, that the Communion Table which formerly stood in
the midst of the Church or Chancell, should be placed at the East end, upon a
graduated advance of ground with the ends inverted, and a wooden traverse of
Railes before it. To which the Observator answers, that the King had given
sufficient authority to it, a year before the visitation which our Author
speaks of, in the determination of the case of St. Gregory Church, November 3.
1633. The Pamphleter hereunto replyeth, that by the Archbishops outrunning
Authority, he intended not, his placing the Communion Table Altarwise, at the
East of the Chancell (so then we have gained that point, if nothing else) but
by enjoining a wooden Traverse of Railes to be set before it, and commanding
all the Communicants to come to it to receive the Sacrament, fol. 27. which
said, he makes a long discourse to prove that by the Queens Injunctions, and
the 82. Canon, the Table is to be placed within the Church or Chancell, that
the Communicants may in greater numbers receive the Sacrament, which is best
done (says he) when the Table is in the Body of the Church or Chancell. And
against this, or in defense of setting Railes before the Table, so as the
Communicant should come up to those Railes to receive. He is sure, that there
is no such thing in the Declaration, not a syllable that tends that way. These
Colworts have been boiled already, served in, and set by the Bishop of Lincoln
on his Holy Table; so that there needs no other Answer, then what we find in
the Antidotum Lincolniense, Chap. 7. and therefore I refer him thither for
his satisfaction. But since he has appealed to the Declaration; to the
Declaration he shall go. In which it is expressly said, That for as much as
concerns the liberty given by the said Common Book or Canons, for placing the
Communion Table in any Church or Chapel with most convenience; that liberty
is not so to be understood, as if it were ever left to the discretion of the
Parish, much less to the particular fancy of any humorous person, but to the
Judgment of the Ordinary, to whose place and function it does properly belong
to give direction in that point, both for the thing it self, and for the time,
when and how long as he may find cause. So that his Majesty's Declaration
leaves it to the power of the Ordinary; and the Archbishop as chief Ordinary
enjoyneth the Table to be placed at the East end of the Chancell, and the
Communicants to come up to it to receive the Sacrament; to which the adding of
a Rail as a matter of decency, and for keeping off disorders and profanations,
is but as an accessory.

But he has one more fling at the Observator, by which he is like to get as
little as by that before. The Observator tells us, that the Archbishop
proceeded in his visitation according to his Majesty's Declaration above
mentioned, made the year before Anno 1633. And this says he is London measure,
and he proves it stoutly, because, I say (this must be understood as speaking
in his own proper person) metropoliticall visitation was 1635. and therefore
the Declaration being made, 1633. cannot be said to have been made the year
before, but by London measure, fol. 27. What a Pythagoras have we here, with
his Ipse dixit; if not the whole man, yet the Soul at least of that grave
Philosopher, transfused into our Authors body by a Metempsuchosis. I say it,
therefore nothing truer, nothing to be replied against it. But good Sir, not so
fast, let a poor man speak and he will tell you, if your Mastership will hear
him out, that though perhaps the metropoliticall visitation was not held till
the year 1635. in those parts and parishes, in which you served, as one of the
E^ders of the Vestry, yet I am very well assured, that it was held in other
places of the Kingdom, and more particularly (if my memory deceive me not) in
all the Counties or Arch-deaconries, of the Diocese of Lincoln, Anno 1634.
which was the next year after the Declaration, without making any such London
measure as you sport your self with.

We must next see how far the rest of the Bishops were concerned in those
Innovations. They were first charged with the audacious obtruding of diverse
superstitious Ceremonies, as erecting of fixed Altars, and dopping and cringing
toward them. But in the Pamphlet we hear nothing of these fixed Altars, or
against placing the Communion Table Altar-wise, at the East end of the
Chancell; the Author seeming so far satisfied, that he sees not now any
outrunning of Authority in that particular. And he is so far satisfied also out
of his own knowledge in the M^numents of most pure Antiquity, which the
Observator had appealed to, that bodily adoration and worshipping toward the
East, was an ancient custom of the Primitive Church, of which he grants that
there is evidence enough in the Ancient writers: adding that as it was ancient,
so he could not say it was illaudable in them, and might be tolerable in us, as
he conceives, were all men satisfied in the Decorum of it; or a liberty left
to those who are still dubious of the lawfulness thereof, to forbear it, fol.
17. In this we both agree, none better. Ancient, laudable, and tolerable, who
can wish for more? yes, liberty to be left those who are dubious of it, either
to use it or not use it, according to the light of their understanding. That if
we do not grant him, we shall not deal so friendly with him as he has
deserved. Let him therefore consult the 7. Canon of the year 1646. in which the
Church commending the reviving of this ancient laudable custom to the serious
consideration of all good people (and not obtruding it on any) concludes the
whole with this desire, that in the practice or emis^ion of this rite the Rule
of Charity prescribed by the Apostle may be observed, which is, that they that
use this rite, despise not them who use it not, condemn not those who use it.
And in requital of this kindness, I shall not stick to allow of his discourse
ensuing, about the not using of such words and names, by the ambiguity whereof
not easily discerned in ordinary discourse, any thing may seem to be intended
not consonant to the Christian Faith, according to that golden saying of
reverend Saint Augustine, which is cited by him.

But now comes in the naughty Cow of Friar Richard of Roughton, which gave a
good meals milk with one heel (it should seem a Bull rather then a Cow, by the
lowing of it) and kicks it down with the other. For he tells us That for
dopping or cringing to, or toward the Altar or Holy Table, as often as they
approached to, or retreated from it, which was often practiced by some indiscreet
pretenders to conformity with the Primitive Church, he finds not the least
trace thereof in any genuine Author, of the first 500 years, fol. 17. Let us
indulge him this also for his former kindness, yet what makes this unto the
purpose? The Bishops stand accused (whether before the Committee or not, is all
one to me) of an audacious obtruding of new Rites and Ceremonies, and in
particular of this cringing to, or toward the Altar, or Holy Table. This is
the charge, a very heavy charge indeed, and but lightly proved; the charge is
of obtruding; but the Proof of practicing; the obtruding charged upon the
Prelates, but the practice laid on some indiscreet pretenders to conformity
with the Primitive times; who if they did it on their own heads, and had no
warrant for it from their Superiors, let them stand or fall unto themselves.
But that the children should eat sour grapes, and the Fathers teeth should be
set an edge, is such a manner of proceeding, as neither Proverb, Law, nor
Gospel, can give countenance to.

The next Innovation, affirmed to be obtruded by the Bishops, is standing up at
the Gloria Patri, to which the Observator Answered, That the Rubrique of the
Church requiring us to stand up at the Creed, obliges us by the same reasons
to stand up at the Gospels, and Gloria Patri, the Gospels being the foundation
of the Creed, as Gloria Patri is the Abstract and Epitome of it. What says the
Pamphleter to this? marry he first asks the Theologaster (the Dr. or the
Observator it is no matter which) of what Creed the Gloria Patri is by him said
to be the Epitome; and then resolves it of himself, that it is not that of the
Apostles, at which the Rubric enjoined us to stand up, because there are in
that Creed some other points, which relate not the Doctrine of the Trinity,
fol. 18. But good Sir have a little patience, and I will pay you all. In the
mean time take this for earnest or in part of payment, that though that Creed
contains the profession of our Faith, in some other points, then those of the
Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, included summarily in the Gloria
Patri; yet are they all reducible to that part of the Creed, as being the
repetition of such signal Benefits, as redound to us by the death and
resurrection, of the Son, our most blessed Savior, or communicated to us by
the influences of the Holy Ghost. So that if this be all you have to object
against us, we may stand up at the Gloria Patri, and stand up at it by the
authority of that very Rubric, which requires our standing at the Creed.

But then he tells us not long after, that as standing is not improper (we
are glad to hear that howsoever) so is it not a posture peculiar to the action
of doxologie and glorifying God, as is evident by our Church, which sometimes
(as in our Communion Service) requires it from our knees, fol. 19. An
objection easy to be answered. The Observator no where says that standing is
a posture peculiar to the Gloria Patri, as not to be communicated to any other
part of Divine worship, it being practiced at the Gospels, and required at the
Creed, and so the first part of this Objection falls without more ado. And 2.
though the Communion Book require kneeling in the people, when Gloria in
excels^s, is said or sung by the Priest; yet is not this required unto it as it
is a doxologie, a giving of glory unto God, but as it is an invocation on
Christ our Savior to have mercy on us, and to receive those prayers which are
offered to him. And kneeling doubtless is the most proper posture in the act of
prayers, required therefore in all such as receive the Sacrament, because it is
given them with a prayer by the Priest or Minister.

That many things may be retained in a Church reformed, ex vi Catholicae
consuetudinis, especially, where there is no Rule to the contrary. The
Pamphleter allows well enough with a Been, Been; but says withal that it is
little to the purpose, there being in the Act of Uniformity a Vae or Woe, to him
who shall willingly use any other Rite or Ceremony, etc. then is set forth in
the Book of Common Prayer, fol. 19. I thought our Author had been such an enemy
to all etcaeteras, because of the mysterious import, as you know who said,
which they carry with them, especially in a Law or Canon, that no such
sham^full thing (for he calls it somewhere a shameful etc. if my memory fail
not) should have been found in all his writings; but I see he can make use of
them when there is occasion; and that too in the citing of a Law or Statute,
which, as he says, does bind all men to a strict conformity to the very
letter of it. I find by this, that our Author is better at the Bar then upon
the Bench; not so much studied in the Querks and Quorums of a Commission, as in
the ferreting and fingring of a Statute Law, in which no Barrester of them all,
no not the Utter Barrester of Lincolns Inn is to be named the same day with
him. For what an Argument had here been for Mr. Prinne, if he could have seen
so far into this millstone of the Law, as our Author can, against bowing at
the name of Jesus; no where appointed in the Rubricks of the public Liturgy,
but first retained, ex vi Catholica^ consuetudinis, required afterward by the
Queens injunctions, and finally by the Canons of 603. Neither of which could
stand before the face of an Act of Parliament, if produced against them. What a
brave Argument could our Author have hinted and held forth to Harry Burton
(never the Princes Tutor Sir, you are out in that, though honored by you with
that title in the sheets unpublished) against standing up at the Holy Gospels,
had he been consulted in the case, as he should have been? Against how many men
might he have brought his Action in the times of conformity, for standing up at
the Athanasian and Nicene Creeds, at the Te Deum, Benedictus, and the other
Hymns? all Trespasses against this Statute, which binds all men (as we are
told by this man of Law) to a strict conformity to the very letter of it.

But the best is, there is no such thing in all that Statute, as our Author
speaks of, no Vae or Woe to him, who shall willingly use any other rite, or
Ceremony, etc. then what is set forth in the Book of Common Prayer. The Statute
speaks of Parsons, Vicars, or other whatsoever ministers, that ought or should
sing or say the Common Prayer, or minister the Sacraments; enjoining such
(under the Penalties therein mentioned) not to use any other Rite, Ceremony,
Order, Form, or Manner of celebrating the Lords Supper openly or privily, or
mattens, Evensong, Administration of the Sacraments, or other open Prayer, then
is mentioned and set forth in the said Book. Nothing in this to restrain men
from using any one or none single Rites or Ceremonies, which had been formerly
in use, and against which there is nothing directed or commanded in the
public Rubricks, no such matter verily; but a Command, that no man in the
Quality of a man in Orders, shall use any other Rite, Ceremony, Order, Form, or
manner of celebrating the Lords Supper, or officiating the morning and evening
Prayer; It is then the whole Form and Order of celebrating Divine offices which
is here required, and not the restraint from using any one single Rite or
Ceremony, other then such as are contained in that Book. For were it otherwise
to expound or understand, none but such men as were enabled to officiate, the
public Liturgy, had been restrained from using any such Rites, or
Ceremonies, as were here cut off with an etc. the people being left at liberty
to use such Rites and Ceremonies, etc. as they had a mind to without any Vae
or woe at all, or any Penalty whatsoever in that Statute mentioned; unless it
may be granted, as I think it will not, that every person so offending, is or
may be possessed of some spiriturall Benefices and Promotions, of which to
forfeit one whole years Profits for the first offense. Nor does the Statute
speak* of such, who shall willingly use any other Rite or Ceremony, etc. (our
man of Law is out in that too, as in all things else) but of such only as shall
wilfully and obstinately stand in the same. And I conceive our Author is so
good a ^ritick in a plain piece of English, as to understand the difference
between the doing of a thing willingly, and standing obstinately and wilfully
to it after it is done. Had any of these things been found in the Observator,
he had been told of forging and falsifying the Record, and I know not what. But
in our Author it is only one of those Piae frauds which necessarily conduce to
the advancing of the Holy cause, and so let it go.

I might expect a fee of my Author for this point of Law, whom otherwise I
find like enough to have entangled himself in the danger of that Statute,
pleading so strongly as he does for stand^ng not only at the Gospels, but also
at the Epistles and second Lessons; though neither the Rubricks of the Liturgy,
nor any Canon of the Church do require it of us. His following maxim, that
standing is the most proper posture of Attention, I like wondrous well; and I
like better, that he says it becomes him not, to have his Hat on, when his
Lord and Master speaks to him, fol. 19. But for all, I would have him take a
special care, lest whilst he thus zealously pursues Order, he outrun
authority, as we know who did. For certainly the Canon which he built upon will
not bear him out in it against the Statute, if the Statute were to be so
expounded, as to restrain the use of all Rites and Ceremonies, not specified
and appointed in the Book of Common Prayer, as he told us lately. For though
Genuflexion or bowing of the knee cannot be done (says he) but in a stationary
posture, yet men that sit may tender due and lowly reverence at the name of
Jesus, by the humble bowing of their Bodies, and testify by that sign and
gesture, their inward humility, Christian Resolution, and due acknowledgement
that the Lord Jesus Christ, the true and eternal Son of God, is the only
Savior of the world, etc. As in the 18. Canon of 603.

But one good turn requires another. The Pamphleter in requital, shall advise
the Observator, not to be too confident, in saying, he was sure, that standing
at the Gloria Patri, was never obtruded by the Prelates; for fear there should
prove some flaw in his assurance, whosoever was of his Counsel in it, fol. 18.
This is a friendly admonition, and I shall make the best use of it accordingly.
But how does he weaken this assurance, and abate this confidence? Marry because
in Bishop Wrens Articles framed for the Diocese of Norwich, sure he is Chap. 4.
there are these words, viz. Do they, i. e. the people, at the end of every
Psalm stand up, and say, Glory be to the Father, etc. And he thinks things
inquired after in Diocesan visitations, may be said to be urged and obtruded,
fol. 18. Hic Rhodus, hic saltus; this is the man, and that is his leap, ma^ch
him he that can. But Sir, though I have heard some men ascribe insallibility to
the Houses of Parliament, yet I never heard of any man till now, that did
entitle them, their Committees instruments, and Agents to the Spirit of
prophecy; and it is impossible, that they could otherwise tell, Anno 1628. what
Bishop Wren would do at Norwich above seven years after, Anno 1636. For mark
the story as it lies. The Committee for Religion declared in Anno 1628. That
upon due inspection they found it in a very tottering and declining condition,
etc. partly from the audacious obtruding of diverse superstitious Ceremonies by
the Prelates, as standing at the Gloria Patri, etc. Hist. fol. 96. This is the
information, but what Proofs have they of it? The Information is in matter of
Fact, of diverse Superstitious Ceremonies, standing up at the Gloria Patri, etc.
At that time and before obtruded by some audacious Prelates. The Proof is given
them by the Spirit of prophecy, in telling them what was, or should be done
above seven years after, when Bishop Wren should hold his first visitation for
the Diocese of Norwich. I see our Author is as good at Logic as he is at Law.
For mark the Argument in Bishop Wrens Articles, framed for the Diocese of
Norwich (Anno 1636. why was that left out?) it is enquired into, whether the
people at the end of every Psalm did stand up and say, Glory be to the Father,
etc. Ergo, which is in English, therefore, This Superstitious Ceremony of
standing at the Gloria Patri, was obtruded by the audacious Prelates above
seven years before. Anno 1628. Brave man at Arms I must confess, though weak to
Baltazar. And now I hope I am quit with him for his Theologaster.

But yet I have not paid him all, there is some behind. For is not this the
man that tells us, that the remissness of the Government of Archbishop Abbot,
made the future Reduction of tender conscienced men to long discontinued
obedience, interpreted an Innovation, Hist. fol. 127. yet he remembers it well
enough; For he tells us in his Pamphlet, fol. 27. Oportet esse memorem, but he
leaves out the most significant word of all, that which most properly does
concern him, Mendacem: Oportet mendacem esse memorem, was the Rule of old, and
it concerns our Author to take notice of it. I well remember those words says
he, but never meant they should relate to the setting Railes before the Holy
Table, fol. 28. Well then allowing our Author his more secret meaning, we have
gained thus much, that placing the Table Altar-wise, and bowing toward it, and
standing at the Gloria Patri, are no more to be reckoned for Innovations, but
Reductions rather, as our Author freely has acknowledged. For telling us that
he never meant, that the words alleged should relate to the setting Railes
before the holy Table; he does ingenuously confess he meant it in all the rest;
according to the good old Rule, Exceptio firmat Regulam in non exceptis. And
again, is not this the man that tells us Anno 1635. in his new Edition, that he
who desires to pourtray England in her full Stature of external Glory, may now
take her dimensions; he shall behold her Church shining in transcendent
Empyreall brightness, and purity of Evangelicall truth. Her religious
performances, her holy offices, ordered and regulated agreeable to the strict
expedient of such sacred actions. Her Discipline, Model, suitable to the
Apostolic form. The set and suite of her Holy Tribe renowned for piety and
learning, and all those in so supereminent a degree, that no Church on this
side of the Apostolic, can or ever could, compare with her in any one, fol.
142. Here is an Euge tuum, and belle, an excellent Panegyric I confess, and I
thank him for it, but very different from those Taxes, charges, and obtrusions,
which we find elsewhere. Out of which I shall only note, as proper to my
present purpose. First, that this Panegyric is placed by him Anno 1635. at
what time placing the Communion Table Altar-wise, and bowing toward it, and
standing at the Gloria Patri were grown more generally in use, then they had
been formerly. And secondly, that it is here said, that her Religious
performances, and holy offices, were then regulated agreeable to the strict
Expedients of such sacred Actions. If regulated by the strict Expedients of
such sacred Actions, as he says they were, then neither placing the Table
Altar-wise, nor bowing toward it, nor standing at the Gloria Patri, no nor the
very Railes themselves coming within the compass of these strict expedients,
are to be reckoned of as Innovations, and Obtrusions by the Committee for
Religion of which we speak, Anno 1628.

The Prelates being thus freed, and freed even by our Author himself, from
innovating in the Worship of God, here by Law established, we must next see,
what danger there was feared from Doctrinal Popery, by the uncontrouled
preaching of several points, tending and warping that way, by Mountague,
Goodman, Cozens, and others, as in the History, Fol. 96. To which the
Observator answered, That neither Mountague nor Cozens, were questioned for
preaching any thing which warped toward Popery; but the one of them for writing
the Book called Appello Caesarem, the other for publishing a Body of Devotions,
according to the Hours of Prayer, in neither of which, an equal and judicious
Reader will find any Popery. What says the Pamphleter to this? Why, first he
does confess, That in stead of preaching, he should have said publishing: and
this mistake (with more then ordinary ingenuity) he has rectified in the last
Edition, Fol. 98. Secondly, as for Dr. Cozens, he grants ingenuously enough,
that in his Book, there is no direct Popery, though something (as he says)
which might raise a jealousy of his tendency that way; but yet forbears to
press it further (and it is well for him, that he had so good a color to
forbear the pressing of that, which he could not prove) Seeing that Doctor has
appeared of late so stout an Advocate for the Reformed Church; as he has been
informed by some, and assured by others, fol. 17. To the Observators defense of
Bp. Mountague, there is no Reply: so that the Action being withdrawn against
one of the parties, and the other quit by Proclamation, we may discharge them
of the Court, without more ado. Finally, as for Bp. Goodman, the Observator
has informed you, that though he preached something once which might warp
toward Popery, yet he did not preach it uncontrouled, being not only
questioned for it, but sentenced to a Recantation before the King. To this I
find no Reply neither, and I wonder at it, considering the great advantage
given by that Bishop at his death, to increase the scandal; a scandal so
unseasonably, and untimely given, as if the Devil himself had watched an
opportunity to despite this Church. And though some men have gladly cherished
this occasion, to draw the rest of the Prelates, and Prelatical party, into a
general suspicion, of being as much inclined to Popery, as that Bishop was;
yet Christian charity should instruct them, not to think evil of all, for the
fault of one, or prejudge any one man, much less the whole Body of a Clergy,
for the fault of another. It rather should be wondered at by all moderate and
discerning men, that notwithstanding so many provocations of want, and scorn,
which have of late been put upon them, there should be found but one of that
sacred order, and but three more (that I have heard of) of the Regular Clergy
to fall off to Popery: though to say truth, it was not in this Bishop a late
falling off, but a pursuance rather of some former inclinations which he had
that way, that being thought to be the reason why he refused subscription to
the Canons of 640. mentioned in our Historian fol. 186.

But, oportet esse memorem, as we know who said: and now it will be time to
pass from those Anomalous Innovations, which seemed to threaten, that Tiber
would drown the Thames, in our Authors language, to those designs which tended
to the bringing in of Arminianisme, if all be true, which was brought in to the
Committee, or by our Author is reported to be brought in to them.

CHAP. VII.
Our Author not so little concerned in the controversies of Arminianism, as he
would be thought. The Arminians not called a Faction by the Observator, nor
said by him to be unsufferable in a Commonwealth. The Laws and Privileges of
the Netherlands never more violated, than in the proceedings against Barnevelt.
The Conspiracy of Barnevelts Kindred not to be imputea to the Arminians. The
moderation of King James on the like occasion. The Arminians no way turbulent,
but as Calvinists only. St. Augustine did not think himself infallible, though
the Pamphleter does. The Observator misreported in delivering the Tenets of
some Calvinists. The Pamphleters trifling in so great a matter as Eternity. The
judgment of King James altered in the paints of Arminianism. Sir Humphries
tale of the two Bishops canvassed and confuted. The Bishop of Winchester
vindicated. Of Dr. More, Dr. Marshal, and their several grudges against that
Bishop. The Lambeth Articles confessed by our Author not to be taken for the
Doctrine of the Church of England. The Observators mistake in the first 3.
years of Dr. Baro, and the grounds thereof. The Observator not disproved
concerning that Doctors retiring into France, nor in the story of those
Articles; With the Pamphleters mistakes in both. The Articles of Ireland
abrogated, by superinducing those of England, proved first by the Certificate
of the two Subscribers, and after by some parallel Cases in Scripture, and the
Statute-Laws. The two Subscribers speak improperly for themselves, and deal
unjustly with the Observator. Of the Differences in the Convocation of Ireland,
between the Lord Primate, and the Bishop of Derry. An error of the Printers
charged on the Observator.
BUt first we must remove a Block which lies in our way, our Author telling
us, how little he is concerned in these Arminian Controversies, which are to be
the Subject of this present Chapter, Fol. 5. Thus do I hear our Author say, but
I find the contrary, and then, quid verba audiam cum facta videam? The
bitterness of his Style against those poor men whom he so nick-nameth, and all
who seem to incline toward their opinions, declare plainly of what Spirit he
is, how very little concerned soever he would seem to be. Of this we shall not
need to look for any further evidence, than the Character he gives both of the
men and of the Doctrine. Their Doctrine branded by the name of errors, and the
Contrary opinions honored with the title of Orthodox, Hist. Fol. 98. Their
tenets joined with those of the Massilians and Semipelagians, Fol. 6. 131.
their persons stigmatized in the Pamphlet, as men having a strong tang of the
Jesuits, in practical or Dogmatical concernments; and indeed a Faction, a
turbulent seditious faction, and so found all along by the united Provinces
from the first of their spawning there, Fol. 46. The Lord Deputy of Ireland
stands accused upon this account in the unpublished sheets of the History, to
have frighted, rather than persuaded the Convocation of Ireland to repeal the
Articles of that Church, principally to advance these Arminian Tenets; the
Court-Clergy generally defamed, as deeply tinctured and stained with the
Massilian and Arminian errors, and Mr. Mountague (afterward Bishop of
Chichester) called unworthy wretch, because he was supposed to incline that
way. Strong Arguments that our Author does not think himself so little
concerned in this business; as he would make the world believe, if he had the
Art of it. But whereas the Pamphleter has told us, that the Observator p. 73.
has very aptly styled them, by the name of a Faction, if he consult the place
again but with half an eye, he will not find them styled so by the Observator,
but by Dr. Whitacres, Dr. Willet, Mr. Chatterton, Mr. Perkins, and certain
others, desiring the Archbishops assistance to suppress that Faction, which
was like to grow against them in that University.

And here I think it not amiss to take another running leap, from Fol. 5. to
Fol. 46. where he infers, out of I know not what words in the Observations,
that reason of State and King craft, will not tolerate the Arminians in a
Commonwealth. But no such thing occurs there, I am sure of that; all that the
Observator says, being only this, that King James tendering the safety of the
Prince of Orange, and the peace of those Provinces, thought it no small piece
of King-craft, to contribute toward the Suppression of the weaker party,
blasting them not only with Reproachful names, but sending such of his Divines
to the Assembly at Dort, as he was sure would be sufficiently active in their
condemnation. Can any man infer from hence by the Rules of Logic, that
reason of State and King-craft will not tolerate the Arminiaus in a
Commonwealth? because as the Case then stood in the Belgique Provinces, betwixt
Barnevelt and the Prince of Orange, King James thought fit to Countenance the
party of the Prince of Orange, and suppress the other. Next as for Barnevelt
himself, one of the wisest men that ever those Countries bred, he saw and
feared that the great power to which the Prince of Orange had attained, if not
evenly balanced, might end at last in the Suppression of the Public
Liberty; and make those Provinces, Unius quasi familiae haereditas, the
Patrimony and Inheritance of the Nassovian Family. Hereupon finding that the
Prince had made himself the head of the rigid Calvinists, he joined himself to
those, whom our Author calls Arminians, but passed in their own Country by the
name of Remonstrants; and thereby brought the Prince into such a straight, that
to preserve his power, and make sure of Barnevelt, he violated all the
privileges of those several States, for which they had first took up Arms
against the Spaniards. For first drawing out such Forces as were most at his
Devotion, he passes from one Town to another, displaceth the Magistrates,
changes the Garrisons, and removes the Governors, putting none into the
Rooms, but such as were of the other party, and assured unto him; And 2ly,
having thus altered the whole Face of the Commonwealth, Barnevelt by these new
Magistrates is seized upon, and contrary to the Fundamental Laws of Holland
(whereof he was a native) put over to certain Delegats appointed by the States
Genesis (men utterly incapable of dealing in matters of that nature) to hear his
process, by who^ he was condemned, and accordingly executed. And this is that
wicked Conspiracy, for which he suffered so condignly, as our Author tells
us; but whether it were so or no, the moderate and unconcerned Reader, but some
what less concerned than the Pamphleter is, will be better able to discern, if
he peruse the Apology of the Remonstrants, in which are many things of note
which concern this business.

As for that Damnable and Hellish Plot about three years after, wherein the
States sitting in Council at the Hague, and after them all, other Anti-Arminian
Magistrates were destined to slaughter, as the Pamphleter has it, Fol. 46. If
all be true that is reported, and the design as damnable and hellish, as the
Pampleter makes it, yet does not this concern the Arminian party, but only the
Children and Kindred of Barnevelt, whose design it was; who to revenge his
death, so unworthily and unjustly contrived (and, as they thought) so
undeservedly, and against their Laws, might fall upon some desperate counsels,
and most unjustifiable courses in pursuance of it. But what makes this to the
Arminian and Remonstrant party? Barnevelts Children were convicted of a
Damnable and Hellish plot against the State; Ergo, the Arminians or
Remonstrants are a turbulent, seditious Faction; and conseq^ently, not to be
suffered in a Commonwealth. King James approved not of this Logic, when it was
moved by some hotheaded Members of the Lower House, to seize upon the persons,
and Confiscate the Fistates of all English Papists, as guilty of the Gunpowder
Treason, because some discontented, turbulent and ambitious spirits had
designed the Plot; I know (says he, in his Speech to both Houses of
Parliament, Anno 1605.) that your hearts are so burnt up with zeal in this
errant, and your tongues so ready to utter your dutiful Affections, and your
hands and feet so bent to concur in the execution thereof, (for which, as I
need not to spur you, so can I not but praise you for the same:) As it may
very well be possible that the zeal of your hearts shall make some of you in
your speeches rashly to blame such, as may be innocent of this Attempt: But
upon the other part, I wish you to consider, that I would be sorry that any
being innocent of this practice, either Domestical or Foreign, should receive
blame or harm for the same: For although it cannot be denied, that it was the
only blind Superstition of their errors in Religion, that led them to this
desperate device; yet does it not follow, that all professing the Romish
Religion were guilty of the same. So he. And how far different this is from the
Pamphleters Logic, (though that the best Logic of these times) is left to the
Consideration of all equal and Indifferent men. And 2ly, admitting that the
whole Arminian party were engaged in these Treasons, either in voto or in Re,
yet does it not follow hereupon with reference to other Countries; that they
are none of the best subjects, be their Doctrine as Orthodox as they pretend:
Which is the Corollary which the Pamphleter has inferred upon it. My reason
is, because Arminianism it self, as it relates to the five points in difference
(which in our Authors Style is called Arminianism) disposes not the Professors
of it to any such practices. And therefore if the Arminians should prove to be
as turbulent and seditious, as the Pamphleter makes them, yet must we not
impute it to them, as they are Arminians, that is to say, as men following the
Melancthonian way, and differing in those five points from the rest of the
Calvinists, but as they are a branch of the Sect of Calvin, to whose Discipline
in all particulars, they conformed themselves, and to his Doctrine in the most,
as was declared by the Observator. And we know well what Dangerous Practices
and Positions have been set on foot within this Island, by such as have pursued
the one, and embrace the other.

This said, I must turn back again, where I find the Observator put to an
unnecessary, but invidious task. The Observator had affirmed, that St.
Augustines zeal against the Pelagians, transported him into such inconvenient
expressions, as the wisest men may fall into on the like occasions. To this the
Pamphleter replieth, That it were a work very proper for the Observator, to
instance in those inconvenient expressions, and to undertake the confutation of
them, Fol. 5. And this I call, both an unnecessary and invidious task:
unnecessary, as being no way pertinent to the present business; invidious, in
regard of that high esteem which that great Father has attained to in the
Christian world. And yet I shall crave leave to say, that if he had not run
himself into some Inconvenient expressions, in condemning Infants unbaptized to
the pains of Hell, he never had incurred the name of Infanto-Mastix: A more
particular account whereof I had rather the Reader should take pains to collect
from his writings, than expect from me. All I shall further add is this, that
St Augustine, when he was alive, did neither think himself infallible, or
exempt from errors; Nor was displeased with St. Hierome, for canvassing or
confuting any point of Doctrine by him delivered. This liberty they mutually
indulged on one another, and good reason for it; Non tam Stultus sum ut
diversitate explanationum tuarum me laedi putem, quia nec tu laederis si nos
contraria senserimus. This was St. Hieromes resolution to St. Augustine in a
point between them; equally full of piety, and Christian courage.

The next thing required of the Observator, is, To produce the men of the
Calvinian party, who say, that a man is forcibly drawn and irresistibly with
the Cords of Grace in the work of conversion. Fol 5. He grants indeed, that
they take away an actual resistance of the will, as inconsistent, simul and
semel, with efficacious Grace, and I grant that too: Grace not being
efficacious, or deserving so to be accounted, when all man's actual resistance
is not took away. But such an irresistibility, as the Observator mentions, he
thinks that none of them assert. But he does but think it, and he is able to
think more then the most subtle disputant of that party is able to prove: But
the Calvinists, or contra-Remonstrants, have thought otherwise of it, who in
the conference at Hague maintained an irresistibility no less evident in the
workings of Grace, then in those of the natural generation, or supernatural
resurrection from the dead, man being no more able in their opinion to resist
the operations of Grace, then he is able either to hinder his own begetting, or
his last raising from the grave: Quemadmodum non est humani arbitrii nasci aut
non nasci, excitari ex mortuis aut non excitari, ita neque ex nostro arbitrio
pendet ullo modo nostra conversio. So they Collat. Hague, page 27. A more
particular account, together with the names of those who maintain this Tenet,
the Observator will produce, when required of him. But then the Pamphleter must
have an explanation of this Metaphysical whimwham, viz. How Eternity (for so
says he the Observator says) not Salvation, can recipere majus and minus,
receive either augmentation or diminution from man, ^ol. 5. But Sir, without
any of your whimwhams, where find you any such thing, or any thing that looks
that way in the Observator? Cannot the Observator say, that by the doctrine of
some Calvinists, and Rigid Lutherans, a man contributes nothing to his own
Eternity, but presently you must cry out of I know not what Metaphysical
whimwhams, as if he had affirmed, that Eternity might recipere majus and minus?
For though Eternity cannot recipere majus and minus, as indeed it cannot, yet I
hope the Pamphleter or our Author will not stick at this, that some men do
contribute more or less, to their own Eternity, or toward the attaining of
their own Eternity (if that will better please the man) than some other do. But
had the observator used the word Salvation, as the Pamphleter says he should
have done, had he spoken properly, then this great quarrel had been saved;
Salvation being susceptible of a majus et minus, (what else can be inferred
from the Pamphleters words?) though Eternity be not: which indeed I will not
say is such a Metaphysical Whimwham, but such a fine piece of Norfolk Drapery,
that it is pity we should have no more of the Remnant, as well and wisely said
the Gentleman on another occasion.

Next for King James, the Pamphleter seems much displeased, that having been
inclinable unto the Calvinian Tenets, as well by the course of his Education,
as by the insinuations of Dr. James Mountague, first Dean of the Chapel, and
afterward Bishop of Bathe and Wells, and at last of Winchester, he should be
thought to change his Judgments in those points on Reading of Mr. Richard
Mountagues Book against the Gagger, and this (says he) is most unlikely, It
being well known, that in Theological controversies King James was able enough
to go alone, and needed not, like a Child, be led up and down by the hanging
Sleeves from one opinion to the other, Fol. 5. But then it is but unlikely
only, though most unlikely, that it should be so; And being but unlikely,
though most unlikely, there is no such impossibility in it, but that it may be
certified without any injury to the abilities of that King in Theological
controversies: it being no unusual thing in the greatest Scholars, not only to
alter their opinions, in matters of opinion only, and not fundamentll (as the
Pamphleter makes these not to be) but Retract and Recognize (as Bellarmine and
Saint Augustiue did) what they said before. And that the King had either
altered his opinion in those points, or abated much of his rigor in it,
appears by the countenance which he gave to Mountagues Book, and the
encouragements which the Author had from him, to vindicate both his Fame and
Doctrine against Ward and Yates, the two Informers; a full account whereof we
have in the observations. Fol. 33.

But the Pamphleter will not have done with Master Montague, telling us a very
pretty tale, that in the year 1628 this Mr. Mountague then Bishop, together
with Doctor Neile Bishop of Winchester, being remonstrated to the King, as
Abettors of those Tenets, professed with Tears in their eyes, that they hated
those opinions, and before his Majesty and his Counsel renounced them, Fol. 6.
Here is indeed a doleful ditty, the Lamentation of a sinner, to the Tune of
Lachrymae; a tale like this we had before, but that it was the Squires tale
then, and the Knights Tale now. For if we ask what authority, what Proof he
has to make good the story; Marry says he, it was so averred by Sir Humphrey
Mildmay in open Parliament, nemine contradicente, no one near the Chair
contradicting. Never was story better proved, nor proved by more particulars of
such weight and moment. It was averred by Sir Humphrey Mildmay (whether
mistaken in the name, or man, I regard not,) and therefore most infalliblly
true, for if Sir Humphrey said the word, it must needs be so: and yet I do not
think that Sir Humphry, or Sir What you will, was any of the Kings Council, or
called into the Conncell Chamber, to behold the Comaedie. It was averred
secondly in the open Parliament, therefor there can be nothing truer; nothing
being told within the Walls, (whether the tales of Dutch Skippers, or of Danish
Flee^s, or the Plague-Plaster sent to Mr. Pym, or saying mass daily in the
Streets at Oxford, and all the rest of the discoveries of Sir Walter Earl) but
ipso facto, by a strange kind of Alcumy, it was made a truth, a most
unquestionable truth. It was averred thirdly, nemine contradicente, and very
good reason for that too; there being none perhaps then present, who were
admitted to the sight of that Interlude, as Sir Humphry was, or otherwise its
worth the while to disprove the Fable. But here I find something worth the
Learning, which is, that nemine contradicente does not signify only (as the
poor Theologaster might conceive it did) no one contradicting, but no one
contradicting who stood near the Chair. A pretty piece of Grammar-learning, and
I thank him for it; the rather, in regard it may be gathered from these words,
that though no man who stood near the Chair did or durst contradict Sir Humpry
in this pretty figment; yet others who stood farther off (and being procul a
Jove, might be procul a fulmine) did presume to do it. And this I hope will
satisfy the Pamphleter, and Sir Humphry too.

We have now done with Bishop Mountague, but we must have another pull about
Bishop Neile, then Bishop of Winchester, by whose, and the Bishop of Londons
Prevalencie, we were told in the History, the Orthodox party were depressed,
and the truth they served, scarce able to protect them to impunity. Reproved by
the Observator, for speaking thus at random, and without any proof, of those
great Prelates, (both being Counselors of State) the Pamphleter comes in to
make good the matter, telling us, that Sir Daniel Norton, and Sir Robert
Philips, informed the House, that Doctor More and Doctor Marshall, were chid by
the Bishop of Winchester, for preaching against popery, both Drs. being ready
to bear witness of the truth thereof, Fol. 16. Now mark the Justice of the man,
and his Logic too. The Information is brought against the Bishops of London
and Winchester, but the proof (such as it is,) against the Bishop of
Winchester only; No reparation being made unto the other for so great an
injury. I trow this is but sorry Justice, and yet the Logic of the proof is a
great deal worse. The information was about the danger of Arminianism, the
Spreade^s of those errors advanced by the Prevalency of those Bishops to great
preferment, the Orthodox party in the mean time depressed, and under inglorious
disdain. Hist. Fol. 96. How does he make this good in the Bishop of
Winchester? Because for sooth he had chidden Doctor More and Doctor Marshall
for preaching against popery. This is the Logic we must look for. The Premises
are of Arminianism, The Conclusion of popery. Or else it must be argued thus,
The Bishop of Winchester chid Doctor More and Doctor Marshall, for preaching
against popery, Ergo, which is in English therefore, the two Bishops of London
and Winchester advanced the Arminian party, and depressed the Orthodox. Our
Author tells us Fol. 35. of this present Pamphlet, that there are some worse
disputants than himself; but if I know in what place to find them, may I burn
my Ke^kerman.

But if the man were chidden, and chidden for preaching against popery, it will
as much conduce to the dishonor of the Bishop of Winchester, as if they had
been chidden on the other account, and therefore we must take some time to
inquire into it, it being possible enough, that they might be chidden by that
Bishop not for their preaching against Popery, but for some indiscretion in the
way of their preaching, and possibly enough (let me add that too) that they
might have some private grudges against that Prelate. Doctor Marshal claimed
some fuel yearly out of that Bishops woods, in the right of his Parsonage,
which that Bishop (being an old Courtier, but of no great Courtship) did refuse
to make him. This gave him occasion of displeasure, and being withal a man of
some indiscretion, he might possibly, not carry the matter so discreetly, but
that he might be liable to some just reproof. But as for Doctor More, I shall
need no other matter against him, than what I find in the unpublished sheets of
our Author himself, where he tells us of him, that ^he was a man of an acute,
but somewhat an ^aculeated wit, Fol. 69. A man (it seems) of more Sting than
Honey, and was not sparing of it (in his heats of zeal) upon all occasions;
Insomuch that there goes a story of him, that Mr. Hugh May who had commended
Archie to the Court not long before, obtained a turn for this Doctor before
King James, in which he showed so much heat, and so little discretion, that the
King told Hugh May when he saw him next, that he thanked him more for his Fool
than he did for his Preacher. Besides our Author tells us of him in the place
above mentioned, that preaching after the Dukes return from the Isle of The, he
took occasion in his Sermon, to speak of the defeat given to the Roman Army,
under the command of Quintilius Varus, by the German Nations, adding these
words of the Historian, that this Army perished, propter inscitiam and
temeritatem ducis: In which being thought to have put a scorn upon the Duke,
and reprehended for it by his Diocesan, he was judged fit to be made use of
against that Bishop, when the teeth of the Informers were edged against him.

Proceed we next to the Lambeth Articles, the great Diana of the Ephesians of
our times. It was affirmed by the Observator, that they were never looked on as
the Doctrine of the Church of England, nor intended to be so looked upon by them
that made them. But this the Pamphleter puts off to Mr. Pym, and the Committee
for Religion; but grants withal, That it is very probable, that the Compilers
of the Book of Articles, and the Book of Homilies, differed from Calvin's sense
in the point of Predestination, and its subordinates, Fol. 15. Nor does he only
grant it to be probable, but he proves it also, It being (says he) very rare
for two, even of the same party, to agree exactly in all parcels of these
Controversies. So then, whether it were our Author, or the Committee for
Religion, which declare these Articles of Lambeth to speak the sense of the 39
Articles of the Church of England, it comes all to one, the Pamphleter leaving
them in the plain field, and siding with the Observator in this particular. In
the occasion of these Articles, or rather in one circumstance of it, the
Observator was mistaken, affirming Page 74. That on the coming of these
Articles to Cambridge, Dr. Baro found himself so discouraged and
discountenanced, that at the end of his first 3 years he relinquished his
Professorship, and retired not long after into France; to this the Pamphleter
makes answer, That Peter Baro relinquished not his professorship at the end of
his first three years, proved by his Lectures upon Jonah, to be Professor
there, Anno 1574. and confessed to be so by the Observator, Anno 1595. 2. That
that Professorship is not eligible, from 3 years to 3 years, but at the end of
each second year; proved by the Statutes of the Lady Margaret (Countess of
Richmond and Derby) the foundresse of it. 3. That Peter Baro never went or
retired into France, after the resignation of his Professorship, but lived and
dyed in Crutched Friars, as may be proved by the Testimony of a Son of his, who
is still alive.

In the two first of these we have Confitentem reum, the Observator crying
peccavi, and confessing guilty, but so that he had good authority for his
error in it; For first the Pamphleter has told us, That very many were of the
contrary belief, that is to say, to the election of that Professor every second
year, and so the wonder is the less, if the Observator should be one of those
very many. 2. He had found in the History of the Lambeth Articles printed at
London 1641. that Baro at the third years end (for so long he was to hold that
Lecture by their ancient Ordinances) relinquished his Professorship, and betook
himself to his private studies. Baro (says he) elapso tri^nnii spatio (Nam
vetere instituto in illius lectura triennalis est professio) professione abiit
and in privata se studia recondidit. 3. He had read in a book called Responsio
necessaria, published by the Remonstrants, Anno 1615. That notwithstanding the
coming of those Articles, he continued in his Professorship, Donec exacto suo
triennio (professio utique il a qua in Collegio fungebatur, in triennium solum
prorogabatur) professione se abdicavit, and tranquillam ut viveret vitam
privatis se studiis totum dedit; that is to say, that his three years being
expired (that Professorship being continued in that University but for three
years only) he left the place, retired unto a private life, and gave himself
wholly to his studies. 4. He has found also in the History of Cambridge, writ
by Mr. Fuller a Cambridge man, and one that should have known the Customs and
Statutes of that University, that the end of Doctor Peter Baro (the Marguaret
Professor) his Triennial Lectures began to draw near, etc. Sect. 21. which
laid together, I would fain know of the equal and impartial Reader, First,
whether the Observator may not be excused for making that Lecture to continue
from three years to three years; And secondly, whether the exacto suo Triennio,
in the Book called Responsio necessaria, and the end of his Triennial Lectures
in Fullers History, might not induce him to conceive, that Dr. Baro gave over
the Professorship at the end of his first three years.

In the last point the cause is not so clear on the Pamphleters side, nay it
will rather go against him. Mr. Prynne, a man diligent enough in the search of
any thing which concerns his Argument, has told us positively, in his
Auli-Armianism, page 268. that being convented before the heads of that
University, he was not only forced to forsake the University, but the Kingdom
too; For which he cites Dr. Ward in his Concio ad Clerum, Anno 1626. and
Thytius in his Preface ad Fratres Belgas; Nor do the Pamphleters proofs come
home to conclude the contrary; unless the Argument be good, that Baro lived
and died in London, and was buried there in St. Olaves Church. Ergo he retired
not into France, upon his first relinquishing of the University. And if it be
true which the Pamphleter tells us, That the Bishop of London ordered the
most Divines in that City to be present at his interment; it is a good
Argument, that both the Bishop, and most eminent Divines of London, were either
inclinable to his opinions, or not so much averse from them, as not to give a
solemn attendance at the time of his Funeral.

As for the Story of these Articles, as laid down in the Observator, he
tellerh us it was never heard off, till the year 1641. which shows how little
he is versed in his own concernments, the same story, let him call it a Tale if
he will, being published in the Responsio necessa^ia, Anno Dom. 1615. which was
26 years before, and but the 20th year from the meeting at Lambeth. And though
the Kentish man he speaks of, whosoever he were, might be unborn at the time of
the making of the Articles, as he says he was, yet the Remonstrants who
published the Responsio necessaria, must be born before, and probably might
have the whole Story from Baro himself, with whom they coresponded in these
points of controversy. Adeo absurda argumenta ineptos habent exitus, as
Lactantius has it.

On what account these Articles were made a part of the confession of the
Church of Ireland, has been shown elsewhere, we must next come unto the
abrogating or repealing of them, for saying which the Observator stands
accused, although repealing be the word of our Author himself in the first
Edition, Fol. 132. yet now he sings a new Song, and tells us many things
quite different from the common opinion, and from his own amongst the rest:
assuring us, that the Articles established in the Church of Ireland, Anno 1615.
were never abrogated, and proving it by a Certificate under the hands of Doctor
Bernard, and one Mr. Pullein, (if he be not of a higher degree,) both of them
convocation men, and present at the conclusion of it, Anno 1634. But this
Certificate will prove upon examination to conclude nothing to the purpose. It
is acknowledged both in the Certificate and Canon That they did not only
approve (which might a been a sufficient manifestation of their agreement with
the Church of England, in the confession of the same Christian faith) but that
they also did receive the Book of Articles of religion, agreed upon by the
Archbishops, and Bishops, and the whole Clergy, in the whole convocation holden
at London, Anno Dom. 1562. Now the Receiving or superinducing of a new
confession, will prove equivalent in the Fact, and I think in Law,) to the
repealing of the old, for otherwise there must be two confessions in the same
Church, differing in many points from one another; Which would have been so far
from creating a uniformity of belief between the Churches, and taking away
thereby the matter of Derision which was given the Papists, in two distinct (
and in some points contrary) confessions, yet both pretending unto one and the
same Religion; that it would rather have increased their Scorn, and made a
greater disagreement in Ireland it self, than was before between the Churches
of both Kingdoms. And this the Certificate it self does seem to intimate. In
which we find, That one of the Assembly (some rigid Calvinist belike) stood up,
and desired that the other Book of Articles, (that is to say in the year 1615)
should be be joined with it which proposition, being it might have made some
rub in the business, if it had been absolutely denied, was put off, by this
cleanly and handsome Temperament, that this would be needless, that Book having
been already sufficiently ratified by the dcer^e of the former Synod. With this
all parties seem contented, and the Canon passed. So easily may the weak
Brethren be outwitted by more able heads. To make this matter plainer to their
several capacities, I will look upon the two Subscribers, as upon Divines, and
on the Pamphleter, our Author, as a Man of law. Of the Subscribers I would ask,
whether Saint Paul were out in the Rules of Logic, when he proved the
Abrogating of the old Covenant by the superinducing of the new. Dicendo autem
novum, veteravit prius, etc. that is to say, as our English reads it, in that
he says, a new Covenant, he has made the first old. Heb. 8. 13. and then it
follows, that that which decays and waxes old, is ready to vanish away,
that is to say, the old being disanulled by the new, there must necessarily
follow the Abolishment of its use and practice. Nor find they any other
Abrogation of the Jewish Sabbath, than by the super-inducing of the Lords day,
for the day of Worship; By means whereof, the Sabbath was lesned in authority
and reputation by little and little, and in short time, was absolutely laid
aside in the Church of Christ; the 4th Commandment, by which it was at first
ordained, being still in force. So then, according to these grounds, the
Articles of Ireland were virtually, though not formally Abbrogatad, by the
super-inducing of the Articles of the Church of England, which is as much as
need be said for the satisfaction of the two Subscribers, taking them in the
capacity of Divines, as before is said. Now for my Man of law, I would have him
know, that the first Liturgy of King Edward the sixth, was confirmed in
Parliament, with several penalties to those who should refuse to officiate by
it, or should not diligently resort and repair unto it. 2, 3. Edw. 6th c. 1.
But because diverse doubts had arisen in the use and exercise of the said Book,
(as is declared in the Statute of 5, 6. Edward 6. c. 1.) for the fashion and
manner of the ministration of the same, rather by the curiosity of the
Ministers, and mistakers, than of any other worthy cause; therefore as well for
the more plain and manifest explanation hereof, as for the more perfection of
the said order of Common service, in some places where it is necessary to make
the same prayer and fashion of Service more earnest and fit to stir Christian
People to the true honoring of Almighty God; The Kings most Excellent Majesty,
with the assent of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament a^embled,
and by the authority of the same, has caused the foresaid Order of Common
service, entitled The Book of Common Prayer, to be faithfully and Godly
perused, explaned, and made fully perfect. Which Book being thus fitted and
explaned, approved by the King, and confirmed in the Parliament in the 5, 6
years of his reign, was forthwith generally received into use and practice, in
all parts of the Kingdom, the former Liturgy being no otherwise suppressed and
called in, than by the superinducing of this, the Statute upon which it stood
continuing un-repealed, in full force and virtue, and many clauses of the same
related to in the Statute which confirmed the second. But fearing to be
censured by both parties, for reading a Lecture of the wars to Annibal, I knock
off again.

Now, forasmuch as the Observator is concerned in this certificate, being said,
to have abused the said Convocation with such a gross mistake, so manifest an
untruth, I would fain know in what that gross mistaking, and the manifest
untruth which these men speak of is to be discerned. The Premises which usher
in this conclusion are these, viz. But that the least motion was then or there
made for the suppressing of those Articles of Ireland, has no truth at all in
it: The Conclusion this, therefore the Observator, and whosoever else has, or
does averr, that the said Articles either were abolished, or any motion made
for the suppressing or abolishing of them, are grossly mistaken, and have abused
the said Convocation in delivering so manifest an untruth. But first the
Observator speaks not of any motion made there for the suppressing of those
Articles. The Proposition for approving and receiving the Confession of the
Church of England might be made effectually (and so it seems it was) without
any such motion: And therefore if the Observator stand accused in that
particular, the manifest untruth, and gross mistake which those men dream of,
must be returned upon themselves. And on the other side if he be charged with
this gross mistake and man fest untruth, for no other reason, but that he
says, those Articles were abolished, as they charge it on him; they should
have first showed where he says it, before they fell so rudely and uncivilly
on a man they know not: The Observator never said it, never meant it, he
understands himself too well to speak so improperly. The word he used was
abrogated, and not abolished: The first word intimating that those Articles
were repealed, or disannulled, and of no force in Law, whereas to be abolished
signifies to be defaced, or raced out, that so the very memory of the thing
might perish. The word abrogated (rightly and properly so taken) is Terminus
forensis, or a term of Law, derived from the custom of the Romans, who if they
did impose a Law to be made by the people, were said Rogare Legem, because of
asking, moving, or persuading to enact the same, velitis Iubeatisne Quirites,
etc. from whence came prorogare Legem, to continue a Law which was in being for
a longer time, and abrogare to repeal or abrogate it for the time to come,
unless upon some further consideration it were thought fit to be restored: But
giving these men the benefit and advantage of their own Expression, and let the
two words Abrogated and Abolished signify the same one thing; where is their
equity the while, for charging that as a gross mistake, and manifest nntruth
in the Observator, which must be looked on only as a failing, or an easy slip,
within the incidence of frailty, as we know who said, in their friend our
Author, the Systeme, the Body of Articles formed by that Church, Anno 1615,
were repealed, says the Historian, Fol. 132. for abrogating the Articles of
Religion established in the Church of Ireland, says the Observator. page 240,
241. both right, or both wrong, I am sure of that; a gross mistake, a manifest
untruth, in both, or neither. And so farewell good Mr. Pullein; wi^h Doctor
Bernard I shall meet in another place.

In the next place, whereas the Observator said, that the abrogating of the
Articles of Ireland was put on the Lieutenants score, because Doctor Bramhall,
( once his Chaplain, and) then Bishop of Derry had appeared most in it: The
Pamphleter answers, that there was never any Controversy in that Synod,
between the Lord Primate and that Bishop, concerning those Articles, Fol. 43.
But tell me Gentle Sir, might not the Bishop of Derry be most active in it,
without a personal controversy betwixt him and the Primate, if so, then was
the Primate more engaged in the quarrel, about receiving, or not receiving the
Articles of the Church of England, than you would gladly seem to have him; If
otherwise, your Answer is nothing to the purpose, nor confutes any thing
affirmed by the Observator. Some disagreement he confesses to have been
between them in that Synod, about the Canons, not the Articles of the Church of
England, but neither he nor the Observator being present at it, they must rely
upon the credit of their Authors. The Observator (as he tells me) had his
intelligence from some of the Bishops of that Kingdom, men of integrity and
great worth, present at all debates and conferences amongst those of their own
order, and so most like to give a just account of all passages there. The
Pamphleter takes his (it seems) from two members of the lower House of
Convocation, who neither were bound to tell more than they knew, nor to know
more than the advantages of the place they served in could communicate to them.
Which of the two intelligences, have, or should have most power in moving the
Sphere of any common understanding, let the Reader judge.

The Pampheter is almost spent, and now plays with flies, quarrelling the
Observator, for saying that this Convocation was held in Ireland Anno 1633.
Whereas Dr. Heylyn, whom he makes to be his alter idem, has placed it in his
History of the Sabbath, Anno 1634. It could not then proceed from ignorance in
the Observator, you have cleared him very well for that, and it will be very
hard for you to prove, that it proceeded from negligence, or from (your
ordinary excuse) a lapse of memory. Printers will fall into such errors do we
what we can, though the calculation be put down, in words at length, and not in
figures, more easily and frequently, when they meet with figures, not words in
length. And so much for all matters which relate to Arminianism. The rest that
follows shall be reduced into two Chapters, the first for Parliaments and
Convocations, and the points coincident; the second for all such other matters
as cannot be contained under those two heads.

CHAP. VIII.
A voluntary mistake of the Author, charged on the account of the Observator.
The Pamphleter agrees with the Observator, about the sitting and impowering of
the Convocation. Our Author satisfied in the etc. left so unhappily in the
Canon of 640. That the Clergy in their Convocation may give away their own
money without leave from the Parliament. The difference in that Case between a
Benevolence and a Subsidy. The Impulsives to that Benevolence. The King not
unacquainted with the differences between the Liturgies. The words of
distribution in the first Liturgy of King Edward, no more favorable to
Transubstantiation, than those which are retained in the present Liturgy. The
reason why so many Papists have been gained of late to the Church of England.
The Convocation of the year 1640 appeared not by their Council in the House of
Commons. New Lords created in time of Parliam^nt, not excluded from their
suffrage in it. The difference between the Loan and the Tax made reconcilable;
the Commons in the Parliament, 1621. not to be called petty Kings. Our Authors
weak excuses for it, and the damages of it. The Pamphleters great liberty in
calculating the Estates of the Peers and Commons to make good his estimate. The
Bishops purposely left out in the valuation. The true stating of the time of
the charge against the late Archbishop. The Bishops not excluded by the
Canon-Laws, from being present at the intermediate proceedings in the business
of the Earl of Strafford. Our Authors resolution, not to warrant Circumstances,
but the Things themselves, of what not able advantage to him. The Observator
justified in the day of taking the Protestation. The four Bishops sent to the
King, and not sent for by him. The Bishop of London supernumerary. The
Pamphleters weak argument upon his silence in that meeting. The Primate of
Armagh, not made use of by the Lord Leiutenant in framing the Answer to his
charge; why chosen to be with him, as his Ghostly Father, before, and at the
time of his death. A fair and friendly expostulation with Dr. Bernard.
FRom the Convocation held in Ireland, proceed we now to that in England, both
yielding matter of Observation, and both alike unpleasing to the Presbiterian
or Puritan party. And the first thing the Pamphleter lays hold on, is a
mistake, occasioned chiefly by himself. He told us of a new Synod made of an
old Convocation, and Fathers the conceit, such as it is, on a witty Gentleman.
But now the witty Gentleman proves to be a Lord, and therefore the Observators
descant on Sir Edward Deering, must be out of Doors Fol. 34. Had the Historian
spoke properly, and told us of a witty Lord, who had said so of that
Convocation, the Observator would have took more pains in inquiring after him,
but speaking of him in the notion of a Gent. only, though a witty Gentleman,
the Observator had some reason to conceive it spoken by Sir Edward Deering, one
of whose witty Speeches, was made chiefly upon that occasion. But as this Lord
is here presented to us in the name of a Gentleman, so Mr. Secretary V^ne is
given unto us in the unpublished Sheets, by the name of a Lord. Had he
corrected himself in this expression, as he did in the other, he might have
eased himself of some work, excused the Observator from some part of his
trouble, and freed Sir Edward Deering from the Descant (as he calls it) of the
Observator.

The Historian had affirmed, that the Convocation was empowered to sit still by
a new Commission. To this the Observator answers, no such matter verily; the
new Commission which he speaks off, gave them no such power; the writ by which
they were first called, and made to be a Convocation, gave them power to sit,
and by that writ they were to sit as a Convocation, till by another writ
proceeding from the same authority, they were dissolved. Does the Pamphleter
deny any part of this? no, he grants it all, and takes great pains to prove
himself, a most serious Trifeler; Confessing, that though the Convocation were
not dissolved, by the dissolutiof the Parliament, yet that it had so little
life in it, as the King thought fit to reanimate it with a new Commission, Fol.
34. not one word in this impertinent nothing of above 30 lines, till the close
of all where the light-fingered Observator is said to have pocketed up the
Breakneck of the business, in suppressing what the Lawyers sent along with
their opinions; viz. that they would advise the Convocation in making Canons to
be very sparing. And this, he says he is informed by a member of that
Convocation, and one as knowing and credible a person as that Assembly had any,
Fol. 35. For this we are to take his word, fot either he has no witness to it,
or else his witness is ashamed to own the testimony; there being otherwise no
danger or inconvenience likely to fall upon him, for giving evidence in the
Cause. And thetefore I would fain know of this nameless witness, how, and by
whom, the Lawyers sent this Advice to the Convocation; whether in the same
paper in which they had subscribed to their opinions, or by some message sent
along with it, by word of month. Not in the Paper I am sure, there was no such
matter; I having opportunity both to see and transcribe the same, as it came
from their hands. And if by message I would know, who it was that brought it,
Not the Archbishop I am sure, by whom the paper was communicated, containing
their opinions, with their names subscribed. The Lawyers durst not be so bold
as to send him upon their errant; or if they were, he lost his errant by the
way, or betrayed the trust reposed in him, for he delivered no such message or
advice, when he acquainted both Houses with their Subscription. And if by any
body else, I must know by whom, when, where, and in whose presence, whether to
one or both the Houses of Convocation, or only to this credible and knowing
person, whose name must be concealed like an Arcanum Imperii, fit only for the
knowledge of he Council of State. When I am satisfied in these particulars, he
shall hear more of me, till then I look upon a nameless witness sa no wirness
at all.

In the Declaration of the meaning of that unhappy etc. left so improvidently
in the Oath, the Pamphleter seems to be very well satisfied, objecting not one
word against it. Only he finds himself aggrieved, that these faults imputed to
the Canon, and contrived by others, should be said or thought to be delivered
as of his own suggestion, the exceptions being taken by the Kentish and
Northamptonshire men, but especially by those of Devonshire, presented September.
16. to the Lords of the Council, and touched at in the Lord Digbi^s Speech
November. 12. Fol. 38. if so, (and be it so this once) I doubt not but all the
said parties, or so many of them as are living, will be satisfied also, in the
plain meaning of that Canon, which seemed to carry such a mysterious import
with it, in our Authors language.

Concerning the Benevolence granted by that Convocation, Our Author told us,
that it was beheld as an act of very high presumption, and an usurpation upon
the pre-eminence of Parliament; No Convocation having power to grant any
Subsidies or aid, without confirmation from the Lay Senate. To which the
Observator says, that never was any rule more false or more weakly grounded;
nor does he only say it, but he proves it too. He proves it first by the powers
granted to the Procurators or Clerks of the Convocation, from the several and
respective Diocesses for which they serve; next by a President of the like in
Queen Elizabeth's time, Anno 1585. exemplified and followed word for word by
this Convocation. Against this the Pamphleter makes these two Objections: The
first drawn from the most infallible judgment of the House of Commons, in
which so many wise and learned men had declared it so, Fol. 39. To which there
needs no other Answer, but that many things passed in that House, rather to
pursue their own interest, and carry on the design which they had in hand, than
that they should be urged in suceeding times, as a Rule to others. The next
drawn from the practice of Convocations, constantly praying and desiring their
Grants and Subsidies may be confirmed and ratified by the High Court of
Parliament, Ibid. A practice taken up in the latter times of King Henry the
8th. when the censures of the Church were grown invalid, and held on in the
reign of King Edward 6th. when the authority of the Clergy was under foot; and
though continued afterward in the times of Queen Elizabeth, and the Kings
succeeding, as the shorter and most expedite way; yet not so binding, but that
they did and might proceed by their own sole power, as is apparent by the
President in the Observator. The Parliaments ratification, when desired by the
Clergy, signifies all; but when the Clergy have a mind to proceed without it,
then it signifies nothing. This said, I shall ex abundantia let the Pamphleter
know, that the Convocation had in this particular, the advice of the Kings
Counsel learned in the Laws, who at first were of opinion, that the Clergy
could not make this grant, but by way of Parliament; but when they had perused
the Instrument, and found that the Grant passed not by the name of a Subsidy,
but of a Benevolence or extraordinary contribution, according to the president
before mentioned, they then changed their minds, and gave their Counsel and
encouragement to go on accordingly. So then, according to this Criticism of the
Council learned, the Convocation may be delivered of a Benevolence, without the
help and Midwifry of an Act of Parliament, but of a Subsidy it cannot.

Now the Impulsives to this grant were not only the consideration of their duty
owing to his Majesty, for his constant defense of the Faith, and protection of
Christ's holy Church, by the maintenance of the happy government, etc. but also
of those great expenses, whereat he was then like to be, as well for the
honorable sustentation of his Royal Estate at home, and the necessary defense
of this his Realm, as also for the effectual furtherance of his Majesty's most
Royal and extraordinary designs abroad. This gives me some occasion to look
toward the Scots, and to consider so far of the Liturgy recommended to them,
as it lies before me in my Author; of this Liturgy he tells us, how
unhappily the King had been persuaded, that it little differed from the
English; to which the Observator answered, that the King needed no persuasion
in this point, The difference between the two Liturgies (whether great or
little) being known unto him before he caused that to be published; the
Pamphleter replyeth, that though the King was showed the Alteration of the
Scottish Liturgy; yet might he so apprehend or be persuaded that the differences
were small, and yet might they be great for all that, and perhaps not
discovered by him. But might be and perhaps are but forry Mediums, on which to
huild a Conclusion of such weight and consequence. 1. For if they might be
great for all that, they might for all that not be great, the one as probable
as the other; if perhaps discovered by him, it is but a perhaps they were not,
and perhaps they were; So that his argument concludes nothing to the contrary,
but that the difference between the two Liturgies (whether great or little)
were (not only shown, but) made known unto him.

The Observator noted next, that the alterations in the Liturgy being made and
showed to the King, he approved well of them; in regard that coming nearer to
the first Liturgy of King Edward the sixth, in the administration of the Lords
Supper (and consequently being more agreeable to the ancient Forms) it might be
a means to gain the Papists to the Church, who liked far better of the first,
than the second Liturgy. In this the Pamphleter very cunningly (that I say no
worse) leaves out these words, and consequently being more agreeable to the
ancient Forms fastening the hopes of gaining Papists to the Church, on the
nearness of the Scottish Liturgy to the first of King Edwards, without relating
to the Forms of more elder times, to which the Papists stand affected, Fol. 29.
This is no fair dealing by the way. But let that pass, he grants it is a matter
beyond dispute, that the Papists liked the first Liturgy of King Edward, better
than the second. Why so? Because the words of Distribution of the Elements are
so framed, as they may consist with transubstantiation. Fol. 30. If that be
all, the Papists have as good reason to like the Liturgy of the Church of
England now by Law established, as they had or have to like the first Liturgy
of King Edward the sixth, The words of Distribution used in the first Liturgy
being still retained in the present, together with the words of Participation
(take and eat, take and drink, etc.) which only did occur in the second
Liturgy. No more consistency with transubstantiation, in the words of
Distribution used in the first Liturgy of King Edward, nor consequently in that
for Scotland, than in that continued in the first year of Queen Elizabeth. But
then the Pamphleter subjoyns, that the gaining of Papists to our Church, was
indeed the great pretended project of forty years continuance, and yet in all
that time not so much as one taken with that Bait. In answer unto which I
desire to know, where the fault was, that for the space of forty years the
intended project of gaining Papists to the Church took no more effect. The
Project certainly was pious, and intended really, and where the fault was we
shall hear from our Author himself, the Bishops of late years (says he)
supinely, either careless or indulgent, had not required within their Dioceses,
that strict obedience to Ecclesiastical constitutions, which the Law expected,
upon which the Liturgy began to be totally laid aside, and inconformity the
uniform practice of the Church. Hist. Fol. 137. The Papists loving comeliness
and order in Gods public service, will not be taken with the hateful Bait of
Inconformity, and forty years of general conformity will be hardly found, in
which we might have gained upon them. Had Bishop Laud succeeded Bancroft, and
the intended Project been followed without interruption, there is little
question to be made, but that our Jerusalem (by this time) might have been a
City at unity in it self. Besides, the Pamphleter might have observed, had he
been so minded, that the Observator speaks these words of gaining Papists to
the Church, as a thing hoped for by the King, of the Scottish Liturgy, and the
nearness which it had to the first of King Edward, which they liked better
than the second. If the pamphleter can prevail so far with my Lord Protector,
as to settle the Scottish Liturgy in Scotland, and the first of King Edward in
this Kingdom, we may in less than forty years give him a better account of the
Papists gained unto the Church, than can be made (for the reasons above
mentioned) for the like space of time now past. If any true Protestants have
been lost hereby, as here is affirmed, when he has told me who, and how many
they are, he shall find me very ready to grieve with him for it. In the mean
time I shall grieve for him who so vainly speaks it.

We have one only thing to add, relating to this Convocation, the Observator
saying, that he had some reason to believe, that the Clergy of that Convocation
did not appear in the Parliament by their Council learned, sufficiently
authorized and instructed to advocate for them. To this the Pamphleter replyeth
by halves, professing that he will not determine ('it is because he cannot) how
the Council for the Clergy were instructed by them; but withal confidently
averring, that by their Council they did appear, first by Mr. Chadwell of
Lincolns Inn, November. 26. then again by Mr. Holburn, the 15 day of December. who
argued two hours in defense of them, Fol. 40. That these two Gentlemen appeared
in this business for the Clergy, I shall easily grant, that is to say, that
they appeared in it, out of a voluntary piety, and an honest zeal to do them
the best offices they could in their great extremities. If the Pampleter mean
no otherwise than thus, he shall take me with him; But there he takes the word
equivocally, and not according to the legal acception of it, and there can be
no legal appearance, but by men authorized and instructed by the parties whom
it does concern, and that these Gentlemen were so, the Pamphleter can neither
say, nor will determine. And certainly if the Members of that Convocation had
been so ill-advised as to submit their persons, Cause, and Jurisdiction, which
I am very well assured they did not, and would never do, to the Judgment of
the House of Commons, it had been more proper for them to have made this
appearance by his Majesty's Attorney and Solliciter, and others of his
Council learned; the Kings interesse and theirs, being so complicated and
involved, as the case then stood, that the one could not fall without the other.

Being thus entered on this Parliament, I will look back to those before, and
take them in their course and order. And the first thing we meet with, is an
ancient Order, said in the History to be found by the Lords, (that is to say,
the Lords which were of the popular party against the Duke) that no Lords
created sedente Parliamento should have voice during that Session, etc.
whereupon their suffrage was excluded. The vanity and improbability of which
Report, is proved by the Observator by these two Arguments; First, that the
Lords Seymore, Littleton, Capel, etc. created sedente Parliamento, Anno 1640.
were admitted to their suffrages, without any dispute, though in a time when a
strong party was preparing against the King. And 2ly. That when a Proposition
of this nature was made unto the King at York, he denied it absolutely, though
then in such a low condition, that it was hardly safe for him to deny them any
thing which they could reasonably desire, which Arguments the Pamphleter not
being able to answer, requires a Demonstration of his. Errous from the Records
themseves, or otherwise no recantation to be looked for from him, Fol. 10.
Whereas indeed it does belong unto our Author, according to the ordinary rules
of Disputation, both to produce a Copy of that ancient Order, and to make proof
out of the Journals of that House, that the new Lords were excluded from their
suffrage accordingly: And this since he has failed to do, the Observators
Arguments remain un-answered, and the pretended Order must be thought no Order,
or of no authority.

In the business of the Levy made upon the Subject, Anno 1626. there is little
difference, the Observator calling it a Loan, because required under that name,
in relation to the Subsidies intended and passed by the Commons in the former
Parliament, our Author calling it a Tax, as being a compulsory tribute, imposed
upon the Subject at a certain rate, and such is this affirmed to be in the
following words, Fol. 10.

And this is no great difference, nor much worth our trouble; Only the
Pamphleter is mistaken, in making this Loan or Tax to be imposed upon the
Subject at a certain rate; Whereas the Commissioners (if I remember it aright)
imposed not any certain rate upon the Subject; but scrued them up as high as
they could, with reference to their Abilities in Estate, and Charge of Family.

Our Author calling the Members of the House of Commons, Anno, 1627. not only
Petty Lords and Masters, but even Petty Kings; and finding that the Observator
marvelled at this strange expression, fitst puts it off upon King James, who
having said the like before (but rather in the way of Jear than otherwise) he
thinks it no great marvel that a poor Subject should use the same expression
also, Fol. 11. The difference is, that the Pamphleter speaks that in earnest,
which the King (most probably) spoke in Jest; and proves it by the power which
the Commons assumed unto themselves in the late long Parliament, of whom he
tells us, that they were not Petty Lords, but Lords Paramount; not Petty
Kings, but Superiors to Kings themselves, Ibid. It Is true, he has a kind of
Plaster to salve this sore (for he would willingly write nothing but saving
truths) advertising that the Expression above mentioned, does not import what
these Gentlemen were de jure, but what de facto, and what in reputation; but
then withal he leaves it standing in the Text, as a plain Position, to serve
as a President to the Commons of arrogating the like powers unto themselves in
succeeding Parliaments. And in this he may be thought the rather to have some
design, because he makes no Answer to that part of the Observation, which
declares out of the very Writs of Summons, that they are called only to
consent and submit such resolutions and Conclusions, as should be then and
there agreed on by the Kings great Council, or the great Council of the
Kingdom; that is to say, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, assisted by the
Reverend Judges, and others learned in the Laws.

To make this position the more probable, our Author tells us, that the House
of Commons was then able to buy the House of Peers, though 118, thrice over,
that is to say, although there were 354 Lords in the House of Peers. For this
being called to an account by the Observator, in regard of the low value which
was put upon the Peerage by it, he thus proceeds to make it good, valuing the
estates of each L. in the House of Peers ato more than 3000 l. per annum, and
each Member in the House of Commons at no less than 2124l. per annum, one with
another. Whereas, unless he make the Baronage of England to be very
despicable, there were but few whose estates could be valued at so mean a rate,
as on the other side there were not very many members in the House of Commons
whose Estates exceeded the proportion which he puts upon them, some of them
being of mean estates, and some of very little or none at all. But give him
leave to set the members of each House at what rate he pleases, then he may as
well enable the House of Commons to buy the House of peers ten times over, as
to buy it thrice.

The Observator having entered into a a Consideration, why the Bishops or
spiritual Lords should be left out by the Author, in this valuation, as if they
were no members of the House of Peers, is answered, that if the Bishops were
members of the House of Peers, then these words of his were turn-key enough to
let them in; if the Observator say not, their exclusion is his own manufacture?
Fol. 12. Well applied John Ellis, and possibly intelligible enough in a place
of manufactures, but nothing proper to the true meaniug of the word in the
vulgar Idiome. But let us take his meaning whatsoever it be, and in what
Country Dialect soever, we may trade the word; and yet all will not serve the
turn to save our Author from the purpose of excluding the Bishops from the
valuation, and consequently from being members of the House of Peers; my reason
is, because it is affirmed by the Observator, that there were at that time
about an hundred and eighteen Temporal Lords, in the Upper House, and
therefore that the Bishops were not reckoned in the calculation. This is so
plain, that the Pamphleters turn-key will not serve to let them in; and I have
reason to believe that he had as great a mind as any to thrust them out: it
being one of his positions in the sheets unpublished, that the Root of
Episcopacie had not sap enough to maintain so spreading and so proud a top as
was contended for, Fol. 185. Whether the King did well or not, in passing a way
the Bishops Votes, in the late long Parliament, has been considered of
already, and therefore we shall need to say nothing here as to that particular.

No Parliament after this, till those of the year 1640. Where the first thing
that offers it self, is the stating of the true time of the charge brought in
against the Archbishop of Canterbury, and his Commitment thereupon. The
Observator following the account of that prelates Diary, abbreviated and
published by Mr. Prynne, Anno 1644. does state it thus, viz. That on Wednesday
the 16th day of December, a Committy was appointed to draw up a charge against
him; that on the same day he was named an Incendiary by the Scotch
Commissioners, who promised to bring in their Complaint on the morrow after,
and that on Friday morning, December 18. Mr. Hollis was sent up with the
impeachment, and presently came in the charge of the Scotch Commissioners The
pamphleter tells us from the Journals (if we may believe them,) that on
Thursday December 17. there was a conference between the two Houses, at which
time the Lord Paget read the Scotch charge against the Archbishop, in which
charge he was named an Incendiarie, Fol. 40. A man would think that the
Archbishops own Diary written with his own hand, and in a matter which so
nearly concerned his life, should find as much credit in the world, as any
thing which the Pamphleter pretends to have found in the Journals, especially,
considering how easy a thing it was (as was proved before) to abuse his
credulity, and make him pay for false Copies as if true and perfect. We found
him in the snare before, when he was fain to rouse up Mr. Prynns Ghost, to help
him out of it; and now there is do remedy (for ought that I can see) but to
conjure up the silly shadow of John Brown, that famous Clericus Parliamentorum
(as he styled himself) to give him a cast of his old Office in the present
plunge. And yet upon these sorry grounds he builds his triumph, and does not
only reckon this among the Observators mistakes, Fol. 45. but tells him, that
in this particular, he is as arrant an Errant as ever was, Fol. 39. If he must
needs be an Errant as you please to make him, you will allow him to be a Knight
Errant at the least, I presume of that, and then none fitter than our Author to
be made his Squire; it is pity that such a Don Quixot should not have his
Sancho, especially considering how easily he may fit him, with some Ifland, or
other of the Terra incognita, wherein the Vice may spend his wit, and abuse his
authority.

Our Author tells us, that the Bishops, upon consideration of some ancient
Canons forbidding them to be assistant in causes of blood or death, absented
themselves at the trial of the Earl of Strafford: in which he more mistakes the
matter than I thought he did, or the Observator has observed. For whereas he
conceivs the Bishops to absent themselves, as if they did it by their own
voluntary act, of their own accord, in reference to some ancient Canons:
Certain it is, that they were purposely excluded by the Votes of both Houses,
from taking Examinations, and hearing the Depositions of Witnesses in the
course of that business, contrary to the former practice, and their ancient
rights, long time before this Cause was btought to a public trial; and that
not in relation to any such Canons, but for fear they might discover some of
those secret practices which were to be contrived and hatched against him.
Against which Preparations to a final trial, or taking the Examinations, or
hearing the Depositions of Witnesses, or giving counsel in such Cases as they
saw occasion; the Council of Toledo says nothing to their disadvantage; and
therefore is produced here by the Pamphleter, to no end at all, but only for
the ostentation of his mighty reading. The Canon is, Si quis Sacerdotum
discursor in altenis periculis extiter it apud Ecclesiam proprium perdat
gradum, that is to say (in our own Authors very words) If any Priest shall
intermeadle in cases endangering the life of others, let him be degraded, Fol.
40, 41. Hereupon I conclude against him, that the Bishops were to be admitted
to all preparatory examinations in the present business, because their
Counsel and Assistance would have tended rather to the preservation, than
conduced to the endangering of the parties life.

Our Author being told by the Observator, that the paper which contained the
names of the Straffordians, was not pasted on the Gates of Westminster, but on
the corner of the wall of Sir William Brunkards House, makes answer, that the
Reports were various, concerning this paper, that some of them agreed with the
Observator; and finally that for his part, he had fastened upon another place;
not undertaking to warrant the circumstance, but the thing, Fol. 41. A very
saving Declaration, and of great advantage, of which if our Author had
bethought himself when he made his Preface, it would have served his turn
better and with less exceptions than to exempt himself so confidently from
substantial falsehoods, and as he hopes, (I must be sure not to leave out that)
circumstantiall also. Not undertaking to warrant the circumstance but the
thing? What a brave medicine have we here, a Panpharmacon fitted for all
diseases in his Temporalities, and Localties too. He may now confidently go on,
in mistaking not only days but years, in his Super-semi-annuating,
Super-annuating, Subter-trienniating, and Subter-sexenniating (for I must cant
to him in his own Language) without all control. He does not undertake to
warrant the circumstance, but the thing. He may misplace battles, feasts, and
entertainments, with equal privilege. It is but a matter of Locality, and mere
point of circumstance, and it is resolved, his undertakings extend only to
warrant the things themselves, and not the circumstances. How easily might the
Observator have excused the Error about the first Trennium of P. Baro, could
he have gotten but a lick on my Authors Gallipot, and helped himself with the
same medicine, when his need required.

But this preservative, our Author keeps only to himself, not having so much
charity, as to allow any part of it to the Observator, should he mistake only
in a day. He makes it one of his mistakes in the general Catalogne, Fol. 45.
that he had erred concerning the protestation, that is to say, for saying the
protestation was taken the very same day in which it was framed, before the
Members were permitted to go out of the House. Whereas says he, the
Protestation was debated on the 3 day of May, the ordering and framing thereof
kept the House all that day, till late at night. So the Journals of that week,
which also present us with the Reading, and taking thereof the next day by the
whole House. Fol. 41. These Journals are an other of our Authors helps, but
upon examination prove to be only false and imperfect Copies, as has appeared
by our inquiry into some of those which before were cited. But say his Copies
what they will, the Observator shall not vary from what he said, nor save
himself by declaring his undertataking, not to warrant circumstances so he had
the Thing. The Author of the Book entitled, A Brief and perfect Relation of
the Answers and Replies of Thomas Earl of Strafford, to the Articles exhibited
against him by the House of Commons, etc. a very intelligent person, whosoever
he was, and very punctuaal in the circumstances of time and place, does declare
it thus, viz. The House of Commons sat all that day (Monday) till 8 at night,
nor were they idle all that time, but brought forth that Protestation, or Bond
of Association (as they term it) which is now in print, it was then drawn up,
and without further process or delay, before they came out subscribed by the
whole House, except the Lord Digby, and an Uncle or friend of his, page 87, 88.
If this suffice not as a Countercheck to the Pamphleters Journals, let him
consult the Protestation it self, as it was first printed, where he shall find
it with this Title, viz. The Protestation taken in the House of Commons, May
the 3. 1641. I could add somewhat of my own knowledge, living then near the
place, and taking notice of all businesses from day to day, but that I will not
light a Candle in so clear a Sunshine.

If no consideration could be had of the Observator, in the mistake but of a
day only, had it happened, so he is not to expect it in offenses of a higher
nature, wherein he is said to be so shamefully out, as never man was, out of
the Story beyond all measure, and out of Charity beyond all Religion, Fol. 41.
charged thus in general, the Pampheter sets upon him with 5 particulars,
relating to the conference between the King and the Bishops in the business of
the Earl of Strafford, that is to say: 1. These Bishops were not sent by the
Parliament to the King, but sent for by him. 2ly. They were five, not four.
3ly. If any of them depended upon the Judgment of the others, it was the
Bishop of London, who at the last meeting and consultation spoke not one
Syllable. 4ly. The Lord Primate had no sharp tooth against the Lieutenant. And
5ly. The Convocation of Ireland was not 1633. as the Observator places it. To
the last of these we have already answered in the former Chapter, to the three
first there are no proofs offered, but his ipse dixit, and therefore might be
passed over without more ado, but being Magisterially delivered, and delivered
ad appositum, to that which had been said by the Observator, I will examine
them one by one as they lie before me.

And first he says, that these Bishops were not sent by the Parliament to the
King, but sent for by him, Fol. 41. And for this we have his own word, worth a
thousand witnesses, without further proof. But first I remember very well, that
on Saturday the 8th. of May, as soon as the House of Peers was risen, I was
told of the designation of the four Bishops, that is to say, the Lord Primate
of Armagh, the Bishops of Durham, Lincoln, and Carl^le, to go the next day unto
the King, to satisfy and inform his conscience in the Bill of Attainder. 2ly.
The King had before declared, the satisfaction which he had in his own
conscience, publicly, in the House of Peers, on good and serious deliberation;
and therefore needed not to send for these Bishops, or any of them, to inform
it now. 3ly. If any doubt were stirred in him after that Declaration, it is not
probable that he would send for such men to advise him in it, in some of which
he could place no confidence in point of judgment, and was exceedingly well
anured in the disaffections of the other. For (not to instance any thing in the
other two can any man of wisdom think, that the King, out of so many Bishops
as were then in London, would put his conscience into the hands of the Bishop
of Lincoln, a man so many times exasperated by him, newly re^ca^ed from a long
Imprisonment, and a prose^ed servant at that time to the opposite party in both
Houses, and with whose ^requent prevarications, he was well acquainted* or
that, he would confide any thing in the judgment of Bishop Potter, a man of so
much want, so many weaknesses, that nothing but the Lawen Sleeves could make
him venerable and, so most like to be the man whose Syllogism the King faulted
for having four terms in it, of which the Pamphlet tells us, Fol. 42. None but
a man of such credulity as onr Authors is, can give faith to this, and I must
have some further proof, than his Ipse dixit, before I yield my assent unto it.

He says next, they were five, not four, Fol. 42. And five there were indeed,
I must needs grant that, but neither sent to him, or sent for by him. For the
truth is, that the King hearing of the Designation of the other four, sent for
the fifth, the Bishop of London, to come to him in the morning betimes, with
whom he had s^^e preparatory conference, with reference to the grand encounter
which he was to look for; And from him he received that satisfaction mentioned
in the (...) Chap. 2. that Bishop counselling him, not to consent against the
vote of his own conscience, as is there affirmed. So we have here five Bishops,
in all, that is to say, four sent to him by the Houses of Parliament, and the
fifth sent for by the King; either the diligence or intelligence of ou Author
being wanting here, as in many other things besides, though he will by no means
ye^ld to have failed in either.

But thirdly, if any of them depended on the judgment of the others, it was the
Bishop of London, Ibid. whether with greater injury to that Bishop, to have his
judgment thus pinned on another man's Sleeve, or to the King in choosing so
unfit a Counselor to inform his conscience, It is hard to say. Our Author in
the first Edition had told us of him, that he was none of the best Scholars;
and the Pamphleter brings this argument now in full proof thereof. But how is
this dependency proved? Because (says he) at the last meeting and consultation
he spoke not one syllable. A most excellent argument. He spoke not a syllable
at the last meeting; Ergo, he spoke nothing in the first. For if it be granred,
that he declared himself in the first conference, though not in the last, it is
enough, accotding to our Authors Logic, to save himself from the imputation of
depending on another man. Or thus, admitting it for true, that the Bishop spoke
nothing in the first conference neither, the argument will be as faulty as it
was before. The Bishop of London, spoke nothing, not one syllable, during the
whole time of the consultation, Ergo, which is in English therefore, he
depended on the Judgment of the other four. For if he spoke nothing all the
while, how can the Pamphleter assure us, what his judgment was, or upon whom it
did depend? But the truth is, that wise Prelate, knew the temper of those
present times, and how unsafe it would be for him to declare himself against
the Sense of the Houses, and therefore having declared his judgment in the
morning privately, and thereby given the King the satisfaction before
mentioned, he rather chose to hear what the other said, than to say any thing
himself.

Whether the Lord Primate had any sharp tooth against the Lord Lieutenant or
not, I dispute not now, the parties being both dead, and the displeasures
buried in the same Grave with them, which for my part I am not wilto revive.
But as to the occasion of them (whatsoever they were) in repealing the first
Articles of the Church of Ireland, and the Debates between the Lord Primate and
the Bishop of Derry, I have already vindicated the Observator in the former
Chapter. The rest which does remain in this redious nothing, which takes up so
great a part of the Pamphlet, consists of some offers of proof, that there
was a more than ordinary dearnesse between the Lord Lieutenant and the Lord
Primate (by consequence no sharp tooth, no grudge upon either fide) a thing
(says he) so likely, that it is almost Demonstrable. And first (says he) the
Lieutenant did from time to time advise with the Primate concerning his Answer
to his change, Fol. 42. A thing so far from being almost Demonstrable, that it
is not likely. For let me ask (for I hope it will be no abusing of your
patience, my most eloquent Cicero, to ask one question) whether he advised with
the Primate in point of matter, or of form, in framing his answer to the
charge. I know you do not think the Primate so great a Lawyer as to be
counseled and advised with, for putting the Answer into Form. The Lord
Lieutenant being furnished with more learned Counsel as to that particular.
And I think also that you know, how able the Lord Lieutenant was, how well
studied in his own affairs, how well provided of all advantages, in Order to
the following trial, and consequently how unusefull the Lord Primate must needs
be to him, as to the matter of his Answer. And whereas it is secondly said,
that after sentence he desired and obtained of the Parliament, that the Primate
might be sent to him, to serve him with his ministerial office in his last and
fatal extremity, Fol. 43. There was good reason for this too, though it make
nothing at all to our Authors purpose. For first the English Bishops were
engaged in a daily attendance, both in Parliament and Convocation, not to be
taken off (had he desired it) upon his concernments, especially considering,
that the Lieutenant had desired the Lord Primates company, not only from the
time of his sentence (as the Pamphleter says) but from the very time that the
Bill of Attainder was formed against him. And 2ly. had he made it his request
to have some or any one of the English Bishops to assist him, and advise with
him in that last necessity, It is most probable, the Fears and Jelousies of the
time considered, that the suit had absolutely been rejected. As for his taking
him by the hand, and leading him along with him to the Scaffold, there wanted
not very good reasons to induce him to it. 1. To declare to all the world the
reality and sincerity of their Reconciliaty, the utter abolition of all former
differences. And 2ly. That the Christianity and Piety of his last Deportment,
reported from the mouth of one, who was known to be none of his greatest
friends, might find the greater credit amongst his Enemies. I see my man of Law
is a sorry Advocate, though he may be good for Chamber-Councel; for never was
good cause more betrayed, nor ill worse managed.

Having thus done with the Pamphleter, as to this particular, I should proceed
to my next and last Chapter; but that I must needs meet with Doctor Bornard,
whom I left but now upon that promise. Not thinking he had Edified sufficiently
by the general Doctrine of the Certificate, without a particular application,
he makes a use of Admonition and Reproof to the Observator, and fearing that
might not be enough to confound the man (for it appears not, that ^e aimed at
his Conversion) he must needs have a fling at him in his Sermon preached at the
Lord Primates Funeral; in which he had some words, to this, or the like effect,
as I am credibly informed, viz. There is one thing which I cannot forbear (and
am wished by others also to it) and that is to vindicate him from the unjust
a^persions of a late Observator, as though he had advised the King to sign the
Bill for the Earl of Straffords death, and afforded some distinction between
his pe^sonal and politic Conscience: A matter altogether false, as the Lord
Primate himself had declared in his life time, adding, that there was something
in the Presses to justify him against that presumptuous Observator. This is
the substance of the charge, in the delivery whereof I think the Preacher might
have made a better Panegyric, had he been quite silent, and not awakened those
inquiries, which are so little advantageous to the memory of that learned
Prelate. Howsoever, if his zeal had not eaten up his understanding, he should
have gone upon good grounds, and not have charged that on the Observator, which
he finds not in him. Where finds he in the Observator, that the Lord Primate
advised the King to sign the Bill for the Earl of Straffords death? Nowhere I
dare be bold to say it, and if h^ can find no body else upon whom to Father it,
the Calumny (if such it were) must rest at his own doors as the Broacher of it.
The Observator only says, that he was one of those four Bishops sent to the
King by the Parliament to inform his Conscience, and bring him to yield unto
the Bill. That the Primate had couceived a displeasure against him, for
abrogating of the Articles of Religion established in the Church of Ireland,
Anno, 1615. and that the Kings conscience was not like to be well informed,
when men so interessed were designed unto the managing and preparing of it. All
this might be, and yet for all this it might not be, that the Lord Primate
advised the King to sign the Bill. So that in brief, the Preacher first raised
this Calmny against the Primate, and then Calumniates the Observator to make it
good, audacter calumniare necesse est ut aliquid haereat, charge but the
Observator home, the presumptuous Observator (so the Preacher called him) and
that will be sufficient proof to make good the Calumny. Less reason is there
in the next, the second part of the charge, though none in this, there being no
such thing in the Observator, as the distinction between the Kings personal and
politic Conscience; The Preacher must look for that elsewhere, if he mean to
find it. The Presumptuous Obsertator was not so presumptuous as to write things
which till that time he never heard of, and possibly had never heard of them at
all, if as well he as others had not been awakened by the Preacher to a further
search. And now upon a further search, I can tell the Preacher where he may
easily satisfy himself, if his stomach serve him. Let him but rake a Walk in
the second part of Dodonas Grove, he shall find it there. And if not satisfied
with that, I shall direct him to some persons of worth and honor, from whom he
may inform himself more fully in all particulars. But as it had been better for
him had he not startled this inquiry in a public audience, for which he could
not find just grounds in the Observations; so I conceive that he will do that
reverend person, and himself some right, if he suffer it to die with the party
most concerned in it, without reviving it again by his double diligence. Non
amo ^inium dilige^tes, is a good old Rule; but causa patrocinio non bona pejor
erit, is a great deal better.

CHAP. IX.
The Duke of Buckingham and the Earl of Bristol absolved from treason by our
Author. Of the papers found sticking in Feltons Hat, and that they prove not,
that the late Remonstrance of the House of Commons, was the motive to his
killing the Duke. The Historian seems not unpleased with the Fact, or involves
a great part of the Nation in the guilt thereof. Fame and Reports much built on
by our Author in the course of his History, and to what intent. The History
rectified b^ the Observations in the Case of Knighthood, the Subjects summoned
to the Coronation were to receive that order, in (our Authors own confession)
if tbe King so pleased. Sir Edward Cooks opinion in the Case examined. The
Pamphleters notable Arguments for the Sw^ord and Surcoat. Of the Earl of
Newcastles two great Feasts at Welbeck and and Belsover. Our Author removes one
of his mistakes from Guild Hall to Cornhill. The Pamphleters causeless quarrel
with the Observator, in reference unto the battle at Rostock; no such
beleguering of that Town, no such battle, nor any such engagement of the
Armies, (before the battle of Lipsique,) as the History mentions. The History
rectified in the first issuing out of the writs for Ship money. And the
Observator quarelled for directing in it. The Pamphleters gross error in
pursuit of that quarrel, together with his equity and ingenuity in the
managing of it. Young Oxenstern was denied audience by King Charles. Of what
authority an eye witniss is, in point of History. The Pamphleters weak
defenses, for his error in that particular. He rectifieth his own discourse of
the first differences between the King and the Scottish Lords by the Observator.
His quarrels with him, and corrections of him, quite besides the Cushion. The
Observator justified touching the constituting of the Lords. Of the Articles in
the Scottish Parliaments. Our Authors false Arithmetique in Substracting from
his own errors, and multiplying the supposed mistakes of the Observator. His
sharp expostulation, how unjustly grounded. The Close of all.
THis Chapter will be like that of Champion in his December Rations, which he
calls testes omnium generum; an Aggregate body, a collection of incoherencies,
as commonly it happens in the Fag-end of such discourses, in which a man has
not the liberty of using his own method, otherwise than as the Author whom he
deals with shall give way unto it. And the first thing we meet with, is the
absolving of the Duke of Buckingham, and Earl of Bristoll from the crime of
treason, wherewith our Author had reproached them in the first Edition: where
showing* how passing jocund many good men were at the contest betwixt those
great persons, h^ adds, that the Question seemed not in the sense of many,
which was the Traitor, but which the most, Hist. Fol. 29. Both charged as
Traitors, in the first, and both absolved from being Traytots by leaving out
this passage in the second Edition. For this he is beholding to the Observator,
from whom he also takes a hint, of giving us a full Copy of the Dukes charge
against that Earl, which before we had not. Now I would fain learn of him,
whether this censure thus expunged were true, or false, whether it seemed so in
his own sense, or in the sense of others. If if be false, why was it put in the
first; if true, why is it left o^t in the second. If so they seemed in his own
sense, why does he not declare how, and by whom his sense was altered in that
point? but if it were the sense of others, I would know the reason why he
should suppress it in this place, where it relates only to a private person,
and stand unto it in all points concerning Episcopacie, the Clergy, and the
Convocation, which still stand under the same terms of reproach and obloquy,
as before they did, How so? because says he, he speaks the sense of others and
not his own, and passing as the words of others, they shall remain in evidence
to succeding times, against all those concerned in it, though it be proved how
much they are calumniated and abused in those scandalous passages. Yet deals he
better with these great persons, than he does with Mr. Attorney Noye; whom
(notwithstanding the vindication of him, by the Observator, which he is not
able to refute,) he leaves still under the defamation of prating and bawling,
giving him the odious Title of a Projector, a subtle Enginier, a man of
cinicall Rusticity, with others of like nature, unworthy appellations for so
brave a man. But kissing goes by favor, as the saying is, and our Author
loves to write (none more) with respect of persons, and to make History do the
drugery of his own despite, though his Preface (if it could) would persuade
the contrary. The next thing which occurs, but not so easily reducible to any
of the former heads relates to the sttory of that horrible Paricide, committed
by John Felton, on the person of the Duke of Buckingham. Concerning which our
Author had told us in his History, that the said Felton had stiched a paper in
his hat, wherein he declared his only motive to the fact was, the late
Remonstrance of the Commons against the Duke, and that he could not sacrifice
his life in a nobler cause, than by delivering his Country from so great an
enemy. To which the Observator answers, first in the way of position, not
that there were no papers found stitched in his Hat, as the Pamphleter fasly
charged on him, Fol. 45. but that there were no such papers foundin his hat or
elsewhere about him, as the Historian mentions, And 2ly. In the way of
explication, that the first to whom that particular motive was communicated,
was one Dr. Hutchenson, sent by the King (upon the first hearing of the News,)
to sift it out of him. Against this last the Pamphleter has nothing to say.
For taking it upon his word, (which we need not do) that Captain Harvey
signified as much, in his Letter dated the same day, Fol. 13. yet this
concludes not in my Logic, nor in no man's else (but his that thinks himself an
Allsteed) that that vile Murderer did first communicate it unto him, before
the Doctor by working on his conscience had first got it out of him. But this
is like the rest of our Authors Arguments, viz. Captain Harvy, being one of
those to whose custody he was committed, did signify it on the same day to his
friends at London, Ergo it was not first confessed to Doctor Hutchenson. But
Captain Harveys Letter says more than this. Felton (says he) told me he was
to be prayed for next day in London, therefore (for one of these Conclusions
must needs follow on it) either Felton had acknowledged to him, that the late
Remonstrance did induce him to kill the Duke; or that it was affirmed to be so,
in the papers which were stitched in his hat.

Now for the matter of those papers; That which they are produced for, is to
prove this point, namely, that his only motive to the Fact, was the late
Remonstrance of the Commons against the Duke. And if they prove not this, as I
think they do not, they prove nothing against the Observator, nor to the
purpose of our Author. Now the first paper had these words, as the Pamphleter
tells us, viz. I would have no man commend me for doing it, but rather
discommend themselves: for if God had not taken away their hear^s for their
sins, he had not gone so long unpunished. The second Paper had these words,
viz. The man is cowardly base in mine opinion, and deserves neither the fame of
a Gentleman or Soldier, that is unwilling to sacrifice his life, for the
honor of God, his King, and Country. To both these he subscribes his name, and
Copies of both these were sent the same day by Captain Harvy to his friends in
London, but neither of them do declare, that his only motive to the fact, was
the late Remonstrance of the Commons against the Duke. The man might possibly
be set on, and his discontents made use of to this barbarous murder, by some of
those who wished well to this Remonstrance (I deny not that) and it may be
believed the rather, because the Pictures of the wretch being cut in brass,
and exposed to sale, were caught up greedily by that party, and being the
Copies of these Letters were printed in the bottom of it, it is more probable
that our Author might have them thence, than from the Letters of the Captain;
but that he was induced to it by the Remonstrance is more than any man of
common sense can collect from those papers; and therefore very ill brought in
with so much confidence and ostentation, to prove that positively, which by no
Logical Inference can be gathered from them. If ever man were Animal Rationale
Risibile, that is to say, a Creature ridiculous for his reasoning, it must
needs be this. But certainly, our Author could not possibly be so much out, in
his rational and discursive faculties, had he not wished well unto the man, and
approved the Fact. He had not else accounted it an exploit of glory, or put
that gloss upon the meaning of the Wretch, that he had stitched those Papers
into the lining of his Hat, for fear, lest the Supposition of private revenge
would infame and blemish the glory of the exploit; nor had he told us, that it
pleased the Common man too well, and that in vulgar sense, it rather passed for
an Execution of a Malefactor, and an administration of that Justice dispensed
from Heaved, which they thought was denied on earth, Fol. 91. Never did man so
advocate for a wilful murder, or render a whole Nation so obnoxious to it,
and so guilty of it; there being little difference, if any, between the
rejoicing at such facts, when done, and consenting to them; Cicero speaking of
the Murder of Julius Caesar, has resolved it so, viz. Quid interest utrum
velim fieri, an gaudeam factum? He that applaudes a Murder acted, renders
himself an Accessory to it, before the fact. We have not done with Felton yet,
for our Author told us that

His body was from thence conveyed to Portsmouth, and there hung in chains,
but by some stole and conveyed away Gibbet and all. The contrary being proved
by the Observator, and the thing too plain to be denied, he has since
rectified his History, as to this parricular, not on the credit of the
Observator (no, take heed o^ that) but because told so by his betters. Yet
still he must be standing on his justification, and as long as he has any
common Fame, or confident Report (be it never so erroneous) to pretend unto, he
conceives that sufficient for him, Fol. 14. Upon this ground, the honor of the
Countess of Buckingham shall be called in question; and an affront falsely
reported to be done to public Justice, shall pass into his Annals as a
matter of truth. He could not else instruct Posterity, or the present age, how
to defame the honor of Ladies, or commit the like Rapes upon the Law, without
fear of impunitie, if either such superfaetations of Fame (in his Canting
Language) should not pass for truths, or otherwise be wondered at as no grounds
for History. If no such consequent follow on it, we must not thank the History,
but the Observations.

In the next place, our Author had told us in his History, That there was an
old sculking Statute long since out of use, though not out of force, which
enjoined all Subjects, who had not some special privilege, to appear at the
Coronation of every King, ad Arma Gerenda, to bear Arms, not to be made
Knights as was vulgarly supposed. In this passage there are two things chiefly
faulted by the Observator; first his reproaching of that Law, by the name of an
old Skulking Statute, which lay not under the Rubbish of Antiquity, but was
printed and exposed to open view, and therefore needed no such progging and
bolting out, as is elsewhere spoken of; And 2ly. his Gloss upon it, as if it
only signified the hearing of Arms, and not receiving the Order of Knighthood,
as had been vulgarly supposed, the contrary whereof was undeniably, and
convincingly proved by the Observator. He has now fully rectified the first
expression* but seems to stand still upon his last. The first expression
rectified thus, viz. By the common Law there was vested in the Kings of this
Realm, a power to Summon (by their Writs out of the Chancery) all persons
possessing a Knights Fee, and who had no special privilege to the contrary, to
appear at their Coronation, etc. Fol. 115. So then, the ancient Common Law,
explained and moderated for the ease of the Subject, by the Statute of King
Edward 2. is freed from the reproachful name of an old Skulking Statute; we
have got that by it, The Observator being justified in our Authors Pamphlet,
for so much of his discourse as concerns that point. And to the rest of that
Discourse, proving that all those who were masters of such an estate as the
Statute mentions, were by the same bound to be made Knights, or to receive
the Order of Knighthood, and not simply to bear Arms, or to receive a Sword and
Surcoat out of the Kings wardrobe, as the Author would have had it in his first
Edition; he comes up so close, as could be scarce expected from him. For first
he tells us in the Text of his new Edition, that such as appeared at the
Coronation, were to receive a sword and Surcoat (he still stands to that) as
the Ensigns of Knighthood: and therefore questionless to receive the Order of
Knighthood also, if the King so pleased: And 2ly, he confesses in his Comment
on it out of Matthew Paris, that King Henry the 3. fined all the Sheriffs of
England five Marks a man, for not distraining every one having 15 l. per annum,
to be made Knights, as he had commanded; adding withal, that he had read of
the like Precept of King Edward the First, Fol. 20. So then, the Subjects were
not called together to the Coronation, ad militiae a^ma gerenda, to bear Arms
only, but to receive the Order of Knighthood; we have got that too.

But all this while the King is like to get nothing by it, if our Author might
be suffered to expound the Law; against which he opposes only the Authority
of Sir Edward Coke; A learned Lawyer I confess, but not to be put in equal
Balance with the Law it self. Well, what says he? Now (says he) tempora
mutantur, the times are changed, and many a Yeoman purchases lands in Knights
Service, and yet ( non debet) ought not, for want of Gentry, to be a Knight:
and a little after, the Fine to the mark, which is chiefly aimed at, Fol. 20.
And in these words, taking the Citation as I find it, I observe these things,
1. That Sir Edward Cokes Non debet cannot bind the King, who may as well make
Leathern Knights as Leathern Lords, (as our Author phraseth it elsewhere) the
Sword of Knighthood taking away the blemishes of Vulgar birth, and stating the
receiver of it, in the rank and capacity of Gentry. Were it not thus, the Door
of Preferment would be shut against well deservers, and neither honor gained
in War, nor eminencies in Learning, nor fidelity in Service, nor any other
Consideration in the way of merit, would render any person capable of the Order
of Knighthood, for want of Gentry, or being descended only from a House of
Yeomanrie. 2ly, I observe, that though he would not have such petsons honored
with the title of Knighthood, (lest else perhaps that honorable Order might
grow Despicable, were it made too common) yet he confesses, that they were to
Fine for it (if I understand his meaning rightly) at the Kings pleasure. 3ly. I
observe how lamely and imperfectly the Pamphleter has delivered the last words
of his Author; which makes me apt enough to think, that he intended to say
somewhat to the Kings advantage, if he had been suffered to speak out. And 4ly,
if Sir Edward Coke should resolve the Contrary, and give sentence in this Case
against the King, yet I conceive it would have been reversible by a Writ of
error; that learned Lawyer, having been a principal Stickler for the Petition
of Right in the former Parliament, and therefore not unwilling to lay such
grounds, whereby the King might be forced to cast himself on the Alms of his
people.

As for the Sword and Surcoat, affirmed to be delivered by the Lord High
Chamberlain, out of the Kings Wardrobe, to such as were summoned to appear; he
still stands to that, not thinking it agreeable to his Condition to yield the
cause, if not found against him by the Jury; the point to be made good is this,
that such as were summoned to the Coronation, were to have every man of them a
Sword and a Surcoat delivered to him out of the Kings Wardrobe by the Lord High
Chamberlain, if the Kings service so required; which he proves by these
Infallible witnesses. Gent. of the Jury, stand together, and hear your
evidence. The first witness is an eminent Antiquary, than whom none can be
fitter to give Testimony to the point in hand; but he alas is long since dead,
and it were pity to raise him from the Dust of the Grave, (as we have done the
Cl^ricus Parliamentorum, and Mr. John Pym, in another case) for fear he put the
Coutt into a greater fright, than when the solemn Assizes was at Oxford. Such a
witness we had once before in the Case of the late Convocation, a credible and
a knowing person, as the Pamphletet told us; but nameless he, for blameless he
shall be, quoth the gallant Sydney; and here we have an eminent Antiquary, but
the man is dead, dead as a door-nail, quoth the Pamphleter in another place. A
nameless witness there, a dead witness here, let them go together. The next
witness is old Matthew of Westminster, who, though dead, yet speaks, who
tells us, That King Edward the 1. sent forth a proclamation, that all such
persons, who had possessions valued at a Knights Fee, should appear at
Westminster, etc. what to do, he tells you presently, admissuri singuli ornatum
militarem ex Regia Garderoba, to receive military accoutrements out of the
Kings Wardrobe, Fol. 20. This witness speaks indeed, but he speaks not home.
The point in Issue, is particularly of a Sword and a Surcoat, the witness
speaks in general, of ornatus militaris only; but whether it were a Sword, a
Surcoat, or a pair of Spurs, or whatsoever else it was, that he tells us not.
So the first witness speaking nothing, and the second nothing to the purpose,
the Pamphleter desires to be Nonsuited, and so let him be. He tells the
Observator, Fol. 36. that his Arguments are nothing ad rem, and besides the
Cushion. But whatsoever his arguments were, I hope these Answers are not only
ad rem, but ad Rhombum, and Rhomboidem also, and so I hope the Pamphleter will
find them upon examination.

In the great Feast at Welbeck there is no such difference, but may be easily
reconciled. That the Earl of Newcastle entertained the King at VVelbeck, is
granted by the Observator, and that it was the most magnificent entertainment
which had been given the King in his way toward Scotland, shall be granted
also; Which notwithstanding, it was truly said by the Observator, that the
Magnificent Feast so much talked of, was not made at VVelbeck, but at Balsover
Castle; nor this year, but the year next after, and not made to the King only,
but to the King and Queen. In the first of which two entertainments, the Earl
had far exceeded all the rest of the Lords, but in the second exceeded himself,
the first Feast estimated at 6000 l. to our Author at York, but estimated on
the unwarrantable Superfaetations of Fame, which, like a Snow-ball, grows by
rolling, crescit eundo, says the Poet: or like the Lapwing, makes most noise
when it is farthest from the nest, where the Birds are hatched. The Observator
took it on the place it self, when the mo^ths of men were filled with the talk,
and their stomachs not well cleared from the Surquedries of that Mighty Feast;
by whom it was generally affirmed, that the last years entertainment (though
both magnificent and August in our Authors language) held no Comparison with
this. So that the one Feast being great, and the other greater, the Observator
is in the right, and our Author was not much in the wrong.

More in the wrong he does confess in the great entertainment given to the City
by the King, affirmed before to have been made at the Guildhall, but now
acknowledged upon the reading of the Observations, to have been made at
Alderman Freemans, Fol. 22. This he has rectified in part, in the new Edition,
and it is but in part neither. For whereas he was told by the Observator, that
the entertainment which the City gave at that time to the King, was at the
House of Alderman Freeman, then Lord Mayor, situate in Cornhill, near the
Royal Exchange, and the entertainment which the King gave unto the City, by
showing them that glorious Masque, was at the Merchant-Tailors Hall in
Thread-needle street, on the backside of the Lord Mayors House, an open passage
being then made from the one to the other: Our Author places both of them in
the Aldermans house. Their Majesty's says he, with their train o^
Court-Grandees, and Gentleman Revellers, were solemnly by Alderman Freeman,
then Lord Mayor, invited to a most sumptuous* Banquet, at his House, where that
resplendent show was iterated and re^ exhibitted. Hist. Fol. 134. This (by his
leave) is but a Tinker-like kind of reformation, they mend one hole, and make
another, that gallant show, not being ^terated and exhibited in the Lord Mayors
House, but in the Merchant-Taylors Hall, as more capable of it.

It is an old saying and a true, that it is better coming to the end of a
Feast, than the beginning of a Fray. Which notwithstanding, I must needs go
where the Pamphleter drives me, that is to say, to a great and terrible fight
near Rostock, which I can find in no place but my Authors brains. He tells us
in his History, That Tilly condacted a numerous Army of thirty three thousand
foot, and seven hundred Horse for the relief of Rostock then besieged by the
King of Sweden; That the King alarmed herewith draws out of his Trenches, to
entertain him, seventeen thousand foot, and six hundred horse; that in
conclusion of the battle Tilly was put unto the worst, and his Army routed; and
that finally upon this Victory he immediately stormed the Town, and carried it,
Hist. Fol. 112. The Observator finding no such rout given to Tilly near Rostock
Anno 1630. where our Author places it, conceived it might be meant of the
battle near Lipsique, Anno 1631. and made his observations accordingly. And
upon this he might have rested, had the Pamphleter pleased, who in his
introduction to the Feast at Welbeck advertise^h that the Observator mentions
a Battle at Lipsique, spoken of before, but where he knows not, only
conjectures that he had a good will to take him to task for a misplacing a
battle, he supposes at Rostock, but upon better consideration, he found his
error to be his own, and not the Authors, and therefore cut out the Leaf
containing the 101, 102 pages, wherein his mistake lay, leaving that Paragraph
tied head and heels together Fol. 21. Did ever man so lay about him in a matter
of nothing, for such is both his fight near Rostock, and this long prattle
which he makes of the Observator. For first, the Lease which contained the 101
and 102 pages, was never cut out; 2ly there is no such incoherence in any of
the Paragraphs there, as if head and heels were laid together; 3ly. the Leaf
which was cut out, contained 107 and 108 pages, and was cut out, not in regard
of any thing there spoken of our Authors battle, but the misplacing the train
of Captives, and the rear of the triumphant masque, occasioned by the
negligence of the Printers only: 4ly. That, in the leaf containing pages 101,
102. The Author might have found mention of the battle of Lipsique, which he
says he knows not where to find, saying, that he, the Observator, mentions a
battle at Lipsique spoken of before, but where he knows not, one evident
argument, that either he looked but carelessly after it, or was not very willing
to find it.

And to say truth, it had been better for him, to have passed it by, for then
he had been only chargeable with some prudent omissions (as we know who was)
whereas by speaking in his History of a battle of Rostock, and seeming offended
to be taxed for misplacing of it, he lays himself open to the assaults of his
adversaries. I have consulted diligently, the History of the Sweedish war in
Germany till the death of that King, written in Latin by Cluverut, together with
that translated out of Italian by the Earl of Mo^mouth, (on whose authority the
Pamphleter relieth in another place,) but can find nothing in either of them,
either of any such seige or of any such battle, or of any such storming of
that Town as my Author speaks of. All that I find concerning Rostock, shall be
summed up thus, namely, that having solicited, and practiced the people of
Rostock to declare for him in that War, he was peaceably received into it; that
having left no Garrison in it, it was surprised by the Imperials, and strongly
fortified; that the King having recovered all the Dukedom of Mecklenburg,
except the Towns of Rostock and Wismer, and not willing to waste time in
besieging either, he fortified Anclam, to bridle the Garrisons of those Towns,
and secure the Country; and finally, that after the great Battle of Lipsique,
the Duke of Mecklenburg, and Marshal Tod, a Commander in the Swedish Army, laid
siege to Rostock and reduced it, the Town not being otherwise stormed than by
want of victuals. Next for the engagement of the Armies, I find that Tilly
having mustered up his united forces, and finding them to consist of 34000.
fighting men, drew thrice toward the King; first as he lay entrenched between
Landsperge and Franckford on the Oder, in the Marches of Brandenburg. 2ly, as
he lay entrenched near Werben, not far from the Territory of Magdeburg. And
3dly, in his Retreat by Tangermond to his faster Holds: that there was no
engagement between the Armies at all in the two first times, and only some
light Skirmishes in the third, without considerable disadvantage unto either
side; the Armies never engaging, till the Battle of Lipsique, in which Tilly
received that dismal rout, which opened the Kings passage into Franconia and
the rest of Germany. Besides which, it is more than certain, that if Tilly had
received any such rout, as our Author speaks of, he could not have proceeded,
as he did, to the sack of Magdeburg; nor would he King have suffered him to
recruit again after such a rout, wherein he had taken 16. Canons, 30 Ensigns,
and 32 Cornets of Horse, and scattered the whole Imperial Army, opening thereby
a way to relieve that City, which Tilly had besieged for declaring in his
Behalf, without any other provocation. So that I must behold this Siege, this
Battle, and the s^orming the Town upon it, as matters to be found only in the
Pamphleters dreams; not otherwise to be excused, but that our Author writing
the History of the reign of King Charles, intends only to justify such Things
and Actions, as have reference to the 16 years whereof he treats in that
History, and that he neaver meant it of such things as were taken in by the By,
as he declares himself, Fol. 8. A very Saving Declaration, and of as great
advantage to him, as the Parliament Journals, or any of his witnesses, either
Dead or Namelesse.

Our Author had told us in his History, that presently on the Discovery of Mr.
Attorney Noyes Design, he issued writs to all the Counties in the Realm,
requiring that every County should for defense of the Kingdom, against a day
prefixed, provide Ships of so many Tun, etc. To this the Observator answers,
That in the first year of the payment of Shipmoney, the Writs were not issued
to all the Counties in England, as our Author tells us, but only to the
Maritime Counties, etc. and that in the next year, not before, the like writs
issued out to all the Counties in England, that is to say, Anno 1636. What
says the Pamphleter to this? First he acknowledges his error, and has
rectified it in the last Edition; but adds withal, that the Observator gives
him two for one: in saying first, that the Ship writs were directed in the
first year to the Mari^ime Counties, whereas it was to the Port towns only; and
2ly, in saying that the Ship writs were directed to all the Counties, Anno
1636. whereas says he, it was 1635. Fol. 25. For the first of these, he
offers no proof but his Ipse dixit, and of what authority that is, we have
seen already. He tells us positively in his Preface, that for matter of
Record he has not consulted the very Originals, but has conformed himself to
Copies; and having been so often cozened in the false Copies of Journals and
Rep^rts, I can see no armor of proof about him, to keep his credulity from the
wounds made by false Records. But 2ly, taking it for true, as perhaps it is,
that the first Writs were directed to the Maritime or Port towns, only; yet
being the Maritime or Port towns, stand in the Maritime Counties, it is not
very much out of the way, to say that the first Writ^ were directed to the
Maritime Counties: Not so much, I am sure, as to say they were directed to the
Mediterraneans or Highlanders, in our Authors canting, unless by such a Fictio
Juris as our common Lawyers call an action of Trover, a Port Town may be said
to be in the Midland Countries. For the second he offers us some proof,
telling us those writs were issued out Anno 1635. as a consequent of the
opinion of the Judges in that November. But will the Pamphleter stand to this,
will he stand to any thing? If so, then certainly he is gone again. The Opinion
delivered by the Judges, was grounded on a letter sent unto them from the King,
with the Case enclosed; which letter bears date the 2d. of February in the 12th
year of his Majesty's reign, Anno 1636. and is so dated by our Author, Fol.
143. Considering therefore that this Letter led the way unto their Opinion, it
is impossible to any common apprehension, that the Judges should deliver their
Opinions 14 months before the letter came to them, that is to say, in the
month of November. Anno 1635. and this I take to be a Subter or a
Super-annuating in his Temporalties, and that too in such things and Actions as
relate to the History of King Charles, and not in things extrinsecal, as the
Battle of Rostock, or in things taken in on the By, as the Synod of Dort.

But for the ingenuitie of the man, and his equity too, The Observator had
informed him of some other mistakes about this business; as first, his making
the Earl of Northumberland Admiral of the first years Fleet, whereas it was the
Earl of Lindsey; And 2ly, in affirming, that the King upon the Archbishops
entreaty, had granted the Clergy an exemption from that general payment,
whereas in^^^^ there was no such matter. The first of these he has rectifyed
in the History, and confessed in the Pamphlet; the second he has rectifyed
without any Acknowledgement, either of the Observators information, or his own
mistake: And finally (so indulgent is he to his own dear self) ranking it
amongst the errors ascribed by him to the Observator, for making the first writ
to be directed to the Maritime Counties, whereas says he, it was to the
Maritime or Port Towns only, he reckons it not amongst his own, in saying
that they were directed to all the Counties of the Kingdom, the Mediterraneans
and Highlanders amongst the rest. Rather than so, Ships shall be sailing on the
Mountains, and cast Anchor there, Whales shall be taken up in Cotswold, and
Shelfish crawl in shoals on the top of the Chilterne, as they did once in the
days of Pythagoras, whom our Author has so often followed in his Ipse dixi^,
that he will credit him in this also; Of which thus the Poet, -- vidi factas ex
aequore terras,
Et procul a Pelago Conchae jacuere Marinae
Et vetus inventa est in montibas Anchora summis.


That is to say.

Often have I seen that Earth, which once I knew
Part of the Sea, so that a man might view
Huge Shells of Fishes on the up-land ground,
And on the Mountains top old Anchors found.
In the Embassage of young Oxenstern to the Court of England, it is said by our
Author, that he was denied audience by the King. The contrary affirmed and
proved by the Autoplie, (one of our Authors own words) of the Observator, whose
curiosity had carried him to behold that ceremony. I have heard it for a Rule
amongst some good women, that a man ought to believe his own wife, before his
own eyes; but I never heard it for a good Rule in Law or History. Not in the
Practice of the Law, in which it is a noted Maxim, plus valet occulatus testis
unus, quam auriti december, that is to say, that one eyewitness speaking to a
matter of Fact, is of greater credit than ten that take it up on hearsay. Much
less in History, the word being anciently derived (...), which signifies to
see, Intimating the relation of such remakable accidents at the performance of
which the Author himself was present. Apud veteres enim (says Isidore in his
origines) nemo scribebat Historiam, nisi is qui interfuisset, et ea quae
scribenda essent vidisset; And though the customary use of the word, has now
taught it a more ample signification, yet an eyewitness in point of story is
more to be believed than any of those which take up matter upon trust. Which
notwithstanding against this Ocular observation (as he calls it in another
place) of the Observator, he opposes the Authority of an Italian Author in his
History of the wars of Christendom, he confesses in the Pamphlet, to be no
competent Judge of our affairs; and yet because the Earl of Monmouth does
translate it so, it can be no otherwise. How so? because, says he, that Earl
is a person of so much honor and knowledge in this business, as he would have
given us some Marginal Caveat, had it been so wide of truth as the Observator
would make it, Fol. 26. Here is a non sequ^tur, with a witness: The History of
Galiazzo, was translated by the Earl of Monmouth, Ergo his Testimony taken upon
hearsay, to be believed before that of the Observator, though speaking as an
eyewitness to the thing or thus, The Earl of Monmouth is a person of honor,
Ergo he must confute his Author by some Marginal note, in a matter which he
never heard of; or thus, the Earl is a person of great knowledge, Ergo he
knows all things which are done in Court, though not present there. The
Premises I grant for truths, most undoubted truths, But the Conclusion follows
as unluckily, as it does in this Enthymeme, Homo est animal implume bipes;
Ergo, Gallus Gallinaceus non vertit stercorarium. As sweet a conclusion in the
one as there is in the other.

In laying down the true occasion of the Scotist broils, the Pamphleter seems
willing to contribute something to the Observator, but in effect adds nothing
pertinent which he finds not there. Only I shall observe two things in the
course of his Narrative. For first, whereas he undertakes to illustrate and
rectify the Story, as he finds it in the Observator, he has indeed rectified
his own error by it. In the unpublished, sheets where this narration was to
pass, as a part of the History, we find it said, that when the Lord Maxwell
came and entr^d the Council of Scotland, the Lords refuse^ to admit him, as
many ways incapable of such Authority. Fol. 18.

But in the Story as it lies before us in the present Pamphlet, be has
rectified this passage by the Observator, ^elling us that he went no further
than Barwick where being informe^ that his person was so generaly ha^ed as even
to the very undoing of his glorious Coach, he dust go no further, but po^^ed
back again unto the Court, Fol. 32. But 2ly. finds he nothing faulty in the
Story of the Observator? Yes, He first finds fault with him for saying, that
the King intending a Parliament in that Kingdom, appointed the Earl of
Niddisdale to preside therein, and furnished him with instructions, for passing
of an Act of Revocation of Abby-lands and lands of Bishoprics; whereas (says
he) he was commissionated with the Earl of Anandale, for summoning a Parliament
(not for revoking of Church and other lands formerly invested in the Crown) but
for contribution of moneys and Ships against the Dunkirkers, Fol. 31. But this
assuredly thwarts with nothing delivered by the Observator, the Observator no
where saying, that the Parliament was to be summoned, for revoking of Church
and other lands formerly invested in the Crown; but that the Lord Maxwell, or
Earl of Nidisdale (call him which you will) was furnished with instructions for
passing an Act, to the purpose above mentioned. And furnished he might be, with
such secret Instructions, though there was nothing to that purpose in the Writ
of Summons, by which that Parliament was called, or in the Commission it self,
by which he was appointed and authorized to preside therein. Much less does
that thwart any thing in the Observator, which the Pamphleter gives us in the
close, when the Scotch Lords and Maxwell were brought Face to Face before the
King, and when upon some Bugwords spoken by the Scots, his Majesty told them,
and not before, he would make them restore all to the crown, which they had
taken from it in his Fathers Minority, Fol. 32. which, whether it be true or not,
is neither ad rem, nor ad Rhombum, as to this particular; It being no where
said by the Observator, that the King had told him so beofre. So that this long
impertinency, might have well been spared, but that the Pamphleter had a mind
to say something in it, though, he knew not what.

Concerning the election of the Lords of the Articles for the Parliament in
Scotland, there appears some difference between the Observator; and the
Historian; to justify himself, the Historian tells us, in his answer, that
his Informer being a person of such eminency of that Nation, and so versed in
the affairs of that Kingdom, is (as he thinks,) more credible in this
particular, than a foreiner, Fol. 32. this is another namelesse witness, given
to us under the Nation of a person of eminency, one of that nation, and versed
in the affairs of that Kingdom; though where to find him out, and how to speak
with him about it, we may seek elsewhere. But of these nameless and dead
witnesses, we may speak so lovely, that we need not put our selves unto the
trouble of a repetition, nor the Observator want a witness of unquestioned
credit, that is to say the famous Camden Clarentius King of Arms, a man so well
versed iu the affairs of that Kingdom, as few Natives better.

The rest that follows in the Pamphlet, confisteth first in an Enumeration of
the Observators and his own mistakes, and s^^condly, In a sharp and severe
expostulation with him for the close of all. His own mistakes, with great
indulgence to himself, he restrains to 8. Which yet for quietness sake, and out
of his superabundant goodness, he is willing to allow for ten; whether they be
but few or not, and whether the mistakes charged upon him by the Observator,
are of such a nature, wherein the fame of no one man, the interest of no one
ca^se, is either damnified or advantaged, as he fain would have it: and on the
contrary, whether all and every of the points which lie in debate between us
(be they great or little) besides which the Pamphleter has pretermitted in the
course of his answer, prove not so many errors and mistakes on the Authors
side; is left unto the judgment of the equal and indifferent Reader. The
errors of the Observator, he has raised to no fewer than 18 which is more
than one for every sheet, one of which, as he says, tends to the very
destruction of sacred worship, as that of the Sabbath, another to the
Defamation of one of the most glorious lights, of our Church, besides his (the
Observators) most notorious corrupting, and falfying his Preface, and such like
odious imputations, not to be pardoned in a man, pretending either to learning
or ingenuity. How far the Observator is excusable, in these three last charges,
and with what folly he is taxed with so many mistakes, the Reader has seen
before this time, if he has seriously considered all the points and
circumstances in dispute between us. And that we may the better see it, I shall
present him with a Catalogue of those 18 E^rours, which being perused, will
need no other refutation, but to read them only. Now the eighteen are these
that follow.

1. Denying the papers found in Feltons Hat. 2, 3, 4. concerning Peter Baro and
the Marguaret Professorship 5. saying standing at Gloria Patri was never
obtruded, 6, 7. Concerning the Sabbath. 8, 9. Concerning the setting forth of
Ships. 10. Sir Edward Deering for the Lord Digby. 11. ArchBishop of Canterbnry
voted an Incendiary. December. 16. for the 17. 12. concerning the protestation.
13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Concerning the Bishops sent to the King, the Primate,
and the Irish Articles.

This is the Pamphleters Bill of Lading, wherewith he fraughts the small Bark
of the Observator, consisting more in tale than it does in weight; his general
muster of mistakes, many of which like Soldiers in a poor Foot Company) are
counted over and over again, to increase the Captains pay, and make up his
numbers; His Catalogue, or his Comedy of Errors rather, which ^ike the
Gallypots and Boxes in the shop of a young Apothecary, serve only to make good
the Shelves, and create him some credit with the Vulgar. For which, and for how
many of which the Observator stands accomptable before God and man, or whether
any of them may be charged on his score, or not, is left (like that before) to
the Readers Judgment.

In the expostulation there is nothing which requires an Answer. But a
complaint against the Observator, for want of Christian, yea Moral principles,
in the course and way of his proceedings, with which had he been furnished in
any measure or Proportion, he should have hinted these mistakes, either by
Conference or by Letter, as fit Considerations for a second Impression, and
this he does the rather insist upon, because of those many opportunities which
the Observator had of conferring with him, meeting together not only a hundred
times in the same Shop, but ten times after the Coming out of the History, and
thereupon it is concluded that it was not the information of the Author, but
some precious quarrel rather, which was desired, Fol. 44, 45. To Answer first
unto the last, the Observator does protest in his own behalf, that he had no
desire or thought of such precious quarrels, as the Author (conscious to
himself of his own impatiencies) does accuse him of, and that he aimed at
nothing else in those Observations, than the Illustration of the Story, and
Rectifying some mistakes in the course thereof, as the title promises. How
often they have met in the same shop, I am not able to say, the Observator
telling me, that he never changed words with him above thrice, and then took
such a scant survey of his Stature, Countenance, and habit, that he might meet
him, a hundred times since, as the Author says he did in transitu, or
intermixed with other Company, without taking any notice of him. Nor does the
Obsertor please himself in these paper quarrels, or would have took the least
part of the pains he did, if he had found himself concerned in his own
particular, either in point of Fame or Fortunes, but it is a good Rule in St.
Hierome, In suspitione Haereseos se nolle que^quam Fore patientem. And if
patience may be counted for a dull stupidity in a man's own Case, when himself
is subjected to the guilt of such Suspicions, it may deserve a far worse name,
when a whole National Clergy, a Provincial Synod, many great men of power and
eminent degree, shall be taxed and branded with tendencies to Papery and
Arminianism, unpardonable irregularities in their proceedings, vitiousness
(even to Scandal) in their lives and Actions, and in ^eed what not; which may
expose them, in this low Estate of their Affairs, to the public hatred. If in
these points and upon these Considerations, the Observator thought himself
obliged to right the Church, disabuse the Reader, and lay before the Historians
eyes, those many particulars, in which either his Intelligence or diligence
failed him, or his judgment was not well informed, or that he had been By^ssed
from the mark of truth by the exeesse and transport of his own Affections, I
hope that God himself will pardon, and all good men excuse me in the
undertaking. In seconding which undertaking, and justifying all the injured
parties, against the Recriminations of the Pamphleter, if I have carried my
Discourse with too quick a hand, it is my hope, that it will rather be imputed
to his own indiscretions, and the frequent provocations given, than to any
propensions in my self, to deal ruggedly with him; Medicum severum intemperans
aeger facit. The Patients Intemperancy does many times occasion the Physician
to be more severe, than he would be otherwise. For my part, as I came not
willingly to this employment, but was necessitated and thrust on by those many
Indignities, which both the History and the Pamphlet had heaped on those, whose
memory and good name, is most precious with me; yet I despair not, but that the
honest zeal which has moved me to it, and the great pains I have taken in it,
may merit a pardon at the least, if it gain not praise. Hic interim liber
professione Pietatis, aut laudatns eri., aut saltem excusatus, in the words of
Tacitus. So God bless us all.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER, Concerning some ADDITIONS to the former WORK.
Good Reader,
AS well for thy fuller Satisfaction, as for the taking away of all exception
from the Pamphleter, I have thought good, to add some further passages to the
Book foregoing: which, without further preamble, I shall here present unto thee
in this Order following.

Addend. ad Page 29. line 25.
-- The Dignity of his Function, and the Civilitie of his breeding, with other
necessary qualifications required in him, being well considered.

But that I may do that Reverend person the greater right, I shall lay down the
whole state of the Business, as it passed indeed, and not as taken up by our
Author, upon Vulgar Fame, though Vulgar Fame be one of the best Authors he
relyeth upon in the whole Course of his History. One Captain Gunter, as they
called him, having purchased the Advowzon of a Benefice, in which one Mr.
Brasgirdle was Incumbent, resolved to make some present advantage by it, and to
that end Articled against Brasgirdle in the High Commission. Brasgirdle was
advised by his Counsel to a Recriminatio^, in which he charged Gunter, for
sweating that he would spit in his face whenever he met him, and swearing
afterward that he had spit in his Face accordingly, as also that the Ordinary
or Official meeting with Gunter at a time, when the said Brasgirdle had
preached at a General Meeting of the Clergy, took the said Gunter to dinner
with him, and placed him at the head of the board, above all the Ministers,
where the said Gunter spent the greatest part of the Meal in railing at and
against the Preacher, to the great scandal and offense of all the Company. And
to this Charge or Recrimination the Proofs came so home, that though Gunter
did deny the Fact, as to his spitting in the Ministers Face, yet it was proved
sufficiently, that he had sworn he would and did it, as before is said. The
cause being pleaded on both sides, and the Reverend Person above aimed at,
being then to pass censure on it, he openly declared, that he would proceed
then, as at other times, secundum allegata and probata, according to the
Proofs and Evidences which had been produced, that it had been proved that the
Minister had taken the degree of a Master of Arts, and after of a Bachelor of
Divinity also, and had lived 20. years and upwards, in the place of his
present dwelling, without any discredit or reproach; that there was no Proof
made of Gunters being a Captain, and he had reason to believe that he was no
Gent. that he was confident no Gent. in England would either spit in the face
of a Minister, or find no other way to shift off the shame and punishment, but
by telling a lie; and finally that the Official had deserved to be censured,
for placing such a Jack-Gentleman as this, above all the Ministers at the
public meeting of a Clergy. These were the words then spoken by that Reverend
Prelate, of this particular man, and not in any such general terms as our
Author has presented them in both Editions. And for the further proof of this,
I shall give these reasons: First, that although he desire not to blazon
himself; yet he has too much in him of the blood of the ancient Gentry, to lay
any such disparagement, or contempt upon them: And 2ly. That no such thing was
articled or insisted on by the House of Commons in their impeachment brought
against him. In which Impeachment, being many months in hammering, and liberty
given to all manner of persons to inform against him, they would certainly have
pitched on this, as a matter of most general concernment to them, if any proof
could possibly have been produced to make good the charge. And with this
Declaration of the true State of the business. I hope the Reader will be
satisfied, though our Author be not; the Impeachment being printed by an Order
of the House of Commons, and easy to be seen by any who desires to see it.

With greater zeal, but with as mischievous intention, etc.

Addend. ad Page 36. l. 6.
-- as for that Cause Asinius called it. Keckerman, building on some words of
Seneca in his book De Ira, places the Patavinitie imputed to him in this point
alone; and hereunto that of Fabius (an old Latin writer) gives a very good
ground, who much commends that lactea ubertas, that milky redundance, or
overflowing of Style, which he noted in him. But if our Author, (as some of our
modern Critics do) conceive this Patavinity to consist rather in some
phrases, which savoured more of the Paduan than the Roman Idiome, yet neither
are they so frequent, nor so much affected, nor of such strange originations,
as to give just cause to any but such severe censurers as Asinus was to except
against him. Small comfort can our Author find from this Patavinity, to
justify that long Catalogue of Ourlandish and newminted words, which is
subjoyned unto the end of the Observations. And for the obsolete words which
were found in Salust, etc.

Addend ad Page 236. l. 12.
-- The Observator will produce when required of him.

But that I may be free from his importunities at another time, and that I be
not chidden now with a quid gaudia nostra moraris, for delaying his contentment
so much and so presently desired, I shall give him both the names and words of
some of that party, to justify all that was said of them by the Observator.
And first we will begin with Calvin, the father and founder of the Sect, and he
tells us thus, Illud toties a Chrysostomo repetitum repudiari necesse est, quem
trahit volentem trahit; quo insinuat deminum porrecta tantum manu expectare an
suo auxilio juvari nobis adlubescat. So he in the second of his Institutions,
cap. 3. Those words (says he) so often repeated by Chrysostom, viz. That God
draws none but such as are willing to go, are to be condemned. By which he
intimates that God expects only with an outstretched and ready arm, whether
we be willing to accept of his help or not In which, though Calvin does not
express clearly that good Fathers meaning, yet he plainly does show his own,
insinuating that God draws men forcibly and against their own will to his
Heavenly Kingdom. Gomarus one of later date, and a chief Stickler in these
controversies, comes up more fully to the words and desire of the Pamphleter.
For putting the question in this manner An gratia haec detur vi irresistibili,
id est, effiicaci operatione Dei, ita ut voluntas ejus qui regeneratur,
facultatem non habeat illi resistendi, he answers presently, Credo and
profiteor ita esse. The question is whether the grace of God be given in an
irresistible manner, that is to say, with such an efficacious operation, that
the will of him who is to be regenerated, has not the power to make
resistance; and then the answer follows thus, I believe and profess it to be
so, So he in his Declaration, Page 20. Peter Martyr, a more moderate man than
the most amongst them, in his Common place de libero Arbitrio, has resolved it
thus. Per absurdum sane est, ut ad immutationem seu regenerationem, aliquid
active conferemus, quandoquidem nemo quicquam agit, ad seipsum generandum, Quod
si verum est in eis ^hy sicis atque carnalibus, quanto magis est dandum in
Spiritualibus, quae a nostris vi^ibus longius distent. It is very absurd (says
he) to think, that we contribute any thing activly in our Regeneration,
considering that we are able to do nothing toward our Generation; And if it
be so in these natural and carnal Acts; how much more must we grant it to be so
in Spiritual Actions, which are more beyond the reach of our power. The whole
body of the Calvinists or Contra-Remonstrants in their Collatio Hagiensis,
before mentioned, have affirmed as much, ascribing no more unto a man in the
work of his own Regeneration, or in the raising of himself from the death of
sin to the life of righteousness, than they ascribe unto him in his
Generation, to the life of Nature, or in his Resurrection from the dead to the
life eternal. For thus say they, Sicut ad nativitatem suam, nemo de suo
quicquam confert, neque ad sui excitationem ex mortuis nemo quicquam adfert de
suo; Ita etiam ad conversionem suam nemo homo quicquam confert, sed est purum
putum opus ejus gratiae Dei in Christo, quae in nobis operatur, non tantum
potentiam credendi sed etiam fidem ipsum. Put this together, and then tell me
whether the rigid sort of Calvinians do not hold and teach, that a man is drawn
forcibly, and irresistably with the Cords of Grace in the work of conversion,
without contributing any thing to, or toward his own Eternity. Nay Dontelock
goes further yet, and is so far from ascribing any thing to man, in order to
his own salvation, that he counts all his best endeavors which tend that way,
to be vain and fruitless, and to conduce more to his hurt than benefit, before
Faith and the Spirit of Regeneration by irresistible operations, (So I
understand his meaning) are iufused into him. Concludimus omnem zelum, omnemque
curam quam promovendae saluti suae h^mines adhibent, variam and frustraneam
esse, magisque obesse quam prodesse, ante fidem and Spiritum renovationis. But
I am weary with raking in these dead men's Graves, whose Heterodoxies and
unsound expressions should (for me) have lien buried in the same Grave with
them, if the Pamphleter had not put me to this troublesome and thanklesse
office.

But then the Pamphleter must have an explanation, etc.

Addend. ad Page 249. l. 3.
-- At the time of his Funeral. But whereas the Pamphleter adds, that of this
he hopes he is credibly informed by his (the said Doctor Baroes) own Son, who
is still alive: The certain falsity of this, may very well seem to disprove all
the rest of the Story. For Doctor Baroes Son died above twenty years since, and
therefore is not still alive, nor could our Author consu^t with him about it by
a saving hope, on which he grounds the credibility of his information. It must
be a strong faith, not a saving hope which can raise the dead, though newly
gathered to their Fathers; and therefore how our Author could receive this
credible information from the Son of Baro, without pretending to a greater
power of working miracles, than ever was granted to any of the Sons of Men, is
beyond my reach. The Pamphleter must find out some other Author for this his
credible Information, or else it might remain as a thing incredible, for any
proof that he has brought us. But this is not the first time that our Author
has endeavored to raise the dead to bear witness for him, and I think it will
not be the last. As for the story of these Articles, etc.

Addend. ad Page 298. l. ult.
-- non bona pejor erit, is a great deal better.

It Is true indeed, the words of the Doctors Sermon, as it came out yesterday in
print ( viz. Monday June 16.) seems at first sight, to differ somewhat from the
passage before recited, as it was sent to me in writing: But first the Reader
is to know, that the Sermon comes not to our Hands, as it came from his Mouth,
it being confessed in the Title, that it has not only been revized, but
enlarged also; of which Enlargements, that of Dodonas Grove may perhaps be one.
2ly. If if be not so, yet the Observator, as well as the Rainger of that
Forest stands charged with this, viz. That the Lord Primate had coined a
distinction, between the Kings personal and political Conscience. For having
eased his Stomach on the Rainger of the vocal Forest, upon that occasion, he
adds, that there was a presump^uous Observator, who had of late more
ridic^lously and maliciously abused him in it. Out of which Premises it cannot
otherwise be concluded, but that the distinction of a personal and political
Conscience must be found in the Observations also, and so found there, as to be
charged on the Lord Primate by the Observator. And if the Preacher can find
this in the Observations, the Observator was too blame, and the Preacher has
made the alteration to a very good purpose. But if it be not so, as indeed it
is not, where lies the malice or ridiculousnesse which the Pulpit rang of? Not
in imposing on the Lord Primate the pretended distinction above mentioned; for
that has found another Father, and was perhaps begotten under some shady Oak
in Dodonas Grove, in which the Observator is not so much as verderer, and
hardly hunteth in the Pourlieus; but for conceiving that the L. Primate gave
this pretended distinction (for let it be but pretended still I dispute not
that) as if the root of it was in revenge for the Earls suppressing the
Articles of Ireland. Sermon. Page 95. Admit it to be so conceived and said by the
Observator, how does the Preacher go about to prove the contrary? Why
certainly by a most unavoidable Argument, declaring thus; that both are of like
falsehood, as has been already apparent in an Answer to him. Ibid. This is just
Mulus Mulum fricat (one galled Horse rubbeth another) in the ancient Proverb.
The Pamphleter justifies himself on the Certificate of Doctor Bernard and his
Brother Pullein; Doctor Bernard justifies himself on the answer of the learned
Pamphleter, which is now before us. The falsehood of that one thing which is
touched on by the Observator, not being made apparent in the Pamphleters
Answer, and to the other thing, the pretended distinction which he wots of, the
Pamphleter makes no Answe^ at all, as finding no ground for it in the
Observations. But Bernardus non vidit omnia, as the saying is. And though he be
not such an ill-looking fellow as the Observator is made to be by his friend
the Pamphleter; yet having lost himself in a Vo^al Forest, he may sometimes
mistake wood for trees, as well as another; Only I could have wished he had
forborne that passage in the close of all, where he relates, That when upon a
rumor of the Lord Primates death, this business of the Earl of Strafford was
objected against him; the King with an Oath protested the innocence of the Lord
Primate in it; or else that he had given us the name of that person of quality,
which was an Earwitnesse to the words, for I can tell him, and will tell him,
if he put me to it, that there are persons of another manner of quality than
those whom he pretends unto, who heard the contrary from the Kings own mouth,
and will not spare to give testimony to the truth in that particular when
required of them. But I forbear to press it further, and could have wished the
Preacher had permitted me not to say so much. I leave him at this time, with
non tali auxilio, etc. and so fare him well.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. for Effects read Defects. page 18. for impudence r. imprudence. p. 20.
for liberty r. belief. p. 29. for office r. of his. p. 34. for seem r. serve.
p. 42. l. 16. for one r. none. p. 44. for est r. Et. p. 45. for 1619 r. 1618.
p. 68. for Masters place r. Masters Mate. p. 102. for super superannuating r.
super sexannuating. Ibid for called r. rather. p. 103. for transitions r.
transactions. p. 102. for Petitions r. positions before. p. 196. l. 19. del.
not. p. 153. for party r. parity. p. 157 for must r. might. p. 162. l. 24. for
but r. yet. p. 164. l. 22. for has r. that it has. p. 187. for has pleased
r. displeased. p. 191. l. 3. del.) was. p. 192. for sent by r. sent to. p. 211.
for 1646. r. 1640. p. 112. l. 1. ad. and they that use it not condemn not those
who use it. p. 231. for when it was moved r. when it was signified to him that
it would be moved. p. 240. for the walls r. these walls. Ibid. for its r.
thought it. p. 250. for a been r. have been. Ibid. l. 26. del. whole. p. 256.
for impose r. propose. p. 260. for so many r. no more. p. 300. for was denied
r. was not denied, p. 303. for prating and bawling r. progging and bolting.


