Historia Quinqu- Articularis: OR, A DECLARATION OF The Judgment of the
Western Churches, And more particularly Of the Church of ENGLAND, IN The Five
Controverted Points, Reproched in these Last times by the Name of ARMINIANISM.
Collected in the way of an Historical Narration, Out of the Public Acts and
Monuments, and most approved Authors of those several CHURCHES.

By PETER HEYLYN.

Jerem. VI. 16. State super vias, and videte, and interrogate de semitis
antiquis, quae sit via bona, and ambulate in ea, and invenietis resrigerium
animabus vestris. Macrob. in Saturnall. Omne meum and nihill meum. LONDON,
Printed by E. C. for Thomas Johnson at the Key in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

TO THE READER.
IT is well known to some in London and elsewhere, that these Papers were
finished for the Press, before August last. But the first breaking out in
Cheshire, and the unsetledness of affairs which ensued upon it, proved such
discouragements to all Engagings of this kind, that Michaelmas was past,
before the undertakers would adventure on it. And what distractions have since
followed in the Public Government (sufficient to retard a work of greater
consequence) is unknown to none. But long looked for comes at last, as the
saying is, though why it should come out at all may be made a question; And I
shall also give the Reader some account of that, but in so doing must make use
of somewhat which was said elsewhere.

It was more then half against my will, and rather through the indiscretion of
others, then any forwardness of my own, that I was drawn to show my self in
these present Controversies. But being unseasonably brought upon the stage by
Dr. Bernard, impertinently enough by Mr. Baxter, and with more then ordinary
Petulancy by the Man of Scorn; the Occasion was laid hold on by some very able
and discerning men, for pressing me to search into the History of these
disputes, so far forth as the Church of England was concerned in them, and to
make public what I found upon that inquiry. To which request I made such
answer at the present, as the consideration of my many unfitnesses for an
employment of that nature, might suggest unto me. But coming to me from so many
hands, that it could not fairly be denied, I was prevailed with in the end, to
apply my self to the undertaking, as soon as I had dispatched such other
businesses as lay then upon me.

In the mean time I thought I might comply sufficiently with all expectations,
by fashioning some short Animadversions on the principal passages, relating to
the Doctrine of the Church of England; which had been purloyned for the most
part out of Mr. Prinnes book of Anti-arminianism, by a late Compiler. By which
name the old Critics and Grammarians, used to call those men, who pilfering
their materials out of other men's writings, did use to lay them close together
as their own, to avoid discovery. ^ompilo, i. e. Sur^^pi^, quia quae fares
auseruat ^a pr^ssim colligunt, quod est compi^are.
And so the word is took by Horace in his Compilasse, Sermon. 1. verse ult. as is
observed on that verse by the learned Scoliasts. So that a Compilator and a
Plagiary, are but two terms of one signification. And he that would behold a
Plagacy in his proper colors, may find him painted to the life in the
Appendix to Mr. Pierce his Vindication of the learned Grotius; to which for
further satisfaction I refer the Reader.

That preamble having led the way, and my other businesses being over, I
prepared my self unto that search, to which I was so earnestly moved, and so
affectionately entreated. My helps were very few and weak, which might
sufficiently have deterred me from the undertaking. But a good cause will help
to carry on it self, and truth will find the way to shine, though darkened for
a time with the clouds of Error; as the Sun breaking from an Eclips, does
appear more glorious, though a while obscured; Delitere videtur sol, non
delitet, as in the like case the Father has it. The Five disputed Points which
in these last times are Reproached by the name of Arminianisme, had more or
less exercised the Church in all times and ages; especially after the breaking
out of the Pelagian Heresies; when all the Niceties thereof were more
thoroughly canvassed. Neither the piety and sobriety of the Primity times, nor
the authority of the Popes, nor the commanding spirit of Luther, nor the more
powerful name of Calvin, have prevailed so far; but that the Church and every
broken fragment of it has found some subdivision about these Debates. So that
it can be no great wonder if the Church of England be divided also on the same
occasion; or that a Deviation should be made from her public Rules, as well as
in all other Churches, and all former times.

Which way the general vote had passed in the elder ages, has been abundantly
set forth by John Gerrard Vossius, in his Historia Pelagiana: But he descended
not so low as these latter times, conceiving he had done enough in showing to
which of the contending parties, the general current of the Fathers did most
incline. And if Turtullians rule be good, that those opinious have most truth
which have most antiquity, ( id verum est quod primum, as his own words are)
the truth must run most clearly in that part of the Controversy which has
least in it of the Zuinglian or Calvinian Doctrines. And so far I shall follow
his method, or example rather, in the pursuit of that design which I have
before me. For though it be my principal purpose to search into the Doctrine of
the Church of England; yet I shall preface my Discourse by laying down The
Judgment of the rest of the Western Churches, before I come to that of our
first Reformers. By means whereof it may be seen what guides they followed, or
rather with what parties they concurred in judgment; since in those times the
Church was generally so distracted about these disputes, that with the whole
the aggregate body of believers, there could be no agreement hoped for, no
compliance possible.

In the pursuance of this work I have exemplified so much of the Debates and
Artifices in the Council of Trent, as concerns these points, and may be
paralleled with the like proceedings, in the Synod of Dort: I have consulted
also tho Confessions, the Synodals, and other public Monuments, and Records of
the several parties, and so many of the best and most approved Authors of this
Church of England, as either were within my power, or could be advised with at
a further distance: One whole discourse I have transcribed about Freewill, not
obvious to be met withal in Shops or Libraries. The like I have done also with
one whole Homily, though the book be easy to be found by those that seek it,
knowing full well how unwilling most Readers are to take more pains in turning
over several books, and examining all quotations which are brought before them,
then of necessity they must. Nor have I purposely concealed or subducted any
thing considerable which may seem to make for the advantage of the opposite
party: And have therefore brought in a discourse of the Martyrologist in favor
of the Calvinian Doctrine. I have also given a just account of the first
breaking out of the Predestinarians in Queen MARY'S time, and of the stirs in
Cambridge, in Queen ELIZABETH'S; not pretermitting such particulars as may be
thought to make for them, in the course of this Narrative, even to the Articles
of Ireland, and the harsh expressions of King JAMES against Arminius. And
therefore I may say in the words of Curtius, Plura equidem transcribo quam
credo; nec enim affirmare aufuge sum, quae dubito; nec subducere sustinco quae
accepi. I have related many things, which I cannot approve, though I have not
let them pass without some censure; that so I may impose nothing on the
Readers belief, without good grounds; nor defraud him of any thing conducible
to his Information.

I was not to be told how much my first engageing in this business might offend
those men who loved to countenance their extravagancy by the name of the
Church, and what loud clamours they had raised against the most Reverend Dr.
Whitgift, for encountering with T. C. in behalf of the Liturgy; against Dr. John
Bridges Dean of Sarisbury, for standing in defense of the sacred Hirarchy;
against the most learned Bishop Bilson for crossing Calvin's new device about
Christ's descent; against Dr. Barce for opposing the Genevian Rigors in the
points before us; against Mr. Richard Mountague for separating the opinions of
private men from the Churches Doctrins; and finally against the late Renouned
Archb. for laboring to restore this Church to its primitive Luster. And though
I could not hope to be more favorably dealt withal in this ^ase, then my
Letters were; yet I might reasonably expect to be used no worse. But on the
contrary. I have lately seen a Scurrilous Pamphlet, the Author ^hereof has
licked up all the filth of for^ (...)else, to vomit it at once upon me; without
^es^^ct to that civility which beseems a Scholar, or that sobriety and modesty
which adorns a Christian; so Cocks are dieted sometimes with Garlic before
they fight, that they may rather overcome their Adversaries, by the stinck of
their breath, then by the sharpeness of their spurs, or the strength of their
blows.

But I have been so long accustomed to the noise of this Railing Rhetoric,
that I am now no more troubled at it, then were the Catadupi at the Rorings of
the River Nilus, or Socrates to see himself derided and exposed to scorn on the
public Theater; Or could I be exasperated to a Retaliation, that saying of St.
Cyprian would recall me to my wonted temper; who being bitterly railed at by
some of his Presbyters, retruned this Answer, Non Oportet me paria cum illis
facere; that it becomes not me to answer them with the like revilings. And yet
I cannot but take notice of a mischievious project, for throwing a Ball of
discord betwixt me and some friends of mine, Doctors in title and degree, and
by the Libeller declared to be of my own persuasion, one of which is affirmed
to say, That I was an unhappy Writer, and marred every thing which I meddled
with; and for the finding of this one I have nothing but a blind direction of
Hist. in the margin; placed there of purpose, as it seems, to put me into a
suspicion of all eminent persons, whose names begin with those two Letters.

It is recorded in the History of Amianus Marcellinus, that certain men
informed the Emperor Valence, by their Devilish Arts, that one whose name
began with THEO should succeed in the Empire. Which put the Jealous Prince into
such a general distrust of all whose Names had that beginning (Theodoret,
Theodosius, Theopulos, Theodulos, Theodore) that he caused many of them, though
men of eminent worth, and most exemplary Loyalty, to be made the subjects of
his fear and cruelty. And such a Devilish Art is this of T. C. the younger (by
which two Letters he affects to disguise his name) to work me into a suspicion
of some eminent persons, and such as must be also of my own persuasions. But I
have no such jealousies as Valence had* and therefore shall create no trouble
to my self or others, upon that temptation. For first, I know the parties
pointed to in those two letters, to be the masters of so much Candor and
Ingenuity, that I am confident they rather would excuse my infelicities, or
insufficiencies (be they which they will) then bring me under the reproach of
any such censure, as none of different judgment ever laid upon me. And
secondly, so much they have descended beneath themselves, as of their own
accord to certify me both by Letters and Messages, how free they were from
giving any ground to that base suspicion, which was contrived with so much
malice and design, to divide between us. And so Autorem Scelus repetet, the
Calumny must be left at the Authors door, as the natural parent of it, till he
can find out more distinctly upon whom to charge it. In the mean time I leave
him to the mercy of the Laws, as a common Barrator, "Drenched over head and
ears in the waters of strife, a sower of discord and discention amongst
faithful friends."

But I have wasted too much time on this piece of impertinency, and might
perhaps have better studied my own fame, if I had took no notice of the Libell,
or the Author either, but that to have been silent altogether, in so just a
grievance* might possibly be taken for an argument of insensibility. For
otherwise as there is nothing in the Author, but the stolen name of Theophilus
Churchman, which descries my Pen, so there is nothing argumentative in the
Pamphlet, either, which was not b^th foreseen and satisfied in the following
papers, before it came unto my hands. I return therefore to my Post, which if I
can make good by Records and Evidence, (the fittest weapons for this Warfare) I
shall not easily be forced from it by Reproach and Clamors, as were the Ancient
Gauls from surprising the Capitol, by the noise and gagling of the Geese. But
whether I have made it good or not, must be left to the Reader; to whom I hope
it will appear, that Calvinism was not the native and original Doctrine of the
Church of England, though in short time it over* spread a great part thereof,
as Arrianism did the Eastern Churches in the elder times; Ubi ingemuit orbis,
as St. Hierom has it, when the world groaned and trembled under the calamity
of that dangerous Heresy. And I hope too it will appear by this discourse,
that I am not yet so far reduced ad secundam pueritiam (as the Scorner taunts
it) as that my venerable back and buttocks (pardon me for repeating such
unmannerly language) should be entitled to the Rod of this proud Orbilius. Or
if I be, I doubt not but that God Almighty, who ordains praise out of the
mouths of babes and sucklings, will raise some glory to his Name from that
second Childhood. To which great God, and his unspeakable mercies in Jesus
Christ, our common Savior, I do most heartily recommend this Church, and all
them that love it.

Lacies Court in Abington, December, 26. 1659. Peter Heylyn.

SYLLABVS CAPITVM: OR, The Contents of the Chapters.
CHAP. I. The several Heresies of those who make God to be the Author of sin,
or attribute too much to the natural freedom of Man's Will in the works of
Piety.
1 GOD affirmed by Florinus, to be the Author of sin, the blasphemy encountered
by Irenaeus, and the foul consequents thereof. 2. Revived in these last Ages
by the Libertines, said by the Papists to proceed from the Schools of Calvin,
and by the Calvinists to proceed from the Schools of Rome. 3. Disguised by the
Maniches in another Dress, and the necessity thereby imposed on the wills of
men. 4 The like by Bardesanes and the Priscilianists, the dangerous consequents
thereof exemplified out of Homer, and the words of St. Augustine. 5. The error
of the Maniches touching the servitude of the will, revived by Luther, and
continued by the Rigid Lutherans. 6. As those of Bardesanes and Priscilian by
that of Calvin, touching the Absolute Decree; the Dangers which lie hidden
under that Decree: and the incompetiblenesse thereof with Christ's coming to
Judgment. 7. The large expressions of the Ancient Fathers, touching the
Freedom of the will, abused by Pelagius and his Followers. 8. The Heresy of
Pelagius in what it did consist, especially as to this particular, and the
dangers of it. 9. The Pelagian Heresies condemned and recanted, the temper of
St. Augustine touching the Freedom of the will in spiritual matters. 10.
Pelagianisme falsely charged on the moderate Lutherans: How far all parties do
agree about the Freedom of the Will, and in what they differ.

CHAP. II. Of the Debates among the Divines in the Council of Trent, touching
Predestination and Original Sin.
1. THE Articles drawn from the Writings of the Zuinglians touching
Predestination and Reprobation. 2. The Doctrine of Predestination according to
the Dominican way. 3. As also that of the Franciscans, with reasons for their
own, and against the other. 4. The Historians Judgment interposed between the
parties. 5. The middle way of Catarinus, to compose the differences. 6. The
newness of St. Augustines Opinion, and the dislike thereof by the most learned
men in the Ages following. 7. The Perplexities amongst the Theologues touching
the Absoluteness of the Decrees. 8. The Judgment of the said Divines, touching
the possibility of Falling from Grace. 9. The Debates about the Nature and
transmitting of Original sin. 10. The Doctrine of the Council in it.

CHAP. III. The like Debates about Free Will, with the Conclusions of the
Council in the Five Controverted Points.
1. THE Articles against the Freedom of the Will extracted out of Luthers
Writings. 2. The exclamations of the Divines against Luthers Doctrine in that
Point, and the absurdities thereof. 3. The several judgments of Marinarus,
Catarinus and Andreas Vega. 4. The different Judgment of the Dominicans and
the Franciscans, whether it lay in man's power to believe, or not to believe,
and whether the freedom of the Will were lost in Adam. 5. As also of the point
of the cooperation of Man's Will with the Grace of God. 6. The Opinion of Friar
Catanca in the point of irresistability. 7. Faintly maintained by Soto a
Dominican Friar, and more cordially approved by others, but in fine rejected.
8. The great care taken by the Legates, in having the Articles so framed as to
please all parties. 9 The Doctrine of the Council in the Five Controverted
Points. 10. A Transition from the Council of Trent to the Protestant and
Reformed Churches.

CHAP. IV. The Judgment of the Lutherans and Calvinians in the said Five
Points, with some Objections made against the Conclusions of the Synod of Dort.
1. NO difference in the Five Points betwixt the Lutherans and the Church of
Rome, as is acknowledged by the Papists themselves. 2. The Judgment of the
Lutheran Churches in the said Five Points, delivered in the famous Confession
of Ausberge. 3. The distribution of the Quarrel betwixt the Franciscans,
Melancthonians, and Arminians, on the one side, the Dominicans, Rigid
Lutherans, and Sublapsarian Calvinists on the other; the middle way of
Catarinus parallelled by that of Bishop Overall. 4. The Doctrine of
Predestination, as laid down by Calvin; of what ill consequence in it self, and
how odious to the Lutheran Doctors. 5. Opposed by Sebastian Castellio in Geneva
it self, but propagated in most Churches of Calvin's Platform; afterward
polished by Perking a Divine of England, and in him censured and confuted by
Jacob Van Harmin a Belgic Writer. 6. A brief view of the Doctrine of the
Supralapsarians, and the odious consequences of it. 7. The judgment of the
Sublapsarians in the said Five points, collected and presented at the
Conference at the Hague, An. 1610. 8. The Doctrine of the Synodists in the said
Five points. 9. Affirmed to be repugnant to the Holy Scripture, as also to the
purity, justice and sincerity of Almighty God. 10. As also subversive of the
Ministry, and all acts of Piety, illustrated by the example of Tyberius Caesar,
and the Lant-grave of Thurin.

CHAP. V. The Doctrine of the Remonstrants, and the story of them, until their
final condemnation in the Synod of Dort.
1. THe Doctrine of the Remonstrants ancienter then Calvinisme, in the Belgic
Churches, and who they were that stood up for it before Arminius. 2. The first
undertakings of Arminius, his preferment to the Divinity Chair of Leyden, his
commendations and death. 3. The occasion of the names of Remonstrants and
Contra-Remonstrants, the Controversy reduced to Five points, and those
disputed at the Hague, in a public Conference. 4. The said five Points,
according to their several heads, first tendered at the Hague, and after at the
Synod of Dort. 5. The Remonstrants persecuted by their Opposites, put
themselves under the protection of Barnevelt, and by his means obtain a
Toleration of their Doctrines, Barnevelt seized and put to death by the Prince
of Orange. 6. The calling of the Synod of Dort, the parallel betwixt it and the
Council of Trent; both in the conduct of the business against their
Adversaries, and the difference amongst themselves. 7. The breaking out of the
differences in the Synod into open quarrels, between Martinius one of the
Divines of Breeme, and some of the Divines of Holland, and on what occasions.
8. A copy of the Letter from Dr. Belcanquall to Sir Dudly Carleton his
Majesty's Resident at the Hague, touching the violent prosecution of those
quarrels by the Dutch Divines. 9. A further prosecution of the Parallel
between the Council and the Synod; in reference to the Artifices used in
drawing up the Canons and Decrees of either, and the doubtful meaning of them
both. 10. The quarrelling parties join together against the Remonstrants,
denying them any place in the Synod, and finally dismiss them in a furious
Oration made by Boyerman, without any hearing. 11. The Synodists indulgent to
the damnable Doctrines of Macorius, and as unmercifull in the banishment and
extermination of the poor Remonstrants. 12. Scandalously defamed to make them
odious; and those of their persuasions in other places ejected, persecuted and
disgraced.

CHAP. VI. Objections made against the Doctrine of the Remonstrants, the
Answers unto all, and the retorting of some of them on the Opposite Party.
1. AN Introduction to the said Objections. 2. The first Objection, touching
their being enemies to the grace of God, disproved in general by comparing the
Doctrine with that of St. Augustine, though somewhat more favorable to
Free Will then that of Luther. 3. A more particular Answer in relation to some
hard expressions which were used of them by K. James. 4. The second charging it
as introductive of Popery, begun in Holland, and pressed more importunately in
England, answered both by Reason and Experience to the contrary of it. 5. The
third charge, of filling men with spiritual p^ide, first answered in Relation
to the testimony from which it was taken, and then retorted on those who object
the same. 6. The fourth Charge, making the Remonstrants a furious and seditious
People, begun in Holland, prosecuted in England, and answered by the most
Religious Bishop Ridley. 7. What moved K. James to think so ill of the
Remonstrants, as to exasperate the States against them. 8. The Remonstrants
neither so troublesome nor so chargeable to the States themselves, as they were
made by the Objector; the indirect proceedings of the Prince of Orange in the
death of Bannevelt, and the injustice of the Argument in charging the practices
of his Children against the Prince of Orange, upon all the party. 9. Nothing in
the Arminian Doctrine that may incline a man to factious and seditious courses,
as is affirmed and proved to be in that of Calvin. 10. The Recrimination
further proved by a passage in the Conference of the Lord Treasurer Burleigh
with Queen Eliz* in a letter of some of the Bishops to the Duke of Buckingham,
and in that of Dr. Brooks to the late Archbishop. 11* More fully prosecuted and
exemplified by Campneys an old English Protestant. 12. A Transition to the
Doctrine of the Church of England.

CHAP. VII. An Introduction to the Doctrine of the Church of England in the
Points disputed, with the removal of some Rubs which are laid in the way.
1. THe Doctrine of the Homilies, concerning the endowments of man at his first
Creation. 2. His miserable Fall. 3. And the promised hopes of his restitution
in the Lord Christ Jesus. 4. A general Declaration of the judgment of the
Church of England, in the points disputed, exemplified in the story of
Agillmond and Lamissus Kings of Lombardy. 5. The contrary judgment of Wickleff
objected, answered, and applied to all modern Heresies. 6. The general answer
of the like Argument pretended to be drawn from the writings of Frith, Tyndall
and Barns; but more particularly. 7. The judgment of Dr. Barns in the present
Points, and the grounds on which he builded the same. 8. Small comfort to be
found from the works of Tyndall in favor of the Calvinian Doctrine. 9. The high
flyings of John Frith and others in the Doctrine of Predestination, reproved by
Tyndall. 10. A parallel between some of our first Martyrs and the blind man
restored to his ^ight in the 8. of St. Mark.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Preparatives to the Reformation, and the Doctrine of the
Church in the present Points.
1. THe danger of ascribing too much to our ancient Martyrs, exemplified in the
parity of Ministers, and popular Elections unto Benefices allowed by Mr. John
Lambert. 2. Nothing ascribed to Calvin's judgment by our first Reformers, but
much to the Augustan Confession, the writings of Melancthon; and 3. unto the
Authority of Erasmus, His paraphrases being commended to the use of the Church
by King Edward* 6. and the Reasons why. 4. The Bishops book in order to the
Reformation, called The Institution of a Christian man, commended by King Henry
8. 1537. corrected afterward by the Kings own hand, examined and allowed by
Cranmer, approved by Parliament, and finally published by the name of A
necessary Doctrine, etc. Anno 1543. 5. The Doctrine of the said two books in the
Points disputed, agreeable unto that which after was established by King Edward
6. 6. Of the two Liturgies made in that Kings time, and the makers of them; the
testimony given to the first, and the alterations made in the second. 7. The
first book of Homilies by whom made, approved by Bucer, and of the Arguments
that may be drawn from the method of it, in the points disputed. 8. The quality
and condition of those men who principally concurred to the book of Articles,
with the harmony or concent in judgment between Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop
Ridly, and Bishop Hooper, etc. 9. The Doctrine delivered in the book of Articles
touching the Five Controverted points. 10. An answer to the objections against
these Articles, for the supposed want of Authority in the making of them. 11.
An objection against King Edwards Catechism, mistaken for an objection against
the Articles; refelled as to that late Schism by John Philpot Martyr, and of
the delegating of their powers by the Convocation to a choice Committee. 12.
The Articles not drawn up in comprehensive or ambiguous terms to please all
parties, but to be understood in the Restrictive letter and Grammatical sense,
and the Reasons why.

CHAP. IX. Of the Doctrine of Predestination, delivered in the Articles, the
Homilies, the public Liturgy, and the writings of some of the Reformers.
1. THe Articles differently understood by the Calvinian party, and the true
English Protestants, with the best way to find out the true sense thereof. 2.
The definition of Predestination, and the most considerable points contained in
it. 3. The meaning of those words in the Difinition, viz. Whom he has ch^sen
in Christ, according to the exposition of St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostom, and St.
Jerome as also of Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop Latimer, and the book of Homilies.
4. The absolute decree condemned by Bishop Latimer, as a means to
licentiousness and carnal living. 5. For which, and making God to be the
Author of sin, condemned as much by Bishop Hooper. 6. Our election to be found
in Christ not to be sought for in Gods secret Councels, according to the
judgment of Bishop Latimer. 7. The way to find out our Election delivered by
the same godly Bishop, and by Bishop Hooper, with somewhat to the same purpose
also from the book of Homilies. 8. The Doctrine of Predestination delivered by
the holy Martyr John Bradford, with Fox his gloss upon the same to corrupt the
text. 9. No countenance to be found for any absolute, personal, and
irrespective Decree of Predestination in the public Liturgy. 10. An answer to
such passages out of the said Liturgy as seem to favor that opinion, as also
touching the number of Gods elect.

CHAP. X. The Doctrine of the Church concerning Reprobation, and Universal
Redemption.
1. THE absolute Decree of Reprobation not to be found in the Articles of this
Church, but against it in some passages of the public Liturgy. 2. The cause of
Reprobation to be found in a man's self, and not in Gods Decrees, according to
the judgment of Bishop Latimer, and Bishop Hooker. 3. The Absolute Decree of
Election and Reprobation how contrary to the last Clause in the 17. Article. 4.
The inconsistency of the absolute Decree of Reprobation with the Doctrine of
Universal Redemption by the death of Christ. 5. The Universal Redemption of
mankind by the death of Christ, delivered in many places of the public
Liturgy, and affirmed also in one of the Homilies, and the Book of Articles. 6.
A further proof of it from the mission of the Apostles, and the prayer used in
the Ordination of Priests. 7. The same confirmed by the writings of Archbishop
Cranmer, and the two other Bishops before remembered. 8. A generality of the
Promises, and an universality of Vocation maintained by the said two godly
Bishops. 9. The Reasons why this benefit is not made effectual unto all sorts
of men, to be found in themselves.

CHAP. XI. Of the Heavenly influences of Gods Grace in the conversion of a
sinner, and Man's cooperation with those Heavenly influences.
1. THE Doctrine of Deserving Grace ex congruo, maintained in the Roman Schools
before the Council of Trent, rejected by our ancient Martyrs, and the book of
Articles. 2. The judgment of Dr. Barnes and Mr. Tyndall touching the necessary
workings of Gods Grace on the Will of man, not different from the Church of
England. 3. Universal Grace maintained by Bishop Hooper, and proved by some
passages in the Liturgy and book of Homilies. 4. The offer of Universal Grace
made ineffectual to some for want of Faith, and to others for want of
Repentance, according to the judgment of Bishop Hooper. 5. The necessity of
Grace preventing, and the free cooperation of man's will being so prevented,
maintained in the Articles, in the Homilies, and the public Liturgy. 6. The
necessity of this Cooperation on the part of man defended and applied to the
exercise of a godly life, by Bishop Hooper. 7. The Doctrine of Irresistability
first broached by Calvin, and pertinaciously maintained by most of his
Followers, and by Gomarus amongst others. 8. Gainsaid by Bishop Hooper and
Bishop Latimer. 9. And their gainsaying justified by the truth Article of King
Edwards book; and 10. the book of Homilies.

CHAP. XII. The Doctrine of Free Will agreed upon by the Clergy in their
Convocation, Anno 1543.
1. OF the Convocation in the year 1543. in order to the Reformation of
Religion in points of Doctrine. 2. The Article of Free Will, in all the powers
and workings of it, agreed on by the Prelates and Clergy of the Convocation,
agreeable to the present Doctrine of the Church of England. 3. An answer to the
first objection concerning the Popishnesse of the Bishops and Clergy in that
Convocation. 4. The Article of Free Will approved by King Henry the 8. and
Archbishop Cranmer. 5. An answer to the last objection concerning the
Conformity of that Article to the present established Doctrine in the Church of
Rome.

CHAP. XIII. The Doctrine of the Church of England concerning the certainty or
uncertainty of Perseverance.
1. THe certainty of Grace debated in the Council of Trent, and maintained in
the affirmative by the Dominicans, and some others. 2. The contrary affirmed by
Catarinus, and his adherents. 3. The doubtful Resolution of the Council in it.
4. The Calvinists not content with certainty of Grace quoad statum praesentem,
presume upon it also quoad statum futurum. 5. The bounds and limits wherewith
the Judgment in this point ought rationally to be circumscribed. 6. The Doctrine
of the Church of England in the present Article. 7. Justified by the testimony
of Bishop Latimer, Bishop Hooper, and Mr. Tyndall. 8. And proved by several
Arguments from the public Liturgy. 9. The Homily commends a probable steadfast
hope; but 10. allows no certainty of Grace, and Perseverance in any ordinary
way to the sons of men.

CHAP. XIV. The Plain Song of the second Homily touching the falling from God,
and the Descants made upon it.
1. MOre from some other Homilies touching the possibility of falling from the
Grace received. 2. The second Homily or Sermon touching Falling from God laid
down Verbatim. 3. The sorry shifts of Mr. Yates to illude the true meaning of
that Homily, plainly discovered and confuted. 4. An answer to his objection
touching the passages cited from the former Homily in Mr. Mountague's Appeal.
5. The judgment of Mr. L. Ridley Archdeacon of Canterbury, in the points of
Election and Redemption. 6. As also touching the Reasons why the Word was not
preached unto the Gentiles, till the coming of Christ; the influences of Grace,
the Coworking of man, and the possibility of Falling from the faith of Christ.

CHAP. XV. Of the Author and Authority of K. Edwards Catechism; As also of the
judgment of Martin Bucer, and Peter Martyr in the Points disputed.
1. THe Catechism published by the Authority of K. Edward 6, 1553. affirmed to
have been writ by Bishop Poynet, and countenanced by the rest of the Bishops
and Clergy. 2. Several passages collected out of that Catechism to prove that
the Calvinian Doctrins were the true genuine and ancient Doctrins of the Church
of England. 3. With a discovery of the weakness and impertinency of the
Allegation. 4. What may most probably be conceived to have been the judgment
of Bishop Poynet in most of the Controverted points. 5. An answer to another
objection derived from M. Bucer and P. Martyr, and the influence which their
Auditors and Disciples are supposed to have had in the Reformation. 6. That
Bucer was a man of moderate Counsels, approving the first Liturgy of K. Edward
6. assenting to the Papists at the Diet of Ratisbone, in the possibility of
Falling from Grace; and that probably P. Martyr had not so far espoused the
Calvinian quarrels, when he lived in Oxon, as after his return to Zurick, and
Calvin's neighborhood. 7. The judgment of Erasmus, according as it is
delivered in his Paraphrases on the Four Evangelists, proposed first in the
general view; 8. And after more particularly in every one of the points
disputed.

CHAP. XVI. Of the first breakings out of the Predestinarians, and their
Proceedings in the same.
1. THe Predestinarians at the first called by the name of Gospellers. 2.
Campneys a professed enemy to the Predestinarians, but neither Papist nor
Pelagian. 3. The common practices of the Calvinists to defame their
Adversaries, the name of Free-will-men to whom given and why. 4. The Doctrine
of John Knox in restraining all men's actions whether good or evil to the
determinate will and Council of God. 5. The like affirmed by the Author of the
Table of Predestination, in which and the Genevian Notes, we find Christ
excluded from being the foundation of man's Election, and made to be an
inferior cause of salvation only. 6. God made to be the Author of sin, by the
Author of a Pamphlet, entitled, Against a Privy Papist, and his secret
Counsels called in for the proof thereof, both by him and Knox, with the
mischiefs which ensued upon it. 7. The Doctrine of Robert Crawley, imputing all
men's sins to Predestination, his silly defenses for the same, made good by a
distinction of John Verons, and the weakness of that Distinction showed by
Campneys. 8. The Errors of the former Authors opposed by Campneys, his book in
Answer to those Errors, together with his Orthodoxie in the point of Universal
Redemption, and what he builds upon the same. 9. His solid Arguments against
the imputing of all actions either good or evil, to Predestination, justified
by a saying of Prosper of Aquitain. 10. The virulent prosecutions of Veron and
Crowley, according to the Genius of the Sect of Calvin.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Disputes amongst the Confessors in Prison, in Queen Mary's
days, and the resetling of the Church on her former Principles under Queen
Eliz.
1. THe Doctrine of Predestination disputed amongst the Confessors in Prison in
Queen Mary's days. 2. The Examination of John Careless before Dr. Martin. 3.
Considerations on some passages in the said Conference. 4. A review made of the
public Liturgy, by the command of Queen Eliz. and the Paraphrases of Erasmus
commended to the reading both of Priests and People. 5. The second Book of
Homilies how provided for, and of the liberty taken by the Gospellers and
Zuinglian Sectaries, before the reviving and confirming of the Book of Articles
by the Queens Authority. 6. Of the reviving and authority of the Book of
Articles, An. 1562. and what may be thence inferred. 7. An Answer to the
Argument drawn from omitting the ninth Article of King Edwards Book, the
necessity of giving some content to the Zuinglian Gospellers, and the
difficulties wherewith they were induced to subscribe the Book, at the first
passing of the same. 8. The Argument taken from some passages in the English
Catechism, set forth by Mr. Alexander Nowell, and the strength thereof. 9.
Considerations made on the said Catechism, and the rest of that Authors
making, and what his being Prolocutor in the Convocation might add to any of
them in point of Orthodoxy. 10. Nothing to be collected out of the first
passage in Mr. Nowels Catechism, in favor of the Calvinian Doctrine of
Predestination and the points depending thereupon, and less then nothing in the
second if it be understood according to the Authors meaning, and the
determination of the Church.

CHAP. XVIII. A Declaration of the Doctrine in the Points disputed under the
new Establishment made by Queen Eliz.
1. THe Doctrine of the second Book of Homilies, concerning the wilful Fall of
Adam, the miserable estate of man, the restitution of lost man in Jesus Christ,
and the universal Redemption of all Mankind by his Death and Passion. 2. The
Doctrine of the said second Book, concerning Universal Grace, the possibility of
a total and final Falling, and the cooperation of man's will with the grace of
God. 3. The judgment of Reverend Bishop Jewel touching the universal
Redemption of Mankind by the Death of Christ; Predestination grounded upon
faith in Christ, and reached out unto all them that believe in him, by Mr.
Alexander Nowell. 4. Dr. Harsnet in his Sermon at Paul's Cross, 1584. shows,
that the absolute decree of Reprobation, t^rneth the truth of God into a lie,
and makes him to be the Author of sin. 5. That it deprives man of the natural
freedom of his will, makes God himself to be double-minded, to have two
contrary wills, and to delight in mocking his poor creature Man. 6. And finally
that it makes God more cruel and unmercifull then the greatest Tyrant, contrary
to the truth of Scripture, and the constant Doctrine of the Fathers. 7. The rest
of the said Sermon reduced unto certain Heads, directly contrary to the
Calvinian Doctrines, in the points disputed. 8. Certain considerations on the
Sermon aforesaid, with reference to the subject of it, as also to the time,
place and person, in and before which it was first preached. 9. An answer to
some Objections concerning a pretended Recantation affirmed to have been made
by the said Mr. Harsnet. 10. That in the judgment of the right learned Dr.
King, after Bishop of Reading, the alteration of Gods denounced Judgments in
some certain cases, infers no alteration in his Councels; the difference
between the changing of the will, and to will a change. 11. That there is
something in Gods decrees revealed to us, and something concealed to himself;
the difference between the inferior and superior causes, and of the
conditionality of Gods Threats and Promises. 12. The accommodating of the
former part of this discourse to the case of the Ninivite 13. And not the case
of the Ninivites to the case disputed.

CHAP. XIX. Of the first great breach which was made in the Doctrine of the
Church, by whom made, and what was done toward the making of it up again.
1. GReat Alteration made in the face of the Church from the return of such
Divines as had withdrawn themselves beyond Sea in the time of Queen Mary; with
the necessity of employing them in the public service, if otherwise of known
zeal a against the Papists. 2. Several examples of that kind in the places of
greatest Power and Trust in the Church of England, particularly of Mr. Fox the
Martyrologist, and the occasion which he took of publishing his opinion in the
point of Predestination; 3. His Notes on one of the Letters of Mr. John
Bradford martyr, touching the matters of Election therein contained, and his
perverting of the Text on which he writes. 4. The difference between the
Comment and the Text, and between the Author of the Comment and Bishop Hooper.
5. Exceptions against some passages, and observations upon others in the said
Notes of Mr. Fox. 6. The great breach made hereby in the Churches Doctrine, made
greater by the countenance which was given to the Acts and Monuments, by the
Convocation, 1571. 7. No argument to be drawn from hence, touching the
approbation of his Doctrine by the Convocation, no more then for the
approbation of his Marginal Notes, and some particular passages in it,
disgraceful to the Rites of the Church, and Attire of the Bishops. 8. A
Counter-ballance made in that Convocation against Fox his Doctrines and all
other Novelismes of that kind.

CHAP. XX. Of the great Innovation made by Perkins in the Public Doctrine, the
stirs arising thence in Cambridge, and Mr. Barrets carriage in them.
1. OF Mr. Perkins and his Doctrine of Predestination, with his recital of the
4 Opinions which were then maintained about the same. 2. The sum and substance
of his Doctrine, according to the Supralapsarian, o^ Supracreatarian way. 3. The
several censures past upon it both by Papists and Protestants, by none more
sharply then by Dr. Robert Abbots, after Bishop of Sarum. 4. Of Dr. Baroe the
Lady Margarets Professor in that University, his Doctrine touching the Divine
decrees, upon occasion of Gods denounced Judgment against the Ninivites. 5. His
constant opposition to the Predestinarians, and the great increase of his
Adherents. 6. The Articles collected out of Barrets Sermon derogatory to the
Doctrine an^ persons of the chief Calvinians. 7. Barret convented for the same,
and the proceedings had against him at his first Convention. 8. A form of
Recantation delivered to him, but not the same which does occur in the
Anti-Arminianisme, nor to be found in the Records of that University. 9.
Several arguments to prove that Barret never published the Recantation imposed
upon him. 10. The rest of Barrets story related in his own Letter to Dr. Goade
being then Vice Chancellor. 11. The sentencing of Barret to a Recantation, no
argument that his Doctrine was repugnant to the Church of England, and that the
body of the same Uuiversity differed from the Heads in that particular.

CHAP. XXI. Of the proceedings against Baroe, the Articles of Lambeth, and the
general calm which was in Oxon, touching these Disputes.
1. THe differences between Baroe and Dr. Whitakers, the Address of Whitakers
and others to Archbishop Whitgift, which drew on the Articles of Lambeth. 2.
The Articles ag^eed on at Lambeth, presented both in English and Latin. 3. The
Articles of no Authority in themselves, Archbishop Whitgift questioned for
them, together with the Queens command to have them utterly suppressed. 4. That
Baroe neither was deprived of his Professorship, nor compelled to leave it, the
Anti-Calvinian party being strong enough to have kept him in if he had desired
it. 5. A copy of the Letter from the Heads in Cambridge to the Lord Treasurer
Burleigh, occasioned as they said by Barret and Baroe. 6. Dr. Overald
encounters with the Calvinists in the point of falling from Grace received; his
own private judgment in the point, neither for total, or for final, and the
concurrence of some other learned men in the same opinion 7. The general calm
which was at Oxon at that time, touching these Disputes, and the reasons of it.
8. An answer to the objection out of the writings of Judicious Hooker, as to
the total and final falling. 9. The disaffection of Dr. Buckridge and Dr.
Houson to Calvin's Doctrins; an Answer to the objection, touching the paucity of
those who oppose the same. 10. Possession of a truth maintained but by one or
two, preserves it sacred and inviolable from unfortunate times; the case of
Liberius Pope of Rome,, and that the testimonies of this kind are rather to be
valued by weight then tale.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Conference at Hampton Court, and the several
encouragements given to the Anti-Calvinians in the time of K. James.
1. THe occasion of the Conference at Hampton Court, and the chief persons
there assembled. 2. The 9 Articles of Lambeth rejected by K. James. 3. Those of
the Church being left in their former condition. 4. The Calvinian Doctrine of
Predestination decried by Bishop Bancroft, disliked by King James, and the
reasons of it. 5. Bishop Bancroft and his Chaplain both abused: the inserting
of the Lambeth Articles into the Confession of Ireland, no argument for K.
James his approbation of them, by whom they were inserted, and for what cause
allowed of in the said Confession. 6. A pious fraud of the Calvinians in
clapping their Predestinarian Doctrines at the end of the Old Testament, An.
1607. discovered, censured and rejected, with the reasons for it. 7. The great
encouragement given by King James to the Anti-Calvinians, and the increase of
that Party both in power and number, by the stirrs in Holland. 8. The offense
taken by K. James at Conradus Vorstius, animateth the Oxford Calvinists to
suspend Dr. Houson, and to preach publicly against Dr. Laud. 9. The like
proceedings at Cambridge, against Mr. Symson, first prosecuted by K. James, and
on what account, that the King was more incensed against the party of Arminius,
then against their persuasions. 10. Instructions published by K. James in order
to the diminishing of Calvin's authority, the defense of Universal Redemption,
and the suppressing of his Doctrins in the other points, and why the last
proved so unusefull in the case of Gabriel Bridges. 11. The publishing of
Mountagues Answer to the Gagger, the information made against it; the Author
and his Doctrins taken by K. James into his protection, and his Appeal licensed
by that Kings appointment. 12. The Conclusion of the whole discourse, and the
submission of it to the Church of England.

Historia Quinqu- Articularis: OR, A DECLARATION OF The Judgment of the
Western Churches, And more particularly Of the Church of ENGLAND, IN The Five
Controverted Points, Reproched in these Last times by the Name of ARMINIANISM.

PART. I. CONTAINING The Debates and Determinations in the said Five Points,
amongst the Learned Romanists in the Council of Trent; as also of the Lutheran
Churches, the Supralapsarian, and Sublapsarian Calvinists, and the Arminians or
Remonstrants.

LONDON, Printed by E. C. for Thomas Johnson at the Key in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1660.

Historia Quinqu- Articularis: OR, A DECLARATION Of the JUDGMENT of the
Western-Churches; And more particularly of the Church of ENGLAND; In the five
Controverted Points, etc.
CHAP. 1. The several Heresies of those who make God to be the Author of Sin,
or attribute too much to the Natural freedom of Man's Will in the Works of
Piety.
I. GOD affirmed by Florinus to be the Author of sin, the blasphemy encountered
by Irenaeus, and the foul Consequents thereof. II. Revived in the last Ages by
the Libertines, said by the Papists to proceed fram the Schools of Calvin, and
by the Calvinists to proceed from the Schools of Rome. III. Disguised by the
Maniches in another dress, and the necessity thereby imposed on the ^ils of
men. IV. The like by Bardesanes, and the Priscilianists, the dangerous
consequents thereof exemplified out of Homer, and the words of S. Augustine. V.
The error of the Maniches, touching the servitude of the Will revived by
Luther, and continned by the rigid Lutherans. VI. As those of Bardesanes and
Priscilian, by that of Calvin, touching the Absolute Decree, the dangers which
lie hidden under the Decree, and the incompetibleness thereof with Christ's
coming to Judgment. VII. The large expressions of the Ancient Fathers touching
the freedom of the ^ill, abused by Pelagius and his followers. VIII. The
Heresy of Pelagius, in what it did consist, especially as to this particular,
and the dangers of it. IX. The Pelagian Heresy condemned and recalled: the
temper of S. Augustine touching the freedom of the Will in spiritual matters.
X. Pelagianism falsely charged on the Moderate Lutherans: How far all parties do
agree about the freedom of the Will, and in what they differ.

1. OF all the Heresies which exercised the Church in the times, foregoing,
there never was any more destructive of humane Society, more contrary to the
rule of Faith and Manners, or more repugnant to the Divine Justice and Goodness
of Almighty God, then that which makes God to be the Author of sin. A blaspemy
first broacht in terms express by Florinus, Blastus, and some other of the City
of Rome, about the year 180. encountered presently by that godly Bishop and
Martyr S. Irenaeus, who published a Discourse against them, bearing this
Inscription Hist. Eccl. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 14. and 19.
(...), Viz. That God was not the Author of sin. And he gave this Inscription
to it (as the Story tells us) because Florinus not content with those Vulgar
Heresies, which had been taken up before, would needs break out into
blasphemous Phrensies against God himself, in making him the Author of all
those sins, which lewd men commit. Which Doctrine were it once admitted, not
only the first sin of Adam, but all the sins that have been hitherto*
perpetrated by his whole Posterity, must be charged on God, and he alone must
be accountable for all Murders, Robberies, Rapes, Adulteries, Insurrections,
Treasons, Blasphemies, Heresies, Persecutions, or any other Abominations, which
have been acted in the world, since the first Creation. For certainly there can
be no reason, why every man may not say, on the committing of any sin,
whatsoever it be, as did Lyconides in Plautus, when he de^^owred old Eudio's
Daughter, Deus mihi impulsor fuit, is me ad illam illexit; it was God alone who
tempted and provoked them to those wicked Actions.

II. What Arguments the good Father used to cry down this Blasphemy (for a
Heresy is a name too mild for so lewd a Doctrine) I cannot gather from my
Author, but such they were, so operative and effectual in stopping the current
of the mischief; that either Florinus and the rest had no followers at all (as
most Heretics had) or such as never attained to the height of their Masters
Impudence. And so that damnable Doctrine (the doctrine of Devils, I may call
it) seems to be strangled in the birth, or to be buried in the same grave with
the Authors of it, never revived in more then thirteen hundred years after the
death of Irenaeus, when it was again started by the Libertines, a late b^ood of
Sectaries, whom each of the two opposite parties are ashamed to own. This
taught as did Florinus, in the Primitive times, Calv. Advers. Liberti. c. ^^,
Quicquid ego, and tu facimus, Deus efficit; nam in nobis est, That whatsoever
thing they did, was Gods working in them; and therefore God to be entitled to
those wicked Actions which themselves committed. The time of their first
breakings out affirmed to be about the year 1529. The Founders of this Sect
Loppinus, and Quintinus, Flemmings both; and this Prateolus affirms for certain
to be the Progeny of Calvin, and other leading men of the Protestant Churches,
They came (says he) Eschola nostrae tempestatis Evangelicorum. Prateol.
Elench. Haere. in Quintin^.
Bellarmine somewhat more remisly, Omnino probabile est, eos ex Calvinianis
promanasse, Bell^^.
and makes it only probable, that it might be so, but not rightly neither: The
Libertines breaking out, as before was said, Ann. 1527. when Calvin was of
little credit, and the name of Calvinists, or Calvinians not so much as heard
of. And on the other side, Paraeus Professor of Divinity in the University of
Hidelberg, writing some Animadversions on the Cardinals Works, assures us that
they were both Papists, acquaints us with the place of their Nativity, and the
proceedings had against them. Nor was Calvin wanting for his part, to purge
himself from such an odious imputation, not only by confuting their Opinions in
a set Discourse, but making one Franciscus Porquius, a Franciscan Friar, to be
a chief stickler in the Cause. Against which I know nothing that can be said
but that the doctrine of the Libertines in this particular, does hold more
correspondence with Calvin's Principles, then any of the received Positions of
the Friars of S. Francis. But whether it were so or not, I shall make this
Inference, That the Doctrine must needs be most impious, which both sides
detested, which the Papists labored so industriously to Father on the Schools
of Calvin, and the Calvinians no less passionatly to charge on some of our
great Masters in the Church of Rome.

III. But so it is, that though the Impiety was too gross to appear bare faced,
yet there have been too many both in the Elder and these later times, who
entertaining in their hearts the same dread^ul madness, did recommend it to the
world under a disguise, though they agreed not at all in that Masque or Vizard,
which was put upon it. Of this sort Manes was the first, by birth of Persia,
and Founder of the damnable Sect of the Manichaeans, An. 273. or thereabouts.
This Wretch considering how unsuccesfully Florinus had sped before, in making
God (who is all, and only good) to be the Author of sin: did first excogitate
two Gods, the one good, and the other evil, both of like eternity; ascribing
all pious Actions to the one, all Sins and Vices to the other: Which ground so
laid, he utterly deprived the will of man of that natural liberty, of which it
is by God invested; and therefore that in man there was no ability of resisting
sin, or not submitting unto any of those wicked Actions which his lusts and
passions offered to him. Prateol. in Elench. Hae^. in Manich.
Contendebant, item, peccatum non esse a libero arbitrio, sed a Daemone, and
^apropter non posse per liberum arbitrium impediri, as my Author has it. Nor
did they only leave man's will in a disability of hindering or resisting the
incursions of sin, but they left it also under an incapability of acting any
thing in order to the works of Righteousness, though God might graciously
vouchsafe his assisting grace, making no difference in this case, betwixt a
living man and a stock or Statua, for so it follows in my Author. Sed and
nullam prorsus voluntati tribuebant Actionem, nec quidem adjuvante spiritu
sancto: quasi nihil interesset inter statuam and voluntatem. In both directly
contrary to that divine counsel of S. James, where he advises us to lay apart
all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness, and to receive with meekness
the ingrafted word, which is able to save your souls. Cap. 1. ver. 21. That of
S. Peter exhorting, or requiring rather, That we work out our salvation with
fear and trembling. And finally that golden Aphorism of S. Augustine; si non
sit liberum arbitrium quomodo, Deus judicabit mundum? With what justice says
the Father, can God judge or condemn the world, if the sins of men proceed not
from their own free will, but from some overruling power which enforced them
to it?

IV. Others there were who harboring in their hearts the said lewd opinions,
and yet not daring to ascribe all their sins and wickednesses unto God himself,
imputed the whole blame thereof to the Stars and Destinies, the powerful
influence of the one, and the irresistible Decrees of the other, necessitating
men to those wicked actions which they so frequently commit. Thus we are told
of Bardesanes, Quod fato conversationes hominum ascriberet, August. de Haeres.
cap. 25.
That he ascribed all things to the power of Fate. And thus it is affirmed of
Priscilianus, Fatalibus Astris homines alligatos, That men were thralled unto
the Stars, Ibid. cap. 15. and 70.
which last S. Augustine does report of one Colarbus, save that he gave this
power and influence to the Planets only; but these if pondered as they ought,
differed but little, if at all from the impiety of Florinus before remembered,
only it was expressed in a better language, and seemed to savor more of the
Philosopher then the other did. For if the Lord had passed such an irresistible
Law of Fate, that such and such should be guilty of such soul Transgressions as
they commonly committed, it was all one as if he was proclaimed for the Author
of them: and then why might not every man take unto himself the excuse and plea
of Agamemnon, (...). Homer Illiad.
It was not I that did it, but the Gods and Destiny. Or if the Lord had given
so irresistible a power to the Stars of Heaven, as to enforce men to be
wickedly and lewdly given; what differs this from making God the Author of
those vicious actions, to which by them we are enforced? And then why might not
every man cast his sin on God, and say, as did some good fellows in S.
Augustines time. August de Genesis ad lit. lib. 2. c. 27.
Accusandum potius esse Autorem syderum, quam commissorem scelerum. That he who
made the Stars was in the fault; not the men that did it.

5. But this absurdity being as much cried down by Augustine and other learned
Writers of those elder times, as the impiety of Florinus had been before; were
either utterly extinguished, or lay concealed for many hundred years together.
Amongst the Philosophical Heterodoxies of the Roman Schools, that of the
Maniches first revived by Martin Luther, who in mere opposition to Erasmus, who
had then newly writ a book De Arbitrio libero, published a Discourse,
entitled, De Arbitrio servo. In which Discourse he does not only say, That the
freedom ascribed unto the Will, is an empty nothing, Titulus, and nomen, sine
re, A name of no such thing in nature; but holds expressly, that man is drawn no
otherwise by the grace of God, then Velut inanimale quiddam, No otherwise then
as a senseless stock or stone (the Statua of the ancient Maniches) in the great
work of his conversion, to a state of Righteousness. And though Luther
afterward conformed his Judgment in this Point, unto that of Melancthon, as
appears by the Augustan Confession, in drawing up whereof he is acknowledged
to have had a principal hand; yet was he followed in this first Error, as in
almost all the rest of his extremitys, by the rigid Lutherans, headed by
Flaccus Illyricus, and his Associats in the City of Magdeberg, at his first
separation from the Melancthonian Divines, who remained at Wittenberg, and had
embraced more moderate and sober counsels: of which more hereafter.

6. But Luther shall not go alone, and not take Calvin along with him, how much
soever they might differ in some other Points: Luther revived the Error of the
Maniches, in denying all freedom to the will, especially in matters which
relate to eternal life; and Calvin will revive the Errors of Bardesanes, and
Priscillian, in charging all men's wicked actions on the Stars, and Destiny, not
positively and in terminis, I must needs say that, but so that he comes close
up to them, to Tantamo^^* ascribing that to the inevitable decrees of Almighty
God, which Bardesanes attributed to the powers of Fate: Priscillian, Clolarbus
to the influences of the Stars and Planets: For if God before all Eternity (as
they plainly say) did purpose and decree the Fall of our Father Adam, Vt sua
defectione periret Adam: In the words of Calvin Calv. inst^^. lib. 3. c. 23
sect. 7
There was in Adam a necessity of committing sin, because the Lord had so
decreed it. If without consideration of the sin of man, he has by his
determinate sentence ordained so many millions of men to everlasting damnation,
and that too necessario, and inevitabiliter, V. Synod. Rom*
as they please to phrase it, he must needs pre-ordain them to sin also: there
being (as themselves confess) no way unto the end but by the means. The odious
Inferences which are raised out of these opinions, I forbear to press, and
shall add only at the present, That if we grant this Doctrine to be true and
Orthodox, we may do well to put an Index expurgatorius upon the Creed, and
quite expunge the Article of Christ's coming to Judgment. For how could God
condemn his Creature to unquenchable Flames? or put so ill an Office upon
Christ our Savior, as to condemn them by his mouth, in case the sins by them
committed were not theirs, but his; or punish them for that himself works in
them, unto which rather he decreed them before all Eternity. Nothing more true
then that excellent saying of Fulgentius, Fulgent. ad Monimum.
Deus non est eorum ultor, quorum est Author. That God does never punish his own
actings in us.

7. Such were the men, and such the means, by which the blame of sin was
transferred from man, and charged on the account of God, either expressly and in
terms, or in the way of necessary consequence and undeniable Illation, by which
lost man was totally deprived of all abilities for resisting Satan, or
otherwise concurring with Gods grace in his own conversion. Nor wanted there
some others in those elder times, who did ascribe so much to man's will, and the
powers of Nature, as to make Gods Grace unprofitable, or at least unnecessary
in either of the Acts aforesaid. The Fathers generally which lived before the
starting of the Pelagian Heresies, declared themselves so largely, if not
lavishly also, in the present Point, that the greatest Patrons of Free will in
the Church of Rome, were fain sometimes to qualify their expressions, and put
a milder sense upon them, then the words import. For being to deal with the
fatal necessity of the Pagans on the oneside, and the Impiety of Ma^iches on
the other side; they gave themselves such liberty in advancing the powers of
Nature, as might best serve to the refelling of either Adversary; not dreaming
then that any Heresy could arise in opposition to the free Grace of God, to
the advancing of free will above all degrees of power and possibility. But on
the contrary Pelagius, a Britain born, either misguided by the lavishness of
their expressions, or otherwise willing to get a Name unto himself by some new
Invention, ascribed so much unto the freedom of the will in all Acts of Piety,
Vt* gratiam Dei necessariam n^n putaret, as Vincentius Strynensis tells us of
him.

VIII. This man associated with Caelestinus, and (...)s two of his Companions,
whom he had either drawn into the same opinion with him, or found them ready of
themselves to promote the work, began to spread abroad their Errors about the
year 405. Amongst the which those that especially concern this purpose are
these two that follow, August. Tom. 2. Epist. ^06.
Viz. 1. Non esse liberum Arbitrium, si Dei indiget auxilio, quoniam in propria
voluntate habet unusquisque facere aliquid, vel non facere. 2. Victoriam
nostram non ex Dei adjutorio esse; sed ex Libero Arbitrio* That is to say, 1.
That there is no freedom of the will, if it stand in any need of Gods
assistance, because every man has it in the power of his own will, either to
do a thing, or not to do it, as to him seems best. And 2. That our Victory over
sin and Satan comes not of any help which we have from God, but our own free
will. Add unto this, that which must follow of necessity from the former
Principles. Orationes quas facit Ecclesia pro infidelibus, and aliis
peccatoribus ut convertantur, sive pro fidelibus ut perseverent, frustra fieri.
That is to say, That the Services of the Church, which are made either for the
conversion of the wicked, or the perseverance of the Just, are but labor lost;
because (say they) our own free will is able of it self to attain those ends,
and therefore it is to no purpose to ask those things at the hands of God,
which we may compass of our selves: Pra^eol. Elenc^. Haeret. in Pelag.
Quod ad illa omnia sufficicere dicant nostri Arbitrii liberam potestatem, and
ita non opus esse a Deo petere quae nos ipsi consequi possumus, as my Author
has it; whose words I have laid down at large, that we may see how much the
world was carried to the other extreme, how much the truth was lost on both
sides, and yet how easy to be found by those who went a middle way in the
search thereof.

IX. For looking on these last opinions as they stand in themselves, we may
affirm of them in general, as Augustine does particularly of the Stoical Fates;
Nil aliud agere nisi ut nullus omnino aut rogetur aut colater Deus. They seem
to aim at nothing more then the utter abolition of the Worship and Service of
God. But these Pelagian Heresies did not hold out long, being solemnly
condemned in the 2 Affrican Councels of Carthage, and Milevis, confuted by S.
Augustine with great care and diligence: and finally retracted by Pelagius
himself in the Synod of Palestine. So that the Heresy being suppressed, the
Catholic Doctrine in that Point became more settled and confirmed by the
opposition* such freedom being left to the will of man, as was subservient unto
grace, cooperating in some measure with those heavenly influences: And so much
is confessed by S. Augustine himself, where he asks this question, Quis nostrum
dicit, quod primi hominis peccato perierit Arbitrium (o) August. l. ^. contr.
Epist* Pelagi. cap. 2.
de humano genere? Does any man (says he) affirm that free will is perished
utterly from man by the fall of Adam? And thereunto he makes this answer:
Libertas quidem periit per peccatum; sed illa quae in Paradiso fuit habendi
plenam cum immortalitate justitiam. That is to say, Freedom is perished by si^,
but it is that freedom only which we had in Paradise, of having perfect
righteousness with immortality. For otherwise it appears to be his Opinion that
man was not merely passive in all the Acts of Grace which conduced to Glory,
according to the memorable saying of his (so common in the Mouths of all men)
Qui creavit te sine te, non salvabit te sine te: That he who first made us
without our help, will not vouchsafe to save us at the last without our
concurrence. If any harsher expressions have escapt his Pen, (as commonly it
happens in the heats of a disputation) they are to be qualified by this last
Rule, and by that before; in which it was affirmed, That God could not with
justice judge and condemn the World, if all men's sins proceeded not from their
own free will, but from some overruling providence which enforced them to it.

10. After this time we meet with no such Enemies to the Grace of God, no such
Advancers of man's free will and the power of Nature, as might entitle any man
to the Crime of Pelagianism. It cannot be denied but that Illyricus and some
other of the rigid Lutherans upbraided Melancthon and all the Divines in a
manner, both of Lipsique and Wittenberge, with teaching that a man by the
powers of Nature may yield obedience to the Word, embrace the Promises, and
make no opposition to the workings of the Holy Ghost^ as has been noted by
Lindan in* Dial. 21.
Lyndanus. But then it must be granted, that when their works came to be
weighed in the Scale of the Sanctuary, it will be found that they speak only of
such a Synergie* or cooperation, as makes men differ from a senseless stock, or
liveless statua, in reference to the great work of his own conversion. And
thereupon we may resolve that at the last the Church in general concentred upon
these Propositions:

1. Man in the state of corruption has freedom of will in Actions natural and
civil.

2. That considered in the same estate he has free will in matters moral. And,

3. That man has free will in Actions of piety, and such as belong unto his
salvation; that is to say, Being first prevented by Gods Grace, and having
afterward the assistance and support thereof: which Propositions being easy
and intelligible as they stand by themselves, but are made more difficult and
obscure, even to learned men, by interweaving them with many intricate
disputes, touching the correspondence of free will, with Prescience,
Providence, and Predestination: disputes so intricate and perplexed, that
Armachan^s (as great a Clerk as almost any in his time) traveled no less then
twenty years in the search of one of them alone, and yet could not find it. And
yet I cannot say, that the consent in those three Propositions before
remembered, in which the Church has generally concentred: since the death of S.
Augustine has met with no dissenting Judgment in these later times. Some men
restraining all our Actions to so strict a Rule, as to make the will of man
determined and tied up in all particulars, even to the taking up of a Rush, or
Straw, as in another case it was taught by Cartwright the great Bel-weather of
the Flock in Queen Elizabeth's Eccles. polit. lib. 11. p 96.
time, sufficiently derided, or rather gravely reprehended for it by judicious
Hooker. And if we meet with any thing which looks that way in the writings of
some Dominican Friars, who stiffly stand to all the rigours of S. Augustine in
the controversies of Predestination, Grace, free Will, etc. against the
Jesuits, and Franciscans: it is to be imputed rather to the error of their
Education, a stifness in maintaining their old Opinions, or finally to that
Animosity, which commonly the weaker party carries against the stronger, then
to any clear and evident Authority, which they can pretend to from that Father,
or any other ancient Writers of unquestioned credit; which said, I hope it will
be granted without much difficulty, that such a doctrine of predestination, as
neither directly nor indirectly makes God to be the Author of sin, nor
attributes so much to the will of man, in depraved nature, as to exclude the
influences of Gods heavenly Grace; is more to be embraced then any other, which
dasheth against either of the said extremes: And that being granted or
supposed, I shall first lay down the Judgment of the differing parties, in the
Article of Predestination, and the Points depending thereupon; and afterward
declare to which of the said differing Parties, the Doctrine of the Church of
England seems most inclinable.

CHAP. II. Of the Debates amongst the Divines in the Council of Trent, touching
Predestinations, and Original Sin.
I. The Articles drawn from the Writings of the Zuinglians, touching
Predestination and Reprob^ation. II. The Doctrine of Predestination according
to the Dominican way. III. As also the old Franciscans, with Reasons for their
own, and against the other. IV. The Historians Judgment interposed between the
Parties. V. The middle way of Catarinus to compose the differences. VI. The
newness of St. Augustines Opinion, and the dislike thereof by the most Learned
men in the Ages following. VII. The perplexities amongst the Theologues,
touching the absoluteness of the Decrees. VIII. The Judgment of the said
Divines, touching the possibility of falling from Grace. IX. The Debates about
the nature and transmitting of Original Sin. X. The Doctrine of the Council in
it.

I. IN such condition stood Affairs in reference to the doctrines of
Predestination, Grace, Free Will, etc. at the first sitting down of the Council
of Trent, in which those Points became the subject of many sad and serious
Debates amongst the Prelates and Divines, then and there Assembled, which being
so necessary to the understanding of the Questions which we have before us: I
shall not think my time ill spent in laying down the sum and abstract of the
same, as I find it digested to my hand by Padre Paulo, the diligent and
laborious Author of the Tridentine History; only I shall invert his method, by
giving precedence to the Disputes concerning Predestination, before the Debates
and Agitations, which happened in canvasing the Articles touching the Freedom of
man's Will, though those about Free Will do first occur in the course and method
of that Council: It being determined by the Council, as that Author has it, to
draw some Articles from the Writings of the Protestants, concerning the
Doctrine of Predestination: It appeared that in the Books of Luther, in the
Augustan Confession, and in the Apologies and Colloquies, there was nothing
found that deserved censure; But much they found among the Writings of the
Zuinglians, out of which they drew these following Articles; Viz.

1. For Predestination and Reprobation; that man does nothing, but all is in
the will of God.

2. The Predestined cannot be condemned, nor the Reprobate saved.

3. The Elect and Predestined only are truly justified.

4. The Justified are bound by Faith to believe, they are in the number of the
Predestined.

5. The Justified cannot fall from Grace.

6. Those that are called, and are not in the number of the Predestined, do
never receive Grace.

7. The Justified is bound to believe by Faith, that he ought to persevere in
Justice until the end.

8. The Justified is bound to believe for certain, that in case he fall from
Grace, he shall receive it again.

II. In the examining the first of these Articles, the Opinions were diverse.
The most esteemed Divines amongst them thought it to be Catholic, the contrary
Heretical; because the good School Writers ( S. Thomas, Scotus, and the rest)
do so think, that is, that God before the Creation, out of the Mass of
mankind, has elected by his only and mere mercy, some for Glory, for whom he
has prepared effectually the means to obtain it, which is called, to
predestinate. That their number is certain and determined, neither can there
any be added. The others not Predestined cannot complain, for that God has
prepared for them sufficient assistance for this, though indeed none but the
Elect shall be saved. For the most principal reason they alleged, that S. Paul
to the Romans having made Jacob a pattern of the Predestined, and Esau of the
Reprobate, he produces the Decree of God pronounced before they were born, not
for their Works, but for his own good pleasure. To this they joined the example
of the same Apostle: That as the Potter of the same Lump of Clay, makes one
Vessel to honor, another to dishonor; so God of the same Mass of men,
chooses and leaves whom he lists: for proof whereof S. Paul brings the
place where God faith to Moses, I will show mercy, on whom I will show mercy,
and I will show pity, on whom I will show pity. And the same Apostle
concludes; It is not of him that wills, or of him that runs, but of God
who shows mercy; adding after, that God shows mercy, on whom he will, and
hardneth whom he will. They said further, That for this cause, the Council of
the Divine Predestination and Reprobation is called by the same Apostle, The
height and depth of wisdom, unsearchable and incomprehensible. They added
places of the other Epistles, where he says, We have nothing but what we have
received from God, that we are not able of our selves, so much as to think
well: and where, in giving the cause, why some have revolted from the Faith,
and some stand firm, he said, it was because the Foundation of God stands
sure, and has this seal; the Lord knows who are his. They added diverse
passages of the Gospel of S. John, and infinite Authorities of S. Augustine,
because the Saint wrote nothing in his old Age but in favor of this Doctrine.

III. But some others though of less esteem, opposed this opinion, calling it
hard, cruel, inhumane, horrible, impious, and that it showed partiality in God,
if, without any motive cause, he elected one, and rejected another; and unjust
if he damned men for his own will, and not for their faults, and had created so
great a multitude to condemn it. They said, it destroyed Free Will, because the
Elect cannot finally do evil, nor the Reprobate good: that it casts men into
a gulf of desperation, doubting that they be Reprobates; That it gives
occasion to the wicked of bad thoughts, not caring for Penance, but thinking
if they be elected, they shall not perish; if Reprobates, it is in vain to do
well, because it will not help them. They confessed, that not only works, are
not the cause of Gods election, because that is before them, and eternal; but
that neither Works foreseen, can move God to Predestinate, who is willing for
his infinite mercy, that all should be saved, to this end prepares sufficient
assistance for all, which every man having Free Will receives or refuses, as
pleases him: and God in his eternity foreseeth those who will receive his
help, and use it to good, and those who will refuse; and rejects these,
electeth and predestinateth those: They added, That otherwise there was no
cause why God in the Scriptures should complain of sinners; nor why he should
exhort all to repentance and conversion, if they have not sufficient means to
get them: that the sufficient assistance invented by the others, is
insufficient, because, in their opinion, it never had nor shall have any effect.

IV. The first Opinion as it is mystical and hidden, keeping the mind humble,
and relying on God, without any confidence in it self, knowing the deformity of
sin, and the excellency of Divine Grace; so this second was plausible and
popular, cherishing humane presumption, and making a great show; and it pleased
more the preaching Friars, then the understanding Divines. And the Council
thought it probable, as consonant to politic Reason: It was maintained by the
Bishop of Bitonto, and the Bishop of Salpi showed himself very partial. The
Defenders of this, using humane Reasons, prevailed against the others, but
coming to the testimonies of Scripture, they were manifestly overcome.

V. Calarinus, holding the same Opinion, to resolve the places of Scripture,
which troubled them all, invented a middle way; That God of his goodness had
elected some few, whom he will save absolutely, to whom he has prepared most
potent, effectual, and infallible means; the rest he desires for his part they
should be saved; and to that end has promised sufficient means for all,
leaving it to their choice to accept them and be saved, or refuse them and be
damned. Amongst these there are some who receive them and are saved, though
they be not of the number of the Elect; of which kind there are very many.
Other refusing to cooperate with God, who wishes their salvation, are damned.
The cause why the first are predestined, is only the will of God: why the
others are saved, is the acceptance, good use, and cooperation with the
Divine assistance, foreseen by God: why the last are reprobated, is the
foreseeing of their perverse will, in refusing, or abusing it. That S. John, S.
Paul, and all the places of Scripture alleged by the other part, where all is
given to God, and which do show infallibility, are understood only of the
first, who are particularly privileged; and in other for whom the common way
is left, the admonitions, exhortations, and general assistances are verified,
unto which he that will give ear and follow them, is saved, and he that will
not, perishes by his own fault. Of these few who are privileged above the
common condition, the number is determinate and certain with God, but not of
those who are saved by the common way, depend on humane liberty, but only in
regard of the foreknowledge of the works of every one. Catarinus said, He
wondered at the stupidity of those, who say, the number is certain and
determined, and yet they add that others may be saved; which is as much as to
say, that the number is certain, and yet it may be enlarged: and likewise of
those who say; That the Reprobates have sufficient assistance for salvation,
though it be necessary for him that is saved to have a greater, which is to
say, a sufficient, unsufficient.

VI. He added, that S. Augustines Opinion was not heard of before his time, and
himself confesses it cannot be found in the works of any, who wrote before
him, neither did himself always think it true, but ascribed the cause of Gods
will to merits; saying, God takes compassion on, and hardneth whom he lists.
But that will of God cannot be unjust, because it is caused by most secret
merits; and that there is diversity of sinners: some who though they be
justified, deserve justification. But after the heat of Disputation against the
Pelagians transported him to think, and speak the contrary; yet when his
opinion was heard, all the Catholics were scandalized, as S. Prosper wrote to
him, and Genadius of Marselles, fifty years after in his judgment which he
makes of the famous Writers, said, That it happened to him according to the
words of Solomon; That in much speaking one cannot avoid sin: and that by his
fault exagitated by his Enemies, the question was not then risen, which might
afterward bring forth heresy, whereby the good Father did intimate his fear
of that which now appears; that is, that by that opposition some Sect and
Division might arise.

VII. The censure of the second Article was diverse, according to the three
related Opinions. Catarinus thought the first part true, in regard of the
efficacy of the Divine Will, toward those who were particularly favored: But
the second false, concerning the sufficiency of Gods Assistance unto all, and
man's liberty in cooperating. Others ascribing the cause of Predestination in
all to humane consent, condemned the whole Article in both parts. But those
that adhered unto S. Augustine, and the common opinion of the Theologans, did
distinguish it, and said, it was true in a compound sense, but damnable in a
divided: a subtilty which confounded the minds of the Prelates, and his own,
though he did exemplify it by saying, he that moves cannot stand still, it is
true in a compound sense, but is understood, while he moves: but in a divided
sense it is false, that is, in another time. Yet it was not well understood
because applying it to his purpose; It cannot be said, that a man
predestined, can be damned, in a time when he is not predestined, seeing he
is always so: and generally the divided sense has no place, where the
accident is inseparable from the subject. Therefore others thought to declare it
better, saying, that God governs and moves every thing, according to its
proper nature, which in contingent things is free, and such, as that the act
may consist together with the power to the opposite; so that with the act of
predestination, the power to reprobation and damnation does stand. But this was
worse understood then the first.

VIII. The other Articles were censured with admirable concord. Concerning the
third and sixth, they said, it has always been an opinion in the Church, that
many receive divine Grace, and keep it for a time, who afterward do lose it,
and in time are damned. Then was alleged the example of Saul, Solomon, and
Judas, one of the Twelve: a case more evident then all, by these words of
Christ to the Father; I have kept in thy name all that thou have given me, of
which not one has perished, but the son of Perdition. To these they added
Nicholas one of the seven Deacons, and others, first commended in the
Scriptures, and then blamed: and for a conclusion of all, the Fall of Luther.

Against the sixth, they particularly considered, that Vocation would become
impious derision; when those that are called, and nothing is wanting on their
side, are not admitted: that the Sacraments would not be effectual for them;
all which things are absurd. But for censure, first, the Authority of the
Prophet was brought directly contrary in terms, where God says, That if the
Just shall abandon justice, and commit iniquity I will not remember his works.
The Example of David was added, who committed Murder and Adultry, of Magdalen,
and S. Peter, who denied Christ: They de^ided the folly of the Zuinglians, for
saying, the Just cannot fall from Grace, and yet sins in every work. The two
last were uniformly condemned of temerity, with exception of those unto whom
God has given a special Revelation, as to Moses and the Disciples, to whom it
was revealed, that they were written in the Book of Heaven.

IX. Now because the Doctrine of Predestination does naturally Hist. of the
Council, fol. 175.
presuppose a Curse from which man was to be delivered: it will not be amiss to
lay down the Judgment of that Council in the Article of Original sin (which
rendered man obnoxious to the dreadful curse) together with the preparatory
Debates, amongst the Scool-men and Divines, which were there Assembled;
touching the nature and transmitting of it from Adam unto his Posterity, and
from one man to another. Concerning which it was declared by Catarinus, That as
God made a Covenant with Abraham, and all his Posterity, when he made him
Father of the faithful: So when he gave Original Righteousness to Adam, and all
mankind, he made him seal an Obligation in the name of all to keep it for
himself and them, observing the Commandment: which because he trangressed, he
lost it, as well for others as himself, and incurred the punishent also for
them; the which as they are derived in every one, and to him as the cause to
others, by virtue of the Covenant: so that the actual sin of Adam is actual sin
in him, and imputed to others in Original; for proof whereof he grounded
himself upon this especially, that a true and proper sin must needs be a
voluntary Act, and nothing can be voluntary, but that transgression of Adam
imputed unto all. And Paul saying, that all have sinned in Adam, it must be
understood that they have all committed the same sin with him; he alleged for
example, that S. Paul to the Hebrews affirms that Levi paid Tithe to
Melchisedeck when he paid in his great Grandfather Abraham: by which reason it
must be said, that the Posterity violated the Commandments of God when Adam did
it: and that they were sinners in him, as in him they received Righteousness.

X. Which Application as it was more intelligible to the Prelates Assembled
together in the Council, then any of the Crabbed Intricacies, and perplexities
of the rest of the Scoolmen, irreconcilable in a manner amongst themselves: so
did I Would n fol. 181.
it quicken them to the dispatch of their Canons, or Anathamatisms (while they
had the Notions in their heads) against all such as had taught otherwise of
Original sin, then was allowed of and maintained in the Church of Rome, but
more particulary against him, 1. That confesses not, that Adam by
transgressing has lost Sanctity and Justice, incurred the wrath of God, Death,
and Thraldom to the Devil, and is infected in Soul and Body. 2. Against him
that averreth that Adam by sinning has hurt himself only, or has derived into
his Posterity, the death only of the Body, and not sin, the death of the Soul.
3. Against him that affirms the sin, which is one in the beginning, and
proper to every one (committed by Generation, not imitation) can be abolished,
by any other remedy then the death of Christ) is applied as well to Children,
as to those of riper years, by the Sacrament of Baptism ministered in the form
and rite of the Church.

CHAP. III. The like Debates about Free Will, with the Conclusions of the
Council; in the Five Controverted Points.
I. The Articles against the Freedom of the Will, extracted out of Luther's
Writings. II. The exclamation of the Divines against Luther's Doctrine in the
Point, and the absurdities thereof. III. The several Judgments of Marinarus,
Catarinus, and Andreas Vega. IV. The different Judgment of the Dominicans, and
Franciscans, whether it lay in man's power to believe, or not to believe; and
whether the Freedom of the Will were lost in Adam. V. As also of the Point of
the cooperation of man's Will with the Grace of God. VI. The opinion of Friar
Catanca, in the point of irresistibility. VII. Faintly maintained by Soto a
Dominican Friar, and more cordially approved by others, but in time rejected.
VIII. The great care taken by the Legates in having the Articles so framed, as
to please all parties. IX. The Doctrine of the Council in the V. controverted
Points. X. A Transition from the Council of Trent, to the Protestant and
Reformed Churches.

I. THese Differences and Debates concerning Predestination, the possibility of
Falling away from the Faith of Christ, and the nature of Original sin: being
thus passed over; I shall look back on those Debates which were had amongst the
Fathers and Divines in the Council of Trent, about the Nature of Free Will, and
the power thereof. In order whereunto these Articles were collected out of the
Writings of the Lutherans, to be discussed and censured, as they found cause
for it. Now the Articles were these that follow, Viz.

1. God is the total cause of our works Good: and Evil, and the Adultry of
David, the cruelty of Manlius, and the Treason of Judas, are the works of God
as well as the Vocation of Saul.

2. No man has power to think well or ill, but all comes from absolute
necessity, and in us is no Free Will, and to affirm it is a mere Fiction.

3. Free Will since the sin of Adam is lost, and a thing only titular, and when
one does what is in his power he sins mortally: yea, it is a thing fained,
and a Title without reality.

4. Free Will is only in doing ill, and has no power to do good.

5. Free Will moved by God, does by no means cooperate, and follows as an
Instrument without life, or an unreasonable Creature.

6. That God corrects those only whom he will, though they will not spurn
against it.

II. Upon the first Article they spoke rather in a Tragical manner, then
Theological; that the Lutheran Doctrine was a frantic wisdom: that man's Will
as they make it is prodigious; that those words, a thing of Title only, a Title
without reality, are monstrous: that the Opinion is impious and blasphemous
against God; that the Church has condemned it against the Maniches,
Priscillianists, and lastly against Aballardus, and Wickliff: and that it was a
folly against common sense, every one proving in himself his own Liberty; that
it deserves not confutation, but as Aristotle says, Chastisement and
Experimental proof, that Luther's Scholars perceived the folly, and to
moderate the Absurdity, said after, that a man had liberty in External,
Political, and Oeconomical Actions, and in matters of Civil Justice, that,
which every one but a Fool knows, to proceed from Councels and Election, but
denied Liberty in matter of Divine Justice only.

III. Marinarus said, That as it is foolish to say, no humane Action is in our
power, so it is no less absurd to say, that every one is: every one finding by
Experience, that he has not his Affections in his power: that this is the
sense of the Schools, which say, that we are not free in the first motions; which
freedom because the Saints have, it is certain, that some freedom is in them
which is not in us. Catarinus according to his opinion, said, That without Gods
special assistance, a man cannot do a moral good; said, there was no liberty in
this, and therefore that the Fourth Article was not so easily to be condemned.
Vega after he had spoken with such Ambiguity, that he understood not himself,
concluded that between the Divines and the Protestants, there was no difference
in Opinion. For they concluding now that there is liberty in Philosophical
Justice, and not in Supernatural, in External works of the Law, not in external
and spiritual; that is to say, precisely with the Church, that one cannot do
spiritual works belonging to Religion, without the assistance of God. And
though he said, all endeavor was to be used for composition; yet he was not
gratefully heard: it seeming in some sort a prejudice, that any of the
Differences might be reconciled; and they were wont to say, that this is a
point of the Colloquies, a word abhorred, as if by that, the Laity had usurped
the Authority which is proper to Councels.

IV. A great Disputation arose upon them, Whether it be in man's power to
believe, or not to believe? The Franciscans following Sotus, did deny it;
saying, That as Knowledge does necessarily follow Demonstrations, so Faith does
arise necessarily from persuasions; and that it is in the understanding, which
is a natural Agent, and is naturally moved by the Object. They alleged
Experience, that no man can believe what he will, but what seems true,
adding, that no man would feel any displeasure, if he could believe he had it
not. The Dominicans said, that nothing is more in the power of the Will, then
to believe, and by the determination and resolution of the Will only, one may
believe the number of the Stars is even.

Upon the Third Article, Whether Free Will be lost by sin, very many Authoritys
of S. Augustine being alleged, which Hist. of Council p* 108. etc.
expressly say it* Soto did invent, because he knew no other means to avoid
them, that true Liberty is equivocal; for either it is derived from the Noun
Libertas, Freedom, or from the Verb Liberare, to set Free: that in the first
sense it is opposed to necessity, in the second to servitude; and that when S.
Augustine said, That Free Will was lost, he would infer nothing else, but that
it is made slave to Sin and Satan. This difference could not be understood*
because a servant is not free, for that he cannot do his own Will, but is
compelled to follow his Masters: and by this opinion Luther could not be blamed
for entituling a Book of SERVILWIL; many thought the Fourth Article absurd,
saying, That Liberty is understood to be a power to both the contraries:
therefore that it could not be said, to be a Liberty to Evil, if it were not
also to Good: But they were made to acknowledge their Error, when they were
told that the Saints and blessed* Angels in Heaven, are free to do good, and
therefore that ^ was no inconvenience that some should be free only to do Evil.

V. In the examining the fifth and sixth Articles of the consent which
Free Will gives to Divine Inspiration, or preventing Grace, the Franciscans
and Dominicans were of diverse Opinions: The Franciscans contended that the Will
being able to prepare it self, has Liberty much more to accept or refuse the
divine Prevention when God gives assistance, before it uses the strength of
Nature. The Dominicans denied that the Works preceding the Vocation, are truly
preparatory, and ever gave the first place to God. Notwithstanding there was a
contention between the Dominicans themselves. For Soto defended, that although
a man cannot obtain Grace, without the special preventing assistance of God,
yet the Will may ever some way resist and refuse it; and when it does receive
it, it is because it gives assent, and does will so: and if our assent were
not required, there would be no cause why all should not be converted. For
according to the Apocalypse, God stands always at the Gate and knocks: and
it is a Saying of the Fathers, now made common, That God gives Grace to every
one that will have it; and the Scripture does always require this consent in
us, and to say otherwise were to take away the Liberty of the Will, and to say,
that God uses violence.

VI. Friar Aloisius Catanca said to the contrary, That God works two sorts of
preventing Grace in the Mind, according to the Doctrine of S. Thomas, the one
sufficient, the other effectual: To the first, the Will may consent or resist,
but not to the second, because it implies contradiction, to say, that Efficacy
can be resisted; for proof he alleged places of S. John, and very clear
Expositions of S. Augustine: He answers that it arises hence, that all are
not converted, because all are not effectually prevented. That the fear of
overthrowing Free Will, is removed by S. Thomas, the things are violently moved
by a contrary Cause, but never by their own: and God being the cause of the
Will; to say it is moved by God, is to say, it is moved by it self. And he
condemned, yea, mocked the Lutherans manner of speech; that the Will follows
as a dead and unreasonable Creature: for being reasonable by Nature, moved by
its own Cause, which is God, it is moved as reasonable, and follows a
reasonable. And likewise that God consents, though men will not, and spurn at
him: For it is a contradiction that the Effect should spurn against the Cause.
That it may happen that God may effectually convert one, that before has
spurned, before sufficient Prevention, but afterward cannot because a
gentleness in the Will moved, must needs follow the Efficacy of the Divine
Motion.

VII. Soto said, That every Divine Inspiration was only sufficient, and that,
that whereunto Free Will has assented, obtains efficiency by that consent,
without which it is uneffectual; not by the defect of it self, but of the man.
The Opinion he defended very fearfully, because it was opposed, that the
distinction of the Reprobate from the Elect, would proceed from man, contrary
to the perpetual Catholic sense; that the Vessels of Mercy are distinguished
by Grace, from the Vessels of Wrath. That Gods Election would be for Works
foreseen, and not for his good Pleasure. That the Doctrine of the Fathers in
the Affrican, and French Councels against the Pelagians, has published, that
God makes them to will, which is to say, that he makes them consent;
therefore giving consent to us, it ought to be attributed to the Divine Power;
or else he that is saved would be no more obliged to God, then he that is
damned, if God should use them both alike.

But notwithstanding all these Reasons, the contrary Opinion had the general
Applause, though many confessed that the Reasons of Catanca were not resolved:
and were displeased that Soto did not speak freely, but said, that the Will
consents in a certain manner; so that it may in a certain manner resist: as
though there were a certain manner of mean, between this Affirmation and
Negation. The free speech of Catanca, and the other Dominicans did trouble them
also, who knew not how to distinguish the Opinion, which attributes
Justification by consent from the Pelagian; and therefore they counseled to
take heed of leaping beyond the Mark, by too great a desire to condemn Luther:
that Objection being esteemed above all, that by this means the Divine Election
or Predestination would be for Works foreseen, which no Divine did admit.

VIII. The Ground thus laid, we shall proceed unto a Declaration of the
Judgment of the Church of Rome, in the five Articles disputed afterward with
such heat, betwixt the Remonstrants, and the contra Remonstrants in the Belgic
Church, so far forth as it may be gathered from the Decrees and Canons of the
Council of Trent, and such preparatory Discourses as smoothed the way to the
Conclusions which were made therein. In order whereunto, it was advised by
Marcus Viguerius, Bishop of Sinigagli, to separate the Catholic Doctrine from
the contrary, and to make two Decrees; in the one to make a continued
Declaration and Confirmation of the Doctrine of the Churches, and in the other
to condemn and Anathematize Ibid. p. 2^^.
the contrary. But in the drawing up of the Decrees, there appeared a greater
difficulty, then they were aware of, in conquering whereof the Cardinal of
Sancta Cruz (one of the Presidents of the Council) took incredible pains,
avoiding as much as was possible to insert any thing controverted amongst the
Schoolmen; and so handling those that could not be omitted, as that every one
might be contented. And to this end he observed in every Congregation, what was
disliked by any, and took it away, or corrected it as he was advised; and he
spoke not only in the Congregations, but with every one in particular, was
informed of all the doubts, and required their Opinions. He diversified the
matter with diverse Orders, changed sometimes one part, sometimes another, until
he had reduced them unto the Order in which they now are, which generally
pleased, and was approved by all. Nor did the Decrees thus drawn and settled,
give less content at Rome then they did at Trent, for being transmitted to the
Pope, and by him committed to the Friars, and other learned men of the Court,
to be consulted of amongst them, they found an universal approbation, because
every one might understand them in his own sense: And being so approved of were
sent back to Trent, and there solemnly passed in a full Congregation, on the
thirteenth of January, 1647. according to the account of the Church of Rome.
And yet it is to be observed, that though the Decrees were so drawn up, as to
please all parties, especially as to the giving of no distaste to the Dominican
Friars and their Adherenrs; yet it is easy to be seen, that they incline more
favorably to the Franciscans, whose cause the Jesuits have since wedded, and
speak more literally and Grammatically to the sense of that party, then they do
to the others: which said, I shall present the Doctrine of the Council of
Trent, as to these controverted Points in this Order following.

1. Of Divine Predestination.
IX. All mankind having lost its primitive integrity by the sin of Adam, they
became thereby the Sons of wrath, and so Conci^. Trid. Ses* ^. c. 1.
much captivated under the command of Satan; that neither the Gentiles by the
power of Nature; nor the Jews by the Letter of the Law of Moses were able to
free themselves from that grievous Servitude. In which respect it pleased
Almighty Ibid. c. 2.
God the Father of all Mercies to promise first, and afterward actually to
send his only begotten Son Jesus Christ into the world, not only to redeem the
Jews who were under the Law, but that the Gentiles also might embrace the
Righteousness which is by Faith, and altogether might receive the Adoption of
Sons. Hist. of the Council f. 212.
To which end he prepared sufficient assistance for all, which every man having
free will might receive, or refuse, as it pleased himself; and foreseeing from
before all Eternity who would receive his help, and use it to Good: and on the
other side, who would refuse to make use thereof; he predestined and elected
those of the first sort to Eternal Life, and rejected the others.

2. Of the Merit and Effect of the Death of Christ.
Him God proposed to be a propitiation for our sins by his Sess. 6. c. 2, 3.
Death and Passion, and not for our sins only, but for the sins of all the
World. But so that though Christ died for all men, yet all do not receive the
benefit of his death and sufferings, but only they to whom the merit of his
Passion is communicated in their new birth or regeneration, by which the grace
whereby they are justified, or made just, is conferred upon them.

3. Of man's Conversion unto God.
The Grace of God is not given to man by Jesus Christ, to no other end, but
that thereby he might the more easily divert Session 6. Can. 2. 3.
himself in the ways of Godliness, and consequently merit and obtain eternal
life, which otherwise he might do without any such Grace, by his own free will,
though with more difficulty and trouble. And therefore if any man shall say,
that without the preventing Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and his heavenly
Influences, a man is able to even hope, love, or repent, as he ought to do,
that so he may be justified in the sight of God: let him be Anathema.

4. Of the manner of Conversion.
The Freedom of the Will is not so utterly lost in man, S^ss. 6. c. 5.
though it be diminished and impaired, as to be accounted nothing but an empty
name, or the name of no such thing existing in nature: in that the Will of man
moved and stirred up by the grace of God, retains a power of cooperating with
the heavenly Grace, by which he does prepare and dispose Ca. 4.
himself for the obtaining of that Justification, which is given unto him. And
therefore if any one shall say that a man cannot resist this grace though he
would, or that he is merely passive, not acting any thing, but as a stock or
senseless stone, in his own Conversion, let him be also held accursed. And so
are they who have presumed to affirm and teach, that it is not in the power of
man to do evil, but as well bad as good works are done not only by Gods
permission, but by his proper working: so that as well the Treason of Judas, as
the Calling of Paul, is to be reckoned for the work of Almighty God.

5. Of the certainty or uncertainty of Perseverance.
No man is so far to presume on the secret Mystery of Predestination, Sess 6.
Can. 13.
as to account himself for certain to be within the number of the Elect; as if
he were assured of this, that being justified, he could neither sin no more,
nor were sure of repentance if he did. And therefore no man is to flatter
himself with any such certainty of perseverance, though all men ought to place
a constant and firm hope (for the obtaining of the same) in the help of God.
They which by sin have fallen away from the grace received; may recover their
lost Can. 14.
Justification, if being stirred up from above, they endeavor the recovery of
it by sincere repentance, or by the Sacrament Can. 15.
of Penance, as the words there are; And finally the grace of Justification
(or the grace by which a man is justified) is not only lost by infidelity, by
which the Faith it self does suffer Shipwreck, but even by every mortal sin,
though Faith be not lost also at the same time with it.

X. Such is the Doctrine of this Council in the Points disputed, extracted
faithfully out of the Canons and Decrees thereof: one only clause being added
to the Article of Predestination, agreeable to the Opinion in the Conferences
and Debates about it, which prevailed most upon the Prelates and all others who
were interessed and entrusted in drawing up the Products and Conclusions of it:
which how far it agrees or disagreeth with, or from that which is maintained
by the opposite Parties in the Reformed and Protestant Churches, we are next to
see.

CHAP. IV. The Judgment of the Lutherans and Calvinians in these Five Points,
with some Objections made against the Conclusions of the Council of Dort.
I. No Difference in Five Points betwixt the Lutherans and the Church of Rome,
as is acknowledged by the Papists themselves. II. The Judgment of the Lutheran
Churches in the said 5 Points, delivered in the famous Confession of Ausperge.
III. The distribution of the Quarrel betwixt the Franciscans, Melancthonians,
and Arminians, on the one side, the Dominicans, Rigid Lutherans, and
Sublapsarian Calvinists on the other; the middle way of Catarinus paralleled by
that of Bishop Overal. IV. The Doctrine of Predestination as laid down by
Calvin, of what ill Consequence in it self, and how odious to the Lutheran
Doctors. V. Opposed by Sebastian Castellio in Geneva it self, but propagated in
most Churches of Calvin's Platform, and afterward polished by Perkins, a
Divine of England, and in him censured and confuted by Jacob Van Harmine, a
Belgic Writer. VI. A brief view of the Doctrine of the Sublapsarians, and the
odious Consequences of it. VII. The Judgment of the Sublapsarians* in the said
Five Points, collected and presented at the Conference at the Hague, Ann. 1610.
VIII. The Doctrine of the Synodists in the said Points. IX. Affirmed to be
repugnant to the holy Scripture, as also to the Purity, Mercy, Justice, and
Sincerity of Almighty God. X. And the subversion of the Ministry, and all Acts
of Piety, illustrated by the example of Tiberius Caesar, and the Lantgrave of
Thurin.

I. SUCH being the Doctrines of this Council in the Points disputed; we need
not take much pains in looking after the Judgment of the Lutheran Churches,
which comes so near to that of the Church of Rome, as to be reckoned Hist. of
the Council of T^. p 210.
for the same. For in the History of the Council, it is said expressly, as
before is noted, that in the Books of Luther, in the Augustan Confession, and
in Apologies and Colloquies, there was nothing found (as to the Doctrine of
Predestination) which deserved to be censured. And therefore they were fain to
have recourse unto the Writings of the Zuinglian Party, (among which, Calvin
and his followers were to be accounted) to find out matter to proceed upon in
their Fulminations: And in particular it is said by Andreas Vega, one of the
stiffest and most learned men amongst the whole pack of the Franciscans, when
the Points about Free Will Ibid. f. 20^.
were in agitation, that between themselves and the Protestants there was no
difference of opinion, as to that particular. How near they came to one another
in the other Points, may easily be found in the Debates and Conferences before
laid down, compared with the Judgment of the Lutheran Doctors, not only in
their private Writings, but their public Colloquies. But then we are to
understand, that this Agreement of the Lutheran Doctors expressed in their
private Writings and their public Colloquies, and especially the solemn
Confession at Ausperge, relates to that interpretation of the Decrees and
Canons of the Tridentine Council, which is made by the Jesuits and Franciscans,
and not unto the Gloss or Exposition which is made thereof by the Preaching and
Dominican Friars.

II. But not to leave so great a matter to a Logical Inference, I shall lay
down the Doctrine of the Lutheran Churches in the said Five Points, extracted
faithfully out of the Augustan Confession, with the Addition of one Clause only
to the first Article (the Makers of the Confession declining purposely the
point of Predestination) out of the Writings of Melancthon, and other learned
men of the same persuasion. Now the Doctrine of the said Churches so delivered
is this that follows, Viz.

1. Of Divine Predestination.
After the miserable fall of Adam, all men which were to August. Confess. cap. 2.
be begotten, according to the common course of Nature, were involved in the
guilt of Original sin, by which they are obnoxious to the wrath of God, and
everlasting damnation: In which Estate they had remained, but that God,
beholding all mankind in this wretched condition, was pleased to make a
general conditional Decree of Predestination, under Appel. Evang. cap. 4.
the condition of Faith and Perseverance; And a special absolute Decree of
electing those to life, who he foresaw would believe, and persevere under the
means and aides of Grace, Faith and Perseverance: and a special absolute Decree
of condemning them whom he foresaw to abide impenitent in their sins.

2. Of the Merit and Efficacy of Christ's Death.
The Son of God, who is the Word, assumed our humane Aug. Confess. c. 3.
Nature in the Womb of the Virgin, and being very God and very Man, he truly
Suffered, was Crucified, Dead, and Buried, to reconcile his Father to us, and
to be the Sacrifice not only for Original sin, but also for all the Actual sins
of men.

A great part of S. Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews is spent in the Id. cap. de
M^ssa.
proving of this Point, that only the Sacrifice or Oblation made by Christ,
procured for others Reconciliation and Remission of sins, inculcating that the
Livitical Sacrifices were year by year to be reiterated, and renewed, because
they could not take away sins, but that satisfaction once for all was made by
the Sacrifice of Christ for the sins of all men.

3. Of Man's Will in the state of depraved Nature.
The Will of man retains a freedom in Actions of Civil Justice, and making
Election of such things as are under the same Ibid. cap. 18.
pretension of natural Reason, but has no power without the special
Assistance of the Holy Ghost to attain unto spiritual Righteousness, according
to the saying of the Apostle; That the natural man perceives not the things
which are of the spirit of God. And that of Christ our Savior, without me you
can do nothing. And therefore the Pelagians are to be condemned, who teach that
man is able by the mere strength of Nature, not only to love God above all
things, but also to fulfill the Law, according to the substance of the Acts
thereof.

4. Of Conversion, and the manner of it.
The Righteousness which is effected in us by the opperation Idem cap. 18.
and assistance of the Holy Ghost, which we receive by yiedling our assent to
the word of God: according to that of S. Augustine, in the third Book of his
Hypognosticks, in which he grants a freedom of the Will to all which have the
use of Reason, not that they are thereby able either to begin or go through
with any thing in the things of God, without Gods assistance, but only in the
Affairs of this present life whether good or evil.

5. Of falling after Grace received.
Remission of sins is not to be denied in such who after Baptism Idem cap. 11.
fall into sins, at what time soever they were converted; and the Church is
bound to confer the benefit of Absolution upon all such as return unto it by
Repentance. And therefore as we condemn the Novatian Heretics, refusing the
benefit of absolution unto those, who having after Baptism lashed into sin,
gave public Signs of their Repentance: so we condemn the Anabaptists, who
teach, that a man once justified can by no means lose the Holy Ghost, as also
those who think that men may have so great a measure of perfection in this
present life, that they cannot fall again into sin.

Such is the Doctrine of the Lutheran Churches agreed on in the famous Augustan
Confession, so called, because presented and avowed at the Diet of Auspurge.
(Augusta vindelicorum the Latins call it) 1530. confirmed after many
struglings on the one side, and oppositions on the other, by Charles the fifth,
in a general Assembly of the Estates of the Empire holden at Passaw, Ann. 1552.
and afterward more fully in another Diet held at Auspurge, Ann. 1555. A
Confession generally entertained not only in the whole Kingdoms of Denmark,
Norway, and Sweden, but also in the Dukedom of Prussia, and some parts of
Poland, and all the Protestant Churches of the High Germany: neither the rigid
Lutherans, nor the Calvinians themselves, being otherwise tolerated in the
Empire, than as they shroud themselves under the Patronage, and shelter of this
Confession. For besides the first breach betwixt Luther and Zuinglius, which
happened at the beginning of the Reformation, there afterward grew a
sub-division, betwixt the Lutherans themselves, occasioned by Flacius
Illyricus, and his Associates; who having separated themselves from Melancthon
and the rest of the Divines of Wittenberge, and made themselves the Head of the
rigid Lutherans, did gladly entertain those Doctrines, in which they were sure
to find as good Assistance, as the Dominicans and their party could afford
unto them. The wisdom and success of which Council being observed by those of
the Zuinglian or Calvinian Faction, they gladly put in for a share, being not
meanly well approved, that though their Doctrines were condemned by the Council
of Trent, yet they found Countenance (especially in the Sublapsarian way) not
only from the whole Sect of the Dominicans, but the rigid Lutherans: And that
the Scales might be kept even between the Parties, there started ou^ another
Faction amongst the Calvinists themselves, who symbolized with the
Melancthonians, or moderate Lutherans, as they did with the Jesuit and
Franciscan Friars. For the Abetting of which their Quarrel, this last side
calling to their Aid all the Ancient Fathers, both Greek and Latin, who lived
before the time of S. Augustine, the others relying wholly on his single
Judgment, not always constant to himself, nor very well seconded by Prosper,
no^ any other of great Note in the times succeeding. Finally that Catarinus may
not go alone in his middleway, I will follow him with one of his own Order (for
he was afterward made Bishop of Mi^ori in Italy) that is to say, the right
learned Doctor Overall, public Professor of Divinity in Cambridge, Dean of S.
Paul's, and successively Bishop of Lichfield, and Norwich, whose Judgment in a
middle way, and though not the same that Catarinus went, the Reader may find
in Mr. Playferts notable Piece, entitled, Apello Evangelium: to which I refer
him at the present, as being not within the compass of my present Design, which
carries me to such Disputes as have been raised between the Calvinians and
their Opposites in these parts of the world, since the conclusion and
determination of the Council of Trent.

IV. And for the better carrying on of my Design, I must go back again to
Calvin, whom I left under a suspicion, of making God to be the Author of sin;
from which though many have took much pains (none more then industrious Doctor
Field) to absolve and free him; yet by his Doctrine of Predestination, he has
laid such grounds as have involved his Followers in the same guilt also. For
not content to travel a known and beaten way, he must needs find out a way by
himself, which neither the Dominicans nor any other of the Followers of S.
Augustine's Rigors had found out before, in making God to lay on Adam an
unavoidable necessity of falling into sin and misery, that so he might have
opportunity to manifest his Mercy in the electing of some few of his Posterity,
and his Justice in the absolute rejecting of all the rest. In which as he can
find no Countenance from any of the Ancient Writers, so he pretends not to
any ground for it in the holy Scriptures. For whereas some objected on Gods
behalf, De certis verbis non extare, That the Decree of Adams Fall, and
consequently the involving of his whole Posterity in sin and misery, had no
foundation in the express words of Holy Writ, Institut. l. 3. c. 23. Sect. 7.
he makes no other Answer to it then a quasi vero, as if (says he) God made
and created man, the most exact Piece of his Heavenly Workmanship, without
determining of his end. And on this Point he was so resolutely bent, that
nothing but an absolute Decree for Adams Fall, seconded by the like, for the
involving of all his Race in the same Perdition, would either serve his turn,
or preserve his Credit. For whereas others had objected on Gods behalf, that no
such unavoidable necessity was laid upon mankind by the will of God; but
rather that he was Created by God unto such a perishing estate, because he
foresaw to what his own perverseness at the last would bring him: He answers
that this Objection proves nothing at all, or at least nothing to the purpose,
which said, he tells us further out of Valla, though otherwise not much versed
(as he there affirms) in the holy Scriptures, Calvin. Institut. lib. 3. cap.
23. sect. 6.
'That this Question seems to be superfluous, because both Life and Death are
rather the Acts of Gods Will, then of his Prescience, or foreknowledge. And
then he adds as of his own, that if God did but foresee the successes of men,
and did not also dispose and order them by his Will, then this Question should
not without cause be moved, Whether his fore seeing any thing, availed to the
necessity of them. But since (says he) he does no otherwise foresee the
things that shall come to pass, then because he has decreed that they should
Idem ib sect 7.
so come to pass: it is in vain to move any Controversy about Gods
foreknowledge, where it is certain that all things do happen rather by divine
Ordinance and appointment.' Yet notwithstanding all these shifts, he is forced
to acknowledge the Decree of Adams Fall to be Horribile decretum, A cruel and
horrible Decree, as indeed it is a cruel and horrible Decree to pre-ordain so
many Millions to destruction, and consequently unto sin, that he might
destroy them. And then what can the wicked and Impenitent do, but ascribe all
their sins to God, by whose inevitable Will they are lost in Adam, by whom
they were particularly and personally necessitated to death, and so by
consequence to sin. A Doctrine so injurious to God, so destructive of Piety, of
such reproach amongst the Papists, and so offensive to the Lutherans, of what
sort soever, that they profess a greater readiness to fall back to Popery, then
to give way to this Predestinarian Pestilence (by which name they call it) to
come in amongst them.

V. But howsoever having so great a Founder as Calvin was, it came to be
generally entertained in all the Churches of his Platform, strongly opposed by
Sebastian Castellino in Geneva it self; but the poor man so despightfully
handled both by him and Beza (who followed him in all, and went beyond him in
some of his Devises) that they never left pursuing him with Complaints and
Clamours, till they had first cast him out of the City, and at the last brought
him to his Grave. The terror of which example, and the great name which Calvin
had attained unto not only by his diligent Preaching, but also by his laborious
Writings in the eye of the World: As it confirmed his power at home, so did it
make his Doctrines the more acceptable and esteemed abroad. More generally
diffused, and more pertinaciously adhered unto in all those Churches, which
either had received the Genevian Discipline, or whose Divines did most
industriously labor to advance the same. By means whereof it came to pass (as
one well observes) 'that of what account the Master of the Sentences was
Hooker in ^^cle. ^ol. Pr^f. p 9.
in the Church of Rome; the same and more amongst the Preachers of the Reformed
Churches Calvin had purchased; so that they were deemed to be the most perfect
Divines, who were most skilful in his Writings. His Books almost the very Canon
by which both Doctrine and Discipline were to be judged: The French Churches
both under others abroad or at home in their own Country, all cast according to
the Mold which he had made. The Church of Scotland in erecting the Fabric of
their own Reformation, took the self same pattern.' Received not long after in
the Palatine Churches, and in those of the Netherlands: In all which as his
Doctrine made way to bring in the Discipline; so was it no hard matter for the
Discipline to support the Doctrine, and crush all those who durst oppose it.
Only it was permitted unto Beza and his Disciples, to be somewhat wilder then
the rest, in placing the Decree of Predestination before the Fall, which Calvin
himself had more rightly placed in Massa corrupta, in the corrupted Mass of
Mankind: and the more moderate Calvinians as rightly presuppose for a matter
necessary, before there could be any place for the Election or Reprobation of
particular persons. But being they concurred with the rest, as to the personal
Election or Reprobation of particular persons; the restraining of the Benefit
of our Saviors Sufferings to those few particulars (whom only they had
honored with the glorious name of the Elect) the working on them by the
irresistible powers of Grace in the Act of Conversion, and bringing them
infallibly by the continual assistance of the said Grace unto life everlasting:
there was hardly any notice taken of their Deviation, they being scarce beheld
in the condition of erring brethren, though they differed from them in the main
Foundation which they built upon; but passing under the name of Calvinists, as
they thus did. And though such of the Divines of the Belgic Churches as were
of the old Lutheran Stock, were better affected unto the Melancthonian Doctrine
of Predestination, then to that of Calvin; yet knowing how precious the Name
and Memory of Calvin was held amongst them: or being unwilling to fall foul
upon one another, they suffered his Opinions to prevail without opposition. And
so it stood till the year 1592. when Mr. William Perkins an eminent Divine of
Cambridge published his Book called the Armilla Aurea, etc. containing such a
Doctrine of Predestination as Beza had before delivered, but cast into a more
distinct and methodical Form. With him as being a Foreiner both by Birth and
Dwelling, a Supralapsarian in Opinion, and one who had no personal Relations
amongst themselves, it was thought fittest to begin to confute Calvin's
Doctrines in the person of Perkins; as many times a Lion is said to be
corrected by the well Cudgelling of a Dog, without fear of danger. And against
him it was, his order in delivering the Decree of Predestination, that Arminius
first took up the Bucklers in his Book, entitled, Examen Praedestinationis
Perkinsoniae, which gave the first occasion to those Controversies which
afterward involved the Sublapsarians also, of which more hereafter.

VI. In the mean time, let us behold the Doctrine of the Supralapsarians, first
broacht by Calvin, maintained by almost all his Followers, and at last polished
and lickt over by the said Mr. Perkings, as it was charged upon the Contra
Remonstrants in the Conference at the Hague, Anno 1610. in these following
words, Viz. 'That God (as some speak) by an Arcan. Dog. Ant. Ro^. p 15.
eternal and unchangable Decree from amongst men, whom he considered as not
created, much less as fal^, ordained certain to eternal life, certain to
eternal death, without any regard had to their righteousness, or sin, to their
obedience, or disobedience; only because it was his pleasure (or so it seemed
good to him) to the praise of his Justice and Mercy, or (as others like better)
to declare his saving Grace, Wisdom, and free Authority (or Jurisdiction:)'
many being also so ordained by his eternal and unchangable decree, fit for the
execution of the same, by the power or force whereof, it is necessary that they
be saved after a necessary, and unavoidable manner, who are ordained to
Salvation, so that it is not possible that they should perish, but they who are
destined to destruction (who are the far greater number) must be damned
necessarily and inevitably; so that it is not possible for them to be saved.
Which doctrine first makes God to be the Author of sin, as both Piscator and
Macarius, and many other Supralapsarians, as well as Perkings, have positively
and expressly affirmed him to be; and then concludes him for a more unmerciful
Tyrant, then all that ever had been in the world, were they joined in one: A
more unmerciful Tyrant then the Roman Emperor, who wished that all the people
of Rome had but one Neck amongst them, that he might cut it off at a blow, he
being such in voto only, God alone in opere.

VII. But this extremity being every day found the more indefensible, by how
much it had been more narrowly sifted and inquired into: the more moderate and
sober sort of the Calvinians forsaking the Colors of their first Leaders,
betook themselves into the Camp of the rigid Lutherans, and rather chose to
join with the Dominican Friars, then to stand any longer to the dictates of
their Master Calvin. These passing by the name of Sublapsarians, have given us
such an order of Predestination as must and does presuppose a Fall, and finds
all mankind generally in the Mass of Perdition. The substance of whose
doctrine both in this and the other Articles were thus drawn up by the
Remonstrants in the Conference at the Hague before remembered.

1. That God Almighty, willing from eternity, with himself to make a decree
concerning the Election of some certain men, but the rejection of others;
considered mankind not only as created, but also as fallen and corrupted in
Adam, and Eve, our first Parents, and thereby the deserving the Curse: And that
he decreed out of the fall and damnation, to deliver and save some certain ones
of his Grace, to declare his Mercy; But to leave others (both young and old,
yea truly, even certain Infants of men in Covenant, and those Infants baptized,
and dying in their Infancy) by his just Judgment in the Curse, to declare his
Justice: and that without all consideration of Repentance and Faith in the
former, or of Impenitence or unbelief in the latter. For the execution of which
decree, God uses also such means, whereby the Elect are necessarily and
unavoidably saved; but Reprobates necessarily and unavoidably perish.

2. And therefore that Jesus Christ the Savior of the World died, not for all
men, but for those only who are elected either after the former or this latter
manner, he being the mean and ordained Mediator, to save those only, and not a
man besides.

3. Consequently that the Spirit of God and of Christ does work in those who
are elected that way, or this, with such a force of Grace that they cannot
resist it: and so that it cannot be, but that they must turn, believe, and
thereupon necessarily be saved. But that this irresistible grace and force
belongs only to those so elected, but not to Reprobates, to whom not only the
irresistible Grace is denied, but also grace necessary and sufficient for
Conversion, for faith, and for salvation, is not afforded. To which Conversion
and Faith indeed they are called, invited, and freely solicited outwardly by
the revealed Will of God, though notwithstanding the inward force necessary to
Faith and Conversion, is not bestowed on them, according to the secret Will of
God.

4. But that so many as have once obtained a true and justifying Ibid. 17. 6.
Faith, by such a kind of irresistible force, can never totally nor finally
lose it, no not although they fall into the very most enormious sins* but are
so led and kept by the same irresistible force, that it is not possible for them
(o^ they cannot) either totally, or finally fall, and perish.

VII. And thus we have the doctrine of the Sublapsarian Calvinists, as it
stands gathered out of the Writings of particular men. But because particular
men may sometimes be mistaken in a public doctrine, and that the Judgment of
such men, being collected by the hands of their Enemies, may be unfaithfully
related; we will next look on the Conclusions of the Synod of Dort, which is to
be conceived to have delivered the Genuine sense of all the parties, as being a
Representative of all the Calvinian Churches of Europe (except those of France)
some few Divines of England being added to them. Of the calling and proceedings
of this Synod, we shall have occasion to speak further in the following
Chapter. At this time I shall only lay down the Results thereof in the five
controverted Points (as I find them abbreviated by Dan. Tilenus.) according to
the Heads before mentioned, in summing up the doctrine of the Council of Trent.

Art. 1. Of Divine Predestination.
That God by an absolute decree has Elected to salvation Arcan. Dogn. Contr.
Remon. p. 23.
a very small number of men, without any regard to their Faith or obedience
whatsoever; and secluded from saving Grace all the rest of mankind, and
appointed them by the same decree to eternal damnation, without any regard to
their Infidelity, or Impenitency.

Art. 2. Of the Merit and Effect of Christ's Death.
That Jesus Christ has not suffered death for any other, but Ibid. p. 29.
for those Elect only, having neither had any intent nor commandment of his
Father to make satisfaction for the sins of the whole World.

Art. 3. Of Man's Will in the state of Nature.
That by Adam's Fall his Posterity lost their Free Will, being Ibid. p. 33.
put to an unavoidable necessity to do, or not to do, whatsoever they do, or do
not, whether it be good, or evil; being thereunto Predestined by the eternal
and effectual secret decree of God.

Art. Of the manner of Conversion.
That God to save his Elect from the corrupt Mass, does beget Ibid p. 41.
faith in them by a power equal to that, whereby he created the World, and
raised up the dead, insomuch that such unto whom he gives that Grace, cannot
reject it, and the rest being Reprobate cannot accept of it.

Art. 5. Of the certainty of Perseverance.
That such as have once received that Grace by Faith, can Ibid. 47.
never fall from it finally, or totally, notwithstanding the most enormious
sins they can commit.

IX. This is the shortest, and withal the most favorable Summary, which I
have hitherto met with, of the conclusions of this Synod: that which was drawn
by the Remonstrants in their Anti^^tam, being much more large, and
comprehending many things by way of Inference, which are not positively
expressed in the words thereof. But against this, though far more plausible
then the rigorous way of the Supralapsarians, Gods love to Mankind, p 45.
it is objected by those of the contrary persuasion; 1. That it is repugnant to
plain Texts of Scripture, as Ezekiel. 33. 11. Romans 11. 2. John. 3. 16. 2 Timothy ^.
4. 2 Pet. 3. 9. Genesis 4 7. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. 2 Chronicles. 15. ^. Secondly* That it
fights with Gods Holiness, and makes him the cause of sin, in the greatest
number of men. 1. In regard that only of his own will and pleasure he has
brought men into an estate in which they cannot avoid sin; that is to say, by
imputing to them the transgression of their Father Adam. And 2. In that he
leaves them irrecoverably Ibid p. 53.
plunged and involved in it, without affording them power or ability to rise
again to newness of life. In which case that of Tertullian seems to have been
fitly alleged, Viz. In cujus manu est ne quid fiat, eideputatur cum jam sit.
That Tertul. l. 2. contr. Marcion. c. 22.
is to say, In whose power it is, that a thing be not done, to him it is
imputed when it is done; as a Pilot may be said to be the cause of the loss of
that Ship, when it is broken by a violent Tempest, to the saving whereof, he
would not lend a Gods love to Mankind. p. 62.
helping hand when he might have done it. They Object thirdly, That this
doctrine is inconsistent with the mercy of God, so highly signified in the
Scriptures, in making him to take such a small and speedy occasion, to punish
the greater part of men forever, and for one sin once committed, to shut them
Ibid. p. 64.
up under an invincible necessity of sin and damnation. For proof whereof they
allege this Saying out of Prosper, Viz. Qui dicit quod non omnes homines velit
Deus salvos fieri, sed certum numerum praedestinatorum: durius loquitur quam
loquutum est de altitudine inscrutabilis gratiae Dei. That is to say^ He which
says that God would not have all men to be saved, but a certain set number of
predestinate persons only: he speaks more harshly then he should of the light
of Gods unsearchable Grace. 4. It is affirmed to be incompatible with the
Justice of God, who is said in Scripture to be Righteous in all his ways,
according unto weight and measure, that the Ibid. p. 65 and p. 67.
far greatest part of mankind should be left remedilesly in a state of
damnation, for the sin of their first Father only: that under pain of
damnation, he should require faith in Christ, of those to whom he has
precisely in his absolute purpose, denied both a power to believe, and a Christ
to believe in; or that he should punish men for the omission of an Act which is
made impossible for them by his own decree, by which he purposed that they
should partake with Adam in his sin, and be stripped of all the supernatural
power which they had in him before he fell. And fifthly, It is said to be
destructive of Gods sincerity, in calling them to repentance, and to the
knowledge of the faith in Jesus Christ, that they may be saved Ibid. p. 68.
to whom he does not really intend the salvation offered, whereby they are
conceived to make God so to deal with men, as if a Creditor should resolve,
upon no terms to forgive his Debtor the very least part of his debt, and yet
make Ibid p 76.
him offers to remit the whole upon some conditions, and bind the same with
many solemn Oaths in a public Auditory. The like to be affirmed also in
reference to Gods passionate wishes, that those men might repent, which repent
not; as also to those terrible threatenings which he thundreth against all those
that convert not to him: all which together with the whole course of the
Ministry, are by this doctrine made to be but so many Acts of deep Hypocrisy
in Almighty God, though none of the Maintainers of it have the ingenuity to
confess the same, but Piscator only, in his, Necesse est, ut sanctam aliquam si
mutationem statuamus in Deo, which is plain and home.

X. And finally it is alleged that this doctrine of the Sublapsarians, is
contrary to the ends by God proposed, in the Word and Sacraments, to many of
Gods excellent Gifts to the Sons of men, to all endeavors unto holiness and
godly living, which is said to be much hindered by it, and tend to Ibid. p. 91.
those grounds of comfort, by which a Conscience in distress should be
relieved. And thereupon it is concluded, that if it be a doctrine which
discourageth Piety; if it makes Ministers (by its natural importment) to be
negligent in their Preaching, Praying, and other Services, which are ordained
of God for the eternal good of their people: if it makes the people careless
in hearing, reading, praying, instructing their Families, examining their
Consciences, fasting and mourning for their sins, and all other godly
Exercises; as they say it does: it cannot be a true and a wholesome doctrine, as
they say it is not. This they illustrate by a passage in Suetonius, relating
Suet. de vit. Tyb. c. 69. p. 180.
to Tyberius Caesar, of whom the Historian gives this note: Circa Deos and
Religiones negligentior erat, quippe addictus mathematicae, persuasionisque
plenus, omnia fato agi. That is to say, That he was the more negligent in
matters of Religion, and about the Gods, because he was so much addicted to
Astrologers, fully persuaded in his own mind that all things were governed by
the Destinies: And they evince by the miseserable example of the Landgrave of
Turinng, of whom it is reported by Heistibachius, that being by his Friends
admonished H^isti. lib. de Minor. Hist. c. 27. p. 39. or in G^ds love to
mank^nd. p. 97.
of his vicious Conversation, and dangerous condition, he made them this
Answer, Viz. Si praedestinatus sum, nulla peccata poterint mihi, regnum
coelorum auferre; si praescitus, nulla opera mihi illud valebunt confer. That
is to say, If I be elected, no sins can possibly bereave me of the Kingdom of
Heaven, if reprobated, no good Deeds can advance me to it. An Objection not
more old then common: but such I must confess to which I never found a
satisfactory Answer, from the Pen of Supralapsarian, or Sublapsarian, within
the small compass of my reading.

CHAP. V. The Doctrine of the Remonstrants, and the Story of them, until their
final Condemnation in the Synod of Dort.
I. The Doctrine of the Remonstrants ancienter then Calvinism in the Belgic
Churches, and who they were that stood up for it before Arminius. II. The first
undertakings of Arminins, his preferment to the Divinity Chair at Leiden, his
Commendations, and Death. III. The occasion of the Name Remonstrants, and
Contra Remonstrants; the Controversy reduced to Five Points, and those
disputed at the Hague, in a public Conference. IV. The said five Points
according to their several Heads first tendered at the Hague, and after at the
Synod at Dort. V. The Remonstrants persecuted by their Opposites, put
themselves under the protection of Barnevelt, and by his means obtained a
collection of their Doctrine. Barnevelt seized and put to death by the Prince
of Orange. VI. The Calling of the Synod of Dort, the parallel betwixt it and
the Council at Trent, both in the conduct of the business against their
Adversaries, and the differences amongst themselves. VII. The breaking out of
the differences in the Synod in open Quarrels, between Martinius one of the
Divines of Breeme, and some of the Divines of Holland; and on what occasions.
VIII. A Copy of the Letter from Dr. Belconyvel to S. Dudly Carlaton, his
Majesty's Resident at the Hague, working the violent prosecutions of those
Quarrels by the Dutch Divines. IX. A further prosecution of the Quarrel between
the Council and the Synod, in reference to the Articles used in the Draught
upon the Canons and Decrees of either, and the doubtful meaning of them both.
X. The quarrelling Parties join together against the Remonstrants, denying them
any place in the Synod; and finally dismissed them in a furious Oration made by
Boyerman, without any hearing. XI. The Synodists indulgent to the damnable
Doctrines of Macorius, and unmerciful in the banishment or extermination of the
poor Remonstrants. XII. Scandalously defamed, to make them odious, and th^se of
their persuasions in other places, Ejected, Persecuted, and Disgraced.

I. HAving thus run through all the other Opinions, touching Predestination,
and the Points depending thereupon: I come next to that of the Remonstrants (or
Arminians, as they commonly call them) accused of Novelty, but ancienter then
Calvinism, in the Churches of the Belgic Provinces, which being Originally
Dutch, did first embrace the Reformation, according to the Lutheran model,
though afterward they suffered the Calvinian Platform to prevail upon them.
It was about the year 1530. that the Reformed Religion was admitted in the
Neighboring Country of East-Friezland, under Enno the First, upon the
preaching of Hardingbergius, a Learned and Religious man, and one of the
principal Reformers of the Church of Emden, a Town of most note in all that
Earldom: from him did Clemens Martini take those Principles, which afterward
he propagated in the Belgic Churches, where the same Doctrine of
Predestination had been publicly maintained, in a Book called Odegus Laicorum,
or the Laymans Guide, published by Anastasius Velluanus, An. 1554. and much
commended by Henricus Antonides, Divinity Reader in the University of Francka:
But on the other side the French Ministers having settled themselves in those
Parts, which either were of French Language, or anciently belonged to the Crown
of France, and having more Quicksilve in them then the others had, prevailed so
far with William of Nassaw, Prince of Orange, that a Confession of their
framing was presented to the Lady Regent, ratified in a forcible and tumultuous
way, and afterward by degrees obtruded upon all the Belgic Churches: which
notwithstanding the Ministers successively in the whole Province of Vtrecht
adhered unto their former Doctrines; not looked on for so doing as the less
Reformed: Nor wanted there some one or other of eminent Note, who did from time
to time oppose the Doctrine of Predestination, contained in that Confession of
the year 1567. when it took beginning. Insomuch that Johannes Isbra^di, one of
the Preachers of Rotradam, openly professed himself an Anticalvinian, and so
did Gellius Succanus also in the Country of West-Friezland, who looked no
otherwise upon these of Calvin's Judgment, then as Innovators in the Doctrine
which had been first received amongst them. The like we find also of Holmanus,
one of the Professors of Leyden, of Cornelius Meinardi, and Cornelius Wiggeri,
two men of principal esteem, before the name of Jacob Van-Harmine, was so much
as talked of.

II. But so it happened, that though these learned men had kept on foot the
ancient Doctrines, yet did they never find so generally an Entertainment in
those Provinces, as they did afterward by the pains and diligence of this
Van-Harmine: (Arminius he is called by our Latin Writers) from whom these
Doctrines have obtained the name of Arminianism, called so upon no juster
Grounds then the great Western Continent, is called by the name of America;
whereas both Christopher Collumbus had first discovered it, and the two Cabots
Father and Son had made a further progress in the said discovery, before
Americus Vespatius ere saw those shores. As for Arminius; he had been fifteen
years a Preacher (or a Pastor as they rather phrase it) to the great Church of
Arastandam, during which times, taking a great distaste at the Book published by
Mr. Perkins, entitled, Armilla Aurea, he set himself upon the canvasing of it,
and published his performance in it, by the name of Examen Praedestinationis
Perkinsoniae, as before was said. Encouraged with his good success in this
adventure, he undertakes a Conference on the same Argument with the learned
Junius, the sum whereof being spread abroad in several Papers, was after
published by the name of Amica Collatio. Junius being dead in the year 1603.
the Curators or Overseers of the University made choice of this Van-harmine to
succeed him in his place. But the Inhabitants of the Town would not so part
with him, till they were overruled by the Entreaties of some, and the power of
others, A matter so unpleasing to the rigid Calvinians, that they informed
against him to the state for diverse Heterodoxies, which they had noted in his
Writings. But the business being heard at the Hague, he was acquitted by his
Judge, dispatched for Leyden, and there confirmed in his place. Toward which the
Testimonial Letters sent from the Church of Amsterdam, did not help a little.
In which he stands commended, Ob vitae inculpatae, sanae doctrinae and morum
summam integritatem. That is to say, for a man of an unblameable life, sound
Doctrine and fair behavior, as may be seen at large, in the Oration which was
made at his Funeral in the Divinity Schools of Leyden, on the 22. day of
October, 1609.

III. Thus dyed Arminius, but the Cause did not so dye with him. For during the
first time of his sitting in the Chair of Leyden, he drew unto him a great part
of the University, who by the Piety of the man, his powerful Arguments, his
extreme diligence in that place, and the clear light of Reason which appeared
in all his Discourses, were so wedded unto his Opinions, that no time nor
trouble could drown them: For Arminius dying in the year 1609. as before was
said, the heats betwixt the Scholars, and those of the contrary persuasion,
were rather increased then abated; the more increased for want of such a
prudent Moderator, as had before preserved the Churches from a public Rupture.
The breach between them growing wider and wider, each side thought fit to seek
the Countenance of the State, and they did accordingly: for in the year 1610.
the Followers of Arminius address their Remonstrance, containing the Antiquity
of their Doctrines, and the substance of them) to the States of Holland, which
was encountered presently, by a Contra Remonstance, exhibited by those of
Calvin's Party: from hence the names of Remonstrants, and Contra Remonstrants,
so frequent in their Books and Writings; each Party taking opportunity to
disperse their Doctrines, the Remonstrants gained exceedingly upon their
Adversarys: For the whole Controversy being reduced to these five Points, Viz.
The Method and Order of Predestination; The Efficacy of Christ's Death, The
Opperations of Grace, both before and after m^^s Conversion, and perseverance
in the same; the Parties were admitted to a public Conference at the Hague, in
the year 1611. in which the Remonstrants were conceived to have had much the
better of the day. Now for the five Articles above mentioned, they were these
that follow;

VIZ. I. De Electione ex fide praevisa.
DEus aeterno and immutabili Decreto, in Jesu Christo filio suo, ante jactum
mundi fundamentum statuit, ex lapso and peccatis obnoxio humano genere, illos
in Christo, propter Christum, and per Christum servare, qui spiritus sancti
gratia in eundem filium ejus credunt, and in ea fide, fideique obedientia, per
eandem gratiam, usque ad finem perseverant.

VIZ. I. Of Election out of Faith foreseen.
ALmighty God by an eternal and unchangable Decree, ordained in Jesus Christ,
his only Son, before the Foundations of the World were laid, to save all those
in Christ, for Christ; and through Christ, who being fallen, and under the
command of sin, by the assistance of the Grace of the Holy Ghost, do persevere
in faith and obedience to the very end.

II. De Redemptione universali.
Proinde Deus Christus pro omnibus ac singulis mortuus est: atque id ita
quidem, ut omnibus per mortem crucis Reconciliationem, and Peccatorum
Remissionem impetrarit: Ea tamen condition, ut nemo illa peccatorum Remissione
fruatur, praeter hominem fidelem, Joh. 2. 16. 1 John 2. 2.

II. Of universal Redemption.
To which end Jesus Christ suffered death for all men, and in every man, that
by his death upon the Cross, he might obtain for all mankind, both the
forgiveness of their sins, and Reconciliation with the Lord their God; with
this Condition notwithstanding, that none but true believers should enjoy the
benefit of the Reconciliation and forgiveness of sins, John 2. 16. 1 John 2. 2.

III. De causa fidei.
Homo fidem salutarem a seipso non habet, nec vi liberi sui arbitrii,
quandoquidem in statu defectionis, and peccati, nihil boni, quod quidem vere
est bonum (quale est fides salutaris) ex se potest cogitare, velle, aut facere:
sed necessarium est, eum a Deo, in Christo, per spiritum ejus sanctum regigni,
renovari, mente, affectibus, seu voluntate, and omnibus facultatibus, ut
aliquid boni posset intelligere, cogitare, velle, and perficere, secundum illud
John 15. 5. sine me potestis nihil.

III. Of the cause or means of attaining Faith.
Man has not saving Faith in and of himself, nor can attain it by the power of
his own Free Will, in regard that living in an estate of sin, and defection
from God, he is not able of himself to think well, or do any thing which is
really, or truly good; amongst which sort saving faith is to be accounted. And
therefore it is necessary that by God in Christ, and through the Workings of the
Holy Ghost he be regenerated and renewed in his understanding, will,
affections, and all his other faculties; that so he may be able to understand,
think, will, and bring to pass any thing that is good, according to that of
Saint John, 15. 5. Without me you can do nothing.

IV. De Conversionis modo.
Dei gratia est initium, progressus, and perfectio omnis boni, atque adeo
quidem, ut ipse homo Regenitus, absque hae praecedanea seu Adventitia,
excitante, consequente, and co-operante gratia, neque boni quid cagitare,
velle, aut facere potest, neque etiam ulli malae tentationae resistere, adeo
quidem ut omnia bona opera, quae excogitare possumus, Deigratiae in Christo
tribuenda sunt. Quoad vero modum co-operationis illius gratiae, illa non est
irresistibilis: de multis enim dicitur, eos spiritui sancto Resistisse. Actorum
7. and alibi multis locis.

IV. Of the manner of Conversion.
The Grace of God is the beginning, promotion, and accomplishment of every
thing that is good in us; insomuch that the Regenerate man can neither think
well, nor do any thing that is good, or resist any sinful temptations, without
this Grace preventing, cooperating and assisting; and consequently all good
works, which any man in his life can attain unto, are to be attributed and
ascribed to the grace of God. But as for the manner of the cooperation of this
Grace, it is not to be thought to be irresistible, in regard that it is said of
many in the holy Scriptures, that they did resist the Holy Ghost; as in Acts 7.
and in other places.

V. De Perseverantia incerta.
Qui Jesu Christo per veram fidem sunt insiti, ac proinde spiritus ejus
vivificantis participes, ii abundehabent facultatum, quibus contra Satanam,
peccatum, mundum, and propriam suam carnem pugnent and victoriam obtineant;
verum tamen per gratiae spiritus sancti subsidium. Jesus Christus quidem illis
spiritu suo in omnibus tentationibus adest, manum porrigit, and modo sint ad
certamen prompti, and ejus Auxilium Petant, neque officio suo desint, eos
confirmat: adeo quidem ut nulla satanae fraud, aut vi seduci, vel e manibus
Christi eripi, possint, secundum illud Johannis 10. Nemo illos e manu mea
eripiet, Sed an illi ipsi negligentia sua, principium illud quo sustentantur in
Christo, deserere non possint, and praesentem mundum iterum amplecti, a sancta
doctrina ipsis semel tradita deficere, conscientiae naufragium facere, a gratia
excidere; penitus ex sacra scriptura esset expendendum, antequam illud cumplena
animi tranquillitate, and Plerephoria dicere possumus.

V. Of the uncertainty of Perseverance.
They who are grafted into Christ by a lively Faith, and are thoroughly made
Partakers of his quickening Spirit, have a sufficiency of strength, by which
(the Holy Ghost contributing his Assistance to them) they may not only fight,
but obtain the Victory, against the Devil, Sin, the World, and all infirmities
of the flesh. Most true it is, that Jesus Christ is present with them by his
Spirit in all their temptations, that he reaches out his hand unto them, and
shows himself ready to support them, if for their parts they prepare themselves
to the encounter, and beseech his help, and are not wanting to themselves in
performing their duties: so that they cannot be seduced by the cunning, or
taken out of the hands of Christ by the power of Satan, according to that of S.
John, No man takes them out of my hand, etc. cap. 10. But it is first to be
well weighed and proved by the holy Scripture, whether by their own negligence,
they may not forsake those Principles of saving Grace, by which they are
sustained in Christ, embrace the present World again, Apostatize from the
saving doctrine once delivered to them, suffer a Shipwreck of their Conscience,
and fall away from the Grace of God, before we can publicly teach these
doctrines, with any sufficient trauquillity or assurance of mind.'

V. It is reported, that at the end of the Conference between the Protestants
and Papists, in the first Convocation of Queen Mary's Reign, the Protestants
were thought to have had the better, as being more dextrous in applying and in
forcing some Texts of Scripture then the others were, and that thereupon they
were dismissed by Weston the Prolocutor, with this short come off: You, said
he, have the word, and we have the Sword. His meaning was, That what the
Papists wanted in the strength of Argument, they would make good by other
ways, as afterward indeed they did by Fire and Faggot. The like is said to
have been done by the Contra Remonstrants, who finding themselves at this
Conference to have had the worst, and not to have thrived much better by their
Pen-comments, then in that of the Tongue, betook themselves to other courses;
vexing and molesting their Opposites in their Classes, or Consistories,
endeavoring to silence them from Preaching in their several Churches: or
otherwise to bring them unto public Censure. At which Weapon the Remonstrants
being as much too weak, as the others were at Argument and Disputation; they
betook themselves unto the Patronage of John Van Olden Burnevelt, a man of
great Power in the Council of Estate for the United Belgic Provinces, by whose
means they obtained an Edict from the States of Holland, and West-Fri^zland,
Ann. 1613. requiring and enjoining a mutual Toleration of Opinions, as well on
the one side as the other. An Edict highly magnified by the Learned Grotius in
a Book, entitled, Pietas Ordinum Hollandiae, etc. Against which some Answers
were set out by Bogerman, Sibrandus, and some others, not without some
reflection on the Magistrates for their Actings in it: But this indulgence,
though at the present it was very advantageous to the Remonstrants, as the case
then stood, cost them dear at last. For Barnevelt having some suspicion that
Morris of Nassaw, Prince of Orange, Commander General of all the Forces of
those United Provinces both by Sea and Land, had a design to make himself the
absolute Master of those Countries, made use of them for the uniting and
encouraging of such good Patriots, as durst appear in maintenance of the common
liberty, which Service they undertook the rather, because they found that the
Prince had passionately espoused the Quarrel of the Contra Remonstrants. From
this time forwards the Animosities began to increase on either side, and the
Breach to widen, not to be closed again; but either by weakening the great power
of the Prince, or the Death of Barnevelt. This last the easier to be compassed,
as not being able by so small a Party to contend with him, who had the absolute
command of so many Legions. For the Prince being apprehensive of the danger in
which he stood, and spurred on by the continual Solicitations of the Contra
Remonstrants, suddenly put himself into the Head of his Army, with which he
marched from Town to Town, altered the Guards, changed the Officers, and
displaced the Magistrates, where he found any whom he thought disaffected to
him; and having gotten Barnevelt, Grotius, and some other of the Heads of the
Party into his power, he caused them to be condemned, and Barnevelt to be put
to death, contrary to the fundamental Laws of the Country, and the Rules of the
Union.

VI. This Alteration being thus made, the Contra Remonstrants thought it a high
Point of Wisdom to keep their Adversaries down, now they had them under, and to
effect that by a National Council, which they could not hope to compass by
their own Authority: To which end, the States General being importuned by the
Prince of Orange, and his Solicitation seconded by those of King James (to
whom the power and person of the Prince were of like Importance) a National
Synod was appointed to be held at Dort, Ann. 1618. Barnevelt being then still
living. To which besides the Commissioners from the Churches of their several
Provinces, all the Calvinian Churches in Europe (those of France excepted) sent
their Delegates also; some eminent Divines being Commissionated by King James
to attend also in the Synod: for the Realm of Britain. A Synod much like that
of Trent, in the Motives to it; as also in the mannaging and conduct of it. For
as neither of them was Assembled till the Sword was drawn, the terror whereof
was able to effect more then all other Arguments: so neither of them was
concerned to confute, but condemn their Opposites.

Secondly, The Council of Trent consisted for the most part of Italian Bishops,
some others being added for fashion sake; and that it might the better
challenge the Name of General, as that of Dort, consisted for the most part of
the Delegates of the Belgic Churches, to whom the foreign Divines were found
inconsiderable. The Differences as great at Dort, as they were at Trent, and as
much care taken to adulce the discontented Parties (whose Judgments were
incompatible with the ends of either) in the one as the other. The British
Divines, together with one of those which came from the Breme, maintained the
universal Redemption of Mankind by the Death of Christ. But this by no means
would be granted by the rest of the Synod, especially by those of North-
Holland, for fear of yiedling any thing to the Arminians; as Soto in the
Council of Trent opposed some moderate Opinions, teaching the certainty of
Salvation, because they were too much in favor with the Lutheran Doctrines.
First, The general body of the Synod not being able to avoid the inconveniences
which the Supra-lapsarian way brought with it, were generally intent on the
Sublapsarian: but on the other side, the Commissioners of the Churches of
South-Holland, thought it not necessary to determine which were considered, man
fallen, or not fallen, while he passed the Decrees of Election and Reprobation. But
far more positive was Gomarus, one of the four Professors of Leiden, who stood
as strongly to the absolute irrespective and irreversible Decree, (exclusive of
man's sin, and our Saviors Sufferings) as he could have done for the Holy
Trinity. And not being able to draw the rest unto his Opinion, nor willing to
conform to theirs, he delivered his own Judgment in writing apart by it self,
not joining in subscription with the rest of his Brethren, for conformity sake,
as is accustomed in such cases. But Macorius one of the Professors in Frankar,
in West-Frizeland, went beyound them all, not only maintaining against
Sibrandus Lubbertus, his fellow Collegiate in their open Synod; That God wills
sin, That he ordains sin as it is sin: and, That by no means he would have all
men to be saved; but openly declaring, That if these Points were not
maintained, they must forsake their chief Doctors who had so great a hand in
the Reformation.

VII. Some other differences there were amongst them, not reconcilable in this
Synod; as namely, whether the Elect be loved out of Christ, or not: whether
Christ were the cause and foundation of Election, or only the Head of the
Elect; And many others of like nature. Nor were these Differences managed with
such sobriety as became the gravity of the persons, and weight of the business,
but brake out many times into such open heats and violences, as are not to be
paralleled in the like Assemblies; the Provincial Divines banding against the
Foreiners, and the Foreiners falling foul upon one another: for so it happened;
that Martinius one of the Divines of Breme, a moderate and learned man, being
desired to speak his mind in the Points last mentioned, signified to the
Synod, 'That he made some scruple touching the Doctrine Passant, In his
Letters, p. 72.
about the manner of Christ's being Fundamentum electionis, and that he thought
Christ not only the Effector of our Election, but also the Author and Procurer
of it. Gomarus presently as soon as Martinius had spoken, starts up and tells
the Synod, Ego hanc rem in me recipio, and therewithal casts his Glove, and
challenges Martinius with this Proverb, Ecce Rhodum, ecce Sullum, and required
the Synod to grant them a Duel, adding, That he knew Martinius could say
nothing in Refutation of that Doctrine.' So my dear Friend Mr. Hales of Eaton
relates the story of this passage in a Letter to Sir Dudly Carleton, bearing
date Jan. 25. 1618. according to the style of the Church of England: and where
he ends, Dr. Belcanquall shall begin relating in his Letters to the said
Ambassador, the story of a greater Fray, between the said Martinius, and
Sibrandus Lubberius above mentioned, upon this occasion. Martinius had affirmed
God to be, Causa Physica Conversionis; and for the truth thereof, appealed to
Goclenius a great Philosopher, being then present in the Synod, who thereupon
discoursed upon it out of Th^mistinus, Averores, Alexander Aphrodisaeus, and
many more; affirming it to be true in Philosophy, although he would not have it
to prescribe in Divinity. Sibrandus Lubbert taking fire at this, falls upon
them both: but the Fray parted at the present, by the care of Boyerman. Gomarus
within few days after picks a new Quarrel with Martinius, and the rest of the
Divines of Breme, for running a more moderate course then the rest of the
Synod: many other of the Provincials seconding Gomarus in the Quarrel, and
carrying themselves so uncivilly in the prosecution; that Martinius was upon
the Point of returning homewards. But this Quarrel being also taken up, the
former is revived by Sibrandus in the following Session, concerning which
Belcanquall writes to Sr Dudley Carleton, this ensuing Letter, which for the
rarity and variety of the passages contained in it, and the great light which
it affords to the present business: I shall crave leave to add it here.

Dr. BELCANQUALLS LETTER TO Sir Dudley Carleton.
My very good Lord,
VIII. SInce my last Letters to your Lordship, Belcanquals Letters. p. 10
there has been no business of any great Note in the Synod, but that which I
am sure your Lordship will be very sorry to hear; Contention like to come to
some head, if it be not prevented in time: for there has been such a Plot laid
ex composito, for disgracing of the Bremenses, as I think the Synod shall
receive small grace by it. D. Gomarus being he at whom the last Disquisition of
the third and fourth Articles ended, was entreated by the President to speak
his mind of the said Articles; but Sibrandus desires the President, first, to
give him leave to add some few things to that he had spoken the day before: Now
what he added was nothing but a renewing of the strife, which was between him
and Martinius in the last Session: two things ^e alleged; First, That he had
been at Goclenius his Lodging, conferring with him about that Proposition,
whether God might be called Causa Physica of humane Actions, and delivered
certain Affirmations pronounced by Goclenius, tending to the Negative; for the
truth of his relation he appealed to Goclenius there present, who testified
that it was so: next Martinius had alleged a place out of Paraeus for the
Affirmative in opere conversionis. Sibrandus, read a great many places out of
Paraeus tending to the contrary: and (no question it being pleaded before) he
entreats some of the Pallatines (naming them all severally) who were Paraeus
his Colleagues, would speak what they did know of Paraeus his mind, concerning
the said Proposition: Scultetus begins with a set Speech, which he had writ
lying before him; but such a Speech it was, as I, and I think all the Exteri,
were exceedingly grieved it should have come from a man of so much worth: the
sum of it was this, That he did know upon his own knowledge, that Paraeus did
hold the contrary of that which had been fasly fathered on him in the Synod,
that he could not endure to hear his dearest Colleague so much abused as he had
been by some men in the Synod: Moreover he could not now dissemble, the great
grief he had conceived that some in the Synod, went about to trouble sound
Divinity with bringing in Tricas Scholasticas, such as was to make God Causam
Physicam Conversionis (that was for Martinius) such portenta vocabulorum, as
determinare, and non determinare voluntatem: that some men durst say, that
there were some doubts in the Fourth Article, which Calvin himself had not
thoroughly satisfied, nor other Learned Reformed Doctors; that it was to be
feared that they intended to bring in Jesuits Divinity in the Reformed
Churches, and to corrupt the Youth committed to their Charge, with a strange
kind of Divinity. This last Speech concerned D. Grotius. Scultetus delivered
his mind in exceeding bitter and disgraceful words, and repeated his bitterest
sentences twice over: he having ended, Martinius with great modesty answered,
first, That he would read Paraeus his own words, which he did; next that for
Sibrandus he wondered that he would now in public bring these things up, since
out of his love to Peace, that very day he had sent his Colleague Grotius to
Sibrandus, with a large explication in that sense, in which he had delivered
the Proposition, with which explication Sibrandus himself had sent him word he
was fully satisfied, and so he made account that that business had been
peaceably transacted: all this while Grotius spoke nothing; Gomarus begins
to go on in the Disquisition, but I think he delivered a Speech against the
Bremenses, which none but a mad man would have uttered. First, Whereas
Martinius had said, that he did desire the resolution of this doubt, Qui Deus
possit ab homine cujus potentia est finita, fidem, quae est opus omnipotentiae,
exigere: and that neither Calvin, nor any of the Divines, had yet plainly
enough untyed the Knot: he replied, first, That he that said so was not Dignus
qui solveret Calvino Corrigiam: and that for the doubt it self, it was such a
silly one, that ipsi pueri in trivio, could ipsius solutionem decantare (at
which Speech every body smiled.) Moreover, whereas Martinius in his Answer to
Scultetus, had not spoken one word against him, but only this, That he was
sorry that one who had now been 25 years a Professor of Divinity should be thus
used for using a School-term: Gomarus very wisely had a fling at the Two, and
tells the Synod, that since some men thought to carry it away annorum numero,
he himself had been a Professor not only 25, but 35 years. Next he falls upon
Grotius, and bids the Synod take heed of these men that brought in the
Monstra and Portenta vocabulorum, the Barbarisms of the Schools of the Jesuits,
determinare, and non determinare voluntatem, with many such speeches delivered
with such sparklings of his eyes, and fireceness of pronunciation, as every man
wondered the President did not cut him off, at last he cut off himself I think
for want of breath; and the President gives Celeberrimo Doctori Gomaro, many
thanks for that his Grave and accurate speech: the Exteri wondered at it; at
last my Lord of Landaff, in Good faith, in a very grave short speech (for
which, as for one of the least, I am persuaded he ever delivered, we and all
the Exteri, thought he deserved infinite Commendations:) he spoke to the
President to this purpose, That this Synod called Disquisition, was instituted
for Edification, not for any man to show Studium Contentionis; and therefore
did desire him to look that the knot of Unity were not broken. In this his
Lordships speech, he named no man, the last word was hardly out of my Lordships
mouth, but furious Gomarus, knowing himself guilty, delivered this wise Speech;
Reverendissime D. Praesul, non agendum est hic in Synodo authoritate, sed
ratione. That it was free for him to speak in his own place, which no man must
think to abridge him of by their Authority. My Lord replied nothing; but the
President told my Lord, that Celeberrimus D. Gom. had said nothing against men's
Persons, but their Opinions, and therefore that he had said nothing worthy of
Reprehension: This gave every man just occasion to think the President was of
the Plot. Martimus against this Speech of Gomarus said nothing, but that he was
sorry that he should have this Reward for his far Journey: The Disquisition
went on to Thysius, who very discreetly told the Synod, he was sorry Martinius
should be so exagitated for a speech, which according to Martinius his
explication was true. Just as Thysius was thus speaking, Gomarus and Sibrandus
who sat next him, pulled him by the Sleeve, talked to him in a confused angry
noise, in the hearing and seeing of all the Synod, chiding him that he would
say so: afterward Thysius with great moderation, desired Martinius to give him
satisfaction of one or two doubtful Sentences he had delivered; which
Martinius, thanking him for his Courtesy, fully did. The President was
certainly in this Plot against Martinius, for at the same time he read out of a
Paper publicly, a note of all the hard Speeches Martinius had used. All this
while D. Grotius his patience was admired by all men, who being so grossly
abused and disgraced, could get leave of his affections to hold his peace.


IX. I could pursue these Differences further both in weight and number,
without any great trouble; but that I have some there work to do, which is the
pressing of some other Conformities between this Synod and the Council: the
same Arts being used in drawing up the Cannons and Conclusions of the one, as
were observed in the other; what Care and Artifice was used in the Council of
Trent, so to draw up the Canons and Decrees thereof, as to please all the
differing Parties, has been already shown in the third Chapter of this Book.
And in the History of the Councels, we shall find this passage, Viz. That
immediately after the Session, Friar Dominicus S^to principal of the Dominicans,
wrote three Books, and did Entitle them of Nature and of Grace: for Commentary
of this Doctrine, and in his Expositions all his Opinions are found. When this
Work was published, Friar Andrew Vega, the most esteemed of the Franciscans,
set forth fifteen great Books for Commentarys, Hist. of the Contr. p. 215.
upon the sixteen Points of that Decree, and did expound it all according to
his own Opinion; which two Opinions says my Author, do not only differ in
almost all the Articles, but in many of them are expressly contrary. A perfect
parallel to which we may find in this Synod; the Conclusions and Results
whereof, being so drawn up, for giving satisfaction to the Sublapsarians, that
those of the Supralapsarian Faction might pretend some Title to them also:
Concerning which, take here this passage from the Arcan. Dogm. Pref. A. 9.
Remonstr. long since published, where we are told of a bitter Contention,
betwixt Voetius and Maresius, about the sense of this Synod: the one of them
maintaining that the Synod determined the Decree of Predestination and
Reprobation, to antecede the consideration of the Fall of Adam; the other
opposing him with an Apology in behalf of the Synod, against that Assertion. So
that though assembled on purpose to decide these Controversies, and appease the
Broyls that Emerged, and were inflamed upon them, yet (that they might seem to
agree together in some thing) have they wrapped up their Decrees and Canons in so
many Clouds, and confounded them with so many Intricacies (if a man has
recourse to their Suffrages for an Interpretation) that they are like to fall
into a greater new Schism, before they come to a settled Resolution, of knowing
what the meaning of that Synod is. And so much of the parallel between the
council of Trent, and the synod of D^rt* touching the managery of all affairs
both in fact, and post fact.

X. It was to be supposed in the midst of so many Differences and disorders,
the Remonstrants might have found a way to have saved themselves, either by
fomenting the Contentions, or by finding some Favors at their hands, who
seemed to be any thing inclinable to their Opinions: but no such favor could
be gained, not so much as hoped for; though Ephraim was against Manasses, and
Manasses against Ephraim, yet were they both together against Judah, as the
Scripture tells us. Nor did the differences between the Supralapsarians, and
the Sublapsarians, or those which were of equal moment in the other Points
extend so far, as to be any hindrance to the condemning of those poor men, to
whom they were resolved not to give an equal hearing before the final sentence
of their recondemnation: so truly was it said by some of the Remonstrants
themselves; Adeo facile Coeunt, qui in fatalitatem absolutam Exam. Cers. p. 63.
B.
tantum consentiunt. In order whereunto, many indirect proceedings had been
used to hinder those of the Remonstrant, or Arminian Party, by excommunicating
some, and citing others to appear as criminal persons, from being returned
Commissioners from their several Classes; and to refuse admittance to them into
the Synod, upon such Returns, except they would oblige themselves to desert
their Party, as in the case of those of Vtrecht, there when the Parties whom
they cited, were authorized by the rest to present themselves before the Synod,
and to press for audience, offering to refer their Cause to a Disputation:
their offer was not rejected only, but they were commanded to forbear any
further attendance, unless they would submit themselves unto two Conditions;
First, To acknowledge the Members of the Synod (whom they beheld as Parties) to
be competent Judges in that case. And secondly, To proceed in such a Method as
they conceived would be destructive of their Cause: On the refusal of which
last, the former Point being in a manner yielded to, in hope of some fair
dealing from the foreign Divines, they were dismissed without hearing what they
could say for themselves, as before was noted. For Boyerman President of the
Synod, having some suspicion that they would openly retort those gross
Impieties, which were contained under the absolute Decree of Reprobation;
dismissed them the Assembly in a most bitter Oration, his eyes seeming to
sparkle fire, for the very fear, or fervency of spirit which was then upon him,
which though I might report with safety enough from the Pen of some of the
Remonstrants, in their Books called the Synodalia Remonstrantium, and the
Antidotum, etc. yet I choose rather to relate it from a more impartial Author,
even from the mouth of my dear Friend, Mr. Hales (the most learned and
ingenious John Hales of Eaton) who being then Chaplain to Sir. Dudley Carleton,
King James his Resident at the Hague, was suffered to be present at the hearing
of it; so that it might be said of them, as was affirmed by Tertullian of the
ancient Gentiles, when the persecuting humor was upon them: A^dire nolunt,
quod auditum damnare non possunt; they were resolved not to hear those
Arguments which they could not answer, or to give ear unto the proving of those
Points, which they could not honestly condemn, if they had been proved.

XI. More favorable were they unto those of the other extremity, looking no
otherwise on the Supralapsarians, then as erring Brethren; but on the
Remonstrants, or Arminians, as their mortal Enemies. Macorius beforementioned,
is charged to have brought many dangerous and blasphemous Paradoxes, in making
God to be the Author of sin, and openly maintaining in the Synod it self, that
God willed sin, that he ordained sin, as sin, and that by no means he would
have all men to be saved, as before is said. He had taught also in his
Writings, Gods Love to mankind, p. 89.
Deum Reprobis verbum suum prop^nere non alio fine, quam ut inexcusabiles
reddantur: That is to say, That God does propound his Word to Reprobates for no
other end, then that they might be left without excuse: That if the Gospel be
considered in respect of Gods intention, the proper end of it, and not the
Accidental, in reference to Reprobates, is their inexcusableness. More then so
yet, That Christ knows all the hearts of Reprobates who he kn^weth neither
can nor will open to him; not that he may enter in, but partly that he may
upbraid them for their impotency, and partly that he may increase their
damnation: And finally, Deum ideo eis locutum esse, ut ex contemptu, and odio
filii unigeniti, Gravior condemnatio esset. That God does speak unto them to no
other end, but that by the contempt and hatred of his only son, they might
incur the greater condemnation. For which and many other expressions of the
like foul Nature, occurring frequently in his Writings, and those* Positions
which he stood to in the open Synod, he received no other Censure from them,
but a fair and friendly Admonition, to forbear such Forms of speech, as Arcan.
Degrees. Cert. Remons. p. 95.
might give offense to tender Ears, and could not be digested by persons
ignorant and incapable of so great Mysteries: As also that he would not set
light by those distinctions of Divines who had deserved well of the Church of
Christ. But on the other side, the Remonstrants who maintained no such
Impieties, whose Writings neither charged God with Tyranny and Hypocrisy or
having any hand in the Act of sin, were most reproachfully handled and thrown
out of the Senate, without so much as hearing, what they had to say in their
own defense, though that was the least part of the misery intended to them: For
when the Synod had concluded in the condemnation of their Doctrine, they next
proceeded to the destructon of their persons, calling upon them to subscribe to
the Acts of the Synod; and setting them a peremptory day for conforming to it:
And when they saw that would not do it, by their incensed importunity, they
procured a Proclamation from the States-Generall, to banish them from their
Native Country, with their Wives and Children, and so compelling them to beg
their Bread, even in Desolate places.

XII. But yet this was no end of their sorrows neither. He must come under a
new Cross, and be calumniated for maintaining many horrid Blasphemies, and
gross impieties, which they most abhorred. For in the continuation of the
History of the Netherlands, writ by one Cross, a fellow of no parts or
judgment, and so more apt to be abused with a false Report; It is there
affirmed (whether with greater ignorance or malice, it is hard to say) That
there was a Synod called at D^rt, to suppress the Arminians; and that the said
Arminians held amongst other Heresies, First, That God was the Author of sin;
and secondly, That he created the far greater part of Mankind, only of purpose
for to damn them; with several others of that kind: Which every man of
reason knows, not only to be the consequence and results of Calvin's Doctrine,
but to be positively maintained and taught by some of his followers. By which
and such like subtle, and malicious practices, they endeavored to expose
their Adversaries to the public hatred, and make them odious with the people;
till at last these poor men might have said most justly, as once the primitive
Christians did, under the burden of the like Calumnies and Imputations,
Condemnati sumus quia nominamur, non quia convincimur, as Tertullian has it,
the name of an Arminian carried a Condemnation in it self without any
conviction. Nor was their fury satisfied in Exauctorating, Banishing, and
destroying those of the adverse party, who lived within the compass of the
Belgic Provinces; the genius of the Sect being active in all parts alike, in
none more visibly then the neighboring City of Ledan, the principal seat and
Signory of the Dukes of Bovillon: Out of which Franciscus Auratus a most
faithful Minister of that Church, is said to have been shamefully ejected for
no other reason, by those of the Calvinian party, but because, preaching on the
Text of St. James 1. 13. God tempts no man, etc. he largely declared, that
God was not the Author of sin. With what severity they proceeded in England,
when they had gotten the advantage of Power and Number, and with what Calumnies
and Reproaches they aspersed all those which were of a contrary persuasion to
them; the sequestring and ejecting of so many hundreds of learned and religious
men from their several Benefices, the most odious Pamphlet called, The First
CENTURY of SCANDALOVS and MALIGNANT PRIESTS, together with many uncharitable
and disgraceful passages against them, in the Writings of some Presbyterian
Ministers, do most clearly evidence.

CHAP. VI. Objections made against the Doctrine of the Remonstrants, the
Answers unto all, and the retorting of some of them on the Opposite Party.
I. An Introduction to the said Objections. II. The first Objection, touching
their being enemies to the Grace of God, disproved in general, by comparing
the Doctrine with that of S. Augustine, though somewhat more favorable to Free
Will then that of Luther. III. A more particular Answer, in relation to some
hard Expressions, which were used of them by King James. IV. The second
charging it as Introductive of Popery, begun in Holland, and pressed more
importunately in England, answered both by Reason and Experience to the
contrary of it. V. The third, as filling men with spiritual pride, first
answered in relation to the testimony from which it was taken, and then
retorted on those who object the same. VI. The fourth Charge, making the
Remonstrants a factious and seditious people, begun in Holland, prosecuted in
England, and answered in the general by the most Religious Bishop Ridly. VII.
What moved King James to think so ill of the Remonstrants, as to exasperate the
States against them. VIII. The Remonstrants neither so troublesome nor so
chargeable to the States themselves, as they are made by the Assertor; the
indirect proceedings of the Prince of Orange, viz. the death of Barnevelt, and
the injustice of the Argument in charging the practices of his Children, and
the Prince upon all the party. IX. Nothing in the Arminian Doctrine, which may
incline a man to seditious courses, as it is affirmed and proved to be in the
Calvin. X. The Racrimination further proved by a passage in the Conference of
the Lord Treasurer Burleigh with Queen Eliz. in a Letter of some of the Bishops
to the Duke of Buckingham, and in that of Dr. Brooks to the late Archbishop.
XI. More fully prosecuted, and exemplified, by Campney's an old English
Protestant. XII. A Transition to the Doctrine of the Chrurch of England.

I. IT may be thought, that some strange mystery of iniquity, lay hidden under
the Mask or Vail of the Five Articles last mentioned, which m^de the Synodists
so furiously to rage against them; to use such cruelty (for severity is too
mild a name to express their ^igor) toward all those who did maintain them.
For justifying whereof in the eye of the World, both before, and after the
Synod, course was taken to impeach their Doctrine in these points of no smaller
crimes, then to be destructive of ^ods Grace, introductory of Popery, tending
unto spiritual pride, and to Sedition or Rebellion in the Civil Government.
Which Objections I shall here present, as I have done the Arguments of most
importance which were Excogitated, and enforced against the Conclusions, and
Determinations of the Synod in the said five points; and that being done, I
shall return such Answers as are made unto them.

II. First then it is objected, that this Doctrine is destructive of Gods Free
Grace, reviving the old Pelagian Heresies, so long since condemned. This is
pressed by Boyerman, in his Annotations Boyerman, Anro^. Grotii Pietat.
on the book of Grotius, called Pietas Ordinum, etc. where he brings in Pareus,
charging them, with having proceeded E Schola Caelestii and Pelagii, from no
other School, then that of Pelagius, and Caelestius, those accursed Heretics.
Thycius another of the Contra-Remonstrants, but somewhat more moderate then the
rest in this particular, conceives their Doctrine to incline rather to
Semi-Pelagianisme, Et aut candem esse, aut non multo diversam, and either to be
the very same, or not much different. But the authority of King James * Declar.
against Vorstius
was of greatest weight, who in his heats against Vorstius, calls them the
Enemies of Gods grace, Atheistical Sectaries, and more particularly, the Enemy
of God Arminius, as the King once called him. To which Objection it is
answered, that whatsoever Pareus and the rest might please to call them, they
had but little reason for it; the Remonstrants speaking as honorably of the
Grace of God as any other whatsoever. And this they prove, by comparing the
first branch of the Fourth Article, with that Golden saying of St. Augustine,
viz. Sine gratia Dei praeveniente ut velimus, and subsequente ne frustra
velimus, ad pietatis opera nil valemus; that is to say, that we may will the
things which are good, and following or assisting, that we do not will them to
no purpose, we are not able to do any thing in the works of piety. And by
comparing the said Clause with St. Augustines words, it cannot easily be
discerned, why the one party should be branded for the Enemies of the Grace of
God, while the other is honored as the chief Patron, and Defender of it. It
can not be denied, but that they ascribe somewhat more ^o the will of man, then
some of the rigid Lutherans and Calvinians do, who will have a man drawn
forcibly, and irresistably* with the cords of Grace, velut in animatum quiddam,
like a senseless stock, without contributing any thing to his own salvation.
But then it must be granted also, that they ascribe no more unto it, then what
may stand both with the Grace and Justice of Almighty God, according to that
Divine saying of St. Augustine, viz. Si non est gratia Dei quomodo salvat
mundum? Si non est liberum arbitrium, quomodo judicat mundum? Were it not for
the Grace of God, no man could be saved, and were there not a freedom of will
in man, no man with justice could be condemned.

III. And as for the Reproachful words which King James is noted to have
spoken of them, it has been said (with all due reverence to the Majesty of so
great a Prince) that he was then transported with prejudice or particular
Interesse; and therefore that there lay an Appeal, (as once to Philip King of
Macedon,) from the King being not then well informed, to the same King,
whenever he should be better informed. Touching their proceedings, it was
observed, 1. That he had his Education in the Kirk of Scotland, where all the
Heterodoxies of Calvin were received as Gospel, and therefore could not so
suddenly cast off those opinions, which he sucked in as it were with his Mothers
Milk. 2. He was much governed at that time by Dr. Mountague, then Bishop of
Bath and Wells, and Dean of his Majesty's Chapel Royal, who having been a
great Stickler in the Predestinarian Controversies, when he lived in Cambridge,
thought it his best way, to beat down all such Opinions by Kingly Authority,
which he could not over-bear by the strength of Arguments. And thirdly, that K.
James had then a turn to serve for the Prince of Orange, of which more anon,
which turn being served, and Mountague dying not long after, his ears lay open
to such further informations as were offered to him, which drew him to a better
liking both of the Men and their Opinions then he had formerly entertained of
either of them.

IV. It is objected secondly, that these Doctrines symbolize so much with the
Church of Rome, that they serve only for a Bridge for Popery to pass over,
into any Church, into which they can obtain admittance. This Calumny first laid
upon them in a Declaration of the States General, against Barnevelt before
remembered; wherein they charge him with a design of confederating with the
Spaniard, to change the Religion of those Countries, and countenancing to that
end the Arminian party, as his fittest Instruments; which clamor being first
raised in Holland, was afterward much cherished, and made use of, by the
Puritan, or Calvinian party amongst us in England. By one of which it is
alleged, that Mr. Pym Justif. of the Fathers, etc. p.
being to make a report to the House of Commons, An. 1626. touching the Books
of Richard Mountague, after Bishop of Chichester, affirmed expressly, that the
whole scope of his Book was to discourage the well-affected in Religion, and
as much as in him lay, to reconcile them unto Popery. He gives us secondly, a
Fragment of a scattered Paper, pretended to be written to the Rector of the
Jesuits College in Bruxells; in which, the Writer lets him know, that they
had strongly fortified their Faction here in England, by planting the Sovereign
Drug Arminianisme, which he hoped would purge the Protestants from their
Heresy. Thirdly, he backs this Paper with a Clause in the Remonstrance of the
House of Commons, 1628. where it is said that the hearts of his Majesty's
Subjects were perplexed in beholding the daily growth and spreading of the
Faction of Arminianisme, that being, as his Majesty well knew, (so they say at
least but a cunning way to bring in Popery. To all which, being but the same
words out of diverse mouths, it is answered, first, That the points which are
now debated between the Calvinians and the old Protestants in England; between
the Remonstrants, and the Contra-Remonstrants in the Belgic Churches; and
finally between the rigid and moderate Lutherans in the upper Germany, have
been as fiercely agitated, between the Franciscans and the Dominicans in the
Church of Rome: The old English Protestants, the Remonstrants, and the moderate
Lutherans, agreeing in these points with the Franciscans; as the English
Calvinists, the Contra-Remonstrants, and the rigid Lutherans do with the
Dominicans: So that there is a compliance on all sides with one of the said two
differing parties in the Church of Rome. And therefore why a general
compliance in these points with the Friars of St. Dominick, the principal
sticklers and promoters of that Inquisition, should not be thought as ready a
way to bring in Popery, as any such compliance with the Friars of St. Francis,
he must be a very wise man indeed which can give the reason. Secondly, it is
answered, that the Melanctonian or moderate Lutherans which make up infinitely
the greatest part of the Lutheran Churches, agree in these points with the
Jesuits or Franciscan Friars, and yet are still as far from relapsing to the
Church of Rome, as when they made the first separation from it. And therefore
thirdly, that if Arminianisme, as they call it, be so ready a Bridge for
passing over to Popery, it would be very well worth the knowing, how and by
what means it should come to pass, that so few of the Remonstrants in the
Belgic Provinces, and none of those whom they call Arminians in the Church of
England, should in so long a time pass over that Bridge, notwithstanding all
the Provocations of want and scorn, which were put upon the one, and have been
since multiplied upon the other.

V. In the next place, it is objected, that the Arminian Doctrines, naturally
incline a man to the sin of pride, in attributing Justis. of the Fathers, etc.
p. 34.
so much to the power of his own will, and so little to the Grace of God, in
choosing both the means, and working out of the end of his own salvation. And
for the proof hereof, a passage is alleged out of the History of the Council
of Trent, that the first opinion, (that is to say, the Doctrine of
Predestination, according to the opinion of the Dominican Friars) as it is
hidden and mystical, keeping the mind humble, and relying on God, without any
confidence in it self knowing the deformity of Sin, and the excellency of
Divine Grace; so the Second (being that maintained by the Franciscans) was
plausible and popular, and cherished humane presumption, etc. The whole passage
we have had before in the Second Chapter, Number. 4. but we shall answer to no
more of it then the former Clause. Concerning which, it may be said, that
though Father Paul the Author of the History has filled the Christian World
with admiration, yet it is obvious to the eye of any discerning Reader, that in
many places he savoureth not so much of the Historian, as he does of the Party;
and that being carried by the Interest of his Native Country, (which was the
Signory of Venice) he seldom speaks favorably of the Jesuits, and their
adherents, amongst which the Franciscans in these points are to be accounted.
Secondly, that either Father Paul did mistake himself, or else that his
Translator has mistaken his meaning, in making the Second Opinion to be more
pleasing to the Preaching Friars, then the understanding Divines; the name of
Preaching Friars, being so appropriated in common speech to those of the
Dominican Order, that it is never applied unto any other. And Thirdly, that the
Authority of Father Paul is no otherwise to be embraced in Doctrinall matters,
(what credit soever may be given to him in point of History) then as it is
seconded by Reason. And certainly, if we proceed by the rule of Reason, that
Doctrine must needs more cherish humane presumption, which puffs men up with
the certainty of their Election, the infallibility of assisting and persisting
Grace, and the impossibility of falling from the attaining of that salvation
which they have promised to themselves; then that which leaves these points
uncertain, which puts a man to the continual necessity of calling on God, and
working out the way unto his salvation with fear and trembling. He that is once
possessed with this persuasion, that all the sins which he can possibly commit,
were they as many as have been committed by all Mankind, since the beginning
of the World, are not able to frustrate his Election, or separate him from the
love and favor of Almighty God; will be too apt to swell with Pharisaicall
pride, and despise all other men as Heathens and Publicans; when such poor
Publicans as have their minds humble and relying ^n God, will stand aloof, not
daring to approach too near the Divine Majesty, but crying out with God be
merciful unto me a sinner, and yet shall be more justified in the sight of God
then the others are* For this we need produce no proof, we find it in the
supercilious looks, in the haughty carriage of those who are so well assured of
their own Election; who cannot so disguise themselves, as not to undervalue and
despise all those who are not of the same party, and persuasion with them. A
race of men, whose insolence and pride there is no avoiding by a modest
submission, whose favor there is no obtaining by good turns, and benefits.
Quorum superbiam frustra per modestiam, and obsequium, effugeris, as in another
case was said by a Noble Britain.

VI. And finally it is objected, (but the Objection rather does concern the
men, then the Doctrine) that the Arminians are a Faction, a turbulent,
seditious Faction, so found in the United Provinces, from their very first
spawning; not to be suffered by any Reason of State in a Commonwealth. So
says the Author of the Pamphlet called the Obs. Observed, p. 46.
Observator observed, and proves it by the wicked conspiracy (as he calls it)
of Barnevelt, who suffered most condignly (as he he tells us) upon that
account, 1619. And afterward by the damnable and hellish plot of Barnevelts
Children and Allies, in their designs against the State, and the Prince of
Orange. This Information seconded by the Author of the Book called, The
Justification P. 37.
of the Fathers, etc. who tells us, but from whom he knows not, that the
States themselves have reported of them, that they had created them more
trouble, then the King of Spain had by all his Wars. And both these backed by
the Authority of K. James, who tells us of them in his Declaration against
Vorstius, That if they were not with speed rooted out, no other issue could be
expected, then the Curse of God, infamy throughout all the Reformed Churches,
and a perpetual rent, and distraction in the whole body of the State. This is
the substance of the Charge: So old and common, that it was answered long
since, by Bishop Ridly in Queen Marys days, when the Doctrine of the
Protestants was said to be the readiest way to stir up sedition, and trouble
the quiet of the Commonwealth; wherefore to be repressed in time by force of
Laws. To which that godly Bishop returns this Answer, "That Satan does not
cease to practice his old guiles and accustomed subtilties: He has ever this
Dart in a readiness, to whirle against his adversaries, to accuse them of
sedition, that he may bring them, if he can, in danger of the Higher Powers;
for so has he by his Ministers, always charged the Prophets of God. Ahab said
unto Elias, art thou he that troubles Israel. The false Prophets complained
also to their Princes of Jeremy; that his words were seditious, and not to be
suffered. Did not the Scribes and Pharisees falsely accuse Christ, as a seditious
person, and one that spoke ^^^ser. between Ridley and Latimer.
against Caesar." Which said, and the like instance made in the Preachings of
St. Paul, he concludes it thus, viz. But how far they were from all sedition,
their whole Doctrine, Life and Conversation does well declare. And this being
said in reference to the Charge in general, the Answer to each part thereof is
not far to seek.

VII. And first it has been answered to that part of it which concerns King
James, that the King was carried in this business, not so much by the clear
light of his most excellent understanding, as by Reason of State; the Arminians
(as they call them) were at that time united into a party, under the command of
John Olden Barnevelt, and by him used (for the reasons formerly laid down) to
undermine the power of Maurice then Prince of Orange, who had made himself the
Head of the Contra-Remonstrants, and was to that King a most dear Confederate.
Which Division in the Belgic Provinces, that King considered as a matter of
most dangerous consequence, and utterly destructive of that peace, unity and
concord, which was to be the greatest preservation of the States United; on
whose tranquillity and power, he placed a great part of the peace and happiness
of his own Dominions. Upon which reason, he exhorrs them in the said
Declaration, to take heed of such infected persons; their own Contrymen
being already divided into Factions, upon this occasion, which was a matter (as
he says) so opposite to unity (which was indeed the only prop and safety of
their State, next under God) as of necessity it must by little and little bring
them to utter ruin, if justly and in time they did not provide against it. So
that K. James considering the present breach, as tending to the utter ruin of
those States, and more particularly of the Prince of Orange, his most dear
Allye; he thought it no small piece of King-craft, to contribute toward the
suppression of the weaker party; not only by blasting them in the said
Declaration, with reproachful names, but sending such Divines to the Assembly
at Dort, as he was sure would be sufficiently active in their condemnation.

VIII. So that part of the Argument which is borrowed from the States
themselves, it must be proved by some better evidence, then the bare word of
Mr. Hickman, before it can deserve an answer; the speech being so Hyperbolicall
(not to call it worse) that it can hardly be accounted for a flower of
Rhetoric. The greatest trouble which the States themselves were put to all
this business, was, for the first eight years of it, but the hearing of
Complaints, receiving of Remonstrances, and being present at a Conference
between the parties. And for the last four years, (for it held no longer) their
greatest trouble was to find out a way to forfeit all their old and Native
Privileges in the death of Barnevelt, for maintenance whereof they had first
took up Arms against the Spaniard. In all which time, no blood at all was drawn
by the Sword of War, and but the blood of 5 or 6 men only, by the Sword of
Justice, admitting Barnevelts for one: Whereas their wars with Spain had
lasted above thrice that time, to the sacking of many of their Cities, the loss
of at least 100000. of their own lives, and the expense of many millions of
Treasure. And as for Barnevelt, if he had committed any Treason against his
Country, by the Laws of the same Country he was to be tried. Contrary
whereunto, the Prince of Orange having got him into his power, put him over to
be judged by certain Delegates, commissionated by the States General, who by
the Laws of the Union, can pretend unto no Authority over the Life and Limb of
the meanest subject. Finally, for the conspiring of Barnevelts Children, it
concerns only them whose design it was. Who to revenge his death, so unworthily
and unjustly contrived, and (as they thought) so undeservedly, and against
their Laws, might fall upon some desperate Councels, and most unjustifiable
courses in pursuance of it. But what makes this to the Arminian and Remonstrant
party? Or does evince them for a turbulent and seditious Faction, not to be
suffered by any Reason of State in a well-ordered Commonwealth. Barnevelts
Kindred might be faulty, the Arminians innocent, or the Arminians faulty, in
their practice against the life of the Prince of Orange, under and by whom they
had suffered so many oppressions; without involving those in their Crimes and
Treasons, who hold the same Opinion with them in their Neighboring Churches.

IX. The reason is, because there is nothing in the Doctrine of the Arminians,
(as it relates to the Five points in difference) which can dispose the
Professors of it to any such practices. And therefore if the Arminians should
have proved as turbulent and seditious as their enemies made them, yet we were
not to impute it to them, as they were Arminians, that is to say, as men
following the Melanctonian way, of Predestination, and differing in those
points from the rest of the Calvinists, but as exasperated, and provoked, and
forced to cast themselves upon desperate courses, Quae libertatis arma dat ipse
dolor, in the Poets language. But so some say, it is not with the Doctrine of
the other party by which men's actions are so ordered and predetermined by the
eternal will of God, even to the taking up of a straw, as before was said, ut
nec plus boni nec minus mali, that it is neither in their power, to do more
good, or commit less evil then they do. And then according to that Doctrine,
all Treasons, Murders and Seditions, are to be excused, as unavoydable in them,
who commit the same, because it is not in their power not to be guilty of those
Treasons or Seditions which the fire and fury of the Sect shall inflame them
with. And then to what end should Princes make Laws, or spend their whole
endeavors in preserving the public Peace, when notwithstanding all their
cares, and travails to prevent the mischief, things could no otherwise succeed,
then as they have been predetermined by the will of God. And therefore the best
way would be, ( Sinere res vadere quo vult (in the Latin of an old Spanish
Monk) to let all matters go as they will, since we cannot make them go as we
would; according to that counsel of the good old Poet.

Solvite mortales animos, curisque levate, Manil. de Sphe. lib.

Totque super vacuis animum deplete querelis:
Fata regunt Orbem, certa stant omnia lege.
That is to say,
Discharge thy soul poor man of vexing fears,
And ease thy self of all superfluous cares.
The World is governed by the Fates, and all
Affairs, by Heaven's decree, do stand or fall.
X. To this effect, it is reported, that the old Lord Burleigh should discourse
with Queen Eliz. when he was first acquainted with the making of the Lambeth
Articles Hist. Artic. Lambeth, p. 6, 7.
. Not pleased wherewith, he had recourse unto the Queen, letting her see how
much her Majesty's Authority, and the Laws of the Realm were thereby violated,
and it was no hard matter to discern what they aimed at, who had most stickled
in the same. For says he, this is their opinion and Doctrine; that every
Humane action, be it good or evil, it is all restrained and bound up by the Law
of an immutable decree; that upon the very wills of men also, this necessity is
imposed, ut aliter quam vellent homines, velle non possent, that men could not
will otherwise then they did will. Which Opinions, says he, Maddam, if they be
true, Frustra ego aliique fideles Majestatis tuae ministri, etc. then I and the
rest of your Majesty's faithful Ministers do sit in Council to no purpose,
it is in vain to deliberate and advise about the affairs of your Realm; Cum de
his quae eveniunt necessario, stulta sit plane omnis consultatio, since in
those things that come to pass of necessity, all consultation is foolish, and
ridiculous. To which purpose it was also pressed by the Bishop of Rochester,
Oxon and St. David's, in a Letter to the Duke of Buckingham concerning
Mountagues Appeal, An. 1625. Cabuba. p. 116.
In which it is affirmed, that they cannot conceive what use there can be of
Civil Government in the Commonwealth, or of Preaching, and external Ministry
in the Church; if such fatal Opinions, as some which are opposite and contrary
to those delivered by Mr. Mountague, shall be publicly taught and maintained.
More plainly and particularly charged by Dr. Brooks, once Master of Trinity
College in Cambridge, in a Letter Con^. Dom. p. 167*
to the late Archbishop, bearing date December. 15. 1630. in which he writes,
that their Doctrines of Predestination, is the root of Puritanisme, and
Puritanisme is the root of all Rebellions, and disobedient untractablenesse in
Parliaments, etc. and of all Schism and sauciness in the Country, nay in the
Church it self; making many thousands of our people, and too great a part of
the Gentlemen of the Land very Leightons in their hearts; which Leighton had
published not long before, a most pestilent and seditious Book against the
Bishops, called Sions Plea, in which he excited the people to strike the
Bishops under the fifth rib, reviling the Queen by the name of a Daughter of
Heth; and for the same was after censured in the Star Chamber, to Pillory, loss
of Ears, etc.

XI. But because perhaps it may be said, that this is but a new device,
excogitated by the malice of these later times, to defame this Answer to a
certain Le^t. p. 38*
Doctrine, let us behold what Campneys has delivered of it in the first or
second year of Queen Eliz. at the first peeping of it out to disturb this
Church. Where, says he, who sees not the distraction of England, to follow
this Doctrine? Who sees not the confusion of all Commonwealths to depend
hereupon? What Prince may sit safely in the seat of his Kingdom? What subject
may live quietly possessing his own? What man shall be ruled by the right of
Law? If there Opinions may be perfectly placed in the hearts of the People?
Which Corollary he brings in, in the end of a Discourse touching the Rebellion
raised by Martin Cyrnell, and seconded by the Earl of Lincoln, Martin Swarth,
and others, against Hen. 7. For, building on the Calvinian Maxim, that as God
does appoint the end, so he appoints also the means and causes which lead
unto it; he thereupon infers, that Martin Swarth, and his men; according to
that Doctrine were destined by God to be slain at the Battle of Stoke. In order
whereunto, first Sir Richard Simon the Priest must be appointed and
predestinate of God to power in the pestilent poison of Privy Conspiracy, and
traiterous mischief of vain glory into the heart of Lambert (his Scholar) as a
cause leading to the same end. Secondly, that he the said Lambert was appointed
and predestinate of God to consent Ibid. p. 38.
and agree unto the pestiferous persuasion of his Master * S. Richard, in the
pride of Lucifer, to aspire unto the Royal Throne, as another cause leading to
the same end which God ordained. Thirdly, that the Irish men were appointed of
God, to be Rebellious Traitors against their Sovereign Lord the King of
England, and to maintain the false and fithy quarrel of Lambert, as another
cause leading to the same end. Fourthly, that in order to the said end, the
Lady Margaret (sister to K. Edw. 4.) was appointed and predestinate of God to
be a Traytoresse to England, and to employ all her wits, forces and power; to
the utter destruction of her natural Country: And Fifthly, in particular, that
the said Lady Margaret was appointed of God to hi^e the said Martin Swarth and
his men, to invade the Realm of England. Sixthly and finally, that the said
Martin Swarth, the Earl of Lincoln, the Lord Lorell, the Lord Gerrard, and
diverse others, Captains of the Rebels, we^e appointed and predestinate of God
to be of such valiant courage in maintaining the false quarrel of traytetous
Lambert, that they were slain, (and on the other side, many a brave English
man's blood was shed) at the battle of Stoke, which was the end of this woeful
Tragedy. Let them say therefore what they can or will; this mere necessity
which our men te^ch, is the very same which the Stoics did hold; which opinion
because it destroyed the state of a Commonwealth, was banished out of Rome, as
St. Augustine declares in lib. Quest Vet. and Nov. Testam.

XII. And thus the different Judgments of all the other Western Churches, and
the several Subdivisions of them, in the five controverted Points, being laid
together, with such Discourses and Disputes, as have occasionally been made*
and raised about them, we will next show to which of the said differing parties
the Church of England ^^^ms most inclinable, and afterward proceed in the
story of i^.

Historia Quinqu- Articularis: OR, A DECLARATION OF THE Judgment OF THE
WESTERN CHURCHES; And more particularly of the CHVRCH of ENGLAND, IN THE Five
Controverted Points; Reproached in these last times by the name of Arminianism.

PART II. Containing the Judgment of the Church of England, and the most
Eminent Divines thereof in the Reign of King Henry the eighth, and King Edward
the sixth.

By Peter Heylin D. D.

London, Printed for Tho: Johnson, 1660.

PART II. The Judgment of the Church of England in the five controverted
Points.
CHAP. 7. An Introduction to the Doctrine of the Church of England in the
points disputed, with the Removal of some rubs which are laid in the way.
1. THe Doctrine of the Homilies, concerning the Endowments of man at his first
creation. 2. His miserable fall. 3. And the promised hopes of his Restitution
in the Lord Christ Jesus. 4. A general Declaration of the judgment of the
Church of England in the points disputed, exemplified in the story of Agilmond
and Lamistus, Kings of Lombardy. 5. The contrary judgment of Wicklif objected,
answered, and applied to all modern Heresies. 6. A general answer to the like
Argument pretended to be drawn from the Writings of Frith, Tyndall and Barns.
But more particularly, 7. The judgment of Dr. Barns in the present points, and
the grounds on which he builded the same. 8. Small comfort to be found from the
works of Tyndal, in favor of the Calvinian Doctrines. 9. The falsifyings of
John Frith and others in the Doctrine of Predestination, reproved by Tyndal.
10. A parallel between some of our first Martyrs, and the blind man restored
to sight in the eighth of Saint Mark.

1. BEing therefore in the next place to declare the Judgment of the Church of
England, I shall prepare the way, by laying down her public Doctrine touching
the Fall of Adam, and the Restitution of mankind in Jesus Christ, that having
cleared God from being the Author of sin, and having laid a sure foundation
for the Restitution of Mankind to Gods grace and favor, and consequently to
the hopes of Eternal life, we may proceed with more assurance to the rest that
follows: And this we cannot better do, then by laying down the words of the
Homily concerning the Nativity and Birth of our Lord and Savior Hom. of the
Nativity, fol. 167.
Jesus Christ; where we find it thus: 'Among all the Creatures (says the
Homily) that God made in the beginning of the world, most excellent and
wonderful in their kind; there was none (as the Scripture bears witness) to
be compared almost in any point unto man; who as well in body as soul,
exceeds all other no less then the Sun in brightness and light exceeds
every bright and little Star in the Firmament: He was made according to the
similitude and image of God, he was endued with all kind of heavenly gifts, he
had not spot of uncleanness in him, he was sound and perfect in all parts, both
outwardly and inwardly; his reason was incorrupt, his understanding was pure
and good, his will was obedient and godly; he was made altogether like unto
God, in righteousness, in holiness, in wisdom, in truth; to be short, in all
kind of perfection.'

2. After which, having spoken of man's Temporal (...), relating to the
delicacies of the Garden of Eden, and the Dominion which God gave him over all
the Creatures; the Homily does thus proceed; viz. 'But as the common nature of
all men is in time of prosperity and wealth, to forget not only themselves,
but also God; even so did this first man Adam, who having but one Commandment
at Gods hand; namely, That he should not eat of the Fruit of Knowledge of Good
and Evil; did notwithstanding most unmindefully, or rather most wilfully break
it, in forgetting the strait charge of his Maker, and giving ear to the crafty
suggestion Hom. of the Nativity, p. 168.
of the evil Serpent the Devil; whereby it came to pass, that as before he was
blessed, so now he was accursed; as before he was loved, so now he was
abhorred; as before he was most beautiful and precious, so now he was most vile
and wretched in the sight of his Lord and Maker; instead of the image of God,
he was now become the image of the Devil; instead of a Citizen of Heaven, he
was now become the bond-slave of Hell, having in himself no one part of his
former purity and cleanness, but being altogether spotted and defiled;
insomuch, that now he seemed to be nothing else but a lump of sin; and
therefore by the just judgment of God was condemned to everlasting death.'

3. This being said touching the introduction of the body Ibid. Idem.
of Sin the Homily does first proceed to the propagation and universal
spreading of it, and afterward to the Restitution of lost man by faith in
Christ: 'This so great and miserable plague (for so the Homily proceeds) if
it had only rested in Adam who first offended, it had been so much the easier,
and might the better have been born; but it fell not only on him, but also on
his posterity and children for ever; so that the whole brood of Adams flesh
should sustain the self same fall and punishment, which their forefather by his
offense most justly had deserved: S. Paul in the fifth to the Romans says, By
the offense of only Adam, the fault came upon all men to condemnation; and by
one man's disobedience, many were made sinners: By which words we are taught,
that as in Adam all men universally sinned, so in Adam all men universally
received the reward of sin; that is to say, became mo^t^l and subject unto
(...) themselves nothing (...)tion both of body and soul, etc. Had it been any
marvel, if mankind had been utterly driven to desperation, being thus fallen
from life to death, from salvation to destruction, from Heaven to Hell! But
behold the great goodness and tender mercy of God in this behalf! albeit man's
wickedness and sinful behavior was such, that it deserved not in any part to
be forgiven; yet to the intent he might not be clean destitute of all hope and
comfort in time to come, he ordained a new Covenant, and made a sure promise
thereof; namely, that he would send a Mediator, or Messiah into the world,
which should make intercession, and put himself as a stay between both parties,
to pacify the wrath and indignation conceived against sin, and to deliver man
out of the miserable curse, and cursed misery whereunto he was fallen
headlong, by disobeying the Will and Commandment of the only Lord and Maker.'

4. Which ground thus laid, we will proceed unto the Doctrine of
Predestination, according to the sense and meaning of the Church of England;
which teaches us (according to the general current of the ancient Authors
before Augustines time) that God from all Eternity intending to demonstrate his
power and goodness, designed the Creation of the World, the making of man after
his own image, and leaving him so made, in a perfect liberty to do or not to do
what he was commanded, and that fore-knowing from all Eternity, the man abusing
this liberty, would plung himself and his posterity into a gulf of miseries; he
graciously resolved to provide them such a Savior, who should redeem them from
their sins, to elect all those to life eternal who laid hold upon him, leaving
the rest in the same state in which he found them for their incredulity. And
this I take to be the method of Election unto life Eternal, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, according to the Doctrine of the Church of England: For
although there be neither prius nor posterius in the will of God, who sees all
things at once together, and wills at the first sight without more delay; yet
to apply his acts unto our capacity, as were the acts of God in their right
production, so were they primitively in his intention: But Creation without
p(...) did forego the fall; and the disease or death which ensued upon it, was
of necessity to be, before there could be a course taken to prescribe the care;
and the prescribing of the care must first be finished, before it could be
offered to particular persons. Of which, and of the whole Doctrine of
Predestination, as before declared, we cannot have an happier illustration then
that of Agilmond and Lamistus in the Longobardia^ story of Paul the Deacon: In
which it is reported, That Agilmond the second King of Lombard, riding by a
fish pond, saw seven young children sprawling in it, whom their unnatural
mothers (as the Author thinks) had thrown into it not long before. Amazed
whereat, he put his hunting spear amongst them, and sti^^ed them gently up and
down; which one of them laying hold on, was drawn to land, called Lamistus,
from the word Lama, which is the language of that people, and signifies a
fishpond; Trained up in that Kings Court, and finally, made his Successor in
the Kingdom. Granting that Agilmond being forewarned in a vision, that he
should find such children sprawling for life in the midst of that pond, might
thereupon take a resolution within himself to put his hunting ^pear amongst
them, and the which of them soever should lay hold upon it, should be gently
drawn out of the water, adopted for his son, and made heir of his Kingdom; no
Humane story can afford us the like parallel case to Gods proceeding in the
great work of Predestination to Eternal life, according to the Doctrine of the
ancient Fathers* and the Church of Rome, as also of the Lutheran Churches, and
those of the Arminian party in the Belgic Provinces.

5. Now that this was the Doctrine also of the Church of England, will easily
appear upon a due search into the Monuments and Records thereof, as they stand
backed by those learned, religious men, who had a principal hand in carrying on
the great work of the Reformation. Among which, those of the Calvinian party
would fain hook in Wicklif, together with Fryth, Barns and Tyndal, which can by
no means be brought under that account, though some of them deserved well of
the Churches for the times they lived in. They that desire to hook in Wicklif,
do first confess that he stands accused by those of the Church of Rome for
bringing in Fatal Necessity, and making God the Author of sin; and then
conclude, that therefore it may be made a probable guess, that there was no
disagreement between him and Calvin: The cause of which Argument stands thus,
That there being an agreement in these points betwixt Wicklif and Calvin; and
the Reformers of our Church embracing the Doctrines of Wicklif; therefore they
must embrace the Doctrines of Calvin also. But first, it cannot be made good
that our Reformers embraced the Doctrines of Wicklif, or had any eye upon the
man; who though he held many points against those of Rom, yet had his field
more tares then wheat; his books more Hetrodoxies, then sound Catholic
Doctrine. And secondly, admitting this Argument to be of any force in the
present case, it will as warrantably serve for all the Sects and Heresies which
now swarm amongst us, as well as for that of Calvin; Wicklif affording them the
grounds of their several dotages, though possibly they are not so well studied
in their own concernments: For they who consult the works of Thomas Waldensis,
or the Historia Wicklifiana, writ by Hartsfield, will tell us that Wicklif,
amongst many other errors, maintained these that follow: 1. That the Sacrament
of the Altar is nothing else but a piece of Bread. 2. That Priests have no more
Authority to minister Sacraments then Laymen have. 3. That all things ought to
be common. 4. That it is as lawful to Christen a child in a Tub of water at
home, or in a Ditch by the way, as in a Font-stone in the Churches. 5. That it
is as lawful at all times to confess unto a Layman, as to a Priest. 6. That it
is not necessary or profitable to have any Church or Chapel to pray in, or to
do any Divine Service in. 7. That burying in Churchyards is unprofitable, and
in vain. 8. That Holy Days ordained and instituted by the Church, (and taking
the Lords Day in for one) are not to be observ^d and kept in reverenc^,
inasmuch as all days are alike. 9. That it is sufficient and enough to believe,
though a man do no good works at all. 10. That no Humane Laws or Constitutions
do oblige a Christian. 11. And finally, That God never gave grace nor knowledge
to a great person or rich man, and that they in no wise f^llow the same. What
Anabaptists, Brownists, Ranters, Quakers, may not as well pretend that our
first Reformers were of their Religion, as the Calvinists can, if Wicklifs
Doctrine be the rule of our Reformation: Which because possibly it may obtain
the less belief, if they were found only in the works of Harpsfield and
Waldensis before remembered, the Reader may look for them in the catalogue of
those Mala Dogm^ta complained of by the Prolocutor in the Convocation, An.
1536. to have been publicly preached, printed and professed by some of
Wicklifs Followers; for which, consult the Church History, lib. 4. fol. 208.
and there he shall be sure to find them.

6. It is alleged in the next place, that the Calvinistical Doctrines in these
points, may be found in the writings of John Frith, William Tyndall, and Dr.
Barns, collected into one volume, and printed by J^ha Day, 1563. of which the
first suffered death for his conscience, An. 1533. the second, An. 1536. and
the third, An. 1540. called therefore by Mr. Fox in a Preface of his before the
Book, the Ringleaders of the Church of England: And thereupon it is inferred,
that the Calvinian Doctrine of Predestination must be the same with that which
was embraced and countenanced by the first Reformers. But first, admitting that
they speak as much in Honor of Calvin's Doctrine as can be possibly desired,
yet being of different judgments in the points disputed, and not so Orthodox
in all others as might make them any way considerable in the Reformation, it is
not to be thought that either their writings or opinions should be looked on by
us for our direction in this case. Barns was directly a Dominican in point of
Doctrine; Frith soared so high upon the wing, and quite out-flew the mark, that
Tyndal thought it not unfit to call him down, and lure him back unto his
perch; and as for Tyndal, he declares himself with such care, and caution,
excepting one of his flyings out against Freewil, that nothing to their purpose
can be gathered from him. Secondly, I do not look on Mr. Fox as a competent
Judge in matters which concern the Church of England, the Articles of whose
Confession he refused to subscribe, he being thereunto required by Archbishop
Pa^ker; and therefore Tyndal, Frith and Barns not to be hearkened to the more
for his commendation. Thirdly; if the testimony of Frith and Tyndall be of any
force for defense of the Calvinists, the Anti-Sabbatarians may more justly make
use of it in defense of themselves, against the new Sabbath speculations of Dr.
Bond and his adherents, embraced more passionately of late then any Article of
Religion here by Law established: Of which the first declares the Lords day to
be no other than an Ecclesiastical Institution, or Church Ordinance; the last,
that it is still changeable from one day to another, if the Church so please:
For which consult the Hist. of Sab. l. 2. c. 8. Let Frith and Tyndal be
admitted as sufficient witnesses when they speak against the new Sabbath
Doctrines, or not admitted when they speak in behalf of Calvin's, and then I am
sure his followers will lose more on the one side, th^n they gained on the
other, and will prove one of the crossest bargains to them which they ever
made. And then it is in the fourth place to be observed, that the greatest
treasury of learning which those and the Famerlines could boast of, was locked
up in the Cloisters of the Begging Friars, of which the Franciscans were
accounted the most nimble Disputants, the Dominicans the most diligent and
painful Preachers; the Augustinians for the most part siding with the one, and
the Carmilites or White Friars joining with the other; so that admitting Frith
and Tindal to maintain the same Doctrine in these points, which afterward was
held forth by Calvin, yet possibly they maintained them not as any points of
Protestant Doctrine, in opposition to the errors of the Church of Rome (which
had not then declared it self on either side) but as the received opinions of
the Dominican Friars, in opposition to the Franciscans. The Doctrine of which
Dominican Friars, by reason of their diligent preaching, had met with more
plausible entertainment, not only amongst the inferior sort of people, but
also amongst many others of parts and learning.

7. And as for Barns, the far most learned of the three, he had been once Prior
of the Augustinian Friars in Cambridge, whose Doctrines he had sucked in at his
first coming thither, and therefore might retain them to the very last, without
relation to the Zuinglian or Calvinian Tenants, or any differences then on foot
between the Protestant Doctors and the Church of Rome: Besides, being of the
same Order which Luther had quitted, the might the more willingly incline to
Luthers first opinion touching servitude of the will, man's inability in
cooperating with the grace of God, and being forcibly drawn in his own
conversion, velut inanimatum quiddam, like a stock or stone, in which he was
tenaciously followed by the rigid Lutherans, though he had afterward changed
his judgment touching that particular: So that beholding Dr. Barns either as
one that followed Luther in his first opinions, or traveled the Dominican way
in the present points as an Augustinian, it is no marvel if we find somewhat
in his writings agreeable to the palate of the Calvinists and rigid Lutherans.
From whence it is that laying down the Doctrine of Predestination he Disc. of
Freewil, p. 278.
discourses thus; viz. 'But yet say thou, that he gives to the one mercy,
and the other none. I answer, what is that to thee? is not his mercy his own?
is it not lawful for him to give it to whom he will? is thine eye evil because
his is good? take that which is thine, and go thy way; for if he will show his
wrath, and make his power known over the vessels of wrath, ordained to
damnation; and to declare the riches of his glory unto the vessels of mercy,
which he has prepared and elected unto glory; what have thou therewith to do?
-- Id. ib.
But here will subtle blindeness say, God saw before that Jacob should do good,
and therefore did he choose him; he saw also that Esau should do evil, therefore
did he condemn him. Alas for blindness! what will you judge of that which God
foresaw? how know we that God saw that? and if he saw it, how know we that it
was the cause of Jacobs Election? These children being unborn, they had done
neitheir good nor bad, and yet one of them is chosen, and the other is refused:
S. Paul knows no other cause but the will of God, and will you needs discuss
another. He says not, I will have mercy on him that I see shall do good; but,
I will show mercy to whom I will: He says not, I will have compassion on him
that shall deserve it de congruo; but, Of him of whom I will have compassion.'
Now as he follows the Dominicans or rigid Lutherans, in laying down the
grounds and method of Predestination; so he draws more to them also, and the
Zuinglians also, touching Gods workings on the will, then possibly may be
capable of a good construction. Ib. p. 281.
'God, says he, of his Infinite power, lets nothing to be exempted from
him, but all things to be subject unto his action; and nothing can be done by
them, but by his principal motion: So that he works in all manner of things,
that be either good or bad, not changing their nature, but only moving them to
work after their natures: So that good works good, and evil works evil, and
God uses them both as instruments, and yet does he nothing evil, but evil is
done alone through the will of man: God working by him (but not evil) as by an
instrument.' Which last Position (notwithstanding all the subtilty in the close
thereof) how far it is from making God to be the Author of sin, I leave to be
determined by men of more Scholastical and Metaphysical heads, then my
simplicity can pretend to.

8. For Tyndal next, though I shall not derogate in any thing from his great
pains in translating the Bible, nor from the glory of his suffering in defense
of those truths for which he dyed; yet there were so many Heterodoxes in the
most of his writings, as render them no fit rule for a Reformat on, no more
then those of Wicklif before remembered; the number and particulars whereof, I
had rather the Reader should look for in the Acts and Monuments, where they are
mustered up together (about the latter end of the Reign of King Henry the
eighth) then expect them here. That which occureth in him touching Predestinat
on, is no more then this; 1. 'Grace Prolog. in Epist. to the Romans, p. 42.
(says he) is properly Gods favor, benevolence, or kind mind, which of his
own self, without our deservings, he reaches to us, whereby he was moved and
inclined to give Christ unto us, with all other gifts of Grace.' Which having
told us in his Preface to St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans; he tells us not
long after, that in the 9, 10, 11. Chapters of the Epistle, the Apostle
teaches us of Gods Predestination; 'From whence it springs altogether
whether we shall believe or not believe, be loosed from sin, or not be loosed:
By which Predestination, our Justifying and Salvation are clear taken out of
our hands, and put into the hands of God only, which thing is most necessary
of all; for we are so weak, and so uncertain, Ibid. 15^
that if it stood in us, there would of truth no man be saved; the Devil no
doubt would deceive him; but now God is sure of his Predestination, neither can
any man withstand or let him; else why do we hope and sigh against sin?'
Discoursing in another place of the act the will has on the understanding, he
tells us, 'that the will of man follows the wit; that as the wit erreth, so
does the will; and as the wit is in captivity, so is the will; neither is it
possible that the will should be free, when the wit is in bondage, etc. -- as I
err in my wit, so I err in my will; when I judge that to be evil which is
good, then indeed do I hate that which is good; and then when I perceive that
which is good to be evil, then indeed do I love the evil.' Finally, in the
heats of his Disputation with Lib. 3. Hist. Moor, p. 306*
Sir Thomas Moor, who had affirmed, That men were to endeavor themselves, and
captivate their understandings, if they would believe. He first cries out, 'How
Beetle-blinde is fleshly reason! and then subjoyns, that the will has no
operation at all in the working of faith in my soul, no more then the child
has in begetting of his father; for, says Paul, it is the gift of God, and
not of us; my wit must conclude good or bad, yet my will can leave or take; my
wit must show me a true or an apparent cause why, yet my will have any working
at all.'

9. I had almost forgot John Frith, and if I had, it had been no great loss to
our rigid Calvinists; who not content to guide themselves in these disputes by
Gods will revealed, have too audaciously pried into the Ark of Gods Secret
Counsels; of which spirit I conceive this Frith to be; not that I find him
such in any of his writings extant with the other two, but that he is affirmed
for such, in a letter of Tyndalls directed to him under the borrowed name of
Jacob: For in the collection of his pieces, neither the Index nor the Margent
direct us unto any thing which concerns this Argument, though to the writings
of the others they give a clearer sense (howsoever made then) in favor of the
Calvinian party, then the books themselves, or possibly was ever meant by the
men that made them: * Now Tyndals Letter Acts and Mon. fol. 987.
is as follows; Dearly beloved Jacob, my hearts desire in our Saviors Jesus
is, That you arm your self with patience, and be bold, sober, wise and
circumspect; and that you keep you a low by the ground, avoiding high questions
that pass the common capacity; but expound the Law truly, and open the Rule of
Moses, to condemn all flesh, and prove all men sinners, and all deeds under the
Law (before mercy has taken away the condemnation thereof) to be sin, and
damnable: And then as a faithful Minister, s^t abroach the mercy of our Lord
Jesus, and let the wounded consciences drink of the water of life: And then
shall your preaching be with power, not as the Doctrine of Hypocrites, and the
Spirit of God shall work with you, and all consciences shall bear record unto
you, and feel that it is so: And all doctrine that casts a mist on these two,
to shadow and hide them, I mean, the Law of God, and mercy of Christ, that
resist you with all your power. Of Prologue before the Epist. unto the Romans p.
48.
him it is, or of such high Climers as he was, who we find Tyn-speaking in
another place: 'But here (says he) we must set a mark upon those unquiet,
busy, and high-climing wits, how far they shall go; which first of all bring
hither their high reasons and pregnant wits, and begin first from on high to
search the bottomless secrets of Gods Predestination, whether they be
predestined or no: These must needs either cast themselves headlong down into
desperation, or else commit themselves to free chance careless: But follow thou
the order of this Epistle, and nuzzel thy self with Christ, and learn to
understand the Law and the Gospel means, and the office of both, that thou
may in the one know thy self, and how thou have of thy self no strength but
to sin; and in the other the grace of Christ; and then see thou fight against
sin and the flesh, as the seven first Chapters teach thee.' Of these high
flyings, Lawbert, another of our Martyrs, was endicted also, who as he would
not plead Not guilty, so he stood not mute, but bound to the Endictment in this
manner following; 'Unto the Article (* says he) whether it be good or evil,
comes of Acts and Mon. fol. 1008.
necessity, that is (as you construe it) to wit, whether a man has freewill,
so that he may deny joy or pain: I say (as I said at the beginning) that unto
the first part of your Riddle, I neither can nor will give any definitive
answer, for so much as it surmounteth my capacity, trusting that God will send
hereafter others that be of better cunning then I to endire it.'

10. If there be any thing in this which may give any comfort to our rigid
Calvinists, much good do them with it; and if they meet with any in the former
passages, let them look back upon the answers before laid down, and then
consider with themselves what they have got by the adventure, or whether
Tynd^ll, Barn^, and Fr^th, conjunct or separate, may be considered as a rule to
our first Reformers; which having done, I would have them finally observe the
passage in the eighth of S. Mark, where the blind man, whom our Savior at
B^thsaida restored to his sight, at the first opening of his eyes said, he saw
men as trees walking; that is to say, he saw men walking as trees, quasi dicat
Homines quos ambulantes video, non homines, sed arbores mihi videntur; as we
read in Maldi^nale: By which the blind man declared (says he) se quidem
videre aliquid, imperfecte tamen videre, cum inter homines and arbores
distingure non posset: I discern somewhat said the poor man, but so
imperfectly, that I am not able to distinguish between trees and men: Such an
imperfect sight as this might these Martyrs have, in giving unto men no greater
power of walking in the ways of Gods Commandments, then as if they had been
senseless trees, or liveless shadows: And such an imperfect sight as this the
Lord gave many times to those whom he recovered out of the Egyptian darkness of
Popish Errors, who not being able to discern all divine truths at the first
opening of the eyes of their understanding, were not to be a Rule or President
to those that followed and lived under a brighter beam of illumination.
Finally, taking all for granted as to the judgment of these men in the points
disputed, which the Calvinians can desire and pretend unto, and leting them
enjoy the title which Mr. Fox has given them, of being called the Ringleaders
of the Church of England (which Bi^ney, Byfield, Lambert, Garet, or any other
of our ancient Martyrs may as well lay claim to) yet as they suffered death
before the public undertaking of the Reformation under E. 6. so nothing was
ascribed to their Authority by the first Reformers.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Preparatives to the Reformation, and the Doctrine of the
Church in the present points.
1. THe danger of ascribing too much to our ancient Martyrs, etc. exemplified
in the parity of Ministers and popular elections unto Benefices, allowed by Mr.
John Lambert. 2. Nothing ascribed to Calvin's judgment by our first Reformers,
but much to the Augustine Confession, the writings of Melancthon. 3. And to the
Authority of Erasmus, his Paraphrases being commended to the use of the Church
by King Edward the sixth, and the Reasons why. 4. The Bishops B^ok in order to
a Reformation, called, The institution of a Christian man, commanded by King
Henry the eigth, 1537. corrected afterward with the Kings own hand, examined
and allowed by Cranmer, approved by Parliament, and finally, published by the
name of Necessary doctrine, etc. An. 1543. 5. The Doctrine of the said two
books in the points disputed, agreeable unto that which after was established
by King Edward the sixth. 6. Of the two Liturgies made in the time of King
Edward the sixth, and the manner of them; the testimony given unto the first,
and the alterations in the second. 7. The first Book of Homilies, by whom made,
approved by Bucer, and of the Argument that may be gathered from the method of
it in the points disputed. 8. The quality and condition of those men who
principally concurred to the Book of Articles, with the Harmony or consent in
Judgment between Archbishop Cramner, Bishop Ridley, Bishop Hooper, etc. 9. The
Doctrine delivered in the Book of Articles, touching the five controverted
points. 10. An answer to the Objection against these Articles, for the supposed
want of Authority in the making of them. 11. An Objection against King Edwards
Catechism, mistaken for an Objection against the Articles, refelled, as that
Catechism by John Philpot Martyr, and of the delegating of some powers by that
Convocation to a choice Committee. 12. The Articles not drawn up in
comprehensive or ambiguous terms to please all parties, but to be understood in
the respective, literal and Grammatical sense, and the Reasons why.

1. I Have the longer stood upon the answering of this Objection, to satisfy
and prevent all others of the like condition, in case it should be found on a
further search, that any of our godly Martyrs, or learned Writers, who either
suffered death before the Reign of Edw. 6. or had no hand in the carrying on of
the Reformation, embraced any opinions in Doctrine or Discipline contrary to
the established Rules of the Church of England: For otherwise, as we must admit
all Tyndalls Heterodoxies, and Friths high flying conce^ts of Predestination,
which before we touched at, so must we also allow a Parity, or an Identity
rather in Priests and Bishops, because John Lambert (another of our godly
Martyrs) did conceive so of it. 'In the primitive Church (says he) there were
no more Officers in the Church of God than Bishops and Deacons; that is to say,
Ministers, as witnesses, beside Scripture, S. Hierom in his Commentaries on
the Epistles of S. Paul; Whereas (says he) that those whom we now call
Priests, were all one, and no other but Bishops, and the Bishops no other but
Priests, men ancient both in age and learning, so near as could be chosen; nor
were they instituted and chosen as they be now adays, the Bishop and his
Officer only opposing them whether they can construe a Collect; but they were
chosen also with the consent of the people, amongst whom they were to have
their living, as shows S. Cyprian: But alack for pity, such elections are
banished, and new fashions brought in.' By which opinion (if it might have
served for a Rule to the Reformation) our Bishops must have been reduced to the
rank of Priests, and the right of Presentation put into the hands of the
people, to the Destruction of all the Pa^^o^s in the Kingdom.

2. If then the question should be asked (as perhaps it may) On whom, or on
whose judgment, the first Reformers most relied in the weighty business? I
answer negatively, first, That they had no respect of Calvin, no more than to
the judgment of Wicklif, Tyndall, Barns, or Frith, whose offered assistance
they refused when they went about it; of which he sensibly complained unto some
of his friends, as appears by one of his Epistles. I answer next affirmatively
in the words of an Act of Parliament, 2. and 3. Edw. 6. where it is said, That
they had an eye in the first place to the mo pure and sincere Christian
Religion taught in the Scriptures; and in the next place to the usages of the
Primitive Church. Being satisfied in both which ways, they had thirdly a more
particular respect to the Lutheran Plat-forms, the English Confession or Book
of Articles being taken in many places word for word out of that of Ausberg,
and a conformity maintained with the Lutheran Churches in Rights and
Ceremonies; as namely, in kneeling at the Communion, the Cross in Baptism, the
retaining of all the ancient Festivals, the reading of the Epistles and Gospels
on Sundays and Holy Days, and generally in the whole Form of External Worship.
Fourthly, in reference to the points disputed, they ascribed much to the
Authority of Melancthon (not undeservedly called the Phoenix of Germany) whose
assistance they earnestly desired, whose coming over they expected, who was as
graciously invited hither by King Edw^rd the sixth ( Regiis literis in Angliam
vocari) as himself affirms in an Epistle to Camerarius: His coming laid aside
upon the fall of the Duke of Sommerset, and therefore since they could not have
his company, they made use of his writings, for their direction in such points
of Doctrine in which they thought it necessary for the Church to declare her
judgment.

3. I observe finally, That as they attributed much to the particulars, to the
Authority of Melancthon, so they ascribe no less therein unto that of Erasmus,
once Reader of the Greek Tongue in Cambridge, and afterward one of the
Professors of Divinity there; whose Paraphrases on the four Evangelists being
translated into English, were ordered to be kept in Churches for the use of the
People, and that they owned the Epistles to be studied by all such as had cure
of souls: Concerning which it was commanded by the injunctions of King Edward
the sixth, published by the advice of the Lord Protector Somerset and the Privy
Council, in the first year of the said Kings Reign: 1. 'That Acts and Mon. fol.
1181.
they should see provided in some most convenient and open place of every
Church, one Great Bible in English, with the Paraphrase of Erasmus in English,
that the people might reverendly, without any let, read and hear the same at
such time as they listed, and not to be inhibited therefrom by the Parson or
Curate; but rather to be the more encouraged and provoked thereunto. And 2.
That every Priest under the degree of a Bachellour of Divinity, should have of
his own, one New Testament in English and Latin, with the Paraphrases of
Erasmus upon the same, and should diligently read and study thereupon, and
should collect and keep in memory all such comfortable places of the Scripture,
as do set forth the Mercy, Benefits and Goodness of Almighty God toward all
penitent and believing persons, that they might thereby comfort their flock in
all danger of death, despair or trouble of Conscience; and that therefore every
Bishop in their Institution, should from time to time try and examine them how
they have profited in their studies.' A course and care not likely to have
entered into the thoughts of the Lord Protector, or any of the Lords of the
Council, if it had not been advised by some of the Bishops, who then began to
have an eye on the Reformation, which soon after followed; and as unlikely to
be counseled and advised by them, had they intended to advance any other
Doctrine, than what was countenanced in the writings of that learned man.
Whereupon I conclude, the Doctrine in the points disputed, to be the true and
genuine Doctrine of the Church of England, which comes most near to the plain
sense of holy Scripture, the general current of the Fathers in the Primitive
times, the famous Augustane Confession, the Writings of Melancthon, and the
Works of Erasmus: To which Conclusion I shall stand, till I find my self
encountered by some stronger Argument to remove me from it.

4. The ground thus laid, I shall proceed unto the Reformation which was built
upon it, first raking in my way some necessary preparations made unto it by H.
8. by whom it had been ordered in the year, 1536. That the Creed, the Lords
Prayer, and the ten Commandments, should be recited publicly by the Parish
Priest in the English Tongue, and all the Sundays and other Holidays throughout
the year: And that the people might the better understand the duties contained
in them, it pleased him to assemble his Bishops and Clergy in the year next
following, requiring them, 'Upon the diligent search and perusing of Holy
Scripture, to set forth a plain and sincere Doctrine, concerning the whole sum
of all those things which appertain unto the Profession of a Christian man.'
Which work being finished, with very great care and moderation, they published,
by the name of an Institution of a Christian man, containing the Exposition or
Interpretation of the common Word, the seven Sacraments, the Ten Commandments,
the Lords Prayer, etc. and dedicated ^t to the Kings Majesty, 'Submitting to
his most Excellent Wisdom and Exact Judgment, to be by him recognized,
overseen, and corrected, if he found Epis. Didic.
any word or sentence in ^t amiss, to be qualified, changed, or further
expounded, in the plain setting-forth of his most virtuous desire and purpose
in that behalf.' A* Dedication publicly subscribed in the name of the rest, by
all the Bishops then being, eight Archdeacons, and seventeen Doctors of chief
note in their several faculties: Amongst which I find seven by name, who had a
hand in drawing up the first Liturgy of King Edward the sixth; that is to say,
Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, Goodrich Bishop of Ely, Hobeach then Bishop
of Rochester, and of Lincoln afterward, Skip then Archdeacon of Dorset, after
Bishop of Hereford, Roberson, afterward Dean of Durham, as Maro was afterward
of S. Paul's, and Cox of Westminster: And I find many others amongst them also,
who had a principal hand in making the first Book of Homilies, and passing the
Articles of Religion in the Convocation of the year, 1552. and so it rested
till the year, 1643. when the King making use of the submission of the Book
which was tendered to him, corrected it in many places with his own hand, as
appears by the Book it self, remaining in the famous Library of Sir Robert
Cotton: Which having done, he sends it so corrected* to Archbishop Cranmer; who
causing it to be reviewed by the Bishops and Clergy in Convocation, drew up
some Annotations on it: And that he did for this intent (as I heard expressed in
one of his Letters bearing date June 25. of this present year) because the Book
being to be set f^rth by his Gra^es censure and judgment, he would have
n^thing therein that Momus himself could reprehend, referring notwithstanding
all his Annotations to his Majesty's exacter judgment: Nor staid it here, but
being committed by the King to both Houses of Parliament, and by them very well
approved of, as appears by the Statutes of this year, Cap. 1. concerning the
Advancing of true Religion, and the abolition of the contrary, it was published
again by the Kings command, under the title of Ne^essary Doctrine and Erudition
for any Christian man: And it was published, with an Epistle of the Kings
before it, directed to all his faithful and loving Subjects; wherein it is
affirmed, 'To be a true Declaration of the true knowledge of God and his Word,
with the principal Articles of Religion, whereby men may uniformly be led and
taught the true understanding of that which is necessary for every Christian
man to know, for the ordering of himself in this life, agreeable unto the will
and pleasure of Almighty God.'

5. Now from these Books, the Doctrine of Predestination Institut. of a
Christian.
may be gathered into these particulars; which I desire the Reader to take
notice of, that he may judge the better of the Conformity which it has with
the established Doctrine of the Church of England.

1. That man by his own nature was born in sin, and in the indignation and
displeasure of God, and was the very child of Wrath, condemned to everlasting
death, subject and thrall to the power of the Devil and sin; having all the
principal parts or portions of his soul, as Reason and understanding, and
free will, and all other powers of his soul and body, not only so destituted
and deprived of the gifts of God wherewith they were firstendued, but also so
blinded, corrupted and poisoned with error, ignorance and carnal
concupiscence, that neither his said powers could exercise the natural function
and office for which they were ordained by God at the first Creation, nor could
he by them do any thing which might be acceptable to God.

2. That Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of God the Father, was eternally
pre-ordained and appointed by the Decree of the Holy Trinity, to be our Lord;
that is to say, to be the only Redeemer and Savior of Mankind, and to reduce
and bring the same from under the Dominion of the Devil and sin, unto his only
Dominion, Kingdom, Lordship and Governance.

3. That when the time was come in the which it was before Necessary prayer.
ordained and appointed by the Decree of the Holy Trinity, That Mankind should
be saved and redeemed, then the Son of God, the second Person in the Trinity,
and very God, descended from Heaven into the world, to take upon him the very
habit, form and nature of man, and in the same nature to suffer his glorious
Passion for the Redemption and Salvation of all Mankind.

4. That by this Passion and Death of our Savior Jesus Christ, not only
Corporal death is so destroyed, that it shall never hurt us, but rather that it
is made wholesome and profitable unto us; but also, that all our sins, and the
sins also of all them that do believe in him, and follow him, be mortified and
dead; that is to say, all the guilt and offense thereof, as also the damnation
and pains due for the same, is clearly extincted, abolished and washed away, so
that the same shall never afterward be imputed and inflicted on us.

5. That this Redemption and Justification of Mankind could not have been
wrought or brought to pass by any other means in the world, but by the means of
this Jesus Christ, Gods only Son; and that never man could yet, nor never
shall be able to come unto God the Father, or to believe in him, or to attain
his favor, by his own wit and reason, or by his own science and learning, or
by any his own works, or by whatsosoever may be named in Heaven or Earth, but
by faith in the Name and Power of Jesus Christ, and by the gifts and graces of
his Holy Spirit.

6. But to proceed, the way to the ensuing Reformation being thus laid open;
The first great work which was accomplished in pursuance of it, was, the
compiling of that famous Liturgy of the year, 1549. commanded by King Edward
the sixth; that is to say, the Lord Protector, and the rest of the Privy
Council, acting in his Name, and by his Authority, performed by Archbishop
Cramner, and the other six before remembered, assisted by Thirdby Bishop of
Westminster, Day Bishop of Chichester, Ridley Bishop of Rochester, Tailor (then
Dean, after) Bishop of Lincoln, Redman then Master of Trinity College in
Cambridge, and Hains Dean of Exeter, all men of great abilities in their
several stations; and finally, confirmed by the King, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons in Parliament assembled, 23 Edw. 6. In which
Confirmatory act it is said expressly to have been done by the especial aid of
the Holy Ghost; which testimony I find also of it in the Acts and Monuments,
fol. 1184. But being disliked by Calvin, who would needs be meddling in all
matters which concerned Religion; and disliked it chiefly for no other reason
(as appears in one of his Epistles to the Lord Protector) but because it
savoured too much of the ancient forms, it was brought under a review, the
cause of the reviewing of it being given out to be no other, than that there
had risen diverse doubts in the Exercise of the said Book, for the fashion and
manner of the Ministration, though risen rather by the curiosity of the
Ministers and Mistakers, then of any other cause, 5, 6 Edw. 6. cap. 1. The
review made by those who had first compiled it, though Hobeach and Redman might
be dead before the confirmation of it by Act of Parliament, some of the New
Bishops added to the former number, and being reviewed, was brought into the
same form in which now it stands; save, that a clause was taken out of the
Letany, and a sentence added to the destribution of the blessed Sacrament, in
the first year of Queen Elizabeth, and that some alteration was made in two or
three of the Rubricks, with an addition of Thansgiving in the end of the
Letany; as also of a Prayer for the Queen and the Royal Issue in the first of
King James.

7. At the same time, and by the same hands which gave us the First Liturgy of
King Edward the sixth, was the first Book of Homilies composed also; in which I
have some cause to think, that Bishop Latimer was made use of amongst the rest,
as one who had subscribed the first other two Books before mentioned, as Bishop
of Worcester, anno 1537. and ever since continued zealous for a Reformation,
quitting in that respect such a wealthy Bishopric, because he neither would
nor could conform his judgment to the Doctrine of the six Articles Authorized
by Parliament: For it will easily appear to any, who is conversant in Latimers
writings, and will compare them carefully with the Book of Homilies, that they
do not only savor of the same spirit in point of Doctrine, but also of the
same popular and familiar style, which that godly Martyr followed in the course
of his preachings; for though the making of these Homilies be commonly ascribed
(and in particularr by Mr. Fox) to Archbishop Cranmer, yet it is to be
understood no otherwise of him, then that it was chiefly done by encouragement
and direction, not sparing his own hand to advance the work, as his great
occasions did permit. That they were made at the same time with King Edwards
first Liturgy, will appear as clearly, first by the Rubric in the said
Liturgy it self, in which it is directed, that after the Creed shall follow
the Sermon or Homily, or some portion of one of them, as they shall be
hereafter divided. It Let. of Mr. Bucer to the Church of England.
appears secondly by a Letter writ by Matrin Bucer, inscribed To the holy
Church of England, and the Ministers of the same, in the year 1549. in the very
beginning whereof he lets them know, That their Sermons ^r Homilies were come
to his hands, wherein they godlily and effectually exhort their people to the
reading of Holy Scripture (that being the scope and substance of the first
Homily, which occurs in that Book) and th^rein expounded the sense of the faith
whereby we hold our Christianity and Justification, whereupon all our help
consists, and other most holy principles of our Religion, with most godly
zeal. And as it is reported of the Earl of Gondomar, Ambassador to King James
from the King of Stain, that having seen the elegan^ disposition of the Rooms
and Offices in Burleigh-House, not far from Stansord, erected by Sir William
Cec^l principal Secretary of State, and Lord Treasurer to Queen Elizabeth, he
very pleasantly affirmed, That he was able to discern the excellent judgment
of the great Statesman, by the neat contrivance of his house: So we may say of
those who composed this Book, in reference to the points disputed, A man may
easily discern of what judgment they were in the Doctrine of Predestination,
by the method which they have observed in the course of these Homilies:
Beginning first with a Discourse of the misery of man in the state of nature;
proceeding next to that of the salvation of mankind by Christ our Savior
only, from sin and death everlasting; from thence, to a Declaration of a true,
lively, and Christian faith, and after that of good works annexed unto faith,
by which our Justification and Salvation are to be obtained; and in the end
descending unto the Homily bearing this inscription, How dangerous a thing it
is to fall from God: Which Homilies in the same form and order in which they
stand, were first authorized by King Edward the sixth, afterward tacitly
approved in the Rubric of the first Liturgy before remembered, by Act of
Parliament, and finally, confirmed and ratified in the Book of Articles agreed
upon by the Bishops and Clergy of the Convocation, anno 1552. and legally
confirmed by the said King Edward.

8. Such were the hands, and such the helps which co-operated to the making of
the two Liturgies, and this Book of Homilies; but to the making of the Articles
of Religion, there was necessary the concurrence of the Bishops and Clergy
assembled in Convocation, in due form of Law; amongst which there were many of
those which had subscribed to the Bishops Book, anno 1537. and most of those
who had been formerly advised with in the reviewing of the Book, by the
Commandment of King Henry the eighth, 1543. To which were added, amongst
others, Dr. John Point Bishop of Winchester, an excellent Grecian, well studied
with the ancient Fathers, and one of the ablest Mathamaticians which those
times produced; Dr. Miles Coverdale Bishop of Exon, who had spent much of his
time in the Lutheran Churches, amongst whom he received the degree of Doctor;
Mr. John Story Bishop of Rochester (Ridley being then preferred to the Sea of
London) from thence removed to Chichester, and in the end by Queen Elizabeth to
the Church of Hereford; Mr. Rob. Farran Bishop of St. David's, and Martyr, a man
much favored by the Lord Protector Sommerset in the time of his greatness; and
finally (not to descend to those of the lower Clergy) Mr. John Hooker Bishop
of Gloucester, and Martyr; of whose Exposition of the Ten Commandments, and his
short Paraphrase on Romans 13. we shall make frequent use hereafter; a man
whose works were well approved of by Bishop Ridley (the most learned and
judicious of all the Prelates) who notwithstanding they differed in some points
of Ceremony, professes an agreement with him in all points of Doctrine; as
appears by a Letter written to him when they were both Prisoners for the truth,
and ready to give up their lives (as they after did) in defense thereof: Now
the words of the Letter are as follows, But now my dear Brother, forasmuch as
I understand by your works, which I have but superficially seen, that we
thoroughly agree, and wholly consent together in those things which are the
grounds and substantial points of our Religion, against the which the world now
so rages in these our days: Howsosoever Acts and Mon. fol. 1366.
in times past, in certain by-matters and circumstances of Religion your wisdom
and my simplicity and ignorace have jarred, each of us following the abundance
of his own sense and judgment: Now, I say, be you assured, that even with my
whole heart, God is he witness, in the bowels of Christ, I love you in truth,
and for the truths sake that abides in us, and I am persuaded, by the grace of
God, shall abide in us for evermore. The like agreement there was also between
Ridley and Cranmer, Cranmer ascribing very much to the judgment and opinion of
the learned Prelate, as himself was not ashamed to confess at his Examination;
for which see Fox in the Acts and Monuments, fol. 1702.

9. By these men, and the rest of the Convocation, the Articles of Religion
(being in number 41) were agreed upon, ratified by the Kings Authority, and
published both in Latin and English, with these following Titles; viz.
Articuli de quibus in Synodo Londinens. A. D. 1552. ad tollendam opinionum
dissentionem, and consensum verae Religionis firmandum, inter Episcopos and
alios eruditos viros, convenerat, Regia authoritate Londin. editi; that is to
say, ' Articles agreed upon, by the Bishops and other learned men assembled in
the Synod at London, anno 1552. and published by the Kings authority, for the
avoiding of diversities of opinions, and for the establishing of consent to the
loving of true Religion.' Amongst which Articles (countenanced in Convocation
by Queen Elizabeth, an. 1562.) the Doctrine of the Church in the five
controverted points is thus delivered, according to the form and order which we
have observed in the rest before.

1. Of Divine Predestination.
Predestination to life is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before the
foundations of the world were laid) he has constantly ordered by his Council,
secret unto us, to deliver from curse and Artic. 17.
damnation those whom he has chosen in Christ out of mankind, and to bring
them by Christ to everlasting salvation, as vessels made to honor.

Furthermore, we must receive Gods promises in such wise as they be generally
set forth to us in holy Scripture, and in our doing the will of God that is to
be followed, which we have expressly declared to us in the Word of God.

2. Of the Redemption of the world by the faith of Christ.
The Son, which is the Word begotten of the Father, begotten from everlasting
of the Father, etc. and being very God, and very man, Artic. 2.
did truly suffer, was crucified, dead and buried, to reconcile his Father to
us, and be a Sacrifice not only for Original guilt, but also for the actual
sins of men.

The Offering of Christ once made, is this perfect Redemption, Propitiation and
Satisfaction to all the sins of the whole world, both Original and Actual.
Artic. 31.


3. Of man's will in ^he state of depraved nature: Man by Original sin is so far
gone from Original ^ighteousness, that of his own Artic. 9.
nature he is inclined to evil, so that the flesh lusts always contrary to
the Spirit; and therefore.

Works done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his Spirit, are
not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they spring not of Artic. 13.
faith in Jesus Christ, neither do they make men meet to receive grace, or (as
the School Authors say) deserve gra^e of Congruity.

4. Of the manner of Conversion.
The condition of man after the fall of Adam is such, that he cannot turn and
prepare* himself by his own natural strength and good works, to faith and
calling upon God; wherefore we have no Artic. 10.
power to do good works pleasant and acceptable to God, without the grace of
God by Christ preventing us, that we may have a good will, and working with us,
when we have that good will.

5. Of the uncertainty of Perseverance.
The Grace of Repentance is not to be denied to such as fall into sin after
Baptism, in regard that after we have received the Holy Ghost, we may depart
from grace gi^en, and fall into sin; and by Artic. 16.
the grace of God (we may) arise again and amend our lives; and therefore they
are to be condemned which say they can no more sin as long as they live here,
or deny the place of Repentance to such as truly repent.

10. Now in these Articles, as in all others of the Book, there are these two
things to be observed; 1. What Authority they carried, in respect of the
making. And 2. How we are to understand them in respect of the meaning. And
first for their Authority; it was as good in all regards as the Laws could give
them, being first treated and agreed upon by the Bishops and Clergy in their
Convocation, and afterward confirmed by the Letters Patents of Edw. 6. under
the Great Seal of England. But against this it is objected, That the Records of
this Convocation are but a degree above blanks; that the Bishops and Clergy
then assembled, had no Commission from the King to meddle in Church business;
that the King durst not trust the Clergy of that time in so great a matter, on
a just jealousy which he had of the ill affections of the major part; and
therefore the trust of this great business, was committed unto some few
Confidents, cordial to the cause of Religion, and not unto the body of a
Convocation. To which it has been already answered, That the Objector is here
guilty of a greater crime than that of Scandalum magnatum, making King Edward
the sixth of pious memory, no better than an impious and lewd Impostor, in
fathering those children on the Convocation, which had not been of their
begetting: For first, the title to the Articles runs thus at large, Art^culi
de quibus, etc. as before we had it; which title none durst adventure to set
before them, had they not really been the products of the Convocation.
Secondly, the King had no reason to have any such jealousy at that time of the
major part of the Clergy, but that he might trust them with a power to meddle
with matters of Religion; this Convocation being holden the sixth year of his
Reign, when Gardener, Bonner, Day and Tunstall, and others of the stiffest
Romanists, were put out of their places; most of the Episcopal Sees, and
Parochial Churches being filled with men according unto his desires* and
generally con^ormable to the Forms of Worship here by Law established. Thirdly,
the Church of England for the first five years of Queen Elizabeth, retained
these Articles, and no other, as the public ^endries of the Church in point of
Doctrine; which certainly she had not done, had it been recommended to her by a
less Authority than a Convocation lawfully assembled and confirmed. And
Fourthly, that it is true, that the Records of Convocation during this King,
and the first years of Queen Mary are very defective and imperfect, most of
them lost; amongst others, those of this present year: And yet one may conclude
as strongly, that my mother dyed childeless, because my Christening is not to
be found in the Parish Register; as that the Convocation of this year was
barren, because the Acts and Articles of it were not entered in the Journal Book.

11. To salve this sore, it is conceived by the Objector, that the Bishops and
Clergy had passed over their power to some 'select Divines appointed by the
King; in which sense they may be said to have made these Articles themselves,
by their delegates, to whom they had deputed their Authority, the case not
being so clear, but that it occasioned a cavil at the Id. Ib.
next Convocation the first of Queen Mary, when the Papists therein assembled,
renounced the legality of any such former transactions.' And unto this it shall
be answered, That no such defect of legality as was here pretended, was charged
against the Book of Articles it self, but only against a Catechism which was
bound up with it, countenanced by the Kings Letters Patents prefixed before it,
approved by many Bishops and learned men, and generally voyced to be another of
the products of this Convocation: And therefore for so much as concerns this
Catechism, it was replied by Mr. John Philpot Archdeacon of Winchester, who had
been a member in the former, and was now a member of the Convocation in the
first of Queen Mary, That he thought they were deceived in the Title of it, in
that Acts and Mon. fol. 1282.
it owned the Title of the last Synod of London, many which were then present,
not being made privy to the making or publishing of it. He added, That the said
former Convocation, had granted the Authority of making excellent Laws, unto
certain persons to be appointed by the Kings Majesty; so as whatsoever
Ecclesiastical Laws they, or the most part of them did set forth (according to
a Statute in that behalf provided) might be well said to be done in the Synod
of London, though such as were of the house, had no notice thereof before the
promulgation: And thereupon he did infer, That the setters forth of the
Catechism did not slander the House, as they went about to persuade the world,
since they had the Authority of the Synod unto them committed, to make such
Spiritual Laws as they thought convenient and necessary for the good of the
Church. In which discourse we may observe, that there was not one word which
reflects on the Book of Articles, all of it being made in reference to the
Catechism before remembered; though if the Objection had been made (as indeed it
was not) against the Articles themselves, the defense of that learned man, and
godly Martyr, would have served as fully for the one, as it did for the other.
But whatsoever may be said in derogation to the Authority of the Book of
Articles, as it was published in the time of King Edward the sixth, Anno Dom.
1552. certain I am, that nothing can be said unto the contrary, but that they
were received, and the far greater part of them agreed upon in full
Convocation, Anno, 1562, And therefore for avoiding of all disputes, I am
resolved to take them in this last capacity, as they were ratified by Queen
Elizabeth, Anno, 1563. confirmed by King James, Anno 1604. and finally
established by the late King Charles, with his Majesty's Royal Declaration
prefixed before them* Anno 1628.

12. Less doubt there is concerning the intent of this Convocation in drawing
up the Articles in so loose a manner, that men of different judgments might
accommodate them to their own opinions, which I find both observed and
commended in them by the former Author; by whom we are informed, that the
Articles of the English Protestant Church, in the infancy thereof, Chur. Hist.
lib. 9. fol. 72.
were drawn up in general terms, foreseeing that posterity would grow up to
fill the same; meaning, that these holy men did prudently discover, that
differences in judgment would unavoidably happen in the Church, and were loath
to unchurch any, and drive them off from an Ecclesiastical communion for petty
differences, which made them pen the Articles in comprehensive words, to take
in all, who differing in the branches, meet in the root of the same Religion:
This has been formerly observed to have been the artifice of those who had the
managing of the Council of Trent, and is affirmed to have been used by such men
also as had the drawing up of the Canons at the Synod at Dort: But the
Composers of the Articles of the Church of England had not so little in them of
the Dove, or so much of the Serpent, as to make the Articles of the Church like
an upright shoe, which may be worn on either foot; or like to Theranc^nes shoe,
as the Adage has it, fit for the foot of every man that was pleased to wear
it; and therefore we may say of our first Reformers, in reference to the
present Book of Articles, as was affirmed of them by Dr. Brancroft then Bishop
of London in relation to the Rubric in private Baptism; that is to say, that
those reverend and learned men intended not to deceive any by ambiguous terms;
for which, see Conf. at Hampton Court, p. 15. And to this supposition or
imagination it is also Conser.
answered, That the first Reformers did not so compose the Articles, as to
leave any liberty to dissenting judgments, as the said Author would fain have
it in some words preceding, but did not bind men to the literal and
Grammatical sense; they had not otherwise attained to the end they aimed at,
which was ad tollendam Opinionum Dissentionem, and consensum in vera Religione
firmandum; that is to say, to take away diversity of opinions, and to establish
an agreement in the true Riligion. Which end could never be effected, if men
were left unto the liberty of dissenting, or might have leave to put their own
sense upon the Articles, as they list themselves: For where there is a purpose
of permitting men to their own opinions, there is no need of definitions and
determinations in a National Church, no more than is of making Laws to bind
the Subjects in an unsettled Commonwealth, with an intent to leave them in
their former liberty, either of keeping or not keeping them, as themselves best
pleased. Which said, we shall enquire into the meaning of the Articles, as
before laid down, whether they speak in favor of the Melancthonian or
Calvinian way, so far forth as the meaning of them can be gathered from the
public Liturgy and Book of Homilies, or from the Writings of those men, who
either had a hand in the making of them, or dyed in the Religion here by Law
established.

CHAP. IX. Of the Doctrine of Predestination delivered in the Articles, the
Homilies, the public Liturgies, and the Writings of some of the Reformers.
1. THe Articles differently understood by the Calvinian party, and the true
English Protestants, with the best way to find out the true sense thereof. 2.
The definition of Predestination, and the most considerable points contained in
it. 3. The meaning of those words in the Definition; viz. Whom he has chosen
in Christ, according to the Exposition of S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S.
Jerome, as also of Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop Latimer, and the Book of
Homilies. 4. The Absolute Decree condemned by Bishop Latimer, as a means to
Licentiousness and Carnal living. 5. For which, and making God to be the Author
of sin, condemned as much by Bishop Hooper. 6. Our Election to be found in
Christ, not sought for in Gods secret Counsels, according to the judgment of
Bishop Latimer. 7. The way to find out our Election, delivered by the same
godly Bishop, and by Bishop Hooper, with somewhat to the same purpose also from
the Book of Homilies. 8. The Doctrine of Predestination, delivered by the holy
Martyr John Bradford, with Fox his gloss upon the same to corrupt the sense. 9.
No countenance to be had for any absolute, personal and irrespective decree of
Predestination in the public Liturgy. 10. An Answer to such passages out of
the said Liturgy, as seem to favor that opinion; as also touching the number
of Gods Elect.

1. THus have we seen the Doctrine of the Church of England in the five
controverted Points, according as it is delivered in the Book of Articles; but
in what sense we ought to understand it, has been made a Question: Some take
the Articles in the Literal and Graminacal sense, which is the fairest and most
approved way of Interpretation; according to the saying of an ancient Writer,
That if the Literal sense of holy Scripture will stand with the Analogy
Declar. before the Art. 1628.
of faith and piety, it is to be preferred before any other: Others they are
(of which his late Majesty complained) who draw the Articles aside, and put
their own sense or comment to be the meaning of the Articles; fashioning them
to their own fancies, as they please themselves: Each of the parties in those
curious points in which the present differences do most consist, conceive the
Articles of the Church to speak for them, exclusive wholly of the other, but
with a notable difference in the Application. The Calvinists, by which name
they love to be Our Divines commonly called Calvinists. Yates in Ap. Caesar.
cap. 5. p. 38.
called, endeavor to captivate the sense of the Article, and bring it to the
bent of their own understanding; but the true English Protestants (whom for
distinction sake we may call Confessionists) accommodate, though they do not
captivate, their own sense to the sense of the Church, according to the plain
and full meaning of the Articles in the points disputed. But because possibly
both parties may not be agreed on a Rule or Medium by which the proper sense
and meaning of the Articles may be best discovered, it will not be amiss to
follow the directions of the Civil Laws, in cases of like doubtful nature;
which is briefly this, viz. Si de interpretatione Legis quaeritur, i^^ri^^is
insp c^endum est, quo jure Civitas ^^^^^ in huj^smodi casibus usa fuit: And
this we shall the better do, if we enquire into the Doctrine of those Learned,
Religious and Godly men, who either had a principal hand in the Reformation, or
were most conversant with them, and beloved of them in their several stations,
taking along with us the Authority of the Homilies and public Liturgy, to
which all parties have subscribed. In order whereunto, it will first be
necessary to lay down the definition of Predestination, as before we had it in
the Article, to sum up the particular points and contents thereof, to show the
sense of one phrase in it, and then to travel more exactly in this enquiry,
whether the method of Predestination, illustrated by the story of Agilmond and
Amistus Kings of Lombardy, cap. 7. number* 4. agree not more harmoniously with the
true sense and meaning of the Church of England, than any other whatsoever.

2. First then, 'Predestination unto life, is defined in the 17 Article to be
the Everlasting purpose of God, whereby, and before the foundations of the
world were laid, he has constantly decreed by his Council secret unto us, to
deliver from damnation those whom he has chosen in Christ out of mankind, and
to bring them by Christ unto everlasting salvation.' In which definition there
are these things to be observed: First, That Predestination does presuppose a
curse or state of damnation in which all mankind was represented to the sight
of God, which plainly crosses the opinion of the Supra-Lapsarians, the
Supra-Creaturians, or Creabilitarians, as some call them now. Secondly, That it
is an act of his from Everlasting, because from Everlasting he foresaw into
what misery whretched man would fall, by the abuse of that liberty in which
first he stood. Thirdly, That he founded it, and resolved for it in the Man and
Mediator Christ Jesus, both for the purpose and performance; which crosses as
directly with the Sublapsarians, who place the absolute decree of
Predestination to life, and of Reprobation unto death, both of body and soul,
before the decree or consideration of sending his only beloved Son Jesus
Christ into the world, to be the common Propitiation for the sins of men.
Fourthly, That it was of some special ones alone, Elect called fort, and
reserved in Christ, and not generally extended unto all mankind; a General
Election, as they say, being no Election. Fifthly, That being thus elected in
Christ, they shall be brought by Christ (but not without their own consent and
cooperation) to everlasting salvation. And finally, That this Council is
secret unto us; for though there be revealed to us some hopeful signs of our
Election and Predestation destination unto life, yet the certainty thereof is a
secret hidden in God, and in this life unknown to us; For who has known the
mind of the Lord, or has been his Counselor? (or of his Secret Council)
says the great Apostle.

3. Such is the definition of Predestination, and the substance of it, in which
there is nothing so obscure, no term so intricate, as to need any especial or
distinct explication, as those words Whom he has chosen in Christ: which being
the very words of the same Apostle, Ephesians first, cap. 4. we will first
paraphrase in the words of some ancient Writers, and then illustrate them by
others of our holiest Martyrs, who had a principal hand in the Reformation:
First, S. Ambrose, amongst others, s^cut elegit Ambros. in Epist. 1, 4.
nos in ipso, as he has chosen us in him, Praescivit enim Deus omnes, scil.
qui credituri essent in Christum: For God (says he) by his general prescience,
did foreknow every man that would believe in Christ: To the same purpose speaks
S. Chrysostom, saying, Quod dicit perinde est ac ^si dicat, Per quem nos
benedixit, per eundem* and elegit; and a little after, Quid est in ipso elegit?
per eam quae in ipso habenda esset, fidem; For, praestitit prius quam ipsi
essemus, magis autem prius quam mundi hujus jacerentur Fundamenta: Which is as
much as to say (says he) as if he had said, That we are blessed in him, in
whom we are chosen; Chrysostom. in Ep. 14.
and we are chosen in him in whom we believe; which he performed before we our
selves had any being, or rather before the foundations of the world were laid:
And to the same effect, the Commentary upon S. Paul's Epistles, ascribed to S.
Jerome; viz. in hoc praedestavit, ut haberent potestatem filii Dei fieri
homines, qui credere voluissent; that is to say, in this he has predestined
us to Eternal life, that men may be made the sons Hierom. in Epist. 64.
of God, if they will believe. Which sayings of those ancient Writers, we shall
expound by others of our holy Martyrs; and first Archbishop Cranmer, in his
Answer to Gardener touching L. 5 p. 372.
the holy Sacrament, tells us this; viz. 'Christ (says he) took unto himself
not only their sins that many years before were dead, and put their trust in
him; but also the sins of those that until his coming again, should truly
believe in his Gospel:' More fully Bishop Latimer, thus, 'When (says he) we
hear that some be chosen, and some be damned, let us have good Sermon. 3. Sunday
after Epiphany, part. 3. fol. 198
hope that we be amongst the chosen, and live after this hope; that is,
uprightly and godly, then shall we not be deceived; think that God has chosen
those that believe in Christ, and Christ is the Book of Life: If thou believe
in him, then art thou written in the Book of Life, and shall be saved.' By
which we may the better understand that passage in the Book of Homilies, where
it said, 'That the Scripture shuts up all under Hom. of the misery of man.
f. 8.
sin, that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ should be given unto them
that believe;' which is as much as can be comprehended in so narrow a compass.

4. This said, as in the way of Explication, we will next see what has been
positively delivered by our first Reformers, concerning the fatality or
absoluteness of Gods Decrees maintained by Calvin then, and his followers
since: Of which thus Bishop Latimer in his Sermon upon Septuag^s^m^. 'Some vain
Sermon. on Septu. fol. 213.
fellows make their reckoning thus, What need I to mortify my body, with
abstaining from all sin and wickedness? I perceive God has chosen some, and
some are rejected; now if I be in the number of the chosen, I cannot be damned;
but if I be accounted amongst the condemned number, then I cannot be saved: For
Gods judgments are immutable; such foolish and wicked reasons some have, which
brings them either to carnal liberty, or to desperation: Therefore it is as
needful to beware of such reason or Exposition of the Scriptures, as it is to
beware of the Devil himself. To the same purpose in his third Sermon after the
Epiphany; viz. We read in the Acts of the Apostles, that when S. Paul had made
a long Sermon at Antioch, there believed (says the Evangilist) as many as were
ordained unto everlasting life: With the which saying, a great number of people
have been offended; and have said, We perceive that only those shall come to
believe, and so to everlasting life, which are chosen of God unto it; therefore
it is no matter whatsoever we do; for if we be chosen to everlasting life, we
shall have it: And so they have opened a door unto themselves of all wickedness
and carnal liberty, against the true meaning of the Scripture: For if they must
be damned, the fault is not in God, but in themselves; for it is written, Deus
v^lt omnes homines salvos fieire, God would have all men should be saved: But
they themselves procure their own damnation, and despise the passion of Christ,
by their own wicked and inordinate living.'

5. Hooper is bolder yet than he, even to the censuring of those Hoop. in
Prefac. before the ten Commandm.
who by the fatality of these Decrees, make God to be the Author of sin: And
first he lets us know in general, 'That the blind Southsayers that write of
things to come, were more to be esteemed of than our curious and high-climing
wits; for they attribute the cause of ill to the evil Aspect, and sinister
conjunctions of the Planets.' Which said, we shall hear him speaking more
particularly to the present point, in this manner Id. Ibid.
following; viz. 'It is not a Christian man's part to attribute to his own
freewil, with the Pelagian, and extenuate Original sin, nor to make God the
Author of evil, and our damnation, nor yet to say, God has written fatal Laws,
with the Stoics, and in the necessity of Destiny, violently pulls one by the
hair into Heaven, and thrusts the other headlong into Hell.' And in another
place 'Our Gospellists, says he, be Id. Ibid.
better learned than the Holy Ghost; for they wickedly attribute the cause of
punishment and adversity to Gods Providence, which is the cause of no ill, as
he himself could do no ill; and every mischief that is done, they say, it is
Gods will.' And then again -- 'Howsoever man judges of Predestination, Id.
Ibid.
God is not the cause of sin, thou art not the God that willest sin; and it is
said, That thy perdition, O Israel, is of thy self, and thy succor only of
me.' And finally, to shut up his discourse hereof with some Application, he
shall tell us thus; 'Being admonished by the Scripture that we must leave sin,
Id. Ibid.
and do the works commanded of God, it will prove but a carnal opinion which we
blind our selves withal, of Fatal Destiny; and in case there follow not in us
knowledge of Christ, amendment of life, it is not a lively faith that we have,
but rather a vain knowledge, and mere presumption.'

6. Next let us look upon such passages in the writings of those those godly
men, which teach us to enquire no further after our Election, than as it is to
be found in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: Of which Bishop Latimer in the
first place thus, Lat. in Sermon. on Septuages. p. 3. fol. 214.
viz. 'If thou art desirous to know whether thou art chosen to everlasting
life, thou may not begin with God; for God is too high, thou can not
comprehend him, the judgments of God are unknown to man, therefore thou must
not begin there: But begin with Christ, and learn to know Christ, and wherefore
that he came; namely, That he came to save sinners, and made himself a subject
of the Law, and fulfiller of the same, to deliver us from the wrath and danger
thereof, and therefore was crucified for our sins, etc. -- Consider, I say,
Christ and his coming, and then begin to try thy self whether thou art in the
Book of Life or not: If thou find thy self in Christ, then thou art sure of
everlasting life: If thou be without him, then thou art in an evil case; for it
is written, nemo venit ad patrem nisi p^r me; that is, no man comes to my
Father but through me; therefore if thou know Christ, thou may know
further of thy Election.' And then in another place, -- 'When we are troubled
within our selves, whether we be elected or no, we must ever have this Maxim
or principal rule before our eyes; namely, that God bears a good will toward
us, God loves us, God bears a Fatherly heart toward us. But you will say,
How shall I know that? or how shall I believe that? We may know Gods good will
toward us through Christ; for so says John the Evangelist, Filius qui est in
sinu patris ipse revelavit; that is, The Son who is in the bosom of the Father,
he has revealed it: Therefore we may perceive his good will and love toward
us. He has sent the same Son into the world, which has suffered most painful
death for us; Shall I now think that God hates me? or shall I doubt of his
love toward me? ' And in another place, 'Here you see how you shall avoid the
scrupulous and most dangerous question of the Predestination of God; for if
thou will enquire into his Councils, and search his Consistory, thy wit will
deceive thee, for thou shall not be able to search the Council of God: But if
thou begin with Christ, and consider his coming into the world, and do
believe that God has sent him for thy sake to suffer for thee, and to deliver
thee from sin, death, the Devil, and Hell? Then when thou art so armed with the
knowledge of Christ; then (I say) this simple question cannot hurt thee, for
thou art in the Book of Life, which is Christ himself -- For thus it is writ,
Sice Deus dilexit mundum, that God so entirely loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son, to the end that all that believed in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life; whereby appears most plainly, that Christ
is the Book of Life, and that all that believe in him, are of the same Book,
and so are chosen to everlasting life; for only those are ordained that
believe.'

Nor stays that godly Bishop here, but proceeds (after some intervening
passages) toward this Conclusion:

'Here is now taught you (says he) how to try your Election; namely, in
Christ: For Christ is the Accompting Book and Register of God, and even in the
same Book, that is, Christ, are witten all the names of the Elect; therefore we
cannot find our Election in our selves, neither yet the high Council of God;
for inscrutabilia su^t judicia Altissimi: Where then shall I find my Election?
in the Compting Book of God, which is Christ, etc.' Agreeable whereunto we
find Bishop Hooper, speaking thus, 'The cause of our Election, is the mercy of
God in Christ; howbeit, he that will be partaker of this Election, must receive
the promise in Christ by faith; for therefore we be elected, because afterward
we are made the members of Christ -- So we judge of Election by the event or
success that happens in the life of man; those only to be elected,' that by
faith apprehend the mercy promised in Christ. To the same purpose also (but not
so clearly and perspicuously) speaks the Book of Homilies; where we find it
thus, viz. 'That Hom. of the misery of man. fol. 11.
of our selves (as in our selves) we find nothing whereby we may be delivered
from this miserable captivity in which we were cast (through the envy of the
Devil) by breaking Gods Commandment in our first Parent Adam: It is the Lord
with whom is plenteous Redemption; he is the God which of his own mercy saves
us, etc. not for our own deserts, merits, or good deeds, etc. but of his mere
mercy freely, and for whose sake truly, for Christ Jesus sake, the pure and
undesiled Lamb of God, etc. for whose sake God is fully pacified, satisfied and
set at one with man. Such is the Doctrine of the Church in the matter of
Predestination unto life, according to the judgment of these learned men, and
godly Martyrs, who were of such Authority in the Reformation.'

8. Proceed we next to one of an inferior Order, the testimony of John
Bradford Martyr, a man in very high esteem with Martin Bucer, made one of the
Prebends of S. Paul's Church by Bishop Ridley, and one who glorified God in the
midst of the flames, with as great courage as his Patron; of whom we find a
Letter extant in the Acts and Monuments directed to his friends N. S. and R. ^.
being at that time not thoroughly Fox Acts and Mo^. fol. 1505.
instructed in the Doctrine of Gods Election: The words of which Letter are as
follows, 'I wish to you my good Brethren the same grace of God in Christ,
which I wish and pray the Father of mercies to give me for his holy names sake,
amen. Your Letter, though I have not read my self, because I would not alienate
my mind from conceived things, to write to others, yet I have heard the sum of
it, that it is of Gods Election; wherein I will briefly relate to you my faith,
and how far I think it good and meet for a Christian to wade in. I believe,
That man made after the image of God, did fall from that pleased estate, to the
condemnation of him and all his posterity: I believe that Christ (for man being
then fallen) did oppose himself to the judgment of God, as a Mediator paying
the ransom and price of Redemption for Adam and his whole posterity, that
refuse it not finally: I believe, that all that believe (I speak of such as be
of years of discretion) are partakers of Christ and all his merits: I believe,
that faith and belief in Christ is the work and gift of God, given to no other
then to those which be his children; that is, to those whom God the Father
before the beginning of the world, has Predestined in Christ unto Eternal
life. Thus do I wade in Predestination, in such sort as God has patefied and
opened it. Though to God it be the first, yet to us it is the last opened; and
therefore I begin with Creation, from whence I come to Redemption, so to
Justification, so to Election. On this sort I am sure that warily and wisely a
man may walk it easily by the light of Gods Spirit, in and by his Word, seeing
this faith is not to be given to all men, 2 Thessalonians. 3. but to such as are born
of God, Predestined before the world was made, after the purpose and good
will of God, etc.' Which judgment of this holy man, comes up so close to that
of the former Martyrs, and is so plainly cross to that of the Calvinistical
party, that Mr. Fox was fain to make soom Scholia's on it, to reconcile a gloss
like that of Orleance, which corrupts the Text; and therefore to have no place
here, however it may be disposed of at another time. But besides the Epistle
above mentioned, there is extant a Discourse of the said godly Martyr,
entitled, The sum of the Doctrine of Predestination and Reprobation; in which
is affirmed, That our own wilfulness, sin, and contemning of Christ, are the
cause of Reprobation, as is confessed by the Author of the Anti-Arminianism, p.
103. though afterward he puts such a gloss upon it (as he does also on the
like passages in Bishop Hooper) as makes the sin of man to be the cause only
of the execution, and not of the decree of Reprobation.

9. But it is said, That any one that reads the Common Prayer Justifi. Fathers.
Book with an unprejudiced mind, cannot choose but observe diverse passages that
make for a Personal, Eternal Election. So it is said of late, and till of late
never so said by any that ever I heard of, the whose frame and fabric of the
Public Liturgy being directly opposite to this new conceit. For in the
general Confession, we beseech the Lord to spare them that confess their
faults, and restore them that be penitent, according to his promises declared
unto mankind in Christ Jesus our Lord: In the Te Deum it is said, that Christ
our Savior having overcome the sharpness of death, did open the Kingd^m of
heaven to all believers: In the Prayer for the first day of Lent, That God
hates nothing which he has made, but does forgive the sins of all them that
be penitent: In the Prayer at the end of the Commination, That God has
compassion of all men, that he hates nothing which he has made, that he would
not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should turn from sin and repent:
In the Absolution before the Communion, That God of his great mercy has
promised forgiveness of sins to all them, which with hearty repentance and tru^
faith turn unto him. Can any one which comes with an unprejudiced mind to the
Common Prayer Book, observe any thing that savoureth of a Personal Election in
all these passages? or can he hope to find them in any other? Look then upon
the last Exhortation before the Communion, in which we are required above all
things, 'To give most humble and hearty thanks to God the Father, and the Holy
Ghost, for the Redemption of the world, by the death and passion of our Savior
Christ, both God and man, who did humble himself even to the death upon the
Cross, for us miserable sinners, which lay in darkness and the shadow of
death.' More of which nature we shall find in the second Article. Look on the
Collect in the form of public Baptism, in which we pray, 'That whosoever is
here dedicated unto God by our Office and Ministrey, may also be endued with
heavenly virtues, and everlastingly rewarded through Gods mercy: O blessed Lord
God, etc.' And in the Rubric before Confirmation; where it is said expressly,
That it is certain by Gods Word, that children being baptized, have all things
necessary to their salvation, and be undoubtedly saved. Look on these passages
and the rest, and tell me any one that can, whether the public Liturgy of
the Church of England, speak any thing in favor of such a Personal and Eternal
Election; that is to say, such an absolute, irrespective, and irreversible
Decree of Predestination (and that of some few only) unto life Eternal, as is
maintained and taught in the Schools of Calvin.

10. Some passages I grant there are, which speak of Gods people, and his
chosen people, and yet intend not any such Personal and Eternal Election, as
these men conceit unto themselves: Of which sort these, viz. To declare and
pronounce to his people being penitent -- O Lord save thy people, and bless thy
heritage -- that it would please thee to keep and bless all thy people -- and
make thy chosen people joyful, with many others interspersed in several places:
But then I must affirm with all, that those passages are no otherwise to be
understood, than of the whole body of the Church, the Congregation of the
faithful, called to the public participation of the Word and Sacraments:
Which appears plainly by the Prayer for the Church Militant here on earth;
where having called upon the Lord, and said, To all thy people give thy
heavenly grace; we are taught presently to add, especially to this
Congregation here present; that is to say, the members of that particular
Church, which there pour forth their prayers for the Church in general. More to
their purpose is that passage in the Collect for the Feast of All Saints; where
it is said, That Almighty God has knit together his Elect in one communion and
fellowship in the mystical body of his Son Jesus Christ; though it does
signify no more but that inseparable bond of Charity, that Love and Unity,
that Holy Communion and Correspondency which is between the Saints in Glory in
the Church Triumphant, and those who are still exercised under the cares and
miseries of this present life in the Church here Militant. But it makes most
unto their purpose (if any thing could make unto their purpose in the
Common Prayer Book) that at the burial of the dead we are taught to pray, That
God would please of his gracious goodness shortly to accomplish the number of
his elect, and to hasten his Kingdom: From whence, as possibly some may raise
this inference, That by the Doctrine of the Church of England, there is a
predestined and certain number of Elect, which can neither be increased nor
diminished, according to the third of the nine Articles which were agreed upon
at Lambeth: So others may perhaps conclude, That this number is made up out of
such Elections, such Personal and Eternal Elections as they have fancied to
themselves. But there is nothing in the Prayer, which can be useful to the
countenancing of any such fancy, the number of the Elect, and the certainty of
that number, being known only unto God in the way of his Prescience, by which
he sees all things past, and all things to come, as if present with him. And
therefore having past a general Decree of Predestination, touching the saving
of all those which believe in Christ, and knowing most infallibly who, and how
many of all Nations will believe in Christ, continue in the faith to the end of
their lives, and consequently attain salvation: The number of the persons so
Predestined, is as well known unto him in the universal comprehension of his
Heavenly Prescience, as if they had been personally elected unto life Eternal,
the accomplishing of which number, that so his Kingdom may be hastened, and the
hastening of his Kingdom, that we, with all the rest which are departed in the
true faith of his holy Name, may have our perfect Consummation and bliss both
in body and soul, is the scope and purpose of that Prayer: And being the sole
scope and purpose of it, cannot imply such a Personal and Eternal Election as
some men imagine, though it conclude both for a number, and for a certain
number of Gods Elect.

CHAP. X. The Doctrine of the Church concerning Reprobation, and Universal
Redemption.
1. THe absolute Decree of Reprobation not found in the Articles of this
Church, but against it in some passages of the public Liturgy. 2. The cause
of Reprobation to be found in a man's self, and not in Gods Decrees, according
to the judgment of Bishop Latimer, and Bishop Hooper. 3. The Absolute Decrees
of Election and Reprobation, how contrary to the last clause in the seventeenth
Article. 4. The inconsistency of the Absolute Decree of Reprobation, with the
Doctrine of Universal Redemption by the death of Christ. 5. The Universal
Redemption of mankind by the death of Christ, declared in many places of the
public Liturgy, and affirmed also in one of the Homilies and the Book of
Articles. 6. A further proof of it from the Mission of the Apostles, and the
Prayer used in the Ordination of Priests. 7. The same confirmed by the writings
of Archbishop Cranmer, and the two other Bishops before mentioned. 8. A
Generality of the Promises, and an Universality of Vocation, maintained by the
said two godly Bishops. 9. The reasons why this benefit is not made effectual
to all sorts of men, to be found only in themselves.

1. AS the speaking of Heaven does many times beget the discovery of Hell; so
the foregoing Discovery of Predestination to Eternal life, conducts me to the
speaking of a few words concerning the Doctrine of Reprobation, Rejection,
Eternal Death, a point of which the Church of England is utterly silent,
leaving it to be gathered upon Logical inferences from that which is delivered
by her in the point of Election (for contrariorum, contraria est ratio, as
Logicians say) though that which is so gathered, ought rather to be called a
Dereliction than a Reprobation: No such absolute, irreversible and irrespective
Decree of Reprobation, taught or maintained in any public Monument or Record
of the Church of England, by which the far greater part of mankind are
pre-ordained, and consequently pre-condemned to the Pit of torments, without
any respect had unto their sins and incredulities, as generally is maintained
and taught in the Schools of Calvin. Much, I am sure, may be said against it
out of the passages in the Liturgy before remembered; where it is said, that
God has compassion upon all men, and hates nothing which he has made; but
much more out of those which are to come in the second Article, touching the
Universal Reconciliation of mankind unto God the Father, by the death of
Christ. Take now no more than this one Collect, being the last of those which
are appointed for Good Friday, on which we celebrate the memorial of Christ his
death and passion; and is this that follows; viz. 'Merciful God, who have
made all men, and hate nothing that thou have made, nor would the death of
a sinner, but rather that he should be converted and^^ve, have mercy upon all
Jews, Turks, Infidels, and Heretics, and take from them all ignorance,
hardness of heart, and contempt of thy Word; and so fetch them home blessed
Lord, to thy flock, that they may be saved amongst the remnant of the true
Israelites, and be made one fold, under one Shepherd, Jesus Christ our Lord.' A
Prayer as utterly inconsistent with the Calvinians Decree of Reprobation, as
the finding of an Hell in Heaven, or any thing else which seems to be most
abhorrent both from faith and piety.

2. More may be said against it out of the writings of Bishop Latimer in his 4
Sermon, third Sunday after Epiphani^. 4 Sermon. in Lincoln.
Latimer and Bishop Hooper before remembered: Beginning first with Latimer, he
will tell us this, viz. 'That if most be damned, the fault is not in God, but
in themselves; for Dus vult omnes homines salvos fieri, God would that all men
should be saved, but they themselves procure their own damnation.' Thus also in
another place, That Christ only, and no man else, merited Remission,
Justification, and Eternal Felicity, for as many as believe the same; that
Christ shed as much blood for Judas, as for Peter; that Peter believed it, and
therefore was saved; that Judas could not believe it, therefore was condemned,
the fault being in him only, and no body else. More fully, not more plainly,
the other Bishop in the said Preface to the Exposition on the Ten Commandments;
where it is said, 'That Gain was no more excluded from the promise of Christ,
till he exlcuded himself, than Abel; Saul, than David; Judas, than Peter; E^au,
than Jacob;' concerning which two brethren, he further added, 'That in the
sentence of God given unto Rebecca, that there was no mention at all, that Esau
should be disinherited of Eternal life, but that he should be inferior to his
brother Jacob in this world; which Prophecy (says he) was fulfilled in their
Posterity, and not the persons themselves (the very same with that which
Arminius and his followers have since declared in this case.)' And this being
said, he proceeds to this Declaration, 'That God is said by the Prophet to
have hated Esau, not because he was disinherited of Eternal life, but in laying
his mountains and his heritage waste for the Dragons of the wilderness, Mal. 1.
3. that the threatening of God against Esau (of he had not of wilful malice
excluded himself from the promise of grace) should no more have hindered his
salvation, than Gods threatening against Nineve; that the cause of Rejection or
Damnation is sin in man, which will not hear, neither receive the promise of
the Gospel. And ^^^ally thus, That by Gods grace we might Exposit* of the
Command, cap. of ignor.
do the good, and leave the evil, if it were not through malice of accustomed
doing of sin; the which excuses the mercy and go d^^ess of God, and makes
that no man shall be excused in he latter judgment, how subtly soever they
now excuse the matter, and put their evil doings from them, and lay it upon the
Predestination of God, and would excuse it by ignorance: o^ say he cannot be
good, because he is otherwise destined; which in the next words he calls A
Stoical (...) refuted by those words of Horace, Nemo adeo f^rus est, etc.'

3. But that which makes most against the absolute, irrespective, and
irreversible decree of predestination, whether it be life or death, is the last
clause of our second Article, being the seventeenth of the Church, as before
laid down; where it is said that we must receive Gods promises in such wise as
they be generally set forth to us in holy Scripture, and that in all our doings
that will of God is to be followed which we have expressly declared to us in
holy Scriptures. And in the holy Scripture it is declared to us, That God gave
his Son for the world, or for all mankind, that Christ offered himself a
Sacrifice for all the sixs of the whole world, that Christ redeemed all
mankind, that Christ commanded the Gospel to be preached to all; that God
wills and commands all men to hear Christ, and to believe in him; and in him to
offer grace and salvation unto all men: That this is the infallible truth, in
which there can be no falsehood; otherwise, the Apostles, and other Ministers of
the Gospel, preaching the same, should be false witnesses of God, and should
make him a liar; than which nothing can be more repugnant to the Calvinian
Doctrine of predestination, which restrains predestination unto life in a few
particulars, without respect had to their faith in Christ, or Christ's suffering
and death for them, which few particulars so predestinate to eternal life,
shall (as they tell us) by an irrestible Grace, be brought to God, and by the
infallible conduct of the holy Spirit, persevere from falling away from grace
and favor: Nothing more contrary to the like absolute decree of Reprobation,
by which the infinitely greatest part of all Mankind is either doomed
remidilesly to the torments of Hell, when they were but in the estate of
Creability (as the Supralapsarians have informed us) and unavoidably necessated
unto sin, that they might infallibly be damned; or otherwise, as miserably
leaving them under such a condition, according to the Doctrine of the
Sublapsarians, which renders them incapable of avoiding the wrath to come, and
consequently subjected them to a damnation no less certain then if they were
created to no other purpose; which makes it seem the greater wonder, that
Doctor Usher (afterward Lord Primate of Ireland) in drawing up the article of
predestination for the Church of Ireland, anno. 1615. should take in so much as
he does of the Lambeth articles, and yet subjone this very clause at the foot
thereof, Article of Ireland, Numb. 12. 14. 17.
which can no more concorporate with it, then any of the most Het rogeneus
metals can unite into one piece of refined Gold; which clause, as it remains
in the articles of the Church of England, how well it was applied by King
James, and others in the conference at Hampton Court, we shall see hereafter.

4. In the mean time we must behold another argument, which fights more
strongly against the Apostles decree of Reprobation then any of the rest
before; that is to say, the reconciliation of all men to Almighty God; the
universal redemption of Mankind by the death of Christ, expressly justfied and
maintained by the Church of England. For though one in our late undertaking
seem exceeding confident, that the granting of universal redemption will draw
no inconvenience with it as to the absoluteness of Gods decrees, or to the
insuperability of converting Grace, or to the certain infallible perseverance
Cap. 10. Hic in ^^stip father.
of Gods elect after conversion: Yet I dare say, he will not be so confident in
affirming this, That if Christ did so far dye for all, as to procure a
salvation for all, under the condition of faith and repentance, as his own
words are, there can be any room for such an absolute decree of reprobation,
(...) and precedent to the death of Christ, as his great masters in the school
of Calvin, have been pleased to teach him. Now for the Doctrine of this Church,
in that particular, it is expressed so clearly in the second article of the five
before laid down, that nothing needs be added either in way of explication or
of confirmation; howsoever, for avoiding of all doubt and Haesitancy, we will
first add some farther testimonies touching the Doctrine of this Church in the
point of universal redemption: And secondly, touching the applying of so great
a benefit by universal vocation, and finally we shall show the causes, why the
benefit is not effectual unto all alike.

5. And first, as for the Doctrine of universal redemption, it may be further
proved by those words in the public Carechism, where the Child is taught to
say, that he believes in God the Son, who redeemed with him all mankind; in
that clause of the public Letany, where God the Son is called the Redeemer of
the world; in the passages of the latter Exhortation before the Communion,
where it is said, That the Oblation of Christ once offered, was a full,
perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice for the sins of the WHOLE WORLD; in the
proper Preface appointed for the Communion on Easter Day, in which he is said
to be the very Paschal Lamb that was offered for us, and takes away the sins
of the world, repeated in the greater Catechism to the same effect. And
finally, in the Prayer of Conservation; viz. Almighty God, our heavenly Father,
Hom. Salvation, p. 13.
which of thy tender mercies did give thine only Son Jesus Christ to suffer
death upon the Cross for our Redemption, who made there by his own Oblation of
himself once offered, a firm, and perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation,
and Satisfaction for the sins of the WHOLE WORLD. To this purpose it is said in
the Book of Homilies, That the World being wrapped up in sin by the breaking of
Gods Law, God sent his only Son our Savior Christ into this world to fulfill
the Law for us; and by shedding of his most precious blood, to make a Sacrifice
and Satisfaction, or as it may be called, amends to his Father for our sins, to
assuage his wrath and indignation conceived against us for the same. Out of
which words it may be very well concluded, That the world being wrapped up in
sin, the Recompense and Satisfaction which was made to God, must be made to him
for the sins of the world, or else the plaster had not been commensurate to
the sore, nor so much to the magnifying of Gods wonderful mercies in the
offered means of Reconcilement betwixt God and man; the Homily must else fall
short of that which is taught in the Articles: In which (besides what was
before delivered from the second and 31. concerning the Redemption of the world
by the death of Christ) it is affirmed in the 15 as plain as may be, That
Christ came to be a Lamb without spot, who by the Sacrifice of himself once
made, should take away the sins of the world: Then which there can be nothing
more conducible to the point in hand.

6. And to this purpose also, when Christ our Savior was pleased to Authorize
his Holy Apostles to preach the Good Tidings of Salvation, he gave them both a
Command and a Commission To go into all the world, and preach the Gospel to
every Creature, Mark 16. 15. So that there was no part of the world, nor any
Creature in the same, (that is to say, no Rational Creature) which seems to be
excluded from a possibility of obtaining Salvation by the Preaching of the
Gospel to them, if with a faith unfeigned they believed the same. Which the
Church further teaches us in this following Prayer, appointed to be used in
the Ordering of such as are called unto the Office of the Holy Priesthood; viz.
'Almighty God and Heavenly Father, which of thine Infinite Love and Goodness
toward us, have given to us thy Only and Most Dear Beloved Son Jesus Christ, to
be our Redeemer and Author of Everlasting Life; who after he had made perfect
our Redemption by his Death, and was ascended into Heaven, sent forth abroad
into the world, his Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Doctors and Pastors, by
whose Labor and Ministry, he gathered together a great Frock in all the Parts
of the World, to set forth the Eternal Praise of his Holy Name: For these so
great Benefits of thy Eternal Goodness, and for that thou have vouchsafed to
call thy Servant here present to the same Office and Ministry of Salvation of
Mankind, we render unto thee most hearty thinks, and we worship, and preise
thee; and we humbly beseech thee, by the same, thy Son, to grant unto all,
which either here, or elsewhere call upon thy name, that we may show our selves
thankful to thee for these and all other thy benefits; and that we may daily
increase and go forward in the knowledge and faith of thee and thy Son, by the
Holy Spirit: So that as well by these thy Ministers, as by them to whom they
shall be appointed Ministers, thy Holy Name may be always glorified; and thy
Blessed Kingdom enlarged, through the same, thy Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, who
lives and reigns with thee in the Unity of the same Holy Spirit, world
without end, Amen.' Which Form in Ordering and Consecrating Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons (I note this only by the way) being drawn up by those which had
the making of the first Liturgy of King Edward the sixth, and confirmed by Act
of Parliament in the fifth and sixth of the said King, was afterward also
ratified by Act of Parliament in the eighth year of Queen Elizabeth, and ever
since has had its place amongst the Public Monuments and Records of the
Church of England.

7. To these I shall only add one single testimony out of the Writings of
each of the three godly Martyrs before remembered, the point being so clearly
stated by some of our Divines, commonly called Calvinists (though not by the
Outlandish, also) that any longer insisting on it may be thought unnecessary:
First then, Bishop Cranmer tells us in the Preface to his Book against Gardener
of Winchester aforementioned, 'That our Savior Christ, according to the will
of his Eternal Father, when the time thereof was fully accomplished, taking our
nature upon him, came into this World, from the high Throne of his Father, to
declare unto miserable sinners the Goodness, etc. To show that the time of
Grace and Mercy was come, to give light to them that were in darkness, and in
the shadow of death, and to preach and give Pardon and full Remission of sin to
all his Elected: And to perform the same, he made a Sacrifice and Oblation of
his body upon the Cross, which was a full Redemption, Satisfaction and
Propitiation for the sins of the whole world.' More briefly Bishop Latimer
thus, Sermon. 1 Sund. after Epiph.
'The Evangelist says, When Jesus was born, etc. What is Jesus? Jesus is an
Hebrew word, which signifies in our English Tongue a Savior and Redeemer of
all Mankind born into the World. This Title and Name To save, appertains
properly and principally unto him; for he saved us; else had we been lost for
ever.' Bishop Ho^per in more Pref. to the ten Commandm.
words to the same effect, 'That as the sins of Adam, without Privilege or
Exemption, extended and appertained unto all and every of Adams Posterity; so
did this Promise of Grace generally appertain as well to every and singular of
Adams Posterity as to Adam; as it is more plainly expressed, where God
promises to bless in the seed of Abraham, all the people of the world.'

8. Next for the point of Universel Vocation, and the extent of the Promises
touching life Eternal: Besides what was observed before from the Public
Liturgy, we find some Testimonies and Authorities also in the Book of
Homilies. In one whereof it is declared, That God received the learned and
unlearned, Hom. of Holy Scrip. p. 5.
and casts away none, but is indifferent unto all. And in another place more
largely, that the imperfection or natural sickness taken in Adam, excludes not
that person from the promise of God in Christ, except we transgress the limits
and bounds of this Original sin, by our own folly and malice; If we have
Christ, then have we with him, and by him all good Hom. against fear of death,
p. 62.
things whatsoever we can in our hearts wish or desire; as, victory over death,
sin, hell, etc. The truth hereof is more clearly evidenced in the writings of
the godly Martyrs so often mentioned; as first of Bishop Latimer, who
discourses thus: 'We learn, says he, by this sentence, that multi sunt
vocati, that many are called, etc. that the preaching of the Gospel is
universal, that it appertains to all mankind, that it is written in omnem
terram exivit so^us eorum, through the whole world Sermon. Septuag.
their sound is heard. Now seeing that the Gospel is universal, it appears
that he would have all mankind be saved; that the fault is not in him if they
be damned; for it is written thus, Deus vult omnes homines salvos fieri, God
would have all mankind saved; his Salvation is sufficient to save all
mankind. Thus also in another place, That the promises of Christ our Savior
are general, they appertain to all mankind: He made a general Proclamation,
saying, Qui credit 1 S^^m. Lincol.
in me, habet vitam aeternam, whosoever believes me, has eternal life -- 'And
not long after in the same Sermon, 'That we must Hook. Pref. to Common.
^ consider wisely what he says with his own mouth, Venite ad me omnes, etc.
Mark here, he says, mark here, he says, Come all ye; wherefore should any
body despai^, or shut out himself from the promises of Christ, which be
general, and appertain to the whole world?' The like says Bishop Hooper also,
Pref. to his Exposition.
telling us, 'There was no diversity in Christ of Jew or Gentile; that it was
never forbid, but that all sorts of people, and every progeny of the world, to
be made partakers of the Jews Religion.' And then again in the example of the
Ninivites: 'Thou have, says he, good Christian Reader, the mercy of God, and
general promise of salvation performed in Christ, for whose sake only God and
man were set at one.'

9. The less assistance we had from Bishop Hooper in the former points, the
more we shall receive in this, touching the causes why this great benefit is
not made effectual unto all alike: Concerning which, he lets us know, 'That to
the obtaining Ibid.
the first end of his justice, he allureth as many as be not utterly wicked,
and may be helped, partly with threatenings, and partly with promises, and so
provokes them unto amendment or life, etc. and would have all men to be saved;
therefore provokes now by fair means, now by foul, that the sinner should
satisfy his just and righteous pleasure; not that the promises of God
appertain to such as will not repent, or his threatenings unto him that does
repent; but these means he uses to save his creature; this way uses he to
nurture us, until such time as the Holy Spirit works such a perfection in us,
that we will obey him, though there were neither pain nor joy mentioned at all
-- 'And in another place more briefly, 'That if either out of a contempt or
hate of Gods Word we fall into sin, and transform our selves into the image of
the Devil, then we exclude our selves by this means from the promises and
merits of Christ.' Bishop Latimer to the same point also: 'His Salvation is
sufficient to satisfy for all the world, as concerning Sermon. 1. Sund. after
Epiph.
it self; but as concerning us, he saves no more than such as put their trust
in him; and as many as believe in him shall be saved; the other shall be cast
out as Infidels into everlasting damnation; not for lack of salvation, but for
infidelity and lack of faith, which is the only cause of their damnation.' One
word more out of Bishop Hooper to conclude thi^ point; which in fine is this,
'To the Objection (says he) touching that S. Peter speaks of such as shall
perish for their false doctrine, etc. this the Scripture answers, that the
promise of grace appertains to every sort of men in the world, and
comprehends them all, howbeit within certain limits and bounds, the which if
men neglect to pass over, they exclude themselves from the promise of Christ.'

CHAP. XI. Of the Heavenly influences of Gods grace in the Conversion of a
sinner, and man's cooperation with those heavenly influences.
1. I The Doctrine of Deserving Grace ex congruo, maintained in the Roman
Schools before the Council of Trent, rejected by our ancient Martyrs, and the
Book of Articles. 2. The judgment of Dr. Barns and Mr. Tyndall, touching the
necessary workings of Gods grace on the will of man, not different from that of
the Church of England. 3. Universal grace maintained by Bishop Hooper, and
proved by some passages in the Liturgy and Book of Homilies. 4. The offer of
Universal grace made ineffectual to some, for want of faith; and to others, for
want of repentance, according to the judgment of Bishop Hooper. 5. The
necessity of Grace Preventing, and the free cooperation of man's will being so
prevented, maintained in the Articles, in the Homilies, and the public
Liturgy. 6. The necessity of this cooperation on the part of man, defended,
and applied to the exercise of a godly life, by Bishop Hooper. 7. The Doctrine
of Irresistibility, first broached by Calvin, pertinaciously maintained by most
of his followers, and by Gomarus amongst others. 8. Gainsaid by Bishop Hooper,
and Bishop Latimer. 9. And their gainsayings justified by the tenth Article of
Kings Edwards Books. And 10. The Book of Homilies.

1. THis leads me unto the Disputes touching the influences of Grace, and the
cooperation of man's will with those heavenly influences, in which the received
Doctrine of the Church of Rome seems to have had some alteration to the better,
since the debating and concluding of those points in the Council of Trent;
before which time the Doctrine of the Roman Schools was thought to draw too
near to the lees of Pelagianism, to ascribe too much to man's Freewill, or so
much to it, at the least, as by the right use of the powers of nature, might
merit grace ex congruo (as the Schoolmen phrase it) of the hands of God.
Against this it was that Dr. Barns declared, as before was said in his
Discourse about Freewill; and against which the Church of England then declared
in the 13 Article, affirming, That such works as are done before the grace of
Christ, and the inspiration of his Spirit, His works, p. 321.
do not make men meet to receive grace; or (as the Schoolmen say) deserve grace
of Congruity. Against which Tyndall gives this note, That Freewill preventeth
not Grace; which certainly he had never done, if somewhat to the contrary had
not been delivered in the Church of Rome; and against which it was declared by
John Lambert, another of our ancient Martyrs, in these following words; viz.
Concerning Freewill (says he) I mean altogether as does S. Augustine, that of
our selves we have no liberty nor ability to do the will of God, but are
subject unto sir, Acts and Mon. fol. 1009.
and thrals of the same, conclusi sub peccato; or as witnesses S. Paul; But by
the grace of God we are rid and set at liberty, according to the proportion
that every man has taken of the same, some more, some less.

2. But none more fully showed himself against this opinion then Dr. Barns
before remembered; not touching only on the by, but writing a Discourse
particularly against the errors of Collection of his works by I. D. fol. 266.
that time in this very point: 'But here (says he) we will search what
strength is of man in his natural power, without the Spirit of God, to will or
do those things that be acceptable before God, unto the fulfilling of the will
of God, etc.' A search which had been vain and needless, if nothing could be
found which tended to the maintenance of acting in spiritual matters, by man's
natural power, without the workings of the Spirit: And therefore he says very
truly, 'That man can do nothing by his Freewil, as Christ teaches ( For
without me ye can do nothing, etc.) where it is opened, that Freewil without
Grace can do nothing (he speaks not of eating and drinking, though they be
works of Grace) but nothing that is fruitful, that is meritorious, that is
worthy of thanks, that is acceptable before God.' To which effect we also find
these brief Remembrances, Man's Freewil without Gods Grace, can do nothing that
is good, p. 263. that all which Freewil can do without Grace, is but sin, etc.
fol, 269. In which passages of those godly Martyrs, as there is nothing in it
self not Divine and Orthodox, so find we somewhat in their writings, which
does as truly and Religiously express the workings of Gods Spirit in the heart
of man, without depriving him of the ability of cooperation, which afterward
was taught and countenanced by the Church of England: Of which thus Tyndall in
his Pathway; 'When the Evangelion is prearhed (says he) the Spirit of God
enters Collection of his works, fol. 382.
into them whom God has ordained and appointed to Everlasting life, and
opens their inward eyes, and works such a belief in them, when the woeful
Consciences feel and taste how sweet a thing the bitter death of Christ is, and
how merciful and loving God is through Christ's Purchasing and Merits, so that
they begin to love again, and consent to the Law of God, how that it is good,
and ought so to be, and that God is righteous that made it, and desire to
fulfill the Law, as a sick man desires to be whole.' According to which
Doctrine, the 19 Sund. after Trin.
Church has taught us to pray thus; viz. 'O God, forasmuch as without thee we
are not able to please thee, grant that that working of the Spirit may in all
things direct and rule our hearts, through Christ our Lord, Amen.' More of
which Prayers might be produced to the same effect, were not this enough; the
point concerning the necessity of Gods grace toward man's Conversion, not being
in Dispute between the Parties.

3. Now for Gods Grace, according as it is set forth in the Church of England,
we shall consider it in the general offer and extent, the efficacious workings
of it, and the concurrence of man's will in the beginning and accomplishment of
his own Conversion: And first, as to the general offer of the Grace of God, we
find Bishop Hooper thus discoursing in the sixth Chapter of his Exposition of
the Ten Commandments: 'Thus did S. Paul (says he) convince the Gentiles of
sin, because they knew the evil they did was condemned by the testimony of
their own Conscience; for the Law of God to do well by, is naturally written in
the heart of every man: He that will diligently search himself, shall sometime
find the same; and in case Exposi. cap. 6.
man should behold his own misery both in body and soul, although there were no
Law correcting, nor no Heavens over our heads to testify the justice and
judgment of God, and the equity of an honest life, man's Conscience would tell
him when he does well, and when he does evil -- ' 'Further (says he) the
judgment and discovery of Reason, directs not only to live just in this
world, but also to live for ever in Eternal Felicity without end: And that
comes by the similitude of God which remains in the soul since the sin of
Adam; whereby we plainly see, that those excuses of ignorance be damnable, when
man sees that he could do well if he followed the judgment of his own
Conscience.' Our Articles indeed say nothing to this particular, but our
Liturgy does; and somewhat is found also of it in the Book of Homilies: For
what can be more clear and full than that clause in the Collect, where it is
said of God Almighty, That he shows to all men being in error, the light of
his truth, to the intent they may return to the way of righteousness, etc. What
more comfortable to a man deprived of the outward benefit of the Word and
Sacraments, than that clause in the Homily, where it is said, That if we lack a
Learned man to instruct and teach us, God himself from above ^xportation ^^
Holy (...).
will give light unto our minds, and teach us those things which are necessary
for us.

4. If then it be demanded, How it comes to pass that this general Overture of
Grace becomes so little efficacious in the hearts of men? we shall find Bishop
Hooper ascribing it in some men to the lack of faith; and in others, to the
want of repentance: Touching the first; he tells us this, 'That S. Paul
concludes, and in a manner includes the Divine Grace and Pres. to the Exposi.
of the Law.
Promise of God with in certain terms and limits; that only Christ should be
profitable and efficacious to those that apprehend and receive this abundant
Grace by faith; and to such as have not the use of faith, neither Christ, nor
Gods Grace to appertain.' After which he proceeds in this manner toward the
other sort of men, which make not a right use of this general Grace for want of
Repentance: 'Howbeit (says he) that Idi Ib.
we know by the Scripture, that notwithstanding this imperfection of faith,
many shall be saved; and likewise, notwithstanding that Gods pro(...) be
general, unto all people of the world, yet many shall be damned. These two
points must therefore diligently be discussed; first, how this faith being
unperfect, is accepted of God; then, how we be excluded from the promise of
grace that extends to all men etc. To which first it is thus answered, That
S. Paul, S. John, and Christ himself, damneth the contemnets of God, or such as
willingly continue in sin, and will not repent; these the Scripture excludes
from the general promise of Grace.'

5. Here then we have the Doctrine of the Church of England delivered in the
Liturgy, and the Book of Homilies, more punctually pressed and applied in the
words of godly Bishop Hooper* concerning Universal Grace, and somewhat also of
the reasons of its not being efficacious in all sorts of men, relating to that
liberty which remains in man, of closing or contending with it, as he is either
ruled by reason, or else misguided by the tyranny of his lusts and passions.
But before I come unto this point, we may behold the necessary workings of Gods
Grace, preventing man by the inspirations of his holy Spirit, and the
concurrence or cooperation of man's will being so prevented, which is the
Celestial influences of the Grace of God: Of which the Church has spoke so
fully in all the Authentic Monuments and Records thereof, that no true English
Protestant can make question of it: For thus she tells us in the tenth Article
of her Confession; viz. That the condition of man after Artic. 10.
the fall of Adam, is such, that he cannot turn and prepare himself by his own
natural strength and good works, to faith and calling upon God: Wherefore we
have no power to do good works pleasant and acceptable unto God, without the
Grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we may have a good will, and working
with us, when we have that good will. In the first clause the Church declares
her self against the old Pelagians, and some of the great Schoolmen in the
Church of Rome; and in the last, against the Maniches, and some of the more
rigid Lutherans in the Churches Protestant, which make man in the work of his
own Conversion to be no other than a Statue, or a senseless stock: Contrary
whereunto we are instructed in the Homily exhorting to Exhort. to the reading
of the Scrip. p. 6.
the reading of Holy Scripture, to use all possible endeavors in our own
Salvation. If we read once, twice, or thrice, and understand not, let us not
cease so, but still continue reading, praying, asking of other men, and so by
still knocking, at last the door shall be opened (as S. Augustine has it)
which counsel had been vain and idle, if man were not invested with a liberty
of complying with it. More plainly is the same expressed in many of our Public
Prayers, as partly in the Collect for Easter Day; in which we humbly beseech
Almighty God, That Collect for Easterday.
as by his special Grace preventing us, he does put in our mind good desires,
so by his continual Fellowship, that he would bring the same to good effect.
And in that on the sevententh Sunday after Trinity, That his Grace may always
prevent and follow us and make us continually to be given to all good works.
But most Col. after T^in.
significantly we have it in one of the Collects after the Communion, that
namely in which we pray to the Lord, To prevent us in all our doings by his
most gracious favor, and further us with Col. before the Communion.
his continual help, that in all our works begun, and continued in him, we may
so glorify his holy Name, that finally, by his mercy, we may obtain life
everlasting, through Christ Jesus our Lord. So that upon the whole matter it
needs must follow, that as we can do nothing acceptable in the sight of God,
without Grace preventing; so by the freedom of man's will, cooperating with the
Grace preventing, and by the subsequent Grace of God Cooperating with the will
of man, we have a power of doing such works as are agreeable to the will of our
Heavenly Father.

6. Now to this Plain Song of the Articles, the Homilies, and the Public
Liturgy, it may be thought superfluous to make a descant, or add the light of
any Commentary to so clear a Text. And yet I cannot baulk some passages in
Bishop Hooper, which declare his judgment in the point; where he not only
speaks of man's concurrence or cooperation with the Grace of God, but lays his
whole damnation on the want thereof: 'Look not therefore (says he) on the
promises of God, but also what diligence and obedience he requires of thee,
lest Preface to his Exposition, etc.
thou exclude thy self from the promise: There was promised to all those that
went out of Egypt with Moses, the Land of Canaan; howbeit, for disobedience of
Gods Commandments, there were but one or two that entered.' This he affords in
his Preface, and more than this in his tenth Chapter of the Exposition,
relating to the common pretense of Ignorance: 'For though (says he) thou can
not come to so far knowledge in the Scripture as others that believe, by reason
thou art unlearned, or else thy vocation will not suffer thee all days of thy
^^^e to be a student, yet must thou know, and upon pain of damnation art bound
to know God in Christ, and the Holy Catholic Church; by the Word written, the
Ten Commandments, Hoop. cap. dign.
to know what works thou should do, and what to leave undone; the Pater
noster, Christ his Prayer, which is an Abridgement, Epitome, or compendious
Collection of all the Psalms and Prayers written in the whole Scripture, in the
which thou prayest for the remission of sin, as well for thy self, as for all
others, desire the Grace of the Holy Ghost to preserve thee in virtue, give
thanks for the goodness of God toward thee and all other. He that knows less
than this, cannot be saved; and he that knows no more than this, if he follow
his knowledge, cannot be damned.'

7. But the main Controversy in the point of man's Conversion, moves upon this
hinge; that is to say, Whether the influences of Gods Grace be so strong and
powerful, that withal they are absolutely irresistible, so that it is not
possible for the will of man not to consent unto the same. Calvin first harped
upon this string, and all his followers since have danced to the tune thereof,
Illud toties a Chrysostomo repetitum repudiari necesse Calv. Institut. lib. 2.
cap. 3.
est, Quem trahit, volentem trahit, quo insinuat Dominum porrecta tantum manu
expectare an suo auxilio juvari nobis adlubescat. These words (says he) so
often repeated by Chrysostom; viz. That God draws none but such as are willing
to go, are to be condemned, the Father intimating by those words, that God
expects only with an outstretched and ready arm, whether we be willing or
not: In which though he does not express clearly the good Fathers meaning, yet
he plainly does declare his own, insinuating, that God draws men forcibly, and
against their will to his Heavenly Kingdom. Gomarus, one of later Declar. p. 20.
date, and a chief stickler in these Controversies, comes up more fully to the
sense which Calvin drives at: For putting the question in this manner, An
gratia hac datur vi irresistibili, id est; efficaci operatione DEI, ita ut
voluntas ejus qui regeneratur, facultatem non habeat illi resistendi? He
answers presently, Credo and profiteor ita esse; that is to say, his question
is, 'Whether the Grace of God be given in an irresistible manner; that is to
say, with such an efficacious operation, that the will of him who is to be
regenerated has not the power to make resistance?' And then the answer follows
thus, ' I believe and profess it to be so.' More of which kind might be
produced from other Authors, but that this serves sufficiently to set forth a
Doctrine which is so little countenanced by the burning and most shining lights
of the Church of England.

8. Beginning first with Bishop Hooper, we shall find it thus: Pref. ^o his
Exp.
'It is not (says he) a Christian man's part to attribute his salvation to his
own Freewil, with the Pelagian, and extenuate Original sin, nor to make God the
Author of ill and damnation, with the Maniche; nor yet to say, that God has
written Fatal Laws, and with necessity of Destiny, violently pulls the one by
the hair into heaven, and thrusts the other headlong into hell, etc. More
fully in his gloss on the text of Saint John, viz. No man comes to me except
my Father draw him, chap. 6. 44. Many, says he, understand these words in a
wrong sense, as if God required no more in a reasonable man than in a dead
post, and mark not the words which follow, Every man that hears, and learneth
of my Father, comes unto me, etc. God draws with his Word and the holy
Ghost, but man's duty is to hear and learn; that is to say, to receive the grace
offered, consent to the promise, and not to impugn the God that calls.' More
fully, but to the same purpose also speaks Bishop Latimer, 'Gods salvation,
says he, is sufficient to save all mankind; But we are so wicked of our
selves, that we refuse the same; and we will not take it Sermon. on Septu. fol.
214.
when it is offered unto us, and therefore he says, pauci vero electi, few are
chosen; that is, few have pleasure and delight in it, for the most part are
weary of it, cannot abide it; and there are some that hear it, but they will
abide no danger for it -- And in few lines after thus, Such men are cause of
their own damnation; for God would have them saved, but they refuse it, like
Judas the traitor whom Christ would have had to be saved, but he refused his
salvation, he refused to follow the Doctrine of his Master Christ.' The like
occurs in another place of the same Sermon, where we find 'that seeing the
preaching of the Gospel is universal, it appears that God would have all
mankind saved; and that the fault is not in him if they be damned; For thus it
is written, Deus vult omnes homines salvos fieri, God would have all men to be
saved, but we are so wicked of our selves that we refuse the same, and will not
take notice of it when it is offered.'

9. And here for strength and confirmation unto all the rest, we are to know
that these two godly Martyrs have delivered no other Doctrine than what is
positively expressed, or may be rationally inferred both from the tenth Article
of King Edwards Book, and the Book of Homilies. And first for the tenth Article
of King Edwards Book, it is this that follows, viz. Gratia Christi, sive
Spiritus Sanctus qui per eundem datur, cor lapideum aufert, and dat cor
^arneum. Atque licet ex nol ^tibus quae recta sunt, volentes faciat, and ex
vole^tibus prava, nolentes reddat; Voluntati tamen nullam violentiam infert,
and n^mo hac de causa cum pe caverit, ut eam ob causum, accusari non meretaur
aut damnar. That is to say. -- 'The Grace of Christ, or the Holy Ghost which is
given by him, does take from man the heart of stone, and gives him a heart of
flesh; And though it renders us willing to do those good works which before we
were unwilling to do, and unwilling to do those evil works which before we did;
yet is no violence offered by it to the will of man; so that no man when he
has sinned can excuse himself, as if he had sinned against his will, or upon
constraint; and therefore that he ought not to be accused or condemned upon
that account.' The composition of which Article does most clearly show that our
first Reformers did as little countenance that Doctrine of the Irresistibility
of Gods grace in its workings on the will of man, which the Calvinians now
contend for, as they did the Dreams and Dotages of some Zuinglian Gospellers,
into whose writings if we look, we shall easily find that Gods divine
Predestination, is by them made the cause of sin, by which men are
necessitated and compelled to those acts of wickedness which they so
frequently commit; By the virtue of Gods will, says one, all things are done
yea even those things which are evil and execrable. By Gods Predestination,
says another, we are compelled to do those things for which we are damned, as
will appear more fully in the sixteenth Chapter, when the extravagancies of the
Predestina^ians come to be considered. And it is probable enough, that to
encounter with these monstrous Paradoxes of the Zuinglian Gospellers, this
Article was first composed; in which Provision seems to have been made against
all those who taught that men sinned against their wills, or upon constraint,
or that men might excuse themselves from the blame thereof upon that
consideration. If any of the Calvinian factions can find any thing in this
Article against Arminianisme, (as they call it) or in defense of the
determining of the will by converting grace, or the consistency of the freedom
or liberty of the will, much good may it do them. But then they should think
themselves obliged to give a better reason, than I think they can, why: this
Article is not to be found in the Book as now it is printed. Either this
Article was not made in favor of Calvinisme, when it was published with the
rest in King Edwards time; or the Reformers of the Church under Queen Elizabeth
were no friends to Calvinisme in causing it to be left out in the second Book,
Anno 1562. to which subscription is required by the Laws of the Land.

10. Proceed we next unto the Book of Homilies; in the one of which we find
this passage 'that few of the proud, learned, wife, Hom. of the Mis. of Man. p.
10.
perfect and holy Pharisees were saved by Christ, because they justified
themselves by their counterfeit holiness before men. -- ' And in another thus.
'But the corrupt inclination of man was so much given to follow his own fancies
(and as Hom. of good works. p. 33.
you would say) to favor his own b^rd, that he worships himself, that all the
admonitions, exhortations, benefits, and the precepts of God, could not keep
him from their intent on.' More clearly and expressly in another place, where
after the recitation of some pious duties by God commended to the Jews, the
Homily proceeds in this manner following: 'But these things they passed not of,
they turned their backs and went their way; they stopped their ears that they
might not hear, and they hardened their hearts as an adamant stone, that 1. p.
of the Ser. of falling from God, p. 53.
they might not listen to the Law, and the words that the Lord had sent through
his holy Spirit: wherefore the Lord showed his great indignation upon them. It
came to pass (says the Prophet) even as I told them, and they would not hear,
so when they cried they were not heard, but were scattered into all Kingdoms,
which they never knew, and their land was made desolate. And to be short, all
they that may not abide the Word of God, but following the persuasions and
stubbornness of their own hearts, go backward, and not forward (as is said in
Jeremy) they go and turn away from God.' Nor is this spoken only of such a
temporary resistance as may be overcome at last by the unconquerable power of
the Spirit of God? but even of such an obstinate and perverse resistance, as in
the end will lead the way to a final Apostasy, an unrecoverable forsaking of
God, and being as irrecoverably forsaken by him: Of which we shall speak more
at large in the fifth and last Article, concerning the uncertainty of
perseverance.

CHAP. XII. The Doctrine of Freewil agreed upon by the Clergy in their
Convocation, An. 1543.
1. OF the Convocation holden in the year, 1543. in order to the Reformation of
Religion in points of Doctrine. 2. The Article of Freewil in all the powers and
workings of it, agreed on by the Prelates and Clergy of that Convocation,
agreeable to the present Doctrine of the Church of England. 3. An Answer to the
first Objection concerning the Popishness of the Bishops and Clergy in that
Convocation. 4. The Article of Freewil approved by King Henry the eighth, and
Archbishop Cranmer. 5. An Answer to the last Objection concerning the
Conformity of the Article to the present Established Doctrine in the Church of
Rome.

1. BUt First, I am to take in my way another evidence, which though it has
not so directly the force of Law to bind us to consent unto it, and perhaps
may not be considered amongst the Monuments and Records of the Reformation; yet
it speaks plainly the full sense of our first Reformers. I speak this of a
pithy, but short Discourse, touching the nature of Freewil, contained amongst
some others, in the Book published by the Authority of King Henry the eighth,
in the year, 1543. entitled, A necessary Doctrine and Erudition for all
Christian men: Concerning which, as we have spoke at large already in Chap. 8.
of this Work, so now we must add something touching this particular, of which
there was no notice taken in the Bishops Book: For when the Bishops Book, which
had been printed in the year, 1537. under the title of An Institution for a
Christian man, had for some time continued without alteration, it was brought
under the review of the Bishops and Clergy assembled in their Convocation,
anno 1543. and having been reviewed in all the parts and members of it, a
particular Treatise touching the nature of Freewil, which in those times had
exercised the greatest wits: Of which I find this Memorandum in the Acts of
the Convocation; that is to say, That on Monday, being the last of April, Lecto
and public exposuo Articulo Liberi Arburii Art. of Confess. 1543. April. uit
in vulgari, etc. The Article of Fre^wil being read, and publicly expounded
in the English Tongue, the most Reverend Archbishops delivered it into the
hands of the Prolocutor, to the end that he should publish it before the Clerks
of the lower House of Convocation, as is accustomed in such cases, Quo lecto,
and per eos approbato; which being read and approved by them, it was returned
with the residue to the upper House of Convocation, with this Approbation, Quod
pro Catholicis and Religiosis acceperunt, n^c non gratias in gentes patribus
egerunt, qu^d tan^^s labores, sudores, and vigilias Religionis and Reipublicae
causa, and unitatis gratia subicra^t; that is to say, that they embraced them
all for sound and Orthodox, rendering unto the Fathers there most humble thanks
for the great care and pains which they had undertaken for the good of the
Church and Commonwealth, and the preserving of peace and unity amongst the
people. Which passage I have at large laid down, to show by whose hands, and by
what Authority, as well the Book it self, which we have spoken of before, as
this particular Treatise in it, was at first fashioned and set forth. And that
being said, I shall first present the Treatise or Discourse it self, and after
Answer such Objections as either prejudice or partiality may devise against it.
Now the Article follows in hac verba.

The Article of Freewil.
2. THe Commandments and threatenings of Almighty God in Scripture, whereby man
is called upon, and put in remembrance what God would have him to do, most
evidently do express and declare, that man has Free Will also now after Romans
12. ^ Tim. 4. 1 John. 2. Matthew. 19.
the fall of our first father Adam, as plainly appears in these places
following. Be not overcome of evil, neglect not the grace that is in thee; Love
not the world, etc. If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments. Which
undoubtedly should be said in vain, unless there were some faculty or power
left in man, whereby he may by the help and grace of God (if he will receive
it, when it is offered him) understand his Commandments, and freely consent
unto and obey them: which thing of the Catholic Fathers is called Free Will,
which if we will describe, we may call it conveniently in all men, A certain
power of the Will joined with Reason, whereby a reasonable creature, without
constraint in things of Reason, discerns and wills good and evil; but it
wills not the good which is acceptable to God, except it be helped with
Grace; but that which is ill it wills of it self. And therefore other men
define Free Will in this wise; Free Will is a power and Reason of Will by which
good is chosen by the assistance of Grace, as evil is chosen without the
assistance of the same.

Howbeit the state and condition of Free Will was otherwise in our first
Parents, before they sinned, than it was either in them or their Posterity
after they had sinned. For our first Parents, Adam and Eve, until they wounded
and overthrew themselves by sin, had so in possession the said power of
Free Will by the most liberal gift and grace of God their Maker, that not only
they might eschew all manner of sin, but also know God and love him, and
fulfill all things appertaining to their felicity and welfare; For they were
made righteous, and to the image and similitude of God, having power of
Free Will ( as Chrysostom says) to obey or disobey; so that by obedience
Eccles. 16.
they might live, and by disobedience they should worthily deserve to die. For
the wise man affirms of them that the state of them was of this sort in the
beginning, saying thus, God in the beginning did create man, and left him in
the hands of his own counsel, he gave unto him his precepts and commandments,
saying, If thou will keep these Commandments, they shall preserve thee; He has
set before thee fire and water, put forth thine hands to whither thou will;
before man is life and death, good and evil; what him lists, that shall he
have. From this most happy estate our first Parents falling by disobedience,
most grievously hurted themselves and their posterity; for besides many other
evils that came by that transgression, the high power of man's Reason and
Freedom of will were wounded and corrupted, and all men thereby brought into
such blindness and infirmity, that they cannot eschew sin, except they be made
free and illuminated by an especial grace, that is say, by a supernatural help
and working of the holy Ghost, which although the goodness of God offers to
all men, yet they only enjoy it, which by their Free Will do accept and embrace
the same.

Nor they also that be helped by the said grace can accomplish and perform
things that be for their wealth, but with much labor and endeavor: So great
is in our nature the corruption of the first sin, and the heavy burden
bearing us down to evil. For truly albeit the light of Reason does abide, yet
is it much darkened, and with much difficulty does discern: things that be
inferior, and pertain to this present life; but to understand and perceive
things that be spiritual, and pertain to that everlasting life, it is of it
self unable. And so likewise there remains a certain freedom of the will in
those things which do pertain unto the desires and works of this present life;
yet to perform spiritual and heavenly things, Free Will of it self is
unsufficient; and therefore the power of man's Free Will being thus wounded and
decayed, has need of a Physician to heal it; and one help to repair it, that
it may receive light and strength, whereby it may be so, and have power to do
those godly and spiritual things which before the fall of Adam it was able and
might have done.

To this blindness and infirmity of man's nature, proceeding of Original sin
the Prophet David has regard, when he desired his eyes to be lightened of
Almighty God, that he might consider the mavelous things that be in his Law.
And also Psalm. 115.
the Prophet Jeremy saying, Heal me O Lord, and I shall be made whole.
Augustine also plainly declares the same, saying, Jer. 16.
We conclude that Free Will is in man after his fall, which thing who so
denies, is not a Catholic man; but in spiritual desires and works to please
God, it is so weak and feeble, that it cannot either begin or perform them,
unless by the Grace and help of God it be prevented and helped. And hereby it
appears that man's strength and Will in all things which be helpful to the
soul, and shall please God, has need of the graces of the holy Ghost, by which
such things be inspired to men, and strength and constancy given to perform
them, if we do not wilfully refuse the said Grace offered to them.

And likewise as many things be in the Scripture which do show Free Will to be
in man; so there be now fewer places in Scripture which declare the Grace of
God to be so necessary, that if by it Free Will be not prevented and helped, it
neither can do, nor will any thing good and godly, of which sort be these
Scriptures following, Without me you can do nothing: no man John 15. Jon. 6. 1
Cor. 3.
comes to me except it be given him of my Father. We be not sufficient of our
selves as of our selves to think any good thing. According unto which
Scriptures and such other like it follows, That Free Will, before it may will
or think any godly thing, must be helped with the grace of Christ, and by his
Spirit be prevented and inspired that it may be able thereunto. And being so
made able, may from thenceforth work together with grace; and by the same
sustained, helped and maintained, may, does accomplish good works, and avoid
sin, and persevere also, and increase in grace; It is true of the grace of
God only that first we are inspired and moved to any good thing: but to resist
temptations, and to persist in goodness and go forward, it is both of the
Grace of God and our Free Will and endeavor. And finally after we have
persevered unto the end, to be crowned with glory therefore, is the gift and
mercy of God, who of his bountiful goodness has ordained that reward to be
given after this life according to such good works as be done in this life by
his Grace.

Therefore men ought with much diligence and gratitude of mind to consider and
regard the inspiration, wholesome motions of the holy Ghost, and to embrace the
Grace of God which is offered to them in Christ, and moves them ^o work good
things. And furthermore to go about by all means to show themselves such, as
unto whom the Grace of God is not given in vain. And when they do settle, that
notwithstanding their diligence, yet through their infirmity they be not able
to do that they desire, then they ought earnestly and with a fervent devotion
and steadfast faith to ask of him, which gave the beginning, that he would
vouchsafe to perform it: which thing God will undoubtedly grant, according to
his promise, to such as persevere in calling upon him. For he is naturally
good, and wills all men to be saved, and cares for them, and provideth all
things by which they may be saved, except BY THEIR OWN MALICE they will be
evil, and so by the righteous judgment of God, perish and be lost. For truly
men be to themselves the AUTHOR OF SIN and DAMNATION. God is neither the AUTHOR
of SIN, nor the CAUSE OF DAMNATION. And yet does he most righteously damn
those men, that do with vices corrupt their nature, which he made good, and do
abuse the same to evil desires, against his most holy will; wherefore men be to
be warned, that they do not impute to God their vice, or their damnation; but
to themselves, who by Free Will have abused the grace and benefits of God. All
men be also to be monished, and chiefly Preachers, that in this high matter
they looking on both sides, so attemper and moderate themselves, that neither
they so preach the Grace of God, as to take away thereby Free Will; Nor on the
other side so extol Free Will, that injury be done to the grace of God.

3. Such was the judgment of the Bishops and Clergy assembled in Convocation,
An. 1543. touching the nature of Free Will, and the co-operations of it with
the grace of God; In which I can see nothing not agreeable to the present
established Doctrine of the Church of England. And if it be objected, as perhaps
it may, that this Convocation was held in times of Popery, and managed by a
Popish Clergy; it may be answered that the Bishops and Clergy then assembled
were such as had a principal hand in the Reformation, and generally subscribed
unto the Articles of Religion, agreed upon, and published in King Edwards time,
Anno 1552. At which time fifteen of the Bishops which had been present at the
Convocation, Anno 1543. were not only living, but present, and consenting to
the Articles in King Edwards time, that is to say, Cranmer Archbishop of
Canterbury; Parfew, Bishop of Saint Asaph; Buchely, Bishop of Bangor; Bush,
Bishop of Bristol; Sampson, Bishop of Litchfield; Butler, Bishop of Saint
David; Goodrich, Bishop of Elie; Ship, Bishop of Hereford; Folgate, Bishop of
Landaff, and afterward Archbishop of York; King, Bishop of Oxon; Chambers,
Bishop of Peterborough; Cepon, Bishop of Sarum; Thi^bly, then Bishop of
Westminster; Aldrich, then Bishop of Caerlile; and Bird, Bishop of Chester: By
which proportion, we may conclude that a far greater number of the Deans and
Archdeacons, who have a personal right of voting in all Convocations, and
coming to the number of eighty and thereabouts, must be living and consenting
also to the Reformation, as being younger men than the Bishops were; not to say
any thing of the Clerks or Procurates of Cathedral Churches, and those of the
Diocesan Clergy, as being variable and changeable from time to time, though
possibly a great part of them might be present and consenting also, 1552. Nor
stood this Book nor the Article of Free Will therein contained, upon the order
and authority only of this Convocation, but had as good countenance and
encouragement to walk abroad as could be superadded to it by an Act of
Parliament, as appears plainly by the Kings Preface to that Book, and the Act
it self, to which for brevity sake I refer the Reader.

4. But if it be replied, that there is no relying on the Acts of Parliament
which were generally swayed, changed, and overruled by the power and passions
of the King; and that the Act of Parliament which approved this Book, was
repealed in the first year of King Edward the sixth, as indeed it was: we might
refer the Reader to a passage in the Kings Epistle, before remembered, in which
the doctrine of Free Will is affirmed to have been purged of all Popish errors;
concerning which take here the words of the Epistle, viz. And forasmuch as the
heads and senses of our people have been imbusied, and in these days Epist. Ded.
traveled with the understanding of Free Will, Justification, etc. We have by
the advice of our Clergy for the purgation of Erroneous Doctrine, declared and
set forth openly, plainly, and without ambiguity of speech, the mere and
certain truth of them: so as we verily trust, that to know God, and how to
live after his pleasure to the attaining of everlasting life in the erd, this
Book contains a perfect and sufficient Doctrine, grounded and established in
holy Scriptures. And if it be rejoyned, as perhaps it may, that King Henry used
to shift opinion in matters which concerned Religion, according unto interest
and reason of State; it must be answered that the whole Book, and every Tract
therein contained, was carefully corrected by Archbishop Cranmer, the most
blessed instrument under God, of the Reformation, before it was committed to
the Prolocutor and the rest of the Celrgy. For proof whereof I am to put the
Reader in mind of a Letter of the said Archbishop, relating to the eighth
Chapter of this Book; in which he signified to an honorable friend of his,
that he had taken the more pains in it, because the Book being to be set forth
by his Graces (that is to say the Kings) censure and judgment, he could have
nothing in it that Momus himself could reprehend, as before was said: And this
I hope will be sufficient to free this Treatise of Free Will from the crime of
Popery.

5. But finally, if notwithstanding all these Reasons, it shall be still
pressed by those of the Calvinian party, that the Doctrine of Free Will, which
is there delivered, is in all points the same with that which was concluded and
agreed on in the Council of Trent, as appears Cap. de fructibus
justificationis, and merito bonorum operum Can. 34. and therefore not to be
accounted any part of the Protestant Doctrine; which was defended and
maintained by the Church of England, according to the first Rules of her
Reformation: the answers will be many, and every answer not without its weight
and moment. For first, it was not the intent of the first Reformers to depart
farther from the Rites and Doctrines of the Church of Rome, than that Church
had departed from the simplicity both of Doctrine and Ceremonies, which had
been publicly maintained and used in the Primitive times, as appears plainly
by the whole course of their proceedings, so* much commended by King James in
the Conference at Hampton Court. Secondly, this Doctrine must be granted also
to be the same with that of the Melancthonian Divines or moderate Lutherans*,
as was confessed by Andreas Vega, one of the chief sticklers in the Council of
Trent, who on the agitating of the Point, did confess ingenuously, that there
was no difference betwixt the Lutherans and the Church touching that
particular. And then it must be confessed also, that it was the Doctrine of
Saint Augustine, according to that Divine saying of his, Sine gratia De^
praeveniente ^t velimus, and subsequente ne frustra velimus, ad pietatis opera
nil valemus, which is the same of that of the tenth Article of the Church of
England, where it is said, That without the grace of God preventing us, that we
may have a good will, and working with us when we have that good will, we can
do nothing that is acceptable to him in the ways of piety. So that if the
Church of England must be Arminian, and the Arminian must be Papist, because
they agree together in this particular; the Melancthonian Divines amongst the
Protestants, yea, and S. Augustine amongst the Ancients himself, must be
Papists also.

CHAP. XIII. The Doctrine of the Church of England concerning the certainty or
uncertainty of Perseverance.
1. THe certainty of Grace debated in the Council of Trent, and maintained in
the Affirmative by the Dominioans, and some others. 2. The contrary affirmed by
Calarinus and his adherents* 3. The doubtful resolution of the Council in it.
4. The Calvinists not coment with certainty of Grace quoad statum presentem,
presume upon it also quoad statum futurum. 5. The bounds and limits wherewith
the judgment in this point ought rationally to be circumscribed. 6. The
Doctrine of the Church of England in the present Article. 7. Justified by the
testimonies of Bishop Latimer, Bishop Hooper, and Master Tyndal. 8. And proved
by several arguments from the public Liturgy. 9. The Homily commends a
probable and steadfast hope; but 10. Allows no^ certainty of Grace and
perseverance (in any ordinary way) to the sons of men.

1. OF all the Points which exercised the wits and patience of the Schoolmen in
the Council of Trent, there was none followed with more heat between the
parties, then that of the certainty of Grace, occasioned by some passages in
the writings of Luther, wherein such certainty was maintained as necessary unto
justification, and an essential part thereof. 'In canvasing of which point, the
one part held that certainty of grace was presumption; Hist. of the ^^^n. of
T^^nt. fol. 205. and^.
the other that one might have it meritoriously. The ground of the first was,
that Saint Thomas, Saint Bonaventure; and generally the Schoolmen thought so;
for which caul the major part of the Dominican^ were of the same opinion;
besides the authority of the Doctors, they alleged for reasons* that God would
not that man should be certain, that he might not be lifted up in pride, and
esteem of themselves, that he might not prefer himself before others, as he
that knows himself to be just would do before manifest sinners: and a
Christian would so become drowsy, careless, and negligent to do good.
Therefore they said that uncertainty was profitable, yea and meritorious
besides, because it is a passion of the mind which does afflict it; and being
supported, is turned to merit.' They alleged many places of the Scripture
also; of Solomon, that a man knows not whether he be worthy of hate or love;
of Wisdom, which commands not to be without fear of these sins pardoned;
of Saint Peter, to work out our salvation with fear and trembling; of Saint
Paul, who said of himself, though my conscience accuse me not, yet I am not
thereby justified.' These Reasons and Testimonies, together with many places of
the Fathers were brought and amplified, especially by Levipandus, Vega, and
Solo.

2. 'But Calarinus and Marinarus had other places of the same Fathets to the
contrary, which showed they had spoken accidentally in this particular, as the
occasions made most for their purpose, sometimes to comfort the scrupulous,
sometimes to repress the audacious; yet they kept themselves close to the
authority of the Scripture. They said that to as many as it is read in the
Gospel that Christ has forgiven sins, to all them he said, Believe that your
sins are forgiven, and it would be an absurdity that Christ should give an
occasion of temerity and pride; or, if the contrary were profitable, or a
merit, that he would deprive all men of it. That the Scripture binds us to
give God thanks for our justification, which cannot be given except we know
that we have obtained it; for to give them when we are uncertain, would be*
most foolish and impertinent. That Saint Paul does plainly confirm the
certainty, when he puts the Corinthians in mind to know that Christ is in
them, except they be reprobates: And when he says, we have received from God
the Spirit to know what is given us by his divine Majesty; and more clearly,
that the holy Spirit does bear witness to our spirit that we are the sons God:
and it is much to accuse them of rashness who believe the Holy Ghost that
speaks with them. For Saint Ambrose says that the Holy Ghost does never
speak unto us, but does make us know that it is he that speaks. After this he
added the words of Christ in Saint John, that the world cannot receive the Holy
Ghost, because it sees him not, nor knows him, but that the disciples shall
know him, because he shall dwell in them. Calarinus did fortify himself
strongly by saying that it was the opinion of a man in a dream, to defend that
Grace is voluntarily received, when we know not whether we have it or not; as
if to receive a thing willingly, it be not necessary that the willing receiver
should know it is given him, that he does really receive it, and that after it
is received, he does possess it.'

3. 'The force of these Reasons made them first retire a little that censured
the opinion of Temerity, and yield that there might be a conjecture; though not
an ordinary certainty; yet they acknowledged a certainty in the Martyrs, in the
newly baptized, and in some by special revelation, and from conjecture, they
were brought to call it moral Faith: And that Vego who in the beginning
admitted probability only, overcome by these Reasons, and beginning to favor
the certainty, for fear of conforming himself to the Lutheran opinion, said
that there was so much certainty as did exclude all doubt, and could not be
deceived;' yet that it was not Christian Faith, but humane and experimental.
But Calarinus and his party which were all the Carmelites, not resting
satisfied either in the terms of an experimental faith, or a moral persuasion,
did press the certainty so far, that many of the Prelate^ began to incline
to that opinion, and to persuade themselves, that certainty of Grace was
founded upon such an assurance as might in some sort be called divine; though
when they came to draw up the Decree therein, they found themselves involved in
more perplexities than they were aware of* For the Point being followed with
great heat between the parties, and each of them conceiving that the truth was
clearly on their side; it was found necessary to cast the Decree into such a
mold, as those of the two contrary opinions might repose themselves on it. And
certainly he that looks on the ninth Chapter of the sixth Session of the
Council entitled Contra inanem Haereticorum fiduciam, may easily perceive into
what streights they were reduced by seeking to content the Leaders of the
several factions. For when the Decree came to be discussed, it was no hard
matter to make them join against that confidence which was maintained by many
of Luthers followers, as if a man were no otherwise justified than by the
confidence which he had in his own justification; yet when they came to
express that certainty which had occasioned that intricate and perplexed
dispute, they were not so well able to state the point, as not to show their
own irresolution and uncertainty in it. For in the conclusion of the Decree in
which they were to declare some cause for which no man could certainly know
that he has obtained Grace at the hands of God, the Cardinal to satisfy one
part, added certainty of faith: and he with the Dominicans not thinking it to
be enough, urged him to add the word Catholic to it; so that the sense
thereof might seem to be to this effect; that no man could assure himself of
obtaining Grace by any such certainty of Faith as may come under the notion of
Catholic. But because the Adherents of Calarius were not so contented, instead
of those words of Catholic Faith (on which the Deminicans Hist. of the Coun.
of Trent. fol. 215.
insisted) it was thought necessary to declare that they meant it not of such a
faith, cui non potest subesse falsum, which cannot be subject to falsehood. And
thereupon the conclusion was drawn up in these following words, viz. Quilibet
dum seipsum, ^uan^que propriam infirmitatem and indispositionem respicit, de
gratia formidare and timere potest, cum nullus scire valeat certitudine* Fidei
cui non potest subesse falsum, se gratiam Dei esse consecutum; that is to say,
that every one in regard of his own disposition and infirmity may doubt with
himself whether he has received this Grace or not, because he cannot know by
certainty of infallible faith that he has obtained it. A temperament which
contented both sides. For one party inferred that all the certainty of faith
which could be had herein, might be false or fallible, and therefore to be
thought uncertain; the others inferred with equal confidence and content that
the certainty therein declared, could have no doubt of falsehood or fallibility,
for the time that it remained Hist. o^ Council p. 215.
in us; and that it could no otherwise become false or fallible, than by
changing from the state of grace to the state of sin, as all contingent
truths, by the alteration of their subjects may be made false also.

4. By which last clause it does appear that all the certainty with Catarinus
and the Carmelites contended for, was no more but this, that the Regenerate and
righteous man might be certain of grace and his own justification, quo ad
statum praesentem, but not that he could challenge or pretend to any such
certainty, quo ad statum futurum, or build on a continual perseverance in it
for the time to come. For even those men who stickled most in maintenance of
the certainty of Grace quo ad statum praesentem, concurred with those who
maintained the uncertainty of perseverance, together with the possibility of
falling Appill. Caeas. part 2. cap. 16.
Totally and Finally from the Grace received, for which see Chap. 2. Number. 8. of
this present Book. But the Calvinists being men of another making, presume not
only (as one says of them) to know all things that belong to their present
justification, as assuredly as they know that Christ is in heaven, but are as
sure of their eternal election, and of their future glorification, as they are
of this Article of our Creed, that Christ was borne of the Virgin Mary. And
that he may not be thought to have spoken this without good authority, we need
look no farther than the fifth Article of the Contra-Romonstrants which was
disputed at the Hague, according as it is laid down in our fourth Chap. Numb.
7. compared with the determination of the Council of Dort touching the point of
Perseverance; the sum whereof is briefly this, viz. 'That God will preserve
in the Faith all those who are absolutely elected from eternity, and are in
time brought to faith by an almighty and irresistible operation or working, so
that though they fall into detestable wickednesses and villainies, and continue
A^^^n. Dry. Anti. R^m^s. p. 21.
in them some space of time, against their conscience, yet the said wicked
villainies do not hinder so much as a straw amounts to, theit election, or
salvation; neither do they or can they by means of, or because of these, fall
from the Grace of Adoption, and from the state of Justification, or lose their
faith; but all their sins how great soever they be, both which heretofore
they have committed, and those which after they will or shall commit, are surer
than assuredly forgiven them, yea and moreover, they themselves, at last,
though it be at the last gasp, shall be called to repentance, and brought out
into possession of salvation.' To which determination of the Synod it self, it
may be thought impertinent to subjoyne the words and suffrages of particular
men, though those of Roger Donlebeck are by no means to be omitted: by whom it
is affirmed, That if it were possible for any one man to commit all the sins
over again which have been acted in the world, it would neither frustrate his
election, nor alienate him from the love and favor of God; For which and many
other passages of like nature, too frequent in the writings of the
Contra-Remonstrants, the Reader may consult the Appendix to the book called
Pre^. Declaratio, Sententiae Remonstratium, printed at Leiden, Anno 1616. and
there he may be satisfied in his curiosity.

5. But on the other side such as have looked into the mysteries of Eternal
life with the eye of Reverence, are neither so confident in the point, nor so
unadvised in their expressions as Donlebeck and others of the presumptuous sort
of our modern Monn. against the Gagger. c. 22. p. 185.
Calvinists, by whom we are informed, that all assurance is twofold, that is to
say, in respect of the object known, believed; and in regard of the subject
believing, knowing: As man relyeth upon his Evidence, or as his Evidence to
rely upon, that all Evidence is divine or humane, from God or man; that
Evidence divine, if apprehended, is ever certain, and infallible, both for the
necessity of our object, God, in whom is nor change, nor shadow of change; as
also for the manner of determining the Evidence, whereby that is certain or
necessary for effect, which is but contingent otherwise in it self; that such
Evidence as is most clear, and such assurance as is most certain in it self,
may be contingent and uncertain, as we may both use it and dispose it, who are
here and there, off and on as our judgments vary, being irresolute in our
ways, and as inconstant constant in our works: And thereupon it is inferred in
behalf of those who maintain the infallibility of such assurance, that they
mean no otherwise than this; that is to say, that in regard of God, faithful
and true; in respect of his promises, Yea and Amen; every child of God renewed
by Grace, may (and ought infallibly) assure himself of his own salvation
procured in Christ, who yet in regard of his own infirmity and inconstancy,
cannot choose but waver in his assurance, and fear the worst, though he hope
the best. And this, if Bellarmine say right, is Saint Augustines doctrine, out
of whom he collects thus much, Ex promissione Christi potest unusquisque
colligere se transisse a morte ad vitam, and in* ^udicium non venire, that is
to say, that every man (he means it only of the regenerate man) may collect
from the promise of Christ, that he is translated from death to life, and shall
not be brought unto the judgment of condemnation; the Cardinal thereupon
resolves, that a man may collect so much by infallible assurance and divine, if
he look into the^ faithfulness of him that promises; but if he consider his
own disposition, we assign no more but probable and conjectural assurance only.

6. Which said as to the certainty and incertainty of the assurance which a man
may have within himself, not only concerning his present being in the state of
Grace, as his continuance and perseverance in it for time to come: we must next
look into the Doctrine of this Church in the point it self: For having formerly
maintained in the tenth Article of her Confession that there remains a freedom
of the Will in man, for laying or not laying hold upon those means which are
offered by the Grace of God for our salvation; she must by consequence
maintain also, that there is a freedom from the Will in standing unto Grace
received, or departing from it. Certain I am that it is so resolved in the
sixteenth Article for her Confession, in which it is declared, that after we
have received the Holy Ghost, we may depart from the Grace* given, and fall
into sin; Art. 16.
and by the Grace of God we may arise again and amend our lives; where plainly
the Church teaches a possibility of falling or departing from the Grace of the
Holy Ghost, which is given unto us, and that our rising again, and amending of
our lives upon such a rising is a matter of contingency only, and no way
necessary on Gods part to assure us of a Doctrine so repugnant to that of the
Calvinists, that to make the Article come up to their opinion, they would feign
add neither finally nor totally (as appears by that of Doctor Reynolds at
Hampton Court) to the first clause of it; By which Addition, as they would make
the last part of it to be absolutely unprofitable, and of no effect; so do they
wilfully oppose themselves against the known maxim in the Civil Laws, which
tells us, Non esse distinguendum, ubi lex non distinguit, that no
distinctions must be made in the explicating or expounding of any Law, which is
not to be found in the Law it self. And therefore for the clear understanding
of the Churches meaning, we must have recourse in this as in other Articles to
the plain words of Bishop Latimer and Bishop Hooper, so often mentioned in this
Work.

7. And first we find Bishop Latimer discoursing thus, 'Let us not do, says
he, as the Jews did, which were stiff-necked; they would not leave their
sins, they had a pleasure in the same, they would follow their old
Traditions, refusing the Bishop Latimer in his 8. Sermon. in Linc.
Word of God; therefore their destruction came worthily upon them; And
therefore I say let us not follow them lest we receive such a reward as they
had, lest everlasting destruction come upon us; and so we be cast out of the
favor of God, and finally lost, world without end. And in another place -- I
say there be two manner of men; some there be that are not justified, not
regenerate, not yet in the state of salvation, Idem in Sermon. Romans 13. 11.
that is to say, not Gods servants: they take the Renovation or Regeneration,
they be not come yet to Christ, or if they were, be fallen again from him, and
so lost their justification; as there be many of us when we fall willingly into
sin against conscience, we lose the favor of God, and finally the Holy Ghost
-- But you will say, How shall I know that I am in the Book of Life? I answer,
that we may be one time in the Book, and another time come out of it again, as
it appears by David, who was written in the Book of Life, but See Ibid.
when he sinned ^oully, at that time came out of the favor of God, until he
repented, and was sorry for his faults: so that we may be in the Book one time,
and afterward when we forget God, and his Word, and do wickedly, we come out
of the Book which is Christ. The like we find in Bishop Hooper, first telling
us that the causes of Rejection or Damnation is sin in Pref. to the Expos. on
the X. Command.
man, that will not hear, neither receive the promise of the Gospel, or else
after he has received it, by accustomed doing of ill, falls either unto a
contempt of the Gospel, or will not study to live thereafter, or else he hates
the Gospel because it condemns his ungodly life. After which he proceeds to
the application -- Refuse not therefore the Grace offered, nor once received,
banish it with ill conversation. If we fall, let us hear Almighty God that
calls us to repent, and with his Word; and return; let us not continue in
sin, nor heap one sin upon another, lest at last we come to a contempt of
God and his Word.' In the beginning of his Paraphrase or Exposition to the
thirteenth Chapter of the Romans, he speaks as plainly to this purpose; which
passage might here deserve place also, but that I am called upon by Master
Tyndall, whose testimony I am sure will be worth the having, and in Collect of
his Works by J. Day. p. 185.
the Prologue to his Exposition on the same Epistle he informs us thus. 'None
of us (says he) can be received to Grace but upon a condition to keep the Law,
neither yet continue any longer in Grace than that promise lasts. And if we
break the Law, we must sue for a new pardon, and have a new light against
sin, hell, and desperation; yet we can come to a quiet faith again, and feel
that sin is forgiven; neither can there be in thee a stable and undoubted
faith, that thy sin is forgiven thee, except there be also a lusty courage in
thy heart, and trust that thou will sin no more; for on this condition that
thou will sin no more, is the promise of mercy and forgiveness made unto
thee.'

8. But against all this it is objected that Montague himself, Hick. in his
justis. of (...)e Fathers, etc. Pres.
both in his Gag and his Appeal, confesses that the Church has left this
undecided; that is to say, neither determining for finally or totally, and much
less for both. And that he does so in the Gag, I shall easily grant, where he
relates only to the words of the Article, which speaks only of a possibility
of falling, without relating to the measure or duration of it. But he must
Montag* Gag. cap. 20. p. 171.
needs be carried with a very strange confidence, which can report so of him in
his book called Appello Caesarem, in which he both expressly says, and
proves the contrary. He says it first in these words, after a repetition of
that which he had formerly said against the Gagger. 'I determine nothing in the
question, that is to say, nor totally nor finally, or totally not finally, or
totally and finally; but leave Apell. Caeas. cay. 4. p. 28.
there all to their Authors and Abettors; resolving upon this, not to go beyond
my bounds, the consented, resolved and subscribed Articles of the Church of
England; in which, nor yet in the Book of Common Prayer, and other divine
offices, is there any tie upon me to resolve in this much disputed question, as
these Novellers would have it ( not as these Novellers would have it, there is
no doubt of that,) For if there be any, it is for a possibility of total
falling, of which more anon.' He proves it next, by several Arguments extracted
from the Book of Homilies and the public Liturgy. Out of which last he
observes three passages, the first out of the Form of Baptism, in which it
is declared, that the baptized infant being born in original sin, by the Laver
of Regeneration Ibid. p35.
in Baptism, is received into the number of the children of God, and Heirs of
everlasting life; the second out of the public Catechism, in which the child
is taught to say, that by his Baptism he was made a member of Christ, the child
of God, and an inheritor of the Kingdom of heaven. The third out of the Rubric
before Confirmation, in which it is affirmed for a truth, that it is certain by
Gods word, that children being baptized, have all things necessary for their
salvation, and be undoubtedly saved. And thereupon he does observe that it is
to be acknowledged for a Doctrine of this Church, that children, duly baptized,
are put 'into a state of Grace and salvation; and secondly, that it is seen by
common experience, that many children so baptized, when they come to age, by a
wicked and lewd life do fall away from God, and from the state of Grace and
salvation wherein he had set them, to a worse state, wherein they shall never
be saved.' From which what else can be inferred, but that the Church maintains
a total, and a final falling from the grace of God? Add hereunto that the
Church teaches men to pray to Almighty God not to take his holy Spirit from
us. And in another place, that he suffer us not at our last hour for any pains
of death to fall from him: which certainly she had never done, were it not
possible for a man so far to grieve and vex the holy Spirit of God, and so far
to despair of his gracious mercy, as to occasion him at the last to deprive us
both of the one and the other.

9. Next for the Homilies, as they commend us unto Gods people a probable and
steadfast hope of their salvation in Christ Jesus; so they allow no such
infallibility of persisting in grace, as to secure them from a total and final
falling. In reference to the first, they tell us in the second part of the
Sermon against the fear of death, 'that none of those their causes of the fear
of death (that is to say, the sorrow of repenting from our worldly pleasures,
the terrible apprehension of the pangs of death, and the more terrible Hom. p.
62.
apprehension of the pains of hell) do make any trouble to good men, because
they stay themselves by true faith, perfect charity, and sure hope of the
endless joy and bliss everlasting. All therefore have great cause to be full
of joy, that be joined to Christ with true faith, steadfast hope, and perfect
charity, and not to fear death, nor everlasting damnation.' The like we find
not long after, where it speaks of those 'when being truly penitent for their
offenses, depart hence in perfect charity and in sure trust, that God is
merciful to them, forgiving them their sins, for the merits of Jesus Christ the
only natural Son.' In the third part of which Sermon it is thus concluded; 'He
that conceives all these things, and believes them assuredly as they ought to
be believed, even from the bottom of his heart, being established in God, in
his true faith, having a quiet conscience in Christ, Ibid. p. 68.
a firm hope and assured trust in Gods mercy through the merits of Jesus
Christ, to obtain this rest, quie^ness, and everlasting joy, shall not only be
without fear of godly death when it comes, but greatly desire in his heart (as
S. Paul did) to be rid from all these occasions of evil, and live ever to Gods
pleasure, in perfect obedience of his Will, with Jesus Christ our Lord and
Savior, to whose gracious presence, etc.' By all which passages it is clear
and evident, that the Church teaches us to entertain a probable and steadfast
hope of our salvation in Christ Jesus; but whether it teaches also such an
infallibility of persisting in grace, such a certainty of perseverance, as to
exclude all possibility of a total or a final falling, we are next to see.

10. And see it we may without the help of Spectacles, or any of the Optical
instruments, if we go no farther than the title of two of those Homilies, the
first whereof is thus inscribed, viz. A Sermon showing how dangerous a thing it
is to fall from God. And it had been ridiculous if not somewhat worse, to write
a Sermon de non ente, to terrify the people with the danger of that
misfortune, which they were well enough assured they should never suffer. Out
of which Homilies the Appellant makes no use but of these words only. 'Whereas
God has showed unto all them that truly do believe his Gospel, his face of
mercy in Christ Jesus; which does so enlighten their hearts, that they be
transformed into his Hom. p. 54.
image, be made partakers of the heavenly light, and of his holy Spirit; be
fashioned to him in all goodness requisite to the child of God: so if they do
afterward neglect the same, if they be unthankful unto him, if they order not
their lives according unto his Doctrine and Example, and to the setting forth
of his glory, he will take from them his holy Word, his kingdom whereby he
should reign in them, because they bring not forth fruit which he looked for.'
Besides which there are many other passages to this effect, where it is said,
that as by pride and sin we fall from God, so shall God and all goodness go
from us -- that sometimes men go from Ibid. p. 50.
God by lack of faith and mistrusting of God -- and sometimes by neglecting his
commandments concerning their neighbors. And after some examples given in
these several cases, it follows that by these examples of holy Scripture we
may know that as we forsake God, so shall he forsake us. And what a miserable
estate does consequently Id. p. 54.
and necessarily follow thereupon, a man may easily consider by the horrible
threatenings of God, etc. And finally having not only laid before us the said
horrible threatenings, but the re^ital also of those gentle courses by which he
does endeavor to gain us to him, it concludes thus, viz. that if these will
not serve, but still we remain disobedient to his Word and will, not knowing
him, or loving him; ^ot fearing him, nor putting our whole trust and confidence
in him: and on the other side to our neighbors, behaving our selves
uncharitably by disdain, envy, malice, or by committing murder, robbery,
adultery, gluttony, deceit, lying, swearing, or other like detestable works,
and ungodly behavior; then he threatens us by terrible comminations, swearing
in great anger, that whosoever does these works, shall never enter into his
rest* which is the kingdom of heaven.

CHAP. XIV. The Plain Song of the second Homily, touching the falling from God,
and the Descants made upon it.
1. MOre from some other Homilies, touching the possibility of falling from the
grace received. 2. The second Homily or Sermon touching falling from God, laid
down verbatim. 3. The sorry shifts of Mr. Yates, to illude the true meaning of
the Homily, plainly discovered, and confuted. 4. An Answer unto his Objection,
touching the passage cited from the former Homily, in Mr. Mountagues Appeal. 5.
The Judgment of Mr. Ridley, Archdeacon of Canterbury, in the points of
Election and Redemption. 6. As also touching the reasons why the Word was not
preached unto the Gentiles till the coming of Christ, the influences of grace,
the co-workings of man, and the possibility of falling from the truth of Christ.

1. Nor does the Church declare this only in the former Homily, where the point
is purposely maintained; but in some others also obiter, and upon the by, where
it discourses principally Hom. of good Works. p. 32.
on some other subject; for in the second part of the Sermon of good Works, we
shall find Saint Chrysostom speaking thus; viz. " The thief that was hanged
when Christ suffered, did believe only, and the most merciful God just fied
him. And because no man shall say again that he wanted time to do good works,
for else he could have done them; truth it is, and I will not contend herein;
but this I will surely affirm, that faith only saved him. If he had lived, and
not regarded faith, and the works thereof, he should have lost his salvation
again; which words of Chrysostom passing for a part of the Homily, declare
sufficiently, that by the doctrine of the Church in King Edwards time, not only
faith, but justification once had, may be lost again.' To the same purpose in
the second part of the Homily against swearing it is plainly said; "That
whosoever forsakes the truth for love or displeasure of any man, or for Page
50.
^ucre and profit to himself, does forsake Christ, and with Judas betray him.'
And somewhat also to this purpose may be found in the third Sermon against the
peril of Idolatry; and Page 58. Page 130.
in the second part of that touching the time and place of prayer; though not
so proper at the present, because not made within the compass of the first
Reformation in King Edwards reign; and keeping my self within the compass, I
think it not amiss to present unto the eye of the Reader, the second part of
the Sermon, about falling from God, and to present the same verbatim, as it
stands in the Book; and afterward to clear it from all such evasions and
objections which the sullenness rather than the subtilty of some men have found
out against it; Now the said second Sermon, (beginning with a recapitulation of
that which had been taught in the first) is this that follows.

The Second Part of the Sermon of falling from God.
'2. In the former part of this Homily, you have learned Hom. of falling from
God. Part 1. fol. 55.
how many manner of ways men fall from God; some by Idolatry, some for lack of
faith, some by neglecting of their neighbors, some by not hearing of Gods
Word, some by the pleasure they take in the vanities of worldly things; yea,
have also learned in what misery that man is which is gone from God; and how
that God yet of his infinite goodness to call again man from that his misery,
uses first gentle admonitions by his Preachers; after he lays on terrible
threatenings: Now if this gentle monition and threatening together do not serve,
then God will show his terrible countenance upon us, he will pour intolerable
plagues upon our heads, and after he will take away from us all his aid and
assistance wherewith before he did defend us from all such manner of calamity
as the Evangelical Prophet Isaiah, agreeing with Christ his Parable, does teach
us, saying, Is^ 5. Mat. ^1.
That God has made a goodly Vineyard for his beloved children; he hedged it,
he walled it round about, he planted it with chosen Vines, and made a Turret in
the midst thereof, gathering also a Wine Press, and when he looked that it
would bring forth good grapes, it brought forth wild grapes, and after it
follows; Now shall I show you (says God) what I will do with my Vineyard, I
will pluck down the hedges thereof that it may perish; I will break down the
walls that it may be trodden under foot; I will let it lie waste, it shall not
be cut, it shall not be dug, but briars and thorns shall overgrow it, and I
will command the clouds that they shall no more rain upon it.

'By these threatenings we are monished and warned, that if we which are the
chosen Vineyard of God, bring not forth good grapes, that is to say, good works
that may be delectable and pleasant in his sight, when he looks for them,
when he sends his Messengers to call upon us for them, but rather bring forth
wild grapes; that is to say, four works; unsavory and unfruitful; then will
he pluck away all defense, and suffer grievous plagues of famine, battle,
dearth and death to light upon us. Finally, if these serve not, he will let us
lie waste, he will give us over, he will turn away from us, he will dig and
delve no more about us, he will let us alone, and suffer us to bring forth even
such fruit as we will, to bring forth brambles, briars and thorns, all
naughtiness, all vice, and that so abundantly, that they shall clean over-grow,
choke, strangle, and utterly destroy us. But they that in this World live not
after God, but after their own carnal liberty, perceive not this great wrath of
God toward them, that he will not dig nor delve any more about them, that he
does let them alone even to themselves: but they take this for a great benefit
of God to have all their own liberty; and so they live, as if carnal liberty
were the true liberty of the Gospel: But God forbid (good people) that ever we
should desire such liberty; for although God suffer sometimes the wicked to
have their pleasure in this world, yet the end of ungodly living is at length
endless destruction; the murmuring Israelites had that they longed for, they
had Quails enough, yea, till they were weary of them; but what was the end
thereof? their sweet meat had sour saw^e; even whilst the meat was in their
mouths, the plague of God alighted upon them, and suddenly they dyed: So if we
live ungodly, and God suffers us to follow our own wills, to have our own
delights and pleasures, and corrects us not with some plague, it is no doubt
but he is almost utterly displeased with us; and although it be long ere he
strike, yet many times when he strikes such persons, he strikes them once for
ever; so that when he does not strike us, when he cease to afflict us, to
punish or beat us, and suffers us to run headlong into all ungodliness, and
pleasures of this world that we delight in, without punishment or adversity, it
is a dreadful token that he loves us no longer, that he cares no longer for
us, but has given us over to our selves.

'As long as a man does prune his Vines, does dig at the root, and lay fresh
earth to them, he has a mind to them, he perceives some token of fruitfulness
that may be recovered in them; but when he will bestow no more such cost and
labor about them, it is a sign that he thinks they will never be good: And the
father as long as he loves his child, he looks angerly, he corrects him
when he does amiss; but when that serves not, and upon that he cease from
correction of him, and suffers him to do what he list himself, it is a sign
he intends to disinherit him, and cast him away for ever; so surely nothing
should pierce our hearts so sore, and put us into such horrible fear, as when
we know in our conscience that we have grievously offended God, and do so
continue, that yet he strikes not, but quietly suffers us in the naughtiness
that we here delight in, then especially it is time to cry, and to cry again as
David did, Cast me not away from they face, and take not Psalm. 51.
thy holy Spirit from me; hide not thy face from me, lest I be like unto them
that go down into hell. The which lamentable prayers of his, as they do
certify us what horrible danger they be in from whom God turns his face,
(for the time, and as long as he so does) so should they more and more stir us
to cry unto God with all our heart, that we may not be brought into the state
which doubtless is so sorrowful, so miserable, and so dreadful as no tongue can
sufficiently express, nor any heart can think; for what deadly grief can a man
suppose it is to be under the wrath of God, to be forsaken of him, to have his
holy Spirit the Author of all goodness, to be taken from him; to be brought to
so vile a condition, that he shall be left meet for no better purpose than to
be for ever condemned to hell? for not only such places of David do show, that
upon the turning of Gods face from any persons, they shall be left bare from
all goodness, and far from hope of remedy; but also the place rehearsed last
before of Isaiah, does mean the same, which shows, that God at length does so
^o sake his unfruitful Vineyard, that he will not only suffer it to bring forth
weeds, briars and thorns, but also further to punish the unfruitfulness of it,
he says he will not cut it, he will not delve it, and he will command the
clouds that they shall not rain upon it; whereby is signified the teaching of
the holy Word, which Saint Paul after a like manner expressed by planting and
watering, Meaning that he will take that away from them, so that they shall be
no longer of his Kingdom they shall be no longer governed by his holy Spirit,
they shall be put from the grace and benefits they had and ever might have
enjoyed through Christ; they shall be deprived of the heavenly light and life
which they had in Christ whilst they abode in him; they shall be (as they were
once) as men without God in this world, or rather in a worse taking.'

'And to be short, they shall be given into the power of the Devil, which
bears the rule of all men which be cast away from God, as he did in Saul and
Judas, and generally in all such as work after their own wills, the children of
mistrust and unbeilef; let us beware therefore good Christian people, lest that
we rejecting, or casting away Gods Word (by which we obtain and retain true
faith in God) be not at length cast so far off, that we become as the children
of unbelief, which be of two sorts far diverse, yea, almost clean contrary, and
yet both be very far from returning to God; the one sort only weighing their
sinful and detestable living with the right judgment and straitness of Gods
righteousness, be so without content, and be so comfortless, (as they all must
needs be from whom the Spirit of counsel and comfort is gone) that they will
not be persuaded in their hearts, but that either God cannot or else that he
will not take them again to his favor and mercy; the other, hearing the loving
and large promises of Gods mercy, and so not conceiving a right faith thereof,
make those promises larger than ever God did, Trusting that although they
continue in their sinful and detestable living never so long, yet that God at
the end of their life will show his mercy upon them; and that then they will
return. And that both these two sorts of men be in a damnable estate, and yet
nevertheless God (who wills not the death of the wicked) has showed means
whereby both the same ( if they take heed in season) may escape. The first, as
they defend Gods rightful justice in punishing sinners (whereby they should be
dismayed, and should despair indeed, as touching any hopes that may be in
themselves) so if they would constantly and steadfastly believe, that Gods mercy
is the remedy prepared against such despair and distrust, not only for them,
but generally for all that be sorry, and truly repentant, and will therewithal
stick to Gods mercy, they may be sure they shall obtain mercy, and enter into
the Port or Haven of safeguard, into the which whosoever do come, be they
before time never so wicked, they shall be out of danger of everlasting
damnation, as godly Ezekiel says, What time soever a sinner does return, and
take earnest of true Repentance, I will forgive all his wickedness.'

'The other as they be ready to believe Gods promises, so they should be as
ready to believe the threatenings of God; as well believe the Law as the Gospel;
as well that there is an hell, and everlasting fire, as there is an heaven, and
everlasting joy; as well they should believe damnation to be threatened to the
wicked and evil doers, as salvation to be promised to Ezekiel. 3.
the faithful in Word and Works; as well they should believe God to be true in
the one as the other.

'And for sinners that continue in this wicked living, they ought to think that
the promises of Gods mercy and the Gospel pertain not unto them being in that
state; but only the Law, and those Scriptures which contain the wrath and
indignation of God, and his threatenings, which should certify them that as
they do over boldly presume of Gods mercy, and live dissolutely; so does God
still more and more withdraw his mercy from them, as he is so provoked thereby
to wrath at length, that he destroys such presumers many times suddenly; for
of such Saint Paul said thus, When they shall say it is peace, there is no
danger, then shall sudden destruction come upon them; let us beware therefore
of such naughty boldness to 1 These. 5.
sin; for God which has promised his mercy to them that be truly penitent,
(although it be at the latter end) has not promised to the presumptuous sinner
either that he shall have long life, or that he shall have true Repentance at
the last end. But for that purpose has he made every man's death uncertain,
that he should not put his hope in the end, and in the mean season (to Gods
high displeasure) live ungodlily: Wherefore let us follow the counsel of the
Wise man, let us make no sarrying to turn unto the Lord, let us not put off
from day to day; for suddenly his wrath comes, and in time of vengeance he will
destroy the wicked; let us therefore turn betimes, and when we turn, let us
pray to God as Hosea teached, saying, Forgive all our sins, receive us
graciously: And if we turn Hosea 14.
to him with an humble and a very penitent heart, he will receive us to his
favor and grace for his holy Names sake, for his Promise sake, for his Truth
and Mercies sake promised to all faithful believers in Jesus Christ his only
natural Son, To whom the only Savior of the world, with the Father and the
Holy Ghost, be all honor, glory and power, world without end; Amen.'

3. These are the very words of the second Homily, touching falling from God,
in which we have many evident proofs, not only that there is a falling, and a
frequent falling, but also a total, yea, a final falling from the grace of God,
according to the Doctrine of the Church of England. And hereunto I must needs
say, that I never met with any satisfactory and sufficient Answer, how much
soever some have slighted the authority of it, or the strength rather of the
Argument which is taken from it; for Mr. Yates of Ipswitch (from whose candle
most of them that followed, borrow all their light) in his book entitled, Ibis
ad Caesarem, writ against Montagues Appeal, can find no better answers to it,
or evasions from it, then they four that follow; viz. 1. That the Homily speaks
Ibis ad C^^. p. 2. c. 3. p. 139.
of the visible Church, and therefore is not to be construed in the same sense
of all; whereas the Homily speaks of Gods chosen people, (his chosen Vineyard
are the words) and consequently not only of the mixed multitude in a visible
Church: He answers secondly, That it speaks with limitation and distinction;
some beholding the face of Gods mercy aright, others not as they ought to do;
the one of which may fall quite away, the other being transformed, can never be
wholly deformed by Satan: But this is such a pitiful shift, as could not save
the man from the scorn of laughter, had he been dealt with in his kind; the
Homily speaking largely of those men, which having beheld Gods face of mercy in
Jesus Christ as they ought to do, do afterward neglect the same, prove
unthankful to him, and order not their lives according to his Example and
Doctrine, etc. for which, consult the place at large in the former Church. He
answers thirdly, that the Homily speaks conditionally, if they afterward, etc.
(that is to say, if afterward they neglect the same, prove unthankful to him,
and order not their lives according to his Example and Doctrine, etc.) and so
concludes nothing positively and determinately; which is a sorrier shift than
that which you had before; for if such conditional Propositions conclude
nothing positively, what will become of all those Propositions in the
Scriptures by which we are assured, That if a sinner do repent him of his sins
and wickednesses, he shall find mercy from the Lord? Do they conclude nothing
positively neither? most miserable were the state of man, if these conditional
Propositions should conclude nothing to the comfort of a troubled conscience.
And finally, he answers thus, that the Homily speaks of Gods dreadful
countenance appearing in plagues, sword, famine, and such like temporal
punishments, wherewith the Elect may be chastened as well as others, that they
may not for ever be condemned with the wicked; the first part of which
Allegation I confess to be true, Gods judgments falling promiscuously on all
sotts of people; but the addition is unknown, and is not to be found in the
words of the Homily. And secondly, the Homily speaks not only of Gods temporal
judgments, with which the Elect be chastened as well as others, that they may
not for ever be condemned with the wicked; but positively and determinately, of
taking from them his Kingdom; and holy word, as in the former, so that they
shall be no longer of his Kingdom, governed no longer by his holy Spirit, put
from the Grace and benefit which they had, etc.

4. But Master Yates intends not so to leave the matter, we must first see that
he is as good at raising an Objection, as at the making of an Answer; and he
objecteth out of another of the Hom. of certain places of Scripture. fol. 150.
Homilies, that though the godly do fall, yet they walk not on purposely in
sin, they stand not still to continue and tarry in sin, they sit not down
like careless men, without all fear of Gods just punishment for sin; through
Gods great grace and infinite mercy they rise again and fight against sin,
etc. But first it may be hoped that Master Yates could not be ignorant how
great a difference there is betwixt such passages as fall occasionally, and on
the by, from the pen of a Writer, discoursing on another Argument, and those
which do occur in such Discourses, Sermons, and other Tractates, as purposely
are made and fitted to the point in hand. And secondly, though it be affirmed
in the said Homily, that the godly man which shall add sin to sin, by Gods
great grace and infinite mercy may arise again and fight against sin: Yet can
it not be gathered thence, that it is so at all times, and in all such cases;
that is to say, that neither the great grace, nor his infinite mercy shall be
wanting at any time unto such as are fallen from God; or that man shall not be
wanting to himself in making a right use of it to his rising again. And then
this passage in the Homily will affirm no more to this purpose, than the Art
16.
Article does; where it is said, that after we have received the holy Ghost, we
may depart from grace given, and fall into sin, and by the grace of God (we
may) arise again and amend our lives.

5. Now to these testimonies from the Homilies, the public Liturgy, and the
writings of the learned men and godly Martyrs before remembered, it will not be
amiss to add one more; that is to say, Master Lancelot Ridley Archdeacon of
Cantenbury, who by his name seems to have had relation to Doctor Nicholas
Ridley Bishop of London, and by his office to Doctor Cranmer Archbishop of
Canterbury, the two chief Agents in the work of the Reformation. This man had
published some Expositions on Saint Paul's Epistles to the Ephesians and
Philippians, as he did afterward on that to the Collossians also; which last
was printed by Richard Grafton, 1548. At which time both the first Liturgy and
the first Book of Homilies were in force and practice, and therefore was not
like to contain any point of Doctrine repugnant unto either of them. And if we
look upon him in his Comment upon the Epistle, we shall find him thus declare
himself in the points disputed; which I will lay all together, according to the
method formerly observed in setting down the Articles or points themselves. For
first in reference to Election unto life eternal, he tells us, 'That all
fullness Ridley in Colos. c^p. 1, 6.
of the Father is called to dwell in Christ, that all men should know all the
goodness they have to come of God by Christ to them; that all that believe in
Christ, should not perish, but be saved, and should have life everlasting by
Christ with the Father.' And afterward speaking on those virtues which Saint
Paul commends in the Elect, he tells us 'that Idem in cap. 2. P, 1.
those virtues do show unto us who be elected of God, and who not, as far as
man can judge of outward things; and that those men may be concluded to be
elected of God who hate all vice and sin, that love virtue, and godly living,
and in it do walk all their lifetime by true faith and works of the spirit.'
2. More plainly does he speak in the second place of Universal Redemption,
telling us that 'all men which either for their Original Id. in cap. 1, 6.
sin, or for their Actual sin, were out of Gods favor, and had offended
God, should by Christ only be reconciled to Gods favor, and have remission of
their sins, and he made partakers of everlasting life; that Christ's death was
a full and sufficient satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, Id. Ibid.
Fr 1.
and for all them that shall be sanctified and saved; that Christ by his death
once for all has fully and perfecty satisfied for the sins of all men; and
finally that therefore this is an undoubted Id. Ibid. F. 7.
truth, ever to be believed of all Christians, that Christ by his Passion and
and Death has taken away all the sins of the world.'

6. In the next place he puts the question with reference to the application of
so great a benefit, for what causes God would not have his Word preached unto
the Gentiles till Christ's time; and makes this answer thereunto, First, 'that
it is a point not to be too curiously searched, or enquired after. Secondly,
that it is enough for us to know that it was so ordered by Gods Will, and for
his glory. But thirdly, that it might yet be done, either because by their sins
they had deserved their blindness and Id. Ibid. G. 2. and 3.
damnation (as indeed they had) or that God saw their hard hearts, or their
stiff necks, and that they would not have received it before Christ's coming, if
the Gospel had been preached unto them; or finally, that God reserved that
mystery unto the coming of our Savior Christ, that by him all goodness should
be known to come to us, etc.' As for the necessary influences of Gods Grace,
and man's co-working with the same, he tells us briefly, 'that no man ought to
ascribe the good works that he Id. cap. 2. H. 7.
does to himself, or to his own might and power, but to God the Author of all
goodness; but then withal that it is not enough for men to have knowledge of
Christ and his benefits, but that they must increase in the knowledge of God,
which knowledge comes by Gods Word. And finally as to the point Idem cap. 4.
of falling away, he gives us first the example of Demas, who as long as all
things were prosperous with S. Paul, was a faithful minister to him, and a
faithful Disciple of Christ; but when he saw Paul cast into prison, he forsook
Paul and his Doctrine, and followed the world; then he infers that many such
there be in the world, etc.' -- of whom speaks Christ. Mat^h. 13. 'Many for a
time do believe, but in time of tribulations they shrink away. And finally he
concludes with this advice, that he that stands should look that he did not
fall; and that he do not trust too much to his own might and power; for if he
did, he should deceive himself, and have a fall as Demas had.' And so much for
the judgment and opinion of Master L. Ridley in the points disputed, who being
Archdeacon of Canterbury, as before was said, may be presumed to be one of
those who concurred in Convocation to the making of the Articles of K. Edwards
Book, 1552. to find the true and natural meaning of which Articles we have
took this pains.

CHAP. XV. Of the Author and Authority of King Edwards Chatechisme, as also of
the Judgment of Martin Bucer, and Peter Martyr, in the Points disputed.
1. THE Catechism published by the Authority of King Edward the sixth, Anno
1553. affirmed to have been writ by Bishop Poinet, and countenanced by the rest
of the Bishops and Clergy. 2. Several passages collected out of that
Catechism, to prove that the Calvinian Doctrines were the true, genuine, and
ancient Doctrines of the Church of England. 3. With a discovery of the weakness
and impertinency of the Allegation. 4. What may most probably be conceived to
have been the judgment of Bishop Poinet, in most of the Controverted Points.
5. An Answer to another Objection derived from Mr. Bucer, and Peter Martyr; and
the influence with their Auditors and Disciples are supposed to have had in the
Reformation. 6. That Bucer was a man of moderate Counsels, approving the first
Liturgy of King Edward the sixth, assenting to the Papists at the Diet of
Ratisbone, in the possibility of falling from grace; and that probably Peter
Martyr had not so far espoused the Calvinian quarrels, when he lived in Oxon,
as after his return to Zurick and Calvin's Neighborhood. 7. The Judgment of
Erasmus, according as it is delivered in his Paraphrases on the four
Evangelists, proposed first in the general view, and after more particularly in
every of the Points disputed.

SE^ur^ de salute, de gloria corte^^s; Having showed Tavit in vita. Agric.
the cause by so many pregnant Evidences, derived from the Articles and
Homilies, and backed by the consenting Testimonies of learned Men and godly
Martyrs; it would add something at the least in point of Reputation, if not of
glory also, to gain Bishop Poinet to the side; of whom, as to his personal
capacity we have spoke already, and must now look back upon him in relation to
a Chatechism of his setting forth; Printed by Wolf in Latin, and by Day in
English, Anno 1553. being the next year after the Articles were agreed upon in
the Convocation; a Catechism which comes commended to us with these
advantages, Prin. Anti Armin. Page 44.
that it was put forth by the Authority of King Edward the sixth, to be taught
by all Schoolmasters in the Kingdom. By another of the same persuasion, 'that
the King committed the perusal of it to certain Bishops, and other learned men,
whom he much esteemed; by whom it was certified to be agreeable to the
Scripture, and Statutes of the Realm; that thereupon he prefixed his Epistle
before it, in which he commands and charges all Schoolmasters whatsoever within
his Dominions, as they did reverence his Authority, and as they would avoid his
Royal displeasure, to teach this Catechism diligently and carefully Anti.
Armin. Page 48.
in all and every their Schools; that so the youth of the Kingdom might be
settled in the grounds of true Religion, and furthered in Gods worship.' The
Church Chapter Hist. lib. 7. sol. 42 l.
Historian seems to give it some further countenance, by making it of the same
extraction with the Book of Articles, telling us that by the Bishops and
Learned men before mentioned, ^e are to understand the Convocation; and that it
was not commanded by his Majesty's Letters Patents to all Schoolmasters only,
but by him commended to the rest of the Subjects; which cost these several
Authors have bestowed upon it* out of an hope of gaining some greater matter by
it, toward the countenancing and advancing of the Calvinian Doctrine,
Predestination, as the true genuine and ancient Doctrine of this Church;
certain I am, that both Mr. Prin and his Shadow so declare themselves; the
Anti-Arm. (...).
one affirming that all these passages are directly for them, and punctually
opposite to their Arminian Antagonists; the Hist. ut supr ^.
other crying out with some admiration, How do the Master and Scholar plainly
declare themselves to be no friends to the Tenants which the English Arminians
now concend for but notwithstanding all this ^ry, I fear we shall get but
little wool, when we come to consider of those passages in Poynets Catechism,
which are most relied on, and which here follow, as I find them in the
Anti-arminianism^, without alteration of the words or syllables, though with
some alteration in the method of the Collection: Now the passages collected out
of Poynets Catechism, are these that follow; viz.

2. 'The Catech. Page 7. 8, 12,
Image of God in ^^^ by original sin and evil custom, was so obscured in the
beginning, and the natural judgment so corrupted, that man himself could not
sufficiently understand the difference between good and bad, between just and
unjust, etc. Page 9,
As for the sacrificings, cleansings, washings, and other Ceremonies of the
Law, they were Shadows, Types, Images, and Figures of the t^^^ and eternal
sacrifice that Jesus Christ made upon the Cross, by whose benefit alone all the
sins of all believers from the beginning of the world are pardoned, by the sole
mercy of God, and not by any merit of their own. Page 13.
As Soon as ever Adam and Eve had eaten of the forbidden fruit, they both dyed;
that is, that they were not only liable to the death of the body, but likewise
lost the life of the soul, which is righteousness, and forthwith the Divine
Image was obscured in them; and those lineaments of Righteousness, Holiness,
Truth, and Knowledge of God, exceeding comely, were disordered and almost
obliterated: the terene Image only remained, coupled with unighteousness,
fraud, carnal affections, and great ignorance of Divine and heavenly things;
from thence also proceeded the infirmity of our flesh, from thence corruption,
and confusion of affections and desires; hence that plague, hence that seminary
and nutriment of sin, wherewith all mankind i^ infected, which is called
Original sin Moreover, nature is so depraved and cast down, that unless the
goodness and mercy of Almighty God had helped us, by the medicine of grace, as
in body we were thrust down into all the miseries of death, so it was necessary
that all men of all sorts should be cast into eternal torments and fire which
cannot be quenched. Fol. 18.
Those things which are spiritual are not seen but by the eye of the Spirit: he
therefore that will see the Divinity of Christ on earth, let him open the eyes,
not of the body, but of the mind, and of Faith, and he shall see him present,
whom the eye does not see; he shall see him present in the midst of them;
Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in his Name, he shall see him
present with us to the end of the end of the world: What have I said, he shall
see Christ present: yea he shall both see and feel him dwelling in himself no
otherwise then his own soul, for he does dwell and reside in the soul, and in
the heart of him who does place all his confidence in him.'

3. Fol. 23.
'Above all things this cannot be concealed, that the benefits which are
brought unto us by the death, the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, were so
great and ample, that no tongue either of men and Angels can express it, etc.
From these, and from other Actions of Christ, two benefits do accrue unto us.
One, that whatsoever he did, he did it all for our profit and commodity; so
that they are as much ours if we cleave fast to them with a firm and lively
Faith, as if we our selves had done them. He verily was nailed to the Cross,
and we are crucified with him, and our sins are punished in him. He died and
was buried; we likewise with our sins are dead and buried; and that so as that
all the memory of our sins is utterly abolished; he rose again, and we also are
risen with him, being made partakers of his resurrection and life, that
henceforth death might no more domineere in us: for there is the same Spirit in
us that raised Jesus from the dead. Lastly, as he ascended into celestial
glory, so we are exalted together with him. Fol. 30.
The Holy Ghost is called holy, not only for his own holiness, but because the
Elect of God, and the Members of Christ are made holy by him. Fol. 31.
The Church is the company of them who are called to eternal life by the holy
Ghost, by whom she is guided and governed; which time she cannot be understood
by the ^ight of Sense or Nature, is justly placed amongst the number of those
things which are to be believed; and is therefore called the Catholic, that is
the universal Assembly of the faithful, because it is not tied to any certain
place. Fol. 44, 45.
God who rules: and governs all things, can do all things. No man is of so
great power that he can so much as withstand him, but he gives whatsoever he
shall decree according to his own pleasure: and those things which are given to
us by him, he is able to take them away.'

4. Verbatim from Page 37. to 41.
'After the Lord God had made the Heaven and Earth, he determined to have for
himself a most beautiful Kingdom, and holy Commonwealth. The Apostles and
Ancient Fathers that writ in Greek, called it Ecclesia, in English a
Congregation or Assembly, into the which he has admitted an infinite number of
men, that should be subject to one King as their Sovereign and only Head; him
we call Christ, which is as much as to say Anointed; or to the furnishing of
this Commonwealth belong all they as many as do truly fear, honor, and call
upon God, daily applying their minds to holy and godly living, and and all
those that putting all their hope and trust in him, do assuredly look for bli^s
of everlasting life. But as many as are in this Faith steadfast, were
fore-chosen, predestinate, and appointed to everlasting life before the world
was made, witness whereof they have within their hearts the merit of Christ the
Author, earnest and unfallable pledge of their Faith: which Faith only is able
to perceive the mysteries of God, only brings peace unto the heart, only takes
hold on the Righteousness which is in Christ Jesus.

Master. 'Doth then the Spirit alone and Faith (sleep we never so securely, or
stand we never so wrestless or slothful) work all things for us, as without
any help of our own to convey us to heaven?

Scholar. 'Just Master (as you have taught me) to make a difference between the
Cause and the Effect. The first principal and most proper cause of our
Justification and Salvation, is the goodness and love of God, whereby he chose
us for his, before he made the world, After that God grants us to be called
by preaching of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, when the Spirit of the Lord is
poured upon us; by whose guiding and governance we be led to settle our trust
in God, and hope for the performance of his promise. With this choice is joined
as companion, the mortifying of the Old man, that is, of our affections and
Iusts, from the same Spirit also comes our Sanctification, the love of God and
of our neighbor, justice and uprightness of life. Finally, to say all in
sum, whatever is in us, or may be done of us, honest, pure, true, and good,
that altogether springs out of this most pleasant Rock, from this most
plentiful Fountain, the goodness, love, choice, and unchangeable purpose of
God; he is the cause, the rest are the fruits and effects. Yet are also the
choice and Spirit of God, and Christ himself, causes conjoined and coupled each
with other; which may be reckoned amongst the principal causes of salvation. As
often therefore as we use to say, that we are made righteous and saved by Faith
only, it is meant thereby, that faith, or rather trust alone, does lay hard
upon, understand, and perceive our righteous making to be given us of God
freely; that is to say, by no deserts of our own, but by the free grace of the
Almighty Father. Moreover, Faith does engender in us love of our neighbor, and
such works as God is pleased withal; For if it be a lively and true Faith
quickened by the Holy Ghost, she is the Mother of all good saying and doing; by
this short tale it is evident by what means we attain to be righteous. For not
by the worthiness of our deservings were we heretofore chosen, or long ago
saved, but by the only mercy of God, and pure grace of Christ our Lord, whereby
we were in him made to do those good works that God had appointed for us to
walk in. And although good works cannot deserve to make us righteous before
God, yet do they so cleave unto Faith, that neither Faith can be found without
them, nor good works be any where found without Faith; Fol. 68.
immortality and blessed life God has provided for his chosen, before the
foundations of the world were laid.'

3. These are the passages which Mr. Prin has gathered out of Poynets
Catechism, to prove that Calvinism is the true, genuine, and Original Doctrine
of the reformed Church of England, in the Points disputed; for my part, I can
see no possible inconvenience which can follow on it, in yiedling so far to his
desires, as to admit the passages before recited, to be fully consonant to the
true, genuine sense, and proper meaning of all, but more especially of our 9.
10. 13. 16. and 17. Articles then newly composed; so that whatsoever is
positively and clearly affirmed in this Catechism of any of the Points now
controverted, may be safely implied as the undoubted Doctrine of our Church and
Articles. For who can find, if he looks upon them with a single and impartial
eye, that all or any of the passages before treated, can be made use of for the
countenancing of such a personal and eternal election, without relation unto
sin, as is supposed by the Supra-Lapsarians, or without reference to Christ's
death and sufferings, as is defended by the Sublapsarians in the Schools of
Calvin? what ground can a man find here for the Horribile Decretum, that cruel
and most unmerciful decree of preordaining the far greatest part of all mankind
to everlasting damnation, and consequently unto sin that they might be damned?
What passage find we in all these, either in opposition to the Doctrine of
Universal Redemption (though that be before said to be here condemned) or in
maintenance of the irresistible working of the grace of God, as takes away all
freedom and cooperation from the will of man, and renders him as unable to his
own conversion, as to the work of his own being begotten to the life of nature;
or to the raising of his dead body to life of glory? And finally what assurance
is here, that the man once justified shall not fall into deadly sin, or not
continue in the same, multiplying one sin upon another till he has made up the
measure of his iniquities? and yet all this while remain in the favor of God,
and be as sure and certain of his own salvation by the like unresistible
working of the holy Spirit, as if he had never wandered from the ways of
Righteousness! He must see further into a Millstone then all men living, who can
conclude from all, or any of these passages, that the Zuinglian and Calvinian
Doctrines (the Anti- Arminian Doctrines, as that Author calls them) are
manifestly approved, and undeniably confirmed Antiarm.
by them, as the only ancient, established and professed Doctrines of our
Church and Articles, or that can honestly affirm (as his echo does) that both
the Master and the Scholar declare themselves plainly in that Catechism, to be
no friends to any of the Tenants which those of the opposite side contend for.

4. Which said, we will endeavor to find out Bishop Justi. Faith. and
Anti-arm. p. 102.
Poynes judgment in the points disputed (or so many of them at the least as
are touched upon) as well from such fragments as are offered to us in the
Anti-Arminianisme, as from such passages as have been cunningly slipped over, of
purpose to subduct them from the eye of the Reader. And first the Author let us
know that God created man after his own Image, that is to say ( in ea
absolutissima Justitia, and perfectissima sanctimonia, etc.) in such a high
degree of righteousness and perfect holiness as came most near unto the
nature of God himself; that this Divine image was so defaced by the sin of our
first parents Adam and Eve, that those lineaments of righteousness, holiness,
truth, and knowledge of God were disordered, and almost obliterated; that man
being in this wretched case, it pleased God to raise him to a new hope of
Restitution in the seed of the woman, that is to say, in Jesus Christ his only
Son, conceived of the holy Ghost, and born of the pure and most immaculate
Virgin Mary; the Actions of whose life do so much redound to our benefit and
commodity, that if we cleave fast unto them with a true and lively faith, they
shall be as much ours as his; and finally, that as many as are in this faith
steadfast, were fore-chosen, predestinate, and appointed to everlasting life
before the world was made. 2. In the next place he lets us know (which the
Author has amongst his fragments) that the sacrificings, cleansings, washings,
and other Ceremonies of the Law were shadows, types, images, and figures of the
true and eternal sacrifice of Jesus Christ made upon the Cross; by whose
benefit alone all the sins of all believers from the beginning of the world,
are pardoned by the sole mercy of God, and not by any deserts of their own. But
then he lets us know withal (which that Author does not) that he did truly die,
and was truly buried, ut ^ratum humano gener^ Patrem suavissimo sacrificio
placaret* that by so sweet a sacrifice he might reconcile his angry and
offended father unto all mankind. 3. In the third place, by asking this
question, viz. whether the Spirit alone and faith, sleep we never so securely,
or stand we never so worthless or slothful, work all things for us, as without
any help of our own to carry us to heaven? He plainly shows first that some
men there were who did so conceive it, but that they were to be condemned for
conceiving so of it. And, secondly, that all men were to lend a helping hand
toward their salvation, not only by laying hold on Christ with the hand of
faith, but in being fruitful of good works, without which, faith is neither to
be reckoned true and lively* or animated by the holy Ghost. 4. He tells us
finally, that the Church is the company of them that are called to eternal life
by the holy Ghost, by whom she is guided and governed. And yet it cannot but be
feared, that many of those who are called to eternal life by the holy Ghost,
and cheerfully for a time obey the calling, and live continually within the
pale of the Church, which is guided by the most blessed spirit, do fall away
from God and the grace received, and thereby bring themselves into a state of
damnation from which they never do recover by sincere repentance.

5. As little comfort can be drawn from that Argument, by which they hope to
make the Articles in these points to speak no otherwise then according to the
sense of Martin Bucer, and Peter Martyr, by whose Disciples and Auditors they
are alleged to have been composed, or at the least by such as hold consent
with them in Doctrine; but unto this it has been answered, that our first
reformers were two old Archbishops, Deans, and Archdeacons, most of them to
be put to School again to either of them. Secondly, the first Liturgy of King
Edward the sixth, which was the key to the whole work, was finished, confirmed,
and put in execution before either of them were brought over; Dispatched soon
after their arrival to their several chaires; Martyr to the Divinity Lecture in
Oxon, and Bucer unto that of Cambridge where Godw. Annal. in Edw. 6.
he lived not long. And dying so quickly as he did, ( Luctu Academiae, as my
Author has it) though he had many Auditors there, yet could he not gain many
Disciples in so short a time. Thirdly, that though Peter Martyr lived to see
the Death of King Edward, and consequently the end of the Convocation, An.
1552. in which the Articles of Religion were first composed and agreed on; yet
there was little use made of him in advising, and much less in directing any
thing which concerned that business; for being a stranger, and but one, and
such an one who had no Authority in Church or State, he could not be considered
as a Master Builder, though some use might be made of him as a labourer to
advance the work. And, fourthly, as to their consent in point of doctrine, it
must be granted in such things, and in such things only in which they join
together against the Papists, not in such points wherein those learned men
agreed not between themselves, and therefore could be no foundation of consent
in others.

6. For they who have consulted the Lives and Writings of these learned men,
have generally observed that Bucer having spent the most part of his time in
the Lutheran Churches, was more agreeable to the doctrines which were there
maintained; as Martyr who was most conversant amongst the Suitzers, showed
himself more inclinable to the Zuinglian or Calvinian Tenants. And it is
generally observed also that Bucer was a man of moderate counsel, and for that
received a check from Calvin, at his first coming hither, putting him in
remembrance of his old fault (for a fault he thought it) M^dici consiliis
Autorem esse vel approbatorem, of being an Author or an approver of such
moderate courses as the hot and fiery temper of the Calvinists could by no
means like. And governing himself with such moderation, he well approved of the
first Liturgy, translated into Latin by Alexander Alesius a learned Scot,
that he might be the better able to understand the composure of it, and pass
his judgment on the same accordingly. And yet it cannot be denied, but that
there are many passages in the first Liturgy which tend directly to the
maintenance of universal Redemption by the death of Christ, of the cooperation
of man's will with the grace of God, and finally of the possibility of falling
from that grace, and other the benefits and fruits thereof before received. In
which last point it is affirmed that he amongst some others of the Protestant
Doctors, assented to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome at the Diet at
Ratisbone. And it is more then probable that Peter Martyr was not Peter Martyr,
I mean that he was not the same man as the Zuinglian and Calvinian Doctrine is,
and his espousing the same being here as he was after his departure, when he
had spent some further time amongst the Suitzers, and was thereby grown a
nearer neighbor unto Calvin then he was in England. For whereas his Book of
Common-places, and his Commentary to St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans, are most
insisted on for the proof of his Calvinisme; it appears Anti arm. p. 79, 83,
94, 102, 103, 108, etc.
plainly by his Epistle to Sir Anthony Coke, that the last was not published
till the year 1558. which was more then five years after his leaving of this
Kingdom. And as for his Book of Common Places, although it was printed first at
London, yet it received afterward two impressions more, the one at Zurick, and
the other at Basil, before the last Edition of it by Massonius after his
decease, An. 1576. By which Edition being that which is in Oxon Library, and
probably remaining only in the hands of Students, or in the private Libraries
of Colleges, it will be hard, if not impossible, to judge of his opinion in
these points, when he lived in England.

7. And now I am fallen amongst these strangers, it will not be amiss to
consult the Paraphrases of Erasmus in the English tongue, which certainly had
never been commended to the reading both of Vide Chap. 8. Sect. 3. and Chap.
17. Sect. 4.
Priest and People, as well by the injunctions of Queen Eliz. as K. Edw. 6. if
they had contained in them any other Doctrine then what is consonant to the
Articles, the Homilies, and the public Liturgy of this Church. Now in his
Paraphrase on the third chap. of St. Joh. v. 16. we shall find it thus. Who
(says he) would have believed the charity of God to have been so great toward
the world, being rebelli us aegainst Paraph. Erasm. fol. 4^4.
him, and guilty of so many great faults: that not only he did net revenge the
ungracious acts that had been committed therein, but also sent down his only
Son from heaven unto earth, and delivered him to suffer death, yea, even the
most shameful death of the Cross, to the intent that what man soever would
believe in him, were he Jew, Grecian, or never so barbarous, should not perish,
but obtain eternal life through the says of the Gospel. For albeit that in
time to come the Father should judge the universal world by his son at his last
coming; yet at this time which is appointed for mercy, God has not sent his
Son to condemn the world for the wicked deeds thereof, but by his death to give
free salvation to the world through faith. And least any body perishing
wilfully should have whereby to exercise his own malice, there is given to all
folks an easy entry to salvation. For satisfaction o^ the faults committed
before, is not required. Neither yet obseration of the Law, nor circumcision;
only he that believes in him shall not be condemned, for as much as he has
embraced that thing, by which eternal salvation is given to all folk, be they
never so much bu^dened with sins, so that the same person after he has
professed the Gospel, do abstain from the evil deeds of his former life, and
labor ^o go forward to perfect holiness, according to the doctrine of him
whose name he has professed. But whosoever condemning so great charity of God
toward him, and putting from himself the salvation that was freely offered,
does not believe the Gospel, he has no need to be judged of any body, for as
much as he does openly condemn himself; and rejecting the thing whereby he
might obtain everlasting life, makes himself guilty of eternal pain.

8. By which passages and the rest that follow on this Text of Scripture, we
may have a plain view of the judgment of this learned man in the points
disputed, as to the designation of eternal life to all that do believe in
Christ, the universality of Redemption by his death and passion, the general
offer of the benefit and effect thereof to all sorts of people; the freedom of
man's will in cooperating with the grace of God, or in rejecting and refusing
it when it is so offered, and relapsing from the same when it is so offered,
and relapsing from the same when it is received. All which we find in many
other passages of those Paraphrases, as occasion is presented to him. But more
particularly it appears, first, that he groundeth our election to eternal life,
on the eternal and divine prescience of Almighty God; telling us in his
Explication of the 25. chapter of St. Matthews Gospel, that the inheritance Ibid.
fol. 96.
of the heavenly Kingdom was prepared by the providence and determination of
God the fore-knower of all things before the world was made. Secondly, of
universal Redemption, in his gloss on the 1. chap. of St. John, he tells us
thus; This Lamb (says he) is so far from being subject to any kind of sin,
that he alone is able to take away all the sins Ibid. fol. 414.
of the whole world. He is so well beloved of God, that he only may turn his
wrath into mercy; He is also so gentle, and so desirous of man's salvation, that
he is ready to suffer pains for the sins of all men, and to take upon him our
evils, because he would bestow upon us his good things. Thirdly, of the manner
of the working of Gods grace, he speaks as plainly in his Explication of the 6.
chap. of the same Evangelist; where he tells us, that of a truth whosoever
comes unto Christ, shall obtain eternal life; that by faith must men come to
him, and that faith comes not at all aventures, but is had by the inspiration
of God the Father, Ibid. fol. 443.
who like as he draws to him men's minds by his Son, in such wise that
through the operation of both jointly together, men come to them both: the
Father not giving this so great gift, but to them that be willing and desirous
to have it; so that who with a ready will and godly diligence, deserves to be
drawn of the father, he shall obtain everlasting life by the Son. No violent
drawing in these words, but such as may be capable of resistance on the part of
man, as appears by his descant on that plain song of our Savior in Mat. 23. in
which he makes him speaking in this manner unto those of Jerusalem, viz.
Nothing is let pass on my behalf, whereby thou might be saved: but
contrariwise Ibid. fol. 90.
thou have done what thou can to bring destruction upon thy self, and to
exclude salvation from thee. But to whom Free Will is once given, he cannot be
saved against his will. Your will ought to be agreeable to my Will. But behold
as miserable calamity, etc. More plainly thus in the like descant on the same
words in St. Lukes Gospel, viz. How many a time and often have I assayed to
gather thy children together, and to join them to my self, none otherwise then
the hen gathers her chickens under her wings, that they may not miscarry! But
thy stubborness has gone beyond my goodness, and as though thou had even
vowed and devoted thy self to utter ruin, so do thou refuse all things
whereby thou migh^est be recovered and made whole. And finally, as to the
possibility of falling from the faith of Christ, he thus declares himself in
the Exposition of our Saviors Parable, touching the sower and the seed, viz.
There is another sort of men which greedily hear the word of Ibid. fol. 58.
the Gospel, and set it deep enough in their mind, and keep it long; but their
minds being entangled and choked with troublesome cares of this world, and
especially of riches (as it were with certain thick thorns) they cannot freely
follow that he ^^veth; because they will not suffer these thorns which cleave
together, and be entangled one with another among themselves, to be cut away,
the fruit of the seed which is sown does utterly perish. Which being so,
either we must conclude the doctrine of this Church in the Book of Articles to
be the same with that which is contained in the Paraphrases of this learned
man, or else condemn the godly Bishops of this Church, and the religious
Princes above mentioned of a great imprudence in recommending them to the
diligent and careful reading both of ^^iest and People.

HISTORIA QVINQV- ARTICVLARIS. OR A DECLARATION Of the Judgment of the WESTERN
CHVRCHES, And more particularly of the CHURCH of ENGLAND In the five
Controverted Points, Reproached in these last Times by the name of Arminianisme.

PART III. CONTAINING The first Breakings out of the Predestinarians, in the
Church of England, and the Pursuance of those Quarrels, from the Reign of King
EDWARD the sixth, to the death of King JAMES.

By P. HEYLIN, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for T. Johnson at the sign of the Key in Paul's Churchyard,
1660.

PART III.
CHAP. XVI. Of the first Breakings out of the Predestinarians, and their
Proceedings in the same.
1. THE Predestinarians called at first by the name of Gospellers. 2. Campneys
a professed enemy to the Predestinarians, but neither Papist nor Pelagtan. 3.
The common practices of the Calvinists to defame their Adversaries, the name of
Free will men, to whom given, why. 4. The Doctrine of John Knox. in restraining
all men's actions either good or evil, to the determinate Will and Counsel of
God 5. The like affirmed by the Author of the Table of Predestination; in whom,
and the Genevian Notes, we find Christ to be excluded from being the foundation
of man's Election, and made to be an inferior cause of salvation only. 6. God
made to be the Author of sin, by the Author of a Pamphlet, entitled against a
Privy Papist, and his secret Counsels called in for the proof thereof, both by
him and Knox, with the mischiefs which ensued upon it. 7. The Doctrine of
Robert Crowly, imputing all men's sins to Predestination, his silly defenses for
the same, made good by a distinction of John Verons, and the weakness of that
distinction showed by Campneys. 8. The Errors of the former Authors opposed by
Campneys, his book in answer to those Errors, together with his Orthodoxie in
the point of universal Redemption, and what he builds upon the same. 9. His
solid Arguments against the imputing of all actions either good or evil to
Predestination; justified by a saying of Prosper of Aquitaine. 10. The virulent
prosecutions of Veron and Crowly, according to the Genius of the sect of Calvin.

THus we have seen the Doctrine of the Church of England in the five
^nntroverted points, according to the Principles and persuasions of the first
Reformers. And to say truth, it was but time that they should come to some
conlusion in the points disputed: there being some men who in the beginning of
the Reign of King Edward the sixth, busily stickled in the maintenance of
Calvin's Doctrines. And thinking themselves to be more Evangelical then the rest
of their brethren; they either took unto themselves (or had given by others)
the name of Gospellers. Of this they were informed by the reverent Prelate, and
right godly Martyr, Bishop Hooper, in the Preface to his Exposition of the ten
Commandments: Our Gospellors (says he) be better learned then the holy Ghost,
for they wickedly attribute the cause of Punishments and Adversity to Gods
Providence, which is the cause of no ill, as he himself can do no ill: and over
every mischief that is done, they say it is Gods Will. In which we have the men
and their Doctrine, how the name of Gospellers, and the reason why that name
was ascribed unto them. It is observed by the judicious Author of the Book,
called, Europae Speculum, that Calvin was the first of these latter times, who
searched into the Counsels (the eternal Counsels) of Almighty God. And as it
seems he found there some other Gospel then that which had been written by the
four Evangelists: from whence his followers in these Doctrines had the name of
Gospellers: for by that name I find them frequently called by Campneys also in
an Epistolary Discourse, where he clears himself from the crimes of Popery and
Pelagianism, which some of these new Gospellers had charged upon him; which had
I found in none but him, it might have been ascribed to heat or passion in the
agitation of these quarrels: but finding it given to them also by Bishod Hooper
(a temperate and modest man) I must needs look upon it as the name of the Sect,
by which they were distinguished from other men.

2. And now I am fallen upon this Campneys; it will not be unnecessary to say
something of him in regard of the great part he is to act on the stage of this
business. Protestant he was of the first edition cordially affected to the
Doctrine of the Church of England in the present points, but of a sharp and
eager spirit. And being not well weaned from some points of Popery in the first
dawning of the day, of our Reformation, he gave occasion unto some of those
whom he had exasperated to inform against him, that they prosecuted the
complaint so far, that he was forced to bear a faggot at St. Paul's Cross (as
the custom was in all such cases) Miles Coverdale, then or not long after
Bishop of Exon, preaching a Sermon at the same. But whatsoever he was then in
other Doctrinals, he has sufficiently purged himself from the crimes of Popery
and Pelagianism, wherewith he had been charged by those of the adverse party.
For whereas one William Samuel had either preached or written Answer to a
certain letter. p. 3.
in Queen Mary's time, That a man might deserve God, etc. Campneys beholds it
for a doctrine so blasphemous and abominable, that neither Papists nor
Pelagians, nor any other Heretic old or new has ever written or maintained a
more filthy and execrable saying. For it is the stat and manifest denying both
of God the Father, and of his Son Christ Jesus: neither does it require any
confutation to him that does but confess that there is a God. And as for my
self, says he, I do not love my life so dearly, as I hate this vile saying
deadly. He gives not long after to the Popish Pelagians the name of a filthy
and detestable Sect. p. 5. mustereth up all the errors of Pelagius, which had
been publicly recanted in the Synod of Palestine, and falling upon that which
teaches, That the grace of God is given according unto our deserving; he
declares it to be vile and abominable, contrary to the manifest mind and words
of the Apostle, p. 12. Finally, Not to trouble my self with more particulars,
encount^ing with another of the Pelagian Heresies, he passionately cries out, O
blasphemy intolerable! O filthy puddle, and sink most execrable! full of
stinking Errors, full of damnable presumption, like to the pride of Lucifer,
most abominable, p. 15.!

3. This is enough to free this man from being either a Papist or Pelagian
Heretic, as his enemies made him. And for the other reproach which they laid
upon him, of being an Enemy to Gods predestination, I conceive it will not be
regarded as a matter of moment, considering the Disputes between them, and the
usual acts of the Calvinians to defame their Adversaries. We showed before, how
Bogerman, Paraeus, and the rest of the Calvinian Sect, reproacht the
Remonstrants with Pelagianism in their public writings, though as free from it
as themselves. We showed before, how Cross in the continuation of his Belgic
History imposes on them for some of their detestable opinions, that they made
God to be the Author of sin, and that he had created the infinitely greatest
part of mankind to no other end, but to burn them in hell fire for ever: which
horrid Blasphemies they both abominated and confuted to their best abilities.
The like unworthy practices, were used by Calvin and Beza, against Sebastian
Castle. a man of no less learning, but of far more modesty and moderation then
either of them; whom they never left persecuting and reviling, till they had
first cast him out of Geneva, and afterward brought him to his grave. And this
they did unto a man both of parts and piety upon no other pretense or
provocation whatever, but because he maintained another way of predestination
then that which they had taught their followers for Gods Truth and Gospel. And
therefore it can be no wonder if the new Gospellers in England, persued the
same courses against all those who opposed their fancies. For being governed by
this spirit, they taxed their opposites sometimes for being Haters of Gods
Predestination, as before is said, though entire Answer to a certain letter. p.
16.
Lovers of the same, reviled them by the names of Popish Pelagians, and
Justifiers of themselves, imputing to those men the whole mass of Pelagianism,
who from their very hearts and souls abhorred all their wicked Opinions, and
have been many years willing to bestow their lives against all their abominable
Errors. And sometimes finally they call them Free Will men in contempt and
scorn; designing by that name not the Papist only, but such of their own
mothers Children also, as taught that Cain was not predestinate to slay his
brother* and that God has not predestinate any man to the committing of
murder, Id. p. 56.
or any such like wicked abominations.

4. Which being said, and the credit of the man set right, we may the better
know what we are to trust to in taking up some few following passages upon his
Authority. Amongst which I shall first begin with that of Knox, that great
Incendiary of the Nation and Kirk of Scotland, who in a book of his published
in the end of King Edwards, or the beginning of Queen Marie's Reign, against an
Adversary of Gods Predestination, as the Title tells us. First builds the
Doctrine of Predestination unto Gods absolute Will, without relation to man's
sin or our Saviors suffering: and then ascribes unto the predeterminate
Counsel and Will of God all humane actions whatsoever.

In Reference to the first he was of their opinion plainly, who building upon
the example of Esau, exclude all that is in man either original sin or actual,
from the cause of Gods hate, which they lay on his own pleasure only: which
Knox endeavors to make good by this following Argument, p. 141. That if Esa^
was hated for his evil deserving, then must needs follow, that Jacob was loved
for his well deserving, the Argument following, as he says, by the Rule of P.
48.
Contraries. What superstructure he has raised upon this Foundation? Assuredly
no better nor no worse then this, That the wicked are not only left by Gods
suffering, but compelled to sin by his power, P. 317. More copiously, but not
more plainly, in another place, fol. 158. where it is affirmed, that whatsoever
the Ethnicks and Ignorants did attribute unto fortune, we Christians do assign
to the Providence of God, that we should judge nothing of Fortune, but that Id.
p. 22.
all comes by the determination of his Counsel* and finally that it
displeases him when we esteem any thing to proceed from any other: so that,
(says he) we not only behold and know him to be the principal cause of all
things, but also the Author appointing all things to the one part, or to the
other by his Counsel. In which last, if he make not God the Author of sin (as I
think he does) we shall very shortly find another that will.

5. So able a Leader as John Knox could not want followers Id. p. 36.
of all Nations to attend upon him: in the Catalogue or list whereof, we must
first look upon the Author of a Treatise written in French, and published
afterward in English, entitled, A brief Declaration of the Table of
Predestination: in which it is affirmed expressly, That seeing God who has
appointed the end, it is necessary also that he should appoint the causes
leading to the same end: as if he should have said (says Campneys) that as God
has appointed some man to be hanged, so he has appointed him also to steal,
as a cause leading to the same end, to which by God he is appointed. The same
French English Author lets us know in another place, P. 15.
That by virtue of Gods Will all things were made; yea even those things which
are evil and execrable: which execrable saying he endeavors to palliate with
this distinction, That those evil execrable things which are wrought by the
virtue of Gods Will, are not evil and execrable, in that they are wrought by
his divine Counsel: but for as much as they proceed from the Prince of the air.
And as for the foundation of Election to eternal P. 63.
life, he lays it not on the free Mercy of God in Christ, which he affirms to
be no other, but an inferior cause thereof; but teaches us to ascend unto an
higher cause, that is to say, to the eternal purpose and predestination of God,
which he determined only in himself. Conform to which we find in the Genevian
Bibles this marginal Note, amongst many others of like nature, viz. As the only
Will and purpose of God is the chief cause of Election and Reprobation; so his
free mercy in Christ is an inferior cause of salvation, etc. Romans 9.

6. In the next place comes out a Pamphlet, entitled against a privy Papist;
the Author whereof takes upon him to prove this point, That all evil springs
out of Gods Ordinance, or that Gods Predestination was the cause of Adams fall,
and of all wickedness. Now this man goes to work like a Logician, and frames
his Sylogism in this manner, viz.

That whatsoever was in Adam, was in him by Gods Will and Major.
Ordinance.

But sin was in Adam. Minot.


Ergo. sin was in him, by Gods will and ordinance,

Of which Sylogisme Campneys very well observes, that if the Major of it be
understood of Adam after his fall, as by the minor it must be) then may it be
affirmed also of any other, that whatsoever execrable wickedness is in him, the
same is in him by Gods will and ordinance. But then because it might be asked,
that seeing it is the decree, ordinance Ibi. p. 43.
and will of God that man should not sin; How they should creep into that
secret council, where God ordained, decreed and willed the contrary? The
leader will come in to help his followers in the present plunge, for in his
traiterous and seditious Libel, Against the Regiment of Women (which he calls,
The first blast of the Trumpet) he knows not how to shift off the obedience due
by Gods word to lawful Queens in their several Kingdoms, but by flying to some
special Revelation from his secret will not publicly communicated to the sons
of men: And this he speaks not faintly, but with zeal and confidence, telling
us how assured him, that God has revealed it to some in our age, (that is to
say, himself and his Disciples in the holy Presbytery) that it is more then a
Monster in nature, that a Woman should Rule and have Empire against man. And
what could they do less, upon this assurance, upon so plain a Revelation of
Gods secret will, then take up arms against their Queen, depose her from her
throne, expel her out of her native Kingdom, and finally prosecute her to the
very death. The Ladder which Constantine the great commended to Assesius a
Novatian Bishop for his safer climing up to heaven, was never more made use of
then by Knox and Calvin, for mounting them to the sight of Gods secret
Council, which St. Paul calls (...), or things unspeakble, such as are neither
possible nor lawful for a man to utter.

7. But of all Knoxe's followers, none followed so close upon his heels as To.
Crowly a fugitive for Religion in Q. Mary's days and the Author of a Book
called a Confutation of 13. Articles, Ibid. p. 18.
etc. In which he lays the sin of Adam (and consequently all men's sins from
that time to this) upon the Absolute Decree of Predestination, for seeing
(says he) that Adam was so perfect "a creature that there was in him no lust
to sin; and yet withal so weak of himself, that he was not able to withstand
the assault of the subtle Serpent; no remedy, the only cause of his fall must
needs be the Predestination of God." In other places of this book he makes it
to be a common saying of the free will men (as in contempt and scorn he calls
them) that Cain was not predestinate to slay is brother; Ibi. p. 2. 4.
which makes it plain, that he was otherwise persuaded in his own opinion:
That the most wicked persons that have been, whereof God appointed to be even
as wicked as they were, that if God do predestinate a man to do things rashly
and without any Ibi. p. 2. 6.
deliberation, he shall not deliberate at all; but run headlong upon it, be it
good or evil: That we are compelled by Gods predestination, Ibi. 2. 7.
to do those things for which we are damned: And finally, finding this
Doctrine to be charged with making God more Ibi. 46.
cruel and unmercifull, then the greatest Tyrant, and pressed therewith by
some of the contrary persuasion, he returns his answer in this wise, If God
(says he) were an inferior to any superior "power, to the which he ought to
render an account of his doing, or if any of us were not his creatures, but of
another creation besides his workmanship, then might we charge him with
Tyranny, because he condemns us, and appointed us to be punished for the
things we do by compulsion, through the necessity of his Predestination." For
a Catholicon, or general Antidote, to which dangerous Doctrines, a new
distinction was devised, by which in all abominations God was expressly said, to
be the Author of the fact or Ibid. p. 4. 47
deed, but not of the crime; which subtilty appears amongst many others in a
brief Treatise of Election, and Reprobation, published by one John Veron in the
English tongue about the beginning of the reign of Queen Elizabeth; Which
subtilty, Ibi. p. 32.
Campneys not unfitly calls, a mavelous sophistication, a strange Paradox, and
a cautelous Riddle, and he seems to have good reason for it. For by this
Doctrine (as he notes) it must follow, that God is the Author of the very fact
and deed of Adultery, Theft, Murder, etc. but not the Author of the sin; Sin
having as they say no positive entity, but being a mere nothing as it were, and
therefore not to be ascribed to Almighty God: And thereupon he does infer,
that when a malefactor is hanged, for any of the facts before said, he is
hanged for nothing, because the fact or deed is ascribed to God* and the sin
only charged on him; which sin being nothing in it self, it must be nothing
that the malefactor is condemned, or hanged for.

8. By all the Books it does appear, what method of Predestination these new
Gospellers drive at, how close they followed at the Heels of their master
Calvin in case they did not go beyond him. Certain it is that they all speak
more plainly then their Master does; as to the making of God to be the the
Author of sin; though none of them speak any things else, then what may
logically be inferred from his ground and principles. And by this book it
appears also, how contrary these Doctrins are, to the established by the first
Reformers in the Church of England; how contrary the whole method of
Predestination out of which they flow, is to that delivered in the Articles,
the Homilies, and the public Liturgy, and witnessed too, by so many learned
men and godly martyrs, Which manifest deviation from the rules of the Church,
as it gave just offense to all moderate and sober men, so amongst others unto
Campneys before remembered; who could not but express his dislike thereof, and
for so doing was traduced for a Pelagian and a Papist, or a Popish Pelagian.
For which being charged, by way of Letter, he was necessitated to return an
Answer to it which he published in the second or third year of Queen Elizabeth.
In which Answer he not only cleares himself from favoring the Pelagian errors
in the Doctrine of Freewill, Justification by works, etc. but solidly and
learnedly refuteth the opinions of certain English Writers and Preachers; whom
he accuses for teaching of false and scandalous Doctrine, under the name of
Predestination; for his preparation whereunto he states the point of universal
redemption Ibi. p. 10. Romans 5.
by the death "of Christ, out of the parrallel which St. Paul has made
between Christ and Adam; that by the comparison of condemnation in Adam, and
redemption in Christ, it might more plainly be perceived, that Christ was not
inferior to Adam, nor Grace to sin; And that as all the generation of man is
condemned in Adam, so is all the generation of man redeemed in Christ: and as
general a Savior is Christ by Redemption, as Adam is a condemner by
transgression." Which ground so laid, he shows how inconsistent their opinions
are to the truth of Scripture, who found the Doctrine of Election and
Reprobation on Gods absolute pleasure; by which infinitely the greatest part of
all mankind is precedaniously excluded from having any part or interess in this
redemption, reprobated to eternal death, both in body and soul: as the
examples of his vengeance, and consequently preordained unto sin, as the means
unto it, that so his vengeance might appear with the face of Justice. Which
preordaining unto sin, as it does necessarily infer the laying of a necessity
upon all men's actions, whether good or bad, according to that predeterminate
Counsel and Will of God; so these good men, the Authors of the books before
remembered, do expressly grant it, acknowldgeing that God does not only move
men to sin, but compel them to it, by the inevitable rules of Predestination.

9. But against this it is thus discoursed by the said Campneys: Ibi. p. 51.
that if Gods predestination be the only "cause of Adams fall, and filthy sin:
And consequently the only cause and worker of all evil; yea even with
compulsion and force (as they shamefully and plainly affirm) then will no man
deny, but that (on the other side) Gods predestination works as violently in
all things that are good: so then if Gods predestination work all, without all
exception, both in evil and good; then all other things whatsoever they be
although they all appear to work and do some things; yet do they indeed utterly
nothing. So that the Devil does nothing, Man does nothing, Laws do nothing,
Doctrine does nothing, Prayer does nothing: but Gods predestination does all
together, and is the efficient cause, yea and the only cause of all things. He
further proves, that according unto Agust Retract. ^. ^. c. 9. and 16.
this position, they hold the error both of the Stoics, as also of the
Manicheans; that is to say, (as St. Augustine declaeth) Ibi. p. 26.
that evil has his original of Gods Ordinance, and not of man's free will; for
if Murderers, Adulterers, Thieves, Traitors, and Rebels, be of God
predestinate and appointed to be wicked, (even as they are) cannot choose but of
mere necessity by the Ordinance of God, commic all such wickedness even as they
do: then what is our life but a mere destiny? All our doing God ordinances;
and all our immaginations, branches of Gods Predestination?" And then we must
have thieves by Predestination, who remasters, and Adulterers by
Predestination, Murderers, and Traitors by Predestination, and indeed, what
not: if all men's actions are necessitated by the will of God, and so
necessitated that they can neither do less evil, nor more good then they do,
though they should never so much endeavor it, as some of our Calvinians teach
us, which opinion, as Campneys has observed, Ibi. p. 45.
is condemned by Prosper of Acquitaine in his defense of St. Augustine, in
these following words; " Predestinationem Prosp. 1. Resp. ad Object. Gal. 6.
dei, sive ad malum, sive ad bonum, etc. That the predestination of God (says
he) does work in all men either into good or into evil, is most foolishly
said. As though a certain necessity, should drive men unto both: seeing in
good things the evil is not to be understood without grace, and in evil
things the evil is to be understood without grace." And so much touching
Campneys, and his performance in the points against the Gospellers, some
passages having before been borrowed from him, concerning Lambert, Gynnell,
and his Adherents. For which see, Chap. 6. Numb. 11.

10. No sooner was this book come out, but it gave a very strong alarm to
those of the Calvinian party within this Realm; which had been very much
increased by the retiring of so many of our learned men to the Zuinglian and
Genevian Churches in Queen Maryes days, amongst which none more eagar,
(because more concerned) then Veron, Crowly above mentioned. The first of
these, being Reader of the Divinity Lecture in the Church of St. Paul's, and one
of the Chaplains to the Queen, published his Answer shortly after, called, An
Apology or Defense of the Doctrine of predestination and dedicated to the
Queen: in which Answer he gives his Adversary no better titles, then the blind
Guide of the free will men p. 37. A very Pelagian, and consequently a Rank
Papist, p 40. Suffering the Devil, by such sectaries as Campneys to sow his
lies abroad, etc. and 41. The Stander-bearer of the free will men; His book
he calls a venomous and Railing book, upbraids him with his bearing of a faggot
in K. Edwards days; and chalenging him, that if he be able to maintain his
own Doctrine, and oppose that in the answer to it, let him come forth and play
the man. Nor was it long before another Answer came out by the name of Crowly,
called an Apology or defense, of the English Writers and Preachers, with
Cerberus the three headed dog Hell, Charge with false Doctrine, under the
name of Predestination, printed at London in the year 1566. And by the title
of this Book, as we may see with what a strange Genius the Gospellers or
Calvinians were possessed from the first beginning, we may well conjecture at
the Gentle usage, which the poor man was like to find in the whole discourse.
But if it be objected in favor of these two books, (that they were published
by Authority and according to order; when that of Campneys, seems to have been
published by stealth without the Name of Author or of Printer, as is affirmed
in Verons book before remembered; It may be since answered, that the Doctrine
of the Church was then unsettled, the Articles of K. Edwards time being
generally conceived to be out of force, and no new established in their place,
when Veron first entered on the cause. And secondly it may be answered, that
though Crowlyes Apology came not out till the year 1566. when the new
articles were agreed upon, yet his treatise called a confutation of 13.
Articles, which gave occasion to the Quarrel, had been written many years
before. And he conceived himself obliged to defend his Doctrine, and get as
good countenance to it as he could within a time, especially intent on
suppressing Popery, might be no hard matter for him to do. And as to that part
of the objections which Relates to Campneys, and his suppressing of his Name* I
look upon it as a high part of wisdom in him, in regard of the Great sway which
the Calvinians had at their first coming over, the prejudice conceived against
him for his slipps and sufferings in the reign of K. Edward, and the Authority
of the men against whom he writ. Veron a Chaplain to the Queen, Crowly of
Great esteem in London for his diligent preaching, and Knox the great Directer
of the Kirk of Scotland.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Disputes amongst the Confessors in Prison in Queen Mary's
days, and the Resetling of the Church on her former principles under Queen
Elizabeth.
1. THe Doctrine of Predestination disputed amongst the Confessors in Prison in
Queen Mary's days. 2. The Examination of John Carelese before Dr. Martin, in
reference to the said Disputes. 3. Considerations on some passages in the
conference betwixt Dr. Martin and the said John Careless. 4. Review made of
the public Liturgy by the command of Queen Elizabeth, and the Paraphrases of
Erasmus commended to the reading both of Priest and People. 5. The second book
of Homilies how provided for, and of the liberty taken by the Gospellers, and
Zuinglian Sectaries, before the reviewing and confirming of the Book of
Articles, by the Queens Authority. 6. Of the reviewing and authority of the
Book of Articles, Anno 1562. and what may be from thence inferred. 7. An answer
from the Agreement drawn from omitting the ninth Article of King Edwards Book,
the necessity of giving some content to the Zuinglian Gospellers, and the
difficulty wherewith they were induced to subscribe the Book, at the first
passing of the same. 8. The Argument taken from some passages in the English
Catechism, set forth by Mr. Alexander Powell, and the strength thereof. 9.
Several considerations on the said Catechism, and the rest of the Authors
making; and what his being Prolocutor in the convocation might add to any of
them in point of Orthodoxie. 10. Nothing to be collected out of the first
passage in Mr. Powells Catechism, in favor of the Calvinian doctrine of
Predestination, and the points depending thereupon, and less then nothing in
the second, if it be understood according to the Authors meaning; and the
determination of the Church.

1. MOre calmly, and with less deviation from the Doctrine of the Church of
England, were the same points, disputed in Queen Mary's days, amongst the
Confessors in Prison, which coming to the knowledge of the Queen and her
Council, a Commission was granted to one Dr. Martin (a busy man in all such
matters as appears by the story) to make enquiry, amongst many other things,
into this particular; and he according to the power given by the commission,
convents before her one John Carelese, borne at Coventry, of no better quality
then a weaver, yet one that was grown very able to express himself, when the
matter came to examination: by which examination it appears, that as Carelese
somewhat differed in the Doctrine of Predestination, and the point depending
thereupon from the Church assembled, according as it was established in King
Edwards time; so True, another of the Prisoners (but of what quality or
condition, I am yet to seek) seems more inclinable to that opinion* if
Carelese understood them rightly, which was defended all that time by the
Popish Clergy. And that the Reader may perceive the better how the difference
stood; I shall lay down so much of the conference, between Dr. Martin and the
Prisoner, as concerns this business, leaving the Reader to admire at Gods
infinite goodness, giving poor unlettered men such a measure of Christian
courage, as might enable them to speak both stoutly and discreetly in their
greatest troubles. Now the said conference was as follows.

2. The Examination of John Carelese before Doctor Martin. Martin. Act. and
Mon. fol. 1742.


Carelese, I could wish that thou would play the wise man's part, thou art a
handsome man, and it is pity but that thou should do well, and save that God
has bought.

I thank your good Mastership most heartily, and I put Carelese.
you out of doubt, that I am most sure and certain of my salvation by Jesus
Christ: so that my soul is safe already, what pains soever my body suffer
here for a little time.

Yea, marry you say truth, for thou art so predestinate Martin.
to life that thou can not perish in whatsoever opinion thou do die.

That God has predestinate me to eternal life in Jesus Carelese.
Christ, I am most certain; and even so I am sure that his holy Spirit
(wherewith I am sealed) will so preserve me from all heresies and evil
opinions, that I shall die in none at all.

Go to, let me hear your faith in Predestination, for that shall Martin.
be written also.

Your Mastership shall pardon me herein, for you said your Carelese.
self ere while, that you had no Commission to examine my conscience.

I tell thee I have a Commission, yea, and a Commandment Martin.
from the Council to examine thee of such things as be in controversy between
thee and thy fellows in the Kings Bench, whereof Predestination is a part as
thy fellow has confessed, and thy self do not deny it.

I do not deny it, but he that first told you that matter might Carelese.
have found himself much better occupied.

Why? I tell thee truth, I may now examine thee of any Martin.
thing that I list.

Then let your Scribe set his pen to the paper, and you Carelese.
shall have it roundly, as the truth is; I believe that Almighty God, our most
dear loving Father, of his great mercy, and infinite goodness (through Jesus
Christ) did elect and appoint in him before the foundation of the Earth was
laid, a Church or Congregation, which he does continually guide and govern by
his Grace and holy Spirit, so that not one of them all ever finally perish.
When this was written, Mr. Doctor took it in his hand, saying.

Why? who will deny this? Martin. Carelese.


If your Mastership do allow it, and other learned men, when they shall see it,
I have my hearts desire.

Did you hold no otherwise then is there written? Martin. Carelese. Martin.


No verily, no nere did.

Write that he says otherwise he holds not (so that was written) It was told
me also, that thou do affirm that Christ did not die effectually for all men.

Whatsoever has been told you, is not much material, for Carelese.
indeed I do believe that Christ did effectually die for all those, that do
effectually repent and believe, and for none other; so that was written.

Now Sir, what is Trews faith of Predestination? he believes, Martin.
that all men be predestinate, and that none shall be damned, does he not?

No forsooth, that he does not. Carelese. Martin. Carelese.


How then?

I think he does believe as your Mastership, and the rest of the Clergy* do
believe of Predestination, that we be elect in respect of our good works, and
so long elected as we do them, and no longer.

Yet thou cannot deny, but that you are at a jar amongst Martin.
your selves in the Kings Bench, and it is so throughout all your Congregation,
for you will not be a Church.

No, Master Doctor, that is not so, there is a thousand Carelese.
times more variety of opinions amongst your Doctors, which you call, of the
Catholic Church; yea, and that in the Sacrament, for the which there is so
much blood shed now adays. I mean, of your later Doctors, and new Writers; as
for the old they agree wholly with us.

3. Now in this conference or examination there are diverse things to be
considered; For, first, I consider Carelese as a man unlettered, and not so
thoroughly grounded in the constitution of the Church of England, as not to
entertain some thoughts to which the doctrine of this Church could afford no
countenance. Amongst which I reckon that strong confidence which he had of his
own salvation, and of the final perseverance of all those who are the chosen
members of the Church of Christ, which was not taught him by the Church, and
could not be obtained in any ordinary way, by the light of that doctrine which
then shined forth unto the people. Secondly, I consider him as one so far
instructed in the knowledge of Predestination, as to lay the foundation of it
on Gods great mercy, and infinite goodness in Christ Jesus; which plainly
crosses with the new Gospellers of those times, who found the same upon his
absolute will and pleasure, without relation to Christ's sufferings for us, or
our faith in him. Thirdly, I consider that the Doctrine of Universal
Redemption, by the death of Christ, and the effectuality thereof to the sons of
men, was then so generally received and taught in the Reformed Church of
England, as not to be known to Artificers, Tradesmen, and Mechanics; and that
they were so well instructed in the nicities of it, as to believe that though
Christ died effectually for all, yet the benefit thereof should be effectually
applied to none, but those who do effectually repent. Fourthly, I consider that
if the Popish Clergy of those times did believe no otherwise of Predestination,
then that men be elected in respect of good works, and so long elected as they
do them, and no longer, as Carelese has reported of them; the Doctrine of the
Church has been somewhat altered since those times; there being now no such
Doctrine taught in the Schools of Rome, as that a man continues no longer in
the state of Election, then whilst he is exercised in good works. And finally,
I consider the unfortunate estate of those, who living under no certain rule
of Doctrine or Discipline, lie open to the practices of cunning and malicious
men; by whom they are many times drawn aside from the true Religion. For
witnesses whereof, we have True and Carelese, above mentioned; the one being
wrought on by the Papists, the other endangered by the Gospellers or Zuinglian
Sectaries; For that Carelese had been tampered with by the Gospellers, or
Zuinglian Sectaries, does* appear most clearly, first by the confidence which
he had of his own salvation, and of the final perseverance of all others also,
which are the chosen members of the Church of Christ; and secondly, but more
especially, for giving the scornful title of a Free Will man to one of his
fellow prisoners, who was it seems of different persuasion from him. For which
consult his letter to Henry Adlington, in the Act. and Mon. Fol. 1749. which
happened unto him as to many others; When that Doctrine of the Church wanted
the countenance of Law, and the Doctors of the Church here scattered and
dispersed abroad, not being able to assist them. In which condition the
affairs of the holy Church remained, till the beginning of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, and for some years after.

4. But no sooner had that gracious Lady attained the Crown, when she took
order for the reviewing of the public Liturgy, formerly Authorized by Act of
Parliament in the fifth and sixth years of King. Edward the sixth. The men
appointed for which work, were Dr. Parker, after Archbishop of Canterbury; Dr.
Grindall, after Bishop of London; Dr. Pilkington, after Bishop of Durham; Dr.
Cox, after Bishop of Elie; Dr. May, Deane of Paul's; Dr. Bill, Provost of Eaton,
after Deane of Westminister; Mr. Whitehead, (sometimes Chaplain to Queen Anne
Bullen) designed to be the first Archbishop of this new plantation; and
finally, Sir Thomas Smyth, a man of great esteem with King Edward the sixth,
and the Queen now Reigning. By these men were the Liturgy reviewed, approved,
and passed, without any sensible alteration in any of the Rubricks, Prayers and
Contents thereof; but only the giving of some contentment to the Papists and
all moderate Protestants in two particulars; the first whereof was the taking
away of a clause in the Letany, in which the people had been taught to pray to
Almighty God to deliver them from the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all
his detestable enormities. The second was, the adding of the sentences in the
distribution of the Sacrament, viz. The Body of our Lord Jesus which was given
for them, preserve thy body and soul to everlasting life. The Blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ which was shed for thee, etc. which sentences exclusive of the now
following words of participation, as they were only in the first, so were they
totally left out of the second Liturgy of King Edward the sixth. Other
alterations I find none mentioned in the Act of Parliament, 1. Eliz. ^. 2. but
the appointing of certain Lessons for every Sunday in the year; which made no
change at all in the public Doctrine, before contained in that Book; and that
the people might be the better trained up in the same Religion, which had been
taught and preached unto them in the time of King Edward the sixth. She gave
command by her Injunctions, published in the first year of her Reign An. 1559.
that the Paraphrases of Erasmus should be diligently studied both by Priest and
people. And to that end it was required (as formerly in the Injunctions of the
said Injunct. 6.
King Edward) 1. That the Paraphrases of the said Erasmus, and on the Gospel in
the English tongue, should be provided at the joint charges of the Parson and
Parishoners, and being so provided should be set up in some convenient place of
every Church, so as the Parishioners may most commodiously resort unto the
same, and read the same out of the time of common service. And, secondly, that
every Parson, Vicar, Curate, and Stipendary Priest, shall provide, and Injunct.
16.
have of his own within the time therein limited, the New Testament in Latin
and English, with the Paraphrases on the same; conferring the one with the
other. And the Bishops by themselves and other Ordinaries, and their Officers
in Synods and Visitations, shall examine the said Ecclesiastical Priests how
they have profited in the study of holy Scripture. Evident Arguments that there
was no intent of settling any other Doctrine in the Church of England, then such
as was agreeable to the Judgment of that Learned man.

5. The next care was for making and perfecting those Homilies, of which we
find mention at the end of King Edwards Book, for the necessary edifying of
Christian people, and the increase of godly living; both Books sufficiently
provided for (besides the confirmation of that first Article of the year,
1552.) in the Rubric of the second Liturgy, where it is said, that after the
Creed, if there be no Sermon, shall follow one of the Homilies already set
forth, or to be set forth by common authority; which Rubric being revised with
the rest of the Liturgy, put the said books of Homilies (as well the second as
first part of them) into the service of the Church, and thereby made them no
small part of the public doctrine; But who they were which labored in this
second Book, whither they were the same that drew up the first, or those who in
Queen Elizab. time reviewed the Liturgy; or whether they were made by the one,
and reviewed by the other, I have no where found, though I have taken no small
pains in the search thereof. But those few doctrinals which were contained in
the Book of Common Prayer, or deducible from it, not being much took notice of;
and the Homilies not confirmed by that common Authority, which was required in
the Rubric, the Zuinglians or Gospellers took the opportunity to disperse
their doctrines, before the door of utterance should be shut against them, or
any public course be taken to suppress their practices. And this they did with
so much diligence and cunning, that they increased exceedingly both in power
and numbers; of which more hereafter. Notice whereof being took of those which
were of most Authority in the Government of the Church, it was thought
necessary for the preventing of the mischief which might thence ensue, that the
Articles of Religion, published in King Edwards time, 1552. should be brought
under a Review, accommodated to the use of the Church, and made to be the
standing Rule, by which all persons were to regulate and confirm their
Doctrines.

6. And to this end a Convocation was assembled on the 13. of January, An.
1562. which continued t^^^ the 14. day of April; the main business which was
acted in it, being the canvasing and debating of the Articles of King Edwards
Book, and passing them in the form and manner in which now they stand; which
business as they took first into consideration on the 19. of January, and
diligently prosecuted from day to day, by the Bishops and Clergy in their
several houses, they came to an agreement on the 29. of the same month, on
which the said Articles were publicly recited, generally approved, and
subscribed by the greatest part of the Clergy which were then assembled. And
being so subscribed, presented to the Queen, and ratified by her Royal
Authority, were forthwith published to the same end for which they were made,
that is to say, For the avoiding of diversities of opinions, and for the
stablishing of consent touching true Religion, as in the title is declared. In
the composing of which Book, though a clause was added to the twentieth
Article, and another taken from the third; though some Articles of King Edwards
were totally omitted, and some new made (as that amongst the rest for
confirmation of the second Book of Homilies) which were not in the Book before;
yet the the five Articles touching the Doctrine of the Church in the points
disputed, as they stand in the eight Chapter of this Book, were left in that
same state in which they found them. And being left in the same state in which
they found them, were to be taken in the same sense, in which they had been
understood at the first making of them, according to such illustrations as
occur in the Book of Common Prayer, such Explanations as are found in the Book
of Homilies, and the judgment of those learned men and godly Martyrs, which
had a principal hand in the Reformation, so that the Articles being the same as
to these particulars, the paraphrases of Erasmus state the same; the public
Liturgy, and the first Book of Homilies, in all points the same; and the
second book of Homilies, agreeing exactly with the first in the present
controversies, as appears by the three first Sections of the seventh Chapter of
this Book, and that which follows in the next; there is no question to be made,
but that the doctrine was the same in the said five points, which had been
publicly allowed of in the time of King Edward.

7. But against this it may be said, that one of the material Articles of King
Edwards book (in reference to the points disputed) was totally left out of
this, and therefore that there was some alteration of the Churches judgment,
as to the sense and meaning of the present Articles, which Article being the
tenth in number, as it stands in that Book, is there delivered in these words,
viz. Gratia Christi seu spiritus sanctus, qui per eundem datur, etc. 'The grace
of Christ, or the holy Ghost which is given by him, does take from man the
heart of stone, and gives him a heart of flesh: And though by the influences
thereof, it renders us willing to do those good works which before we were
unwilling to do, and unwilling to do those evil works which before we did;
voluntati tamen nullam violentiam infert; yet is no violence offered by it to
the will of man: nor can any man when he has sinned excuse himself, quasi
nolens aut coactus peccaverit, as if he had sinned against his will, or upon
constraint, and therefore that he ought not to be accused or condemned upon
that account.' For answer whereunto it may first be said, that the Composers of
that Book, thought it not fit to clog it with any unnecessary points in which
the peace and safty of the Church seems not much concerned; and therefore as
they left out the present Article, so they omitted the sixteenth touching the
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, together with the four last of King Edwards
Book, touching the General resurrection, the stare of men's souls after death,
the Doctrine of the Millinaries, and of a general salvation to be given to the
wicked also, after they had endured the pains of hell for a certain time.
Secondly, they considered, that the doctrine of man's free Cooperation with the
grace of God, had been sufficiently expressed and provided for by the tenth
Article of this Book, and the ninth of which illustrated by diverse passages in
the public Liturgy, accommodated and applied to the most increase of piety in
the Book of Homilies: therefore that there was no great need to contend about
it, or to retain it in the Book. And somewhat also must be done (the point
being so secured and provided for, as before was said) to content (the
Zuinglians, or Calvinians, by which last name they were afterward more
generally called) who were grown strong and numerous in most parts of the
Realm: Insomuch that many of them did not refuse to subscribe the Book, and
were complained of for that cause by the Prolocutor to the House of Bishops;
desiring that an order might be presently made to cause them to subscribe their
names to the said Article, either in their own house, or before their
Lordships: which order being made on the fifth of February, the Prolocutor
signified to the Archbishop and Bishops in the name of the lower House of
Convocation; that some of the Refusers had subscribed, and that others still
persisted in their former obstinacy. And thereupon the Bishops ordered the same
day (the tenth of February) quod nomina eorum qui hactenus non subscripserant,
presententur coram iis in proxima sessione; that is to say, that the names of
such who still refused to subscribe, should be presented to their Lordships at
the next Session; which put an end to the Dispute, for after this I hear no
more of their refusals; the subscription of the book being universal, as
appears by this memorial in the jornal of that Convocation, viz. universus
clerus eosdem etiam unanimiter and recepit and professus est, ut ex manuum
suarum subscriptionibus patet; that is to say, that all the Clergy did
unanimously approve the said Articles, and testified their consent therein, as
by the subscription of their hands does and may appear; so difficult a thing it
was from the first beginning to bring that violent and head strong faction unto
any conformity.

8. In the next place it is objected that Mr. Alexander Justif. of the Fath
pref.
Powell Dean of Saint Paul's, who was Prolocutor in this Convocation,
maintains in his Catechism a Doctrine contrary to that which the Arminians,
as some call them, do now contend for; and that it is not to be thought, that
he, and others engaged with them in the same convocation, were either so
ignorant, as not to understand what they put into the Articles or so infatuated
by God, to put in things quite contrary to their own judgments, which being
supposed or took for granted, we are directed to his Catechism written in the
English tongue, and dedicated from the two Archbishops from which the Objector
has abstracted these two passages following, viz. 'To the Church do all they
properly belong, as many as do truly fear, honor, and call upon God,
altogether applying their minds to live holily and godly, and with putting all
their trust in God, do most assuredly look for the blessedness of eternal life.
They that be steadfast, stable and constant in this faith, were chosen and
appointed, and (as we term it) predestinate to this so great felicity, p. 44.
The Church is the body of the Christian Commonwealth, i. e. the universal
number and fellowship of the faithful, whom God through Christ has before all
beginning of time, appointed to everlasting life.' Such are the passages in
this Catechism, from which the Objector has concluded, that Mr. Powell had no
communion with Arminians (as some please to call them.) And to say truth, he
could have no communion with the Arminians (as some please to call them) though
he had desired it; Arminius being not born, or but newly borne, when Mr. Powell
wrote that Catechism; and Mr. Powell had been dead some years before the name
of an Arminian had been heard in England.

9. But unto this it has been answered, that looking upon Mr. Powell, in his
public capacity, as he was Prolocutor to that Convocation, it cannot be
denied, but that he was as like to understand the conduct of all affairs
therein, as any other whatsoever; And yet it cannot rationally be inferred from
thence, that therefore nothing was concluded in that convocation, which might
be contrary to his own judgment for a private person, admitting that he was
inclined to Calvin in the points disputed, as he was not neither. For had he
been of his opinion, the spirit of that Sects is such as could not be
restrained from charity it self dogmatical, and in terms express; and not
occasionally only, and on the by (as in the Catechism now before us) and that
too in full general terms that no particular conclusion Justif. of the Fath.
pref.
can be gathered from them. It has been answered again thus, that the Articles
in the five points, being the same with those in King Edwards Book, and so
confessed by the Objector; and no new sense being put upon them by the last
establishment, they must be understood no otherwise then according to the
judgment of those learned men and godly Martyrs, before remembered, who had
before concurred unto the making of them, from which if Mr. Powells sense
should differ in the least degree, it is to be looked upon as his own, not the
sense of the Church. And, thirdly, it has been observed that the Catechism to
which we are referred for the former passages, is not the same with that, which
is authorized to be taught in the Grammar Schools in Greek and Latin, nor the
same which was published with the consent of the Author in the English tongue,
An. 1572. but a Catechism of a larger size, yet of less authority, out of
which the other was extracted; such points as were superfluous, and not well
expressed, not being reduced into the same. And somewhat certainly there was in
it, which rendered it incapable of any further Editions, and not thought fit to
be translated into Latin, though such a translation of it was propounded to
the Archbishops, Bishops in the Epistle Dedicatory, to the shorter English.
And though to let us know what Catechism it is he means, he seems to
distinguish it from the other, by being dedicated to the two Archbishops: Yet
that does rather betray the Objectors ignorance then advance his cause, the
Authors one Latin Edition, and the English of it being Dedicated to the two
Archbishops as well as that.

10. But since he has appealed to the larger Catechism, to the larger
Catechism let him go, In which he cannot so much as find one single question
touching the Doctrine of Predestination, or the points depending thereupon: and
therefore is necessitated to have recourse unto the Articles of the Catholic
Church, the members and ingredients of it, from whence he does extract the two
former passages. And then again, we are to note, that the first of the two
passages not being to be found in the Latin Edition, nor the English
translation of the same, is taken almost word for word out of Powells
Catechism, therefore to be understood in no other sense then before it was,
when it was perused and approved by the Bishops and other learned men of King
Edwards time. And, thirdly, there is nothing in all that passage, which
justifies the absolute and irrespective decree of the Predestinarians, or the
restraining of the benefit of our Saviors sufferings to a few particulars,
nothing of Gods invincible working on the hearts of his chosen ones* or the
impossibility of man's cooperating any further in his resurrection from the
death of sin to the life of lighteousness, then in that of his body from the
grave to the life of glory; nothing that teaches any such certainly, or
infallibly of persevering in the faith and favor of God: as all the sins of
the world are not able to deprive them of it, but that they shall, must
necessarily be brought again into the place and station from which they had
fallen. And as for the last of the said two passages being the very same with
that in the Authors Latin, and the English translation of the same, there is
nothing in it, which either a true English Protestant, or a Belgic Remonstrant
may not easily grant, and yet preserve himself from falling into Calvinisme in
any of the points disputed. For granting that the Church is the universal
number and fellowship of all the faithful whom God through Christ has before
all beginning of time appointed to everlasting life; Yet must it so be
understood* that either they were appointed to eternal life upon the
supposition of their faith and repentance, which may extend to the including of
all those who are called to the external participation of the Word and
Sacraments: or else that it is meant specially of such as are appointed from
all eternity to life everlasting, without excluding any from the Dignity of
being members of the Church, who have received the outward call, and openly
join with them in all public duties, and thereby pass in common estimate
amongst the faithful believers; And then this definition will afford no comfort
to our modern Calvinists, or create any inconvenience unto those whom they
call Arminians.

CHAP. XVIII. A Declaration of the Doctrine in the Points disputed under the
new establishment made by Queen Elizabeth.
1. THe Doctrine of the second Book of Homilies concerning the wilful fall of
Adam, the miserable estate of man, the restitution of lost man in Jesus Christ,
and the universal redemption of all mankind by his death and passion. 2. The
doctrine of the said second Book concerning universal grace, the possibility of
a total and final falling, and the cooperation of man's will with the grace of
God. 3. The judgment of Reverend Bishop Jewel, touching the universal
redemption of mankind by the death of Christ; Predestination grounded upon
faith in Christ, and reached out unto all them that believe in him, by Mr.
Alexander Powell. 4. Dr. Harsnet in his Sermon at St. Paul's cross, Anno 1584.
shows that the absolute decree of Reprobation turns the truth of God into a
lie, and makes him to be the Author of sin. 5. That it deprives man of the
natural freedom of his will, makes God himself to be double minded, to have
two contrary wills, and to delight in mocking his poor creature, man. 6. And
finally, that it makes God more cruel and unmerciful then the greatest Tyrant,
contrary to the truth of Scripture, and the constant Doctrine of the Fathers.
7. The rest of the said Sermon reduced unto certain other heads, directly
contrary to the Calvinian Doctrines in the points disputed. 8. Certain
considerations on the Sermon aforesaid, with reference to the subject of it, as
also to the time, place and persons in and before which it was first preached.
An Answer to some Objections concerning a pretended Recantation falsely affirmed
to have been made by the said Mr. Harsnet. 10. That in the judgment of the
Right learned Dr. King, after Bishop of London, the alteration of Gods
denounced judgments in some certain cases infers no alteration in his
councels; the difference between the changing of the will, and to will a
change. 11. That there is something in Gods decrees revealed to us, and
something concealed unto himself, the difference between the inferior and
superior causes, and of the conditionalty of Gods threats and promises. 12.
The accomodating of the former part of this discourse to the case of the
Ninevites. 13. And not the case of the Ninevites to the case disputed.

1. THese Obstacles being thus removed, I shall proceed unto a Declaration of
the Churches Doctrine under this new establishment made by Queen Eliz. And,
first, all Arguments derived from the public Liturgy, and the first book of
Homilies being still in force; we will next see what is delivered in the
Homilies of the second part, established by a special Article, and thereby made
a part of the doctrine here by law established: And, first, as touching the
doctrine of Predestination, it is declared in the Homily of the Nativity, 'That
as in Adam all men universally sinned; so in Adam all men received the reward
of sin, that is to say, became mortal and subject unto death, having in
themselves nothing but everlasting condemnation, both of body and soul; that
man being in this wretched case it pleased God to make a new Covenant with him,
namely, that he would send a Mediator or Messiah into the world which should
make intercession, and put himself as a stay between both parties to pacify
wrath and indignation conceived against sin, and to deliver man out of the
miserable curse, and cursed misery, whereunto he was fallen headlong, by
disobeying the Will and Commandment of the only Lord and Maker. Nor, secondly,
was this deliverance and redemption partial, intended only for a few, but
general and universal for all mankind; the said Homily telling us not long
after, that all this was done to the end the promise and covenant of God made
unto Abraham Hom. p. 172.
and his posterity concerning the Redemption of the world, might be credited
and believed -- to deliver mankind from the bitter curse of the Law, and make
perfect satisfaction by his death for the sins of all people.' -- For the
accomplishment whereof, 'It was expedient, says the Homily, that our Mediator
should be such an one as might take upon him the sins of mankind, and sustain
the due punishment thereof, viz. death -- ' to the intent he might more fully
and perfectly make satisfaction for mankind: which is as plain as words can
make it, and yet not more plain then that which follows in the Homily of the
worthy receiving of the Sacrament, Fol. 200.

2. Nor does the Homily speak less plainly in another Hom. 1. part against the
peril.
place concerning universal Grace, then it does speak to this in reference to
universal redemption, as appears evidently by the first part of the Sermon
against the peril of Idolatry, in which it is declared in the way of
paraphrase on some passages in the 40. Chapter of the Prophet Isaiah, 'that it
had been preached to men from the beginning, and how by the creation of the
world, and the greatness of the work, they might understand the Majesty of God,
the Creator and Maker of all things to be greater then it should be expressed
in any image or bodily similitude.' And therefore by the light of the same
instruction (had they not shut their eyes against it) they might have come unto
a further knowledge of the will of God; and by degrees to the performance of
all moral duties required of them before Christ coming in the flesh. And in the
third part of the same Sermon there are some passages which do as plainly speak
of falling from God, the final alienation of the soul of a man once righteous,
from his love and favor. Where it is said, 'how much better it were that the
arts of painting, and we had never been found, then one of them whose souls are
so precious in the sight of God, should by occasion of image or picture, perish
and be lost.' And what can here be understood, by the souls which are so
precious in the sight of God, but the souls of the elect, of justified and
righteous persons, the souls of wicked men being vile and odious in his sight,
hated by God, as Esau was, before all eternity, as the Calvinians do inform
us. And what else can we understand by being perished and lost, but a total or
final alienation of those precious souls, from his grace and favor: more Hom.
of the Re^urrection, p. 139.
plainly speaks the Homily of the Resurrection, in which the Church represents
unto us, what shame it should be for us, 'being thus clearly and freely washed
from our sin to return to the filthiness thereof again? What a folly it
would be for us, being thus endued with righteousness to loose it again? What
a madness it would be to to loose the inheritance we be now set in, for the
vile and transitory pleasure of sins. And what an unkindnesse it would be,
where our Savior Christ of his mercy is come unto us, to dwell with us as our
guest, to drive him from us, and to banish him violently out of our souls: And
instead of him in whom is all grace and virtue to receive the ungracious spirit
of the devil, the founder of all naughtiness and mischief;' then which there
can be nothing more direct and positive to the point in hand. And as for the
cooperation of man's will with the grace of God either in accepting or
resisting it, when once offered to him, besides what may be gathered from the
former passages; it is to be presumed as a thing past question in the very
nature of that book, for what else are those Homilies but so many proofs and
arguments to evince that point. For to what purpose were they made, but to stir
up the minds of all men to the works of piety: And what hopes could the
Authors of them give unto themselves of effecting that which they endeavored,
had they not presupposed and taught that there was such a freedom in the will
of man, such an assistance of Gods grace, as might enable them to perform
these works of piety, as in all and every one of the said Homilies are
commended to them. More for the proof of which points, might be gathered from
the said second Book of Homilies, established by the Articles of Queen
Elizabeth's time, as before is said, were not these sufficient.

3. Proceed we therefore from the Homilies, and the public monuments of the
Church to the judgment of particular persons, men of renown and eminent in
their several places, amongst which we find incomparable Jewel, then Bishop
of Sallsbury, thus clearly speaking in behalf of universal redemption, viz.
Certo animis nostris persuademus, etc. 'We do assuredly persuade our minds
(says he) that Christ is the obtainer of forgiveness for our sins; and that
by his Bishop Jewels Defen. Apolog. c. 19. Devis. 1.
blood all our spots of sins be washed clean: that he has pacified and set at
one all things by the blood of his cross: that he by the same one only
sacrifice which he once offered upon the cross, has brought to effect, and
fulfilled all things? and that for the cause he said, it is finished. By which
word (says he) be plainly signified,, persolutum ^am esse pretium, pro peccato
humani generis,, that the price or ransom was now fully paid for the sin of
mankind.' Now as Bishop ewell was a principal member of the House of Bishops,
so Mr. Powell was the Prolocuto^ for the House of the Clergy, in which the
Articles were debated and agreed upon. In which respect his favor is much
sought by those of the Calvinian party, as before was shown. But finding no
comfort for them in his larger Catechism, let us see what may be found in his
Latin Catechism, authorized to be taught in Schools, and published by his
consent in the English tongue, Anno 157^. And first he shows, that as God is
said to be our Father for some other reasons, so most specially for this; quod
nos divine per spiritum sanctum generavit, and per fidem in verum Ca^^c.
Edition 1654. p. 19.
suum, a^que naturalem filium Iesum Christum nos el git, sibique Filios, and
regni ^oelestis, atque sempiternae vitae heredes per eundem inj^ituit; that is
to say, because he has divinely regenerated us (or begotten us again) by the
Holy Ghost, and has elected us by faith in his true and natural son Christ
Jesus, and through the same Christ ^ath adopted us to be his children and
heirs of his heavenly Kingdom and of life everlasting. And if election come by
our faith in Christ, as he says it does, neither a Supra-bapsarian, nor a
Sub-^ap^arian, can find any comfort from this man, in favor of that absolute
and irrespective decree of Predestination, which they would gladly father on
him in his larger Catechism. And then as for the method of predestination, he
thus sets it forth, viz. 'Deus Adamum illis honoris insignibus ornavit, ut ea
cum sibi tum suis, id est, toti Ib. ^^.
humano generi, aut servaret, aut amitteret, etc. God (says he) endued Adam
with those ornaments (that is to say, those ornaments of grace and nature,
which before we speak of) that he might have them or loose them for himself and
his, that is to say, for all mankind. And it could not otherwise be, but that
as of an evil tree, evil fruits do spring: so that Adam being corrupted with
sin, all the issue that came of him, must also be corrupted with that
original sin; For delivery from the which there remained no remedy in our
selves, and therefore God was pleased to promise that the seed of the woman,
which is Jesus Christ, should break the head of the Serpent, that is, of the
Devi, who deceived our first parents, and so should deliver them and their
posterity that believed the same. Where first we have man's fall. Secondly, Gods
mercy in his restitution. Thirdly, this restitution to be made by Jesus Christ;
and, fourthly, to be made to all, which believe the same.'

4. Proceed we next to a Sermon preached at St. Paul's cross, October. 27. 1584.
by Samuel H^rs^et then fellow of P^mbrooke Hall in Cambridge and afterward
Master of the same, preferred from thence to the Sea of Chichester, from thence
translated unto Norwitch, and finally to the Archiepiscopal See of York. For
the Text or subject of his Sermon, he made choice of those words in the Prophet
Ezekiel, viz. As I live (says the Lord) I delight not in the death of the
wicked, chap. 33. v. 11. In his discourse upon which text, he first discharges
God from laying any necessity of sinning on the sons of men, and then
delighting in their punishment because they have sinned: he thus breaks out
against the absolute decree of reprobation, which by that time had been made a
part of the Zuinglian Gospel, and generally spread abroad both from Press and
Pulpit. 'There is a conceit in Mr. Harnets Sermon at Paul's Cross bound up at
the end of Dr. Stewards three Sermons, print ed 1658. p. 133 etc.
the world (says he) speaks little better of our gracious God then this, and
that is, that God should design many thousands of souls to hell before they
were, not in eye to their faults, but to his own absolute will and power, and
to get him glory in their damnation. This opinion is grown high and monstrous,
and like a Goliath, and men do shake and tremble at it; yet never a man reaches
to David's sting to cast it down. In the name of the Lord of Hosts we will
encounter it, for it has reviled not the Host of the living God, but the Lord
of Hosts.

'First, that it is directly in opposition to this Text of holy Scripture, and
so turns the truth of God into a lie. For whereas God in this Text does lay
and swear, that he does not delight in the death of man; this opinion says,
that not one or two, but millions of men should fry in Hell; and that he made
them for no other purpose then to be the children of death and hell, and that
for no other cause but his mere pleasures sake; and so say, that God does not
only say, but will sweat to a lie. For the oath should have run thus, as I
live (says the Lord) I do delight in the death of man.

'Secondly, it does (not by consequence but) directly make God the Author of
sin. For, if God without eye to sin did design men to hell, then did he say
and set down that he should sin: for without sin he cannot come to hell:
And indeed does not this opinion say, that the Almighty God in the eye of his
Council, did not only see, but say that Adam should fall, and so order and
decree, and set down his fall, that it was no more possible for him not to
fall, then it was possible for him not to eat? And of that when God does order,
set down and decree, (I trust) he is the Author, unless they will say, that
when the Right honorable Lord Keeper does say in open Court, we order, he
means not to be the Author of that his Order.

'Which said, he tells us Thirdly, that it takes away from Adam (in his state
of innocence) all freedom of Will and Ibid. p. 135.
Liberty not to sin. For had he had freedom to have altered Gods designment,
Adams liberty had been above the designment of God. And here I remember a
little witty solution is made, that is, if we respect Adams Will, he had power
to sin, but if God Decrees, he could not sin. This is a silly solution; And
indeed it is as much as if you should take a sound, strong man that has power
to walk, and to lie still, and bind him hand and foot, (as they do in Bedlam)
and lay him down, and then bid him rise up and walk, or else you will stir him
up with a whip; and he tell you, that there be chains upon him, so that he is
not able to stir; and you tell him again, that, that is no excuse, for if he
look upon his health, his strength, his legs, he has power to walk, or to
stand still; but if upon his Chains, indeed in that respect he is not able to
walk. I trust he that should whip that man for not walking, were well worthy to
be whipped himself: Fourthly, As God do abhor a heart, and a heart, and his soul
detesteth also a double minded man: so himself cannot have a mind and a mind; a
face like Janus, to look two ways. Yet this opinion makes in God two Wills,
the one flat opposite to the other: An Hidden Will by which he appointed and
willed that Adam should sin; and an open Will by which he forbad him to sin.
His open Will said to Adam in Paradise, Adam thou shall not eat of the Tree of
good and evil: His Hidden Will said, Thou shall eat; nay, now I my self cannot
keep thee from eating, for my Decree from Eternity is passed, Thou shall eat,
that thou may drown all thy posterity into sin, and that I may drench them as I
have designed, in the bottomless pit of Hell. Fifthly, Amongst all the
Abominations of Queen Jez^bel, that was the greatest (1 King. 21.) when as
hunting after the life of innocent Naboth, she set him up amongst the Princes
of the Land, that so he might have the greater fall. God planted man in
Paradise, (as in a pleasant Vineyard) and mounted him to the world as on a
stage, and honored him with all the Sovereignty, over all the Creatures; he
put all things in subjection under his feet, so that he could not pass a decree
from all Eternity against him, to throw him down headlong into hell: for God
is not a Jezabel, Tollere in altum, to lift up a man, ut lapsu graviore ruat,
that he may make the greater noise with his fall.'

6. But he goes on, 'and having illustrated this cruel Mockery by some further
instances, he tells us, that the Poet Ib. p 140.
had a device of their old Saturn, that he eat up his Children as soon as they
were born, for fear least some of them should dispossess him of Heaven. Pharaoh
King of Egypt, had almost the same plea, for he made away all the young Hebrew
Males least they should multiply too fast: Herod for fear out Savior Christ
should supplant him in his Kingdom, caused all the young Children to be slain:
those had all some color for their barbarous cruelty. But if any of those had
made a Law, designing young Children to torments before they had been born; and
for no other cause and purpose, but his own absolute will; the heavens in
course would have called for revenge. It is the Law of Nations, that no man
innocent shall be condemned; of reason not to hate, where we are not hurt; of
nature to like and love her own brood, (...), (says the holy Ghost) we are
Gods Kindred, he cannot hate us when we are innocent, when we are nothing, when
we are not. Now touching Gods Glory (which is to us all as dear as our life)
this opinion has told us, a very inglorious and shameful ^^le* for it says,
the Almighty God would have many soul^ go to ^ell; and that they may come
t^i^^e^ they must sin, that so ^e may have ^ust cause to condemn them. Who does
not smile at the Grecians Conceit, that gave their God a glorious title for
killing of flies? Gods Glory in punishing arises from his Justice in revenging
of sin: and for that it tells us, as I said, a very sad and unpleasant tale;
for who could digest it to hear a Prince say after this manner? I will beget me
a son, that I may kill him, that I may so get me a name, I will beget him
without both his feet, and when he is grown up, having no feet, I will command
him to walk upon pain of death: and when he breaks my Commandment, I will put
him to death. O beloved, these glorious fancies, imaginations and shows, are
far from the nature of our gracious, merciful and glorious God, who has
proclaimed himself in his Titles Royal, Jehovah, the Lord, the Lord strong and
mighty, and terrible, slow to anger, and of great Goodness: And therefore let
this conceit be far from Jacob, and let it not come near the Tents of Joseph.
How much holyer and heavenlyer conceit had the holy Fathers of the Justice of
God? Non est ante punitor Deus, quam peccator homo, God put not on the person
of a Revenger, before man put on the person of an Offender, says St. Ambrose.
Neminem coronat antequam vincit; neminem punit antequam peccat; he crowns none
before he overcomes, and he punishes no man before his offense. Et qui facit
miseros ut misereatur, crudelem habet miserecordiam, he that puts man into
miseries that he may pity him, has no kind, but a cruel pity.'

7. The absolute de^ree of Reprobation being thus discharged, he shows in the
next place, that as God desires not the death of man without relation to his
sin, so he desires Ibid. 148.
not the death of the sinful man, or of the wicked sinful man, but rather
that they should turn from their wickedness, and live. And he observes it is
said unto the Coats in Saint Mathews Gospel, Ite melidicti in ignem paratum; he
does not say, Maledicti patris, Go ye cursed of the Father; (as it is Benedicti
patris, when he speaks of the sheep) God intituling himself to the blessing
only; and that the fire is prepared, but for whom? Non vobis, sed Diabolo and
Angelis ejus, not for you, but for the Devil and his Angels. So that God
delights to prepare neither death nor hell for damned men. The last branch of
his discourse he resolves into six consequences, as links depending on his
chain; 1. Gods absolute Will is not the cause of Reprobation, but sin. 2. No
man is of an absolute necessity the child of Hell, so as by Gods grace he may
not avoid it. 3. God simply wills and wishes every living soul to be saved,
and to come to the kingdom of Heaven. 4. God sent his son to save every soul,
and to bring it to the kingdom of heaven. 5. God offers Grace effectually to
save every one, and to direct him to the Kingdom of heaven. 6. The neglect and
contempt of this Grace, is the cause why every one does not come to Heaven, and
not any privative Decree, Council and Determination of God.' The stating and
canvasing of which points, so plainly, curtly to the Doctrines of the old
Zuinglian Gospellers, and the modern Calvinians; as they take up the rest of
the Sermon, so to the Sermon I refer the Reader for his further satisfaction in
them. I note this only in the close, that there is none of the five Arminian
Articles (as they commonly call them) which is not contained in terms express,
or may not easily be found by way of Deduction in one or more of the six
consequences before recited.

8. Now in this Sermon there are sundry things to be consisidered, as namely,
first, That the Zuinglian or Calvinian Gospel in these points, was grown so
strong, that the Preacher calls it their Goliath; so huge and monstrous, that
many quaked and trembled at it, but none, that is to say, but few or none, vel
d^o, vel n^mo, in the words of Persius, durst take up David's sling to throw it
down. Secondly, That in canvasing the absolute Decree of Reprobation, the
Preacher spared none of those odious aggravations which have been charged upon
the Doctrines of the modern Calvinists by the Remonstrants, and their party in
these latter times. Thirdly, That the Sermon was preached at St. Paul's Cross,
the greatest Auditory of the Kingdom, consisting not only of the Lord Major,
the Aldermen, and the rest of the chief men in the City, but in those times of
such Bishops, and other learned men as lived occasionally in London, and the
City of Westminster, as also of the Judges and most learned Lawyers, some of
the Lords of the Counsel being for the most part present also. Fourthly, That
for all this we cannot find, that any offense was taken at it, or any
Recantation enjoined upon it, either by the high Commission, or Bishop of
London, or any other having authority in the Church of England, nor any
complaint made of it to the Queen, or the Counsel-Table, as certainly there
would have been, if the matter of the Sermon had been contrary to the Rules of
the Church, and the appointments of the same. And finally we may observe, that
though he was made Archbishop of York in the Reign of King Charles, 1628. when
the times are thought to have been inclinable, to those of the Arminian
Doctrines; yet he was made Master of Pembrook hall, Bishop of Chichester, and
from thence translated unto Norwitch, in the time of King James. And thereupon
we may conclude, that King James neither thought this Doctrine to be against
the Articles of Religion, here by Law established, nor was so great an enemy to
them, or the men that held them, as some of our Calvinians have lately made him.

9. But against this it is objected by Mr* Prin in his book Prepe^uity, etc.
304.
of Perpetuity, etc. printed at London in the year 1627. 1. That the said Mr.
Harsnet was convented for this Sermon, and forced to recant it as heretical. 2.
That upon this Sermon, and the controversies that arose upon it in Cambridge
between Baroe and Whitacres, not only the Articles of Lambeth were composed (of
which more hereafter) but Mr. Wotton was appointed by the University to confute
the same. 3. That the said Sermon was so far from being published or printed,
that it was enjoined by Authority to be recanted. For Answer whereunto, it
would first be known, where the said Sermon was recanted, and by whose
Authority. Not in or by the University of Cambridge, where Mr. Harsnet lived
both then, and a long time after; for the Sermon was preached at St. Paul's
Cross, and so the University could take no cognizance of it, nor proceed
against him for the same. And if the Recantation was made at St. Paul's Cross,
where the supposed offense was given, if would be known by whose Authority it
was enjoined. Not by the Bishop of London, in whose Diocese the Sermon was
preached: for his Authority did not reach so far as Cambridge, whither the
Preacher had retired after he had performed the service he was called unto: And
if it were enjoined by the High Commission, and performed accordingly, there is
no question to be made, but that we should have heard of in the
Anti-Arminianism, where there are no less then eight leves spent in relating
the story of a like Recantation pretended to be made by one Mr. Barret on the
tenth of May, 1595. and where it is affirmed, that the said Mr. Harsnet held
and maintained the same errors for which Barret was to make his Recantation.
But as it will be proved hereafter that no such Recantation was made by Barret;
so we have reason to believe that no such Recantation was imposed on Harsnet.
Nor, secondly; Can it be made good, that the Controversies between Doctor
Whitacres and Dr. Baroe were first occasioned by this Sermon, or that Mr.
Wotton was appointed by the University to confute the same. For it appears by a
letter written from the heads of that University to their Chancellor, the Lord
Treasurer Burleigh, dated March 18. 1595. that Baroe had maintained the same
Doctrines, and his Lectures and Determinations above 14. years before, by their
own account, for which see Chap. 21. Number. 80. which must be three years at the
least before the preaching of that Sermon by Mr. Harsnet. And though it is
probable enough that Mr. Wotton might give himself the trouble of confuting the
Sermon, yet it is more then probable that he was not required so to do by that
University. For if it had been so appointed by the University, he would have
been rewarded for it by the same power and authority which had so appointed,
when he appeared a Candidate for the Professorship on the death of Whitacres,
but could not find a party of sufficient power to carry it for him, of which
see also Chap. 21. numb. 4. And thirdly, as for the not printing of the Sermon,
it is easily answered; the Genius of the time not carrying men so generally to
the printing of Sermons as it has done since. But it was printed at the last,
though long first: And being printed at the last, has met withnone so forward
in the Confutation, as Mr. Wotton is affirmed to be, when at first it was
preached. And therefore notwithstanding these three surmises which the Author
of the P^rpetuity, etc. has presented to us, it may be said for certain, as
before it was, that Mr. Harsnet was never called in Question for that Sermon of
his, by any having Authority to convent him for it, and much less, that he ever
made any such Recantation, as by the said Author is suggested.

10. In the next place we will behold a passage in one of the Lectures upon
Jonah delivered at York, Anno 1594. by the right learned Dr. John King
(descended from Robert King, the first Bishop of Oxon) afterward made Dean of
Christ Church, and from thence preferred, by the power and favor of
Archbishop Bancroft to the Sea of London; A Prelate of too known a zeal to the
Church of England to be accused of Popery, or any other Heterodoxies in
Religion of what sort soever, who in his Lecture on these words, Yet forty
days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown, cap. 3. verse 4. discourses on them in
this manner.

The only matter of Question herein, is how it may stand Bishop King's L^ctur^
upon Jo^a^* L^ct. 33. p. 450.
with the constancy and truth of eternal God to pronounce a Judgment against a
place which takes not affect within one hundred years: For either he was
ignorant of his own time, which we cannot imagine of an omniscient God, or his
mind was altered, which is unprobable to suspect. For ^^ the strength of Israel
a man that he should lie, or as the Nu^b. 23. Heb. 13. Rev. 1.
son of man that he should repeat? Is he not yesterday, and to day, and the
same for ever? that was, that is, and that which is to come? I mean not only in
substance, but in Will and Intention; Does he use lightness? Are the words that
he speaks yea and nay? Does he both affirm and deny too? Are not all his
Promises, are not all his Threatenings, 2 Cer. 1.
are not all his Mercies, are not all his Judgments, are not all his words,
are not all the tittles and jots of his words, yea and amen? so firmly
ratified, that they cannot be broken: Doubtless it shall stand immutable, When
the heaven and the earth shall be changed, and wax old like a garment, Ego Deus
and non mutor, I am Mal, 3.
God that am not changed. The School in this respect has a wise distinction,
It is one thing to change the Will, Alind mutare voluntatem, aliud velle
mutationem, A. quin. 1. qu. 19. art. 7.
and another to will a change, or to be willed that a change should be. God
will have the Law and Ceremony at one time; Gospel without Ceremony at another,
this was his Will from Everlasting, constant and unmovable, that in their
several courses both should be. Though there be a change in the matter and
Subject, there is not a change in him that disposes it. Our Will is in winter
to use the fire, in summer a cold and an open air; the thing is changed
according to the season; but our Will whereby we all decreed and determined in
our selves so to do, remain the same.

11. Sometimes the Decrees and purposes of God consist of two parts, the one
whereof God reveals at the first, and the other he concealeth a while, and
keeps in his own knowledge; as in the Action enjoined to Abraham, the purpose
of God was two fold; 1. To try his Obedience. 2. To save the Child. A man may
impute it inconstancy to bid and unbid: but that the Will of the Lord was not
plenarily understood in the first part. Mutat sentententi^m non mutat consi^ium
lib. 10. mor. cap. 23.
This is it which Gregory expresses in apt terms, God chan^eth his intent
pronounced sometimes, but never his Counsel intended. Sometimes things are
decreed and spoken of according to inferior cause, which by the highest and
overruling cause are otherwise disposed of. One might have said, and said
truly, both ways, Lazarus shall rise again, and Lazarus shall not rise again:
if we esteem it by the power and finger of God it shall be; but if we leave it
to nature, and to the arm of flesh it shall never be. The Prophet Esaias told
Hezekias the King, put thy house in order Esa. 38
for thou shall die: considering the weakness of his body, and the extremity
of his disease, he had reason to warrant the same; but if he told him
contrariwise, according to that which came to pass, thou shall not die, looking
to the might and mercy of God who received the prayers of the King, he had said
as truly. But the best definition is, that in most of these threatenings there
is a condition annexed unto them, either expressed or understood, which is as the
hinges to the Jer 18
Door, and turns forward and backward the whole matter. In Jeremy it is
expressed, I will speak suddenly against a Nation or a Kingdom, to pluck it up,
to root it out, and to destroy it; But if this Nation, against whom I have
pronounced, Ier 18
turn from their wickedness, I will repent of the plague which I thought to
bring upon them. So likewise for his mercy, I will speak suddenly concerning, a
Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to build it, and to plant it; but if ye do
evil in my sight, and hear not my voice, I will repent of the good I thought
to do for them. Genesis 20. it is expressed, where God tells Abimeleck,
withholding Abraham's wife, Thou art a dead man, because of the woman which
thou have taken: the event fell out otherwise, and Abimileck purged himself
with God, With an upright mind, and innocent hands have I done this. There is
no question but God enclosed a condition within his speech, Thou art a dead
man, if thou restore not the woman without touching her body, and dishonouring
her husband.

12. Thus we may answer the scruple by all these ways. 1. Yet forty days and
Nineveh shall be overthrown, and yet forty and forty days, and Nineveh*
shall not be overthrown. Why? Because Nineveh is changed, and the unchangable
will of God ever was, that if Niniveh showed a change, it should be spared. 2.
There were two parts of Gods purpose, the one disclosed, touching the
subversion of Nineveh, the other of her conversion, kept within the heart of
God. Whereupon he changed the sentence pronounced, but not the council
whereunto the sentence was referred. 3. If you consider Niniveh in the
inferior cause, that is in the deservings of Niniveh, it shall fall to the
ground; but if you take it in the superior cause, in the goodness and
clemency of Almighty God, Niniveh shall escape. Lastly, the judgment was
pronounced with a condition reserved in the mind of the judge, Niniveh shall
be overthrown if it repent not. Now he that speaks with condition, may change
his mind without suspicion of lightness. As Paul peomised the Corinthians to
come to them in his way toward Macedonia, and did it not; For he ever more
added in his soul 2 Cor. 1.
that condition which no man must exclude, if it stand with the pleasure of
God, and he hinder me not. Philip threatened the Lacidemonians, that if he
invaded their country, he would utterly extinguish them; They wrote him no
other answer but this, If, meaning it was a condition well put in, because he
was never like to come amongst them, Si nisi non esset, perfectum quidlibet
esset. If it were not for conditions and exceptions, every thing would be
perfect, but nothing more unperfect then Niniveh, if this secret condition of
the goodness of God at the second hand had not been.

13. So far this Reverend Prelate has discoursed of the nature of Gods
decrees, and accommodated his discourse thereof to the case of the Ninevites.
Let us next see how far the principal particulars of the said discourse, and
the case of the Ninivites it self may be accommodated to the Divine decree of
Predestination; concerning which the said Reverend Prelate was not pleased to
declare his judgment, either as being impertinent to the case which he had in
hand, (...) out of an unwillingnesse to engage himself in those disputes which
might not suddenly be ended. All that he did herein was to take care for laying
down such grounds in those learned Lectures, by which his judgment might be
guessed at, though not declared. As Dr. Peter Baroe (of whom more hereafter)
declared his judgment touching the Divine Decrees in the said case of the
Ninevites, before he fell particularly on the Doctrine of Predestination, as he
after did. And first, As for accomodating the case of the Ninevites to the
matter which is now before us, we cannot better do it then in the words of
Bishop Hooper, so often mentioned; who having told us that Esau was no more
excluded from the promise of grace, then Jacob was, proceeds thus, viz. Pres.
to his Expos. on the ten Commandments.
'By the Scripture (says he) it seems that the sentence of God was given to
save the one, and damn the other, before the one loved God, or the other hated
him. Howbeit these threatenings of God against Esau (if he had not of his wilful
malice excluded himself from the promise of grace) should no more have hindered
his salvation, then Gods threatenings against Nineveh, (which notwithstanding
that God said should be destroyed within forty days, stood a great time
after, and did penance. Esau was circumcised, and presented unto the Church of
God by his Father Isaaac in all external Ceremonies as well as Jacob.' And that
his life and conversation was not as agreeable unto justice and equity as
Jacobs was, the sentence of God unto Rebecca was not in the fault; but his own
malice. Out of which words we may observe, first, that the sentence of God
concerning Esau, was not the cause that his conversation was so little
agreeable to justice and equity; no more then the judgment denounced against
the Ninivites, could have been the cause of their impenitency, if they had
continued in their sins and wickednesses without repentance; contrary to the
Doctrine of the Gospellers in Queen Mary's days, imputing all men's sins to
predestination. Secondly, that Gods threatenings against Esau (supposing them to
be tanta-mount to a reprobation) could no more have hindered his salvation; then
the like threatening against the Ninevites, could have sealed to them the
assurance of their present destruction; if he had heartily repented of his
sins* as the Ninevites did. And therefore, thirdly, as well the decree of God
concerning Esau, as that which is set out against the Ninevites, are no
otherwise to be understood, then under the condition tacitly annexed unto them,
that is to say, that the Ninevites should be destroyed within forty days, if
they did not repent them of their sins; and that Esau should be reprobated to
eternal death, if he gave himself over to the lusts of a sensual appetite:
Which if it be confessed for true, as I think it must, then, fourthly, the
promises made by God to Jacob, and to all such as are beloved of God, as Jacob
was, and consequently their election unto life eternal, are likewise to be
understood with the like condition; that is to say, if they repent them of
their sins, and do unfainedly believe his holy Gospel. The like may be
affirmed also in all the other particulars touching Gods decrees, with
reference to the Doctrine of predestination, which are observed or accomodated
by that learned Prelate in the case of the Ninevites, had I sufficient time and
place to insist upon them.

CHAP. XIX. Of the first great breach which was made in the Doctrine of the
Church; by whom it was made, and what was done toward the making of it up.
1. GReat alterations made in the face of the Church, from the return of such
Divines as had withdrawn themselves beyond Sea in the time of Queen Mary; with
the necessity of employing them in the public service, if otherwise of known
zeal against the Papists. 2. Several examples of that kind in the places of
greatest power and trust in the Church of England; particularly of Mr. Fox the
Martyrologist, and the occasion which he took of publishing his opinion in the
point of predestination. 3. His notes on one of the Letters of John Bradford
Martyr, touching the matter of Election therein contained. 4. The difference
between the Comment and the Text, and between the author of the Comment, and
Bishop Hooper. 5. Exceptions against some passages, and observations upon
others, in the said Notes of Mr. Fox. 6. The great breach made hereby in the
Churches Doctrine, made greater by the countenance which was given to the Book
of Acts and Monuments, by the Convocation, An. 1571. 7. No argument to be drawn
from hence touching the approbation of his doctrine by that Convocation, no
more then for the Approbation of his Marginal Notes, and some particular
passages in it, disgraceful to the Rites of the Church, attire of the Bishops.
8. A counterballance made in the Convocation against Fox his Doctrine, and all
other Novelismes of that kind.

1. IT was not long that Queen Mary sat upon the Throne, and yet as short time
as it was, it gave not only a strong interruption for the present to the
proceedings of the Church, but an occasion also of great discord, and
dissension in it for the time to come. For many of our Divines, who had fled
beyond the Sea to avoid the hurry of her Reign, though otherwise men of good
abilities in most parts of Learning, returned so altered in their principals,
as to points of Doctrine, so disaffected to the Government, forms of worship
here by Law established, that they seemed not to be the same men at their
coming home, as they had been at their going hence: yet such was the necessity
which the Church was under, of filling up the vacant places and preferments,
which had been made void either by the voluntary discession, or positive
deprivation of the Popish Clergy, that they were feign to take in all of any
condition, which were able to do the public service, without relation to their
private opinions in doctrine or discipline, nothing so much regarded in the
choice of men for Bishoprics, Deanries, Dignities in Cathedral Churches, the
richest B^nefices in the Country, and places of most command and trust in the
Universities, as their known ^eal against the Papists, together with such a
sufficiency of learning as might enable them for writing and preaching against
the Popes supremacy, the carnal presence of Christ in the blessed Sacrament,
the superstition* of the Mass, the half communion, the cel^bratin* of Divine
service in a tongue not known unto the people, the enforced single life of
Priests, the worshipping of Images, and other the like points of Popery, which
had given most offense, and were the principal causes of that separation.

2. On this account we find Mr. Pilkington preferred to the Sea of Durham, and
Whittingham to the rich Deanery of the Church; of which the one proved a great
favourer of the Non-conformists, as is confessed by one who challenges a
relation to his blood and family; the other associated himself with Goodman, as
after Goodman did with Knox, for planting Puritanisme and sedition in the Kirk
of Scotland. On this account Dr. Lawrence Humphrey a professed Calvinian, in
point of doctrine, and a Nonconformist, (but qualified with the title of a
moderate one) is made the Queens professor for Divinity in the University of
Oxon; Thomas Cartwright, that great Incendiary of this Church, preferred to be
the Lady Margarets professor in the University of Cambridge; Sampson made Dean
of Christ-church and Go^w. in C^ta^. Epis^, Oxon
presently proptor Puritaxismum Exauctoratus, turned out again for Puritanisme,
as my Author has it: Hardiman made one of the first Prebends of Westminster
of the Queens foundation, and not long after deprived of it by the high
Commissioners for breaking down the Altar there, and defacing the ancient
utensils and ornaments which belonged to the Church. And finally upon this
account, as Whitehead, who had been Chaplain to Queen Anne Bulline, refused
the Archbishopric of Canterbury, before it was offered unto Parker and
Cov^rdale to be restored to the Sea of Exon, which he had cheerfully accepted
in the time of King Edward; so Mr. John Fox of great esteem for his painful and
laborious work of Acts and Monuments* (commonly called the Book of Martyrs)
would not accept of any preferment in the Church, but a Prebends place in
Salisbury which tide him not to any residence in the same. And this he did
especially (as it after proved) to avoid subscription, showing a greater
willingness to leave his place, then to subscribe unto the Articles of
Religion then by Law established, when he was legally required to do it by
Archbishop Parker. Of this man there remains a short Discourse in his Acts and
Monuments of Predestination, occasioned by a letter of Mr. Bradfords before
remembered, whose Orthodox doctrine in that point he feared might create some
danger unto that of Calvin, which then began to find a more general
entertainment, then could be rationally expected in so short a time; And
therefore as a counter-ballance he annexeth this discourse of his own with this
following title, viz.

Notes on the same Epistle, and the matter of Election thereunto appertaining.
'3. As touching the Doctrine of Election (whereof this letter of Mr. Bradford,
and many other of his Letters more Fox in Acts and Mon. fol. 1505
do much entreat) three things must be considered. 1. What Gods Election is,
and what the cause thereof. 2. How Gods Election proceeds in working our
salvation. 3. To whom Gods election pertains, and how a man may be certain
thereof. -- Between Predestination and Election this difference there is,
Predestination is as well to the Reprobate as to the Elect, Election pertains
only to them that be saved. Predestination in that it respects the
reprobate, is called reprobation; in that it respected the saved, is called
Election, and is thus defined. Predestination is the eternal decreement of
God, purposed before in himself, what shall befall all men either to salvation
or damnation; Election is the free mercy and grace of God, in his own will
through faith in Christ his Son, choosing and preferring to life such as
pleases him. In this definition of Election first goes before (the mercy and
grace of God) as the causes thereof, whereby are excluded all works of the Law,
and merits of deserving, whither they go before faith, or come after; so was
Jacob chosen, and Esau refused before either of them began to work, etc.
Secondly, in that the mercy of God in this Definition is said to be (free)
thereby is to be noted the proceeding and working of God not to be bound to any
ordinary place, or to any succession of choice, nor to state and dignity of
person, nor to worthiness of blood, etc. but all goes by the mere will of
his own purpose, as it is written spiritus, ubi, vult spirat, etc. And thus was
the outward race and stock of Abraham after flesh refused (which seemed to have
the pre-eminence) and another seed after the Spirit, raised by Abraham of the
stones, that is of the Gentiles. So was the outward Temple of Jerusalem, and
chair of Moses, which seemed to be of price forsaken, and Gods chair advanced
in other Nations. So was tall Saul refused, and little David accepted: the
rich, the proud, and the wise of this world rejected, and the word of salvation
daily opened to the poor, and miserable Abjects, the high mountains cast
under, and the low valleys exalted, etc.

And in the next place it is added ( in his own will) by this falls down the
free will, and purpose of man, with all his actions, councels, and strength of
nature: according as it is written, non est volentis, neque currentis, sed
miserentis Dei, etc. It is not him that wills, nor in him that runs, but
in God that shows mercy. So we see how Israel ran long, and yet got nothing.
The Gentile runs, began to set out late, and yet got the game: So they which
came at the first which did labor more, and yet they that came last were
rewarded with the first, Mat. 20. The working will of the Pharisee seemed
better, but yet the Lords Will was rather to justify the Publican, Luke 18.
The elder son had a better will to tarry by his father, and so did indeed; and
yet the fat calf was given to the younger son that ran away, Luke 15. whereby
we have to understand, how the matter goes not by the will of man, but by the
will of God as it pleases him to accept, according as it is written, non ex
voluntate carnis, neque ex voluntate viri: sed ex Deo nati sunt, etc. Which are
born not of the will of the flesh, nor yet of the will of man, but of God.
Furthermore, as all then goes by the will of God only, and not by the will of
man: So again, here is to be noted, that the will of God never goes without
faith in Christ Jesus his Son.

And therefore, fourthly, is this cl^use added in the definition, through faith
in Christ his Son, which faith in Christ to usward makes altogether. For,
first, it certifieth us of Gods Election, as this Epistle of Mr. Bradford does
well express: For whosoever will be certain of his Election in God, let him
first begin with faith in Christ, which if he find in him to stand firm, he
may be sure, and nothing doubt, but that he is one of the number of Gods Elect.
Secondly, the said faith, and nothing else, is the only condition and means
whereupon Gods mercy, grace, Election, vocation, and all Gods promises to
salvation do stay accordingly: the word of St. Paul, si permanseritis in fide,
and if ye abide in the faith, Col. 1. 3. This faith is the mediate and next
cause of our justification simply without any condition annexed: For as the
mercy of God; his grace, Election, vocation, and other precedent causes, do
save and justify us upon condition, if we believe in Christ: so this faith
only in Christ without condition, is the next and immediate cause, which by
Gods promise works our justification: according as it is written, creed in
dominum Jesum, and salvus eris, tu, and domus tua. Believe in the Lord Jesus,
and thou shall be saved, thou and thy whole house. And thus much touching the
Definition of Election, with the causes thereof declared, which you see now to
be no merits or works of man, whither they go before, or come after faith. For
like as all they that be borne of Adam, do taste of his Malediction, though
they tasted not of the Apple: so all they that be born of Christ (which is by
faith) take part of the obedience of Christ, although they never did that
obedience themselves, which was in him, Romans 5.

Now to the second consideration: Let us see likewise, how and in what order
this Election of God proceeds in choosing and electing them which he
ordains to salvation, which order is this. In them that be chosen to life,
first, Gods mercy and free grace brings forth Election: Election works
Vocation, or Gods holy calling: which Vocation, though hearing brings
knowledge, and faith in Christ: Faith through promise, obtains justification;
juctification through hope, waits for glorification; Election is before time,
vocation and faith comes in time; justification and glorification is without
end. Election depending upon Gods free grace and will, excludes all man's will,
blind fortune, chance, and all peradventures. Vocation standing upon Gods
Election, excludes all man's wisdom, cunning; learning; intention, power and
presumption. Faith in Christ, proceeding by the gift of the holy Ghost, and
freely justifying man by Gods promise, excludet^^ all other merits of men, all
condition of deserving, and all works of the Law, both Gods Law, and man's Law,
with all other outward means whatsoever. Justification coming freely by faith,
stands sure by promise, without doubt, fear, or wavering in this life.
Glorification appertaining only to the life to come, by hope is looked for.
Grace and Mercy preventeth, Election ordains; Vocation prepares, and
receives the Word, whereby comes faith; Faith justifies; Justification
brings glory* Election is the immediate and next cause of Vocation; Vocation
(which is the working of Gods Spirit by the Word) is the immediate and next
cause of faith; Faith is the immediate and next cause of justification.

And this order and connection of causes is diligently to be observed because of
the Papists, which have miserably confounded and inverted this doctrine; thus
teaching, that Almighty God, so far as he foreseeth man's merits before to come,
so does he dispense his Election. Dominus prout ^njusque merita fore previdet,
ita dispensat electionis gratiam, futuris tamen concedere. That is, that the
Lord recompenseth the grace of Election, not to any merits proceeding; but yet
grants the same to the merits that follow after; and not rather have our
holiness by Gods Election going before. But we following the Scripture, say
otherwise, that the cause only of Gods Election, is his own free mercy, and
the cause only of our justification is our faith in Christ, and nothing else.
As for example; first, concerning Election, if the question be asked, why was
A^raham chosen, and not Na^h^^* why was Jacob chosen, and not Es^u* why was
Moses (...)* and Phar^^^ ^^^dened? why D^vid accepted, and Saul refused? why,
few be chosen, and the most forsaken? It cannot be answered otherwise but thus,
because so was the good will of God. In like manner touching vocation, and also
faith, if the question be asked, why this vocation and gift of faith was given
to Cornelius the Gentile, and not to Tertullus the Jew? why to the poor, the
babes, and the little ones of the world (of whom Christ speaks, I thank the
Father which have hid these from the wise, etc. Mat. 11.) why to the unwise,
the simple abjects and outcasts of the world? (of whom speaks Saint Paul, 1
Cor. 1 You see your calling my brethren, why not many of you, etc. Why to the
sinners and not to the just? why the beggars by the highways were called, and
the bidden guests excluded? We can ascribe no other cause, but to Gods purpose
and Election, and say with Christ our Savior, quia Pater sic complacitum est
ante te; ye Father for that it seemed good in thy sight, Luke 10.

And so it is for justification likewise, if the question be asked why the
Publican was justified and not the Pharisee, Luke 18. Why Mary the sinner, and
not Simon the inviter? Luke 11. Why Harlots and Publicans go before the Scribes
and Pharisees in the Kingdom? Mat. 21. why the son of the Freewoman was
received? and the bondwomans Son being his elder, rejected, Genesis 21. why
Israel, which so long sought for righteousness found it not? and the Gentiles
which sought it not found it? Romans 9. We have no other cause hereof to render,
but to say with Saint Paul, because they sought for it by works of the Law, and
not by faith; which faith as it comes not by man's will (as the Papists falsely
pretends) but only by the election and free gift of God; so it is only the
immediate cause whereto the promise of our salvation is annexed, according as
we read. And therefore of faith is the inheritance given, as after grace, that
the promise might stand sure to every side, Romans 4. and in the same Chapter.
Faith believing in him that justifies the wicked is imputed to righteousness.
And this concerning the causes of our salvation, you, you see how faith in
Christ immediately and without condition does justify us, being solicited with
Gods mercy and election, that wheresoever election goes before, faith in
Christ must needs follow after. And again, whosoever believes in Christ Jesus,
through the vocation of God, he must needs be partaker of Gods election:
whereupon resulteth the third note or consideration, which is to consider,
whither a man in this life may be certain of his election. To answer to which
question this first is to be understood, that although our election and
vocation simply indeed, be known to God only in himself, a priore: yet
notwithstanding it may be known to every particular faithful man, a Posteriore
that is by means, which means is faith in Christ Jesus crucified. For as much
as by faith in Christ a man is justified, and thereby made the child of
salvation: reason must needs lead the same to be then the child of election,
chosen of God to everlasting life. For how can a man be saved, but by
consequence it follows that he must also be elected.

And therefore of election it is truly said: de electione judicandum est a
posteriore, that is to say, we must judge of election by that which comes
after, that is, by our faith and belief in Christ: which faith, although in
time it follows after election, yet this the proper immediate cause assigned
by the Scripture, which not only justifies us, but also certifieth us of this
election of God; whereunto likewise well agrees this present Letter of Mr.
Bradford, wherein he says: Election, albeit in God it be the first, yet to us
it is the last opened. And therefore beginning first (says he) with Creation,
I come from thence to Redemption, and justification by faith: so to election,
not that faith is the cause efficient of election, being rather the effect
thereof, but is to us the cause certificatory, or the cause of our
certification whereby we are brought to the feeling and knowledge of our
election in Christ. For albeit the election first be certain in the knowledge
of God, yet in our knowledge faith only that we have in Christ, is the thing
that gives to us our certificate and comfort of this election. Wherefore,
whosoever desires to be assured that he is one of the Elect number of God, let
him not climb up to heaven to know, but let him descend into himself, and
there search his faith in Christ the Son of God, which if he find in him not
feigned, by the working of Gods Spirit accordingly: thereupon let him stay, and
so wrap himself wholly both body and foul under Gods general promise, and
cumber his head with no further speculations: knowing this, that whosoever
believes in him shall not perish, John 3. shall not be confounded, Romans 9.
shall not see death, John 8. shall not enter into judgment, John 5. shall have
everlasting life, John 3. 7. shall be saved, Mat. 28. Acts 16. shall have
remission of all his sins, Act. 10. shall be justified, Romans 3. Call. 2. shall
have floods flowing out of him of the water of life, Joh. 7. shall never die,
John 11. shall be raised at the last day, John 6. shall find rest in his soul,
and be refreshed, Mat. 11, etc.

4. Such is the judgment and opinion of our Martyrologist, in the great point
of Predestination unto life; the residue thereof touching justification, being
here purposely cut off with an etc. as nothing pertinent to the business which
we have in hand. But between the Comment and the Text there is a great deal of
difference, the Comment laying the foundation of Election on the Will of God
according to the Zuinglian or Calvinian way; but the Text laying it wholly upon
faith in Christ (whom God the Father has Predestinate in Christ unto eternal
life) according to the doctrine of the Church of England. The Text first
presupposes an estate of sin and misery into which man was fallen, a ransom
paid by Christ for man and his whole Posterity, a freedom left in man thus
ransomed, either to take, or finally to refuse the benefit of so great mercy:
and then fixing or appropriating the benefit of so great a mercy ( as Christ
and all his merits do amount to) upon such only as believe. But the Comment
takes no notice of the fall of man, grounding both Reprobation and Election on
Gods ^bsolute pleasure, without relation to man's sin or our Saviors
sufferings, or any acceptance or refusal of his mercies in them. As great a
difference there is between the Author of the Comment, and Bishop Hooper, as
between the Comment and the Text: Bishop Hooper telling us, cap. 10. number. 2.
that Saul was no more excluded from the promise of Christ, then David; Esau
then Jacob; Judas then Peter, etc. if they had not excluded themselves: quite
contrary to that of our present Author, who having asked the question, why
Jacob was chosen, and not Esau; why David accepted, and Saul refused, etc.
makes answer, that it cannot otherwise be answered, then that so was the good
Will of God.

5. And this being, said I would feign know upon what authority the Author
has placed Nachor amongst the reprobates, in the same Rank with Esau, Pharaoh
and Saul; all which he has marked out to reprobation; the Scripture laying no
such censure on Nachor, or his Posterity as the Author does; Or else the
Author must know more of the estate of Nachor then Abraham his brother did;
who certainly would never have chosen a wife for his son Isaac out of Nachors
line, if he had looked upon them as reprobated and accursed of God. I observe,
Secondly, that plainly God is made an accepter of persons by the Authors
doctrine. For, first, he tells us that the elder son had a better will to
tarry by his father, and so did indeed, but the fatted Calf was given to the
younger son that ran away; and thereupon he does infer, that the matter goes
not by the will of man, but by the Will of God, as it pleases him to accept. I
observe, Thirdly, that Vocation, ^^^ the Authors judgment, stands upon Gods
Election, as the work thereof; whereas Vocation is more general, and is
extended unto those also whom they call the Reprobate, and therefore stands
not on Election, as the Author has it. For many (...) called, though out of
those many which are called, but a few are chosen. Fourthly, I observe, that
notwithstanding the Author builds the doctrine of Election ^^^ Gods absolute
will and pleasure, yet he is feign to have recourse to some certain condition,
telling us, that though the mercy of God, his Grace, Election, Vocation, and
other pre^^^ent Causes do justify us; yet this is upon condition of believing
in Christ. And finally, it is to be observed also, that after all his pains
taken in defending such a personal and eternal Election, as the Calvinians now
contend for; he advises us to wrap up our selves wholly, both body and soul
under Gods general promise, and not to cumber our heads with any further
speculations, knowing that whosoever believes in him shall not perish, etc.

6. And so I take my leave of our Martyrologist, the publishing of whose
discourse I look on as the first great battery which was made on the Bulwarks
of this Church, in point of Doctrine by any member of her own, after the
settling of the Articles by the Queens Authority, Anno 1562. the brables raised
by Crowley in his Book against Campneys, though it came out after the said
Articles were confirmed and published, being but as haile-shot in comparison of
this great piece of Ordnance. Not that the Arguments were so strong as to make
any great breach in the public Doctrine, had it been published in a time-lesse
capable of innovations, or rather if the great esteem which any had of that
man, and the universal reception which his Book found with all sorts of people,
had not gained more authority unto his discourse, then the merit or solidnesse
of it could deserve. The inconveniences whereof, as also the many marginal
Notes and other passages, visibly tending to faction and sedition in most parts
of that Book, were either not observed at first, or winked at in regard of the
great animosities, which were engendered by it in all sorts of people, as well
against the persons of the Papist, as against the doctrine; Insomuch that in
the Convocation of the year, 1571. there passed some Canons, requiring that not
only the Deanes of all Cathedrals should take a special care, that the said
Book should be so conveniently placed in their several Churches, that people of
all conditions might resort unto it; but also, that all and every Archbishop,
Bishops, Deans, Residentiaries, and Archdeacons should choose the same to be
^laced in some convenient public room of their several houses, not only for
the entertainment and instruction of their menial servants, but of such
strangers also as occasionally repaired unto them.

7. If it be her eupon inferred that Fox his doctrine was approved by that
Convocation, and therefore that it is agreeable to the true intent and meaning
of the Articles of the Church of England; besides what has been said already
by Anticipation, it may as logically be inferred, that the Convocation approved
all his Marginal Notes; all the factious and seditious passages; and more
particularly the scorn which he puts upon the Episcopal habit and other
Ceremonies of the Church. Touching which last (for the other are too many to be
here recited) let us behold how he describes the difference which happened
between Hooper, Bishop of Gloucester on the one side, Cranmer and Ridley on the
other, about the ordinary habit and attire then used by the Bishops of this
Church, we shall find it thus, viz. 'For notwithstanding the godly reformation
Acts and Mon. fo. 1366, 1367
of Religion that was begun in the Church of England, besides other ceremonies
that were more ambitious then profitable, or tended to edification; they used
to wear such garments and apparel, as the Romish Bishops were wont to do. First
a Chimere, and under that a white Rocket, then a Mathematical cap with four
Angles, dividing the whole world into four parts. These trifles being more for
superstition then otherwise, as he could never abide, so in no wise could he be
persuaded to wear them. But in conclusion, this Theological contestation came
to this end, that the Bishops having the upper hand, Mr. Hooper was feign to
agree to this condition, that sometimes he should in his Sermon show himself
apparalled as the Bishops were. Wherefore appointed to preach before the the
King, as a new player in a strange apparel he comes forth on the stage; His
upper garment was a long skarlet Chimere down to the foot, and under that a
white linen Rocket, that covered all his shoulders; upon his head he had a
Geometrical, that is a square cap, albeit that his head was round. What case of
shame the strangeness hereof was that day to the good preacher, every man may
easily judge. But this private contumely and reproach, in respect of the
public profit of the Church, which he only sought, he bare and suffered
patiently.'

8. Here have we the Episcopal habit affirmed to be a contumely and reproach
to that godly man, slighted contemptuously by the name of trifles, and
condemned in the Marginal Note for a Popish attire; the other ceremonies of the
Church being censured as more ambitious, then profitable, and tending more to
superstition, then to edification; which as no man of sense or reason can
believe to be approved and allowed of by that Convocation; so neither is it to
be believed that they allowed of his opinion in the present point. For a
counterballance whereunto there was another Canon passed in this Convocation,
by which all preachers were enjoined to take special care, ne quid unquam
doceant, pro concione; quod a populo religiose, teneri, and credi velint, nisi
quod consent aneum sit doctrinae veteris aut novi testamenti quodque ex illa
ipsa doctrina Catholici Patres and veteres Episcopi Collegeri^t, that is to
say, that they should maintain no other doctrine in their public Sermons to be
believed of the people, but that which was agreeable to the doctrine of the Old
and New Testament, and had from thence been gathered by the Catholic (or
Orthodox) Fathers, and ancient Bishops of the Church. To which rule if they
held themselves as they ought to do, no countenance could be given to Calvines
Doctrines, or Fox his judgment in these points maintained by one of the
Catholic Fathers, and ancient Bishops of the Church, but St. Augustine only,
who though he were a godly man and a learned Prelate; yet was he but one
Bishop, not Bishops in the plural number, but one father, and not all the
fathers, and therefore his opinion not to be maintained against all the rest.

CHAP. XX. Of the great Innovation made by Perkins in the public Doctrine, the
stirs arising thence in Cambridge, and Mr. Barrets carriage in them.
1 OF Mr. Perkins and his Doctrine of Predestination, with his recital of the
four opinions, which were then maintained about the same. 2. The sum and
substance of his Doctrine according to the Supralapsarian, or Supra-creatarian
way. 3. The several censures past upon it, both by Papists and Protestants, by
none more sharply then by Dr. Rob. Abbots, after Bishop of Sarum. 4. Of Dr.
Baroe, the Lady Margarets Professor in the University, and his Doctrine
touching the divine Decrees, upon occasion of Gods denounced Judgment against
the Ninivites. 5. His constant opposition to the Predestinarians, and the great
increase of his Adherents. 6. The Articles collected out of Barrets Sermon,
derogatory to the Doctrine and persons of the chief Calvinians. 7. Barret
convented for the same, and the proceedings had against him at his first
conventing. 8. A form of Recantation delivered to him, but not the same which
does occur in the Anti-Arminianism to be found in the Records of the
University. 9. Several arguments to prove that Barret never published the
Recantation imposed upon him. 10. The rest of Barrets story related in his own
letter to Dr. Goad, being then Vice-Chancelour. 11. The sentencing of Barret to
a Recantation, no argument that his Doctrine was repugnant to the Church of
England, and that the body of the same University differed from the heads in
that particular.

1. THis great Breach being thus made by Fox in his Acts and Monuments; was
afterward opened wider by William Perkins, an eminent Devine of Cambridge, of
great esteem amongst the Puritans for his zeal and piety, but more for his
dislike of the Rites and Ceremonies here by Law established; of no less fame
among those of the Calvinian party both at home and abroad for a Treatise of
Predestination, published in the year 1592. entitled, Armilla Aurea, or the
Golden Chain, containing the order of the causes of salvation and damnation
according to Gods word. First written by the Author in Latin for the use of
Students, and in the same year translated into English at his Request by one
Robert Hill, who afterward was Dr. of Divinity, and Rector of St. Bartholomews
Church near the royal Exchange. In the preface unto which Discourse, the Author
tells us, 'that there was at that day four several Opinions of the order of
Gods Predestination. The first was of the old and new Pelagians, who placed the
cause of Gods Predestination in man, in that they hold, that God did ordain men
to life or death, according as he did foresee, that they would by their natural
free will, either reject or receive Grace offered. The second of them, who (of
some) are termed, Lutherans, which taught, that God foreseeing that all mankind
being shut under unbelief, would therefore reject Grace offered, did hereupon
purpose to choose some to salvation of his mere mercy, without any respect of
their faith or good works, and the rest to reject, being moved to do this,
because he did eternally foresee, that they would reject his Grace offered
them in the Gospel. The third of Semi-palagian Papists, which ascribe Gods
Predestination partly to mercy, and partly to men's foreseen Preparations and
meritorious works. The fourth, of such as teach, that the cause of the
execution of Gods Predestination, is his mercy in Christ in them which are
saved; and in them which perish, the fall and corruption of man; yet so as that
the Decree and eternal Counsel of God concerning them both, has not any cause
besides his Will and pleasure.' In which Preface whither he has stated the
opinions of the parties right, may be discerned by that which has been said in
the former Chapters: and whither the last of these opinions ascribe so much to
Gods Mercy in Christ in them that are saved, and to man's natural Corruption in
them that perish, will best be seen by taking a brief view of the opinion it
self. The Author taking on him to oppugn the three first as erroneous, and only
to maintain the last as being a truth, which will bear weight in the balance
of the Sanctuary, as in his Preface he assures us.

2. 'Now in this book Predestination is defined, to be the Decree of God, by
the which he has ordained all men to Golden chain*
a certain and everlasting Estate: that is, either to salvation or condemnation
to his own Glory. He tells us secondly, that the means for putting this decree
in execution, were the creation and the fall. 3. That man's fall was neither by
Ibid. p. 52.
chance, or by Gods not knowing it, or by his bare permission, or against his
Will; but rather miraculously, not without the Will of God, but yet without all
approbation of it.' Which passage being somewhat obscure, may be explained by
another, some leaves before. In which the Question being asked, Whether all
things and actions were subject unto Gods Decree? He answers, 'Yes surely,
and therefore the Lord according to his good pleasure has most certainly
decreed every both thing and action, whether past, present, or to come,
together with their circumstances of place, time, means, and end:' And then the
Question being pressed to this particular, What even the wickedness of the
wicked? The answer is affirmative, 'Yes, he has most justly decreed the wicked
works of the wicked. For if it had Ib. 29.
not pleased him, they had never been at all: And albeit they of their own
natures are, and remain wicked, yet in respect of Gods decree they are to be
accounted good.' Which Doctrine, though it be no other then that which had
before been taught by Beza, yet being published, more copiously insisted on,
and put into a more methodical way, it became wondrous acceptable amongst those
of the Calvinian party both at home and abroad, as before was said. Insomuch
that it was printed several times after the Latin edition, with the general
approbation of the French and Belgic Churches, and no less then 15. times,
within the space of twenty years in the English tongue. At the end of which
term in the year 1612. the English book was turned by the Translator into
Questions and Answers, but without any alteration of the words of the Author,
as he informs us in the last page of his Preface, after which it might have
sundry other impressions; that which I follow, being of the year 1621. And
though the Supra-lapsarians or rigid Calvinists (or Supra-creatarians rather,
as a late judicious Writer calls them) differ exceedingly in these points, from
many of their more moderate brethren, distinguished from them by the name of
Sub-lapsarians; yet in all points touching the specifying of their several
supposed Decrees, they agree well enough together, and therefore wink at one
another, as before was noted.

3. Notwithstanding the esteem wherewith both sorts of Calvinists entertained
the book, it found not the like welcome in all places, nor from all men's hands.
Amongst other Ib. Epist. Dedi.
Parsons the Jesuit gives this censure of him, viz. That by the deep humor of
fancy he has published and writ many books with strange Titles, which neither
he nor his Reader do understand, as namely about the Concatenation of laying
together of the causes of man's Predestination and Reprobation, etc. Jacob van
Harmine, (afterward better known by the name of Arminius) being then Preacher
of the Church of Amsterdam, not only censured in brief as Parsons did, but
wrote a full discourse against it, entitled, Examen Predestinationis
Perkinsanae, which gave the first occasion to these controversies (many
appearing in defense of Perkins and his Opinions) which afterward involved the
Sub-lapsarians in the self same Quarrel. Amongst our selves it was objected,
'That his Doctrine, referring all to an absolute decree, hamstring'd Ha^. in
Holy State p. 90.
all industry, and cut off the sinews of men's endeavors toward salvation, for
ascribing all to the wind of Gods Spirit (which blows where it lists) he
leaves nothing to the cares of men's diligence, either to help or hinder to the
attaining of happiness, but rather opens a Absolv. contr. Tompsoni Diatrib.
wide door to licentious security.' But none of all our English was so sharp in
their censures of him, as Dr. Robbert Abbot, then Dr. of the Chair in Oxon. and
not long after Bishop of Sarum, who in his book against Tompson (though others
inclined too much to Calvin's Doctrines) gives this Judgment of Mr. Perkinsius,
viz. Alioqui eruditus, and pius in discriptione Divinae Praedestinationis, quam
ille contra nostram, contra veteris Ecclesiae, fidem citra lapsum Adami
absolute decretum constituit, erravit, errorem non levem, cujus adortis
quibusdam viris inita jamdudum and suscepta defensio, turbas ecclesiis non
necessarias dedit, quas etiamnum non sine scandalo and periculo haerere
videmus, dum viam quisque quam ingressus est sibi ante tenendum jndicat, quam
ductam sacrarum literarum authoritate lineam veritatis, tanquam filum
Ariadnaeum sibi ducem faciat, that is to say, Perkins, though otherwise a godly
and learned man in his description of Divine Predestination, which contrary not
only to the Doctrine of the primitive times, but also unto that of the Church
of England, he builds upon an absolute decree of Almighty God, without
referrence to the Fall of Adam, ran himself into no small error: The defense
whereof being undertaken by some learned men, has given the Church some more
then necessary troubles, which still continued not without manifest scandal and
Danger to it; whilst every one does rather choose to follow his own Way therein,
then suffer himself to be guided in the Labyrinth by the line of truth (as by
the clew of Ariadne) drawn from the undeniable Authority of holy Scriptures.
And so I leave the man with this observation, that he who in his writings had
made the infinitely greatest part of all mankind incapable of Gods grace and
mercy, by an absolute and irrespective decree of Reprobation; who in expounding
the Commandments, when he was Catechist of Christ's College in Cambridge, did
lay the Law so home in the Holy State, p. 90.
ears of his Auditors, that it made their hearts fall down, and yea their hair
to stand almost upright; and in his preaching use to pronounce the word Damned,
with so strong an Emphasis, that it left an echo in the ears of his hearers a
long time after; this man scarce lived out half his days, being no more then
forty four years of age from the time of his death, at the pangs conducing
unto which, he was noted to speak nothing so articulately, as Mercy, Mercy;
which I hope God did graciously vouchsafe to grant him in that woeful Agony.

4. But to proceed, this Doctrine finding many followers, and Whitacres himself
then Dr. of the Chair in Cambridge concurring in opinion with him, it might
have quickly overspread the whole University, had it not been in part
prevented, and in part suppressed by the care and diligence of Dr. Baroe, and
his Adherents, who being a French man born, of eminent piety and learning, and
not inclimable at all unto Calvin's Doctrines, had been made the Lady Margarets
Professor for the University somewhat before the year 1574. For in that year he
published his Lectures on the Prophet. Jonah. In one of which being the 29th in
number, Baroe Praelect. 29. p. 216.
he discourses on these words of the Prophet, viz. Yet forty days and Nineveh
shall be destroyed, cap. 3. ver. 4. where we find it thus, Haec denunciatio non
est quasi Proclamatio decreti divini absoluti, sed quaedam ratio praep^nendae
divinae voluntatis, qua Deus little animos flectere voluit: quare haec oration,
et si simplex and absoluta v^eatur, tacitam tamen habet conditionem, (nisi
rescipiscant) namque hanc in esse conditionem eventus comprobavit; The
denouncing of this Judgment (says that learned man) is not to be beheld as
the publication of one of Gods absolute Decrees, but only as a form observed in
making Gods Will known unto them, by which he meant to put them to it, and rouse
their spirits to Repentance. Therefore (says he) although the Denunciation of
the following Judgment seem to be simply positive and absolute, yet has it
notwithstanding this Condition (that is to say, unless they do repent) included
in it; for that such a condition was included in it, the event does show; which
said, he leads us on to the denouncing of the like Judgment on the house of
Abimileck, which he had before in Dr. King chap. 18. number. 11. who herein either
followed Baroe, or at the least concurred in opinion with him. And in the next
place he proceeds a little further then the case of the Ninivites, Baroe
Praelect. 30. p. 217.
touching upon the point of Election unto life eternal, by the most proper
superstructure could be laid upon such a foundation, Dei voluntas non erat ut
perirent, si rescipiscerent, non vult enim mortem peccatoris, sed ut
convertatur: Et rursus Dei erat voluntas, ut perirent, nisi rescipiscerent.
Haec enim duo unum sunt; ut Dei voluntas est ut vitam habeamus si credamus: Et
Dei voluntas non est ut vitam habeamus, nisi credamus; aut si credentes,
perseveremus, non autem si aliquandiu credentes non pers^veremus, that is to
say, It was not the Will of God that they should perish, if they did repent,
(For God desires not the death of a sinner, but rather that he be converted
and live) and yet it was his will that they should pe^ish if they did not
repent: for these two are one, as for example: It is the Will of God, says he,
that we should have eternal life, if we believe, and constantly persevere in
the faith of Christ. And it is not the will of God that we should have eternal
life, if we do not believe, or believing only for a time, do not persevere
therein to the end of our lives; which point he further proves by the condition
of the message sent from God to Hezekiah by the Prophet, Isaiah, 2 King. 20. 1.
as before was said in Dr. King: For which, together with the rest of his
discourse upon that occasion, concerning the consistency of these alterations
with the immutability or unchangableness of Almighty God; I shall refere the
Reader to the book it self.

5. So far that learned man had declared himself upon occasion of that Text,
and the case of the Ni^evites before the year 1574. being ten years before the
preaching of H^rsnets Sermon at St. Paul's Cross, and more then twenty years
before the ^^irs at Cambridge betwixt him and Whitacres. In all which time, or
at lest the greatest part thereof, he inclined rather unto the Melancthonian
way, (according to the Judgment of the Church of England) in laying down the
Doctrine of Predestination then to that of Calvin. For fifteen years it is
confessed in a letter sent by some of the heads of Cambridge to William Lord
Burleigh, then Chancellor Anti-arminian. p. 256.
of the University, bearing date March the 8. 1595. That he had taught in his
Lectures, preached in Sermons, determined in the Schools, and printed in
several books, a contrary Doctrine unto that; which was maintained by Dr.
Whitacres, and had been taught and received in the University ever since the
beginning of her Majesty's Reign: which last, though it be gratis dictum,
without proof or evidence, yet it is probable enough that it might be so;
Cartwright that unextinguished Firebrand being Professor in that place before
him, and no greater care taken in the first choice of the other before recited
to have had the place, then to supply it with a man of known aversness from all
points of Popery. And it seems also by that letter, that Baroe had not sown his
seed in a barren soil, but in such as brought forth fruit enough, and yielded a
greater increase of Followers, then the Calvinians could have wished. For in
one place the letter tells us, that besides Mr. Barret (of whom we shall speak
more anon) There were diverse others who there attempted publicly to teach new
and strange opinions in Religion, as the Subscribers of it call them. And in
another place it tells us of Dr. Baroe, that he had many Disciples and
Adherents, whom he enboldned by his example to maintain false Doctrine. And by
this check it may be said of Peter Baroe in reference to that University,
endangered to be overgrown with outlandish Doctrines, as the Historian does of
Cajus Marius, with referrence to the state of Rome in fear of being overrun by
the Tribes of the Cymbri, which were then breaking in upon it, Actum esset de
Repub. nisi Marius isti seculo contigisset, the Commonwealth had then been
utterly overthrown, if Marius had not been then living.

6. Now as for Barret before mentioned, he stands accused so far forth as we
can discern by the Recantation, which some report him to have made for
preaching many strange and erroneous Anti-armini. p. 56.
Doctrines, that is to say; 1. 'That No man in this transitory life is so
strongly underpropped at lest by the certainty of faith; that is to say, (as
afterward he explained himself) by Revelation, that he ought to be assured of
his own salvation. 2. That the faith of Peter could not f^il, but that the
faith of other men might fail, our Lord not praying for the faith of every
particular man. 3. That the certainty of perseverance for the time to come is a
presumptuous and proud security, forasmuch as it is in its own nature
contingent, and that it was not only a presumptuous but a wicked Doctrine. 4.
There was no distinction in the faith, but in the persons believing. 5. That
the forgiveness of sins is an Article of the Faith, but not the forgiveness of
the sins particularly of this man o^ that; and therefore that no true Believer,
either can or ought believe for certain that his sins are forgiven him. 6. That
he maintained against Calvin, Peter Martyr, and the rest, (concerning those
that are not saved) that sin is the true proper and first cause of Reprobation.
7. That he had taxed Calvin for lifting up himself above the high and Almighty
God: And 8ly, That he had uttered many bitter wo^ds against Peter Martyr
Theodore Beza, J^rom, Zanchius, and Francis Junius, etc. calling them by the
odious names of Calvinists, and branding them with a most grievous mark of
Reproach, they being the lights and Ornaments of our Church, as is suggested in
the Articles which were exhibited against him.'

7. For having insisted, or at lest touched upon these points in a Sermon
preached at St. Marys on the 29. day of April, Ann. 1595. all the Calvinian
heads of that University being lbid together by Whitaores, and inflamed by
Perkins, took fire immediately. And in this Text he was convented on the fifth
of May next following at nine of the clock in the morning, before Dr. Some,
then Deputy Vice Chancellor to Dr. Duport, Dr. Goad, Dr. ^yndal, Dr.
Whitacres, Dr. Barwell, Dr. Jegon, Dr. Preston, Mr. Chatterton, and Mr. Claton
in the presence of Thomas Smith public Notary; by whom he was appointed to
attend again in the afternoon. At which time the Articles above mentioned were
read unto him, which we alleged to be erroneous and false, Et repugnantes
esse religioni, in regno Angliae and legitima Authoritate receptae ac
stabilitae, that is to say, contrary to the Religion received and established
by public Authority in the Realm of England. To which Articles being required
to give an Answer, he confessed that he had published in his Sermon all these
positions, which in the said Articles are contained, sed quod contenta in
i^^dem Religioni Ecclesiae Anglicanae, ut prefertur, omnino non repugnant, but
denied them to be any way repugnant to the Doctrine of the Church of England.
Whereupon the Vice Chancellor and the forenamed heads entering into mature
deliberation, and diligently weighing and examining these positions, because it
did manifestly appear, that the said positions were false, erroneous, and
likewise repugnant to the 'Religion received and established in the Church of
England, adjudged and declared, that the said Barret had incurred the Penalty
of the 45. Statute of the University de concionibu^:' And by virtue and tenor
of that Statute they decreed and adjudged the said Barret to make a public
recantation, in such words and form, as by the Vice Chancellor, and the said
heads, or any three or two of them, or else upon his refusal to recant in that
manner, to be perpetually expelled both from his Colled^e and the University:
binding him likewise in an Assumpsit of 40 li. to appear personally upon two
days warning before the Vice Chancellor or his Deputy, at what time and place
they should require.

8. It appears afterward by the Register of the University, that Barret being
resummoned to appear before him, though none but Goad, Tyndal, Barwell and
Preston, were present at that time with the Vice Chancellor or his Deputy (for
I know not which) a Recantation ready drawn was delivered to him, which he was
commanded to publish solemnly in St. Mary's Church on Satterday, the 10. of May
then next ensuing. And it is confidently affirmed by the Author of the
Arminianism, and his Ecco too, that the said Recantation Anti-armini^^. p. 61.
was publicly made by the said Barret at the time and place therein appointed.
And hereof the first Author seems to be so confident, that he does not only
tell us, that this Recantation was made accordingly, but that it was not made
with that Humility and Remorse which was expected; it being said, that after
the reading thereof, he concluded thus, Haec dixi; intimating thereby, that he
consented not in his heart to that which he had delivered by his tongue. This
is the total of the business concerning Barret in the Anti-Arminianism, in
which there is somewhat to be doubted, and somewhat more to be denied. And
first it is to be doubted, whether any such Recantation, consisting of so many
Articles, and every Article having his abjuration or Recantation subjoined unto
it, was ever enjoined to be made: for though the Author of the book affirms
in one place, that the whole Recantation, in the same manner and form (...)
there we find it, was exemplified, and sent unto him under the hand of the
Register of the University, page 62. yet he confesses within few lines after,
that no such matter could be found, when the heads of houses were required by
an Order from the house of Commons in the last Session of Parliament, Anno
1628. to make certificate to them of all such Recantations as were recorded in
their University Register, and of this Recantation in particular. And though
it be hereupon inferred, that this Recantation was embezilled and razed out of
the Records of the University by some of the Arminian party, the better to
suppress the memory of so great a foil; yet it may rather be believed, that
many false Copys of it were dispersed abroad by those of the Calvinian faction,
to make the man more odious, and his opinions more offensive then might stand
with truth.

9. The truth is that a Recantation was enjoined, and delivered to him, though
not the same, nor in the same form and manner as before laid down; Barret
confessing in his letters, of which more anon, that a Recantation was imposed
on him and expected from him: But then it is to be denied as a thing most
false, that he never published the Recantation, whatsoever it was, which the
heads enjoined and required at his last convention. For, First, It is
acknowledged in the Authors own Transcript of the Acts, that though he did
confess the propositions wherewith he was charged to be contained in his
Sermon; yet he would never grant them to be contrary to the Doctrine of the
Church o^ England, and therefore was not likely to retract the same. Secondly,
It is plain by Barrets said letters, the one to Dr. Goad Master of Kings, the
other to Mr. Chadderton Master of. Emanuel College, that neither flattery, nor
threatenings, nor the fear of loosing his subsistence in the University, should
ever work him to the publishing of the Recantation required of him. And
thirdly, It appears by the letters from the heads above mentioned to the Lord
Treasurer Burleigh, that Barret had not made the Recantation on the 8th. of
March, which was full ten months after the time appointed for the publishing
of it. And on these terms this business shows the Author his Error, to
affirm with all confidence, (for if the one does, the other must) that Barret
made this Recantation in St. Mary's Church on the tenth of May, Anno 1595.
Barret declaring in his letter to Dr. Goad, about nine months after, that he
would never make it; And the heads signified to the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, on
the eight of March, being ten months after, that at that time he had not made.
And who should believe in the present case, Barret that says he would never do
it, and the heads, who say, he had not done it on the eight of March: or that
they say upon the credit of a false and malicious Copy (purposely spread
abroad by the Puritan faction to defame the man) that he had published it on
the 10. of May, ten months before. I find also in the Title to this
Recantation, as it stands in the Anti-arminianism (p 46) that Mr. Harsnet of
Pembrook Hall, is there affirmed to have maintained the supposed Errors, for
which Barret was condemned to a Recantation: and it is strange that Harsnet
should stand charged in the Title of another man's sentence, for holding and
maintaining any such points as had been raked out of the dunghill of Popery and
Pelagianism, as was there affirmed; for which he either was to be questioned in
his own person, or not to have been condemned, to the Title of a sentence
passed on another man. Which circumstance as it discredits the Title, so the
Title does as much discredit the reality of the Recantation, adeo mendaciorum
natura est, ut cohaerere non possint, says Lactantius truly. The rest of
Barrets story shall be told by himself, according as I find it in a letter of
his to Dr. Goad then being Vice Chancellor, written about nine months after
the time of his first conventing: as the letter does appear, which is this that
follows.

A Copy of Mr. Barret's Letter to Dr. Goade.
10. MY Duty remembered to your Worship, etc. Sir, according to your
appointment, I have conferred with Mr. Overald and Mr. Chadderton. Mr. Overald
after once conference, refused to talk off these points any more, saying it
needed not: For Mr. Chadderton he is a learned man, and one whom I do much
reverenced, yet he has not satisfied me in this point. For I required proof
but of these two things at his hands, viz. That Una sides did differ specie
ab alia; and that it was aliud donum ab alio, but he did neither. But for the
first whereas he should have proved it did differ specie, he proved it did
differ numero, and that but out of the Mr. of the Sentences, whose Authority
notwithstanding I do not impugn. And for the other, that it should be Aliud
donum, he proves out of St. Augustine, that fides demonum is not alia a fide
Christianorum, which no man ever denied: for fides Demonum is not Donum at all,
so that it comes not in Question, so that I being here unsatisfied of one
party, meaning Mr. Chadderion, and rather confirmed of the other party; I do
hold my positions as before. And for the Retractation I purpose not to perform
it: Yet that the peace of the University, and the Church may be preserved, I do
solemnly promise to keep my opinion to my self: so that in this regard my
humble suit unto your Worship (and hearty prayer to God) is this, that you
would suffer me to continue in the University without molestation, though I
live but in disgrace amongst you, yet I regard it, so I may be quiet. For my
intent is to live privately at my book, until such times as by continual
conference with those that are of contrary Judgment, I may learn the truth of
your Assertions; which when I have learned, I promise before God and your
Worship not to conceal. But if you and the rest of your Assistants (whom I
reverence) do purpose to proceed in disquieting and traducing me as you have
done by the space of three quarters of this year, and so in the end mean to
drive me out of the University, I must take it patiently, because I know not
how to redress it; but let God be judge between you and me. These things I
leave to your worships favorable consideration; for this I must needs say,
(and peradventure it may tend to your credit, when I shall report it) that
above the rest hitherto I have found you most courteous and most just. I leave
your worship to Gods Direction and holy tuition, expecting a gracious answrr,

Your daily Beads man, WILLIAM BARRET.


11. But here perhaps it may be said, that though Barret might be as obstinate
in refusing to publish the Recantation, as this letter makes him; yet it
appears by the whole course of those proceedings, that his Doctrines were
condemned by the heads of the University, as being contrary to that which was
received and established in the Church of England. And that it was so in the
Judgment of those men, who either concurred in his censure, or subscribed the
letter to the Lord Treasurer Burleigh above mentioned, in a thing past
question. But this can be no Argument, that Barrets Doctrines were repugnant to
the Church of England, because these heads either in favor of Dr. Whitacres,
or in respect to Mr. Perkins, were pleased to think no otherwise of them: for
if it be, we may conclude by the same Argument, that the Church of Rome was in
the right, even in the darkest times of ignorance and superstition, because all
those who publicly opposed her Doctrines, were solemnly enjoined by the then
prevailing party to a Recantation; and which is more, it may be also thence
concluded that the Doctrine maintained by Athanasius touching Christ's Divinity,
was contrary to that which had been taught by the Apostles, and men of
Apostolical spirits, because it was condemned for such, by some Arrian Bishops
in the Council (or rather Conventicle of Tire which was held against him.

2. It cannot be made apparent that either Dr. Duport, the Vice Chancellor who
was most concerned, or Dr. Baroe, the Lady Margarets Professor for divinity
there had any hand in sentencing this Recantation. Not Dr. Baroe, because by
concurring to this sentence he was to have condemned himself: Nor Dr, Duport,
for I find his place to be supplied, and the whole action governed by Dr. Some
(which shows him to be absent at that time from the Vniver^ity) according to
the style* whereof, the Title of Procancellarius is given to Dr. So^e in the
Acts of the Court, as appears by the extract of them in the Anti-Arminianism,
p. 64. compared with p. 63.

But thirdly, admitting that the head^ were generally thus inclined, yet
probably the whole body of the University might not be of the same opinion with
them: those heads not daring to affirm otherwise of Barrets Doctrine in their
letter to the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, then that it gave just offense to many.
And if it gave offense unto many only, it may be thought that it gave no
offense to the Major part, or much less to all; for if it had, the Writers of
the letter would not have been so sparing in their expressions, as to limit the
offense to many, if they could have said it of the most. But of this we shall
speak more in the following Chapter, when we shall come to feel the pulse of
the University in the great competition between Wotton and Oveald after
Whitacres death. Of which opinion Harsnet was, we have seen before. And we have
seen before that Baroe had many Disciples and Adherents which stood fast unto
him. And thereupon we may conclude, that when Dr. Baroe had for 14 or 15. years
maintained these* opinions in the Schools (as before was showed) which are now
novelized by the name of Arminianism; and such an able man as Harsnet had
preached them without any Control, when the greatest audience of the Kingdom
did stand to him in it. There must be many more Barrets who concurred with the
same opinions with them in the University, though their names through the envy
of the times are not come unto us.

CHAP. XXI. Of the proceedings against Baroe, the Articles of Lambeth, and the
general calm which was in Oxon, touching these Disputes.
1. THe differences between Baroe and Dr. Whitacres, the address of Whitakers
and others to Archbishop Wh^tgift, which drew on the Articles on Lambeth. 2.
The Articles agreed on at Lambeth, presented both in English and Latin. 3. The
Articles of no authorty in themselves, Archbishop Whitgift questioned for them,
together with the Queens command to have them utterly suppressed. 4. That Baroe
neither was deprived of his Professorship, nor compelled to leave it, the
Anti-Calvinian party being strong enough to have kept him in if he had desired
it. 5. A Copy of the Letter from the Heads in Cambridge to the Lord Treasurer
Burleigh, occasioned as they said by Barret and Baroe. 6. Dr. Overalds
encounters with the Calvinists in the point of falling from the grace received;
his own private judgment in the point, neither for total, nor for final, and
the concurrence of some other learned men in the same opinion. 7. The general
calm which was at Oxon at that time touching these disputes, and the Reasons
of it. 8. An answer to that Objection out of the writings of judicious Hooker,
of the total and final falling. 9. The disaffections of Dr Bukeridge, and Dr.
Houson to Calvines doctrines: an Answer to the Objection touching the paucity
of those who opposed the same. 10. Possession of a truth maintained but by one
or two, preserves it sacred and inviolable for more fortunate times; the case
of Liberius Pope of Rome; and that the testimonies of this kind are rather to
be valued by weight then tale.

1. FRom barret pass we on to Baroe, betwixt whom and Dr. Whitacres there had
been some clashings, touching Predestination and Reprobation, the certainty of
salvation, and the possibility of falling from the grace received. And the
heats grew so high at last that the Calvinians thought it necessary in point of
prudence to effect that by power and favor, which they were not able to
obtain by force of argument. To which end they first addressed themselves to
the Lord Treasurer Burleigh then being there Chancellor, acquainting him by Dr.
Some, then Deputy Vice Chancellor, with the disturbances made by Barret,
thereby preparing him to hearken to such further motions, as should be made
unto him in pursuit of that quarrel. Bat finding little comfort there, they
resolved to steer their course by another compass. And having prepossest the
most Reverend Archbishop Whitgift, with the turbulent carriage of those men,
the affronts given to Dr. Whitacres, whom (for his learned and laborious
Writings against Cardinal Bellarmine) he most highly favored, and the great
inconveniences like to grow by that public discord; they gave themselves good
hopes of composing those differences, not by the way of an accommodation, but an
absolute conquest; and to this end they dispatched to him certain of their
number in the name of the rest, such as were interessed in the quarrel (Dr.
Whitacres himself for one, and therefore like to stickle hard for the obtaining
their ends; the Articles to which they had reduced the whole state of the
business being brought to them ready drawn, and nothing wanting to them but the
face of Authority, wherewith, as with Medusa's head to confound their enemies,
and turn their adversaries into stones. And that they might be sent back with
the face of authority, the most Reverend Archbishop Whitgift, calling unto him
Dr. Flecher, Bishop of Bristol, then newly elected unto London, and Dr. Richard
Vauhan Lord Elect of Bangor, together with Dr. Tyndal Deane of Elie, Dr.
Whitacres and the rest of the Divines which came from Cambridge, proposed the
said Articles to their consideration at his house in Lambeth, on the tenth of
November. An. 1595. by whom these Articles were agreed on in these following
words.

1. Deus ab eterno praedestinavit quosdam ad vitam: quosdam reprobavit ad
mortem.

1. God from eternity has predestinate certain men unto life, certain men he
has reprobate.

2. Causa movens aut efficiens predestination^s ad vitam non est praevisio
fidei, aut perseverantiae, aut bonorum operum, aut ullius rei qui insit, in
personis Praedestinatis, sed sola voluntas beneplaciti Dei.

2. The moving or efficient cause of predestination unto life, is not the
foresight of faith, or of perseverance, or of good works, or of any thing that
is in the person predestined, but only the good will and pleasure of God.

3. Praedestinatorum praefinitus and certus est numerus, qui nec angeri, nec
minui potest.

3. There is predetermined a certain number of the Predestinate, which can
neither be augmented or diminished.

4. Qui non sunt Praedestinati adsalutem, necessario, propter peccata sua
damnabuntur.

4. Those who are not predestined to salvation, shall be necessarily damned
for their sins.

5. Vera, viva and justificans fides, and piritus Dei justificantis, non
extinguitur, non excidit, non evanescit in Electis, aut finaliter, aut
totaliter.

5. A true living and justifying faith, and the Spirit of God justifying is not
extinguished, falls not away, it vanishes not away in the Elect, either
totally or finally.

6. Homo vere fidelis, id est, fide justificante praeditus, certus est
pleriphoria Fides de Remissione peccatorum suo^um, and salute sempiterna sua
per Christum.

6. A man truly faithful, that is, such an one who is endued with a justifying
faith, is certain with the full assurance of faith, of the remission of his
sins, and of his everlasting salvation by Christ.

7. Gratia salutaris, non tribuitur, non incommunicatur, non conceditur
universis hominibus, qua servari possint si velint.

7. Saving grace is not given, is not granted, is not communicated to all men,
by which they may be saved if they will.

8. Nemo potest venire ad Christum, nisi datum ei fu^rit, and nisi pater eum
t^axerit, and omnes homines non trahuntur a patre, ut veniant ad filium.

8. No man can come unto Christ, unless it be given unto him, and unless the
father shall draw him, and all men are not drawn by the Father, that they may
come to the Son.

9. Non est positum in arbitrio, aut potestate uniuscujusque hominis servari.

9. It is not in the will or power of every one to be saved.

3. Now in these Articles there are these two things to be considered, first
the Authority by which they were made, and secondly the effect produced by
them, in order to the end proposed; And first as touching the authority by
which they were made, it was so far from being legal and sufficient, that it
was plainly none at all. For what authority could there be in so thin a meeting
consisting only of the Archbishop himself, two other Bishops (of which but one
had actually received consecration) one Deane and half a dozen Doctors and
other Ministers, neither empowered* to any such thing by the rest of the Clergy,
nor authorized to it by the Queen. And therefore their determinations of no
more Authority, as to binding of the Church, or prescribing to the judgment of
particular persons, then as if one Earl, the eldest son of two or three others,
meeting with half a dozen Gentlemen in Westminster Hall, can be affirmed to be
in a capacity of making orders which must be looked on by the Subject, as Acts
of Parliament. A Declaration they might make of their own opinions, or of that
which they they thought fittest to be holden in the present case, but neither
Articles nor Canons to direct the Church: for being but opinions still, and the
opinions of private and particular persons, they were not to be looked upon as
public Doctrines. And so much was confessed by the Archbishop himself, when
he was called in question for it before the Queen* who being made acquainted
with all that passed by the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, who neither liked the
Tenants, nor the manner of proceeding in them, was most passionately offended
that any such Innovation should be made in the public Doctrine of this Church;
and once resolved to have them all attainted of a Praemunire. But afterward
upon the interposition of some friends, and the reverend esteem she had of the
excellent Prelate, the Lord Archbishop (whom she commonly called her Black
Husband) she was willing to admit him to his defense: and he accordingly
declared in all humble manner, that he and his associates had not made any
Articles, Canons or decrees with an intent, that they should serve hereafter
for a standing Rule to direct the Church, but only had resolved on some
propositions to be sent to Cambridge, for the appeasing of some unhappy
differences in the University; with which Answer her Majesty being somewhat
pacified, commanded notwithstanding that he should speedily recall and suppress
those Aricles which was performed with such care and diligence, that a Copy of
them was not to be found for a long time after. And though we may take up this
relation upon the credit of history of the Lambeth Articles printed in Latin,
1651. or on the credit of Bishop Mountague, Appeal. p. 71.
who affirms the same in his appeal, Anno 1525. yet since the Authority of both
has been called in question, Resp. Nec. p. 146.
we will take our warrant for this Narrative from some other hands. And first
we have it in a book called Necessario Responsio published by the Remonstrants,
Anno 1618. who possibly might have the whole story of it from the mouth of
Baroe, or some other who lived at that time in Cambridge, and might be well
acquainted with the former passages. Cabula p. 117.
And secondly, We find the same to be affirmed by the Bishops of Rochester,
Oxon, and St. David's in a letter to the Duke of Buchingham, August 2. 1625. In
which they signify unto him, that the said Articles being agreed upon, and
ready to be published, it pleased Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, upon notice
given how little they agreed with the practice of piety and obedience to all
Government, to cause them to be suppressed, and that they had so continued ever
since, till then of late some of them had received countenance at the Synod of
Dort.

4. Next touching the effect produced by them in order to the end so proposed,
so far they were from appeasing the present Controversies, and suppressing
Baroe, and his party, that his Disciples and Adherents became more united, and
the breach wider then before. And though Dr. Baroe not long after, deserted
both his place in the University, yet neither was he deprived of his
Professorship, as some say, nor forced to leave it on a fear of being deprived,
as is said by others: For that Professorship being chosen from two years to two
years, according to the Statutes of the Lady Margaret, he kept the place till
the expiring of his term, and then gave off without so much as showing himself
a suitor for it: Which had he done, it may be probable enough, that he had
carried it from any other Canditate or Competitor of what rank soever. The
Anti-Calvinian party being grown so strong, as not to be easily overborn in a
public business by the opposite faction. And this appears plainly by that
which followed on the death of Dr. Whitacres, who died within few days after
his return from Lambeth, with the nine Articles so much talked of. Two
Candidates appeared for the Professorship after his decease, Wotton of Kings
College a professed Calvinian, and one of those who wrote against Mountagues
Appeal, Anno 1626. Competitor with Overald of Trinity College almost as far
from the Calvinian Doctrine in the main Platform of Predestination, as Baroe,
Harsnet or Barret are conceived to be. But when it came to the Vere of the
University, the place was carried for Overald* ^y the Major part: which as it
plainly shows, that though the Doctrines of Calvin were so hotly stickled here
by most of the Heads, yet the greater part of the learned body entertained them
not; so does it make it also to be very improbable, that Baroe should be put
out of his place by those who had took in Overald, or not confirmed therein, if
he had desired. And therefore we may rather think, as before is said, that ^he
relinquished the place of his own accord* in which he found his Doctrine
crossed by the Lambeth Articles, and afterward his peace distracted by several
Informations brought against him, by the adverse faction; and thereupon a
letter of Complaint presented to the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, subscribed by
most of those who before had prosecuted Barret to his Recantation. Which letter
giving very great light to the present business, as well concerning Barret as
Baroe* though principally aiming at the last, I think worthy of my pains, and
the Readers patience: and therefore shall subscribe it as hereafter follows.

A Copy of the Letter sent from some of the Heads in Cambridge, to the Lord
Burleigh, Lord High Treasurer of England, and Chancellor of the University.
RIght Honorable, out bounden Duty remembered; we are right sorry to have such
occasion to trouble your Lordship; but the peace of this University and Church
(which is dear unto us) being brought into peril, by the late reviving of new
opinions and troublesome controversies amongst us, has urged us (in regard of
the places we here sustain) not only to be careful for the suppressing the
same to our power but also to give your Lordship further information hereof as
our Honorable Head and careful Chancellor.

About a year past (amongst diverse others who here attempted publicity to teach
new and strange opinions in Religion) one Mr. Barret more boldly then the rest,
did preach diverse Popish errors in St. Mary's to the just offense of many,
which he was enjoined to retract, but has refused so to do in such sort as
has been prescribed: with whose fact and opinions, your Lord was made
acquainted by Dr. Some the Deputy Vice Chancellor. Hereby offense and division
growing as after by Dr. Baroes public Lectures and determinations in the
Schools, contrary, (as his Auditors have informed) to Dr. Whitacres* and the
sound received truth ever since her Majesty's Re^g^* we sent up to London by
common consent in November last, Dr. Tyndal, and Dr. Whitacres (men especially
chosen for that purpose) for conference with my Lord of Canterbury, and other
principal Divines there* that the controversies being examined, and the truth
by their consents confirmed, the contrary errors and contentions thereabouts
might the rather cease. By whose good travel with sound consent in truth, such
advice and care was taken by certain propositions (containing certain
substantial points of Religion, taught and received in this University and
Church, during the time ofher Majesty's Reign, and consented unto, and
published by the best approved Divines both at home and abroad) for the
maintaining of the same truth and peace of the Church, as thereby we enjoyed
here great and comfortable quiet, until Dr. Baroe (in January last in his
Sermon Ad Cl^rum in St. Mary's, contrary to restraint, and Commandment from the
Vice Chancellor and the Heads) by renewin^ again these opinions, disturbed our
peace, whereby his Adherents and Disciples were and are too much imboldned to
maintain false Doctrine to the corrupting and disturbing of this University,
and the Church, if it be not in time effectually prevented. For remedy whereof
we have with joint consent and care (upon complaint of diverse Batchelors in
Divinity) proceeded in the examination of the cause, according to our Statutes,
and usual manner of proceeding in such causes, whereby it appears by
sufficient Testimonies, that Dr. Baroe has offended in such things as his
Articles had charged him withal*

There is also since the former, another Complaint preferred against him by
certain Batchelors in Divinity, that he has not only in the Sermon, but also
for the space of this 14. or 15. years taught in his Lectures, preached in his
Sermons, determined in the Schools, and printed in several books, diverse points
of Doctrine not only contrary to himself, but also contrary to that which has
been taught and received ever since her Majesty's Reign; and agreeable to the
errors of Popery, which we know your Lordship has always disliked and hated:
so that we (who for the space of many years past have yielded him sundry
benefits and favors here, in the University, being a stranger, and forborne him
when he has often heretofore (busy and curious in aliena Republica) broached
new and strange questions in Religion) now unless we should be careless of
maintaining the truth of Religion established, and of our duties in our places
cannot (being resolved and confirmed in the truth of the long professed and
received Doctrine) but continue to use all good means, and seek at your
Lordships hands some effectual Remedy hereof, lest by permiting passage to
these errors, the whole body of Popery should by little and little break in
upon us, to the overthrow of our Religion, and consequently the withdrawing of
many here and else where from true obedience to her Majesty.

May it therefore please your Lordship to have an honorable consideration of
the premises, and (for the better maintaining of Peace, and the truth of
Religion so long received in this University and Church) to vouchsafe your
Lordships good aid and advice both to the comfort of us, (wholly consenting and
agreeing in Judgment) and all others of the University truly affected, and to
the suppression in time, not only of these errors, but even of gross Popery,
like, by such means, in time easily to creep in amongst us (as we find by late
experience it has dangerously begun) Thus craving pardon for troubling your
Lordship, and commending the same in praise to Almighty God, we humbly take our
leave,

From Cambridge March 8. 1595 Your Lordships humble and bounden to be
commanded, Roger Goad, Procan. R. Some, Tho. Leg, John Jegon, Thomas Nevil,
Thomas Preston, Hump. Tyndal,, James Mountague, Edm. Barwel, Laur. Cutterton.


6. Such was the condition of Affairs at Cambridge at the expiring of the year,
1595. the genuine Doctrine of the Church, beginning then to break through the
clouds of Calvinism, wherewith it was before obscured, and to shine forth again
in its former luster. To the advancement of which work, as the long continuance
of Baroe in the University, for the space of 20. years and upwards, the
discreet Activity of Dr. Harsnet, Fellow and Master of Pembrook College for
the term of 40. years and more, gave a good encouragement; so the invincible
constancy of Mr. Barret, and the slender opposition made by Overald,
contributed to the confirmation and increase thereof. For scarce had Overald
warmed his Chair, when he found himself under a necessity of encountering some
of the Remainder of Baroes Adversaries, though he followed not the blow so far
as Baroe did; for some there were of the old Predestination Leven, who
publicly had taught (as he related it in the conference at Hampton Coutt) 'all
such persons, as were once truly justified, though after they fell into never
so grievous sins, yet remained still just (or in the state of Justification)
before they actually repented of those sins; yea, though they never repented of
them through forgetfulness, or sudden death, yet they should be justified and
saved without Repentance. Against which Overald maintained, that whosoever
(although before Conf. at Ham. C. p. 42.
justified) did commit any grievous sin, as Adultery, Murder, Treason, or the
like, did become ipso facto, subject to Gods wrath, and guilty of damnation (or
were in the state of damnation, quo ad presentem statum) until they repented:'
And so far he had followed Baroe, but he went no further, holding (as he
continued his own story) that such persons as were called and justified
according to the purpose of Gods Election, did neither fall totally from all
the graces of God (though how a justified man may bring himself into a present
state of wrath and damnation, without a total falling from all the graces of
God, is beyond my Reason) and that they were in time renewed by the Spirit of
God unto a lively faith and repentance, and thereby justified from those sins
(with the guilt and wrath annexed unto them) into which they had fallen: nor
can it be denied, but that some other learned men of those times were of the
same opinion also. Amongst which I find Dr. John Bridges dean of Sarum,
Anti-Armini. page 202.
and afterward Lord Bishop of Oxon, to be reckoned for one, and Mr. Richard
Hooker (of whom more anon) to be accounted for another. But being but the
compositions of private men, they are not to be heard against the express words
of the two Homilies touching Falling from God, in case the point had not been
positively determined in the sixteenth Article. But so it happened,
notwithstanding that Overald not concurring with the Calvinists concerning the
estate of such justified persons as afterward fell into grievous sins; there
grew some diffidences and distrust between them, which afterward widned
themselves into greater differences. In so much that dissenting from them also
touching the absolute decree of Reprobation, and the restraining of the benefit
of Christ's death and Gods grace unto a few particulars, and that too in Gods
primitive purpose and intent, concerning the salvation and damnation of
mankind; those of the Anti-Calvinian party went on securely, with little or no
opposition and less disturbance.

7. At Oxford all things in the mean time were calm and quiet, no public
opposition showing it self in the Schools or Pulpits. The reasons of that
which might be, first that the Students of that university did more incline
unto the canvasing of such points as were in difference betwixt us and the
Church of Rome, then unto those which were disputed against the Calvinists in
these points of Doctrine; for witness whereof, we may call in the works of
Sanders Stapleton, Allyns, Parsons, Campian, and many others of that side; as
those of Bishop Jewel, Bishop Bilson, Dr. Humpherys, Mr. Novell, Dr. Sparks,
Dr. Reynolds, and many other, which stood firm to the Church of England. And
secondly though Dr. Church Hist. l. 9.
Humpheryes, the Queens Professor for divinity was not without cause reckoned
for a Nonconformist, yet had he the reputation of a moderate man, ( a moderate
Nonconformist, as my Author calls him) and therefore might permit that Liberty
of opinion unto other men which was indulged unto himself; neither did Dr.
Holland who succeeded him, give any such countenance to the propogating of
Calvin's doctrines, as to make them the subject of his lectures and
disputations. In so much that Mr. Prinne, with all his diligence, can find but
seven men w^o publicly maintained any point of Calvinisme in the Schools of
Oxon. from the year 1596. to the year 1616. and yet to make that number also he
is fain to take in Dr. George Abbot, and Dr. Benfield, on no other account, but
for maintaining, deum non esse authorem peccati, that God is not the Author of
sin, which any Papist, Lutheran, or Arminian, might have maintained as well as
they.

8. And yet it cannot be denied, but that by error of these times, the
reputation which Calvin had attained to in both universities, and the extreme
diligence of his followers for the better carrying on of their own designs,
their was a general tendency unto his opinions in the present controversies;
so that it is no marvel, if many men of good affection to that Church in
government and forms of worship, might unawares be seasoned with his Principles
in point of Doctrine: his book of Institutes being for the most Justit fathers
in the Pref.
part the foundation on which the young Divines of those times did build their
studies; and having built their studies on a wrong foundation, did publicly
maintain some point or other of his Doctrines, which gave least offense, and
ou^ of which no dangerous consequence could be drawn (as they thought and
hoped) to the dishonor of God, the disgrace of Religion, the scandal of the
Church, or subversion of godliness: amongst which if Judicious Mr. Hooker be
named for one, (as for one I find him to be named) yet is he named only for
maintaining one of the five points, that namely of the not total, or final
falling away of Gods Elect, as Dr. Overald, also did in the Schools of
Cambridge* though neither of them can be challenged for maintaining any other
point of Calvin's Doctrine, touching the absolute decree of Reprobation,
Election unto life, without Reference to faith in Christ, the unresistable
workings of Grace, the want of freedom in the will to concur therewith, and the
determining of all men's actions unto good or evil without leaving any power in
men to do the contrary. And therefore, secondly, Mr. Hookers discourse of
Justification, as it now comes into our hands, might either be altered in some
points after his discease, by him that had the publishing of it; or might be
written by him as an essay of his younger years, before he had confuted the
book of Homilies and perused every clause in the public Liturgy (as he after
did) or had so carefully examined every text of Scripture, upon which he lays
the weight of his judgment in it, as might encourage him to have it printed
when he was alive.

9. Of any men who publicly opposed the Calvinian tenants in this Univesity
till after the beginning of King James his reign. I must confess that I have
hitherto found no good assurance; though some their were who spared not to
declare their dislike thereof, and secretly traind up their scholars in other
principles. An argument whereof may be that when Dr. Baroe dyed in London
(which was about three or four years (after he had left his place in
Cambridge) his funeral was attended by most of the Divines then living in and
about the City; Dr. Bancroft then Bishop of London giving order in it, which
plainly shows that there were many of both Universities which openly favored
Baroes doctrines, and did as openly dislike those of the Calvinians, though we
find but few presented to us by their names. Amongst which few, I first reckon
Dr. John Buckridge President of St. John's College, and Tutor to Archbishop
Laud, who carried his Anti-Calvinian doctrins with him to the Sea of Rochester,
and publicly maintained them at a conference in York house, An. 1626. And
secondly, Dr. John Houson one of the Cannons of Christ Church and
Vice Chancellor of the University. An. 1602. so known an enemy to Calvin his
opinions, that he incurred a suspension by Dr. Robert Abbots then
Vice Chancellor. And afterward being Bishop of Oxon, subscribed the letter,
amongst others to the Duke of Buckingham in favor of Mountague, and his Book
called Apello Cesarem, as before was said. And though we find but these two
named for Anti-Calvinist in the five controverted points, yet might there be
many houses perhaps some hundreds who held the same opinions with them, though
they discovered not themselves, or break out in any open opposition 1 King. 19*
18. 1 King. 19. 13.
as they did at Cambridge: God had 7000. servants in the Realm of Israel, who
had not bowed the knee to Baal, though we find the name of none but the Prophet
Eliah, the residue keeping themselves so close for fear of danger that the
Prophet himself complained to God, that he alone was left to serve him. A
parallel case to which may be that the Christians during the power and
prevalency of the Arian Heretics, St. Jerome giving us the names of no more
them three, who had stood up stoutly in defense of the Nicene council, and the
points of Doctrine there established, viz. 1. St. Athanasius Patriark of
Alexandria in Egypt, St. Hillarie Bishop of Poictious in France: and St.
Eusebius Bishop of Vevelli in Italy, of which thus the Father, Siquidem Arianis
victis triumphatorem Athanasium suum Egyptus excepit; Hillarium e prelio
revertentem galliarum ecclesiia complexa est, ad reditum Eusebii sui lugubres
vestes Italia mutavit, that is to say, upon the overthrow of the Arians Egypt
received her Athanasius, now returned in triumph; the Church of France embraced
her Hillary coming home with victory from the battle; and on the return of
Eusebius, Italy changed her mourning garments. By which it is most clear even
to vulgar eyes that not these Bishops only did defend the truth, but that it was
preserved by many others as well of the Clergy as of the people in their
several Countries; who otherwise never had received them with such joy and
triumph, if a great part of them had not been of the same opinions, though no
more of them occur by name in the records of that age.

10. But then again, If none but the three Bishops had stood unto the truth in
the points disputed at that time between the Orthodox Christians and the Arian
Heretics, yet had that been sufficient to preserve the Church from falling
universally from the faith of Christ, or deviating from the truth in those
Deuteronomy. 17. 6. Mar. 18. 19.
particulars; the word of truth being established (as say both Law and Gospel)
if there be only two or three witnesses to attest unto it; two or three members
of the Church may keep possession of a truth in all the rest, and thereby save
the whole from error; even as a King invaded by a foraign enemy, does keep
possession of his Realm by some principal forrtesse, the standing out whereof
may in time regaine all the rest, which I return for answer to another
objection touching the paucity of those Authors whom we have produced in
Maintenance of the Anti-Calvinian or old English doctrines, since the resetling
of the Church under Queen Elizabeth; for though they be but few in number, and
make but a very thin appearance; Apparent rari nautes in gurgite vasto, in the
Poets language, yet serve they for a good assurance that the Church still kept
possession of her primitive truths, not utterly lost though much endangered by
such contrary Doctrines as had of late been thrust upon her, there was a time
when few or none of the Orthodox Bishops durst openly appear in favor of St.
Athanasius, but only Theod Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 15.
Liberius Pope of Rome, who thereupon is thus upbraided by Constantius the
Arian Emperor, Quota pars tu es orbis terrarum, qui solus etc. How great a
part (says he) art thou of the whole world, that thou alone should show thy
self in defense of that wicked man, and thereby overthrow the peace of the
Universe. To which Liberius made this answer, non diminuitur solitudine mea,
verbum dei, nam and olim tres solum inventi fuere qui edicto resisterint, that
is to say, the word of God is not made the weaker by my sole appearing in
defense thereof no^ more then when there were but three, (he means the three
Hebrew Children in the book of Daniel) with durst make open opposition to the
Kings Edict. Liberius thought himself sufficient to keep possession of a truth
in the Church of Christ, till God should please to raise up more Champions in
all places to defend the same, not thinking it necessary to return any other
answer, or to produce the names of anyothers of his time who turned Athanasius
as much as he which brings into my mind a passage in the conference betwixt Dr.
Ban, Featly and Sweat the Jesuit, in which the Jesuit much insisted on that
thread bare question, viz. where was your Church before Luther? which when the
the Doctor went to show out of Scriptures and Fathers, some of the Papists
standing by, cried out for names, those which stood further of ingeminating
nothing but Names Names, whereupon the Dr. Merrily asked them, if nothing would
content them but a Buttery book. And such an Answer I must make in the present
case to such as take up testimony by tale, not weight, and think no truth is
fairly proved, except it come attended with a cloud of witnesses. But what we
want in number now, he shall find hereafter, when we shall come to take a view
of King James his Reign to which now we hasten.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Conferrence at Hampton Court, and the several
encouragements given to the Anti-Calvinians in the time of KING James.
1. THE occasion of the conference at Hampton Court, and the chief persons
there assembled. 2. The nine Articles of Lambeth rejected by King James. 3.
Those of the Church being left in their former condition. 4. The Calvinian
Doctrine of Predestination decryed by Bishop Bancroft, and disliked by King
James; and the reasons of it. 5. Bishop Bancroft and his Chaplain both abused;
The inserting the Lambeth Articles into the confession of Ireland, no argument
of King James, his approbation of them, by whom they were inserted, and for
what cause allowed of in the said Confession. 6. A pious fraud of the
Calvinians in clapping their predestinarian Doctrines at the end of the old
Testament, An. 1607. discovered, censured and rejected, with the reasons for
it. 7. The great Encouragement given by King James to the Anti-calvinians, and
the increasing of that party both in power and number by the stirs in Holland.
8. The offense taken by King James at Conradus Vorstius, animateth the Oxon.
Calvinists to suspend Dr. Houson, and to preach publicly against Dr. Laud. 9.
The like proceedings at Cambridge against Mr. Simpson, first prosecuted by King
James, and on what account, that the King was more incensed against the party
of Arminius, then against their persuasions. 10. Instructions published by King
James in order to the diminishing of Calvin's authority, the defense of
universal Redemption, and the suppressing of his Doctrines in the other points,
and why the last proved so unusefull in the case of Gabriel Bridges. 11. The
publishing of Mountagues answer to the Gagger, the information made against it:
the Author and his Doctrine taken by King James into his protection, and his
appeal licensed by the Kings appointment. 12. The conclusion of the whole
discourse and the submission of it to the Church of England.

1. NOW we come unto the Reign of King James of happy memory, whose breeding in
the Kirk of Scotland had given some hopes of seeing better days to the English
Puritans then those which they enjoyed under Queen Elizabeth. Upon which hopes
they presented him at his first coming to the Crown with a supplication, no
less tedious then it was impertinent, given out to be subscribed with a
thousand hands, though it wanted many of that number, and aiming at an
alteration in many points, both of Doctrine and Discipline: But they soon found
themselves deceived. For first the King commanded by public proclamation, that
the divine service of the Church, should be diligently officiated and
frequented as in former times, under pain of suffering the severest penalties
by the Laws provided in that case. And that being done, instead of giving such
a favorable answer to their supplication, as they had flattered themselves
withal, he commended the answering of it to the Vice Chancellor, Heads, and
other learned men of the University of Oxon. from whom there was nothing to be
looked for toward their contentment. But being, thirdly, a just Prince, and
willing to give satisfaction to the just desires of such as did apply
themselves unto him; as also to inform himself in all such particulars, as were
in difference betwixt the Petitioners and the Prelates: he appointed a solemn
Conference to be held before him at Hampton Court on Thursday the 12. of
January, Anno 1603. being within less then ten months after his entrance on
the Kingdom. To which conference were called by several letters on the Churches
part, the most Reverend and right renowned Fathers in God, Dr. John Whitgift
Archbishop of Canterbuy, Dr. Richard Bancroft Bishop of London, Dr. Tobie
Mathews Bishop of Durham, Dr. Thomas Bilson Bishop of Winchester, Dr. Gervase
Babbinton Bishop of Worcester, Dr. Anthony Ru^d Bishop of David's, Dr. Anthony
Walson Bishop of Chechester, Dr, Henry Robbinson Bishop of Carlisle, and Dr.
Thomas D^ve Bishop of Peterborough, as also Dr. James Mountague Dean of the
Chapel, Dr. Thomas Ravis Dean of Christ Church, Dr. John Bridges Dean of
Sarum, Dr. Lancelot Andrews Dean of Westminster, Dr. John Overald Dean of Saint
Paul's, Doctor William Barlow Dean of Chester, Doctor Giles Tompson Dean of
Windsor, together with Dr. John King Archdeacon of Nottingham, and Dr. Richard
Field after Dean of Gloucester; all of them habited and attired according to
their several ranks and stations in the Church of England. And on the other
side, there appeared for the Plantiffe or Petitioner Dr. Reynolds, Dr. Spark,
Mr. Knewstubs, and Mr. Chatterton; the two first being of Oxon. and the other
of Cambridge, apparelled in their Turkey Gowns to Con. at H. C. p. 27.
show (as Bishop Bancroft tartly noted) they desired rather to conform
themselves in outward Ceremonies with the Turks, then they did with the Papists.

2. The first day of the Conference being spent betwixt the King and the
Bishops: the second which was the 16. of the same month, was given to the
Plantiffes to present their grievances, and to remonstrate their Con. at H. C*
p. 24.
desires; amongst which it was named* by Dr. Reynolds, (as the mouth of the
rest) That the nine Assertions Orthodoxal as he termed them) concluded upon at
Lambeth might be inserted into the book of Articles, which when King James
seemed not to understand, as having never heard before of those nine
Assertions. 'He was informed that by reason of some Controversies arising in
Cambridge about certain points of Divinity, my Lords Page 40, etc.
Grace assembled some Divines of especial note to set down their opinions,
which they drew into nine Assertions, and sent so them to the University for
the appeasing of those Quarrels; and thereupon his Majesty resolved thus, that
when such questions arise amongst Scholars, the quietest proceeding, were to
determine them in the University, and not to stuff the book with all
Conclusions Theological.' Out of which passage I observed, First, that the
Attribute of Orthodoxal is ascribed to the said nine Assertions by none but Dr.
Reynolds, who termed them so, and not by Dr. Barlow then Dean of Chester who
related the conference, and had been present at the making of the said
Assertions, being at that time one of the domestic Chaplains of Archbishop
Whitgift. And secondly, That they were not made to be a standing Rule to the
Church of England, but only for the present pacifying of some differences which
arose in Cambridge, as is here acknowledged. I observe thirdly, that King James
did utterly eject the motion, as to the inserting of the said nine Assertions
amongst the Articles of the Church, leaving them to be canvased and disputed in
the Schools, as more proper for them. And fourthly, That being left to be
disputed in the Schools, they might beheld in the Affirmative, or in the
Negative, as best pleased the Respondent.

3. It was also moved by Dr. Reynolds, That the book of Articles of Religion
concluded 1562. might be explained Ib, p. 24.
in places obscure, and enlarged where some things were defective. And in
particular he desired, Page 25
that an explanation might be made of the 23d. Article for ministering in the
Congregation, of the 25. touching Page 37
Confirmation, and of the 37th. concerning the Authority Page 38
of the Pope of Rome, as also that these words, viz. That the intention of the
Minister is not of the Essence of the Page 24
Sacrament, might be added in some fit place to the book of Articles. But that
which Dr. Reynolds did most insist upon, was the 16. Article, where it is said,
That after we have received the Holy Ghost, we may depart from Grace. The
meaning whereof, though he acknowledged to be sound, yet he desired, that
because they may seem to be contrary to the Doctrine of Election and
Predestination in the 17th. Article, those words may seem to be explained with
this or the like addition, viz. That neither totally nor finally. Which motion
or proposal concerning Dr. Overald more then any other, he took occasion
thereupon to acquaint his Majesty with that which had happened to him at
Cambridge, concerning the Estate of a justified man, fallen into any grievous
sin, as Murder, Treason, Adultery, and the like, as has been shown at large in
the former Chapter. But the result of all was this, that after a full debate
and consideration concerning every one of the said Articles, and the doubts
moved about the same, there was no cause sound for altering any thing in any of
them, and as little for the 16th. as for any other. For though the said Dr.
Overald had declared it P^g. 41.
for his own opinion, that he who was called and justified, according to the
purpose of Gods Election, being brought into a state of wrath and damnation,
did neither fall totally from all the graces of God, nor finally from the
possibility of being renewed again by Gods holy Spirit, as before is said, and
that King James himself had left it to be considered, whether the word Often
might not be added to the 16. Article, as thus, viz. We may often depart from
Grace, etc. yet being left to the consideration of the Prelates as were all the
rest, the said Article remained without any alteration, as before they found
it, and as it still continues to this very day.

4. But here is to be observed, 'that upon the first motion concerning falling
from Grace; the Bishop of London Con. p. 19
took occasion to signify to his Majesty, how very many in these days
neglecting holiness of life presumed too much of persisting in Grace, laying
all their Religion upon Predestination, If I shall be saved, I shall be saved,
which he termed a desperate Doctrine, showing it to be contrary to good
divinity, and the true Doctrine of Predestination, wherein we should rather
reason Ascendendo then Discendendo; thus, I live in obedience to God, in love
with my neighbor, I follow my occasion, etc. Therefore I trust God has
elected me, and predestined me to salvation; not thus which is the usual
course of argument, God has predestinate and chosen me to life, therefore
though I sin never so grievously, yet I shall not be damned, for whom he once
loves, he loves to the end. Whereupon he showed his Majesty out of the next
Article, what was the Doctrine of the Church of England touching predestination
in the very last Paragraph, scilicet, We must receive Gods promises in such
wise as these be generally set forth to us in holy Scriture, and in all our
doings the Will of God to be followed which we have delivered to us in holy
Scripture. Which part of the Article his Majesty very well approved, and after
he had, (according to his manner) very singularly discoursed on that place of
Paul, Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling: he left it to be
considered, wither any thing were not to be added for the clearing of the
Doctors doubt, by putting in the word often, or the like: as thus, We may often
depart from Grace, but in the mean time wished that the Doctrine of
Predestination might be very tenderly handled, and with great discretion, lest
on the one side Gods omnipotency might be called in question, by impeaching the
Doctrine of his eternal Predestination, or on the other a desperate Resumption
might be arreared by inferring Ib p. 43
the necessary certainty of standing and persisting in grace. After which, upon
occasion of Dr. Overals discourse concerning his affairs at Cambridge, his
Majesty entered into a longer discourse of Predestination and Reproation then
before, and of the necessary conjoyning Repentance and holiness of life with
true faith; concluding that it was Hypocrysie, and not true justifying faith
which was severed from them. For although Predestination and Election depend
not upon any Qualities, Actions, or works of men, which be mutable, but upon
Gods eternal and immutable decree and purpose; yet such is the necessity of
Repentance after known sins committed, as that without it there could not be
either Reconciliation with God, or remission of those sins.'

5. But here methinks I hear it said, 'that though the King being then
unaquainted with the Lambeth Articles, thought not meet to put them amongst the
Articles of this Church yet he liked it well enough in his Clergy of Ireland,
Just* of the Fathers, etc. in pref.
that they took them into their confession, and Bishop Bancroft had agreed to
them before the conference, and that when he was Archbishop, his Chaplain with
his good liking and approbation published the Exposition or Analysis of our
Articles, in which he gives the Calvinist as fair quarter as can be wished.'
But first (beginning with the last) so much of the objection as concerns Bishop
Bancroft is extremely false, not agreeing to the Lambeth Articles, nor being
Bishop of London when those Articles, were agree unto as is mistakeingly
affirmed; and that Analysis or Explication of our English Articles related to
in the objection being published in the year 1585. which was ten years before
the making of the Lambeth Articles, and eighteen years before Bancroft had been
made Archbishop. And secondly, It is not very true, that King James liked,
(that is to say, was well pleased with) the putting of those Articles into the
confession of the Church of Ireland, though the said Confession was subscribed
in his name by the Lord Deputy Chichester, is plainly enough not without his
consent: for many other things were in the Confession to which the Lord Deputy
subscribed, and the King consented as affairs then stood, which afterward he
declared no great liking to, either of the Tenor or effect thereof. For the
truth is, that the drawing up of that confession being committed principally to
the care of Dr. Usher, and afterward Lord Primate of Ireland, a professed
Calvinian, he did not only thrust into it all the Lambeth Articles, but also
makes others of his own opinions: as namely, That the Pope was Antichrist, or
that man of sin, that the power of sacerdotal Absolution is no more then
declatory, as also touching the morality of the Lords day Sabbath, and the
total spending of it in religious Exercises: Which last how contrary it is to
King James' Judgment, how little cause he had to like it, or rather how much
reason he had to dislike it, his Declaration about Lawful sports, which he
published within three years after, does express sufficiently; so that the King
might give consent to the confirming of these Articles amongst the rest, though
he liked as little of the one as he did of the other: And he might do it on
these Reasons. For first, The Irish Nation at that time were most tenaciously
addicted to the errors and corruptions of the Church of Rome, and therefore
must be bended to the other extreme before they could be straight, and Orthodox
in these ponits of Doctrine. Secondly, it was an usual practice with the King
in the whole course of his government, to balance one extreme by the other,
countenancing the Papists against the Puritan, and the Puritan sometimes
against the Papist, that betwixt both the true Religion and Professors of it
might be kept in safety.

6. With greater Artifice but less Authority have some of our Calvinians framed
unto themselves another Argument, derived from certain Questions and answers
printed at the end of the Bible, published by Rob. Barker his Majesty's own
Printer in the year 1607* from whence it is inferred by the Author of the
Anti-Arminianism, and from him by others, that the said Questions and Answers
do contain a punctual Declaration of the received Doctrine of this Church in
the points disputed. But the worst is, Anti-armin. p. 54.
they signify nothing to the purpose for which they were produced. For I would
fain know by what Authority those Questions and Answers were added to the end
of the Bible? If by Authority, and that such Authority can be produced, the
Argument will be of force which it takes from them, and then no question but
the same Authority by which they were placed there at first, would have
preserved them in that place for a longer time then during the sale of that
Edition: The not retaining them in such Editions as have followed since the
sale of that, shows plainly that they were of no authority in themselves, nor
intended by the Church for a rule to others: and being of no older standing
then the year 1607. (for ought appears by Mr. Prin, who first made the
objections) they must needs seem as destitute of antiquity as they are of
authority, so that upon the whole matter the author of the book has furnished
those of different Judgment with a very strong argument, that they were
foysted in by the fraud and practice of some of the Emissaries of the Puritan
Faction: who hoped in time to have them pass as current amongst the people as
any part of Canonical Scripture. Such Piae frauds as these are, we should have
too many, were they once allowed of: Some prayers were also added to the end of
the Bible in some Editions, and others at the end of the public Liturgy. Which
being neglected at the first, and afterward beheld as the authorized prayers
of the Church, were by command left out of those books and Bibles as being the
compositions of private men, not the public acts of the Church, and over since
added as before.

7. But to return unto King James, we find not so much countenance given to the
Calvinians by the fraud of his Printer, as their opposites received by his
grace and favor by which they were invested in the chief preferments of the
Chutch of England, conferred a^ openly and freely upon the Anti-Calvinians, as
those who had been bred up in the other persuasions, Trosse, Tyriusque mihi
nullo discrimine habentur, as we know who said. For presently upon the end of
the conference he prefers Bishop Bancroft to the Chair of Canterbury, and not
long after Dr. Barlow to the Sea of Rochester. On whose translation unto
Lincoln, Dr. Richard Neil then Dean of Westminster succeeds at Rochester, and
leaves Dr. Buckridge there for his successor at his Removal unto Lichfiel^ in
the year 1609. Dr. Samuel Harsnet is advanced to the Sea of Lichfield, and
about ten years after unto that of Norwich. In the beginning of the year 1614.
Dr. Overald succeeds Neil (then translated to Lincoln) in the Sea of Coventry
and Lichfiel^, Dr. George Mountein succeeded the said Neil (then translated to
Durham) in the Church of Lincoln. In the year 1619. Dr. John Houson one of the
Canons of Christ Church, a professed Anti-calvinist is made Bishop of Oxon. And
in the year 1621. Dr. Valentine Carry Successor unto Overal^ in the Deanery of
Saint Paul, is made Bishop of Exon, and on the same day Dr. William Laud who
had been Pupil unto Buckridge as before said, is consecrated Bishop of St.
David's. By which encouragements the Anti-Calvinians o^ old English Protestants
took heart again, and more openly declared themselves then they had done
formerly; the several Bishops above named finding so gracious a Patron of the
learned King, are as being themselves as bountiful Patrons (respect being had
to the performants in their nomination) to their friends and followers. By
means whereof, though they found many a Rub in the way, and were sometimes
brought under censure by the adverse party; yet in the end they surmounted all
difficulties, and came at last to be altogether as considerable both for power
and number, as the Calvinists were. Toward which increase the differences
betwixt the Remonstrants and the Contra-Remonstrants in the Belgic Provinces
did not help a little, who publishing there discourses one against the other,
sharpened the Appetite of many Students in both Universities to feed more
heartily on such dishes as were now plentifully set before them, then they had
done in former times; which they either were not to be had, or not to be fed
upon without fear of surfite, without the danger of disgorging what before they
had eaten.

8. But so it happened that while matters went thus farely forwards Condradus
Vrorstius, suspected for a Sa^osetenian, or Socinian Heretic; and one who had
derogated in his writings from the Purity, the Immensity, the Omniscience, and
immutability of Almighty God, was chosen by the Curators of Leiden, Anno 1611.
to succed Arminius in that place. Wherewith King James being made acquainted
inflamed as well with a pious zeal to the honor of God, as a just fear least
the Contagion of his Errors might cross the Seas and infect his own Subjects
also, he first follicited the States not to suffer such a man to be placed
amongst them, and afterward to send him back, when they had received him. But
finding no success in either, and having sent many fruitless messages and
letters to the States about it, he published his Declaration against the said
Vorstius, and therein used many harsh and bitter Expressions against Arminius
and his followers (of which see cap. 6. Number. 37. as if they had been guilty of
the same impieties. This put the Calvinists again upon such a Gog that none of
their Adversaries in either of the Universities (^ of what eminent parts and
name soever) could escape their hands. During which heats, the reverend Dr.
Houson, who had been Vice Chancellor of the University ten years before was
called in question and suspended by Dr. Rob. Abbot, then Dr. of the Chair and
Vice Chancellor also, Propter conciones publicas, minus orthodoxas and plenas
offensionis: for preaching certain Sermons less Orthodox and fuller of offense
then they should have been. He was sufficiently known for an Anticalvinist; and
had preached somewhat tending to the disparagement of the Genevian Annotations
on the Holy Scriptures (censured more bitterly by none then King James himself)
which brought him under this displeasure. And about two years after, anno 1614.
the said Dr. Abbot fell violently foul on Dr. William Laud, then President of
St. John's College, whom in his Sermon at St. Peter's on Easter* Sunday, he
publicly exposed to contempt and scorn under the notion of a Papist, as
^^arrets. Doctrines had been formerly condemned at Cambridge by the name of
Popery, for which consult the Anti-Armin. p. 66.

9. But there was some thing more peculiar in the case of Mr. Edward Sympson
then in that of the two great Doctors before remembered; King James himself
being both the Informer and the Prosecuter against this man, as it is thus
related by the Chapter Hist. l. 6. Hist. of Camb. p. 160.
Church Historian, viz. 'It happened in the year 1616. that Mr. Edward Sympson,
(a very good Scholar) fellow of Trinity College, preached a Sermon before King
James at Royston, taking for his text John 3. 6. that which is born of the
^lesh is slesh: Hence he endeavored to prove that the committing of any great
sin does extinguish Grace and Gods Spirit for the time in the man.' He added
also that St. Paul in the seventh Chapter to the Romans spoke not of himself as
an Apostle and regenerate, but sub sta^u legis: Hereat his Majesty took (and
publicly expressed) great distaste; because Arminius had lately been blamed
for extracting the like Exposition out of the works of Faustus Socinus.
Whereupon he sent to the two professors in Cambridge for their Judgment
herein, who proved and subscribed the place ad Romans 7. to be understood of a
Regenerate man, according to St. Augustines latter opinion in his
Retractations; and the Preacher was enjoined a public Recantation before the
King, which accordingly was performed by him. In which it is first to be
observed, that no offense was taken at the first part of his Sermon, in which
he went no further then Dr. Overal had gone before, as in our last chap. Numb.
6. Secondly, That the latter part thereof might have given as little, if his
Exposition on the 13. chap. of St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans, had not been
fathered on Arminius, against whom the King had openly declared in his book
against Vorstius, and likewise upon his followers in the Belgic Provinces
himself as a dangerous party, which he then labored to suppress as before was
noted. And therefore, thirdly, I observe that the two Professors in Cambridge
did neither more wholly or originally of their own authority, but as they were
set on by the King, who could not otherwise be satisfied then by some such
censure on Arminius, and consequently for his sake on the Preacher too. For
that King James condemned not the Arminian Doctrines in themselves, though he
had taken some displeasure against their persons, as is said before, appears
not only by rejecting the Lambeth Articles, and his dislike of the Calvinian
Doctrine of Predestination, in the conference at Hampton Court, but also by
instructing his Divines commissionated for the Synod of Dort, not to oppose the
Article of Universal Redemption, which they accordingly performed. Nor were the
said Professors at that time so forward as to move in it of themselves, as may
appear by their not answering of Tompsons book, entitled de Intercisione
Gratiae and Justificationis, though the Author of it was a member of that
University: but leaving it to be confuted by Dr. Abbot, their brother in the
chair at Oxon. So great an Alteration had been made in the Affections of the
University since the first striking up of their heats against Baroe and Barret,
which presently began to cool on the death of Whitacres, and seemed to have
been utterly quenched in the death of Perkins. The hammering of the Golden
chair gave the first blow in it.

10. But though the passions of the King inflame by holy indignation, and kept
unto the height to serve other men's tongues, rather then to advance his own;
had used some harsh expressions against Arminius; yet did his passions calm,
and subside at last giving him leave to look about him, and to discern the
dangers which did seem to threaten him on the other side: considering
therefore with himself, or being informed by tale of the Bishop and Divines,
as were then about him, how great an adversary was Calvinius to Monarchical
interesse, how contrary the Predestination doctrines were to all rules of
Government, he found it neeessary to devise or admit some course of the
preventing of the mischief. To which end he issued certain directions to the
vice Chancellor and Heads of both Universities bearing date, January. 18. 1619.
Requiring them to take special order among other things, that all that took
any degree in the 'Schooles should subscribe to the three Articles in the
thirty sixth Canon; that no man in the Pulpit or Directions to the
Vice-chancelour and heads, etc. Jan. 18. 1616.
Schools be sufferred to maintain Dogmatically any point of doctrine that is
not allowed by the Church of England, that none be suffered to preach or
lecture in the Towns of Oxon. or Cambridge, but such as were every way
conformable to the Church both in doctrine and discipline; and finally (which
most apparently conduced to the ruin of Calvinism) that young Students in
divinity be directed to study such books as be most agreeable in doctrine and
discipline to the Church of England, and excited to bestow their time in the
Fathers, and Councels, Schoolmen, Histories and Controversies, and not to
insist too long upon Compendiums and abbreviations, making them the grounds of
their study in divinity.' This seemed sufficient to bruise these doctrines in
the shel, as indeed it was, had these directions been as carefully followed, as
they were piously prescribed. But little or nothing being done in pursuance of
them, the Predestinarian doctrines came to be the ordinary Theme of all
Sermons, Lectures and Disputations, partly in regard that Dr. Prideaux who had
then newly succeeded Dr. Rob. Abbot in the chair at Oxon. had very passionately
exposed the Calvinian Interest; and partly in regard of the Kings declared
averseness from the Belgic Remonstrants, whom for the reasons before
mentioned, he labored to suppress to his utmost power. And yet being careful
that the truth should not fair the worse for the men that taught it, he gave
command to such Divines as were commissionated by him to attend in the Synod of
Dort, Anno 1618. not to recede from the doctrine of the Church of England in
the point of universal Redemption by the death of Christ. A point so
inconsistent with that of the Absolute and irrespective decree of Reprobation,
and generally of the whole Machina of Predestination, and the points depending
thereupon as they are commonly maintained in the Schools of Calvin, that fire
and water cannot be at greater difference. But this together with the rest
being condemned in the Synod of Dort, and that Synod highly magnified by the
English Calvinists, they took confidence of making those disputes the Subject
of their common discourses, both from the Pulpit and press, without stint or
measure. And thereupon it pleased his Majesty, having now no further fear of
any dangers from beyond the seas, to put some water into their wine, or rather
a Bridle into their mouths by publishing certain orders and directions touching
Preachers and preaching, bearing date on the 4. of August 1622. In which it was
enjoined, amongst other things, 'That no Preacher of what Title soever (under
the degree of a Bishop or Dean at least) do from hence forth presume to teach
in any popular Directions of preaching and preachers.
Auditory the deep points of Predestination, Election, Reprobation, or of the
Universality, Efficacity, Resistability, or Irresistability of Gods Grace, but
rather leave those Theames to be handled by learned men, and that modestly and
moderately by use and application, rather then by way of positive Doctrine, as
being fitter for Schools and Universities then for simple Auditors.' The
violating of which order by Mr. Gabriel Bridges of Corpus Christi College in
Oxon. by preaching on the 19th of January then next following against the
absolute decree, in maintenance of universal Grace, and the cooperation of
man's free will prevented by it (though in the public Church of the University)
laid him more open to the prosecution of Dr. Prideaux, and to the censure of
the Vice-Chancelor, and the rest of the Heads, then any preaching on those
points, or any of them could possibly have done at another time.

11. Much was the noise which those of the Calvinian party were observed to
make on the publishing of this last order, as if their mouths were stopped
thereby from preaching the most necessary Doctrines tending toward man's
salvation. But a far greater noise was raised upon the coming out of Montagues
answer to the Gagger, in which he asserted the Church to her primitive and
genuine Doctrines, disclaimed all the Calvinian Tenants, as dis-owned by her,
and left them to be countenanced and maintained by those to whom they properly
belonged. Which book being published at a time, when a Session of Parliament
was expected in the year 1624. The opportunity was taken by Mr. Yates and Mr.
Ward, two of the Lecturers or Preachers of Ipswich to prepare an Information
against him, with an intent to prosecute the same in the following Session. A
Copy whereof being come into Mountagues hands, he flies for shelter to King
James, who had a very great estimation of him for his parts and learning, in
which he had over-mastred, they then though much less Seldom at his own
Philologie. The King had already served his own turn against the Remonstrants
by the Synod of Dort, and thereby freed the Prince of Orange his most dear
Confederate from the danger of Barnwell, and his faction. Archbishop Abbot
came not at him since the late deplorable misfortune which befell him at
Branzil, and the death of Dr. James Mountague Bishop of Winton left him at
liberty from many importunities and solicitations with which before he had
been troubled; so that being now master of himself, and governed by the light
of his own most clear and exellent Judgment, he took both Montague, and his
Doctrines into his Protection, gave him a full discharge, or quietus est, from
all those Calumnies of Popery or Arminianism, which by the said Informers were
laid upon him; encouraged him to procecd in finishing his just Appeal, which he
was in hand with; commanded Dr. Francis White, then lately preferred by him to
the Deanery of Carlisle, and generally magnified not long before for his zeal
against Popery, to see it licensed for the Press, and finally gave order unto
Mountague to dedicate the book (when printed) to his Royal self. In obedience
unto whose Command the Dean of Carlisle licensed the book with this
approbation, That there was nothing contained in the samo, but what was
agreeable to the public Faith, Doctrine and Discipline established in the
Church of England. But King James dying before the book was fully finished at
the Press, it was published by the name of Appello Cesarem, and dedicated to
King Charles, as the son and Successor to whom it properly belonged; the Author
touching in the Epistle Dedicatory, all the former passages; but more at large
then they are here discoursed of in this short Summary.

12. And thus far have we prosecuted our discourse concerning the five points
disputed between the English Protestants, the Belgic Remonstrants, the
Melancthonian Lutherans, together with the Jesuits and Franciscans on the one
side, the English Calvinists, the Contra-Remonstrants, the Rigid Lutherans, and
the Dominican Friars on the other side. In the last part whereof we may
observe, how difficult a thing it is to recover an old doctrinal Truth, when
overborn and almost lost by the continual Prevalency of a Busy faction. And I
have carried it on no further, because at this time Bishop Laud (to whom the
raising and promoting of the Arminian Doctrines, as they call them, is of late
ascribed, was hardly able to promote or preserve himself, oppressed with a heard
hand by Archbishop Abbot, secretly traduced unto the King for the unfortunate
business of the Earl of Devonshire, attaining with great difficulty to the poor
Bishop-prick of St. David's, after ten years service, and yet but green in
savor with the Duke of Buchingham. What happened afterward toward the
countenancing of these Doctrines by the appearing of King Charles in the behalf
of Mountague, the letter of the three Bishops to the Duke in defense of the man
and his opinion, his questioning and impeachment by the House of Commons, and
his preferment by the King to the Sea of Chichester, are all of them beyond the
bounds which I have prescribed unto my self in this Narration. Nor shall I now
take notice of his Majesty's Proclamation of the 14. of June, Anno 1626. For
establishing the peace and quiet of the Church of England: by which he
interdicted all such preaching and printing as might create any fresh
Disturbance to the Church of England: or for his smart Answer to the part of
the Remonstrance of the house of Commons, Anno 1628. which concerned the danger
like to fall on this Church and Kingdom, by the grouth of Arminianism, or of
the Declaration prefixed before the book of Articles in the same year also, for
silencing the said Disputes, or finally of his Majesty's Instructions, bearing
date, December. 30. 1629. for causing the Contents of the Declaration to be put
in execution, and punctually observed for the time to come. By means whereof,
and many fair encouragements from many of our Prelates, and other great men of
the Realm, the Anti-Calvinist party became considerable both for power and
number.

FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT To the READER. Concerning some particulars in a scurrulous
Pamphlet entitled A Review of the Certamen Epistolare, etc.
PRima dicta mihi summa dicenda camaena, with thee good Reader I began, and
with thee I must end. I gave thee notice in the Preface of a scurrilous Libel,
the Author whereof had disgorged his foul stomach on me, and seemed to Glory in
the shame. But whither this Author be a Cerberus with three heads, or a
Smertginnuus with fire, or but a single Shimi only (for it is differently
reported) is all one to me, who am as little troubled with the noise of
Billings-gate, as the cry of an Oyster-wife. It is my confidence that none of
the dirt, which he most shamefully p. 175.
confesses himself to have thrown in my face will be found upon it,
notwithstanding that necesse est ut aliquid haereat may be sometimes true.
Omitting therefore the consideration of his many Obscaenities which every where
are intermingled for the flowers of his Rhetoric, I cannot but do my self so
much justice, as to satisfy the Reader in the truth of some things, which
otherwise may be believed to my disadvantage. I am content to suffer under as
much obloquie as any foul mouthed Presbyterian can spit upon me; but I am not
willing to be thought a slanderer, a profane person, or ungrateful for the
smallest favors; all which the Author of that scurrulous pamphlet has
imposed upon me.

In the first place it is much labored to make me guilty of ingratitude and
disaffection to Magd. Coll. of which I had the honor to be once a member, and
do retain so high an estimation of it, that whenever I shall write or speak
any thing to the reproach of that foundation, let my tongue cleave unto the
roof p. 22.
of my mouth, and my right hand forget its cunning. But I am able to
distinguish between the duty I owe to the House it self, and that which every
member of it is to challenge from me, ( quid civitati, and quid civibus debeam
in the Orators Criticisme) And therefore I would not have the Libeller or his
partners think that his or their taking Sanctuary under the name of Magdalen
College shall so far privilege them in their actings (either against the
Church in general, or my own particular) but that I shall as boldly venture to
attacque them there; without fear of sacrilege, as Joab was smitten by Benaiah
at the horns of the Altar.

But the best is that I am made to have some ground for my disaffection, though
there be no less falsehood in the fundamentals then the superstructure. And a
fine tale is told of some endeavors by me used for bringing one of my own
brood into that foundation; the failing of which hopes must of necessity
occasion such an undervaluing of that College p. 22.
as to change it from a nest of Sparrows to a nest of Cuckoes. But the truth
is, that the party for whom I was a suitor, was so far from being one of my
own brood, as not to be within the compass of my Relations; so much a stranger
to my blood that he was no otherwise endeared unto me, then by the
extraordinary opinion which I had of his parts and industry. And therefore I
commended him no further unto Doctor Goodwin, then that it was not my desire to
have him chosen, if any abler Scholar should appear for the place. And it was
well for the young man that I sped no better; Periisset nisi Periisset, as we
know who said. For within less then two years after he was elected into the
Society of Merton College (to their great honor be it spoken) upon no other
commendation then his own abilities. p. 67.


In the next place I am made a slanderer for saying, that the new Sabbath
speculations of Doctor Bound and his adherents had been embraced more
passionately of late then any one Article of Religion here by Law established.
How so? Because says he (or they it is no matter which) it is well known that
they do more passionately embrace the great truths of Christ's Divinity, and the
Divine Authority of Scripture, etc. then any opinion about the Sabbath. What
may be meant by the, etc. it is hard to say, perhaps the Presbyterian
Discipline, or the Calvinian Doctrines of Predestination; the two dear
Helena's of the Sects as sacred and inviolable in their estimation, as any of
their new opinions about the Sabbath. But whether the great truths of Christ's
Divinity, the Divine Authority of Scipture, or any Article of Religion here by
Law established, be embraced by them with the like passion as their new Saint
Sabbath; may be discerned by that impunity which is indulged by them to all
Anabaptists, Familists, Ranters, Quakers, and all other Sectaries. By whom the
great Truths of Christ's Divinity, and the Divine Authority of holy Scripture,
and almost all the Articles of the Christian Faith have been called in
question. And yet we cannot choose but know with what severity they proceeded
when they were in power against all persons whatsoever whom they found
traveling on the Sunday, though their business was of more concernment to
them then the lifting of the Ox or Ass out of the ditch. With what a cursed
rigor a Victualler has been forced to pay ten shillings for selling a
halfpenny loaf to a poor man in the time of Sermon; What penalty they
procured to be ordained against Vintners, Tailors, Barbers, for selling but a
pint of Wine, or carrying home a new suit of Clothes, or trimming the man that
was to wear them on their Sabbath day: And finally, against all persons
whatsoever for walking in the fields or streets after all the public duties
of the day were ended. They may tell tell me what they will of their giving the
Right hand of Fellowship to some Divines of Transmarine Churches, who differ in
that Doctrine from them. But quid verba audiam cum Ibid.
facta videam, the bleating of the sheep, and the lowing of the Oxen will not
out of my ears, though preferred under a pretense of making them an acceptable
Sacrifice to the Lord their God.

But the maine endeavor of the Pamphlet is to bring me under the reproach of a
Profanation, in using such words unto the King in a Petition of mine presented
to him, as it could not without sin be applied unto any but to God. A greater
crime then any of the other two, and as falsely charged. It is suggested in the
Libell, that upon the sense of some indignity which was offered to me, in being
disturbed in my possession of a Lodging in Magdalen College, I made complaint
unto the King of the great wrong which had been done his Majesty's creature,
and the workmanship of his hands, and that for this expression I was checked by
the Marquess of Hertford, who was then Chancellor of that University; for
proof whereof we are referred to somewhat which was said in the Bursery of
that College before two of the fellows.

But first I hope that all things which we said in the Bursery before any two
or more of the Fellows ( -- Ecce inter pocula quaerant Romalides Saturi, etc.
--) must not pass for Gospel, nor that all Tabletalk, fit only for the
Voider, when the meal is done, is to be preserved upon Record for undoubted
Truths. Secondly, I am confident as I can be of any thing so long since done,
that no such expression ever passed my pen, there being no visible necessity to
enforce me to it. I Conceive, Thirdly, that the Libeller cannot be so much a
Stranger to the Assembly Notes, on the 1. of Genesis 6. as not to know (if he had
learnt it no where else) that it is a familiar phrase, in the Style of the
Court, to say such an one was created Earl, Marquess, or Duke, etc. upon
which ground the Members of the House of Peers were looked upon by our
Republicans or Common wealths men (not without some contempt) as his Majesty's
Creatures, Creatures of the Prerogative, as they commonly called them. And
therefore, Fourthly, that the Marquess of Hertford was not likely to reprove
me for calling my self his Majesty's creature, or the workmanship of his
hands, in reference to my temporal fortunes, and the place I held about the
King; that Noble person, acknowledging with a loyal gratitude that he received
his Creation to the Honorable Title of Lord Marquess from the hands of his
Majesty; and that his being made Governor to the Princes Highness was the
Kings sole workmanship. Finally, if all expressions of this nature must be laid
aside, and that we must be taught a new Court-Dialect, because some Divines of
the Assembly and other professed enemies of Monarchical Government do not like
the old; we must discharge the Titles of most High and Might, of Majesty, and
sacred Majesty, because disliked by Buchanan in his most seditious Book de Jure
Regni. By whom such adjuncts are reputed inter Barbarismos and Solecismos
Aulicos, and amongst the Barbarismes and extravagancies of the Courts of
Princes.

But for the clearer satisfaction of all equal and unbyassed persons, I shall
lay down the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, as to that
particular. In which the Reader is to know, that at his Majesty's first making
choice of Oxon for his Winter Quarters, Anno 1642. The course of my attendance
carried me to wait upon him there as a Chaplain in ordinary. Where I had not
been above a week, when I received his Majesty's command by the Clerk of the
Closet for attending Mr. Secretary Nicholas on the morrow morning, and applying
my self from time to time to such directions as I should receive from him in
order to his Majesty's service. Which command was afterward reinforced upon
me, when the time of my ordinary attendance of the Court was at an end for that
year (as can be proved by two several intimations of it under his own most
Royal hand) with this charge super-added to it, that I was not to depart the
Town without special leave. I found by this that my attendance at the Court
was like to last as long as the War, and therefore that it did concern me to
accomodate my self with Lodging and such other necessaries as might both
encourage and enable me to perform those services which were required at my
hands. A Chamber in the College being vacant within few months after by the
absence of one of the Fellows, and the death of the other, I gained the free
consent of the absent party (Master Hobs by name, in whom the sole right of it
then remained) to make use of it for my self, and my little Company.

Five months I quietly enjoyed it without interruption. But coming from the
Court on Alhallowday, I found some soldiers in the Room, who told me that
they came to take possession of it for Master D. who had succeeded in the
Rights of the man deceased, and that they meant to keep it for him until
further order. This* carried me back unto the Court, where I acquainted Master
Secretary with the indignity and affront which was put upon me; desiring him
either to defend me from contempt and scorn, or that he would get me a
discharge from that employment which had lain so long and heavy on me. By his
advice a short Petition was drawn up to his sacred Majesty, briefly containing
the particulars before laid down, and humbly praying in the close, that he
would graciously be pleased to extend unto me such a measure of his power and
favor in the case before him, as might preserve me in a fit capacity to
proceed in those services, which otherwise I could not be able to perform, as
I had done formerly. His Majesty thereupon gave order to the now Lord Bishop of
Lichfield being then President of the College, to see me resetled for the
present; and to Sir Arthur Ashton, who was then Governor of the Town to take
some strict course with his Soldiers, for not giving me the like disturbance
for the time to come; which was the least I could expect from his Majesty's
goodness.

And here I thought my troubles had been at an end. But so it happened that
the Lord Marquess of Hertford was at the same time chosen Chancellor of the
University; and some of his sevants must be dealt with to espouse the quarrel.
By whose soliticaton, I was required to attend his Lordship whithin few days
after, and I went accordingly. But when I came, and that his Lordship saw how
far his Majesty had already apperaed in the business, he could not but
perceive withal how unfit it was for him to take any cognizance of that cause
which by his Majesty had been heard and predetermined. He thereupon presently
declined the business, seemed much offended at the trouble which was given me
in it, and having dismissed the rest of the company, retained me with him for
some time; held some discourse with me about the quality and estate of the
Kings affairs, and finally called for Ale and Wine for my entertainment. But
notwithstanding those indignities which were put upon me on the one side, and
those many advantages which I had on the other, I carried my self fairly all
along to my troublesome Landlord, gave him a civil treatment in the Christmas
Holidays, presented him with no inconsiderable new years gift, as the times
then were; and promised him that as soon as otherwise I could provide my self
of convenient Lodging, I would give him the contentment he so much desired. Nor
was it long before I did make good that promise. Since which time all fair
offices and friendly correspondencies have past between us, there being nothing
(I thank God) which I can more easily forget then the sense of Injuries.

Hic status, haec Rerum fuerat fortuna mearum Such was the state of these
affairs,
And such the issue of my cares.
And thus good Reader thou have seen those horrible prophanations, slanders
and ingratitudes, for which I stand arraigned in that scurrilous Libell, for by
that name I shall take leave to call that Pamphlet, which for the Ribauldry
thereof was stopped by the Vice Chancellor at the Press in Oxon, and being at
last brought forth in the dark at London, is neither justified by the name of
the Author, nor otherwise offered unto sale then by an underhand promoting of
it amongst those of that Faction. But there is still a race of men as anciently
there was in Saint Hieroms time; qui aliorum vituperatione laudabile se videri
cupiunt, which hope to get themselves a name by defaming others. And for my
part I am content they should enjoy the ignominy of that Peccant humor (which
is so proper to the Text) without other censure then that which Michael the
Archangel passed upon the Devil, when he contended with him for the body of
Moses, of whom it is written by Saint Jude, that he durst not bring a railing
accusation against that Accuser of the brethren, but left him to the judgment
of Almighty God, with (...); the Lord rebuke thee.

I have but one thing more to add, and that relates to the Integrity of Doctor
Barlow, who stands defamed by the Libeller and his alter idem for using some
unjust dealing toward Doctor Reynolds, Doctor Sparks, etc. in his relation of
the conference at Hampton Court. For proof whereof one Master Sparks (affirmed
to be a man of eminent learning) must be disquieted at his death, (if not
rather raised up from the dead) to declare his knowledge; who signified by his
friend I. M. what he once heard from H. G. an aged Minister concerning Doctor
Barlow's sorrow at his deathbed for the wrong he had done to Doctor Reynolds,
and the rest in relating that conference with H. I. is reported to have added
further, that being at a Table with Master Sparks the son of Doctor Sparks,
he found him very sensible of the abuse (of which he could not speak without
great indignation) which had been put upon his Father and Doctor Reynolds, by
the said Relator. But first the man himself is dead, from whom we are to take
our greatest light in so dark a business. And who can tell but that this whole
narration may be one of those pious frauds devised by the Pamphleter, or his
Alter Idem) nec enim nunc fallere primum, Incipit a nobis -- for imposing as
well upon the dead as upon the living. Secondly, the principal witness being
dead, the credit of the sigment rests on two common vouchers, that is to say
I. M. and H. I. as easy to be found, and as honest folk as Nicholas Nemo, in
Utopia, or Madam Charity of the Oudemeon street in Mantinea, or Doctor H. H. in
the Margin of the Libel which is now before us. Thirdly, it must needs seem
exceeding strange to a sober Reader, that this great truth should lie concealed
(like a spark raked up in ashes) five and fifty years, and then blaze out upon
a sudden, when it was not thought of. And, Fourthly, I had once the happiness
to be exeeeding well acquainted with Master Thomas Sparks of Cando^er, in the
County of South-Hampton, and Master William Sparks of Bleckly in the County of
Buckingham, sometime Divinity Reader in Magdalen College, the only sons of
Doctor Sparks before remembered, and having had many opportunities of
discoursing with them about that conference, and their Fathers acting in the
same, I never heard the least word, from either of them of any wrong done or
supposed to be done by Doctor Barlow in drawing up the substance and
abridgement of it, so that I doubt not but it will appear on the full debate
that Doctor Barlow is more wronged in his fame by these Libellers Pamphlets,
then ever Doctor Reynolds had been injured by that learned Prelate.

I have now done with these polemical discourses, and shall not easily engage
in a new adventure, unless invincible necessity, or some unsufferable
provocation shall enforce me to it. In which case only it is possible that I
may be tempted to the resuming of those arms which otherwise I would willingly
hang up in the Temple of Concord: that I may spend the whole remainder of my
time in more peaceful studies. I have already done my part in vindicating the
Doctrine, Government, and forms of worship, established in the Church of
England. And it is time to leave the Stage to more able Actors. To whom I
recommend the care of that weighty business, not doubting but that my
endeavors in the Churches service will find acceptance with all equal and
indifferent men. And for the rest who are so far engaged in the adverse party,
that possibly they may hate to be reformed in the Psalmists language. I neither
fear their censures, nor court their favors; but leave them to enjoy the
happiness of these open times, in quibus non modo libertas, sed etiam loquendi
libido impunita est, as my Author has it. And thus good Reader I bid thee once
again farewell in the Lord, to whose unspeakable mercies in Christ Jesus, thou
art most heartily recommended by

Lacies Court in Abindon, Dec. 29. 1659. Thine always to be commanded in the
Churches service P. H.

An Advertisement touching the ERRATA.
THe ill printing of that part of the Certamen Epistolore, which was most
controversial, has exposed me to some disadvantage in the eyes of those who
are willing to interpret every mistaking of the press to be an error of the
pen; which has made me require the greater care for the well-doing of this,
though it could not pass without such faults as workmen will commit sometimes,
do they what they can. But they are neither great nor many, and such as are may
be corrected in this manner.

The Errata of the first Part.
Pa. 3 line 5 for Loppinus read Coppinus, p 9 l 34 for works, r. words, p 30 l
22 for sub. r. supra, p 39 l 17 Macurius r. Maccorius, p 46 l 26 r.
Belconquall. 29 for quarrel r. parallel, p 48, etc. for Arustondon r.
Amsterdam, p 49 l 20 for drown r. divorce, p 57 r. Themistius, p 60 l 14, etc.
for Grotius r. Crotius, p 62 for Synod called r. Synodical, p 70 l ul^. add
that without the grace of God preventing, we may will the things, etc.

The Errata of the second Part.
P. 20 l 19 for word r. Creed, p 21 l 8 for heard r. find, p 27 l 11 for to the
loreing of r. touching, p 31 l 34 for Therancen^s r. Theramenes, p 50 l 9 for
Apostles r. positive, p 51 l 9 for greater Catechism r. Gloria in excelsis, p
74 l 12 for Butler r. Barlow.

The Errata of the third Part.
P. 2 l 23 for how r. two, p 6 l 6 del. who, p 14 and c. for Powel r. Nowel p.
25 l 5 for from charity r. from showing, p 28 l 11 for Powel r. Poynets, p 41 l
2 for descended from r. descended from a brother of Robert King, etc. p 70 l 30
ad should be tendered to him, p 101 l 11 for makes r. many p 103 l 11 for
Lichfield r. Chichester, p 105 l 5 r. looked, and del. himself.


