THE LAW OF Charitable Uses. WHEREIN The Statute of 43. Eliz. Chap. 4. is set
forth and Explained; with Directions how to Sue out and prosecute Commissions
grounded upon that Statute:

Also Presidents, Inquisitions, and Decrees, with diverse Judgments, and
Resolutions upon Exceptions and Appeals against Decrees; and other Proceedings
upon the said Statute.

By JOHN HERNE.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Timothy Twyford, and are to be sold at his Shop,
within the Inner-Temple-Gate, 1660.

To the Reader.
TO commend the Piety of this Statute, or to lament the want of a thorough
Explanation, would afford abundant matter for a long Preface; but intending (as
I ought) charity without ostentation, I shall only inform the Reader, that
being frequently present at Commissions grounded on this Statute of Charitable
Uses, I have found the Gentlemen of the Country, Commissioners, Jurors, and
parties prosecuting (by want of experience in Clerks attending such
Commissioners) forced to unnecessary attendance and charge; Whereupon grown
almost weary of well-doing with ill direction, they never cheerfully embraced
the Commissions; Nay, many Inquisitions and Decrees, which have been returned,
miscarried, and were rendered ineffectuall through the unskilfulnesse of those
that drew them: I have therefore, to prevent such inconveniences in future,
published the Statute, with several Observations thereupon, with diverse
Resolutions and Judgments of Lord Chancellors, Keepers, and Judges upon the
same, and upon Exceptions taken to several Inquisitions and Decrees made by
Commissioners on such Commissions: To which I have added some good forms of
Inquisitions, Decrees and Exceptions to Decrees; that those Gentlemen who are
Authorized to execute such Commissions, may be better acquainted with the
Statute, and by it understand their power and duty, with the best method of
proceeding thereupon. And that the Clerks attending such Commissions, may be
furnished with Presidents of all sorts for the readier dispatch of the same; my
only aim herein being, to ease the Country and the Prosecutors of unnecessary
charge and trouble, and to render the proceedings upon such Commissions
effectual; and my hope is, that this Work will take that good effect for which
it is intended.

J. H.

THE STATUTE Of Charitable Uses.
43. Eliz. CHAP. 4. An Act to redress the mis-imployment of Lands, Goods, and
Stocks of Money heretofore given to Charitable Uses.


WHereas Lands, Tenements, Rents, Annuities, Profits, Hereditaments Goods,
Chattells, Money, and Stocks of Money, have been heretofore given, limited,
appointed and assigned, as well by the Queens most excellent Majesty, and her
most noble Progenitors, as by sundry other well disposed persons; some for
relief of aged, impotent and poor people; some for maintenance of sick and
maimed soldiers, and Mariners, Schools of Learning, free Schools, and Scholars
of Universities; some for repair of Bridges, Ports, Havens, Causways, Churches,
Sea-bancks and Highways; Some for education and preferment of Orphans; some
for, or toward the Relief, Stock, or Maintenance for houses of Correction;
some for marriages of poor Maids; some for supportation, aid and help of young
Tradesmen, Handycrafts-men, and persons decayed, and others for relief or
redemption of Prisoners or Captives, and for aid or ease of any poor
Inhabitants concerning payment of Fifteens, setting out of Soldiers and other
Taxes, which Lands, Tenements, Rents, Annuities, Profits, Hereditaments, Goods,
Chattels, Money and Stocks of Money, Nevertheless, have not been employed,
according to the charitable intent of the Givers and Founders thereof, by
reason of frauds, breaches of Trust, and negligence in those that should pay,
deliver and employ the same. For redress and remedy whereof; Be it enacted by
Authority of this present Parliament. That it shall and may be lawful, to and
for the Lord Chancellor, or Keeper of the great Seal of England for the time
being, And for the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, for the time being,
for Lands within the County Palatine of Lancaster, from time to time, to award
Commissions under the great Seal of England, or the Seal of the County
Palatine, as the case shall require, into all or any part or parts of this
Realm respectively, according to their several Jurisdictions, as aforesaid, to
the Bishops of every several Diocese and his Chancellor, in case there shall
be any Bishop of that Diocese at the time of awarding of the same Commissions,
and to other persons of good and sound behavior, authorizing them thereby, or
any four or more of them, to enquire as well by the Oaths of twelve men or more
of the County, as by all other good and lawful ways and means, of all and
singular such Gifts, Limitations, Assignments and Appointments aforesaid, and
of the abuses, breaches of Trust, negligences, mis-imployments, not employing,
concealing, defrauding, misconverting or misgoverning of any Lands, Tenements,
Rents, Annuites, Profits, Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels, Money, or Stocks of
Money heretofore given, limited, appointed or assigned, or which hereafter
shall be given, limited, appointed, or assigned, to, or for any the charitable
and godly uses before rehearsed, and after the said Commissioners, or any four
or more of them (upon calling the parties interessed in any such Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Annuities, Profits, Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels, Money and
Stocks of Money) shall make inquiry by the oaths of twelve men or more of the
said county (whereunto the persons interessed shall and may have and take their
lawful challenge and challenges) and upon such enquiry, hearing, and examining
thereof, set down such Orders, Judgments and Decrees as the said Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Annuities, Profits, Goods, Chattels, Money, or Stocks of
money may be duly and faithfully employed, to and for such of the charitable
uses and intents before rehearsed respectively for which they were given,
limited, assigned or appointed by the Donors and Founders thereof, which
Orders, Judgments and Decrees not being contrary or repugnant to the Orders,
Statuts, or Decrees of the Donors or Founders, shall by the authority of this
present Parliament stand firm and good according to the Tenor and Purport
thereof, and shall be executed accordingly, until the same shall be undone and
altered by the Lord Chancellor of England, or Lord Keeper of the great Seal of
England, or the Chancellor of the county Palatine of Lancaster respectively
within their several Jurisdictions, upon complaint by any party grieved to be
made to them.

Provided always, that neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall
in any wise extend to any Lands, Tenements, Rents, Annuities, profits, goods,
chattells, money or stocks of money, given, limited, assigned or appointed, or
which shall be given, limited, appointed or assigned to any College, Hall, or
house of Learning within the Universities of Oxford or Cambridge, or to the
Colleges of Westminster, Eaton, or Winchester, or any of them, or to any
Cathedral or Collegiat Church within this Realm.

And Provided also, That neither this Act nor any thing therein shall extend to
any City or Town corporate, or to any the Lands or Tenements given to the uses
aforesaid within any such city or town corporate, where there is a special
Governor or Governors appointed to govern or direct such Lands, Tenements, or
things disposed to any the uses aforesaid, neither to any College, Hospital
or Free School, which have special Visitors or Governors or Overseers
appointed them by their Founders.

Provided also, and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that neither this
Act, nor any thing therein contained shall be any way prejudicial or hurtful
to the jurisdiction of the Ordinary, or power of the Ordinary, but that he may
lawfully in every cause execute and perform the same, as though this Act had
never been had or made.

Provided also, and be it enacted, That no person or persons, that has, or
shall have any of the said Lands, Tenements, Rents, Annuities, Profits,
Hereditaments, goods, Chattels, Money or Stocks of Money in his hands or
possession, or does, or shall pretend Title thereunto, shall be named a
Commissioner or a Iuror for any the causes aforesaid, or being named, shall
execute or serve in the same.

And Provided also, That no person or persons which has purchased or obtained,
or shall purchase or obtain upon valuable consideration of Money or Land, any
Estate in, or Interest, of, in, to, or out of, any Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Annuities, Hereditaments, Goods or Chattels that have been or shall be given,
limited or appionted to any of the charitable Uses above mentioned, without
fraud or covin (having no notice of the same charitable Uses) shall not be
impeached by any Decrees or Orders of Commissioners above mentioned, for, or
concerning the same his Estate or Interest; And yet nevertheless, be it
enacted, that the said Commissioners, or any four or more of them, shall and
may make Decrees and Orders for recompense to be made by any person or persons,
who being put in trust, or having notice of the charitable Uses above
mentioned, has, or shall break the same trust, or defraud the same Uses by any
conveyance, gift, grant, lease, demise, release or conversion whatsoever, and
against the Heirs, Executors and Administrators of him, them, or any of them,
having assets in Law, or equity, so far as the same assets will extend.

Provided always, that this Act shall not extend to give power or authority to
any Commissioners before mentioned, to make any Orders, Judgments or Decrees,
for or concerning any Manors, Lands, Tenements, or other Hereditaments
assured, conveyed, granted, or come unto the Queens Majesty, to the late King
Hen. the 8. King Edw. the 6. or Q. Mary, by Act of Parliament, surrender,
exchange, relinquishment, escheat, attainder, conveyance or otherwise; And yet,
nevertheless, be it enacted, That if any such Manors, Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, or any of them, or any Estate, rent or profit thereof, or out of
the same, or any part thereof, have or has been given, granted, limited,
appointed or assigned to, or for any the charitable Uses before expressed at
any time since her Majesty's Reign, that then the said Commissioners, or any
four or more of them, shall and may, as concerning the same Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, Estate, Rent or Profit, so given, limited, appointed, or
assigned, proceed to enquire and to make Orders, Judgments and Decrees
according to the purport and meaning of this Act as before is mentioned in the
last said mentioned Proviso notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted, that all Orders, Judgments and Decrees of the said
Commissioners, or of any four or more of them, shall be certified under the
seals of the said Commissioners, or any four or more of them, either into the
Court of the Chancery of England, or into the Court of the Chancery within the
County Palatine of Lancaster, as the case shall require respectively, according
to their several jurisdictions, within such convenient time as shall be
limited in the said Commission.

And that the said Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, and the said Chancellor of
the Duchy, shall and may within their said several jurisdictions, take such
order for the due execution of all or any of the said Judgments, Orders,
Decrees, as to either of them shall seem fit and convenient.

And that if after any such certificate or certificates made, any person or
persons shall find themselves grieved with any of the said Orders, Judgments,
or Decrees, that then it shall and may be lawful to and for them, or any of
them, to complain in that behalf unto the said Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper,
or to the Chancellor of the said Duchy of Lancaster, according to their
several jurisdictions for redress therein, and that upon such complaint, the
said Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, or the said Chancellor of the Duchy
may, according to their said several jurisdictions, by such course as to their
wisdom shall seem meetest, the circumstances of the case considered, proceed
to the examination, hearing and determining thereof, and upon hearing thereof,
shall and may adnull, diminish, alter, or enlarge the said Orders, Judgments
and Decrees of the said Commissioners, or any four or more of them, as to
either of them in their said several jurisdictions shall be thought to stand
with equity and good conscience, according to the true intent and meaning of
the Donors and Founders thereof, and shall and may tax and award good costs of
suit by their discretions against such persons as they shall find to complain
unto them without just and sufficient cause of the Orders, Judgments, and
Decrees before mentioned.

The heads of the Statute of Charitable Uses.
BY this Statute, Authority is given to the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper,
and to the Chancellor of the Duchy, respectively, to grant Commissions under
their several seals.

Concerning these Commissions, these six things are to be observed.

1. The number; the Commissioners must be four or more. 2. The Commissioners
must be the Bishop and Chancellor of the Diocese, if there be a Bishop, and
other persons of good and sound behavior. 3. In that Commission any four of
them do suffice to make Orders and Decrees, for therein none is of the Quorum.
4. None shall be Commissioners that have any part of the Land, etc. or goods or
chattels, money or stocks in question. 5. The Commission is to limit a certain
time within which the Commissioners are to order, decree, and certify. 6.
Their Authority is to enquire as well by the Oaths of twelve men or more, as by
all other good ways and means.
Concerning the Jurors or Enquest of enquiry, these two things are to be
observed.

1. The parties interessed may have their lawful challenge and challenges. 2.
None that pretend title to any of the lands, etc. goods, chattels, money, or
stocks in question, shall be a Juror, etc.
They are to enquire of all and singular gifts, limitations, and appointments
of any Lands, Tenemens, Rents, Annuities, Profits, Hereditaments, Goods,
Chattels, Money, Stocks of money for 21 Charitable uses, in relieving,
maintaining, repairing, educating, preferring, marrying, supporting, aiding,
helping, redressing, and easing.

1 For relief of aged, and impotent, and poor people. 2 For maintenance of
sick and maimed soldiers. 3 Schools of Learning. 4 Free Schools. 5 Scholars
in Universities. 6 Houses of Correction. 7 For repair of Bridges. 8 Of Ports
and Havens. 9 Of Cawsies 10 Of Churches. 11 Of Sea bancks. 12 And of High
ways. 13 For education and preferment of Orphans. 14 For marriage of poor
Maids. 15 For supportation and help of young Tradesmen. 16 Of Handicraftsmen.
17 Of persons decayed. 18 For Redemption or relief of Prisoners or Captives.
19 For ease and aid of poor Inhabitants concerning payment of fifteens. 20
Setting out of Soldiers. 21 And other Taxes.
And the Commissioners have power to enquire of these nine things, 1 Of abuses.
2 Of breaches of trust. 3 Of negligences. 4 Of misimployment. 5 Of not
employing. 6 Of concealing. 7 Of defrauding. 8 Of misconverting 9 Of
misgovernment
of any lands, tenements, rents, annuities, profits, hereditaments goods,
chattels, money, stocks of money given to any of the charitable uses aforesaid.

But this Act does not extend to all Lands, etc. nor to all Goods and Chattels,
money, or stocks of money given to any Charitable use aforesaid, but certain
are exempted in these eight several Cases, viz. 1 Of the Colleges and Halls in
either of the Universities of Cambridge and Oxford. 2 Of the College of
Westminster. 3 Of the College of Eaton. 4 Of the College of Winchester. 5 Of
any City or Town corporate where there is a special Governor or governors of
such Lands. 6 Of any College, Hospital, or Free School which have special
Visitors or Governors, or Overseers appointed to them by the Founders. 7 Of
Purchasors having these three qualities; 1 For valuable consideration of money
or land. 2 Without fraud or covin. 3 Having no notice of the same charitable
use.



But albeit the Commissioners cannot make a Decree against any such purchasors,
yet may they make Decrees for recompense to be made by any person or persons
who being put in trust, or having notice of the charitable Uses abovesaid, have
or shall break the said trust or defraud the same uses by any conveyance, gift,
grant, lease, release or conversion, and against his or their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, having assets in Law or Equity so far as the same assets will
extend.

8. Of purchasors of Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments assured, conveyed or
come to Queen Elizabeth, Queen Mary, Henry 8. or Edw. 6 by Act of Parliament,
surrender, exchange, relinquishment, escheat, attornment, conveyance or
otherwise; but if any such Manors, Lands, etc. have since the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign been given, etc. to any of the charitable uses before
expressed, then this Act does extend to the same.

Concerning the Certificate of the Commissioners, these four things are to be
observed: 1. That they certify their Order and Decree respectively, either
into the Court of Chancery of England, or into the Chancery of the County
Palatine of Lancaster, as the case shall require. 2. That it ought to be in
Parchment, under the hands and seals of the Commissioners. 3. It must be within
the time limited in the Commission. 4. That the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper,
and the said Chancellor of the Duchy shall and may within their severll
jurisdictions, take such order for the due execution of all or any of the said
Judgments, Decrees, and Orders so certified, as to either of them shall seem
fit and convenient.


In the Remedy for the parties grieved with such Decrees so certified, these
five things are to be considered.

1. That he complain to the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper, or to the
Chancellor of the Duchy, according to their several jurisdictions for
redress thereof; And this Complaint is to be by Bill. 2. Upon such complaint,
first they shall respectively by such course as to their wisdoms shall seem
meetest, the circumstances of the case considered, proceed to the hearing,
examination, and determining thereof; and upon hearing thereof, shall or may
adnull the whole, diminish part, or enlarge (that is, confirm the former, and
enlarge the same by adding something thereunto) the Judgments and Decrees so
certified. 3. As shall be thought to stand with equity and good conscience. 4.
According to the true intent and meaning of the Donors and Founders thereof;
and this is lapis ductitius, whereby the Commissioners and Chancellors must
steer their course. 5. And shall and may tax and award good costs of suit by
their discretion respectively, against such persons as shall complain to them
respectively, without just and sufficient cause of the Orders, Judgments and
Decrees before mentioned: But this Order being given and limited by an Act of
Parliament, no costs (if the Order, Judgment, or Decree be adnulled,
diminished, or enlarged) ought to be given to the party complaining.
Proceedings upon the Statute of charitable Uses.
A Warrant to call the Parties interessed in the Goods or Lands misimployed, to
appear before the Commissioners.

Essex. ss.
WHereas by a Commission under the Great Seal of England, bearing date at
Westminster the 21 day of July, 1659. We whose names are hereunder written, for
the due execution of a certain Statute, made in the forty third year of the
Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, Entitled, An Act to redress the
misimployment of Lands, Goods, and Stocks of Money heretofore given to
charitable Uses, are (among others) authorized and empowered to make such
enquiring, Orders, Judgments and Decrees, touching the Premises, as in the
said Statute and Commission are mentioned. And whereas complaint has been made
unto us by diverse of the Inhabitants of C. in the County of E. That the rents,
issues and profits of certain Messuages and Lands in great Chesterford in the
said County heretofore given and appointed by one T. H. deceased, for the aid
of the Inhabitants of C. aforesaid, touching the payment of Fifteens, relief
of the poor, and maintenance of the Highways, and other charitable Uses, there
have been misgoverned, misemployed and misconverted by you, of which they
desire that inquiry and redress may be made. Now, according to the directions
of the said Statute and Commission, we do hereby give you notice of the said
complaint, and also that we do intend to meet for the execution of the said
Statute and Commission, and to make inquiry of and touching the matters
complained of as aforesaid, on the twentieth day of July, at the house of T. W.
in G. in the said County of E. at which time and place, we do desire you to be
present to make your defense therein, if you shall think it expedient. So fare
you well,

Your loving friends, A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H.


To the Sheriff of the County of E.
Essex.
BY virtue of a Commission under the Great Seal of England, bearing date at
Westminster the 6 day of May instant, to us (whose names are hereunder written)
and others directed, for the due execution of a Statute, made the three and
fourtieth year of the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, entitled, An Act to
redress the misimployment of Lands, Goods, and Stocks of money heretofore
given to charitable Uses. We do will end require you, That you cause to come
before us, and others the said Commissioners, or any four of us, at the house
of A. B. called or known by the Name or Sign of the Crown in B. in the County
aforesaid, on the 10 day of June now next ensuing, by nine of the clock in the
morning of the same day, twenty four honest and lawful men of your said County,
to enquire upon their oaths according to the tenor of the said Commission, what
Lands, Tenements, rents, annuities, profits. Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels,
Moneys and Stocks of Money, have at any time heretofore been given, limited,
appointed, or assigned for any the charitable Uses in the said Statute and
Commission mentioned, and that have been misimployed, misconverted, or
misgoverned, and of other the matters and things in the said Commission
mentioned in that behalf, and hereof you are not to fail.

Given under our Hands and Seals the 22 day of May, in the year of our Lord,
1658.
When four or more of the Commissioners are met, then read the Commission.
Then call the Sheriff to return his Precept. Then call the Jury. When the Jury
are full, then call the parties Defendants, that they may take their challenges
to the Jury. Then swear the Foreman as follows: The Oath to the Foreman of
the Jury.
YOu shall diligently enquire what Lands, Tenements, Rents, Annuities, Profits,
Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels, Money, and Stocks of Money, have been
heretofore given, limited, appointed, or assigned, as well by any King or Queen
of England, as any other well disposed person or persons for relief of aged,
impotent and poor people, maintenance of sick and maimed Soldiers, Mariners,
Schools of Learning, Free Schools, and Scholars of Universities, repair of
Bridges, Ports, Havens, Cawsies, Churches, Sea-banks, and Highways, education
and preferment of Orphans, marriage of poor maids, supportation and help of
young Tradesmen, Handicraftsmen, and persons decayed, redemption or relief of
prisoners, and captives, ease and aid of poor Inhabitants concerning payment of
Fifteens, setting out of Soldiers, and other taxes; and of the abuses, breaches
of trust, negligences, misimployment, not employing, concealing, defrauding,
misconverting, and misgovernment of the same Lands, Tenements, Stocks of money,
and other things, given to any the charitable Uses aforesaid: And thereof you
shall make a true presentment according to your evidence, and the best of your
knowledge, So God help you.




It is convenient to have the Inquisition ready drawn in Paper, especially as
to Wills and Deeds, and the breaches of Trust, etc. and matters of Fact, that
so the Jury having a draught ready, may with ease amend, and make it ready to
be engrossed, and so save the Jury the trouble of another meeting.

Inquisitions.
Essex ss.
AN Inquisition indented, taken at L. in the County aforesaid, the four and
twentieth day of M. in the year of our Lord 1658. before W. C. R. S. etc. by
virtue of a Commission under the Great Seal of England, to them and others
directed, for the due executing of a Statute made in the High Court of
Parliament, holden the 27 day of October, in the three and fortieth year of the
Reign of the late Queen, entitled, An Act to redress the misimployment of
Lands, Goods, and Stocks of Money heretofore given to charitable Uses, By the
oaths of, etc. honest and lawful men of the County aforesaid, who being duly
returned, impannelled and sworn according to the said Statute and Commission,
say upon their oath, That M G. late of W. in the County of E. Widow deceased,
long before her death, did hold to her and her Heirs of the then Lady of the
Manor of W. in the said County of E. by Copy of Court-Roll according to the
custom of the said Manor, all that Message with the Appurtenances, situate
and lying at P. of the yearly value of, etc. above all charges and reprizes.
And the Jurors aforesaid do further say upon their oath, That the said Tenement
and Premises were diverse years in the life time of the said M. G. held and
enjoyed by D. B. late of S. deceased, and that the said M. G. did in her life
time, and long before her death, assign, limit, and appoint, that thirty
shillings of the rent of the said Tenement and Premises, should be yearly
employed and bestowed, in and for the relief of the poor people, for the time,
and from time to time, being in W. aforesaid, for ever, and that the sum of
thirty shillings per ann. was yearly for diverse years together in the life time
of the said M. G. and by her direction, gift and appointment, paid to the
Churchwardens of the said Parish for the relief of the poor there. And the
Jurors aforesaid do further say upon their oath, That the said M. G. to the
intent the said yearly sum of thirty shillings might be the better secured to
be paid unto the poor of the said Parish of W. in her life time (to wit) the,
etc. did surrender the same Tenement and Premises, according to the custom of
the said Manor, into the hands of the then Lady of the said Manor, to the use
of such person and persons, and to the use and intent of the Testament or last
Will of the said M. G. as by the Copy of the Court-Roll of the same Manor to
the Jurors aforesaid in evidence now showed, it does and may appear. And the
Jurors aforesaid do further say upon their oath, that the said M. G. after the
making of the said surrender, did declare her Will, mind, and desire, to be,
and did assign, limit and appoint, That thirty shillings out of the said Rents,
Issues and Profits of the said Tenement and Premises, should yearly, and every
year for ever then after, be paid to the Churchwardens of the Parish of W.
aforesaid for the time, and from time to time, being for and toward the relief
of the poor people of the Parish of W. aforesaid. And the Jurors aforesaid do
further say upon their oath, That the said M. G. on, or about the day of, etc.
died, and that the said D. B. having notice of the charitable Devise,
Assignment, and appointment of the said M. G. aforesaid, to and for the pious
use aforesaid, did for some years after the death of the said M. G. hold and
enjoy the said Tenement and Premises, and did pay the same thirty shillings
yearly to the Churchwardens of the said Parish, for the relief of the poor of
W. aforesaid accordingly. And the Jurors aforesaid do further say upon their
oath, That since the death of the said M. G. the said D. B. during his life,
and from and after his death, R. B. Son of the said D. B. have held and enjoyed
the said Tenement and Premises, and received, and has taken the Rents and
Profits thereof, as owners of the same Premises, by virtue, as they affirm, of
some surrender, or other assurance thereof made by J. G. deceased, who was Son
and Heir of M. G. And that the said R. B. and -- B. have for the space of these
eight years, now last past, detained the said Gift of thirty shillings from the
said charitable Use, to and for which the same was Devised, assigned, and
limited, as aforesaid. And that at the Feast of, etc. there was, and yet is the
sum of, etc. of the said yearly payment of thirty shillings per ann. so
Devised, limited, assigned and appoined by the said M G. to and for the
charitable use, intent, and purpose aforesaid, behind, arrear and unpaid. In
witness, etc.

Essex ss.
AN Inquisition indented, taken at the S. at B. in the said County, the day of
etc. before J. W. W. E. etc. Gent. by virtue of a Commission under the Great
Seal of England, bearing date, etc. to them and diverse other persons directed,
for the due execution of a Statute made in the High Court of Parliament, holden
the 27 day of October, in the three and fortieth year of the Reign of the late
Queen Elizabeth, entitled, An Act to redress the misimployment of Lands,
Goods, and Stocks of Money heretofore given to charitable uses, by the oaths of
J. F. R. L. etc. honest and lawful men of the said County, who being duly
returned, impannelled and sworn according to the said Statute and Commission,
do say upon their oaths, That one M. B. on, or about the day of, etc. was
seized in his Demesne as of Fee, of and in one Message, etc. And that the said
M. B. being so seized of the said Messuages and Premises aforesaid, he the
said M. B. made his last Will and Testament in Writing, bearing date the day
of, etc. and by the same his said Will, did amongst other things, give, demise,
and bequeath the said Messuages called C. to A. his wife, during her life, and
after her decease, to the Church of T. aforesaid, in these words following:
Item, I give, etc. And the Jurors aforesaid do further say upon their oaths,
That one T. K. on, or about the day of, etc. did enter into the said Messuages
and Premises called C. and by himself and his under Tenants, possessed and
enjoyed the same, and took and received the rents and profits thereof during
his life, paying only seven Nobles per ann out of the rents and profits of the
same to the Churchwardens and Parish of T. to and for the charitable Use
aforesaid: And the Jurors aforesaid do further say upon their oaths, That after
the death of the said T. K. E. K. Son of the said T. K. now also deceased,
entered into the said Messuages and Premises, and by himself and his under
tenants, did take and receive the rents and profits thereof during his life,
and continued the payment of the said seven Nobles per ann. for the same to the
said Church, until about twelve years last past, at which time the said E. K.
did refuse to continue the payment of the said seven Nobles per ann. any
longer. And the Jurors aforesaid do further say upon their oaths, that the said
Messuages, so as aforesaid divised, was diverse years since made, divided, and
converted into several Tenements. And that the said Massuage or Tenement,
called C. and now commonly called by the name of the Church-House, is now, and
for diverse years last past, has been in the possession of E. C. And that the
said Houses, Tenements and Cottages in T. aforesaid, now in the Tenure or
Occupation of E. P. Widow, were formerly outhouses, belonging to, and parcel
of the said Message and Premises with the Appurtenances, called C. alias the
Church-House. And the said Jurors do further say upon their oaths, That the
said Message or Tenement, Houses and Premises, now are, and for these six
years last past, have been of the clear yearly value of, etc. above the moneys
payable out of the Rents and Profits thereof, to and for the superstitious uses
above mentioned, and all other charges and reprizes. And the Jurors aforesaid,
do further say upon their oaths, That sithence the death of the said E. K.
which happened about two years since, the rents of the Message, Tement, and
other the Premises, have been claimed by T. K. Son and Heir of E. K. as
belonging to him as Son and Heir to his said Father, and that the said
Message, Tenement and Premises have been enjoyed and disposed of by him the
said T. K. and his under Tenants, and the Issues, Rents and Profits growing and
arising out of the same for these two years last past, have been received and
enjoyed by the said T. K. and by him converted to his own particular use and
benefit. In witness whereof, to one part of this present Inquisition delivered
by the said Jurors to the said Commissioners, and by them to be returned into
the high Court of Chancery, as well the said Commissioners as the said Jurors
have set their Hands and Seals. And the other part thereof remaining with the
Foreman of the said Jurors, the said Commissioners have set their Hands and
Seals the day and year first above written.

Devon. ss.
AN Inquisition, etc. By the oaths of, etc. who being duly returned, impannelled
and sworn according to the said Statute and Commission, say upon their oath,
That on or about the tenth day of J. in the twentieth year of the Reign of
Henry the eighth late King of England J. C. R. A. J. C. T. B. W. C. W. S. T. T,
and T. W. as Feoffees in Trust for one J. B. sometimes of E. in the said County
Yeoman deceased, stood jointly seize of and in their Demesne as of Fee in one
Message, with the Appurtenances, situate and being in G. in the County
aforesaid, etc. And that the said J C. R. A. and other the aforesaid Feoffees,
being so of the said Message, Lands and Premises seized in Trust, as
aforesaid, the said J. B. made his last Will and Testament in Writing, bearing
date the sixteenth day of A. in the said twentieth year of the Reign of the
said late King H. 8. and by the same did will, declare and appoint, that they
the said J. C. R. A. and other his Trustees aforesaid, their Heirs and
Assigns, and all such other person and persons as should stand seized of the
said Message, Lands and Premises, with the Appurtenances, from time to time,
of the issues and profits coming and growing of the said Tenement and Lands,
should sufficiently repair, new build, and maintain the Houses, Edifices and
Buildings of the said Tenement, as often, and when as need should be for
evermore. And further, that the said Feoffees, of the issues and profits coming
of the said Tenement, Lands and other the Premises with the Appurtenance,
should do, keep and find on the day of the Month, that the said J. B.
deceased, or within six days before, or within six days after, an yearly obit
or anniversary within the aforesaid Parish Church of E. for the Souls of the
said J. B. the Souls of his father and mother, his wife and children, and all
Christian souls, and that the Feoffees or their Assigns, should expend yearly
at every Obit so kept, and for his Name to be had in the Bedroll, 6 s 8 d And
that all other issues and profits coming and growing of the said Tenement,
Lands, and other the Premises, with the Appurtenances over and above the said
Edifices, and reparations, and the said 6 s 8 d for the said Obit and Bedroll
should be expended, distributed, and laid out in making and mending of the
Highways between H. in the said County, and the City of L. and in other deeds
of Piety and Charity by the discretion of two of the said Feoffees. Provided
always, that the profits of all Woods and Wood-sale that should come and grow
of the Grove called R. should be distributed, one time to the use of the
aforesaid Parish Church of E. and at another time to the use of the Parish
Church of T. G. aforesaid, the profits of the first Wood-sale to the use of the
Parish Church of E. And further, that two Persons being Feoffees, of, and in
the said Tenement, and Lands, and other the Premises, with the appurtenances,
should take and levy to the uses aforesaid, all the issues and profits of the
same, and to distribute and dispose them in manner and form as the said J. B.
has before willed and declared: Provided always, that no person which should
have the levying and gathering of the same issues and profits of the said
Tenements, Lands and other the Premises, with the Appurtenances should levy
and gather them over and above one whole year together, but that yearly an
Election to be made of two persons of the said Feoffees to be Renters and
Gatherers of the said issues and profits, to the use and intent before
expressed; And that the said persons so elected and named Renters and Gatherers
should yearly give up their account before the residue of the said Feoffees
which shall stand seized of, and in the said Tenement, Lands, and other the
Premises, with the Appurtenances, or before the most part of them, on the day
of Saint J. in Christmas week, and that every person so levying and gathering
the said issues of the said Tenement and Lands, shall have for their labor and
business in that behalf, 12 d And that such persons as were seized and
infeoffed at the making and declaring of his said Testament and last Will, of
and in the said Tenement, Lands, and other the Premises, with the
Appurtenances, should make an Estate and Feoffment of and in the same unto
twenty four honest persons, dwelling and inhabiting within the aforesaid
Parishes of E. and T. G. And that the said twenty persons, and their heirs
should stand seized and enfeoffed of and in the said Tenement, Lands, and other
the premises, with the appurtenances, to the use and performance of the said
Testament and last Will of the aforesaid I. B. And at such time and when it
should fortune the said twenty four persons to decease or void the said
Parishes to the number of eight persons so that there were not liveing and
inhabiting within the said two Parishes of the said Feoffees over and above
eight persons, That then the said eight persons so surviving and inhabiting,
should make an Estate and Feofment of the said Tenement, Lands, and other the
premises with the appurtenances, unto twenty four honest persons, dwelling and
inhabiting within the said Parishes, To have and to hold the said Tenement,
Lands, and other the Premises, with the appurtenances, unto the said twenty
four, and to their heirs, to the use and performance of the said Testament and
last Will of the aforesaid I. B. And as often as it shall happen the said
Feoffees, to come to the number of eight, in form aforesaid, The same eight
persons so often to make an Estate and Refeoffment of the said Tenement, Lands,
and other the Premises with the Appurtenances, to twenty four honest persons of
the said Parishes, and so from time to time, as often as any such case shall
happen or fall for evermore, as by a certain Indenture bearing date the 29. day
of D. in the year of our Lord God 1518. and in the said tenth year of the Reign
of King H. the eighth, now showed forth in evidence to the said Jurors, by the
present Feoffees of the said Tenement and Premises more at large it does and
may appear. And the said Jurors do further say upon their oaths, that the said
I. C. R. A. and others the Trustees aforesaid, being so seized of the said
Tenement, Land, and Premises, in Trust as aforesaid, They the said I. C. R. A.
and others the Trustees aforesaid, did by a certain Deed or Writing, bearing
date on or about the said twentieth day of D. in the said tenth year of the
Reign of the said King H. the eighth, convey the said Tenement, Lands, and
Premises, with the Appurtenances, unto I. A of E. aforesaid Mercer, and I. W.
of the same Yeoman, their Heirs and Assigns, to fulfill the Will of the said
I. B. And that they the said I. A and I. W. being of said Tenement, Lands, and
Premises, with the Appurtenances seized. They the said I. A. and I. W. did by
their Deed of Feoffment executed by Livery and Seisin, bearing date the said
29. day of D. in the said tenth year of the Reign of the said King H. the
eighth, convey the said Tenement, Lands and Premises, with the Appurtenances
unto R. A. of T. G. aforesaid R. A. and W. A. sons of the said R. W. A. the
elder; F. A. son of the said W. A. the elder T. T. alias T. R. I. T. son of the
said T. T. H. A. son of the said I. A. H. B. R. B. son of the said H. B. W. N.
the younger, I. P. W. P. sons of R. P. R. P. the younger T. M. the elder of T.
G. aforesaid, T. T. son of H. T. W. C. W. S. W. A. son of I. A. W. S. I. S. son
of the said W. S. T. S. I. S. son of the said T. S. I. W. son of R. W. I. B.
the elder, H. H. the younger, and S. son of W. S. W. B. son of B. B. and I. P.
of E. aforesaid, as by the said last recited Deed of Feoffment, now also showed
forth in evidence to the said Jurors, by the said now present Feoffees of the
said premises may appear; And the said Jurors do further say upon their oaths,
That about N. in the sixth year of the Reign of the late Queen Eliz. H. A. and
R. A. sons of W, A. deceased; I. R. and I. R. son of the said I. F. A. and R.
A. son of the said F. S. A. son of H. A. deceased I. W. son of I. W. deceased,
I. A. son of I. A. of B. deceased, W. C. son of W. C. of T. G. aforesaid W. A.
and I. A. and I. A. son of the said W. S. A. and T. A. sons of the said H. A.
deceased, I. S. and A. S. son of the said I. S. son of T. S. deceased, and S.
son of T. S. I. S. son of E. S. deceased, and I. B. the Elder of E. aforesaid,
being then Feoffees of the said Tenement, Lands, and Premises, with the
Appurtenances, they the said last mentioned Feoffees, did then exchange with
one F. L. a certain parcel of meadow called C. parcel of the said Lands, before
mentioned, containing by estimation two Acres and a half, or thereabouts, for
two Acres and a half of Land called A. lying amongst other Lands, that were the
said B. the which two Acres and a half of Lands so taken and exchanged by the
said Feoffees from the said F. L. the said Feoffees and their Assigns have
quietly enjoyed ever since, but whether the said Lands taken in exchange be of
equal yearly value with the meadow given in exchange, by the said Feoffees, to
the said F. L. the said Jurors know not: And the said Jurors do further say
upon their oaths, That the said Tenement, Lands, and Premises, with the
Appurtenances that were the said I. B. have been ever since the said B. death
continued in Feoffment to diverse and sundry persons by several Conveyances to
the use and performance of the will of the said I. B. as appears by diverse
Deeds unto the Jurors aforesaid, in evidence therein at the time of the taking
of this Inquisition, and that upon view of the said evidences it appeared that
diverse Feoffments have been made of the said Premises by surviving Feoffees, to
their children and others of their alliance, by which means the interest of the
said Premises has been continued in the name and blood of several families,
that have lived in the said Parishes, and that thereby diverse Knights,
Esquires, and Gentlemen of worth and quality have been left out, that have
been then Inhabitants of the said Parishes. And the Jury aforesaid do further
say upon their oaths, that the said Tenement, Lands, and Premises, with the
Appurtenances, are now by mean Conveyance and Assurance, come unto I. S. of E.
aforesaid Gent. W. C. of T. G. aforesaid, Gent. A. S. of E. aforesaid Gent. and
to diverse other, being in all about eighteen in number, and that the said I. S.
and A. S. and their Ancestors have been Feoffees of the said Premises, ever
since the year of our Lord God 1611, and that they and the other Feoffees now
living, claim no interest in the said Premises, but as Feoffees in Trust for
performance of the Will of the said I. B. and the said I. S. W. C. A. S. and
diverse other of the now Feoffees, appearing before the said Commissioners, and
the said Jurors at the time and place first above mentioned, and did then and
there produce two Books that have been kept by them and others, under whom they
claim, wherein are set down the Accounts of the yearly Revenues and Profits
that have been made of the said Premises, from the year of our Lord God 1587
and diverse years before until this present, And upon our view of the said books
it appears that the Trust of the said Will has been managed by some few of
the twenty four Feoffees, the residue giving an implicit consent to what such
few should do, both concerning the bestowing of the yearly Revenue of the said
premises, and of the said Woodsales, as also in Election of Rent gatherers, and
in making up an allowance of the yearly Accounts. And it did also further
appear by view of the said books, that the yearly Accounts therein set down are
imperfect, and that there are many alterations in the figures of the sums of
money expended by the said Rent gatherers, And that the Accounts therein
specified are for the most part made by disbursments of Sums of money in the
general wiith reference unto particular bills not set down in the said Books,
and that at one time, or in two or three years together, no Accounts were made
by the Rent-gatherers: And that the said Feoffees have failed to elect yearly
new Rent-gatherers, And that they have allowed unto the Tenant of the said
House and Lands, out of his Rent, sometimes 40. s for a dinner, at their
meeting, And that the said Feoffees and Rent-gatherers have from time to time
kept moneys in their hands, which they have received for Rent of the said House
and Lands, which they call in their books of Accounts, house money, And diverse
sums of money which they have received by sale of the wood in R. W. which they
call Church money, And that sometimes they have expended the house money upon
the Church, And sometimes the Church money upon the Highwaies, and have entered
their Accounts as money borrowed of the Church, for the house, and of the house
for the Church, And they have brought into Account diverse sums of money, to
have been expended by them yearly upon the said Churches of E. and T. G. And
the Ms. and Cs. having Certificates in writing, what moneys have been expended
yearly by the said Rent-gatherers in repair of the said Churches, from the year
1611 until this present time, and upon comparing the said Certificates, with
the said books of Account, It does appear, That in some years, wherein the said
Rent-gatherers have set down in their Accounts to have expended moneys in the
repair of the said Churches, that nothing was then set down in the said Church
Books to have been expended by the said Rent-gatherers; in some years the
sums of Expenses do agree with the Church-book, in some years more is set
down in the Rent-gatherers book to have been expended upon the said Churches,
then is in the said Church-book. And the said Jurors do further say upon their
oaths, That fithence the said year 1611, until this present, diverse Feoffees,
some whereof are yet living, have been at several times Rent-gatherers and
Feoffees, And that for the most part of that time, the yearly Revenue, and
Rent, of the said House and Lands, have been about 20 l which according to
their Accounts, has been expended yearly in repair of the Highwaies between M.
and some three or four miles of E. and for their dinner at their meetings, and
by giving of 40 s or more in some years to several poor persons Inhabiting in
the said Parishes, And that in that time Woodsales have been made of the Woods
growing in R. Grove, And that the moneys thereupon arising, have been kept in
their hands these three years, and they have new built the said house called S.
and improved the said Tenement and Lands to be worth 26 l 13 s 4 d per annum,
to be letten: And further the said Jurors do say upon their oaths, that the
yearly expenses of the said Feoffees, have been by Auditors (appointed by the
said Commissioners in the presence of some of the said Feoffees) cast, and
upon, and by the said Auditors Certificate it appears, that over and above all
charges and expenses by the said Feoffees, until this present time, in building
the said house, repair of the Highwaies, Gifts of money to poor people, moneys
expended in Dinners, and repair of the said Churches, there does at this time
remain in the hands of I. S. etc. the now Feoffees of the said Tenement, Lands,
and Premises, or in the hands of some of them, the sum of 54 l 14 s 5 d or
thereabouts, to the Church of E. and 56 l 5 s 1 d or thereabouts, unto the
Church of T. G. The which several sums, diverse of the Parishioners of the
said several Parishes of T. G. and E. of good ability, have desired the said
Feoffees, to deliver unto them for a Church Stock for their several Parishes,
to be by them bestowed to the use of the said several Churches, according to
the said Will of the I. B. But they the said now Feoffees, or some of them,
have and do refuse to deliver the same unto them. And the said Jurors do
further say upon their oaths, That sometimes the surviving Feoffees have
suffered the interest of the said Premises to continue in them until under the
number of eight Feoffees were surviving, and Inhabitants of the said Parishes.
And that the said last Feoffment, made of the said Premises, by the then
surviving Feoffees, diverse of the said last Feoffees are since dead, so that at
this Present there are but to the number of nineteen Feoffees, living and
inhabiting within the said Parishes of E. and T. G. In witness etc.

Decrees.
Essex.
AT L. S. in the County of E. aforesaid the last day of M. in the year of our
Lord Christ 1659. Whereas by an Inquisition taken at L. S. aforesaid the 24th.
day of this instant M. before W. C. Sergeant at Law, R. S. Esquire, etc. By
virtue of a Commission under the great Seal of England to them and others
directed, for the due execution of a Statute made in the High Court of
Parliament, holden the 27. day of O. in the 43. year of the Reign of the late
Queen E. Entitled an Act to redress the misimployments of lands, goods, and
stocks of money heretofore given to charitable uses, by the oaths of J. A.
Gent. R. B. Esquire, etc. honest and lawful men of the County aforesaid: It is
found, and does appear, that M. W. Widow deceased, long before her death, did
hold to her and her heirs of the then Lady of the Manor of W. in the said
County of E. by copy of Court Roll, according to the custom of the said
Manor, all that Tenement, etc. as by the said Inquisition hereunto annexed may
appear. Now we the said W. C. R. S. etc. Having first called the said R. B.
being the party interessed in the Tenement and premises in the said
Inquisition mentioned (who appeared before us by her Council before the taking
of the said Inquisition, and was fully heard touching the premises) and having
examined and considered the matters and things in and by the said Inquisition
found, and thereby appearing, do (by virtue of the said Statute and Commission,
and the power and authority to us thereby given) order, adjudge, and decree,
that the said R. B. her Executors and Administrators shall within one month
next after notice of this Decree, Order, and Judgment, pay unto the
Churchwardens of the said Parish of W. for the time being, the sum of 20 l of
lawful money of England, for the arrearages of the said yearly payment of 30 l
per annum so by her withheld and detained from the charitable use aforesaid,
to and for the relief of the poor people of VV. aforesaid: And also the sum
of ten pounds more for damages for the detaining of the said money, and for the
costs and charges of the Parishioners of VV. aforesaid by them expended, and by
the suing forth of the Commission aforesaid, and in the prosecution thereof:
And in and about the obtaining of the said Inquisition and this Decree. And we
the said VV. C. R. S. etc. do further order, adjudge and decree, that the said
R. B. her Heirs and Assigns, owners and proprietors of the Tenement and
Premises aforesaid, and all and every other person and persons whatsoever,
claiming, by, from, or under the said M. VV. and D. B. deceased, or either of
them, shall (from henceforth for ever hereafter out of the rents issues and
profits of the said Tenements and Premises yearly, and every year) pay unto
the Churchwardens of the parish of VV. aforesaid for the time, and from time
to time being, the sum of thirty pounds of lawful money of England, upon the
Feast of the Epiphany, in every year, yearly for ever, to and for the relief of
the poor of VV. aforesaid, according to the true direction, appointment,
intent, and meaning of the said M. G. the Donor thereof. In witness whereof,
etc.

Essex.
AT E. in the said County upon the twentieth day of November, in the fourteenth
year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles, by the grace of God, King of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. Whereas by
an Inquisition indented, taken at E. aforesaid the one and twentieth day of
September last past, before Thomas Winniff, Dean of St. Paul's Church, London,
etc. By virtue of his Majesty's Commission under the great Seal of England,
bearing date the sixth day of March, in the thirteenth year of his said
Highness Reign, directed to the right Reverend Father in God, the Lord Bishop
of London, etc. Authorizing them, or any four or more of them, for enquiring
and reformation of Deceits and Breaches of trust, concerning Lands, Tenements,
and other things given, limited and appointed to any the charitable Uses named
in the said Commission within the said County, according to a Statute of the
three and fortieth year of the Reign of the late Queen Eliz. in such cases made
and provided by the oaths, etc. It was found that H. L. late of W. in the said
County of Essex, deceased, did in his life time, amongst other things, purchase
of one N. S. a certain customary Message or Tenement, with the Appurtenances,
in W. aforesaid late in the Tenure or Occupation of one J. E. Gent. and holden
of the Lord of the said Manor by Copy of Court Roll, according to the custom
of the said Manor. And he the said H. L. took surrender thereof in the names
of his Sons, H. L. and J. L. being then Infants of tender years, And
afterward, during his life, did take and receive the rents, issues and profits
of the said Message or Tenement, with the Appurtenances, to his own proper use
and behoof: And that the said H. L. having purchased the said Message or
Tenement, with the Appurtenances, amongst other things as aforesaid, he the
said H. L. did make his last Will and Testament in Writing, bearing date the 28
day of November, 1619. And by the same his last Will and Testament did limit
and appoint, one yearly Rent of forty shillings to be issuing and payable
yearly for ever out of the Message or Tenement in W. aforesaid, then in the
Tenure of the said M. S. or his Assigns, to be distributed amongst the poor
people of the Parish of W. aforesaid, from time to time aforesaid for ever, in
manner and form following, viz. Item I give and bequeath unto W. M. Knight, J.
W. Clerk, the now Parson of W. H. H. Merchant, J. W. Gent. and E. P. Merchant,
and their Heirs for ever, for the relief of the poor of the said Parish, one
yearly Rent of forty shillings, to be issuing and payable yearly for ever, out
of my Message or Tenement in W. with the Appurtenances, now in the Tenure of
M. S. or his Assigns, to be paid at the Feast of the Birth of our Lord God in
every year, and to be distributed to and amongst the poor people of the Parish
of W. from time to time for ever, by discretion of the chief Inhabitants, and
the Parson, and the Churchwardens of the said Parish for the time being for
ever. And if it shall happen the said Rent, or any part thereof to he behind or
unpaid at the said Feast, that then it shall be lawful for the said W. M. J.
W. H. H. J. W. and E. P. their Heirs or Assigns, to enter into the said
Message, destrain for the same, and for the arrearages thereof, if any shall
be behind and unpaid. And whereas it was further found by the said Inquisition,
that the said H. L. in or about the Month of January, in the said year of our
Lord God, 1619. died: And that the said H. L. his Son died also in the life
time of him the said H. And that the said J. L. now Sir J. L. Knight, them
survived, and being seized of the said Message or Tenement, with the
Appurtenances, amongst other things, the said Sir W. M. Knight, in the said
Will named, being one of the Devisees of the said Rent, and trusted by the said
Will, to see the said charitable Use performed, and having notice of the said
charitable Use, did, in or about the Month of November, in the year of our Lord
God, 1633. purchase the said Message or Tenement, with the Appurtenances,
amongst other things, of the said Sir J. L. and that thereupon, the said Sir J.
L. in or about the Month of November in the said year, 1633. did surrender the
said Message or Tenement, amongst other things, into the hands of the Lord of
the said Manor of W. to the use of the said W. M. Knight, his Heirs and
Assigns for ever; And that the said Sir W. M. at a Court holden for the said
Manor the tenth day of December, in the year of our Lord God, 1633. was
admitted Tenant to the said Message or Tenement with the Appurtenances
accordingly. And that the said W. M. Knight, continued seized of the said
Message or Tenement amongst other things, until about the Month of June last,
at which time, he the said W. M. for a valuable consideration of money, did
surrender the said Message or Tenement with the appurtenances, amongst other
things, into the hands of the Lord of the said Manor of W. to the use of H. P.
Esquire his Heirs and Assigns for ever, according to the custom of the said Manor;
And that the said H. P. at a Court holden for the said Manor, on or about the
one and twentieth day of June last, was admitted Tenant to the said Message or
Tenement, with the Appurtenances, amongst other things accordingly: And that
before the time that he the said H. P. was admitted Tenant to the same, as
aforesaid, he having the sum of 1000 l or more of the said purchase money
remaining in his hands unpaid, had notice of the said Devise and charitable
Use. And lastly, that the said yearly Rent of 40 s nor any part thereof has
not been as yet, at any time distributed unto and among the poor people of the
Parish of W. aforesaid according to the Will of the said Sir H. L. but has
remained in arrear and unpaid to the Parishoners, by the Occupiers of the said
Land, ever since the death of the said Sir H. L. viz. for the space of these
eighteen years last past, contrary to the true intent and meaning of the said
Will, as by the said Inquisition hereunto annexed more at large, it does and
may appear. Now the said T. W. E. L. N. W. J. H. W. C. D. D. and D. T. for
reformation of the said abuse, neglect and breach of Trust, do hereby order,
adjudge and decree in manner and form following; that is to say, That he the
said H. P. now owner of the said Message or Tenement and Land charged with the
said Rent, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, shall pay, or
cause to be paid unto the said J. W. and the now Churchwardens of the said
Parish of W. or one of them, the sum of 38 l of lawful money of England
within eight days after Process shall be served upon the said H. P. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, at or in the Parsonage House of W.
aforesaid, for the arrearages of the said yearly Rent or sum of 40 s limited
and appointed by the said Sir H. L. in and by his said Will, to be issuing and
paid out of the said Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances, to the
charitable use above expressed: And that the said sum of 38 l shall be
distributed by them the said J. W. and the said Churchwardens of the same
Parish, unto and amongst the poor people of W. aforesaid, according to the Will
of the said Sir H. L. And that the said H. P. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, shall also pay unto them the said J. W. and the
said Churchwardens of W. the sum of 10 l of lawful money of England, toward
the charges laid out in the suing forth of the said Commission, and in
prosecuting of the said Inquisition and this Decree. And the said T. W. etc. do
further order, adjudge and decree, that the said Sir W. M. Knight, and J. W.
being the surviving Devisees of the said Rent of 40 s per ann. limited and
appointed to be paid out of the said Message or Tenement, to and for the
charitable Use above mentioned, shall at or before the said Feast of the
Annunciation of our blessed Lady the Virgin Mary next ensuing, by their Deed or
Writing, in due form of Law, to be made, grant, convey, assign, or set over
the said yearly Rent of 40 s limited and appointed by the said Will of the said
Sir H. L. to be for ever paid out of the said Message or Tenement with the
Appurtenances in W. aforesaid, to and for the charitable Use before expressed,
unto Sir H. H. Knight, W. J. Doctor in Divinity, Rector of the Parish Church of
W. aforesaid, B. W. W. B. T. M. and D. T. Esquires, their Heirs and Assigns, in
as large, ample and beneficall manner and form to all intents and purposes
whatsoever, as the same is granted, Demised, or bequeathed unto them the said
Sir W. M. Knight, J. W. Clerk, H. H. J. W. and E. P. and their Heirs, in and by
the Will of the said Sir H. L. To the end, intent and purpose the said Sir H.
H. W. J. B. W. W. B. and D. T. their Heirs and Assigns may be enabled to
demand and receive the said yearly Rent of 40 s of and from the owners and
occupiers of the said Message or Tenement for ever, at the Feast of the Birth
of our Lord God. And that the same may be distributed unto and amongst the poor
people of the said Parish of W. aforesaid, from time to time for ever, by the
discretions of the said chief Inhabitants and the Parson, and the Churchwardens
of the said Parish for the time being, for ever, where most need shall be,
according to the true intent and meaning of the said Sir H. L. in his said Will
expressed. And the said T. W. E. L. N. W. J. H. W. C. D. D. and D. T. do
further order, adjudge and decree, that as soon as any four of them, the said
Sir H.H. W.J. B.W. W.B. T.M. and D. T. shall depart this life, that then the
said two surviving Assigns of the said yearly Rent of 40 s shall by some
Writing under their hands and seals in due form of Law to be made, assign and
set over the said yearly Rent of 40 s limited and appointed by the said Sir H.
L. to and for the charitable Use above mentioned, unto two other persons by
them the said surviving Assigns to be nominated and their Heirs, upon
condition that they the said two persons so to be nominated by them the said
surviving Assigns, as aforesaid, immediately after the said Rent shall by such
Act and Deed be vested and settled in them, shall re-assigne and set over the
said yearly Rent of 40 s unto them the said surviving Assigns: And also to
four or more other persons of the best quality then living in W. aforesaid,
their Heirs and Assigns for ever in Trust, to and for the performance of the
charitable Use above mentioned; And that from time to time, as often as any
four of the Assigns of the said Rent shall depart this life, that then the
surviving Assigns of the said Rent, shall make such new Assignments of the
said yearly Rent of forty shillings as are above expressed and mentioned. In
witness, etc.

The certain and sure way of making Decrees, is* strictly to observe and pursue
the Will and Intent of the Donor. The return of the Commission to be written
upon the back thereof. The Execution of this Commission appears in several
Schedules to the same Commission annexed.
Four Comissioners, or more; A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H.


Cases adjudged upon Appeals.
Mich. 1626. Winsor and Hilton.
IN the Case between Thomas Winsor Plaintiff, and Robert Hilton and others, of
the Town of Farnham Defendants, upon a Reference to the Judges out of the
Chancery, It was resolved by the Judges of the Kings Bench, That if upon an
Appeal in Chancery or Duchy, The Decree and Orders of the Commissioners for
Charitable uses be confirmed, The party grieved can have no bill of Review,
because the Appeal is in the nature of a Bill of Review, and no Bill of Review
does lie after a Decree is confirmed upon a Bill of Review, for then it may be
infinite vexation. But in such a Case the party greived may prefer his Petition
in Parliament, and there have his complaint examined, And the Lords in
Parliament may confirm, alter, or adnul the Decree, which is to be final, as it
was resolved by the Judges and the Kings Council, Assistants in the House of
Peers, 20. Caroli 1643. Between the poor of Eastham in Essex Plaintiffs, and
the Lady Kemp and others Defendants, where Dandy, one of the Almesmen of the
Almeshouse in Eastham, of the foundation of Giles Breame Esquire, complained by
Petition before the Lords in Parliament, to have a Decree made by the Lord
Coventry adnulled, who by his Decree altered the Decree of the Commissioners,
and the said Defendants excepted that the said Decree could not be adnulled
without Bill in Parliament, for the reason aforesaid, and upon reference to the
said Judges and Council, they certified us aforesaid, and then the Lords
proceeded to examine the said Lord Keepers Decree, and confirmed it.

Mich. 44. Eliz.
EGerton, Popham, and Anderson, and Cook Attorney General, resolved these
questions upon the said Statute.

1. That the Bishop of the Diocese, if there be any at the time of the sealing
of the Commission ought by the express words of the said Statute, to be named
a Commissioner, or otherwise, the Commission is void; But if he be named a
Commissioner, it is not requisite that he should be present at the execution of
it, for that none is of the Quorum; but any four or more of the Commissioners
named, may execute the same without the presence of the Bishop or his
Chancellor, If the Sea of the Bishop be void at the sealing of the Commission,
then the Bishop need not to be named a Commissioner, neither his Chancellor, and
the metropolitan shall not be named in stead of the Bishop, for that he is not
Bishop of the Diocese, And if the Bishop be named a Commissioner, and dye
before the Certificate returned, this does not avoid the Commission, but the
other Commissioners may proceed.

2. If a Lease or Conveyance be made by parties trusted with a Charitable use,
whereby the same is defrauded, the Commissioners may Decree the same Lease and
Conveyance to be void. And upon such Decree the same is void in Interest and
Estate. And if afterward upon an Appeal, the Lord Keeper adnul the
Commissioners Decree, or decree the Lease or Conveyance to be good, it is then
revived and made good again in Interest and Estate. And if such Lease or
Conveyance be assigned over to any, the Commissioners may Decree the assignment
to be void, although the first Conveyance was made fraudulently, and in deceit
of the charitable use.

2. If houses given to Charitable uses be suffered to be ruinous and out of
repair by negligence, The Commissioners may Decree That those which receive the
Rents and Profits of them, shall repair the same, although they have otherwise
expended the Rents in performance of the Charitable use, and may order the
houses to be ever after kept in good repair, as often as need requires. And if
they which ought to repair the said houses be dead before the Commissioners
Decree, The Commissioners may order that their Heirs, Executors, or
Administrators having Assets in Law or Equity, shall repair the same.

4. That the word given in the Statute, extends to gifts after the Statute, as
well as to gifts before.

5. The Commissioners cannot by their Decree make a Corporation, not before
incorporated, and enable them to take to charitable uses as a Corporation. As
Churchwardens which are a Corporation in Law, but to special purposes.

But they may Decree Lands held in Capite, or in Socage, to a Corporation
already incorporate, to be Trustees, to perform a Charitable use, and it shall
be no Mortmain.

Also they may Decree Lands given to charitable uses, to sundry persons, and
their Heirs, to the said uses, and enable them to demise the same Lands for the
best profit of the said Charitable use, and that when such a number of them
dye, the survivers shall make a Conveyance to settle the said lands in
themselves that survive, and others to make up and continue the number by them
appointed.

6. If lands that lie in the body of a County be given to a Corporation, to
maintain charitable uses, the Commissioners of the Country may make orders to
reform the breaches of Trusts, and misimployment of such lands, by the
Corporation.

Trin. 9. Caroli. East-greensteds Case.
THese points were resolved by the Lord Coventry.

1. That whereas Robert Earl of Dorset, had granted a Rent charge of 330 l per
ann. out of diverse his Manors and Lands in London and several Counties for
maintenance of an Almshouse in East-greensted, erected by himself. First, That
if a Rent be granted out of Lands in several Counties for maintenance of
charitable uses in one County, The Commissioners in that County, where the
charitable use is to be performed, may make a Decree to charge the lands in
other Counties, to pay an equal contribution of charge in payment of the said
Rent, and there needs not several Inquisitions in each County, for that the
Rent is an entire grant, by the Deed or Will.

2. If the devisees of a Rentcharge or the grantees thereof to a charitable
use, do purchase part of the lands, out of which the rent is issuing, or all
the land, Although in extremity of Law, the Rentcharge is extinguished, yet if
the Commissioners Decree, the Rent to be revived, and settle it upon others to
maintain the charitable use, the Rent is revived by the said Decree.

3. If a Rentcharge be granted out of land to a charitable use, and the land
is afterward sold for valuable consideration of money or land, to one that had
no notice of the Rent, yet the Rent remains. For that the purchase was of
another thing, that was not given to the charitable use.

4. By the Statute, the parties interessed are to have notice from the
Commissioners, of the time and place of their sitting to execute the
Commission. Yet if the Commissioners make a Decree without giving such notice
to the parties interessed, it is good. And if the parties upon their Appeal do
take exception that they had not any notice of the time of the executing of the
Commission from the Commissioners, That shall not avoid the Decree, unless they
show withal, in their exception, that for lack of such notice, they lost the
benefit of such an exception, to the Commissioners or some of them, or of such
a challenge to a Juror, expressing the cause in certain: And if the Lord Keeper
adjudge the cause shown to be a sufficient exception and challenge, the
Decree, or Orders of the Commissioners, shall be adnulled and reversed without
further examination, for the intent of such notice to be given, is. That the
parties interessed may make their lawful challenges to the Commissioners or
Jurors, as the Statute allows them.

5. Resolved that the notice which a Purchasor of lands given to charitable
uses ought to have; ought to be certain, and a general notice, is not
sufficient. As if land given to charitable uses be intended to be sold by Act
of Parliament: and when the Bill is read in the house of Parliament, it is
there spoken unto and declared, that the land is chargeable with a charitable
use, and recompense is offered otherwise to assure the charitable use then by
that land, and afterward the Bill does not pass, and the Land is sold to one
of the Members of the House that spoke unto the Bill for money. Yet this notice
in Parliament, is not sufficient notice, within the intent of the Statute,
because it was not known to such a Purchasor, but as a Parliament man in
another capacity.

6. If a Purchasor of Land given to charitable uses, for consideration of
money, has Legal notice of the use, and afterward sells the Land to another
for money, who has no notice of the use. This second Purchasor shall hold the
Land chargeable with the charitable Use, for that the first Purchasor held it
so, and the second Purchasor coming under his Title, must hold it subject to
the charges the first Purchasor held it, for that he claims under him; But if
the first Purchasor had no notice of the Use, then is the Land discharged of
the charitable Use: and if he aftewards sell it to another for money that has
notice of the Use, yet he shall not hold it subject to the charitable Use, for
that the Land was discharged thereof upon the first Purchase.

7. That if a Rentcharge be granted to a charitale Use, out of Lands in
several Counties, the Commissioners are to charge this Rent by their Decree,
upon all the Lands in every County, according to an equal distribution, having
regard to the yearly value of all the Lands chargeable with the Rent, and
cannot by their Decree charge one or two Manors with all the Rent, and
discharge the residue in other Counties or places, for that their Decree will
then be contrary to the Will of Founders or Donors.

16. Martii 4. Carol.
BEtween the poor of Walthamstow in Essex, and upon a Devise of money by one
Colby to relieve the poor there; these points were resolved: First, S. took
exception upon his appeal in Chancery, that he had no notice of the time and
place of the Execution of the Commission from the Commissioners, whereby he
lost the benefit of his challenge to some of the Jurors that were Inhabitants
in Walthamstow, as being parties interessed, and upon proof it appeared, that
the number of eighteen, were sworn upon the Jury, whereof three of them were
substantial men of Walthamstow, and none of the poor there to take benefit by
the Gift, and the Lord Keeper disallowed the Exception, for that it appeared
fifteen others were of the Jury, against whom no ception is taken, and a
Verdict of twelve or more, is good, although others of the Jury, above the
number of twelve dissent; also the three Inhabitants were no parties interessed
in the Gift, and may be Jurymen, they being none of the poor of the said
Parish. Secondly, if one be authorized by a party subject to the Decree of the
Commissioners for a charitable Use, as a Counselor, Solicitor, or Attorney, to
solicit and defend his Suits, and notice is given to his Attorney, Counselor,
or Solicitor, by the Commissioners of the time and place for execution of the
Commission against the person so entertaining him, telling and advising him to
acquaint the party interessed therewith, and gives him timely notice to
acquaint him accordingly; and at the time and place of meeting, neither the
party interessed, nor any other comes to make defense and challenge; if the
Commissioners proceed to enquire and make a Decree, it is good, and the notice
to his Clients is sufficient: and in the case of S. it was proved, that he was
an aged man, not able to follow his own business; dwelling in a remote County,
and that he had a Son a Counselor at Law, who attended his Fathers business
in other things, unto whom the Commissioners gave notice of the time and place
for executing the Commission, and that he might have given his Father timely
notice of it, and it was taken as a neglect of purpose, to avoid the
Commission. Also it was proved, that the Father had personal notice of the
time and place appointed by the Commissioners to make the Decree, and his Son
came to attend it, but did not take any exception to the Jurors, and the Lord
Keeper said, that notice was sufficient, although he had no notice of the
Inquiry.

Thirdly, if one Devise money to a charitable Use for Relief of the poor, and
makes two Executors, and dies, and they prove the Will, and jointly
intermeddles with the Receipt of money, and one trusts the other with the money
given to perform the charitable Use, and to pay it accordingly, and he wastes
it and dies insolvent, the surviving Executor shall be charged to pay the money
for the charitable Use, if the Testator left Assets to pay it, for that they
jointly meddled in the execution of the Will, but if the Executor that died had
only proved the Will in the name of both Executors, and the surviving Executor
never meddled in the execution of the Will, but left all to the other, and he
had wasted the Estate, and died insolvent, the surviving Executor shall not be
charged with the charitable Use out of his own Estate, for that the other
Executor had a joint authority with him from the Testator, and he would not
prevent his intermeddling, and the survivor had no other means to prevent his
charge, then by his refusal.

Lastly, if money be given to a charitable Use by Will, and the Executors
detain it in their hands many years without employing it according to the Will,
having Assets, the Commissioners may Decree the money with damages for
detaining of it, to be employed in the charitable Use, according to their
discretions, not exceeding 8 l per cent. for a year, for the damages.

Mich. 10. Car. int. Inhabitants of Eltham in Kent, against Warreyn, the Case
was thus:

Land was given in the time of Hen. 8. being then of the value of 3 l per ann.
to the Parishoners of Eltham, to repair the Highways there, this Land does
improve to be of the value of 11 l per ann. diverse of the Parishoners being
Vestry-men there, do Demise this Land and House upon it, to Warreyn for fifty
years, at 3 l Rent per ann. Warreyn cuts down Timber Trees, growing upon the
Land, and repairs the House with part, and sells and otherwise disposes of the
residue, and pays the 3 l Rent yearly, which is bestowed in repair of the High
ways; The Commissioners Decree Warreyn to pay damages for cutting down three
trees, and that his Lease should be void, and surrendered up to be cancelled,
and to pay the surplusage of the true value of the Land, as it was improved at
the time of the Lease for the time he enjoyed it, and that diverse of the
Parishoners, naming them particularly, should be Trustees to the said Land for
the best profit of the charitable Use, and that such a number should enfeoff
others of the Parishoners to continue the number of the Trustees, by the Decree
appointed. And upon Warreyns Appeal to the Lord Keeper the Decree of the
Commissioners was confirmed in all things, and resolved, that the cutting down
of the trees was a waste, for which Warreyn should pay damages according to the
value of them, and bestowing but part upon the House, not being able to prove
the quantity, it was fraud in him, to color his disposing the residue
otherwise, but if he had bestowed all, or the greatest part of the trees in the
repair, it had been no waste: 2. It was resolved, that Commissioners may give
costs to the party which prosecutes a Commission, to reform a breach of trust
in a charitable Use, and the Lord Keeper may increase these costs, if the party
grieved complain without cause: 3. The Lease being made at an under value, is a
breach of trust, and fraud, to deceive the charitable Use of the true value of
the Land: And the Commissioners may Decree the Lease to be void and surrendered,
and that the Lessee shall pay the true profits of the value of the charitable
Use above the Rent reserved. And lastly, the Commissioners may by their Decree,
enable persons as Trustees, to have interest in the Lands given to charitable
Uses, and to Demise the same according to the improved value.

In the Case of Sutton Colefield, in Com. War. Hill. 11. Car.
FIrst, It was resolved, That it is not material that the Commissioners which
were present at the time the Evidence was given, and of the taking of the
Inquisition, be present at the making of the Decree, for if any or all of them
are absent at the making of the Decree, which were present at the time of the
taking of the Inquisition and Evidence, the Decree is good, if it be made by
four Commissioners, or more. And if it appears by the return, that the names of
four Commissioners were affixed to the Inquisition, and four other
Commissioners to the Decree, all is good.

Secondly, resolved, If Lands of the value of 3 l per ann. be given to maintain
a Schoolmaster, and in the Deed it is expressed, that the said 3 l shall be
only employed to maintain that use, and no other use is expressed in the Deed,
and afterward the Land increases to a greater value, all the increased Rent
shall be employed for maintenance of that charitable Use, because it does not
appear that the Donor had any intention that the profits of his Land should be
employed to any other use, and at the first he gave so much as the Land was
worth.

Thirdly, resolved, if Land given to charitable Use be sold for money to one
that has notice of the use, this notice did make the Land chargeable with the
use in all other Purchasors hands, although the other Purchasors had no notice
of the use, because they take the Land charged with other encumbrances as the
first Purchasor held, but if the first Purchasor had notice of the use, then is
the Land discharged of the use, and it shall so remain in all the Purchasors
hands, although they had notice of the use.

Fourthly, resolved, if Land of the value of 3 l per ann. is given to a
charitable use, which is paid accordingly, and afterward the Land increases
to a better yearly value, if the increased value be not also paid to the
charitable use, that is breach of trust, which the Commissioners may reform, if
no other use of employment of the revenue be expressed in the Donors Deed.

Fifthly, resolved, if Land be given to a Corporation, or other particular
persons to perform a charitable use, and the Donor appoint them Visitors, also
of the use according to his intent, if the said Visitors do break the trust,
either in detaining part of the revenue, misimploying, or any other ways
defrauding the charitable use, this may be restored by Decree of the
Commissioners, notwithstanding the Statute of 43 Eliz. which disables
Commissioners to meddle with Lands given to charitable uses, where special
Visitors are appointed, for the intent of the Statute is to disable
Commissioners to meddle with such a case, where the Land is given to persons in
trust, to perform a charitable use, and the Donor appoint special Visitors to
see these trustees to perform the use according to his intent, if the Trustees
defraud the trust, the Commissioners cannot meddle, but the Visitors are to
perform it, but where the Visitors are Trustees also, there the Commissioners
may by their Decree reform the abuse of the charitable use.

Hynshaw and Pydwers the Mayor of the Corporation of Morpeth in Northumberland,
5. Car.
KIng Edw. 6. gives Land to the Mayor and Commonalty of Morpeth, of the value
of 20 l per ann. to maintain a Schoolmaster there, and appoints them Visitors
of the Schoolmaster and Scholars, that they behave themselves according to
his Orders, this Land increases to 100 l by the year, and the Corporation did
only bestow on the Schoolmaster the 20 l per ann. accordding to the value at
the time of the first Gift. A commission is granted to reform this breach of
trust, and the Corporation upon summons, refused to appear before the
Commissioners, for that they are appointed Visitors, and the Proviso of the
Statute does exempt in such cases the power of the Commissioners, the
Commissioners certify this to the Lord Keeper, and that the Visitors were the
persons trusted, and did break the trust, and Sergeant Thomas Crew moving the
Lord Keeper upon this Certificate the 22 of May, 5 Car. the Lord Keeper
declared his opinion to be, that the Commissioners might proceed in the
execution of their Commission, for the Visitors being Trustees and Parties
breaking the Trusts, are not within the intent of the Proviso, and if it should
be otherwise construed, this breach of Trust would escape unpunished, unless
in Chancery or in Parliament; which were a tedious and chargeable Suit for poor
persons: And the Lord Keeper said, That the not bestowing of the increased
value of the Land given, was a breach of trust in the Corporation, if no other
use be expressed in the Letters Patents: Also it was then said, If Land be
given to maintain a charitable use for relief of poor, and also that the
Schoolmaster or poor shall pray for the Donors soul, that the charitable use
shall be said, the principal intent of the Donor, and the praying for his
soul, but an accessory, and therefore the charitable use shall support and
preserve the Land.

The Case of the Inhabitants of Woodford in Essex, against Parkhurst; Hill. 14.
Carol.
SIr Henry Leigh did purchase Copyhold lands in Woodford, in the name of two of
his younger sons, and their Heirs, they being within age, and by his Will,
Devises to Sir William Martin and other Parishioners of Woodford, and their
Heirs, a Rentcharge of 40 s per annum, out of this Copyhold land, for relief
of the poor there, and dies, Sir William Martin purchases this land, and
enjoyes it for many years, and then sells the land unto Packhurst and his
Heirs, Parkhurst has notice of the Charitable use: between the Surrender and
his admittance, the Commissioners Decree Parkhurst to pay all the arrerages
since Sir Henry Leighs death, and upon his appeal, the Lord Keeper resoved
these points. First, that the Rent is well Devised, although Sir Henry had
nothing in the land in strictness of Law, for that the Estate in Law, was in
the children, yet Sir Henry making the Purchase, and enjoying the land as
owner, and receiving the Profits of it, he shall be said in Equity to have
power to dispose to a Charitable use: Also it being objected that there wanted
a Surrender to enable him to Devise, the Lord keeper said, yet the Devise was
good enough, and shall be said a good gift, limitation, and appointment within
the Statute, in favor of Charitable uses. Secondly, resolved that the Rent,
although it was extinct in Law, by Sir William Martin purchased, yet by the
Commissioners Decree it is revived. Thirdly, Resolved, the Rent is not extinct
by this Purchase, although he had no notice of the same, for that the Purchase
is of another thing then was given to the Charitable use. Fourthly, Resoved,
that the Rent is a charge which goes with the Land, in whose hands soever it
comes, and a Distress may be taken for the arrerages, upon the ter-tenant for
the time it was arrear in others hands, and the owners remedy, to have
contribution against all others that enjoyed the Land before him, is by Suit in
Chancery; and here Parkhurst by the Decree, had contribution against all others
that enjoyed the Land charged, and suffered arrerages to accrue in their time.
Lastly, Resolved that the notice of the Rent given to Parkhurst, after the
Surrender and agreement for the Purchaser and before his admittance, was a
sufficient notice within the Statute; if notice in this case had been
requisite, for that Parkhurst was no complete and absolute Purchasor before
admittance; so of notice given to a Purchasor, of a Charitable use chargeable
upon the Land, mean between his agreement, and sealing of the Writings, before
the perfecting of the settling of the Estate in him, by Attornment, Livery, or
Inrolment of the Deed of Conveyance.

Hennington Hastings in Com. War, 6. Jacob.
ONe Humfrey Davis erected an Almshouse in Hennington Hastings, for eight poor
men, and being Seized of lands in Tennington, Monton, and ^urbery, then let for
10 l Rent per annum, does devise the rents of his said lands, for maintenance
of the said poor in the said Almshouse, and dies, his heir paies the Ten pound
yearly for maintenance of the poor, at the Almshouse, and at the end of the
term, does Demise the land at 40 l per annum. The Commissioners does Decree the
whole land for maintenance of the Charitable use, and the arrerages of the
improved Rent taken by the Heir, from the time of the expiration of the old
Lease, until the Decree, and that the new Lease shall be void, and surrendered,
and upon the Heirs appeal in Chancery, and acceptions taken to the Decree, the
Lord Keeper referred the Case to the Judges principally, whether if one Devise
the Rents of his Land to a Charitable use, if by this Devise the Land passed,
and they certified their opinions, that by Devise of the Rents of the lands to
a Charitable use, the land it self did pass, and in twelve Jac. in the Case of
one Kerry and Dethick, it was adjudged, that if one Devise to another and his
Heirs, the Rents and Profits of his Lands, that this is a Devise of the Land
it self; also they resolved, that when one Devises the Rent of his Land to a
Charitable use, it shall be taken largely for a Devise of the Rent then
reserved, or afterward to be reserved upon an improved value, and the Lord
Keeper did afterward confirm the Commissioners Decree in all things.

The School of Thetfords Case upon a Bill exhited in Parliament, 8. Jacobi. 8.
Coke fol. 130.
LAnd of the value of 35 l by the year, was by Sir Thomas Fulmerston 9. Eliz.
Devised to certain persons in Trust, and their Heirs for maintenance of a
Preacher, School master, and poor people, in Thetford, and by the Will, a
special distribution was made, how much the Preacher, Schoolmasters and poor
should have, amounting in the whole, unto 35 l by the year, which was the value
of the Land at the time of the Devise, and afterward the land increases to be
by the value of 100 l by the year, and upon a Reference to the Chief Justices
and Judge Walmsley, they certified their opinions, that the Revenew of the
Lands shall be employed to increase the several stipends of the persons
appointed to be maintained by the Devisor. and if any surplusage do remain, it
shall be employed for the maintenance of a greater number of people, and
nothing shall be converted by the Devisees, to their own use, for that it
appears by the distribution of the Devisor, that he intended that all the
Profits of his lands, shall be employed in the Charitable works by him Founded,
and left nothing to his Heirs or Executors, of the Profits of his Lands, as
they were in value at his death, and as if the value of the Lands had
decreased, the poor should have lost in their stipends, so when the Revenue of
the Revenue of the Lands increase, they shall gain; and the Lord Coke said,
that this resolution did concern all the Colleges in the Universities and
elsewhere, for when the lands were first given for their maintenance, and that
every Scholar should have a penny half penny a day, this was then a competent
allowance for a Scholar in respect of the price of victuals then and yearly
value of the Land, and now the price of victuals being increased, the first
maintenance for Scholars, is not competent for them; and as the value of the
lands increase, so ought the allowance for the Scholars to increase; for the
Colleges seized in Jure Collegii, to the intent that the members of the
College, shall be maintained, according to the intent of the Founder, which
is, that all the Revenue and Increase of the Profits of their Lands, shall be
bestowed in the works of Charity, which the Founder has expressed, and that
nothing should be committed to any other private uses, for panis egentum est
vitae pauperum, and qui defraudat eos homo sanguinis est, and upon conference
with all the Judges of England, they agreed to the opinion of both the
aforesaid Judges, and both Houses of Parliament passed the Bill accordingly,
and the King assented to the Bill.

Dame Billingsleys Case. 12. Jac.
THe Lady Billingsley, being a feme covert, and Administatrix unto Martin her
first husband, made her Will, and gave 400 l unto Charitable uses, out of 1800
l debt, due unto Martin upon a Statute, and dies, Administration of Martins
goods, is committed unto others; the Executors of the Lady Billingsley prove
the Will, and have asse^^, Commissioners for charitable uses make a Decree
against the Executors for payment of the 400 l given by her unto the Charitable
use.

Upon an Appeal, the Executors take exception against the Decree: first, that
the Will is void being made by a feme covert, for that the Demise of the
Charitable use, is to be paid but of money due upon a Statute, which is a thing
in action, and the Administrators of Martyn have now the debt out of which the
charitable use ought to be paid, but the Lord Keeper did confirm the Decree,
and declared, that the Will of a Femecovert, is not merely void, unless her
Husband did contradict it, and it shall stand good in this case, and be a good
Declaration of money to a charitable Use within the Statute. Secondly, this
Declaration shall be good to charge her Executors to pay the charitable use, it
being found that they have Assets, and they shall be liable to pay it out of
her Estate, but it shall not charge the Administrators of Martin, for that they
be Administrators to another, and claimed immediately from Martin above the
Will.

Decimo quinto Jac. Collisons Case.
COllison seized of Lands in Fee in Pape street of Eltham, in 25 H. 8. --
Devises the Rents of his Lands to his Executors for reparations of High ways
within the Parish for ever, and upon a Reference to Mountague and Hoboard,
chief Justices, out of the Chancerie, they certified, that this was a good
Demise of the Land, and that if one do Demise the Rents and profits of his
Lands to another and his Heirs, this is a good Demise of the Land it self.
Secondly, although this was a void Demise in Law, because it was made in 25 H.
8. at which time no Land was Demisable by the Common Law but customary Land,
and the Statute of 32, 34 H. 8. were made diverse years after, yet by the
Statute, 43 Eliz. it is made good, and shall be taken within that Statute, for
a good limitation and appointment to a charitable use, and it was Decreed
according to their certificate.

Sir Tho. Middletons Case. 1617.
SOldiers and Mariners, by a voluntary contribution amongst themselves, abates
out of their wages of six shillings a Month, 4 d by the Month, and he which
takes five shillings by the Month, 3 d by the Month, and appoints this to be
paid to Sir Tho. Middleton, to the intent that he shall employ it for relief of
maimed Soldiers and Mariners, upon the Seas, their wives and children, and
Sir Tho. receives by this appointment, 400 l which he keeps in his hands about
twenty years. This voluntary contribution was made by the Mariners and
Soldiers attending Sir Francis Drake, and Sir John Hawkins, in their voyages to
the West Indies, upon a Commission upon the Statute of Charitable Uses, this
voluntary agreement and constitution of the Soldiers and Mariners was proved
before them, and that Sir Tho. Middleton had received by reason thereof 400 l
which he had detained in his hands twenty years. The Commissioners make a
Decree for payment of the said money, with some damages, and upon Appeal to the
Lord Keeper, he confirmed this Decree.

Rivetts Case. 15 Jac.
A Copyholder of Land in Fee, Devises the same to a charitable Use without a
surrrender, Commissioners make a Decree for the Land, and upon Appeal, the
Decree was confirmed; for although it be a void Devise by the common Law, yet
it is a good limitation and appointment of Land to a charitable use, and it
shall bind the Heir, but not the Lord for his Fine.

This Devise was made unto the Devisors Son and Heir, and his Heir, upon
condition, that he and his Heirs should employ the profits of the Land for the
relief of Stow Market in Suffolk, and after the Devisor died without a
Surrender to the use of his Will. In 6 Jac. the Heir having sold the Land to
one Flick for valuable consideration of money, sues out a Commission upon the
Statute of charitable Uses, by fraud and covin between him and Flick, to
discharge this Land of the charitable use, upon which Commission, it was proved
before the Commissioners, that Flick had any notice of this charitable use, but
it was proved that the Heir that sold the Land had Assets, both in Law and
Equity, to give allowance out of his Estate to maintain this charitable use,
whereupon the Commissioners Decreed, that the Son and Heir should grant out of
his own Land, the sum of five Marks, and to maintain this charitable use, it
being then proved, that the Land Devised for the charitable Use, was of no
great value, and they further Decree, that Flick should hold his Land
discharged of the charitable use: And this Decree being certified into the
Chancery, and prosecuted by the Heir and Flick, with intent to discharge the
Land Devised, of the charitable use, the Lord Keeper confirmed it; Afterward
the Parishoners of Stow Market having notice of this fraud, and that the Land
Devised was worth 7 l 10 s per ann. they in 14. Jac. sue out another Commission
upon the said Statute, and before the Commissioners it was proved that Flick
had notice of this charitable use before he bought the Land. Secondly, it was
proved that the first Commission was sued out by fraud and combination between
the Heir and Flick, on purpose to discharge the Land Devised, of this
charitable use. Thirdly, it was proved that the Land Devised was worth 7 l 10 s
per an. And fourthly, that the Heir had not paid the 5 Marks Decreed by the
former Commission to be paid, upon all which proofs, the latter Commissioners
Decree Flicks Land for maintenance of the charitable use appointed, and the
Jury having found the former Commission to be prosecuted by fraud and
combination, as aforesaid, they Decree that Flick shall pay the full value of
his Land by the year to the charitable use, from the time of his Purchase. And
lastly, they Decree, that the Heir that ought to have paid the 5 Marks per ann.
for diverse years, and has not paid it at any time, should pay the arrerages,
and then his Land to be discharged from further payment of it. This latter
Decree being certified in the Chancery, Flick took exception, that the second
Commission issued out illegally, there having been a former Commission and
Decree, to discharge the Land of the charitable use, which was confirmed by
Decree of this Court, which ought to be final, and is not to be reversed but
in Parliament, according to Andrew Hynstors Case before; and if a Commission
upon a Commission should issue out upon this Statute, such multiplicity of
Suits would arise, as that it would prove inconvenient, and multiplicity of
Suits is not allowed in Law. But the Lord Keeper did confirm the second Decree,
because of the fraud and combination between the Heir and Flick in suing out
the first Commission, which was found by the Jury, and proved before the L.
Keeper, and therefore he now reversed the first Decree, and confirmed this, for
that by the Law, Fraus and dolus nemini patrociniam debet, but if a Decree be
legally made without fraud by the Commissioners for charitable uses, and upon
Appeal this is confirmed in the Chancery, and where a Decree is made by
Commissioners for charitable uses, and this Decree confirmed in Chancery, if
the Decree be not performed accordingly: now no Commission need be sued out,
for upon an Affidavit made of a breach of the Decree, an Attachment and other
Process of course is to issue out to compel the parties concerned, to perform
the Decree; yet if a second Commission do issue out, it is not illegal, if
nothing be decreed against the first Decree; and upon this second Commission,
they are to decree by form of the first Decree, if they find a breach.

Barnard Hides Case.
TRinity, 4 Car. Barnard Hides Case against the Parishoners of Gillingham,
Darford, and Sutton in Kent.

Katherine Banne grants by Deed, a Rentseek out of 208 acres of Land, for
relief of the poor in those Parishes, and limits this to commence after her
death, and gives seisin of this in her life, the Rent is behind for thirty six
years, Hide Purchases the Land, having notice of the charitable use, and in
the Grant, there was a nomine poenae of 50 s if the Rent be not paid by her
Heirs within fourteen days after it was due by the Grant, and it was found that
Hide had held the Land seven years, upon a Commission for charitable uses, the
Commissioners Decree that Hide shall pay all the arrerages for thirty six
years, and also the arrerages of the nomine poenae for seven years, being the
time he had enjoyed the Land, and Decree that the Grantor shall distrain for
the Rent for ever after. And the Commissioners Decree being returned in
Chancery, the Lord Keeper referred it to the Judges, who resolved these points:
First, that Hide should pay all the arrerages for thirty six years, for that
the Land is chargeable with the Rent, in whose hands soever it comes.
Secondly, that the seisin given by the Grantor in her life, is good, although
the Rent did not commence, or was in esse at the time of the seisin given.
Thirdly, if Land or Rent be given to a charitable use, and misimployed, a
Purchasor which has notice of the Gift, shall not be further charged then
during his own time; but where the Rent is concealed, a Purchasor shall answer
for all the time of the concealment, for the Land is a Debtor, and transit cum
onere. Fourthly, if a Rent be granted out of Land to a charitable use, and one
buys the Land for a valuable consideration of money, having no notice of the
charitable Use and Rent, yet the Rent remains, because it is collateral to the
Land, and another thing, and the notice required by the Statute is to be given,
as well of the Land, as of the charitable use. Fifthly, resolved, that the
Purchasor shall not pay the arrerages of the nomine poenae, because it was a
personal charge upon the Heir, who ought to have paid the Rent, and it does
not charge the Land. Sixthly, when the Heir or others, charged to pay a
charitable use, do break the trust, the Commissioners may transfer the trust
unto others, as to the Churchwardens, or other Parishoners of the Parish where
the charitable use is to be distributed. Lastly, it was resolved, that if a
Rent seek be granted to a charitable use, the Commissioners by their Decree
cannot make this a Rentcharge, by adding a clause of distress, unless it be
for that this alters the nature of the Rent in the creation of it, and is
against the mind of the Donor.

Mich. 14. Car. Plate and the Masters and Fellows of St. John's College in
Cambridge.
PLate being seized of Copyhold Land in tail in Highgate in Midlesex,
surrenders this in Court to the use of his Will, and suffers a Recovery in the
Court of the Manor, in which no Judgment is given against the Vouchee, and
after Devises by his Will, this Copyhold Land, and all his Freehold Land to
his wife for life, the remainder to the Master and Fellows of St. John's
College in Cambridge for maintenance of the Scholars there, the Heir of Plate
enters upon the wife, to avoid the Devise, and the Master and Fellows prefer a
Bill in Chancery to preserve their interest, and to have the Devise to them
confirmed. The Lord Keeper, Littleton, resolves, that if no Judgment be given
against the Vouchee, to have in value, in case of a common recovery to cut off
an Estate tail, that it is a void recovery, and will not cut off an Estate
tail; and as to the wife, to whom the Land was Devised for life, the Heir had
liberty given by Law to evict them, but as to the College and the remainder
limited to them, the Lord Keeper did declare, that the Devise is good to them
by the Statute, 43 Elizabeth touching Gifts, Limitations and appointments of
Lands to charitable uses; for there is gift and limitation of the Land to a
charitable use, which shall not be avoided for want of circumstance of Law to
make it good; and also the Lord Keeper said, that although the College was
incorporated by another name then the Devise was to them, and therefore might
not be capable of it, yet the Devise is good to them by the said Statute: also
if the Heir avoid the Estate tail against the Wife at Law, yet the remainder to
the College shall stand good, and be a remainder without a particular Estate,
which by rules of Law cannot be, but these defects in cases of charitable uses
are made good by that Statute, by a benign and favorable interpretation
thereupon for maintenance of Charity, as it is in other cases upon Statutes for
Piety and Charity.

13 Jacobi Jesus College Case in Court of Wards referred to the Judges.
DOctor Floyd seized of Lands in Capite, Devises them to Jesus College in
Oxford, and their Successors, to find a Fellow there, which should be of his
blood and alliance, and it was referred to the Judges, Whether this Devise be
good or no, and they resolved and certified, that by the Common Law and Statute
of Wills, the Devise was void; for these Statutes enabled persons to Devise
their Lands, excepting to Corporations, for that is Mortmain: also none can
Devise all their Capite Lands to any, but must leave a third part to descend,
but they certified and resolved, that although it be void by the Common Law;
yet the Statute of 43. Eliz. for charitable Uses, does make this good, as a
limitation and an appointment, and that it was good for all the Land: But if an
Infant or Lunatic, who by Law is disabled to make a Will or Devise of his
Land, do Devise his Land to a charitable use, this is void and not made good by
the Statute, for want of a capacity to make a Will by Law.

The Lord Edward Mountagues Case in the Court of Wards. 17. Jac.
SIr Walter Mountague seized in Fee of Capite Lands in Hanging Houghton in
Northamptonshire, conveys two parts of these lands unto uses limited within the
Statute of 32. and 34. H. 8 and by his Will devises the third part, remaining
in him, for maintenance of a charitable use in Wales, and upon a reference unto
Hobart and Tanfield, they resolved, this Devise to be void, and was not aided
by the Statute of 43. Eliz. for charitable uses, for in the instant of his
death, the Lands descended to the Heir, and the Devisor having disposed of two
parts in his life, according to the Statute of Wills, he is disabled by the
Common Law, and those Statutes, as owner of the Lands, to Devise any part of
his third part remaining: See Doctor Floyds Case before in Jesus College Case.

Seymor against the poor of Twyford. Trinity 1634.
MOney was given to charitable uses, and detained a long time as concealed, the
Commissioners upon the said Statute, Decreed the Money to be paid with
interest, after the rate of 8 l per cent. and this Decree was confirmed by the
Lord Keeper. So in the Case of the Lady Mountague of Ilford, and the
Inhabitants of Barking in Essex, Sir Charles Mountague her Husband, gave by his
Will 10 l to the poor of Barking, and made his Wife Executrix, and died, she
kept the Money above twelve years in her hands, and the Commissioners Decreed
her to pay 20 l for the detainig this Money, for use and principal, and the
Lord Keeper Coventry confirmed this Decree about 12. Carol.

The Poor of East Greenstead against Howard. 8. Carol. and 10.
REsolved by the Lord Keeper upon Appeal, to alter or confirm a Decree made by
Commissioners upon the Statute of Charitable Uses, the Decree is not
perpetuated, and not to be altered, but by Act of Parliament, and is to remain
in the Pety Bagg, and it is in his power to make a Decree good where it is
defective.

Hungate on the part of the Inhabitants of Sherborn. 3. Carol.
A Debt owing by Statute, Bond, Judgment or Recognizance, which in Law is a
thing in action, was given for the creation of a School, and this was Decreed
to be a good appointment, within the Statute, to maintain a charitable Use.

Steward against Germyn. 41. Eliz.
ONe having Lands and Goods, appoints by his Will, that the same shall be sold
to maintain a charitable Use, and does not appoint by whom the sale shall be
made, the Commissioners do by their Decree, appoint that J. S. shall sell these
Lands and Goods, and Decree his sale to be good, and that the money to be
raised thereby, shall be employed to maintain the charitable Use, according to
the Donors Will, and this Decree was confirmed by the Lord Keeper upon an
Appeal to him.

Hellams Case. 5. Caroli.
A Devise was made of Lands to the Company of Leather-sellers in London, to
maintain a charitable Use there, upon a Decree by Commissioners, to settle the
Lands upon the Company, an Appeal was, and exception taken, for that the
Company of Leather-sellers was a Corporation, and the Statutes of Wills does
except Devises of Land to a Corporation, but the Decree was confirmed, there
being many Presidents in it.

The School of Rugby in the County of Warwick. 2. Caroli.
ONe seized in Fee of houses in Gray's Inn Lane, London, gave these houses to
certain persons in Trust, to build a School at Rugby in the County of Warwick,
and upon breach of the Trust, a Commission was taken out in Warwickshire, to
enquire of this Gift, and by a Jury there, the Gift and breach of Trust was
found, and a Decree made by the Commissioners in that County, to settle the
lands according to the Donors Will, and upon an Appeal, the Decree was
reversed, for the Inquisition and Decree was not made, nor found by Jurors and
Commissioners of the County where the Lands given to such uses do lie; the
words of the Statute be, To enquire by the oaths of twelve men, or more of the
County, of such gifts, limitations and appointments, and of the breaches of
Trust of such Lands and Goods, etc. which is intended to be by Jury and
Commissioners of that County where the Lands do lie.

Kensons Case. 41. Eliz.
REsolved that a Copyhold may be charged or given to a charitable use.

Wingfields Case. 4. Car.
MOney was given for the good of the Church of Dulk, and this was resolved to
be a good Gift, notwithstanding these general words.

Goffe cont. Webb. 44. Eliz.
HVnt seized in Fee of the Rectory of Haynes in the County of Wilts, Devised
the same to be sold, and the Money to be distributed unto twenty of the poor of
his kindred, and by Egerton and Popham, this was adjudged a good Devise,
notwithstanding it does not appear that he had any poor, kindred.

Champion contra Smith. 3. Jacobi.
RIdley, seized of Copyhold land in Barking in Essex, did Devise the same to
the Parson and Churchwardens of in Thames Street, London, to the end that they,
and four honest men of that Parish, should sell this land, and employ the Money
for the poor and charitable uses in that Parish. And upon an Appeal made, it
was objected, that the Devise was void, because the Parson and Churchwardens
were not a Corporation to take lands out of London, nor to sell it for such
uses, but it was Decreed, that the Devise was good, and that they had good
authority to sell the same.

Stoddard 20. Jacobi.
SToddard Devised by parcel, a yearly Rent of 10 l per ann. for ever out of
his House, called The Swan, with 100 Marks in the Old Jury, London, for
maintenance of two Scholars in Oxford and Cambridge, and willed, that one Hugh
the Scrivener should put it into Writing, which was done accordingly, and this
being found by Inquisition, was Decreed, and the Decree confirmed upon an
Appeal, for although by Law a Rent cannot be created or granted without Deed or
Will in writing; yet this Nuncupative Will was good, to create the Rent to a
charitable use, by the words of the Statute of limitation or appointment; for
although it be not a good Gift, yet it is a good limitation or appointment.

Mayor and Burgesses de Reading, contra Lane. 43. Eliz.
A Devise was made to the poor people maintained in the Hospital of St.
Lawrence in Reading for ever; Exception was taken, that the poor were not
capable by that name, for that they were no Corporation, yet because the Mayor
and Burgesses were capable to take Lands in Mortmain, and they did govern the
Hospital, it was Decreed, that the Defendant Lane should assure the Land to
the Mayor and Burgesses for the maintenance of the said Hospital.

Mayor of Bristoll against Whitton. 8. and 9. Caroli.
A Man Devises Money to a charitable use, to be bestowed amongst poor people,
and the other of his goods to be employed for such uses as his Feoffees shall
think fit. Resolved by the Lord Keeper, and the Certificate of two Judges, that
although Bristoll be a Corporation, yet the Devise to them is good.

Fisher against Hill. 10. Jacob.
WHen no use is mentioned or directed in a Deed, it shall be Decreed to the use
of the poor, although the Feoffees be gentlemen living out of the Town, and no
Inhabitants within the Town.

Peacock against Thewer, Mich. 14. Car.
LAnds are given to a charitable use, if a Purchasor buys these lands, not
having notice of the charitable use, it shall not bind the Purchasor; but if a
Rent be given out of lands to a charitable use, and a Purchasor purchases the
lands for money, not having notice of the charitable use, yet he shall pay the
Rent, for that he does not purchase it, but the land out of which the Rent
issues, but he shall not pay any more arrerages of the Rent then what was
encurred during his time of purchase; but every occupier and owner must answer
the arrerages for his own time. See before Purkhursts Case, and the Inhabitants
of Wood and Barnard Hides Case before.

2. Caroli, Pennyman against Jennys.
LAnds were given to Churchwardens of a Parish, to a charitable use, although
the Devise be void in Law, it was Decreed good in Chancery, by the words,
limited and appointed within the Statute.

Trin. 15. Car. Pember against the Inhabitants of Knighton.
MOney was given to maintain a Preaching Minister, this is no charitable use
named in the Statute, yet by the Lord Keeper and two Judges, it was Decreed to
be good, and the use a charitable use, within the Equity of that Statute, and
the Executor was ordered to pay that money to the charitable use for
maintenance of it.

Trin. 15. Car. Peustred cont. Panyer.
A Devises 20 l per ann. to a Preaching Minister, and makes his wife
Executrix, and dies, leaving Lands and Assets in Goods, the Executrix refuses
to buy Lands or a Rent of that value, the Lord Keeper, and two Judges Decree,
the Executrix to buy Lands to that value, and to assure it for the charitable
use.

Trin. 15. Car. Bramble against the poor of Havering.
A Feme covert makes a Will, and devises 30 s per ann. out of some of her own
Lands to a charitable use; the Heir submits himself to an Award, and is bound
to perform it; the Arbitrators do Award the payment of it: yet by Decree the
Heir is discharged to pay it, and that the Devise was void, ab initio, so of an
Infant, and other persons disabled in Law to make a Will, or to Devise Lands.

Mayor de Londons Case.
LAnds were Devised to the Mayor and Chamberlain of London, to the use of the
Master and Governors of the Hospital of St. Bartholomew, London. Resolved,
that Devise is good, although the Corporation be not incorporated by that name,
but by the name of Mayor and Commonalty; for the intent of the Devisor shall be
observed: and it appears that the Devisor intended to give it to the
Corporation of London: Also the Will is, To maintain an Hospital, which is a
charitable use, which the Law ought to favor.

Pauperes de Chelmsford, and Sir Henry Mildmay, Minh. 1649.
KIng Edward 6. founded a Free School in Chelmsford, and made it a Corporation
of Guardians, Master and Usher, and gave Chantery to them and their successors,
to the value of 300 l per ann. at this day, to maintain the Master, Usher, and
certain poor people in Chelmesford and Moulsham, and appointed, that the Rents,
Issues, and Profits of their lands should be employed for their maintenance,
and not otherwise; and appointed the Lord Peter, and the Heirs males of his
body, Sir Tho. Mildmay, and the Heirs males of his body, Sir Jo. Tirril, and
the Heirs males of his body, and Sir Humfrey Mildmay, and the Heirs mals of his
body, should be Governors of the said Free School and Lands; and that none
under the degree of a Knight, should be one of the Governors, the Governors
make Leases of the Lands at under values for Fines and small Rents, according
as they were at the first Foundation. The Commissioners Decree the Government
and Ordering of the Lands to others, by reason of their breach of Trust. Sir
Henry Mildmay of Moulsham near Chelmsford, being the chief man that received
the Rents, let the Leases, and defrauded the Trust, the rest of the Governors
Heirs being within age, or beyond the Seas, put in Exception to the Decree.
First, that the Corporation had special Visitors appointed, and so within the
Proviso of the Statute: Secondly, for that the Decree is against the Founders
intent, who would have none under the degree of Knight to be a Governor, to
which was answered, That when the Visitors break the Trust, they may be
questioned by Decree of the Commissioners, as is the Case of the School of
Morpeth, and other Cases before cited. Thirdly, that the general intent was of
Edw. 6. that the Profits of the Lands should be solely converted for the use of
the School and poor, and that the Visitors and their Heirs, should make no
profit of it, and that of being a Knight, was but for the Honor of the Family,
appointed Governors, and they all being persons of great Possessions, and
living near Chelmsford. But the Lords Commissioners reversed the Decree, by
reason of the Proviso in the Statute, and ordered that a Bill be exhibited
against the now Visitors and Governors, and that upon proof of their breach of
Trust, a course should be taken for relief of the School and Poor, according to
the intent of the Founder.

The Case where a Tenant in Capite, Devised all his Lands to a charitable Use.
TH. seized in Fee of the Manor of L. held in Socage, and of 54 acres of
Marshland, held in Capite, devises all the Socage-lands to C. Hospital in L.
paying 1000 l after the death of A. the wife of T. H. as she in her life time
should appoint the same to be paid.

Part of the Socage-lands Devised to the Hospital, is by Commission of the
Court of Wards, set out to N. H. the Heir, for his third part. A. H. dies, and
the Hospital pays the 1000 l The Commissioners for charitable uses have
Decreed to the Hospital, all the Socage lands Devised to the use of the poor.
This being the substance of the Case, the questions hereupon arising upon the
Appeal, were: Whether the Devise to the charitable uses be good, and whether
the Commissioners had power to decree the whole Socage lands devised, or but
two parts only. It was agreed that by the Statutes of 32 and 34 Henry 8. the
Devise is void for a third part. But it was insisted upon, that although the
Devise be void for a third part by those Statutes, yet this is such a
limitation and appointment within the Statute of 43. Eliz. as does well enable
the Commissioners for charitable uses to Decree the whole.

First, That it has been generally held, that the Statute of 43. Eliz. for
charitable Uses, does supply all the defects of assurances where the Donor is
of a capacity to dispose, and has such an Estate as is any ways disposeable by
him. And upon this ground it has been held, That if a Copyholder does dispose
of Copyhold lands to a charitable use, without a Surrender, or if Tenants in
tail do convey land to a charitable use without a Fine, or if a reversion be
granted without Attornment or Inrolment, and diverse other the like cases; yet
these defects are supplied by the Statute of 43. Eliz. because the Donor had a
disposing power of the Estate, and this is a good limitation and appointment
within this Statute: But it is true, if an Infant, Lunatic, or any other
person, who has not capacity to dispose an Estate, shall grant to a charitable
use, this defect is not supplied by this Statute: and this difference is
resolved in Collisons Case, 15. Jacob. in the Lord Hobarts Reports, folio 136.

Secondly, the words of the Statute of 43. Eliz. are very considerable in this
Case, for although the Statute does give power to the Lord Chancellor, or Lord
Keeper, upon complaint to them made, to adnull, diminish, alter, or enlarge any
Decree made by the Commissioners for charitable uses: yet the same is with this
limitation, so far as may stand with Equity and good conscience, according to
the true intent and meaning of the Donor and Founder thereof.

Whereby it does appear, that in all Gifts, Appointments, Limitations and
Assignments within that Statute, special regard is to be had to the intent of
the Donor, and this power of adnulling, diminishing, altering or enlarging
Decrees made by the Commissioners for charitable uses, is appropriated solely
to the Lord Choncellor, or Lord Keeper, and not to any other, and to proceed
therein according to Equity and good conscience.

Thirdly, the Case of G. L. Hillar. 13. Jac. reported by the Lord Hobart, fol.
136. does resolve the point in question: Where the Case being, that G. L. being
seized in Fee of lands in Cardigan, 1571. in August, 25. Eliz. Devised the same
land to A. his wife for life, and after to J. his daughter for life, and after
these lives ended, to the principal Fellows and Scholars of Jesus College in
Oxford, and their successors, to find a Scholar of his Blood from time to
time, and dyed, the lives ended, B. L. the Heir of G. L. being the Kings Ward,
entered, and upon a Case made hereof in the Court of Wards, and by order of that
Court, brought to the Lord Hobard, then Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and
the Lord Chief Baron Tanfield to be resolved of by them, who agreed, and so
certified, that the Devise was void in Law, because the Statute of Wills did
not allow Devises to Corporations in Mortmain, yet they held it clearly within
the relief of the Statute of charitable Uses of 43. Eliz. under the words,
limited and appointed, and so it was Decreed, that the College should enjoy it
against the Ward and his Heirs.

The Case of Collison, 15. Jac. Reported likewise by the Lord Hobard, fol. 136.
Resolved the point in question, where the Case being, That Collison, 15. Hen.
8. Devised a House in Etham in Kent, to L. his Wife for life, and after her
death, made J. K. and others, Feoffees (as he called them) in the said House,
to keep it in reparations, and to bestow the rest of the profits upon the
reparation of certain Highways there, Collison and his Wife died, and the House
descended to O. R. an Infant This Case being in Chancerie between the
Parishoners and B. was referred by the Court to the Lord Hobart, and the Lord
Chief Baron Tanfield, who resolved it clearly, that though the Devise were
utterly void, yet it was within the relief of the Statute of 43. Eliz. within
the words, limited and appointed to charitable Uses.

This Decree was lately confirmed by the Lords Commissioners, Keepers of the
Great Seal, for that it fully appeared to them, that it was the true intent and
meaning of A. H. the Donor, that all the lands in question should go to the
Hospital.

Inquisitions.
Devon. ss.
AN Inquisition taken, etc. Before, etc. By virtue of a Commission under the
Great Seal of England, bearing date at Westminster, the 6. day of M. in the
year of our Lord God, 1650. to them, and diverse other persons, dwelling and
inhabiting within the said County, directed, for the due execution of a
Statute, made in the high Court of Parliament, holden the 27. day of O. in the
43. year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lady, Queen Eliz. Entitled, An
Act to redress the misimployment of Lands, Goods, and Stocks of Money
heretofore given to charitable Uses, by the oaths of, etc, good and lawful men
of the said County of D. who being sworn, etc. say upon their oath, That J. T.
late of L. Merchant, deceased, was in his life time, and at the time of his
death, possessed of a personal Estate of great value: And that the said J. T.
did heretofore make his last Will and Testament, bearing date the tenth day of
O. which was in the year of our Lord God, 1649. And by the same Will did
nominate, constitute, and appoint W. L. of T. and T. H. of L. in the County of
C. Gent. the Executor of the said Will: And that afterward the said J. T. did
make a Codicil which was annexed to his said last Will and Testament, and which
he did appoint to be part of his said Will: And that the said J. T. in and by
the said Codicil, did among other things, make such recital, disposition,
limitation, and appointment, as follows in these words, That is to say, And
whereas I have not finished the Almshouses by me already begun, and do intend
that eight poor people of the said Parish of M. shall be placed therein, when
finished, and receive fifty shillings a piece yearly by quartery payments for
their maintenance during their lives and purpose that the same shall be so
continued and supplied for ever, with poor people of that Parish, and with that
yearly maintenance. Now I J. T. Testator, named in the said Will, do hereby
will and appoint mine Executors, W. L. and T. H. in my said Will, named, to
finish the said Almshouses with all speed, out of the surpluss of my Estate not
disposed by the said Will, nor by this Codicil, and likewise therewith to
purchase so much Freehold land in fee simple, and settle and assure the same
upon Feoffees for the maintenance of eight poor people of M. Parish aforesaid
for ever, to be placed in the said Almshouses, at M. aforesaid, as shall be
convenient. And the Jurors aforesaid do further say upon their oaths, That the
said J. T. afterward, that is to say, on the 22th day of D. died. And that the
said W. L. and T. H. proved the said Will and Codicil of the said J. T. and
took upon them the execution thereof: And that they the said W. L. and T. H.
after the death of the said J. T. did finish the building of the said
Almshouses before mentioned, out of the Estate of the said J. T. And that the
said T. H. did place eight poor people in the said Almshouses there: But the
Jurors aforesaid do likewise say upon their oaths, That the said W. L. and T.
H. in the said Will of the said J. T. named, have not, nor either of them, has
out of the Estate of the said J. T. (appointed or limited for that purpose, or
otherwise) as yet purchased, settled, or assured Freehold Land in Fee simple,
of the clear yeary value of 20 l by the year, as by the said Will and Codicil
is intended and appointed upon Feoffees or Trustees for the maintenance of
eight poor people of M. aforesaid for ever; placed, and to be placed in the
said Almshouses, as by the said Codicil is directed, limited and appointed; And
that in further breach of the Trust in them, the said W. L. and T. H. reposed
in and by the said Will and Codicil. They the said W. L. and T. H. have not
paid unto the poor people formerly placed in the said Almshouses, and now
remaining there, namely A B. etc. their several and respective yearly
allowances of 50 s the year, appointed them by the said, J. T. as aforesaid by
the space of two years, ending at the Feast of the Annunciation of the blessed
Virgin Mary last past, amounting in all, to the sum of 20 l but do detain and
withhold the same money from them the said poor people. And the said Jurors do
further say upon their oaths, That the said W. L. and T. H. have Assets of the
said J. T. in their hands (of the surpluss of his Estate not disposed of by his
said Will and Codicil) sufficient to purchase so much Freehold land in Fee
simple, as may be convenient for the maintenance of eight poor people, placed
and to be placed in the said Almshouses in such manner as the said J. T. has
in and by his said Will and Codicil willed, directed, limited and appointed. In
Witness, etc.

Devon. ss.
AT S. in the said County, the 19. day of J. in 11. year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord, Charles, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France
and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.

Whereas a Commission under the Great Seal of England, bearing date at West.
the 8. day of Febr. last, has been directed amongst others, to Sir W.R. Knt.
etc. and to diverse other persons, dwelling and inhabiting within the said
County, authorizing them, or any four or more of them, to enquire, as well by
the oaths of twelve good and lawful men, or more of the said County, as by
other good and lawful ways and means of all and singular Lands, Tenements,
Rents, Annuities, Profits, Goods, Chattels, Money and stocks of Money
heretofore given, limited, appointed and assigned by any well disposed person,
to or for any the charitable and godly uses in the said Commission mentioned
within the said County. And of the abuses, breaches of Trusts, negligences,
misimployments, not employing, concealing, defrauding, misconverting or
misgovernment of the said Lands, Tenements, Rents, Annuities, and other things;
and for the setting down such Orders, Judgments, and Decrees, as that the same
Lands, Tenements, Rents, Annuities, Profits, Goods, Chattels, Money, and Stocks
of Money, may be duly and faithfully employed, to and for the charitable Use
and Intents for which they were given, limited, assigned, or appointed by the
Donors and Founders thereof, according to a Statute made in the 43. year of the
Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, entitled, An Act to Redress the
Misimployments of Lands, Goods and Stocks of Money given to charitable Uses.
And whereas the said Sir W. R. etc. being seven of the Commissioners named and
authorized, in and by the said Commission, meeting for the execution of the
said Commission, at the day and place aforesaid, it was then and there found by
the oaths of F. M. J. B. etc. good and lawful men of the said County, duly
summoned, impannelled, and sworn, according to the said Statute and Commission,
that A. B. etc. and J. his wife, by their Writing under their Seals, bearing
date the 20 day of J. in the fifth year of the Reign of the said Queen; and by
and according to a Grant and License from the said Queen duly obtained, did
Found, Erect, and incorporate a Free School in C. by the name of the
Schoolmaster and Guardians of the Lands, Tenements and possessions of the
Grammar School of A. B. Esquire in C. in the County of D. and did name and appoint
G. H. Presbyter, Schoolmaster, and A. B. and C. D. Guardians of the said
Lands, Tenements, and Possessions, who by virtue thereof were Schoolmaster and
Guardians of the Lands, Tenements, and Possessions of the said Grammar School,
and became and were one body Corporate and politic, both in name and thing:
And that the said School being so erected, founded and established, and the
Schoolmaster thereof, and the Guardians of the Lands, Tenements and
Possessions of the same School being a body Corporate and Politic, as
aforesaid, the said A. B. did make his last Will and Testament in Writing,
bearing date, etc. and by the same his said last Will, according to the license
of the said Queen in that behalf granted, did (among other things) give and
bequeath to J. G. the Manor of D. with the Appurtenances, in the said County
of D. for the term of 21. years, paying yearly, during the said term, the Rent
of 20 l And that the said A. B. by the same his said Will, did give and
bequeath the Reversion and Remainder thereof, with the said Rent, to the said
Schoolmaster and Guardians, To have and to hold the said Manor and the said
Rent and the Reversion thereof to them and their successors for ever, to the
intent that with the Issues and Profits thereof, they should find six poor
folks in S. in such manner as by him or his Executors should be appointed. And
that afterward, in the Term of Easter, viz. On Wednesday, being the third day
of May, in the twentieth year of the Reign of our said late Sovereign Lady,
Queen Eliz. It was (among other things) by the Right Honorable, Sir N. B.
Knight, then Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and her Majesty's Court
of Chancery (by the assent and consent of W. B. Esquire Cousin and Heir to the said
A. B. Patron of the said Grammar School) Ordered, adjudged and Decreed, That
the Statutes, Ordinances and Constitutions of and for the said Grammar School;
and of and for the relief of certain poor people within the Parish of S.
aforesaid, of the foundation of the said A. B. and Dame J. his wife, should be
made and ordered by the appointment of E. then Bishop of Exeter, or of his
Successors, and of A. N. then Dean of the Cathedral Church of St. P. in E. or
his Successors, and of the said W. B. or his Heirs, and that G. late Bishop of
E. Successor to the said E. Bishop of London, or A. B. of S. aforesaid Knight,
Cousin and Heir to the said A. B. deceased, and Cousin and Heir to the said W. B.
Esquire, and Patron of the said Grammar School, and J. D. Dean of the said
Cathedral Church of St. P. in E. by a certain Writing indented, bearing date
the 8. day of J. in the tenth year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord,
King James over this Realm of England, An. Dom. 1612. did in performance of the
said Decree, make, ordain, publish, and declare, diverse Statutes, Ordinances,
and Constitutions concerning the said Grammar School, the Schoolmaster,
Guardians, and Possessions of the same, and that they the said G. Bishop of E.
Sir A. B. the Heir of J. D. Dean of St. P. did in and by the said Writing
indented, amongst other things, by virtue of the said Decree in particular,
make, ordain, publish and declare, certain Ordinances and Constitutions
concerning the Lands, Tenements and Possessions of the said School, in these
words following: 1. Item, All Leases to be made by the said Corporation of any
their Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, being in the hands of any Farmer or
Farmers, by virtue of any old or former Lease for years, shall be utterly void,
unless the same old or former Lease for years be within 14. years expiration
of the said years by effluction of time at the making of the said new Lease,
and be surrendered within one year next after the making of the same Lease. 2.
Item, The said Corporation shall do their best endeavor for the preservation
and advancement of their Possessions, Rents and Revenues, without making or
consenting to any disherison to be had or made to the said Corporation in any
thing. 3. Item, The said Schoolmaster and Guardians shall not have any power
to do or suffer any act to the disherison of the said Corporation, without the
consent of the Bishop of E. and of the Patron for the time being: And that G.
H. late School master of the said Grammar School, and J. W. and W. C. late
Guardians of the Lands, Tenements and Possessions of the same School, by a
certain Deed indented, written in Parliament, and sealed with the common Seal
of the said Corporation, bearing date the 10. day of J. in the second year of
the Reign of his Majesty that now is, did with one assent and consent, Demise,
Grant, betake, and to Farm let unto one F. R. late of L. Gent. his Executors
and Assigns the said Manor of D. with the Appurtenances thereunto belonging,
for the term of one and twenty years, to commence from the Feast day of the
birth of our Lord God then last past before the date of the same Indenture of
Demise, at, for, and under the yearly Rent of 20 l of lawful money of England:
And the said T. W. late Schoolmaster of the said Grammar School, Successor to
the said G. H. and J. F. and G. O. Guardians of the Lands, Tenements, and
Possessions of the same School by a certain Indenture, bearing date the 8. day
of N. in the 13. year of his now Majesty's Reign, reciting the said former
Lease so made to the said F. R. as aforesaid, did Demise, Grant, set and to
Farm let, unto H. J. late of P. in the said County of D. Esquire, his Executors
and Assigns, all that the aforesaid Manor of D. with the Appurtenances,
together with all the Lands, etc. thereunto belonging, To have and to hold the
said Manor and Premises to the said H. J. his Executors. Administrators and
Assigns, from the end and expiration of the said first mentioned Indenture of
Lease, That is to say, from the Feast of the Birth of our Lord God, which shall
be in the year of our Lord God, 1642. unto the end and term of one and twenty
years from thence forth, next and immediately ensuing, and fully to be complete
and ended, for and under the yearly Rent of 50 l of lawful money of England;
and that the same last mentioned Lease or Demise was allowed of by P. L. and
Dame E. B. his Wife, as Patrons of the same School: And that the said old or
former Lease made and granted of the said Manor of D. and Premises, with the
Appurtenances by the said J. H. precedent Schoolmaster, and the said T. C. J.
W. and W. C. to the said F. R as aforesaid, was not within 14. years of
expiration of the years thereby granted by effluction of time at the making of
the said new Lease by the said T. C. J. W. and G. G. to the said H. J. as
aforesaid, neither was the same old or former Lease so made and granted to the
said F. R. by the said J. H. and J. B. as aforesaid, surrendered or otherwise
avoided within one year next after the making of the said new Lease to the said
H. J. nor at any time sithence. And that the said Manor of D. yet is, and at
the time of the making of the said Lease to the said H. J. was worth 60 l of
lawful money of England, per ann. And that the said T. C. is dead, and that T.
O. Presbyter, is now Schoolmaster of the same Grammar School of the said A. B.
Esquire in D. aforesaid: And that neither the said A. B. nor J. his Wife made any
direction, otherwise then as aforesaid, touching the Issues and Profits of the
said Manor, as by the said Inquisition hereunto annexed, relation being
thereunto had more at large, it does and may appear. Now, for as much as it
appears by the Inquisition before recited, That by the Statutes, Ordinances
and Constitutions concerning the Grammar School before mentioned, and the
Lands, Tenements, and Possessions thereof: All Leases made by the said
Corporation of any their Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, being in the hands
of any Farmer or Farmers, by virtue of any old or former Lease for years, shall
be utterly void, unless the same old or former Lease for years be within
fourteen years of expiration of the said years by effluction of time at the
making of the said new Lease, and be surrendered within one year next after the
making of the same Lease: And for that it appears likewise by the said
Inquisition, That the old or former Lease therein mentioned to be made and
granted of the Manor of D. before mentioned by the said J. H. J. F. and G. O.
to the aforesaid R. F. as aforesaid, was not within fourteen years of
expiration of the years thereby granted by effluction of time, at the making of
the said new Lease by the said T. C. J. W. G. G. to the said J. H. as
aforesaid: And that the same old or former Lease so made and granted to the
same R. F. by the said J. H. and J. F. and G. O. as aforesaid was not
surrendered, nor otherwise avoided within one year next after the making of the
said new Lease to the said R. F. or ever at any time since: And for that it
appears, and therefore the making of the said new Lease was a breach of Trust
in the said Schoolmaster and Guardians: Further also it appears by the said
Inquisition, that the said Manor and Premises so demised and granted to the
said H. J. as aforesaid, at the Rent of 50 l per ann. is worth 60 l per ann. to
be let; therefore, and for other the matters and things in the said Inquisition
appearing, the said Sir W. R. etc. being six of the Commissioners named and
authorized in and by the said Commission, upon full hearing and debating of the
matter by the Council, learned in the Laws, appearing before the said
Commissioners, as well on the behalf of T. J. Son of the said H. J. who
claims an interest in the said Manor of D. for diverse years yet to come,
under color of the Lease before mentioned, made by the said J. H. J. B. and G.
O. to the said H. J. as aforesaid, do by virtue of the said Statute and
Commission, order, adjudge and decree, that the said Lease made and granted by
the said J. A. J. B. and G. O. to the said H. J. was made contrary to the
intent of the Donor of the said Lands, and contrary to the Ordinances and
Constitutions appointed for, and concerning the said School, and the Lands,
Tenements and Possessions thereof, and is not warranted by all or any of them,
but was and is an abuse and misgovernment of the said Manor and Lands, and a
breach of Trust in the said T. O. Schoolmaster of the said Grammar School. J.
B. and G. O. Guardians of the Lands, Tenements and Possessions of the said
School, and is a great and apparent prejudice, and hinderance to the due and
faithful employment of the profits of the same, according to the intent of the
Donor, and a defrauding of a charitable Use within the said Statute, and that
the said Lease, and the said Manor and Lands, and the Indenture of Demise for
the passing of the same to the said F. R. is, and from henceforth shall be,
utterly void and of none effect. And the said Commissioners do further order,
adjudge and decree, That the said T. O. Schoolmaster, and the Guardians of the
Lands, Tenements and Possessions of the same School, for the time being, shall
and may Demise, grant, and to Farm let, the said Manor of D. in such manner as
by the same Ordinances and Constitutions concerning the said School, School
master, and the Lands, Tenements and Possessions thereof is limited, declared,
ordained and appointed: The said Lease so made of the same Manor and Lands to
F. R. aforesaid notwithstanding: And they the said Commissioners do further
order, adjudge and decree, that the said T. R. Esquire, Son of the said F. R.
shall within one Month after notice of this Decree, deliver the Indenture of
the said Lease made unto the said F. R. of the said Manor and Premises as
aforesaid, to the said T. O. or his Successors, and Guardians of the Lands,
Tenements and Possessions of the same School for the time being, to be
cancelled; and shall likewise within that time pay unto the said T. O. the sum
of 10 l of lawful money of England, for his charges and expenses, in suing out
the said Commission, and in the prosecution of the said Inquisition and this
Decree. Witness.

Directions. When a Commission is first sued out, it is good to give notice to
the Churchwardens and Overseers for the Poor of Parishes near where the
Commissioners sit, after this Manner:
The second day of May, 1610. By the Commissioners for Charitable Uses, sitting
at B. in the County of C.
Cambr.
WHereas a Commission under the Great Seal of England, bearing date at
Westminster the tenth day of January, 1610. Has been directed to diverse
persons, dwelling and inhabiting within the County aforesaid, authorizing them,
or any four or more of them, to enquire by such ways and means as in the said
Commission is mentioned, what Lands, Tenements, Rents, Annuities, Profits,
Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels, Money, and stocks of money, have been heretofore
given by any well disposed person or persons for relief of aged, impotent, and
poor people, maintenance of sick and maimed Soldier and Mariners, Schools of
Learning, Free-Schools, and Scholars of Universities, repair of Bridges,
Ports, Havens, Causways, Churches, Sea-bancks, and Highways, for Education and
Preferment of Orphans: for or toward the relief, stock, or maintenance for
houses of Correction, marriage of poor Maids, supportation, aid and help of
young Tradesmen, Handycrafts men, and persons decayed, release and redemption
of Captives, aid or case of any poor Inhabitants, concerning payment of
Fifteens, setting out of Soldiers, and other Taxes, and of the abuses, breaches
of Trust, negligences, misimployment not employing, concealing, defrauding,
misconverting, and misgovernment of the same Lands, Tenements, stocks of Money,
and other things given to any of the Charitable Uses aforesaid; and to set down
such Orders, Judgments and Decrees, as that the same Lands, Tenements, Money,
and other things, may be duly employed to and for such of the Charitable Uses
aforesaid for which they were given, limited or appointed by the Doxors and
Founders thereof. It is this day Ordered by the said Commissioners, that notice
be given to all Parishes and places within the said County of C. of the
Commission aforesaid, and the power thereby given to the said Commissioners,
that so all persons that have occasion may take the benefit of the said
Commission, and have remedy and redress thereby, and withal, that directions
be given, that such persons as do come to the said Commissioners for relief in
the Premises, do bring with them the Wills, Evidences, Charters and Writings,
whereby the Charitable Uses do appear to be given, created, limited, assigned,
and appointed, and sufficient witness to prove the breaches of Trust, not
employing, or misimployment of such things as shall be so abused, not employed
or misimployed, as aforesaid.

By T. W. Clerk, attending the said Commissioners.

Decrees.
AT R. within the said County, on Tuesday the ninth day of September, in the
one and twentieth year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles by the Grace
of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith,
etc. An. Dom. 1645. Whereas a Commission under the great Seal of England,
hearing date the eighth day of February last past, has been directed to W. C.
J. H. C. M. G. W. Esquires, and G. M. Gent. and to diverse other persons
dwelling and inhabiting within the said County, authorizing them, or any four
or more of them, to enquire by the oaths of twelve good and lawful men, or
more of the County, as by all other good and lawful ways and means of all and
singular Lands, Tenements, Rents, Annuities, Profits, Hereditaments, Goods,
Chattels, Money, and Stocks of Money heretofore given, limited, appointed and
assigned by any well disposed Person, to or for any the Charitable and Godly
uses in the said Commission mentioned, within the said County; And of the
Abuses, Breaches of Trusts, Negligences. Mis-imployments, not Employing,
Concealing, Defrauding, Mis-converting, or Mis-government of the same Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Annuities, and other things; and for the setting down such
Orders, Judgments and Decrees, as that the same Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Annuities, Profits, Goods, Chattels, Money, and Stocks of Money may be duly and
faithfully employed to and for the Charitable uses and intents, for which the
same were given, limited, assigned, and appointed by the Donors and Foundors
thereof, according to a Statute made in the three and fortieth year of the
reign of the late Queen Eliz. Entitled An Act made to redress the
Mis-imployments of Lands, Goods, and Stocks of Money heretofore given to
Charitable uses: And whereas the said W. C. J. H. C. M. and G. M. being four
of the Commissioners named and authorized in and by the said Commission meeting
for the execution thereof, at the day and place aforesaid. It was then and
there found by the oaths of J. F. R. L. etc. good and lawful men of the said
County, That one A. B. as in and by the said Inqu^sition hereunto annexed it
does and may appear, etc. Now they the said W. C. J. H. C. M. G. W. and G. M.
having heard the said T. H. and his Council touching the Premises; and being
of opinion that the gift of the said Message, Tenements and Premises by the
said A. B. in manner and form aforesaid, is a good Gift, Limitation,
Appointment, and Assignment of the same Message, Tenements, and Premises to
and for the said Charitable use within the intent of the Statute before
mentioned; And for that it appears to the said Commissioners by the said Will
and Inquisition that but only part of the Issues and Revenues of the said
Tenements and Premises were appointed by the said Will to be bestowed to the
maintenance of the superstitious uses therein mentioned, and that the value of
the money appointed for the said superstitious uses does not amount to above
twenty shillings per annum at the most; And for that it does not appear unto
the said Commissioners, that any part of the Rents and Profits of the said
Tenements and Premises were at any time within five years before the first day
of the Parliament begun, the fourth day of November one thousand five hundred
forty seven, and in the first year of the reign of King Edward the sixth late
King of England employed, paid, or bestowed to the maintenance of the said Obit
and other the superstitious uses before mentioned, or any of them; And
forasmuch as it appears by the intent of the said Will, that Feoffes ought to
be appointed successively, and the said House and Premises were to be conveyed
unto them for the more legal and faithful continuance and employment of the
Rents and Profits of the same to the Charitable use aforesaid: to the end,
intent, and purpose, therefore, that the Rents and Profits of the said Lands,
Tenements, and Premises may be duly and faithfully employed in and for the
charitable use, to and for which the same were limited, appointed, and assigned
by the Donor thereof as aforesaid; They the said W. C. J. H. C. M. and G. M. do
by virtue of the said Statute and Commission, Order and Decree that the said
T.H. the Grandchild, T.C. J. C. and all and every other person and persons now
holding, occupying, or enjoying the same Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and
Premises before mentioned, to and for the maintenance of the Charitable use
before mentioned, and every of them shall within one month next after notice of
this Decree, leave, surrender, and yield up the Possession of the said
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Premises, unto, or for the Churchwardens of
T. aforesaid, and that the said Churchwardens shall within three months next
after they shall be actually possessed of the said Lands, Tenements, and
Premises make and execute a Feoffment of the same Lands, Tenements, and
Premises to the use of themselves, and thirteen others of the Parishioners of
T. aforesaid, and their heirs in such manner as by Council learned shall be
advised and directed, to the end, intent and purpose, that the Feoffes in such
Feoffment to be named, and their heirs may stand and be seized of the same
Lands, Tenements, and Premises, upon trust and confidence that they and their
heirs shall permit and suffer the Churchwardens of the same Parish for the
time being, to receive and take the Rents and Profits of the same Premises from
time to time as the fame shall arise, become due, and payable, to and for the
reparation of the said Parish Church of S. aforesaid, as often, and when as
need shall require; and that when ten or more of the said Feoffes of the
Premises shall be dead (or before if it shall be thought expedient) the
surviving Feoffes shall make a new Feoffment of the same Premises to the use of
themselves, and of so many more of the Parishioners of T. aforesaid, as shall
make it the number of fifteen; And that that order and rule shall be observed
in all succeeding Generations; And the Commissioners aforesaid do further
order, adjudge, and decree, that the Churchwardens of T. aforesaid, for the
time being, shall upon Tuesday in the Easter week, yearly give up true and
perfect accounts in writing to the Feoffes of the Premises, or the Major part
of them in the Parish Church of T. aforesaid, of their Receipts and
Disbursements of, touching and concerning the Rents and Profits of the
Premises; And if it shall upon such account appear that any moneys are
remaining in their hands, that then the said Churchwardens so accounting,
shall within one month then next following, deliver and pay over the said
Moneys so remaining in their hands to the succeeding Churchwardens, to and for
the Charitable use before mentioned: And forasmuch as it appears unto the
said Commissioners, that the said T. H. the Grandchild has in his custody an
ancient Deed or Writing whereby the said Messuages or Tenements, and Premises
were conveyed to the said A. B. and his heirs, and likewise the Original Will
of the said A. B. whereby the Premises are demised, limited, appointed, or
assigned to and for the Charitable use before mentioned: The said Commissioners
do further order, adjudge, and decree, that the said T. H. shall within one
month after notice of this Decree, deliver un-the Churchwardens of T.
aforesaid for the time being, the said Deed and Will, and all other Deeds,
Evidences, and Writings, touching, and concerning the said Messuages,
Tenements, and Premises, or any of them, which now are, or have been in his
hands or custody, or in the hands or custody of any other person or persons, to
his use, or by his consent, or delivery at any time, sithence the death of the
said E. H. And lastly the said Commissioners do further order, adjudge, and
decree, that the said T. H. the Grandchilde, shall within one month next after
notice of this Decree, pay unto the Churchwardens of the said Parish Church of
T. for the time being the sum of twenty pounds of lawful money of England, for
the Rents and Profits of the said Messuages, Tenements, and Premises by him
received since the death of his said Father E. H. Which the said Churchwardens
are to employ and bestow in and about the repair of the said Parish Church, as
need and occasion shall be and require. In witness, whereof the Commissioners
aforesaid have hereunto set their hands and seals, the day and year above
written.

Exceptions to a Decree.
EXceptions taken by T. H. Gent. to a Decree made at R. in the County of D. on
Tuesday the ninth day of September in the year of our Lord, 1645. made by W. C.
J. H. C. M. and G. M, Commissioners, appointed and authorized by a Commission
under the great Seal of England, bearing date the eighth day of February, 1643.
directed to the said Commissioners, and to diverse other persons in the County
of D. grounded upon the Statute made in the three and fourtieth year of the
reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, Entitled, An Act made to redress
misimployments of Lands, Goods, and stocks of Money given to charitable Uses,
as follows.

WHereas it is set forth by the said Decree, that one A. B. by his Will in
Writing, bearing date the 17. day of January 1524. did Devise and bequeath a
Message or Tenement, with certain houses, and a Garden thereunto belonging,
with the Appurtenances, in T. in the said County of D. commonly called or known
by the dame of C. to A. his Wife, during her life, and after her decease, unto
the Church of T. aforesaid in these words following: Item, I Will, after my
decease, that A. my wife, have my House, called C. during her natural life,
and she to keep up the reparations of the said House, and the Lords Rent to
pay, and she to find four Tapers of four pound of Wax, that is, one before the
Rude under the Rude loft, and another before our Lady, another before St.
Thomas, and one before St. Anthony. Item, I Will that she keep mine Obit every
year during her life, and to have every year three Priests and they to have
eight pence a piece, and two dozen of bread, and a kinder kin of double Beer,
and two Cheeses, price of twenty pence. Item, I Will, and appoint after my
decease, that all and singular my Evidences, and my Copies, that they be
delivered into the custody of the Churchwardens of the Parish of Peter and Paul
of T. aforesaid. Item, I will that after the natural life of A. my Wife, that
then my House, called C. with all the Appurtenances belonging thereunto, as is
more plainly specified by my Deeds, that it shall remain evermore unto the
Church aforesaid; First, to keep mine Obit yearly, and the four Tapers of four
pounds of Wax: Moreover, I Will, that after the decease of A. my wife, that the
Churchwardens do buy six pounds of Wax, and make the common light, and the
Tapes before the Rude, to the full of two pounds of Wax a piece, and so to
continue for evermore, and the residue of the Rent to remain to the reparations
of the Church aforesaid: And whereas it is set forth by the said Decree, that
the said A. and B. and A. B. are long since dead, and that T. H. Esquire,
deceased, on or about the six and twentieth day of January, in the thirtieth
year of the reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, did enter into the said Message
and Premises, called C. and was possessed thereof, and during his life, took
the Rents and profits thereof, paying only five Nobles per ann. out of the
Rents and profits of the same Message and Premises to the Churchwardens and
Church of T. to the charitable use aforesaid; and that E. H. Esquire deceased, son
of the said T. also entered upon the Premises, and paid the five Nobles a year
as abovesaid, until about twelve years last past, at which time the said E. H.
refused to pay it, and that the same premises is now divided into several
Tenements and that since the death of the said E. H. who died about two years
before the Decree; the said Exceptant, T. H. Son and Heir of the said E. H.
came to the said Message and Premises called C. as Son and Heir to the said
E. H. And the said Commissioners have ordered, that the said Exceptant, T. H.
and his Tenants, should surrender and yield up the Possession of the said
Message and Premises, unto the Churchwardens of T. aforesaid, and to deliver
up the Deeds and Evidences of the same Premises, and to pay unto the said
Churchwardens the sum of twenty pounds, to be employed for the repairs of the
said Church; Unto which Decree, this Exceptant, T. H. does except, and
conceives, and is advised by his Counsel, that he is not, nor ought to be bound
by the said Decree and Order made by the said Commissioners as aforesaid, for
the Causes and Reasons hereafter following.

And first, For that it appears by an ancient Deed of Feoffment, bearing date
the two and twentieh day of June, in the tenth year of the Reign of the late
King Henry the eighth, that one J. K. and J. his wife, W. F. W. T. J. S. and R.
M. did grant and confirm unto the before named A. B. R. F. R. F. and J. R. to
the use of the said A. B. and his Heirs and Assigns forever, all that the
Message, with the buildings, gardens and Appurtenances, called C. situate,
lying and being in T. in the County of D. between, etc. as by the said Deed of
Feoffment ready to be produced, may appear, Which said last mentioned Message
and Premises, called C. is not the Message, Lands and Premises in the
occupation of this Exceptant and his Tenants, and which are charged and decreed
to the charitable use by the said Commissioners, as aforesaid; For this
Exceptant says, that the aforesaid Message or Tenement, called C. so conveyed
by the last mentioned Deed of Feoffment to A. B. as aforesaid, was held of the
Manor of G. in the said County of D. by fealty, suit of Court, and the yearly
Rent of two shillings eight pence per ann. as by the Surveys and Records of the
said Manor may appear, which said Message and Premises afterward came to be
the Inheritance of one R. E. and was then called by the name of C. otherwise E.
Hall. And this Exceptant further says, that the said R. E. being seized in Fee
of the said Message and Premises, did upon or about the twelfth day of
November, in the eighth year of the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth,
acknowledge a Statute of one hundred and fifty pounds unto one T. O. for the
payment of the sum of one hundred and sixteen pounds at a day shortly after,
which was not paid, which Statute was extended about the tenth day of April, in
the fourteenth year of the Reign of the said late Queen Elizabeth, upon the
said Message and Premises, which was aftewards assigned over unto T. H. this
Exceptants Grandfather, upon or about the five and twentieth day of January, in
the fourteenth year of the Reign of the said late Queen Elizabeth. And it
appears by the said Extent, that the said R. E. had sold the said Message
and Premises, unto one S. F. and his Heirs by Deed, bearing date upon or about
the twentieth day of June, in the twentieth year of the Reign of the said late
Queen Elizabeth: And this Exceptant says, that the said T. H. this Exceptants
Grandfather, having the said Premises so in Extent, and the same being but of
small value, and the money that was owing thereupon being more worth then the
said Message and Premises, he did by his Deed, bearing date upon or about the
five and twentieth day of January, in the thirteenth year of the Reign of the
late Queen Elizabeth, grant to several Trustees, one Annuity or yearly Rent of
forty six shillings eight pence to be issuing and going out of the said
Message, called C. to be employed for the repairs of the Parish Church of T.
aforesaid, which said sum of forty six shillings and eight pence is the seven
Nobles mentioned in the said Decree. And this Exceptant says, that when the
said Extent is ended, the inheritance of the said Message and Premises will
come unto T. F. Son and Heir of S. F. deceased, as by an Office after the
decease of the said S. F. found at L. the three and twentieth day of November
in the four and fourtieth year of the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth may
appear; which said Massuage and Premises last before mentioned, if any at all
ought only to be charged with the said charitable use and none other.

The second Exception.
And secondly, This Exceptant says, that the Message and Premises in the
Decree mentioned to be in this Exceptants occupation, and the other Messuages
and Premises therein mentioned to be in the occupation of him; this Exceptant
and his Tenants are not the Messuages and Lands given to the said charitable
use, nor ought not to be charged therewith; for this Exceptant says, that the
late King Edward the sixth, by his betters Patents under the great Seal of
England, bearing date the tenth day of April, in the third year of his Reign,
did amongst other things, give and grant unto one R. W. and W. P. and their
Heirs, all that his Message or Tenement called C. and all Lands, Meadows,
Pastures, Feedings and Hereditaments whatsover thereunto belonging, then or
late in the occupation of N. P. to hold of the said King as of his Manor of C.
in the County of D. in Fee-socage, and not in Capite, for all Rents, Services
and demands whatsoever. And this Exceptant says, that the said Message,
called C. alias E. Hall, charged and given to the said charitable use, is held
of the said Manor of G. by fealty, suit of Court, and the yearly Rent of two
shillings and eight pence, as is herein before mentioned, and therefore the
same is differenced and plainly distinguished from the said Message and
Premises, called C. in the possession of this Exceptant and his Tenants: And
this Exceptant further says, that afterward, that is to say, the nine and
twentieth day of April, in the third year of the Reign of the said late King
Edward the sixth, the said R. W. and W. P. did by Deed of Feoffment, and by
other good Conveyances and Assurance in the Law, convey and assure the
aforesaid last mentioned Message, called C. (amongst other things) to W. C.
and J. W. and their Heirs, and afterward G. C. Son and Heir of the said W. C.
who had the said last mentioned Message, called C. by survivorship, did by his
Indenture of Bargain and Sale, enrolled in Chancery, dated the thirteenth day
of October, in the twelfth year of the late Queen Elizabeth, bargain and sell
the said last mentioned Message, called C. amongst other things, to W. L. and
his Heirs, and afterward the said W. did by his Deed indented, enrolled in
Chancery, dated the tenth of July, in the thirteenth year of the Reign of the
late Queen Elizabeth, convey and assure the said last mentioned Message,
called C. unto T. H. and his Heirs, which said T. H. was Grandfather of this
Exceptant, and the same is by descent, and other good Conveyance and Assurance
in the Law, lawfully vested and come unto this Exceptant, and he now is
lawfully seized thereof, and ought to hold and enjoy the same, free from the
said charitable use.

The third Exception.
And thirdly, This Exceptant says, that the said T. H. his Grandfather, at the
time of his purchase of the said last mentioned Message, called C. had no
notice of the said charitable use, and if the said Message were charged, or
chargeable therewith, or liable thereunto, as in truth it is not, yet ought the
same not to be charged therewith; For that by the said Statute made in the
three and fourtieth year of the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, made for
charitable uses, it is provided and ordained, that no Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments given or appointed to any charitable uses shall be impeached by
any Decrees or Orders of Commissioners for charitable uses, the Purchasers
having no notice of the said charitable uses.

The fourth Exception.
And fourthly, This Exceptant says, that if it were true, as in truth it is
not, That the said last mentioned Messuages, called C. were charged, or
chargeable with the said charitable use, yet ought not the said Order or Decree
made by the said Commissioners any ways to impeach or charge the said Message
or Premises with the said charitable use, or any ways to deprive this Exceptant
thereof; For that by the said Statute, made in the three and fourtieth year of
the Reign of the said late Queen Elizabeth, It is Enacted, that the said Act
for charitable uses, shall not extend to give power and authority to any
Commissioners for charitable uses, to make any Order, Judgment or Decrees, for
or concerning any Manors, Lands, Tenements, or other Hereditaments, assured,
conveyed, granted, or come unto the Queens Majesty, the late King Henry the
eighth, King Edward the sixth, or Queen Mary by Act of Parliament, surrender,
exchange, relinquishment, Escheat. Attainder, Conveyance, or otherwise. And
forasmuch as it appears that the said Message and Premises last before
mentioned, called C. was by the said late King Edward 6. by his Leters Patents,
dated the eighth day of April, in the third year of his Reign, granted (amongst
other things) unto the said R. W. and W. P. and their Heirs, as is herein
before mentioned; And therefore, if the same had been any ways given to the
said charitable use, as in truth it was not, yet ought the same now to be free
from the same by force and virtue of the said Act of Parliament.

The fifth Exception.
And fifthly, This Exceptant says, that the said Commission grounded upon the
said Statute to the said Commissioners directed, in pursuance whereof they made
their Decree, is not returned into this Honorable Court into the Office of the
Petty-bag, as it ought to be; for all which Causes, this Exceptant does humbly
pray the said Order and Decree may be reversed and made void, and his said
Message and Premises may be freed from the same; And that this Exceptant may
be dismissed with his reasonable costs and charges in this behalf wrongfully
sustained.

Answers to Exceptions.
The Answer of J. L. and S. W. Churchwardens of G. T. in the County of D.
Respondants to the Exceptions of T. H. Gent. by him taken, to the Decree in the
said Exceptions mentioned.

WHereas the said Exceptant does except to and against the said Decree, for
that the Message or Tenement, called C. given by the Will of A. B. therein
named, to the charitable use therein specified, are not the Message, Tenement
and Lands in the occupation of the said Exceptant and his Tenants, and which
are charged and Decreed to the said charitable use: And also for that the
Exceptants Grandfather T. H. therein named, had at the time of his Purchase of
the Premises in the occupation of him and his Tenants, no notice of the said
charitable use; and that the said Premises were heretofore conveyed by Letters
Patents from King Edward the sixth: And lastly, for that the Commission
directed to the Commissioners in the said Decree named, wherein they made the
said Decree, was not returned into this Court at the time of the said Exception
unto which Exceptions, these Respondents saving unto themselves all advantages
of Exception to the incertainties and insufficiencies thereof, say, That they
are upon the matter, strangers to the matters set forth by the said Exceptions,
having not lived very long in the said Parish, and being no otherwise concerned
then as Churchwardens thereof; and it cannot be presumed they should know the
facts and titles alleged by the said Exceptions of their own knowledge. But
they say, that the said Exceptant was several times summoned and heard before
the Commissioners that made the said Decree, and the Jury by them impannelled;
And he brought his Learned Counsel with him, who urged before the said Jury and
Commissioners, who were learned in the Law, and good and honest men, before
their Verdict given, or Decree made, the substance and matter of the said
Exception, and what ever could be alleged against the decreeing of the
Premises, and the same Decree was made upon a full hearing of both sides. And
one of the main points insisted on before the said Jury and Commissioners, was
the matter of the aforesaid first two Exceptions, whether the Premises decreed
to be charged with the charitable use, were the Message, Tenement, and Lands
given by the said Will, yea or no, it being a proper issue for a Jury of
parcel, or no parcel, the same Premises in the occupation of the Exceptant were
after a full and deliberate hearing and evidence on both sides found by the
said Jury to be the same Tenements and Lands devised by the said Will. And the
matter of the said two next Exceptions, Whether the said Exceptants Grandfather
had notice of the charitable use before, or at his Purchase of the Premises, or
that the Premises were in the Crown, yea, or no, being also proper for a Jury,
were likewise upon the like evidence then given, found by the said Jury for the
said Parish against the said Exceptant. And these Respondents verily believe,
the said Exceptant cannot but be satisfied with the said Verdict and Decree,
and does trouble these Respondents and the said Parish, only to drive them to
some composition or low terms of agreement: And in particular, these
Respondents say, that they doubt not to make it appear by several particulars,
and parcels of evidences and pleadings, and proofs in several Courts (if this
Honorable Court should now think fit to put them thereunto after the said
Deliberation and Verdict) that the Premises charged with the said charitable
use, are the same that were charged and devised by the said Will, and that the
Purchaser (if he was one) had and could not but have and take notice before,
and at the time of his Purchase: And likewise say, that the said King Edward
the sixth, or his father, Henry the 8th, Queen Mary, or Queen Elizabeth, or
either of them, were not at any time seized or entitled to be seized of the
Premises, or any part thereof; and if the said King Edward the sixth made such
Grant as aforesaid, the same was not of these self-same Premises, but of other
Tenements; and if it were, the said King had no seisin or Inheritance of or in
the said Lands, or right so to grant the same, nor does the said Grant, if any
such be, prejudice the charitable use, as the Respondents are advised. And
these Respondents further say, that they are informed, the said Commission is
returned into this Court, and there remains of Record: Wherefore these
Respondents humbly pray the said Decree may stand ratified and confirmed, and
the said Decree and charitable Use may be performed, and these Respondents
discharged with their costs in this behalf most wrongfully sustained.

THE TABLE.
THe Statute of 43. Elizabeth, of charitable uses. Page 1 The heads of the said
Statute, 10 A Warrant to call the parties Defendants, to appear before the
Commissioners. 17 A Warrant to the Sheriff to return a Jury. 19 The Oath af the
Jury. 20 Direction for expediting Inquisitions and Decrees. 21 An Inquisition
whereby money is appointed to be paid yearly out of Copiheld Lands. 22 A Decree
upon that Inquisition. 43 An Inquisition wherein Lands are found to be given to
a Church for charitable uses. 27 An Inquisition upon a Gift of Lands for repair
of a Church, and repair of Highways. page 29 An Inquisition upon a Will for
building of an Almshouse. 111 An Inquisition upon a Gift of Land given to a
Free School. 115 A Decree upon the Inquisition in the seven and twentieth page.
130 Eexceptions to a Decree. 137 The Answer to those Exceptions. 148 A Decree
wheren forty shillings per annum given out of Copihold Lands is Decreed, in
which the Inquisition is recited. 45 Winsor and Hiltons Case in Michael. Term,
1626. 55 Six Questions resolved in Michaelmas Term, the four and fourtieth of
Elizab. by Egerton, Popham, Anderson and Coke. 57 East-Greensteds Case in
Trinity, in 9. Caroli. 60 The poor of Waltham Stows Case, in 4. Caroli. 64 The
Inhabitants of East-Greensteds Case. in Mich. Term, in 10. Carol. 67 The Case
of Sutton Colfield in Com. Warwick, in Hill. 11. Caroli. 69 The Mayor of
Morpeths Case, in 5. Caroli. 72 The Case of the Inhabitants of Woodford in
Essex, in Hill. in 14. Caroli. 74 The Case of Heming Hastings in Warwickshire,
in 6. Jacobi. 86 The School of Thetfords Case upon a Bill exhibited in
Parliament, in 8. Jacobi. 78 Dame Billingsleys Case, in 12. Jacobi. 80
Collinsons Case, in 15. Jacobi. 81 Sir Thomas Middletons Case, in 1617. 82
Rivets Case, in 15. Jacobi. 83 Barnard Hidd's Case. 87 The Case between Plat
and the Master and Fellows of St. John's College in Cambridge, in Mich. 14
Caroli. 89 Jesus College Case in the Court of Wards referred to the Judges in
13. Jacobi. 91 The Lord Edward Mountagues Case in the Court of Wards, in 17.
Jacobi. 92 Seymor against the poor of Twyford Trinity 1634. 93 The Poor of
East-Greenstead against Howard, in 8. and 10. Caroli. 94 Hungate on the part of
the Inhabitants of Herborne in 3. Caroli. 94 Steward against Germyn, in 41.
Elizab. 95 Hellams Case, in 5. Caroli. 95 The School of Rigbyes Case, in 2.
Caroli. 96 Hensons Case, in 41. Eliz. 97 Wingfields Case, in 4. Caroli. 97
Goffe against Web, in 44. Eliz. 97 Champion against Smith, in 3. Jacobi 98
Stoddards Case, in 20. Jacobi. 98 The Case of the Mayor and Burgess of Redding
against Lane, in 43. Eliz. 99 The Mayor of Bristol against Whitton, in 8. and
9. Caroli. 100 The Case between Fisher and Hills, in 10. Jacobi. ibid. Peacock
against Thewer in Mich. 14. Caroli. 100 Pennington against Jennys, in 2.
Caroli. 101 Pember against the Inhabitants of Kingston, in Trin. 15. Caroli.
ibid. Penstred against Panyer, in Trin. 15. Caroli. 102 Bramble against the
poor of Havering, in Trin. 15. Caroli. ibid. The Mayor of Londons Case. 103 The
Poor of Chelmsfords Case in Michaelmas Term. 1644. 103 The Cause where Tenant
in Capite Devised all his Lands to charitable uses. 107
FINIS.

