RESPONDET PETRVS: OR, The ANSWER of PETER HEYLYN D. D. To so much of Dr.
Bernard's Book Entitled, The Judgment of the late Primate of Ireland, etc. As
he is made a Party to by the said Lord Primate in the Point of the SABBATH, And
by the said DOCTOR in some others. To which is added AN APPENDIX In Answer to
certain Passages in Mr Sandersons HISTORY of the Life and Reign of K. CHARLES,
Relating to The Lord PRIMATE, The ARTICLES of Ireland, And the EARL of
Strafford, In which the RESPONDENT is concerned.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivy-lane, and R. Marriot in S.
Dunstans Churchyard, Fleet Street. M DC LVIII.

THE AUTHORS PREFACE To the Reader.
IT was upon the 2. of January that Doctor Bernards Book entitled The judgment
of the late Primate of Ireland, etc. came to me from a friend in London, which
I had no sooner caused to be read over to me, but I looked upon it as the most
unwelcome New-years-gift that could have been sent me from an enemy. So far I
found my self concerned in it, that without a manifest betraying of my Fame and
Innocence, I was not to defer my Answer, notwithstanding all the difficulties
which appeared before me. I considered of my own unfitness to enter into new
disputes, having so little use of my eyes and hands for such employments; the
eminence of the name which I was to deal with in reference to whom I could be
looked upon no otherwise then as a Grasshopper compared with the son, of Anak;
and finally the disagreeableness of some part of the subject to the complexion
and temper of the present times. But on the other side, that saying of S.
Hierom, Se nolle quenquam in suspicione Haereseos silentem esse, That he would
have no man hold his peace when suspected of Heresy, over-ballanc'd all. And
in this Book of Doctor Bernards I found my self accused of Heterodoxie at the
least, if not of Heresy, reproacht with violating my subscription, and running
cross unto the public Doctrines of the Church of England in the Book of
Homilies. Reproaches not to be endured but by guilty persons, such as sink under
the calamity of an (...) or self-conviction. So that being forced upon an
answer, I was resolved to make it as speedy as I could before prejudice and
prepossessions had made too strong a head against me in the minds of men. I
never loved to have such work stick long in my fingers; and therefore
notwithstanding the extremity of the season and the tyranny of a Quartan Ague
under which I languished, I gave it such a quick dispatch that it might easily
have been published by the middle of the Term then following. But contrary to my
expectation it met with so many rubs between the Pen and the Press, that the
Term was past before it could be undertaken; And then the undertakers were not
willing to make too much haste, a dead vacation being held to be no fit time to
quicken and give life to the sale of new books, not extremely popular.

But to say truth, what I have lost one way by these delays, I have gained in
another: For by this means I have had the opportunity of seeing my self abused,
and reprochfully handled in the late History of the Life and Reign of King
Charles; the Author whereof has been entertained by Doctor Bernard as a
soldier of Fortune to undertake this Pen-combat for him, though he would
rather be supposed to serve under the Lord Primates Colors, as the nobler
General. But serve he under whom he will, it is all one to me, who am designed to
bear the blows, not made the gentler by the Name and Reputation of the party
who engaged him in it. The best is, that he has not found me unprovided for my
own defense, and if he chance to fall back with some loss of Honor, he must
blame himself. It has been always my desire not to die in debt, and therefore
I have paid this Creditor with an answer also. For though I know well that
neglected calumnies are of least continuance, Convicia spreta exolescunt, as it
is in Tacitus: yet this is to be understood of such common fames as pass upon
the breath of rumor, and are taken up on hearsay only, or from short-lived
Pamphlets; not of such calumnies as are enrolled upon Record, or pass into the
body of a public History. If contumelies of this nature were to go unanswered,
the party wronged must live defamed, and die remediless; a scorn unto the
present times, and a perpetual ignominy to the ages following. To prevent
which, I have taken the best course I could to right my self against all
opponents, to let both Doctor Bernard, and this fresh Adventurer understand the
hazard which they so wilfully run into by provoking an unwilling Adversary, who
was resolved never to have looked back upon those Disputes, which formerly had
too much exercised both his Pen and Patience. But being what is past cannot be
recalled, we must all submit our selves and our performances to the Readers
judgment, who I desire may be impartial and unbiassed on either side, that so
the truth only may obtain the victory, and let the people shout and say with
them in Esdras, Magna est veritas and praevalet, that is to say, Great is truth
and mighty above all things, 1 Esdr. c. 4. v. 41.

From Lacies Court in Abingdon, March 18. 1657.
RESPONDET PETRVS, Or the Answer of PETER HEYLYN, D. D. TO So much of Doctor
BERNARDS Book entitled The Judgment of the late Primate of Ireland, etc.
SECT. I.
The privileges of the dead infringed by Dr. Bernard; The Answerer drawn
unwillingly to this encounter. The occasion and necessity of it. The Fathers
generally declared against the morality of the Sabbath. The day of worship not
transferred from the seventh day of the Week to the first by Christ our
Savior, as the Lord Primate seems to make it. The word Sabbatum not used to
signisie the Lords Day, by the Ancient Writers. The Lord Primates great mistake
in the meaning of Sidonius Apollinaris. Sabbatarius Luxus, what it was, and of
the riotous feastings of the Jews on the Sabbath day. The Lords day vulgarly
(though but lately) called the Sabbath by the artifice of the Sabbatarians,
contrary to the known meaning of the word Sabbatum in the Latin tongue.

IT was a pious wish of Tacitus, that renouned Historian, when he had brought
Agricola to the funeral Pile, ut in loco Piorum manibus destinato placide
quiescat, Tacit. in vit. Agric.
that he might rest without disturbance in the place appointed for the souls of
virtuous persons. Thus Dido with like piety prayed, ut senis Anchisae molliter
ossa cubent; In Epist. ad Aenae.
that the bones of old Anchises might rest in peace; and King Josia gave
command, that the Bones of the Prophet which prophesied against the Altar of
Bethel, should not be removed. 2 Kings 23. 18.
In which respect the grave is called by Tertullian, Asylum Mortis, Tertul.
Apolog.
the Sanctuary of the dead; and great complaint is by him made, that the
privileges of that Sanctuary were infringed by the Gentiles, and the bodies of
dead Christians most barbarously ravished by them, de requie Sepulturae, from
the resting places of the grave. A thing so odious in it self, and to all
mankind, that grievous punishments have been inflicted, even by Heathen
Emperors, upon offenders of this nature; Et certe gravissimae poenae in
Sepulcrorum violatores vel ab ipsis Ethnicis Imperatoribus statu^ae sunt* as
Pamelius notes upon the place. In this respect also sollicitare umbras* as
Manilius has it, to disturb the spirits of the dead, and sorce them by Charms
and Incantations from the place of their repose and rest, to the end that we or
others may ask counsel of them, has been always held for execrable, both by
God and man. For that this is a trouble and disturbance to them, appears
plainly by the passionate words which Samuel spoke to Saul, saying, Cu^
inquietasti me? why have 1 Samuel 28. 15.
thou disquieted me, and brought me up? that is to say, disquieted my spirit,
and brought up my body by the Charms and Sorceries of this accursed woman, the
Witch of Endor. The crime is prohibited by God himself in the Book of
Deuteronomy, Let Deuteronomy. 18. 11.
none be found amongst you that is a Charmer, or that counsels with spirits,
aut qui quaerit a mortuis veritatem, or that asks counsel of the dead, a
Necromancer, as we read in our last Translation. The criminal Party, by the Law
of Moses* to be stoned to death, Levit. 20. 27. nor were less punishments
inflicted on them by the Laws Imperial, though differing in the kind of death
which was ordained by God in the Law of Moses; it being ordered by the Edict of
the Emperor Constantine, that such as were guilty of this crime, as of all
other kinds of Witchcraft (though otherwise privileged by their birth, from
all sorts of tortures) tormenta and cruciatas non fugerent, should first be put
upon the Rack, and endure several sorts of torments, and then be broken on the
Wheel, and there end their miseries; for which see the Codex. 1. 9. Ad Taurum.

Which passages, had they been seriously considered by Doctor Bernard, as they
should have been, he would not have offered the Lord Primate, his deceased
Patron, so great an injury, as to force him from the place of Repose, and
disturb his Rest, that either he or any others might ask counsel of, or receive
it from him; to bring him back upon the Stage, from whence he had made his Exit
with a general Plaudite; especially to bring him back to so ill a purpose, as
either to begin new Controversies, or revive the old: His memory (by this
means) must needs become less precious then before it was, with all knowing
men, whom either in the point of Episcopacy, or in that of Universal Redemption
by the death of Christ, or in the Doctrine of the Sabbath, or finally in
defense of the Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies of the Church of England (to which
the Doctors Book declares him to be no great friend) he has made his
Adversaries. I know well how unworthy a thing it is to rake into the graves of
men deceased, and (like Vultures) to prey on dead bodies; and that of all
combats, there is none more fruitless and ignoble, then that which the Greeks
call, (...), to fight with shadows. But if the dead be made to speak, and by
writings published in their names, shall disturb the Church, and send out
Chartels of desiance to particular men (to my self for one) it is all the
reason in the world, that their writings should be called to an account, though
their persons cannot; and that the parties so defied should stand upon their
guard, and defend themselves, and use all honest Arts and Means for conjuring
down a spirit so unhappily raised. No man of courage will be frighted with an
Apparition, or terrified with the Ghost or Shadow (for the word Vmbra takes in
both) of the greatest Clerk. But much more reason is there for it, when the
dead are not only made to speak* but to give ill language, to tax a modest man
with Sophistry and Shamelessness, and I know not what; reproaches not to be
endured with patience from the dead or living. A worm if trod upon, will turn
again, as the Proverb is; and seeing I may say in the Psalmists language, that
I am a Worm and no Man, I hope I shall not be condemned if I turn again; and
rather choose to plead not guilty to the whole Indictment, then by a wilful
standing mute, to betray both my own fame, and the cause together; let the
worst come that can befall me, it will be thought no discredit to me, to be
vanquished by so great an Adversary; whom to contend with, is an honor, and to
be overcome by him would be no disgrace, should it so fall out: so that I may
affirm with him in Ovid, and perhaps more justly then he did,

-- Nec tam Turpe mihi vinci est, quam contendisse decorum. For I must needs
say that the Doctor has engaged me with a Noble Adversary, who by his
indefatigable industry, and unwearied studies, had made himself the Master of
as great a Treasury, both of Divine and Humane Learning, as any man living in
this last age could pretend unto; and which is more, he had it all ready at
command, by the benefit of an excellent memory: but no Abilities not governed
by an infallible Spirit can exempt a man from being many ways obnoxious to
mistakes and errors (the common incidences to humane frailty) men of the
greatest eminence in point of learning, being as subject thereunto as those of
weaker parts, and less reputation. Tertullian, Cyprian, Origin, and Lactantius,
(...), men of renown for Learning in the Primitive times, shall attest to this,
as in the general Rule or Thesis; but whether it will hold good also in the
application, the matter in dispute before us, the event must show. The matter
in dispute occasioned by publishing certain Letters of the late Lord Primate,
in which he excepteth against some passages in a Book of mine, entitled, The
History of the Sabbath, and signified those exceptions to some special friends;
that is to say, to Doctor Twisse of Newberry, Mr. Ley of Badworth,
Presbyterians both, and to an Honorable Friend not named, but like to be of
the same stamp with the other two. The Letters writ many years ago, Anno 1640
and writ with no intent (as I verily think) to have been published; but lately
published howsoever by Doctor Bernard of Grayes Inn, and published to no other
purpose, for ought I can find, but to engage me in this necessary, but unequal
Duel. The passages excepted against are but five in number, in which I am
concerned by name, and but one more, or two at the most, in which I am
interessed on the By. And of those five, there is but one material, and of any
consequence in the main concernments of the Cause; the other four being either
extrinsecal, or of less importance, more then to show that nothing in that
History, which was found liable to exception, should escape uncensured.
Assuredly it had been a work more proper for so great an Antiquary, a man so
verst and studied in all parts of Learning, to have returned a full and
complete Answer to that History, had he found it answerable; then to except
against some few passages in it of no greater moment; and by so doing to
justify and confirm the Author in all the rest. Exceptio firmat regulam in non
exceptis, is a good old rule, and which I might crave leave to use to my best
advantage; but that I am resolved to try my fortune, and make good those
passages against which the Lord Primate has excepted. To the defense whereof
(with all due reverence to his Name and Memory) I shall now proceed. Noster
duorum eventus ostendat utra gens sit melior.

And first the Lord Primate tells us this, that when he gave himself to the
reading of the Fathers, he took no heed unto any thing that concerned this
Argument, as little dreaming that any such Controversy would have arisen
amongst us, p. 74. And I concur with him in words, though perhaps not in
meaning also; there being none who reads the Fathers with care and caution, who
can suppose that any Controversy should arise about the Sabbath, against the
morality whereof the Fathers generally declare upon all occasions. The Lord
Primate tells us of Saint Augustine, page 75. That purposely selecting those
things which appertained unto us Christians, he does wholly pretermit that
Precept in the recital of the Commandments of the Decalogue. To which Testimony
(though this alone may seem sufficient to confirm the point) I shall add some
more. And first the said Saint Augustine tells us, that it is no part of the
Moral Law; for he divides the Law of Moses into these two parts, viz.
Sacraments and Moral Duties, accounting Circumcision, the New Moons, Sabbaths,
and the Sacrifices, to appertain unto the first; ad mores autem, Non occides,
etc. and these Commandments, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not commit
Adultery, and the rest to be contained within the second. The like says
Chrysostom, that this Commandment is not any of those, (...), which naturally
were implanted in us, or Andriant. 12. Tom. 6.
made known unto our conscience; (...), but that it was temporary, and
occasional, and such as was to have an end, where all the rest were necessary
and perpetual. Tertullian also in his Treatise against the Jews says, that it
Contra Judaeos.
was not Spirituale and aeternum Mandatum, sed temporale, quod quandoque
cessaret, not a spiritual and eternal institution, but a temporal only.
Finally, to ascend no higher, Justine Martyr Dial. cum Try^hone.
more expressly in his Dispute with Trypho a learned Jew, maintains the Sabbath
to be only a Mosaical Ordinance; and that it was imposed upon the Israelites,
(...), (...), because of their hard-heartedness and irregularity. And as for
the Lords day which succeeded in the place thereof, the Fathers generally think
no otherwise of it, then as an Ecclesiastical Institution, not founded upon any
precept, either of Christ or his Apostles, but built perhaps upon some
Apostolical practice, which gave the Church authority to change the day, and to
translate it from the Seventh on which God rested, to the First day of the
week, the day of our Saviors Resurrection.

And though the Lord Primate, to gain unto the Lords day the Reputation of
having somewhat in it of Divine Institution, ascribes the alteration of the day
to our Lord and Savior, page 76. yet neither the Author whom he cites, nor the
Authority by him cited will evince the point. And first, the Author will not do
it; the Homily De Semente, out of which the following proof is taken, being
supposed by the Learned not to have been writ by Athanasius, but put into his
Works as his, by some that had a mind to entitle him to it; as generally all
the Works of the Ancient Fathers have many supposititious writings intermingled
with them. Secondly, the Authority or Words cited will not do it neither,
though at first sight they seem to come home to make proof thereof. The words
are these, (...), that is to say, the Lord translated the Sabbath from the
seventh day of the week, to the Lords day, or first day of the week. Which
words are to be understood, not as if done by his Commandment, but on his
occasion; the Resurrection of our Lord upon that day, being the principal
motive, which did induce his Church to make choice thereof for a day of
Worship. For otherwise the false Athanasius, whosoever he was, must cross and
contradict the true, who having told us, that it was commanded at the first,
that the Sabbath should be observed ((...), as his own words are) in memory of
the accomplishment of the worlds Creation; ascribes the institution of the
Lords day to the voluntary usage of the Church of God, without any Commandment
from our Savior, (...), etc. We celebrate, says he, the Lords day, as a
memorial of the beginning of a new Creation, which is plain enough.

In the next place it is acknowledged by the Lord Primate, That generally the
word Sabbatum, in the writings of the Fathers, does denote our Saturday, p. 74.
Which notwithstanding, either because it was affirmed by the Historian, History
of the Sabbath, Part 2. Chap. 2. Number. 12. that the word Sabbatum was not used
to signify the Lords day by any approved Writer, for the space of a thousand
years and upward; or not to leave the Sabbatarian Brethren at so great a loss
in that particular, he would fain find out one (though but one of a thousand)
who has used it to denote our Christian Festivities also. Where not that the
Lord Primate does not say (as indeed he could not) that the word Sabbatum was
used to signify the Lords day, but only to signify the other Festivals of
the Church, the Christian Festivities, as he calls them, in which how much he
is mistaken we shall see anon. That one here meant and mentioned is Sidonius
Apollinaris Bishop of Auvergne in France, who describing the moderation of the
Table of Theoderick King of the Goths upon the Eves, and the excess on the
Holy Day following; he Lib. 1. Epist. 2.
writes of the one, that his Convivium diebus profestis simile privato est,
that his Table on the working-dayes was furnished like the Table of private
men; but of the other days, or Festivals, he tells us this, De luxu autem
illo Sabbatario narrationi m^ae supersedendum est, qui nec latentes potest
latere personas, that is to say, that his excess, or Sabbatarian luxury
required not to be spoken of, because it could not be concealed from those who
lived most retiredly. If either the Lord Primate, or Sirmondus the Jesuit
could infer from hence, that the word Sabbatum was used by Apollinaris, to
signify, or denote our Christian Festivities, much less the Sunday, or Lords
day, I shall miss my mark. They say, it is a sign of ill luck for a man to
stumble at the threshold, and never was such a stumble made by a man of
learning, in the first beginning of a work: for clearly Sabbatarius luxus,
relates not to the Lords day, nor the other Festivals, but is there used
proverbially, to signify that excess and riot which that King used at his
Table on the days aforesaid. The proverb borrowed from the Jews, and the
riotous feastings on the Sabbath. Its true, the Jews did commonly fast till
noon upon their Sabbath, till the devotions of the morning were complete and
ended; on which account they tax the Disciples of our Savior, for eating a few
ears of Corn on the Sabbath day, Matthew. 12. 2. but then it is as true withal,
that they spent all the rest of the day in their riotous feastings, not only
with plenty of good cheer, but excess of wine. In which regard, whereas all
other marketing was unlawful on the Sabbath days, there never was restraint of
selling Wine: the Jews believing that therein they brake no Commandment,
Hebraei faciunt aliquid speciale in vino, viz. quod cum in Sabbato suo a
caeteris venditionibus and emptionibus cessent, solum vinum vendunt, credentes
se non solvere Sabbatum, as Tostatus has it. Tostatus in Exodus 12.
And for the rest of their excesses Saint Augustine tells us, that they kept
the Sabbath only, ad luxuriam and ebrietatem, Tract. in Joan.
in rioting and drunkenness, and that they rested only, ad nugas and luxurias
suas, De 10. Cordis cap. 3. In Psalm. 91.
to luxury and wantonness; they consumed the day, languido and luxurioso otio,
in an effeminate slothful ease: and finally, did abuse the same, not only
deli^iis Judaicis, In Psalm. 23.
in Jewish follies, but ad nequitiam, even to sin and naughtiness. Put
altogether, and we have luxury and drunkenness, and sports, and pleasures;
enough to manifest that they spared not any dainties to set forth their
Sabbath. Tertullian has observed the same, but in fewer words, according to
his wonted manner, who speaking of the Jews in his Apologeticum adversus
Gentes, Cap. 16. has told us of them, that they did Diem Saturni otio and
victui decernere, devote the Saturday, or Sabbath, unto Ease and Luxury. But
before either of them this was noted by Plutarch also, an Heathen, but a great
and grave Philosopher, who lays it to their charge, that they did feast it on
their Sabbath with no small excess, but of wine especially; and thereupon
conjectureth, that the name of Sabbath had its original from the Orgies, or
feasts of Bacchus, whose Priest used often to ingeminate the word Sabbi, Sabbi,
in their drunken ceremonies. From whence we have the word (...), which
signifies to triumph, dance, or make glad the countenance. And from hence also
came (...), the surname of Bacchus, or at the least some Son of his mentioned
in Coelius Rhodiginus, as is observed by Dr. Prideaux in his Tract De Sabbato.
This said, the meaning of Apollinaris will be only this, that though
Theoderick kept a spare Table on the other days, yet on the Festivals of the
Church, he indulged unto himself a kind of Sabbatarian luxury, that is to say,
such riotous feasting, and excess, as the Jews used upon their Sabbath.
Nothing in this to prove that the word Sabbatum was used by any approved Writer
for the space of a thousand years and upward, to signify either the Lords day,
or any of the Christian Festivities, as the Lord Primate would sain have had
it; which notwithstanding, partly by the diligence of our Sabbatarians, and
their active Emissaries, and partly by the ignorance of some, and the easiness
of the rest of the people, the Sunday or Lords day is generally called by no
other name then by that of the Sabbath; he who shall call it otherwise then the
vulgar do, being branded commonly with profaneness or singularity. And yet if
any of these fine fellows should be asked the English of the Latin word
Sabbatum, they could not choose but answer, that it signified the seventh day of
the week, or the Saturday only. Or if they should, every Clerk, Notary, and
Register in the Courts of Judicature would deride them for it, who in drawing
up their Processes, Declarations, Entries, Judgments and Commissions, never
used other Latin word for Saturday, but Dies Sabbati* as long as any of those
forms were written in the Latin tongue* And they continued in that tongue,
till toward the later end of the late long Parliament, in which it was ordered,
that all Writs, Declarations, and other legal instruments of what kind soever,
should be made in English; the readiest way to make all Clerks, Atturnies,
Registers, etc. more ignorant of Grammar learning then they were before.

SECT. II.
The Lord Primates judgment of the Sabbath, delivered in two Propositions. His
first Proposition for setting apart some whole day for Gods solemn worship by
the Law of Nature, found both uncertain and unsafe; no such whole day kept, or
required to be kept by the Jews or Gentiles. His second Proposition, neither
agreeable to the Schoolmen, or the Sabbatarians, nor grounded upon Text of
Scripture. He reconciles himself with the Sabbatarians by ascribing an
immutability to a Positive Law; but contrary therein to the first Reformers,
and other learned men of the Protestant and Reformed Churches. He founds the
Institution of the Sabbath on Genesis 2. An Anticipation or Prolepsis in that
place of Genesis maintained explicitly by Josephus, and many of the most learned
of the Jewish Rabbis, as also by Tostatus and his followers amongst the
Christians; implicitly by those, who maintained that the Sabbath was not
instituted in the first beginning. The like Anticipations frequent in the holy
Scripture, and justified by many of the Ancient Fathers, and not a few learned
men of the later times. The Sabbath not a part of the Law of Nature.

BUt now before we can proceed to such other passages, which the Lord Primate
has excepted against in History of the Sabbath, either by name, or on the by,
it will be necessary that we know his own Judgment and Opinion in the ground
of this Controversy; as well concerning the morality of the fourth
Commandment, as the true ground and institution of the Sabbath. And to find
that we must consult his Letter to Mr. Ley, in which he tells us, That for
his own part, he never yet doubted, but took it for granted; that as the
setting of some whole day apart for Gods solemn worship was juris Divini
naturalis, so that this solemn day (he means the Sabbath) should be one in
seven, was juris Divini positivi, recorded in the fourth Commandment, p. 113.
And in these words we have two several propositions, viz. First, That the
setting apart of some whole day to Gods solemn worship, is juris Divini
naturalis: and secondly, that the Sabbath, which he means by this solemn day,
was juris Divini positivi, recorded in the fourth Commandment; both which shall
be examined in their several turns. And first I would fain know of Doctor
Bernard, or any other of the Lord Primates Chaplains (since he cannot answer
for himself) where we shall find, that the setting apart of some whole day for
Gods solemn worship, was juris Divini naturalis. That some time was to be set
apart for the worship of God, is agreed by all, and reckoned by most knowing
men, not interessed in any party, to be the moral part of the fourth
Commandment; but that this time should be some whole day, is neither imprinted
in man's heart by the Law of Nature, nor ever required of the Jews, nor observed
by the Christians. Or granting that some such whole day was to be set apart for
Gods solemn worship; I would fain know in the first place when the said whole
day was to begin, and how long to continue; whether it were a whole natural
day, or a whole artificial day, as they use to phrase it. And if it were a
whole natural day, then whether to extend from midnight to midnight, after the
reckoning of the Gentiles; or from Sunsetting to Sunsetting, from Even to
Even, according to the account of the Jews: or if a whole artificial day, then
whether a day of twelve hours only, after the reckoning of the Jews; or from
Sunrising to Sunsetting (be they more or less) according to the several
Climates under which men lived. Which points, unless they be well stated, the
conscience will have nothing in this case to rely upon. In the next place
considering that the Lord Primate speaks indefinitely of some whole day,
without determining when and how often the said whole day was to be observed, I
would fain know whether such a whole day was to be set apart once or twice in
the week; or whether it would suffice to the fulfilling of the moral part of
the fourth Commandment, if it were only once a month, or once a year, or once
in seven year, or once in the course of a man's whole life. For being it is said
indefinitly, that the setting apart of some whole day to Gods solemn worship,
is juris Divini naturalis, ingraffed in the Heart of man by the Law of Nature;
it may be probably inferred, that the setting apart of one whole day at what
time soever a man pleases, may very sufficiently comply with the intention of
that Law, and consequently discharge the man so doing, from all further
observance: which how far it will satisfy the consciences of men, or be
accounted acceptable in the sight of God, I shall leave to others to determine.

But admitting that this whole day, which the Lord Primate speaks of, was to
have as frequent a return as the Jewish Sabbath; I would then know when such a
whole day was either ordinarily kept, or required to be kept by the Jews or
Gentiles. That no such whole day was ever ordinarily kept by the Jews, appears
by their riotous feastings on the Sabbath day, which before we spoke of; by
which it is most evident, that the one half of that day was either spent in
Luxury and Riot, or in Rest and Idleness; and that the least part of the other
moiety was spent in holy Meditation, and much less in the solemn worship of
God: which in the first settlement of that Nation in the Land of Canaan, was
performed only in the Tabernacle, as afterward in the Holy Temple, at which
but few of the people, and those which dwelt near the place of worship, could
give any attendance. We meet indeed with a Commandment, that the Sabbath was to
be continued from Even to Even, Levit. 23. 32. that is to say, from Friday
evening at Sunset, until the like time of Sunset on the Sabbath day. Which
Precept being first given by God, with reference to the day of Atonement or
Expiation (and commonly applied by the Jews to the weekly Sabbaths) requires
no otherkeeping of the day for that space of time, more then the afflicting of
their souls by a solemn fast, then only rest from labor, and all servile
works. And this appears plainly by the first words of the said 32. verse, where
it is said, That it should be unto them a Sabbath of rest, compared with verse.
30, 31. where forbearing all or any manner of work is the chief thing required
to the observation of that day. And yet that rest from labor, and cessation
from all manner of work frequently intermitted also, either with reference to
the solemn keeping of the day it self, Mat. 12. 5. or the preservation of the
creature, Luke 13. 15. and 14. 5. But that the whole day extending from Even to
Even, should be either spent in afflicting their souls, as it is meant only of
the day of Atonement or Expiation, which was observed but once a year; or in
the acts of solemn and religious worship, if it be understood of the weekly
Sabbath (to which the Jews commonly applied it also, as before was said) as I
no where find, So have I no reason to believe it without better grounds.
Certain I am, that so much of the Sabbath day, after this account, as
intervened between the Sunsetting on the Friday, and the Sunrising on the
Sabbath, was partly spent in rest from labor, and making necessary
preparations for the day ensuing; and part thereof in necessary repose and
sleep, for the refreshing of their bodies, and support of nature; and how the
rest of that day was spent, we have seen before.

There is another place in Scripture much pressed upon the consciences of the
people, by the rigid Sabbatarians of these times, to stave them off from any
lawful recreation on their new made Sabbath; that is to say, Isa. 58. 13, 14.
where God speaks thus unto that people: If thou turn away thy foot from the
Sabbath from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight,
the holy of the Lord, honorable, and shall honor him, not doing thine own
ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words; then shall
thou delight thy self in the Lord. But if we look better on this Text, and
compare it with verse. 3. of the same Chapter, where we find mention of a fast,
and of the afflicting of their Souls on the day of that fast, we may see easily
that the Text so much insisted on by our Sabbatarians, relates only to the day
of Atonement; which being a day of public humiliation, and of confessing their
sins to the Lord their God, required a stricter withholding of themselves from
their lawful pleasures, then any of the weekly Sabbaths. So as admitting that
this whole day was by God required to be spent in some religious Acts of solemn
worship* (though never kept so by the Jews) yet was it but one whole day in a
year, and that enjoined also by a positive Law; which if it be sufficient to
discharge the obligation laid upon us by the Law of Nature, the observation of
the Sabbath formerly, of the Lords day now, may be thought superfluous. And if
no such whole day were kept, or required to be kept by the Jews, Gods peculiar
people, there is small hope to find it amongst the Gentiles; who did too much
attend their profit, and indulge their pleasures, to spend whole days upon the
service of their gods. I speak here of that which the Gentiles did in ordinary
and common course, as a thing constantly required of them, and observed by
them; and not of any extraordinary and occasional action, such as the three
days fast which was kept in Nineve by the Kings command, upon that fearful
Proclamation which was made against it by the Prophet Jonah. As for the
Christians, I dare with confidence affirm, that the spending of the whole Lords
day in the acts of worship, was never required of them, or of any of them, by
any Imperial Edict, or National Law, or Constitution of the Church, till the
year 1615. at what time it was enjoined by the Articles of the Church of
Ireland; as shall be proved at large hereafter, when that passage in those
Articles comes to be examined.

The Lord Primates first Proposition being thus blown off, we next proceed to
the examination of the second, that is to say, That the solemn day of worship
should be one in seven, was juris Divini positivi, recorded in the fourth
Commandment. A proposition which will find few Friends, and many Adversaries,
especially as it comes attended with the explication which he makes upon it:
For first it crosses with Tostatus (a man of as great industry, and as much
variety of learning as any of the age he lived in) and not with him only, but
with Thomas Aquinas, the great Dictator of the Schools, and generally with all
the Schoolmen; of which thus Dr. Prideaux in his Tract De Sabbato, Sect. 3. It
is, as Abulensis has it, a Dictate of the Law of Nature, that some set time be
put apart for Gods holy worship: but it is Ceremonial and Legal, that this
worship should be restrained either to one day of seven, or the seventh day
precisely from the worlds creation. A time of rest is therefore moral; but the
set time thereof is ceremonial: which is confessed by those who have stood most
on this Commandment, and urged it even to a probable suspicion of Iudaisme.
Aquinas also so resolves it; and (which is seldom seen in other cases) the
Schoolmen (of what Sect soever) say the same: whereby (says he) we may
perceive in what respects the Fathers have sometimes pronounced it to be a
ceremony, and a shadow, and a figure only.

In the next place it crosses with the Sabbatarians of these later times, who
generally make the sanctifying of one day in seven, to be the moral part of the
fourth Commandment; the limiting of that day to the last day of the week, or
the seventh day on which God rested, to be the ceremonial part of it: and it
concerns them so to do in point of interest, for otherwise they could find no
ground for the morality of the Lords day Sabbath, and founding that morality on
the fourth Commandment, and pressing it upon the consciences of the people with
such art and industry. So that we have three parts at least of this one
Commandment, viz. the moral part, consisting in the setting apart of one whole
day (but no matter when) for Gods solemn worship; the Positive part consisting
(as the Lord Primate says) in sanctifying one day in seven; and then the
ceremonial part in limiting that day to the seventh day precisely of the
creation of the world, on which God rested from his labors. And strange it
were if the judicial Law should not put in also for a share, and make up the
fourth; the man that gathered sticks on the Sabbath day, being tried according
to this Law, and condemned accordingly. But here before we shall proceed to the
Explication, by which the Lord Primate makes his opinion more agreeable to the
Sabbatarians then at first it seemed, I must ask some of the Lord Primates
followers, where I shall find the Institution of that positive Law, which
before we heard of, by whom it was ordained, and on whom imposed; for positive
Laws must be declared and enjoined in terms express, or else they are neither
Laws nor Positive. If they shall say that we may find the Institution of it in
the second of Genesis, then must it be the sanctifying of that very seventh day
on which God rested from his labors, and not the setting apart, or sanctifying
of one day in seven, as the Lord Primate would fain have it. And, secondly, if
the setting a part or sanctifying of one day in seven, as it is juris Divini
positive, be that which is recorded in the fourth Commandment, as the Lord
Primate says it is, then must it also be the same very seventh day on which
God rested, as before; there being no other day but that commanded to be kept
holy in that Commandment, or mentioned to be blessed and sanctified by the Lord
our God. And on the other side, if sanctifying the seventh day precisely on
which God rested from his labors, either as mentioned in the fourth
Commandment, or instituted in Genesis 2. be only juris ceremonialis, but a matter
of Ceremony, as the Sabbatarians would fain have it: then as they leave no room
at all for the Lord Primates positive Law, in either Scripture; so do they
furnish the Church with a better Argument against themselves, concerning the
Antiquity and use of Ceremonies, then has yet been thought of. But leaving
them to free themselves from these perplexities at their better leisure, we
must next see what satisfaction will be offered to the Sabbatarians; who make
the sanctifying of one day in seven to be the moral, not the positive part of
the fourth Commandment: And herein we shall find the Lord Primate very ready to
give them all possible contentment. And therefore he ascribes so much morality
to his positive Law, as to make it immutable, and unchangeable by Men or
Angels, which is one of the chief privileges of the moral Law; and then he
fixes the first Institution of it on Genesis 2. which makes it equal in a manner
to the Law of Nature, if not part thereof.

And first, says he, I mean here such a jus Divinum positivum, as Baptism and
the Lords Supper are established by; which lies not in the power of any Man or
Angel to change or alter, page 105. This makes it somewhat of kin to a moral
precept, of which the Schoolmen have afforded us this general Aphorism,
Praecepta legis naturalis esse indispensabilia, that is to say, that the
precept of the Moral Law, or the Law of Natures, are not to be dispenst withal
upon any occasion or necessity whatsoever it be, and much less to be changed
and abrogated at the will of man: which explanation (not to dispute the
mutability, or immutability of a positive Law) will find as many Adversaries as
the proposition; as that which crosses with the Doctrine of some of the first
Martyrs in the Church of England, and with the first Reformers, and other
leading men of the Protestant and Reformed Churches. And first it is resolved
thus by Mr. Tyndal (a man sufficiently famous for his great pains in
translating Answ. to Sir Tho. More* p. 287.
the Bible into English) who suffered Martyrdom in the year 1536. As for the
Sabbath (says he) we be Lords over the Sabbath, and may yet change it into
Monday, or into any other day, as we see need; or may make every tenth day a
holy day only, if we see cause why. Neither was there any cause to change it
from the Saturday, but to put a difference between us and the Jews; neither
need we any holy day at all, if the people might be taught without it. And
somewhat to this purpose (though not in terms so fully significant and express)
we find affirmed by John Frith, (a man of much learning for his age) who
suffered Martyrdom in the year 1533. Our Declarat. of Baptism. p. 96.
forefathers (says he) which were in the beginning of the Church did abrogate
the Sabbath, to the intent that men might have an example of Christian liberty,
etc. Howbeit, because it was necessary that a day should be reserved, in which
the people should come together to hear the word of God, they ordained in stead
of the Sabbath, which was Saturday, the next day following, which is Sunday.
And although they might have kept the Saturday with the Jew, as a thing
indifferent; yet they did much better. Which words of his, if they seem rather
to demonstrate the Churches power in altering the time of worship from one day
to another, then the mutability of the precept on the which it was founded; I
am sure that Zuinglius the first Reformer of the Church among the Switzers,
will speak more fully to the purpose: Hearken now Contra Valent. Gentil. Tom.
1. p. 254.
Valentine (says he) by what ways and means the Sabbath may be made a
ceremony; if either we observe that day which the Jews once did, or think the
Lords day so affixed unto any time, Vt nefas sit illum in aliud tempus
transfer, that we conceive it an impiety it should be changed unto another;
on which as well as upon that, we may not rest from labor, and hearken to the
word of God; if perhaps such necessity should be, this would indeed make it
become a ceremony. But Calvin speaks more plain then he, when he professes,
that he regarded not so much the number of seven, Vt ejus servituti Ecclesias
astringeret, as to enthral the Church unto it. And this is (...), as much as
can be comprehended in so narrow a compass. More largely Vrsine the Divinity
Reader in the University of Heidelberg, and a great follower of Calvin in all
his writings, who makes this difference between the Lords day and the Sabbath;
That it was utterly unlawful to the Jews, either to neglect or change the
Sabbath without express Catech. qu. 103.
Commandment from God himself, as being a ceremonial part of Divine Worship:
but for the Christian Church, that that may design the first or second, or any
other day to Gods public service; so that our Christian Liberty be not thereby
infringed, or any opinion of necessity or holiness affixt unto them, Ecclesia
vero Christiana primum, vel alium diem tribuit ministerio, salva sua liberate,
sine opinions cultus vel necessitatis, as his own words are. Chemnitius yet
more plainly for the Lutheran Churches, who frequently affirms, that it is
libera observatio, a voluntary observation; that it is an especial part of our
Christian liberty, not to be tied to days and times, in matters which concern
Gods service, and that the Apostles made it manifest by their example, singulis
diebus, vel quocunque die, that every day or any day may by the Church be set
apart for religious exercises. And finally as Bullinger, Bucer, Brentius cited
by Dr. Prideaux in his Tract De Sabbato, and e nostri^ non pauci, besides many
others of the Reformed Churches, by telling us that the Church has still a
power to change the time of worship from one day to another, do tacitly infer
that the Church has power to change that time from the seventh day to the
tenth or twelfth, as well as from the first day of the week to the third or
fourth; so they which teach us, that the sanctifying of one day in seven is not
the moral part of the fourth Commandment, do imply no less. Of which opinion
beside Tostatus and the Schoolmen before remembered, we find also Calvin to have
been, Lib. Instit. 2. c. 8. 11. 34. besides Simler in Exodus 20. Aretius in his
common places, Loco 55. Franciscus Gomarus, in his Book, De origin and
Institutione Sabbati. Ryvet in Exodus 20. p. 190. to whom Chemnitius may be
added for the Lutheran Churches. In one of which it is affirmed* that the
sanctifying of a seventh day rather then of the eighth or ninth, juris est
Divini, sed ceremonialis. And if it be ceremonial only, Simner in Exodus 20.
though of Gods appointment, it must be subject unto change and mutability, as
well as Circumcision and the Passover, or any other of the legal or Mosaical
Ordinances. And by another it is said, that it can neither be made good by the
Law of Nature, or Text of Scripture, or any solid Argument drawn Gomarus de
orig. Sabbati.
from thence, Vnum e septem diebus ex vi praecepti quarti ad cultum Dei
necessario observandum, that by the fourth commandment, one day in seven is of
necessity to be dedicated to Gods service: which does as plainly contradict the
Lord Primates second Proposition, as the Explication of it is found contrary to
the rest before.

The second way whereby the Lord Primate does strengthen and support his
positive Law, and makes it to come more near to the Sabbatarians of these later
times, is by his fixing the first Institution of it on the second of Genesis,
which makes it equal in a manner to the Law of Nature, if not part thereof. For
that the institution of it in the first beginning, is the very same with making
it a part or branch of the Law of Nature, may be inferred first from these
words of Tostatus in Genesis 2. Number* Sabbatum cum a Deo sanctificatum fuerit in
primordio rerum, etc. whether the Sabbath being sanctified by God in the
infancy of the World, had been observed by men, by the Law of Nature. And
secondly, it may be inferred from Dr. Prideaux in his Tract De Sabbato, Sect.
2. Some, says he, fetch the Original of the Sabbath from the beginning of the
World, when God first blessed the seventh day and sanctified it. Whence well
this question may be raised, Whether before the publishing of Moses' s Law, the
Sabbath was to be observed by the Law of Nature? And that the Lord Primate does
fetch the original of the Sabbath from the beginning of the World, is evident
from a passage in his Letter to Dr. Twisse, p. 78. In which, says he,
(addressing his speech unto that Doctor) The Text of Genesis 2. 3. ( as you well
note) is so clear for the ancient institution of the Sabbath, and so fully
vindicated by Dr. Ryvet from the exceptions of Gomarus, that I see no reason in
the earth, why any man should make doubt thereof. And yet the matter is not
past all doubt neither, I am sure of that: For other men as eminent in all
parts of Learning, and as great Masters of Reason as Doctor Ryvet ever was,
have affirmed the contrary; conceiving further, that those words in the second
of Genesis are spoken in the way of a Prolepsis or Anticipation: Gods
sanctifying the day of his Rest, being mentioned in that time and place, not
because the Sabbath was then instituted, but because it was the occasion of
setting apart that day by the fourth Commandment to be a Sabbath, or a day of
holy repose and rest to the House of Israel. Of this opinion was Tostatus in
his Comment on Genesis 2. countenanced by Josephus Antiq. l. 1. c. 2. by Solomon
Iarchi, one of the principal of the Rabbis, and many other learned men of the
Jewish Nation, as appears by Mercer a learned Protestant Writer, and one well
verst in all the learning of the Jews, in his Comment on Genesis 2. who adds de
proprio, that from Gods resting on that day, Postea praeceptum de Sabbato natum
est, the Commandment for sanctifying the seventh day was afterward given. And
this opinion of Tostatus passed generally for good and current with all sorts
of people till Ambrose Catharinus, one of the principal sticklers in the
Council of Trent, opposed him in it; who though he grant the like Anticipation,
Genesis 1. v. 27. disalloweth it here. And disallowing it in this place, he not
only crosses with Tostatus, but with some of the most learned Christian
Writers, both of the Church of Rome, and the Protestant Churches, who hold that
the Sabbath was not instituted in the first beginning, nor imposed on Adam as a
Law, to be observed by him and his posterity. Of this opinion was Pererius a
learned and industrious man of the Romish party, in his Comment on the second
of Genesis And of this opinion was Gomarus, that great undertaker against the
Arminians, in his Tract De origin and institution: Sabbati, with many other
eminent men of both Religions, too many to be named in this place and time:
whose opinions in this point cannot otherwise be made good* and justifiable,
but by maintaining an Anticipation in this Text of Moses; though few of them
speak their minds so fully and explicitly in it as Dr. Prideaux, no way
inferior to the best of those who opine the contrary. For what weak* proofs
are they (says he) which before were urged? God blessed the seventh day and
sanctified it; therefore he then commanded it to be kept holy by his people.
And then he adds -- Moses (as Abulensis has it) spoke this by way of
Anticipation; rather to show the equity of the Commandment, then the original
thereof. So he in the third Section of his Tract De Sabbato.

Nor are such Anticipations strange in Holy Scripture; for besides that
Anticipation in the first of Genesis, verse. 27. allowed by Catharinus, as
before was said, defended by St. Chrysostom on Genesis 2. Origin on Genesis 1.
Gregory the Great in his Morals, lib. 32. cap. 9. and finally justified by St.
Hierom, who in his Tract against the Jews does affirm as much; we find the
like Gen 12. 8. and Judges c. 2. v. 1. both which are granted without scruple
by Dr. Bound, the first who set on foot the Sabbatarian Bound, Editio 2. p. 10.
Doctrines in the Church of England. The like Anticipation is observed in Exodus
16. 32. as appears plainly, both by Lyra and Vatablus, two right learned men;
the first a Jew, the second eminently studied in the Jewish Antiquities. And
yet the observation is much elder then either of them, made by St. Augustine,
who lived long before the time of Lyra, in his 62. Question on the Book of
Exodus; and by Calvin who preceded Vatablus, in his Comment on that Tract of
Scripture* These passages and Testimonies I have only touched and pointed at,
as plainly and briefly as I could, for the Readers better satisfaction in the
present difference; referring for the Quotations at large to the History of the
Sabbath, Part 1. c. 1. n. 2, 3. 4. and there he shall be sure to find them.
From all which laid together it is there concluded, that for this passage of
the Scripture, there is nothing found unto the contrary, but that it was set
down in that place and time, by a plain and near Anticipation; and does relate
unto the time wherein Moses wrote: and therefore no sufficient warrant to fetch
the institution of the Sabbath from the first beginning. Nor could I find when
I had Doctor Ryvet under my eye, that his Arguments against Gomarus were of
weight enough to counter balance the Authority of so many learned Writers,
both Jews and Christians; or to weigh down so many Texts of holy Scripture, in
which the like Anticipations are observed by Origin, Hierom, Chrysostom, and
Gregory the Great, men of renown for Piety and Learning in the primitive times,
and by many other learned men in the times succeeding, though otherwise of
different persuasions in the things of God. But Ryvet and the Lord Primate held
the same opinion, both of them grounding the first institution of the Sabbath
on a Positive Law. Legem de Sabbato positivam non naturalem agnoscimus, are the
words of Ryvet, p. 173. which is the same with the Lord Primates jus Divinum
positivum, though in different terms. And therefore it can be no marvel if
Ryvets Arguments be cried up for vindicating that passage in the second of
Genesis in so full a manner, that the Lord Primate can see no reason in the
earth, why any man should make doubt thereof. And yet there may be good reason
for it, though he see it not.

Now that the seventh day Sabbath was not a part, or branch of the Law of
Nature, which is observed to be a necessary consequent, following upon the
fixing of the first institution of it in the second of Genesis, will evidently
appear by the concurrent testimonies of learned men, both of the elder and last
times. It was indeed naturally ingraffed in the heart of man, that God was to
be worshipped by him, (...), said the Grecian Orator, Imprimis venerare Dium,
said the Latin Poet. And it was also naturally ingraffed in the heart of man,
not only that some time should be set apart for the worship of God, of which
we have so many evident examples in the Greeks and Romans, that no man can make
question of it, but that in all the Acts of worship a man should totally
abstract himself from all worldly thoughts, which might divert him from the
business he was then about. Orantis est nihil nisi coelestia cogitare, as we
learned when School-boyes. But that this time should rather be the seventh day
then any other, is not a part or branch of the Law of Nature, never accounted
so by the Ancient Writers, nor reckoned so by some of those of note and
eminency, who otherwise are great friends to the In Ezekiel. c. 20.
Lords day Sabbath. Certain I am that Theodoret does not so account it, who
tells us that the observation of the Sabbath came not in by nature, but by
Moses' s Law; Sabbati observandi non natura magistra sed latio legis, which is
short, but full. Nor is it so accounted by Sedulius, another of the ancient
Writers, In Romans 3*
who ranks it amongst the legal ceremonies, and not amongst those things quae
legi naturali congruunt, which are directed merely by the Law of Nature; nor by
Damascen amongst the Greeks, who does assure us, (...), In Orthod. fide l. 24.
c. 4.
that is to say, that when there was no Law enacted, no^ no Scripture inspired
by God, that then there was no Sabbath neither; nor finally by our venerable In
Luke 19.
Beda, who lived about the same time with Damascen, and was of the same
judgment with him in this particular: for he assures us, That to the Fathers
before the Law, all days were equal; the seventh day having no prerogative
before the others, which he calls, naturalis Sabbati libertatem, the liberty of
the natural Sabbath; and by that liberty (if I rightly understand his meaning)
men were no more restrained to one day then unto another, no more unto the
seventh then the fourth or eighth. Tostatus to the same effect, for the middle
times, who tells In Exodus 2. qu. 11.
us, That howsoever the Hebrew people, or any other before the giving of the
Law, were bound to set a part some time for religious duties, Non tamen magis
in Sabbato quam in quolibet aliorum dierum, yet were they no more bound to the
Sabbath day, then to any other. For this last age, though I could help my self
by many good Authors, yet I shall rest content with two, that is to say, the
Lord Primate himself, and Doctor Ryvet before named, who build the institution
of the Sabbath on a positive Law, and not upon the Law of Nature. And therefore
if the instituting of the Sabbath in the first beginning, be in effect to make
it all one with the Law of Nature, as was inferred from Dr. Prideaux and
Tostatus; it must needs follow thereupon, that the Sabbath not being looked on
as a part of the Law of Nature, could not be instituted (as the Lord Primate
says it was) in the first beginning.

SECT. III.
The sanctifying of the Sabbath in the first beginning, imports a Commandment
given to Adam for the keeping of it. No such Commandment given to Adam in his
own personal capacity, nor as the common root of mankind. The Patriarchs before
the flood did not keep the Sabbath. The Sabbath not observed by the Patriarchs
of the line of Sem, nor by the Israelites in Egypt. That the Commandment of the
Sabbath was peculiar only to the Jews, proved by the testimony of the
Fathers, and the Jews themselves. That the seventh day of every week was not
kept holy by the Gentiles, affirmed by some of their own best Authors, and some
late Divines. The Jews derided by the Gentiles for their seventh day Sabbath.
The Lord Primates Antithesis, viz. that the seventh day was more honored by
the Gentiles then the other six, not proved by any ancient Author, either Greek
or Latin. The three Greek Poets whom he cites, do not serve his turn; and how
they came to know that the Creation of the World was finished in seven days,
which is all they say. The passage of Tertullian in his Tract Ad Nationes, as
little to his purpose as the three Greek Poets. The meaning of that Author in
his Apologeticum cap. 16. not rightly understood by the Lord Primate; whose
Arguments from Tibullus, Lucian, and Lampridius conclude as little as the rest.
The observation of the Sabbath, and other Jewish Ceremonies taken up by the
later Gentiles, not upon any old Tradition, but by Imitation. The custom of
the Romans in incorporating all Religions into their own, and the reason of it.

BUt there is one Conclusion more which follows on the instituting Hosp in de
Fest. Ethn. and Jud. l. 3. c. 3.
of the Sabbath in the first beginning, and is like to afford us more work then
the other did. For if it be all one to bless and sanctify the seventh day in
the beginning of the World, as to impose it then on Adam to be kept and
sanctified, as some say it is; it may be very well concluded, that if no such
commandment was then given to Adam, the Sabbath was not blessed and sanctified
in the first beginning. Nor can it stand with Piety and Reason that it should
be otherwise; For to suppose, that God did set apart, and sanctify the seventh
day for a day of worship, and yet that no Commandment should be given for the
keeping of it, what is it but to call in question the most infinite wisdom of
Almighty God, which never did any thing in vain? unless perhaps we may conceive
with Tornelius, that the Angels Annal. d. 7.
solemnized this first Sabbath with joyful shouts and acclamations, as he
gathers from Job 38. 4, 6. Or that the WORD, the second person in the Syntax
of the blessed Trinity, did take De creat. hominis l. 1. ad finem.
our humane shape upon him, and came down to Adam, and spent the whole day with
him in spiritual exercises, as is affirmed by Zanchius, with an ego non dubito,
as a matter which no man need make doubt of, but he that listed. For if any
such Commandment was given to Adam, it must be either given him in his own
personal capacity, or as he was the common root of all mankind, which was then
virtually in his loins, as Levi Hebr. 7. 10.
is said by the Apostle to have paid Tithes unto Melchisedeck, because he was
then virtually in the Loins of his Father Abraham when those Tithes were paid.
But no such precept or command was given to Adam in his own personal capacity,
for then the Sabbath must have died and been buried in the same grave with him;
nor was it given to him as the common root of all mankind, for then all the
Nations of the World had been bound to keep it: the contrary whereof we shall
see anon. In the mean time let us take with us the Authority of the Ancient
Writers, by some of which it is affirmed that no commandment was given by God
to our Father Adam, but that he should abstain from eating of the fruit of the
Tree which grew in the middle of the Garden; as namely by Tertullian adversus
Iudaeos. Basil de jejunio. Ambrose Lib. de Elia and jejunio c. 3. Chrysostom
Hom* 14. and 16. on the Book of Genesis. Austin de Civitate l. 14. c. 12. As
also by many other Christian Doctors of all times and ages, who from hence
aggravate the offense of Adam, in that he had but one Commandment imposed on
him, and yet kept it not. By others it is said expressly that Adam never kept
the Sabbath, as certainly he would have done at some time or other, if any such
Commandment had been given him by the Lord his God; as namely by Justin Martyr
in his Dialogue with Trypho the Jew, Tertullian in his Book adversus Iudaeos,
which may be gathered also in the way of a necessary consequence from the words
of Eusebius, De Praep. Evang. l. 7. c. 8. and those of Epiphanius adversus
Haereses l. 1. n. 5. Whose words we have laid down at large, Hist. of Sub. p.
1. c. 1. n. 5. This is enough to prove that no command for keeping of the
Sabbath day was given to Adam in his own personal capacity, and no more then
so; besides the necessary expiring of the Sabbath with him, had it been so
given. And that it was not given to him as the common Root of Mankind, will
appear as plainly, by the not keeping of that day by any which descended from
him, till it was declared unto the Israelites in the fall of Mannah, and
afterward imposed upon them by the fourth Commandment: for if it had been kept
by any, it must have been by those of the godly Line, from whom our Savior was
to derive his Humane nature; and yet it has been proved out of very good
Authors that it was never kept by Abel, Seth, Enos, Enoch, or Methusalem, nor
finally by Noah himself, though called in Scripture by the name of a Preacher
of Righteousness; the proofs whereof may be found at large in the History of
the Sabbath, Part 1. Chap. 2. Number. 6, 7, 8, 9. And if it were not kept by those
of the godly Line, we have no hope to find any thing for the keeping of it in
the house of Cain, or in the families of any of the other Sons of Adam, whose
extreme wickedness grew so abominable in the sight of God, that he was forced
to wash away the filth thereof by a general Deluge. After the Flood, we find
the world repeopled by the Sons of Noah, the godly Line being as ignorant of
the Sabbath as the rest of the Nations: for it has been sufficiently proved
out of very good Authors, that neither Sem nor Melchisedech (if a different
person from him) nor Heber, nor Lot, ever kept the Sabbath; and that it was not
kept by Abraham, or any of his Sons, as neither by Jacob, Joseph, Moses, or any
of the House of Israel, as long as they remained in Egypt, in the House of
Bondage; for which see Hist. of Sab. Part. 1. c. 3. n. 4, 5, 7, 8, 9. And if we
find no such observance in the House of Sem, who were more careful of their
ways, and walked agreeably to the declared will and pleasure of Almighty God,
it were in vain to look for it in the House of Iaphet, or in that of the
accursed Cain, the founders of the Europaean and African Nations, or amongst
any others which descended from the Sons of Sem, who pass together with the
rest by the name of Gentiles.

Now that the Gentiles were not bound to observe the Sabbath, is proved by
diverse of the Fathers, and many of the greatest Clerks among the Jews, whom
affirm expressly that the Commandment of the Sabbath was given to none but those
of the House of Israel. Of this mind was St. Austin Epist. 119. De Genesis ad lit.
l. 4. c. 11, 13. Epist. 86. Ad Casalanum; in all which places he appropriates
this Commandment to the Jews or Hebrews. St. Cyril in Ezekiel. h. 20. Theodoret
in Ezekiel. 20. Procopius Gazaeus in Genesis 21. And for the Jews, it was a common
opinion received amongst them, that the Sabbath was given to Chap. 16. 29.
them only, and not to the Gentiles, as Petrus Galatinus proves from the best
of their Authors; who thereupon infers, Quod Gentes non obligantur ad
Sabbatum, that the Gentiles were not bound to observe the Sabbath. The like may
be gathered from Josephus, who in many places calls the Sabbath (...), or a
national custom, Antiq. lib. 4. cap 8. and de bello lib. 2. cap. 16. to whom I
shall now add another of later date, of my Lord Primates own commending, that
is to say, Manasses Ben Israel, who tells in his Book De Creatione, that the
observation of the Sabbath was commanded only unto the Israelites, and that
all the Duties which the Heathen were tied unto, were comprised in the precepts
given to the sons of Noah, as is affirmed in the Letter to Dr. Twisse, p. 78.

And that the Sabbath was not kept by the Gentiles (as well as not imposed upon
them by any Commandment) the Historian has made good by two several Mediums;
whereof the first is taken from the writings of the Gentiles themselves, by
which it does appear that they gave no greater respect to the Saturday, then to
any other day whatever; and that though they celebrate the seventh day as a
festival day, yet was it not the seventh day of the weeek, but the seventh day
only of every month, which might happen as well upon any of the six days as
upon the Saturday. And so it is observed by Philo a right learned Jew, who puts
this difference between the Gentiles and the Jews; that diverse Cities of the
Gentiles did solemnize the seventh day, (...), once a month, beginning their In
Decalogo.
account with the new Moon, (...), but that the Jews did keep every seventh
day constantly. Nor was the seventh day of the month on which they sacrificed
to Apollo, esteemed more holy by the Gentiles then their other Festivals, on
which they tendered their Devotions to their other Gods; and in particular was
not accounted more holy then the first or fourth, which Hesiod places in the
same parallel with the seventh in this following verse, viz.

(...). In which if any Opera and dies.
should take notice that the attribute of (...), or holy, is affixt unto the
seventh day only, the Scholiast on that Author shall remove that scruple, A
novilunio exorsus tres laudat, omnes sacras dicens, septimam etiam ut Apollinis
natalem celebrans; and tells us that all three are accounted holy, and that the
seventh was also celebrated as Apollo's birthday. As for the first day of the
month, as is observed by Alexander ab Alexandro, it was Dies Geniales. l. 3. c.
18.
consecrated by the Greeks to Apollo also, the fourth to Mercury, the eighth to
Theseus, because he was derived from Neptune, to whom, as Plutarch says, they
offered sacrifice on the same day also. So was the second day of the month
consecrated to the Bonus Genius, the third and fifteenth to Minerva, the last
Hospin. De orig. Fest. c. 5.
to Pluto, and every twentieth day by the Epicures to their God the Belly. Thus
also had the Romans their several Festivals in every month, some in one month,
and some in another; the ninth day only of every month being solemnly observed
by them (and from thence called Nundinae) because devoted unto Jupiter the most
supreme Deity. But what need more be said in this, when we have confitentem
reum? For Dr. Bound, the first that set on foot these new Sabbath-Doctrines,
does confess ingeniously, That the memory of Weeks and Sabbaths was altogether
2 Edit. p. 65.
suppressed and buried amongst the Gentiles; to whom I shall subjoyn de novo
the Lord Primate himself, who though he stick hard to prove that the Saturday
was held in greater estimation by the Gentiles then all the rest yet he
acknowledges at the last, that they did not celebrate their Saturdayes with
that solemnity wherewith themselves did their Annual Festivities, or the Jews
their weekly Sabbaths, p. 85. therefore not kept by them as a Sabbath, there is
no doubt of that; which was by the first of the two Mediums to be clearly
proved.

The second Medium by which it is proved by the Historian, that the Gentiles
did not keep the Sabbath, is gathered from those bitter scoffs and Satirical
jeers, which the Gentiles put upon the Jews (and such of their own people as
did Judaize) for the observation of the same. Of this we have an ev^dent proof
in the Prophet Jeremiah, who tells us in his book of Lamentations, how the
adversaries of the Jews did mock at their Sabbath, c. 1. v. 7. And adversaries
they had of all sorts, and of different Countries, who did mock at them for
their observation of the Sabbath day. The name derived by Apion Joseph.
adversus Apion. l. 2.
from Sabbo, an Egyptian word, signifying an inflammation in the privy parts,
from which by resting on the seventh day they received some ease; then which
what greater scorn could be put upon it by a wretched Sycophant? But others
with more modesty, but as little truth, from Sabbo signifying the Spleen, with
which the Jews were miserably tormented till on the seventh day released from
it; for which consult Giraldus in his Book De Annis and Mensibus: By Persius in
his fifth Satyr called recutita Sabbata, in which their Circumcision and their
Sabbaths were both jeered together: by Ovid Peregrina Sabbata, in his first
Book De Remedio Amoris, because not known or commonly observed amongst the
Romans: the men themselves by Martial in his Epigram to Bassa, reprochfully
nicknamed Sabbatarii: Accused for spending the seventh part of their lives in
sloth and idleness by Seneca apud. August. de Civit. Dei l. 6. c. 11. Iuvenal
Sat. 14. Tacitus Hist. l. 5. and therefore fitted with a day of equal dullness,
the Saturday (or dies Saturni, as the Latins call it) being thought unfit for
any business, rebus minus apta gerendis, as it is in Ovid, whose words I shall
produce at large, because I am to relate to them on another accasion.

Quaque die redeunt, rebus minus apta gerendis, Culta Palaestino septima sacra
viro. The seventh day comes for business most unfit;
Held sacred by the Jew, who halloweth it.
A fancy not so strange in Ovid, as it seems in Philo, a Jew by birth, and a
great stickler in behalf of the Jewish Ceremonies, who tells us, that the
seventh day was chosen for a day of rest, because the seventh number in it
self was (...), De Abrahamo.
that is to say, the most peaceable number, the most free from trouble, war,
and all kind of contention. Yet not more strange in Philo then it is in
Aretius, a Writer of the Reformed Churches, who thinks that day to have been
chosen before any other, Quod putaretur civilibus actionibus Problem. loc. 55
ineptum esse, etc, Because that day was thought by reason of the dullness of
the Planet Saturn, more fit for contemplation then it was for action. Add more
(to end as I began with an Etymology) that Plutarch derives the name of Sabbath
from Sabbi Sabbi, ingeminated by the Priests of Bacchus in his drunken Orgies;
as others do from (...), which signifies to celebrate those Orgies: both with
reproach enough to the Jewish Nation, who by their riotous feastings and
excesses on the Sabbath day, gave such a scandal to the Gentiles, that luxus
Sabbatarius became at last to be a byword, as in that passage of Apollinaris
spoken of before. Out of all which it may be probably inferred, that they that
did so scornfully deride the Jewish Sabbaths, did keep no Sabbath of their own;
by consequence, that no command for the keeping of it was given to Adam as the
common Root of all mankind, and therefore no such institution in the second of
Genesis, as the Lord Primate would fain have it.

Against these passages and proofs the L. Primate makes not any Exceptions; and
therefore it may be took for granted, that the Gentile^ neither were commanded
to keep the Sabbath, nor did keep the Sabbath, which were the matters to be
proved. But for an Answer thereunto, he sets upon Antithesis, a contrary
proposition of his own, of purpose to run cross to that which is maintained by
the Historian, l. 4 c 1. n 8. For whereas it was there affirmed by the
Historian, that the 7th. day was not more honored by the Gentiles then the
eighth or ninth; the Lord Primate on the other side has resolved the contrary,
affirming, that the Heathens did attribute some holiness to the Seventh day,
and gave it a peculiar honor above the other days of the week, p. 83. For
proof of this, he first supposes a Tradition among the Jews and Gentiles,
that the seventh day was not of Moses but the Fathers, and did not begin with
the Commonwealth of Israel, but was derived to all Nations by lineal descent
from the Sons of Noah, p. 82. But where to find, and how to prove this
Tradition, we are yet to seek; the Lord Primate vouching no more ancient Author
for it then Tertullian, who lived almost two hundred years after Christ our
Savior, and relates only to his own times, not to those of old. No evidence
produced to prove the Proposition, or the Supposition, out of any of those
famous Writers, Philosophers, Historians, Poets, Orators, who flourished in the
heroic times of Learning amongst the Grecians; nor from any of the like
condition amongst the Roman^, who lived and flourished before or after the
triumphant Empire of Augustus Caesar (one passage out of Tibullus excepted
only) till we come to Aelius Lampridius, an Historian, who lived after
Tertullian. It Is true the Lord Primate cites three Greek verses from as many of
the old Greek Poets, but they make nothing to his purpose, as himself
confesses. The verses alleged (as he tells us) by Clemens Alexandrinus (l.
5. Stromat.) and Eusebius (lib. 13. De praeparat. Evangel.) which verses and
four others to the same effect, he might have found in the History of the
Sabbath, Part 1. Chap 4. Number. 9. And there he might have found also, that those
verses had been formerly alleged by a learned Jew named Aristobulus, who lived
about the time of Ptolemy Philometor King of Egypt. The three Poets which I
find here cited, are Homer, Linus, and Callimachus; the three verses these:

(...).
(...).
(...).
But there is nothing in these verses which proves either the Proposition, or
the Supposition, touching the honoring of the seventh day more then any other,
but only that the Poets were not ignorant that the works of the Creation were
finished on the seventh day, as himself acknowledges p. 86. Now how these
Poets came to know that the Creation of the World was finished on the seventh
day, is told us by Aristobulus before mentioned, namely, that Apud Eusebius.
the Poets had consulted with the holy Bible, and from thence sucked this
knowledge, (...), as his own words are. And this may be agreeable enough to the
times they lived in. For Homer who was the oldest of them, flourished about
500. years from the death of Moses, which happened in or near the Reign of
Solomon the Son of David, the most mighty Monarch of the Hebrews, at what time
the people managed a great trade in Egypt, and held good correspondence with
those of Tire, from both of which being Seafaring Nations, the Greeks might
come unto the knowledge (derived to them from the Book of Moses) of the Worlds
Creation. And as for Callimachus who was the latest of the three, he lived not
till 700. years from the time of Homer, which happened in the Reign of Seleucus
Nicanor, the first King of Syria of the Macedonian Race or Lineage, when the
Jews were under the command of one or other of the Princes of Greece, as
Successors to Alexander the Great in his Eastern Conquests.

Now for Tertullian, on whose Authority the Lord Primate does most rely, we
find him cited page 84. in two several places, each place relating to a several
Tract of that learned Writer. The first is taken from the first Book and
thirteenth Chapter of his Tract inscribed Ad Nationes, published first amongst
the rest of his Works, in the Edition of Rigaltius, and not long after, in a
small volume by it self at Geneva, Anno 1625. with Gothofred his Notes upon
it; supposed by some to be but the rude draught of his Apologetick adversus
gentes; but whether it be so or not, we must take it as it lies before us; and
the words are these, viz. Qui solemn and diem ejus nobis exprobratis, agnoscite
vicinitatem; non long a Saturno and Sabbatis vestris sumus* Where first it is
to be observed, that Tertullian speaks not this of the ancient Gentiles, but
applies himself to those only of the times he lived in; and therefore no fit
Author either to prove the Proposition, That the Heathens did attribute some
holiness to the seventh day; and gave it a peculiar honor above the other days
of the week, unless he mean it of the Heathens, amongst whom he lived; much
less to justify the perpetual Tradition of the seventh day, which the L
Primate will not have to be derived unto them from the Commonwealth of Israel,
but the Sons of Noah. And secondly, we may observe, that many of the Gentiles
at that time when Tertullian wrote that Tract unto them, had taken up many of
the Jewish customs, and amongst others the observation of their Sabbath, whose
riotous feastings on the same might be communicated very readily unto all the
rest. But this can be no proof at all for the times preceding, especially
before the Jews began to intermingle in the Provinces of the Roman Empire; and
much less serve to fill up that vast vacuity which was between that
intermingling and the Sons of Noah. Pass we on therefore to the next, taken
from the Apologetick, Chap. 16. to which for the better understanding of the
former passage, we are referred by Gothofredus. Aeque si diem solis (says
Tertullian) laetitiae indulgemus, alia long ratione quam religione solis;
secundo loco ab eis sumus qui diem Saturni otio and victui decernunt --
exorbitantes and ipsi a Judaico more, quem ignorant. Which words of his, though
the Lord Primate would apply as spoken of, because they are spoken to the
Gentiles, I doubt not, but upon examination of the Authors meaning, we shall
find it otherwise; which passage by the Scholiast is thus glossed, Quod autem
ad diem solis attinet, alio ratio est a cultu solis, quae nos eum diem qui est
a Saturni secundus, and a Judaeis superstitiose observatur, celebrare
persuadet; nam and illi nesciunt suam legem explosam jam and exoletam
refrixisse. Pamelius gives this note upon it. That the Christians celebrated
the Sunday, ut distinguantur a Judaeis qui diem Saturni, id est, Sabbatum,
solenniter etiamnum otio decernunt; to the end they might be distinguished from
the Jews, who devoted their Sabbath (which the Romans call by the name of dies
Saturni) unto ease and eating. What the effect is of the Scholiast and his
Paraphrase we shall see anon.

In the mean time we may observe that Tertullian does not say, secundo loco a
vobis sumus, that we are in the next place to you, by which he might understand
the Gentiles; but secundo loco ab eis sumus qui diem Saturni otio and victui
decernunt, who dedicate the Saturday unto sloth and luxury; which must be
understood of the Jews, and of none but them. And whereas the Lord Primate
lays the strength of his Argument on the last words of his Author, viz.
Exorbitantes and ipsi a Judaico more quem ignorant, that is to say, that the
Gentiles by consuming that day in ease and riot, had deviated from the custom
of the Jews, of which they were ignorant: yet certainly those words are
capable of no such construction: For certainly the Gentiles by consuming that
day in Rest and Riot, could not be said to deviate from the custom of the
Jews, whose riotous feastings on their Sabbath had made them a reproach to the
Greeks and Romans; nor could they in any sense be said to be ignorant of the
Jewish custom in that kind, which Plutarch had before observed and charged
upon them. In the next place, the Scholiast applying the former passage to the
Jews alone, and their superstitious observation of their Sabbath, or
Saturn's-day, gives us this gloss on the last words which are now before us,
viz. Nam and illi nesciunt suam legem explosam jam and exoletam refrixisse,
that is to say, that they were ignorant that the Law (by which their Sabbath
had been ordained) was repealed and abrogated. Which though it may be true
enough in the Proposition, yet I cannot think that it agrees with the Authors
meaning in the Application. Nor am I better edified with the criticism of
Gothofredus on this place, who thinks it to lie under some great corruption (
qui locus haectenus in foedissimo mendo cubat) leaves in worse case then he
found it -- by his pretended Emendation. And therefore I conceive Tertullians
meaning to be briefly this, that the Jews then living had so disused and
estranged themselves by their riotous feastings on the Sabbath from that
sobriety and moderation wherewith their Ancestors had used to observe that day,
that they seemed ignorant in a manner of the ancient custom of their own
Nation in that case.

These passages of Tertullian being thus explained, the Answer to the rest of
the Lord Primates Authors will find less difficulty. Tibullus in a verse of his
Saturni sacra me tenuisse die. bestows the Epithet of Sacra upon the Saturday,
or day of Saturn. But this I say, and so says the Lord Primate too, is not so
properly to be understood of the Gentiles, who made not the seventh day a
festival (or an holy day) as the Jews did, p. 83. but of the very Jews
themselves, who kept it for a festival, or an holy day. And then Tibullus says
no more then what Ovid has affirmed in the verse formerly cited, in which he
calls the seventh day by the name of septima sacra dies, with reference to
the Jews, and to them alone. That which comes next from Lucian in his (...),
touch the Boys getting leave to play (...), on the seventh day, or Saturday,
p. 86. is of little consequence; Lucian then lived in the East Countries, where
the Gentiles, Jews and Christians lived promiscuously with one another. And it
is probable enough that the Schoolmasters observing that the Saturday was held
in great veneration by the Christians, and kept for a Festival by the Jews,
the better to comply with both, or to send home their Children (if they had any
such in their Schools) in convenient time; might rather choose to gratify the
Boys with a play day, (...), on the seventh day or Sabbath, then on any other.
And as for the Emperor Alexander Severus, and his using to go unto the Capitol
and other Temples on the Saturday or seventh day, as Aelius Lampridius has
informed us of him, it is of less consequence then the former: it being well
known to all which have read the Stories of that age and time, that being
trained up under the wing of his Mother, who was inclinable enough to the
Christian Faith, he had not only somewhat in him of a Christian, but a smack
also of the Jew. And therefore if he more frequented the Capitol and other
Temples on the seventh day, or Saturday, then on any other, it is not to be
attributed to any Authority which the Lord Primates Tradition might have gained
upon him, but unto education or imitation, no great matter which.

For that many of the Gentiles, who lived within the verge of the Roman Empire,
had taken up diverse of the customs and ceremonies of the Jews, who lived
scattered and dispersed amongst them; is affirmed positively by Josephus. (...),
etc.
Quin etiam populi jam olim (says he) multam nostram pietatem aemulantur;
neque Civitas Graecorum ulla usquam aut Barbarorum, nec ulla gens, ad quam
septimanae, in qua vacamus, consuetud^ minime pervenerit, etc. that is to say,
that the Gentiles long since showed themselves inclinable to the religion of
the Jews, and that there was no City of the Greeks, or barbarous people, or any
Nation whatsoever, in which their custom in observing the seventh day for a
day of rest, as also of their games and fasts was not taken up. In which
respect Philo has told us more then once, that the Sabbath was become a
general Festival, which in his Treatise De Dec alogo may be easily found. And
it was very agreeable to the ancient custom of the Romans that it should be so,
who used when they had conquered any Country, not only to carry away their
gods, and set them up amongst their own, but to take from them some part of
their religion, thinking thereby to enlarge the bounds of their Empire, and
bring all the Nations of the World under their command. Sic eorum Potestas and
Authoritas totius Orbis Ambitus occupavit: sic imperium suum ultra solis vias
and ipsius Oceani limits propagavit: sic dum Vniversarum gentium sacra
suscipiunt, etiam regnare meruerunt, as Cecilius pleads the cause for them in
Minutius Foelix.

SECT. IV.
The Historian charged by name, for saying that the ancient Gentiles knew not
the distinction of weeks, and sent to be taught his lesson better of Dector
Ryvet and Salmasius. His Arguments to prove the point laid down at large, and
not refelled by the Lord Primate. The Lord Primates opinion to the contrary not
proved by any ancient Author, either Greek or Latin. The practice of the
Sclavonians related by Helmoldus (an obscure Writer, and a Postnatus too) does
not prove the point. Nothing affirmed by Theophilus Antiochenus, or Johannes
Philoponus, to prove that the distinction of weeks was anciently known amongst
the Gentiles. The Historians Application justified.

WE are now come at last to the first of those Charges, in which the Author of
the History is concerned by name, touching the division of time into weeks,
whether observed or not observed by the ancient Gentiles; in which the Lord
Primate thus declares: The Gentiles (says he) both Civil and Barbarous, both
ancient and of later days, as it were by an universal kind of Tradition,
retain the distinction of the seven days of the week, which if Dr. Heylyn had
read so well proved as it is by Rivetus and Salmasius, he would not have made
such a conclusion as he does: that because the Heathen (of the four great
Monarchies at least) had no distinction of Weeks, therefore they could observe
no Sabbath, p. 79. The Historian is here sent to School to learn of Ryvet and
Salmasius, that the Gentiles both civil and barbarous, both ancient and of
later days, as it were by an universal kind of Tradition, retained the
distinction of the seven days of the week: of Ryvet he must learn for one,
because he was of the same opinion with the Lord Primate in the point of the
Sabbath; and of Salmasius for the other, because he was of the same judgment
with him in the point of Episcopacy* But the Historian will not learn of any
such Masters, but only of the Lord Primate himself. But first it will be
necessary to know what the Historian says to the point in hand; and yet not
only what he says (as if he could carry it out on his own Authority) but what
he proves by witnesses of unquestioned credit. The passage is not long, and
therefore without any abbreviation, I shall here subjoyn it. Whereas it is
conceived Purch. pilgr. l. 1. c. 4.
by some, that the Gentiles by the light of nature had their weeks, which is
supposed to be an argument that they kept the Sabbath; a week being only of
seven days, and commonly so called both in Greek and Latin: we on the other
side affirm, that by this very rule, the Gentiles, many of them, if not the
most, could observe no Sabbath; because they did observe no weeks. For first
the Chaldees and the Persians had no weeks at all: but to the several days of
each several month appropriated a particular name of some King or other; as the
Peruvians do at this present time; Et nomina Emend. Temp. l. 3.
diebus Mensis indunt, ut prisci Persae, as Scaliger has noted of them. The
Grecians also did the like in the times of old: there being an old Attick
Calendar to be seen in Scaliger, wherein is no division of the month into weeks
at all. As for the Romans, they divided their account into eights and eights,
as the Jews did by sevens and sevens; the one reflecting on their Nundinae, as
the other did upon their Sabbath; Ogdoas Romanorum in tributione dierum
servabatur propter Nundinas, ut hebdomas apud Judaeos propter sabbatum. For
proof of Id. l. 4.
which there are some ancient Roman Calenders to be seen as yet, one in the
aforesaid Scaliger, the other in the Roman Antiquities of John Rossinus;
wherein the days are noted from A to H. as in our common Almanacks from A. to
G. Id. l. 1. Ed. 2.
The Mexicans go a little further, and they have thirteen days to the Week, as
the same Scaliger has observed of them.

Nay, even the Jews themselves were ignorant of this division In Levit. 13.
qu. 3.
of the year into weeks, as Tostatus th^nks, till Moses learnt it of the Lord,
in the fall of Mannah. Nor were the Greeks and Romans destitute of this
account, only when they were a rude and untrained people, as the Peruvians and
Mexicans Hist. l. 36.
at this present time: but when they were in their greatest flourish for Arts
and Empire. Dion affirms for the ancient Greeks, that they knew it not; (...),
Marlorat. 7.
for ought he could learn: and Seneca more punctually, that first they learnt
the motions of the Planets of Eudoxus, who brought that knowledge out of Egypt,
and consequently could not know the week before. And for the Romans, though
they were well enough acquainted with the Planets in their later times; yet
they divided not their Calendars into weeks, as now they do, till near about
the time of Dionysius Exiguus, who lived about the year of Christ, 520. Nor had
they then received it in all probability, had they not long before admitted
Christianity throughout their Empire; and therewithal the knowledge of the holy
Scriptures, where the account by weeks was exceeding obvious.

Such are the Arguments, and such the Authors, by which the Historian proved
(or endeavored to prove) that the division of the year into weeks was not known
anciently amongst the Gentiles. And against these the Lord Primate takes not
any exception, but thinks that he has done his work, if he can find out two or
three witnesses to affirm the contrary: It might have been expected that a man
so verst and studied in Antiquities, would have pressed the Historian with the
weight of such proofs and evidences as had been dug out of the rock,
extracted out of the Monuments and Records of the elder times. But on the
contrary, we have not so much as one single testimony produced from any Latin
Authors (Historians, Orators, Poets, or Philosophers) which lived between the
first foundation of the Roman greatness, and the declining of the same; nor
from the writings of those famous men amongst the Grecians, who made their
country as renowned for Arts and Eloquence, as otherwise it had been innobled
for Arms and Victories. For the first Author we are sent to (who though he
lived far off in respect of place, yet lived not very far off in regard of
time) is one Helmondus or Helmandus, who wrote the History of the Sclaves, or
Sclavonian Nations; Nations not known or heard of by that name in Europe, till
the year 600, converted to the Christian Faith by Cyril and Methodius, between
the years 860. and 890. So that if the distinction of weeks did reach etiam ad
ipsos usque Sauromatas, and was known to the Sclavonians themselves, while they
continued in their ancient Paganism, as the Lord Primate says it was, p. 79. I
trow, this can be no sufficient argument, that the distinction of weeks was
anciently known amongst the Gentiles, which was the matter to be proved. The
Sclavonians having conquered Dalmatia, and those other Provinces which bordered
on Macedon and Thrace, two hundred years at the least before they received the
Gospel, might take up the distinction of time into weeks, from the Nations whom
they had subdued, whilst they were yet in the state of paganism, and no harm
done to the Historian in the present business: and therefore granting all that
has been said by Helmoldus, though a post-natus, living about the year 1180.
the Historians Proposition still holds good and unconfuted; unless this
Argument be of force, viz. The Sclavonians when they were in the state of
Paganism, betwixt the year 600. and 860. used to assemble on the second day of
the week Illic secunda feria populus terrae cum flamine and regulo convenire
solebant propter judicia. Helmold. Chron. Sclav. l. 1. c. 24.
to determine Controversies, as Helmoldus tells us; therefore the distinction
into weeks was anciently known amongst the Gentiles in their several Countries,
above 2000. years before them. But if the same order of the days of the week
be retained by them, which The ophilus the old Bishop of Antioch notes to have
been observed by all mankind, all is well enough; and the Sclavonians, though a
Nation of later standing, may well be made an instance for that observation,
which all mankind had generally been accustomed to in all times foregoing. But
certainly Theophilus Antiochenus tells us no such matter. The place here Page
80.
cited, as it stands translated in the Bibliotheca Patrum, is as follows;
Praeterea, de die septimo qui inter omnes Mortales celebris est, (...), etc.
magna apud plerosque ignoratia est: Hic enim dies qui ab H^braeis Sabbatum
vocatur, Graece si quis nomen interpretetur, septimus dicitur: hoc nomine
mortales omnes diem istum appellant, and nominis causam nesciunt pl^rique.
Where clearly Theophilus speaks nothing with reference to the Gentiles of the
elder times, but tells us in the present tense, what estimation there was had
of the seventh day, which the Jews called the Sabbath, in the present times; I
mean the times in which he lived, which was about the latter end of the second
Century, Anno 174. And therefore if all mankind in his time, by reason of the
observation of the seventh day amongst the Jews, retained the same order of
the days of the week, which the Sclavonians after did; this cannot be
conceived a sufficient Argument, that the same order was observed by the
ancient Gentiles, whom that old Bishop of Antioch had no reference to in this
citation: Johannes Philoponus the Grammarian speaks more plainly then
Theophilus did, but he speaks nothing to the point which we have in hand, (...)
etc. which Balthazar Corderius thus translateth, Illud certe omnes homines
consentiunt, septem soles esse dies, qui in seipsos revoluti totum tempus
constituunt. And so it was no question in that Authors time, which was about
the year 600. and somewhat after the distinction of time into weeks, being then
generally received by all civil Nations, who either had received the Gospel, or
had been under the command of the Roman Empire: That which comes after touching
Moses (Solus itaque magnus Moles septenarii dierum numeri rationem divina
insp^ratione hominibus tradidit) shows rather the original of the distinction,
then the general practice; it being more then a thousand years from the death
of Moses, before that distinction of time was received by the G^eeks and R^m^ns
and therefore not to be hoped nor looked for in the barbarous Nations. And this
is that which Petavius the Jesuit, a right learned man has thus delivered. De
doctr. temp. l. 7. c. 3.
Anni divisio posterior est in Hebdomadas: ea dividendi ratio prorsus a Iudaeis
o iginem traxit: Romani etiam* ac Gentiles ante Tertulliani aevum adsciv^sse
videntur. The last division of the year (says he) is into weeks, derived
originally from the Hebrews, and seems to have been taken up by the Romans and
other Gentiles before the time of Tertullian, who takes notice of it. By which
it seems that this distinction was of no great standing in the Roman Empire,
till first their acquaintance with the Jews, and afterward their receiving of
the Christian faith, had brought it into use and esteem amongst them.

The Proposition of the Histo^ian being thus made good, I doubt not but the
Application will hold accordingly. For hereupon it is inferred Hist. of Sab.
Part. 1. c. 4. n. 11. That the Chaldees, Persians, Greeks, and Romans, all the
four great Monarchies, did observe no Sabbaths, because they did observe no
weeks. But the poor Historian must not pass with this truth neither, which
necessarily does arise upon the proof of the Proposition. And therefore he is
told, That if he had read how well the contrary is proved by Rivetus and
Salmasius, he would not have made such a Conclusion as he does. That because
the Heathen (of the four great Monarchies at least) had no distinction of
weeks, therefore they could observe no Sabbath. And I concur fully with the
Lord Primate in this particular. The Historian was not so irrational, as to
infer that the Heathen of the four great Monarchies could observe no Sabbath,
because they did observe no weeks; in case it had been proved to his hand, or
that any sufficient Argument had been offered to him to demonstrate this, that
the very Gentiles, both Civil and Barbarous, both Ancient and of later days,
as it were by an universal kind of Tradition, retained the distinction of the
seven days of the week; which is the point that Rivet and Salmasius are
affirmed to have proved so well, p. 79. But on the contrary, the Historian
having proved that there was no such distinction of the seven days of the
week, retained by the ancient Gentiles, either Civil or Barbarous; and so well
proved it, that the Lord Primate has not any thing to except against him: the
Application will hold good against all opposition, and I shall rest my self
upon it, that the Heathen which observed no Weeks, could observe no Sabbath.

SECT. V.
The Historian taxt for saying that the falling of the first Pentecost, after
Christ's Ascension, upon the first day of the week, was merely casual. The Lord
Primates stating the Question, and his inference on it. Exceptions against the
state of the Question, as by him laid down, viz. in making the Feast of First
fruits to be otherwise called the feast of Pentecost, or the feast of Weeks,
etc. and that he did not rightly understand the meaning of the word Sabbath,
Levit. 23. 16. The Pentecost affixt by Moses to a certain day of the month, as
well as the Passover, or any other Annual Feast; made by the Primate to fall
always on the first day of the week; and God brought into act a miracle every
year, that it might be so. An Answer to the Lord Primates Argument from the
practice of the Samaritans in their keeping of Pentecost. The Quartodecimani
and the Samaritans Schismatics at the least, if not Heretics also. The Lord
Primate puts a wrong sense upon Isychius and Saint Ambrose, to prove that they
gave to the Lords day the name of Sabbath, and his ill luck in it. The
inference of the Lord Primate examined and rejected. The first day of the week
not called the Lords day immediately after the first Pentecost, as is collected
from Waldensis, nor in a long time after. The Lord Primates great mistake in
Tertullians meaning about the Pentecost. Each of the fifty days which made up
the Pentecost esteemed as holy by the Primitive Christians, as the Lords day
was. The mystery of the First fruits not first opened by the Lord Primate, as
is conceived by Dr. Twisse, who applauds him for it.

THe second charge which the Lord Primate lays upon the Historian, relates
unto the holding of the great feast of Pentecost, upon which day the Holy Ghost
came down and sat upon the heads of the Apostles, in the shape of cloven fiery
tongues; and added by Saint Peter's preaching no fewer then three thousand
souls to the Church of Christ. It was, says the Historian, a casual thing
that Pentecost should fall that year upon the Sunday. It was a moveable feast,
as unto the day, such as did change and shift it self, according to the
position of the feast of Passover: the rule being this; that that on what day
soever the second of the Passover did fall, upon that also fell the great feast
of Pentecost. Nam (...) semper eadem est feria, quae (...); as Scaliger Emend.
temp. l. 2.
has rightly noted. So that as often as the Passover did fall upon the
Saturday or Sabbath, as this year it did; then Pentecost fell upon the Sunday:
but when the Passover did chance to fall upon the Tuesday, the Pentecost fell
that year upon the Wednesday: and sic de caeteris. And if the Rule be true, as
I think it is, that no sufficient Argument can be drawn from a casual fact; and
that the falling of the Pentecost that year, upon the first day of the week, be
merely casual; the coming of the Holy Ghost upon that day, will be no Argument
nor Authority, to state the first day of the week in the place and honor of
the Jewish Sabbath.

But the Lord Primate will by no means allow of this, and therefore having
framed a discourse concerning the feast of Pentecost, and the day on which it
was to be holden, he lets us see by a marginal Note, p. 90. against whom it is
that he bends his forces, viz. against Dr. Heylyn, Part 2. c. 1. page 14. Let
us see therefore what he has to say against Dr. Heylyn in this particular, and
into what inconveniences he runs himself by the contradiction. In order
whereunto he must first observe how he states the question, and then consider
whether his proofs and arguments will come up to it.

The Israelites (says he) by the Law of Moses, were not only to observe their
weekly Sabbath every seventh day, but also their feasts of weeks once in the
year: which although by the vulgar use of the Jewish Nation, it may now fall
upon any day of the week, yet do the Samaritans, until this day, constantly
observe it on the first day of the week, which is our Sunday; for which they
produce the Letter of the Law, Leviticus 23. 15, 16. where the feast of the
first fruits (otherwise called Pentecost, or the feast of weeks) is prescribed
to be kept the morrow after the seventh Sabbath: which not they only, but also
amongst our Christian Interpreters, Isychius and Rupertus do interpret to be
the first day of the week. p. 87, 88. This ground thus laid, and some proofs
offered (quite beside the point in question) to show that the Lords day was
called by the name of Sabbath in some ancient Writers, he builds this
superstructure on it, and makes this following Descant on the former Plain
song, viz. But touching the old Pentecost, it is very considerable, that it is
no where in Moses affixed unto any one certain day of the month, as all the
rest of the feasts are; which is a very great presumption that it was a
moveable Feast, and so varied, that it might always fall upon the day
immediately following the ordinary Sabbath. And if God so order the matter,
that in the celebration of the feast of weeks, the seventh day should purposely
be passed over, and that solemnity should be kept on the first: what other
thing may we imagine could be presignified thereby, but that under the state of
the Gospel, the solemnity of the weekly service should be celebrated upon that
day? p. 90.

Such is the state of the Question, and such the inference which arises from
that stating of it; both which are now to be examined as they lie before us.
And first, the feast of first fruits was not otherwise called Pentecost, or the
feast of weeks, as the Lord Primate says it was. For though two loves in the
name of the first fruits of the second, or wheat Harvest, were to be offered to
the Lord on the feast of weeks, which being celebrated on the fiftieth day,
from the sixteenth of Nisan, had the name of Pentecost; yet was the name of the
feast of first fruits appropriated more especially to the second day after the
Passover, or the sixteenth of Nisan, on which the people offered the first
fruits of their Barley (which in that country was first ripe) and from which
the Computation of the said fifty days was to take beginning. And it was thus
appropriated for these reasons following. 1. Because the sixteenth of Nisan was
the first day of their Harvest, on which the people were to offer the very
first fruits of the increase of the earth (which in that Country was their
Barley) before which time they were not to eat either bread, or parched corn,
or the green ears of it; this offering to be made in the Sheafe or Gripe,
before the Corn was thresht out, v. 10. to the end that all the subsequent
Harvest, by the offering of these first fruits, might be blessed unto them:
whereas the offering of the two loves in the name of the first fruits of their
Wheat, was not until the end of Harvest (above seven weeks after) when the
Wheat was housed and threshed, and made into bread. And secondly, the name of
the feast of first fruits was appropriated to the sixteenth of Nisan, because
it had no other name by which it might be dignified above the rest of the
fifty, and distinguished from them; whereas the day on which the two loves were
to be offered, was eminently known by the name of the feast of weeks, and the
feast of Pentecost, and sometimes also called the feast of the Law, because the
Law was given that day by the hand of Moses.

In the next place, the Lord Primate either did not understand the meaning of
the word Sabbath, Levit. 23. 15, 16. or if he did, he would not seem to
understand it, the better to carry on some design for the Sabbatarians: for by
the tenor of his discourse, it appears most evidently that in both places he
understands the word Sabbath in no other sense, but as it signifies the weekly
Sabbath of the fourth Commandment, and thereupon concludes, that the
computation of the fifty days beginning on the morrow after the Sabbath, and
continuing till seven Sabbaths should be complete even unto the morrow after
the seventh Sabbath the feast of Pentecost must of necessity fall upon the
first day of the week which is now our Sunday. If so, the Sabbatarian Brethren
are in the right, in making the falling of the first Christian Pentecost, on
which the Holy Ghost came down, and sat on the heads of the Apostles (three
thousand souls being that day added to the Church of Christ) to be an argument
of some weight for their Lord's Day Sabbath; and Dr. Heylyn is in the wrong, for
making the falling of that Pentecost upon the first day of the week, to be a
matter of casualty, the feast of Pentecost not being tied to a certain day, but
falling on any day of the week, as the year did vary. But by his leave, by
Sabbath in verse 15. ( And you shall count unto you from the morrow after the
Sabbath) we are to understand the feast of unleavened bread, which with all
other of the Annual feasts had the name of Sabbath, as appears plainly by many
several passages in this very Chapter. And this is that which is observed by
some of the Fathers, (...), says Saint Chrysostom, Hom. in Matthew. 39. (...),
says Isidore, Epist. 110. l. 3. And secondly, by Sabbath in the rest of those
two verses, viz. Seven Sabbaths shall be complete; even unto the morrow after
the seventh Sabbath, etc. we are not to understand the weekly Sabbath, but the
week it self, the whole seven days, which from the last in order, but the
first in dignity, took the name of Sabbath. For so we read it in Chap. 18. of
Saint Luke, where the Pharisee boasted of himself, that he fasted twice a week,
verse 12. (...), says the Greek original, Jejuno bis in Sabbato, says the
vulgar Latin. Thus also in Matthew. 28. and Luke 24. we find (...), prima and
una Sabbati, as the vulgar has it, to denote the first day of the week, as our
English reads it. And then the meaning of the Text will be briefly this, that
the feast of Pentecost (reckoning the computation from the morrow after the
Sabbath, that is to say, the feast of unleavened bread) was to be kept
precisely on the morrow after the end of the seventh week, from the sixteenth
of Nisan, on what day soever it should happen, and not on the morrow after the
seventh weekly Sabbath, as the Lord Primate would fain have it. And therefore
thirdly, if the Samaritans observing it until this day upon the first day of
the week, which is our Sunday, produce the letter of the Law, Levit. 23. 15,
16. by keeping it upon that day, they transgress the Law, because they take not
along with them the true meaning of it, and the intent of him that gave it for
a Law to the House of Israel. And this is just the case of Origin in the
Primitive times, who by following the letter of the Gospel, made himself an
Eunuch, contrary to the mind and meaning of Christ our Savior, and therefore
sinned against God and his own body. Fourthly, and finally, if Ruportus speak
no otherwise then Isychius does, he must be reprehended by the Lord Primate, as
Isychius is for straining the signification of altera dies Sabbati, to express
thereby the Lords day; though both produced in this place to no other purpose,
then to prove that the morrow after the seventh Sabbath was the first day of
the week, which is now our Sunday.

Let us next see what Superstructures have been made by the Lord Primate on the
former grounds, what descant he has made on the plain-song, which before we
touched at. And first he tells us how considerable it is, that the old
Pentecost is no where in Moses affixed unto any one certain day of the month,
as all the rest of the feasts are, p. 90. But this is gratis dictum also the
feast of Pentecost being as precisely tied to a certain day, as either the
Passover, the feast of Expiation, or the feast of Tabernacles; for being the
Passover is sixth on the fourteenth of Nisan, the feast of unleavened bread on
the fifteenth, the offering of the first fruits on the sixteenth; and that the
feast of Pentecost was to be kept on the fiftieth day after that: it must-needs
fall expressly and of course (allowing thirty days to the month, as the Jews
computed it) on the fifth of Sivan; which makes it evident, that the old
Pentecost was affixt by Moses to one certain day of the month, as well as any
of the rest. He tells us next, that the old Pentecost may be presumed to have
been a moveable feast, but varied so, that it might always fall upon the day
immediately following the ordinary Sabbath. Which were it so, it must needs be
a movable immovable feast* though being constantly reckoned from the sixteenth
of Nisan, and kept as constantly on the morrow after the end of the seven weeks
from thence computed; seems to have nothing moveable in it, but all fixed and
firm. Thirdly, whereas it is took for granted, and affirmed expressly, that the
Pentecost did always fall upon the day immediately following the ordinary
Sabb^th; there is not any thing more different from the truth it self, nor less
agreeable to right reason. The Passov^r, though it was fixed on the fourteenth
of Nisan, as to the day of the month, did ^all in course (as the f^ast of
Christmas, the Epiphany, the Annuntiation, and all the rest of the Festivals
which depend not on the keeping of Easter do with us in England) on every day
of the week successively in their turns and courses. So that if the fourteenth
of Nisan full upon the second day of the week, the feast of Pentecost must fall
that year upon the Wednesday; and if the fourteenth of Nisan fell upon the
Tuesday, then the Pentecost must fall that year upon the Thursday, and sic de
caeteris. Besides, the year was so unequal amongst the Jews, that it was
impossible the feast of Pentecost should be kept always on the first day of the
week, or the morrow after the ordinary Sabbath, as the Lord Primate would fain
have it. For the Jews measuring their months by the course of the Moon, they
made their year fall shorter by eleven days, than those who measured their
year by the course of the Sun; and therefore were necessitated at the end of
every 2d* or 3d. year, to insert a month, which they commonly called Veadar, or
the second Adar, because it followed after the 12th. month, which they called
Adar. By reason whereof, it was altogether impossible in the course of nature,
or in the ordinary revolution of times and seasons, that the Pentecost should
always fall on the first day of the week; and therefore God himself is brought
upon the Stage, and must work a miracle every year to make up the matter; for
so it follows, viz God (says he) so ordered the matter, that in the
celebration of the feast of Weeks, the seventh day Epist. Oenon. ad Parid.
should purposely be passed over, and that solemnity should be kept upon the
first. p. 90 And this I needs must look on as an high presumption in another
man ( absit reverentia vero, in the Poets language) that God should be entitled
to the maintenance of our private fancies, and brought to act his part (without
any necessity) in the abetting of men's quarrels. The Heathen Poet was a better
Divine then so, who would not have God made an Actor in the common Enter^udes (
Nec Deus intersit nisi dignus vindice nodus Inciderit, as his own words are)
unless some great and weighty difficulty, not otherwise to be resolved, did
require the same. But I am sure there is no such difficulty in the case which
we have before us, as to make God a party in it, to bring him down once in
every year to act a miracle, in ordering the matter so, that howsoever the
course of the year did change and vary, the Pentecost or feast of weeks should
always fall upon the first day of the week, which is now our Sunday.

Now though I should proceed to the examination of the inference which arises
from the former premises, yet I shall first consider of the proofs and
testimonies which the Lord Primate has produced in this particular. And the
first Argument which he brings, is from the practice of the Samaritans, of whom
he tells us that the Samaritans do constantly observe the Pentecost on the
first day of the week, which is now our Sunday, p. 87. their practice in it
being preferred before the vulgar use of the Jewish Nation, by whose account it
may now fall on any day of the week, as is there affirmed. Assuredly the Jews
who so tenaciously adhere to their Circumcision and their Sabbaths, and so
religiously observe the feast of unleavened bread, and the feast of Purim
according to the times appointed in the holy Scripture, cannot be thought to
violate the Law of Moses in keeping the feast of Pentecost on any day of the
week whatsoever, as it chanced to fall. And on the other side, the Samaritans
being looked upon by the Jews as Schismatics, as Heretics also by Epiphanius,
and diverse other Christian Authors, can make no president in this case, nor
ought to have their practice used for an Argument to consute the practice of
the Jews, the more regular people, and more observ^^^ of the Law, and the
punctualities or nicities of it, then the others were.

Much like to this was the point in difference, between the old Heretics,
called Quartodecimani* and the Orthodox Christians, about the time of keeping
Easter, which the Quartodecimani kept always on the fourteenth day of the
month, on what day soever it should happen, on which day the Jews also kept
their Passover, the Orthodox Christians keeping it on the Sunday after, in
memory of the Resurrection of our Lord and Savior, for which the feast of
Easter was first ordained. He that shall justify the Samaritans against the
Jews in the case of Pentecost, may as well justify the Quartodecimani against
the Orthodox Christians in the case of Easter. And yet to justify the
Samaritans, it is after added, that they produce the Letter of the Law, Levit.
23. 15, 16. where the feast of the first fruits ( otherwise called Pentecost,
or the feast of Weeks) is prescribed to be kept the morrow after the seventh
Sabbath, which they interpret to be the first day of the week, p. 87, 88. As if
the Jews did not, or could not keep themselves to the Letter of the Law, in
keeping Pentecost at the end of fifty days, on what day soever it might fall,
because the Samaritans pretend to have the Law on their side in that
particular. Assuredly the Lord Primate did not consider of the absurdities he
has fallen into by thus advocating for the Samaritans, and fixing the feast of
Pentecost on the morrow after the seventh weekly Sabbath; for by this means in
stead of a feast of Pentecost to be observed on the fiftieth day from the first
account, we shall have a feast (by what name soever we shall call it) to be
observed on the forty ninth, forty eighth, and forty seventh* which though they
may be called the feasts of Weeks, or the feasts of the Law, cannot by any
means be called the feast of Pentecost. For if the sixteenth of Nisan, or the
feast of first fruits fall upon the Monday, the feast of Pentecost (improperly
so called) must be kept upon the forty ninth; if on Tuesday, on the forty
eighth day after; and so abating of the number till we come to Saturday; on
which day, if the sixteenth of Nisan should chance to fall (as sometimes it
must,) the next day after the seventh Sabbath would be but the forty fourth
day; and so by the Lord Primates Rule, we shall have a feast of Pentecost but
once in seven years, that is to say, when the sixteenth of Nisan did fall upon
the first day of the week, which is now our Sunday; a feast of Weeks, or of
giving of the Law on the other six. Adeo Argumenta ex absurdo petita ineptos
habent exitus, said Lactantius truly.

The second proof is borrowed from the testimony of Isychius, an old Christian
Writer (who lived about the year 600.) interpreting the morrow after the
seventh Sabbath, as the Samaritans also do, to be the first day of the Week.
And true it is, that Isychius does so expound it; and more then so, makes it to
be the first intention of the Lawgiver* that the day from which the fifty
days were to be reckoned, should be the first day of the week, which is now
our Sunday. Planius, laith he, legislator intentionem suam demonstrare volens,
ab altero die Sabbati Isych. l. 6. in Levit. c. 23.
memorari praecepit quinquaginta dies; dominicum diem proculdubio volens
intelligi. In which as the Lord Primate dares not justify his Author for
straining the signification of altera dies Sabbati, to signify the Lords day,
beyond that true meaning of the word, which in Moses denotes no more then the
morrow after the Sabbath (though produced by him to no other purpose then to
prove that point;) so dare not I justify the Lord Primate in straining the
words of his Author beyond their meaning, and telling us that he made no
scruple to call the day of Christ's resurrection another Sabbath day. For if we
look upon it well, we shall not find that Isychius calls the day of the
Resurrection by the name of another Sabbath day, but only tells us that the
Lords day, the day on which our Savior rose, was altera dies Sabbati, that is
to say, the first day of the Week, or the morrow after the Sabbath (understand
by Sabbath in this place, the feast of unleavened bread) from whence the fifty
days, which ended in the feast of Pentecost, were to take beginning, as will
appear by comparing these words with those before, viz. ab altero die Sabbati
memorari praecepit quinquaginta dies. If the Lord Primate can find no better
comfort from the Council of Friuli, cap. 13. for calling the day of Christ's
Resurrection by the name of another Sabbath day; he will find but little, if
not less, from those words of Saint Ambrose, to which the said Council of
Friuli is supposed to allude. The Fathers words on which the Lord Primate does
rely, to prove that the Lords day was then called a Sabbath, as both Isychius
and the said Council of Friuli are presumed In Psalm. 47.
to do, are these that follow, viz. Vbi Dominica dies coepit praecellere, qua
Dominus resurrexit, Sabbatum quod primum erat secundum haberi coepit a primo.
In which passage he would have us think that the Lords day is called primum
Sabbatum, or the first Sabbath; and the Saturday Sabbatum secundum, or the
second Sabbath. Whereas indeed the meaning of the Father is no more then this,
that after the Lords day had grown into estimation, and got the better, as it
were, of the Jewish Sabbath (ubi Dominica dies coepit praecellere, etc.) the
Sabbath of the Jews, which was before the first in honor and account, began
to be looked upon in the second place, the first being given unto the day of the
Resurrection. And as for the Council of Friuli, the Lord Primate does not say
for certain, that the Lords day is there called Sabbatum primum, and the Jewish
Sabbath, Sabbatum ultimum; but that they are so called, if he be not mistaken:
but if he be mistaken in it (why not as well in this as in all the rest?) the
Council of Friuli will conclude no more then Saint Ambrose did, to whom it is
said to have alluded.

And on the contrary, if the Testimonies here alleged from Isychius, the
Council, and Saint Ambrose may be properly used to prove, that the Lords day
was then called by the name of the Sabbath, the Lord Primate must have very ill
luck in finding no other testimony, but that of luxus Sabbatarius in
Apollinaris, p. 75. to evidence that the Latin word Sabbatum, used to denote
our Christian Festivities, of which in our first Section we have spoken
suffi^iently.

Nor is the Lord Primate less zealous to entitle the Lords day to some
Divinity, then to gratify the Sabbatarian Brethren, by giving it the name of
the Sabbath day. For this is that which is chiefly aimed at in the inference,
wherein I would very cheerfully concur in opinion with him, but that I am
unsatisfied in the grounds of it. For if I were satisfied in this, that God so
ordered the matter, that in the celebration of the feast of Weeks, the seventh
day should purposely be passed over, and that solemnity should be kept upon the
first; I should as easily grant as he, that nothing was more likely to be
presignified thereby, then that under the state of the Gospel the solemnity of
the weekly service should be celebrated upon that day, p. 90. But being I
cannot grant the first for the reasons formerly delivered, I cannot on the
like, or for better reasons, admit the second. I grant that under the state of
the Gospel, the solemnities of the weekly service were celebrated on that day;
and yet I can neither agree with him, nor with Thomas Waldensis, whom he cites
to that purpose, that the Lords day did presently succeed. ( Tunc intrasse
Dominicam loco ejus) in the place thereof, as Baptism presently (as he says)
succeeded in the place of Circumcision. For though Saint John* Apocal. 1. call
the first day of the week by the name of the Lords day, as most Christian
Writers think he did, yet does it not follow thereupon that it was so called,
statim post missionem spiritus Sancti (as Waldensis would have it) immediately
on the coming down of the Holy Ghost. For not only in the eighteenth of the
Acts, which was some years after the first Christian Pentecost, but in Saint
Paul's Epistle to the Corinthians, it is given us by no other name, then that of
the first day of the Week; nor did Saint John write the Revelation, in which
the name of the Lords day is first given unto it, till the ninty fourth or
ninty fifth year from our Saviors birth, which was sixty years, or
thereabouts, from the coming down of the Holy Ghost, the first Christian
Pentecost. And though I am not willing to derogate from the honor of so great
a day, yet I cannot agree with the Lord Primate, That it is in a manner
generally acknowledged by all, that on that day (viz. the first day of the
week) the famous Pentecost in the second of the Acts was observed. For Lorinus
in his Commentary on the second of the Acts, tells us of some who hold, that at
the time of our Saviors suffering, the Passover fell upon the Thursday, and
then the Pentecost must of necessity fall upon the Saturday, or Jewish Sabbath.
But seeing it is said to be agreed on generally in a manner only, let it pass
for once. All which considered, I shall and will adhere to my former vote, viz.
that if the rule be true, as I think it is, that no sufficient argument can be
drawn from a casual fact, and that the falling of the Pentecost that year, upon
the first day of the week, be merely casual; the coming of the Holy Ghost upon
that day will be no Argument nor Authority to state the first day of the week
in the place and honor of the Jewish Sabbath.

And now before I shut up this Dispute about the Pentecost, I shall crave leave
to put the Lord Primate in mind of a great mistake which he has fallen into,
by putting another sense on Tertullians words, about the first Pentecost, as
observed by the Christians, than was intended by that Author. For telling us,
p. 85. That the Gentiles did not celebrate their Saturdays with that solemnity,
wherewith themselves did their Annual Festivities, or the Jews their weekly
Sabbaths; he brings for a proof thereof a passage cited out of the fourteenth
Chapter of Tertullian, De Idololatria; by which it may appear, says be, that
Tertullian thus speaks unto the Christians, who observed 52. Lords days every
year, whereas all the Annual festivals of the Pagans put together did come
short of fifty; Ethnicis semel annuus dies quisque festus est, tibi octavo
quoque die. Excerpe singulas solemnitates nationum, and in ordinem t^xe,
Pentecosten implere non poterunt. But clearly Tertullian in that place neither
relates to the 52 Lords days, nor the number of 50. but only to the Christian
Pentecost, which in his time was solemnized 50. days together, and took up the
whole space of time betwixt Easter and Whitsuntide. And this appears plainly by
the drift of the Author in that place, in which he first taxes the Christians
with keeping many of the feasts of the Gentiles, whereas the Gentiles kept not
any of the feasts of the Christians, non Dominicam, non Pentecosten, no not so
much as the Lords day, or the feast of Pentecost. And then he adds, that if
they did it on^^y to refresh their spirits, or indulge something to the flesh,
they had more festivals of their own then the Gentiles had. The number of the
feasts observed by the Gentiles, being so short of those which were kept by the
Christians of his time, ut Pentecosten non potuerint, they could not equal the
festival of the Pentecost only, much less the Pentecost and the Lords day
together. And so it is observed by Pamelius in his Notes upon that place; where
first he tells us, that the Author in that place understands not only the
feast of Pentecost it self, or the last day of fifty, sed etiam tempus illud
integrum a die Paschae in Pentecosten, but the whole space of time betwixt it
and the Passover (taking the word Passover in the largest sense, as it
comprehends also the feast of unleavened bread.) But what need Pamelius come in
place, when it is commonly avowed by the ancient Writers, that all the fifty
days which made up the Pentecost, were generally esteemed as holy, and kept
with as great reverence and solemnity as the Lords day was? No fasting upon the
one nor upon the other; Die dominico jejunium nefas ducimus, vel de geniculis
adorare; De corona mil. c. 3.
eadem immunitate a die Paschae in Pentecosten gaudemus, as Tertullian has it.
Saint Ambrose more expressly tells us, Sermon 61. that every one of those fifty
days was instar Dominicae, and qualis est Dominica, in all respects nothing
inferior to the Lords day; and in his Comment on Saint Luke c. 17. l. 8. that
omnes dies (that is to say, all those fifty days) sunt tanquam Dominica. Add
hereunto Saint Jeroms testimony, Ad Lucinum, and then I hope Tertullians words
in his Book De Idololatria, c. 14. will find another sense and meaning then
that which the Lord Primate has ascribed unto it.

To shut up this Dispute, in which we have encountered so many errors, the Lord
Primate tells us very rightly, that on the day of the Passover, Christ our
Passover was slain for us, that he rested in the grave the whole Sabbath
following (commonly called the feast of unleavened bread) the next day after
that, the first fruits of the first ( or Barley) Harvest was offered unto God,
and that from thence the count was taken of the seven Sabbaths, and that upon
the morrow after the seventh Sabbath (which was our Lords day) was celebrated
the feast of weeks, etc. Upon which offering of the sheaf of the first fruits
of the first, or ( Barley) Harvest (which happened at the time of our Saviors
suffering on the first day of the Week) he gives this note, that Christ rose
from the dead upon that day, and became the first fruits of them that slept;
many bodies of the Saints that slept arising likewise after him, p 91. And for
this note, he receives great thanks from Dr. Twisse, signifying in a letter to
him the great satisfaction which he received from him, in opening the mystery
of the feasts of first fruits, to the singular advantage of the Lords day, in
the time of the Gospel, p. 103. But herein Dr. Twisse may be said to be like
those men of whom Tully speaks, Qui non tantum ornarent aliquem suis laudibus,
sed honorarent alienis. For without derogating in the least from the honor due
to the Lord Primate, I cannot say that the honor of the first opening of this
mystery does belong to him; it being an observation which I had both read in
Books, and heard in Sermons many years before 1640. in which (or but the year
before) the Lord Primate wrote this present Letter to Doctor Twisse. But
because I have but few Books by me, and cannot readily call to mind in what
Books I read it, I shall content my self at this present with the gloss of
Deodati on the twentieth verse of the fifteenth Chapter of the first Epistle to
those of Corinth, where it is said, that Christ was risen again, and was become
the first fruits of them that slept, premising only by the way, that Diodati
began those Annotations in the Italian tongue, about the year 1606. to give his
Countrymen an insight of the darkness wherein they lived, which afterward he
polished and perfected in such manner, as they are now come into our hands. Now
Diodati his note is this, viz. that Christ is called the first fruits of them
that slept, not only because he was the first in the order of the
Resurrection, which is in Believers, as it were, a wakening from sleep; but
also in the quality of a Chief, the cause and pledge of it in all his members
inseparably united to him by communion of Spirit, Romans 8. 11. even as under the
Law in the first fruits offered to God, the people had an assurance of Gods
blessing upon all their Harvest. In a word, as some things are defined, or (to
speak more properly) described amongst Philosophers rather by what they are
not, then by what they are; so it is easier to declare to whom the first
opening of this Mystery of the first fruits (if there be any mystery in it)
does not of right belong, then to whom it does.

SECT. VI.
The Historian charged for following the Greek Editions of Ignatius, in his
Epistle to the Magnesians. An old Latin Translation of Ignatius preferred by
the Lord Primate before any of the Greek Editions, and the reason why. Proofs
from the best of the Greek Fathers, that the Sabbath was kept as an holy day by
the Primitive Christians; The contrary not proved by these two testimonies
which are alleged from the Council of Laodicea, and the words of Gregory the
Great. The Council of Laodicea prohibits not the keeping of the Sabbath day,
but the keeping of it after the manner of the Jews, by abstaining from all kind
of work. The Sabbatarians by imposing a restraint from all manner of work on
the Lords day, are by Pope Gregory the Great made the Preachers of Antichrist.
The Lord Primate picks a needless quarrel with the Bishop of Ely.

THe third charge laid by name on the Historian, relates unto a passage cited
out of the Epistle of Ignatius Ad Magnesianos; in which he does not stand
accused either for falsifying the words of his Author, or putting a wrong sense
upon them; but only for not consulting with an old Latin copy of Ignatius
which he never heard of. The Historian had then by him no fewer then four
Editions of that Father, one published by Mastreus the Jesuit, both in Greek
and Latin; another in both languages, published by Vedelius a Genevian, with
his notes upon it; a third more ancient then either of them, printed at Paris,
in both languages also, but the year I remember not; and a fourth in Latin
only, but of a very old Print, subjoyned unto the works of Dionysius the
Areopagite. Out of all which compared together, he cited that passage out of
the Epistle to the Magnesians, against which the Lord Primate has excepted,
and is this that follows; (...), etc. Let us not keep the Sabbath in a Jewish
manner, in sloth and idleness; for it is written, that he that will not labor
shall not eat, and in the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat thy bread. But let
us keep it after a spiritual fashion, not in bodily ease, but in the study of
the Law; not eating meat dressed yesterday, or drinking lukewarm drinks, or
walking out a limited space, or settling our delights, as they did, on dancing;
but in the contemplation of the works of God, (...), etc. And after we have so
kept the Sabbath, let every one that loves Christ, keep the Lords day
festival, the Resurrection day, the Queen and Empress of all days; in which
our life was raised again, and death was overcome by our Lord and Savior. So
that we see he would have both days observed; the Sabbath first, though not as
would the Ebionites, in a Jewish sort: and after that the Lords day, which he
so much magnifieth, the better to abate that high esteem which some had cast
upon the Sabbath.

Against this passage, and the inference which is raised upon it, the Lord
Primate first objecteth, saying, that there is no such thing to be found in an
old Latin copy of the works of Ignatius, which is to be seen in the Library of
Caius College in Cambridge, which for many respects he does prefer before any
Greek Edition then extant. And in that old Latin copy, says he, there is
nothing to be found in the Epistle to the Magnesians, touching the Sabbath and
the Lords day, but these words only, viz. Non amplius Sabbatizantes, sed
secundum Dominicam viventes, in qua and vita nostra orta est. And thereupon he
does infer that all those other words alleged by Doctor Heylyn (Part 2. page
43.) to prove that Ignatius would have both the Sabbath and the Lords day
observed, were afterward added by some later Grecian, who was afraid that the
custom of keeping both days observed in his time, should appear otherwise to
be directly opposite to the sentence of Ignatius, p. 95, 96. This is the
easiest charge that may be, and if there were nothing else intended, but to
show that the Historian was not the Master of so much good fortune, as to have
seen the old Latin Copy in Caius Library before he undertook that work, we
might here end this Section without more ado. But the main matter aimed at in
it, is to disprove that which the Historian has delivered, concerning the
observing of both days, as well the old Sabbath, as the new Lords day by the
Primitive Christians. That which the Lord Primate cites out of the third Book
of Eusebius, to show that the main intention of Ignatius was to oppose the
Ebionites of his own time, is no more then what he might have found in the same
Part and Page of the History of the Sabbath, which himself has cited; and
therefore might have here been spared, were it not used by him as an Argument
to prove that which no body does deny, viz. That by their imitation of the
Church herein the antiquity of the observation of the Lords day might be
further confirmed, p. 96. Nor is it to much better purpose that he proves the
universality of the observance of the Lords day, out of another passage of the
same Eusebius in his Book De laudibus Constantini; in which he does but (...),
having no other Adversary (that I know of) to contend withal. The Author of
that History had said so much of the Antiquity of the Lords day, and the
Universality of the observance of the same, with many other things conducing to
the honor of that sacred day; that he received thanks for it sent to him in
the name of diverse Ministers living in Buckinghamshire, and Surrey (though of a
different persuasion from him in other points about that day) whom he never
saw. But that the Saturday, or old Sabbath, was not kept holy at the first by
the Primitive Christians, by those especially who lived in the Eastern parts of
the Roman Empire; neither the antiquity nor the universality of keeping the
Lords day can evince at all.

For on the contrary, that the old Sabbath was kept holy by the Primitive
Christians, is proved first by the Constitutions of the Apostles ascribed to
Clement (of good Authority in the Church, though not made by them) where it is
said, (...). By which it evidently appears, that both days were ordered to be
kept holy, the one in memorial of the Creation, the other of the Resurrection.
Which Constitutions being not thought to be of weight enough to make good the
point (though of so great antiquity and estimation, as to be mentioned and made
use of by Epiphanius, a right learned man) are somewhat backed by the Authority
of Theophilus Antiochenus an old Eastern Bishop, who lived not long time after
Ignatius, Anno 174. by whom we are told of that great honor which the seventh
day or Jewish Sabbath had attained unto ( qui apud omnes mortales celebris est,
as before we had it in our fourth Section on another occasion) with all sorts
of people. But if this be not plain enough, as I think it is, they are secondly
most strongly countenanced by the Authority of the Synod held in Laodicea (a
Town of Phrygia) Anno 314. where there passed a Canon (...), Can. 16.
touching the reading of the Gospels with the other Scriptures upon the
Saturday or Sabbath; that in the time of Lent there should be no oblation made
(...), but on the Saturday, and the Lords day only; Can. 49.
neither that any festival should then be observed in memory of any Martyrs,
but that their names only should be commemorated, (...), upon the Lords day
Can. 52.
and the Sabbaths. Which Canons were not made (as may appear plainly by the
Histories of these elder times) for the introduction of any new observance
never used before, but for the Declaration and Confirmation of the ancient
usage. Thirdly, De Castigatione.
we find in Gregory Nyssen, that some of the people who had neglected to
observe the Saturday, were reproved by him on the Sunday, (...) (...); etc.
With what face, says the Father, will thou look upon the Lords day, which have
dishonored the Sabbath? know thou not that these days are Sisters, and
that whosoever does despise the one, does affront the other? Fourthly, by Saint
Basil the Saturday or Sabbath is reckoned for one of those four days, on which
the Christians of his time used weekly to participate of the blessed Eucharist
((...)) Epist. 289.
the Lords day, Wednesday and Friday being the other three. And though it
cannot be denied, but that the observation of the Saturday began to lessen and
decay in diverse places toward the latter end of the fourth Century, and in
some other places, as namely the Isle of Cyprus, and the great City of
Alexandria (following therein the Custom of the Church of Rome) had never been
observed at all; Yet, fifthly, Epiphanius Bishop of Salamis in the Isle of
Cyprus, could not but acknowledge, that in other places (...), they used to
Expos. fidei Cath. 24.
celebrate the holy Sacrament, and hold their public meetings on the Sabbath
day. And sixthly, the Homily De Semonte ascribed to Athanasius, does affirm as
much, as to the public Assemblies of the Christians on the Sabbath day; and so
does Socrates the Historian, who accounts both days for weekly festivals,
(...), and adds (...), that on them both the Congregation used to be
assembled, and the whole Liturgy performed. By which account, besides Socrates,
and the Author of the Constitutions, against whom some objections have been
pretended, we have the Testimonies of Theophilus Antiochenus, Gregory Nyssen,
Basil, Epiphanius, and the Author of the Homily De Semente ascribed to
Athanasius, most plain and positive in this point, that both the Sabbath and
the Lords day were observed for days of public meeting by the Eastern
Christians, as was affirmed before out of the Epistle of Ignatius ad Magnes.
And I conceive that the Lord Primate did not, or could not think (or if he did,
cannot be justified for so thinking) that men of such an eminent sanctity as
those Fathers were, would falsify that Epistle of Ignatius to serve their
turns, or add any thing to that Epistle which they found not in it, out of a
fear that the custom of keeping both days observed in their times, should
appear otherwise to be directly opposite to the sentence of Ignatius, p. 96.
And therefore Doctor Heylyn taking the words of Ignatius, as he found them in
the several Greek Editions above mentioned, and finding them so well backed and
countenanced by those holy Fathers which succeeded in their several times, need
not be troubled at the starting out of an old Latin Manuscript, so different
from the Greek Editions, as it seems to be; nor to recede from any thing which
he has cited out of those Editions, because the Lord Primate finds it not in
his Latin Manuscript.

The passage of Ignatius Ad Magnesianos, cited by the Historian, being
justified by so many good Authors, all living and writing (except Socrates
only) in the four first Centuries; we must next see what the Lord Primate has
to object against it, or any thing therein delivered, or rather to confirm his
correction of it out of the old Latin Copy in the Library of Caius College.
The old Latin Copy has it thus, Non amplius Sabbatizantes, sed secundum
Dominicam viventes, in qua and vita nostra orta est. And this he thinks to be a
sufficient Argument to prove, that the Lords day was observed as a weekly holy
day by the Christians in the room of the abrogated Sabbath of the Jews, p. 93.
Though no such thing can be collected, either as to the weekly celebrating of
the Lords day, or the abrogating of the Jewish Sabbath from his Authors words.
But then as well to justify the reading of this old Latin Copy, as to refel
that which the Historian had observed from the Greek Editions, he gives us two
Authorities, and no more but two: The first is the Authority of the Fathers in
the Council of Laodicea, touching the time whereof (whether he or the Lord
Bishop of Ely be in the right) we dispute not now; By whom it was declared,
quod non oportet Christianos Judaizare, and in Sabbat o otiari, sed ipsos eo
die operari; diem autem Dominicam praeferentes, otiari (si modo possint) ut
christianos, p. 98. But unto this it may be answered, that this Canon (it is
the 29 in number) relates not to the meetings of the Christians on the Sabbath
or Saturday for Gods public service; but to the usage of some men, who did
seem to Judaize upon it, by giving themselves to ease and idleness, and to rest
from labor when the service of the day was ended. And that the Canon meant no
more then to reprove such men as observed the Saturday or Sabbath after the
manner of the Jews, and to take order for the conttary in the time to come,
appears most evidently by the great care they took touching the solemnizing of
that day, and the Divine Offices to be done upon it, declared in three several
Canons, the sum whereof we have seen already in this Section. So that this
first part of that Canon aimed at no other end, but by ordaining that the
people should work on the Sabbath or Saturday (suppose it still after the
public service of the day was ended) thereby to distinguish them from the
Jews, who would not work at all upon it. And then that this distinction
between them and the Jews might appear more evidently, it was ordered in the
later part of that Canon, that preferring the Lords day before it, they should
as Christians rest from labor on that day, if their occasions would permit
them: For if we mark it as we should, we shall not find that the Fathers
absolutely prescribed any such cessation from all, or any work (for which
purpose it is chiefly cited) but only with a si modo possint, if neither
Masters, Parents, or other Superiors should command them otherwise, or that the
convenience of their own affairs, or the doing of good offices to their
neighbor, did not occasion them to dispose of it, or some part thereof on some
bodily labor. The Canon must be thus expounded, or else it must run cross to
those which before were mentioned, which were ridiculous to imagine in so grave
a meeting. The next Authority is taken from Gregory the Great, who tells us
that it is the Doctrine of the Preachers of Antichrist, qui veniens diem
Dominicum and Sabbatum ab omni opere faeciet custodiri, who at his coming shall
cause both the Lords day and the Sabbath to be kept or celebrated without doing
any manner of work. A passage very strangely cited, and such as I conceive the
Lord Primate will neither stand to, nor be ruled by upon second thoughts. For
if it be the Doctrine of the Preachers of Antichrist, that no manner of work is
to be done upon the Saturday or Sabbath, it is the Doctrine of the same
Preachers of Antichrist, that no manner of work be done on the Lords day
neither. And if it be the Doctrine of the Preachers of Antichrist, that no
manner of work should be done on the Lords day, what will become of all our
English Sabbatarians, and their Abetrers, who impose as many restraints of this
kind upon Christian people, as ever were imposed on the Jews by the Scribes
and Pharisees? What will become of those who framed the Articles of Ireland, or
have since subscribed them, or preached, or writ according to the tenor of
them; in one of which it is decreed, that the first day of the week, which is
the Lords day, is wholly to be dedicated to the service of God, and that
therefore we are bound therein to rest from all common and daily business? The
Lord Primate did not well consider of these inconveniences, when he brought in
Gregory the Great to bear witness for him. And in that want of consideration,
he falls on Doctor Francis White, Lord Bishop of Ely, a right learned man, for
rendering Pope Gregory's words by a strange kind of mistake in turning this word
and the Copulative, into or the Disjunctive. But possibly this may be a fault
of the Printers, or a slip of the Pen, without any purpose or design of
altering the least word, or true intention of that Father. And secondly,
whether it be rendered by the Copulative and, or the Disjunctive or, is not
much material; for if it be the Doctrine of the Preachers of Antichrist, to
teach men to abstain from all manner of work both on the Saturday and the
Sunday; it is, no doubt, the Doctrine of the same preachers of Antichrist, to
teach men to abstain from all manner of work upon the Saturday, or the Sunday.
So that the Lord Primate might have spared that exception against a man of his
own order, and of so great Abilities in the Schools of Learning; but he held a
contrary opinion to the Sabbatarians, and therefore was to fare no better then
the Author of the History had fared before him. And herein the Lord Primate
seems to be of the same mind with the famous Orator, who held it very just and
equitable, ut qui in eadem causa sint in eadem item essent fortuna. And so much
for that.

SECT. VII.
The Historian charged for crossing with the Doctrine of the Church of England,
and in what particulars; Mr. Ley accused by the Lord Primate, for being too
cold and waterish in the point of the Sabbath. That by the Declaration of the
three Estates convened in Parliament, 5. and. 6. of Edw. 6. the times of
public worship are left to the liberty of the Church; and that by the Doctrine
of the Homilies the keeping of the Lords day has no other ground then the
consent of godly Christian people in the Primitive times. No more of the fourth
commandment to be now retained, by the Book of Homilies, then what belongs to
the Law of Nature. Working in Harvest, and doing other necessary business,
permitted on the Lords day, both by that Act of Parliament, and the Queens
Injunctions. No restraint made from Recreations on the Lords day till the first
of King James. The Sundaies and other Festivals made equal in a manner by the
public Liturgy, and equal altogether by two Acts of Parliament. The Answer to
the Lord Primates Objection from the Book of Homilies with reference to the
grounds before laid down. The difference between the Homilies of England and
the Articles of Ireland in the present case. Several strong Arguments to prove
the Homily to mean no otherwise then as laid down in the said Answer. Doctor
Bounds Sabbath Doctrines looked on as a general grievance, and the care taken to
suppress them.

WE are now come unto the third and most material charge of all the rest, by
which the Historian stands accused for opposing the Doctrine of the Church of
England in the Book of Homilies, to which he had formerly subscribed; and that
too in so gross a manner, that all the Sophistry he had could neither save him
harmless for it, nor defend him in it. This is an heavy charge indeed; and that
it may appear the greater, the Lord Primate lays it down with all those
aggravations which might render the Historian the less able either to traverse
the Indictment, or plead not guilty to the Bill. I wonder (says he in his
Letter to an Honorable Person, page 110.) how Doctor Heylyn, having himself
subscribed to the Articles of Religion agreed upon in the Synod held at London,
Anno 1562. can oppose the conclusion, which he finds directly laid down in
the Homily of the time and place of Prayer, viz. God has given express charge
to all men in the fourth Commandment, that upon the Sabbath day, which is now
our Sunday, they shall cease from all weekly and weekday labor, to the
intent, that like as God himself wrought six days, and rested the seventh, and
blessed and consecrated it to quietness and rest from labor, even so Gods
obedient people should use the Sunday holily, and rest from their common and
daily business, and also give themselves wholly to the heavenly exercise of
Gods true Religion and service. This is the charge which the Historian suffers
under, wherewith the Lord Primate, as it seems, did so please himself, that
like a crambe his cocta, it is served in again in his Letter unto Mr. Ley; but
ushered in with greater preparation then before it was. For whereas Mr. Ley had
hammered a Discourse about the Sabbath, which he communicated to the Lord
Primate, to the end it might be approved by him, the Lord Primate finds some
fault with the modesty of the man, as if he came not home enough in his
Propositions to the point in hand; Your second Proposition (says he p. 105.)
is too waterish, viz. That this Doctrine rather then the contrary is to be held
the Doctrine of the Church of England; and may well be gathered out of her
public Liturgy, and the first part of the Homily concerning the place and time
of prayer. Whereas you should have said, that this is to be held undoubtedly
the Doctrine of the Church of England. For if there could be any reasonable
doubt made of the meaning of the Church of England in her Liturgy, who should
better declare her meaning then her self in her Homily? where she peremptorily
declares her mind; That in the fourth Commandment God has given express
charge to all men, etc. as before we had it.

Assuredly a man that reads these passages cannot choose but think that the Lord
Primate was a very zealous Champion for the Doctrine of the Church of England;
but upon better consideration we shall find it otherwise, and that he only
advocateth for the Sabbatarians, not only contrary to the doctrine of the
Church of England, but the practice also: which that we may the better see, I
shall lay down plainly, and without any sophistry at all, upon what grounds the
Lords day stood in the Church of England at the time of the making of this
Homily, both absolutely in it self, and relatively in respect of the other Holy
days. And first we are to understand, that by the joint Declaration of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons assembled in Parliament in the 5.
and 6. years of King Edw. 6. the Lords day stands on no other ground then the
Authority of the Church, not as enjoined by Christ, or ordained by any of his
Apostles. For in that Parliament, to the honor of Almighty God it was thus
declared, viz. Forasmuch as men be not at all times so mindful to laud and
praise God, so ready to resort to hear Gods holy word, and to come to the holy
Communion, etc. as their bounden duty does require; therefore to call men to
remembrance of their duty, and to help their infirmities, it has been
wholsomly provided, that there should be some certain times and days appointed
wherein Christians should cease from all kind of labor, and apply themselves
only and wholly unto the aforesaid holy works, properly pertaining to true
Religion, etc. which works, as they may well be called Gods service, so the
times especially appointed for the same, are called holy days: Not for the
matter or the nature either of the time or day, etc. for so all days and times
are of like holiness, but for the nature and condition of such holy works, etc.
whereunto such days and times are sanctified and hallowed, that is to say,
separated from all profane uses, and dedicated not unto any Saint or Creature,
but only unto God and his service. Neither is it to be thought that there is
any certain time, or definite number of days ^rescribed in holy Scripture; but
the appointment both of the time, and also of the number of days, is left by
the Authority of Gods word unto the liberty of Christ's Church, to be determined
and assigned orderly in every Country by the discretion of the Rulers and
Ministers thereof, as they shall judge most expedient to the setting forth of
Gods glory, and edification of their people. Which Statute being repealed in
the Reign of Queen Mary, was revived again in the first year of Queen
Elizabeth; and did not stand in force at the time of the making of this Homily,
which the Lord Primate so much builds on, but at such time also as he wrote his
Letter to Mr. Ley, and to that Honorable Person whosoever he was.

But since he has appealed to the Book of Homilies, to the Book of Homilies
let him go, where he shall find as little comfort as he found in the Statute.
For in the Homily touching the time and place of prayer, out of which the Lord
Primate has selected this particular passage, it is thus doctrinally resolved,
viz. As concerning the time, in which God has appointed his people to assemble
together solemnly, it does appear by the fourth Commandment, etc. And albeit
this commandment of God does not bind Christian people so straightly to observe
and keep the utter Ceremonies of the Sabbath day, as it did the Jews, as
touching the forbearing of work and labor in the time of great necessity, and
as touching the precise keeping of the seventh day, after the manner of the
Jews; (for we keep now the first day which is our Sunday, and make that our
Sabbath, that is, our day of rest, in honor of our Savior Christ, who as upon
that day rose from death, conquering the same most triumphantly:) Yet
notwithstanding whatsoever is found in the Commandment, appertaining to the Law
of Nature, as a thing most godly; most just and needful for the setting forth
of Gods glory, ought to be retained and kept of all good christian people. So
that it being thus resolved, that there is no more of the fourth Commandment to
be retained by good Christian people, then what is found appertaining to the
Law of Nature; and that the law of nature does not tie us to one day in 7. or
more to one day of the 7. then to any other: let us next see by what Authority
the day was changed, and how it came to be translated from the 7th to the
first. Concerning which it follows thus in the said Homily, viz. This example
and commandment of God, the godly christian people began to follow, immediately
after the Ascension of our Lord Christ, and began to choose them a standing day
of the week to come together in; (the very same with that before declared in
the Act of Parliament) yet not the seventh day, which the Jews kept, but the
Lords day, the day of the Lords Resurrection, the day after the seventh day,
which is the first day of the week, etc. Sit hence which time Gods people has
always, in all ages, without any gainsaying, used to come together on the
Sunday to celebrate and honor Gods blessed name, and carefully to keep that
day in holy rest and quietness, both man and woman, child, servant, and
stranger. So far the Homily; and by the Homily it appears plainly that the
keeping of the Lords day is not grounded on any commandment of Christ, nor any
precept of the Apostles, but that it was chosen as a standing day of the week
to come together in, by the godly christian people, immediately after Christ's
Ascension, and has so continued ever since. So then, the keeping of the Lords
day being built on no other grounds (as is declared both in the Homily and the
Act of Parliament) then the authority of the Church, the consent of godly
Christian people; it must needs follow thereupon, that it is to be kept with no
greater strictness (with reference either unto worldly business, or honest
recreations) then what is required of the people by the Law of the Land, the
Canons of the Church, or by the Edicts and Proclamations of the King, or other
supreme Governor under whom we live. And if we please to look into the Act of
Parliament before remembered, we shall find it thus in reference unto worldly
business, viz. It shall be lawful to every Huusbandman, Labourer, Fisherman,
and to all and every other Person or Persons, of what Estate, Degree, or
Condition he or they be, upon the Holy days aforesaid (of which the Lords day
is there reckoned for one) in Harvest, or at any other times in the year, when
necessity shall so require, to labor, ride, fish, or work any kind of work at
their free will and pleasure: any thing in this Act to the contrary
notwithstanding. The like we also find, as to worldly business, in the Queens
Injunctions Injunct. 20.
published in the first year of her Reign; in which the Sunday is not only
counted with the other holy days, but labor labor at some times permitted,
and which is more, enjoined upon it: For in those Injunctions it is ordered
with a non obstante, That all Parsons, Vicars, and Curates shall teach and
declare unto their Parishoners, that they may with a safe and quiet conscience,
after Common Prayer, in the time of Harvest, labor upon the holy and festival
days, and save that thing which God has sent; And if for any Scrupulosity or
grudge of conscience, men should superstitiously abstain from working on these
days, that then they should grievously offend and displease God. And though it
may be said, that the Queens Injunction, and every thing therein contained, was
buried in the same Grave with her; yet cannot this be said of the Act of
Parliament, which is still in force, and gives as much permission unto Worldly
business, as the said Injunction. And as for Recreations, there was not only
permission of such civil pastimes, and man-like exercises, by which the spirits
of men might be refresht, and their bodies strengthened; but even of Common
Enterludes, Bear-baitings, Bull-baitings, and the like, fit only for the
entertainment of the ruder or more vulgar sort. For though the Magistrates of
the City of London obtained from Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1580. that Plays and
Enterludes should no more be acted on the Sunday within the liberties of their
City; and that in the year 1583. many were terrified from beholding the like
rude sports upon that day, by the falling of a Scaffold in Paris Garden,
whereby many were hurt, and eight killed out right: yet there was no restraint
of either in other parts of the Realm, till King James (to give a little
contentment to the Puritan party in the beginning of his Reign) prohibited the
same by his Proclamation, bearing date at Theobalds May 7. 1630. But for all
other civil Recreations, they were not only permitted as they had been
formerly, but a Declaration issued from that King about sixteen years after,
concerning lawful sports, from which some of the preciser sort of Justices had
by their own authority restrained the people.

In the next place let us behold the Sunday or Lords day comparatively with the
Saints days, and other Festivals; and we shall find them built on the same
foundation, the same Divine offices performed in both, and the like diligent
attendance required on both. For in the Act of Parliament 5, 6. of Edw. 6.
before remembered, the appointing of all holy days and set times of worship
being first declared to be left by the Authority of Gods Word, unto the liberty
of Christ's Church, to be determined in every country by the discretion of the
Rulers thereof; it is next signified what days shall be accounted holy days,
and what shall not. For so it follows in that Statute; Be it enacted, etc.
that all the days hereafter mentioned shall be kept and commanded to be kept
holy days, and none other: that is to say, all Sundays in the year, the
feasts of the Circumcision of our Lord Jesus Christ, of the Epiphany, of the
Purification (with all the rest now kept, and there named particularly.) The
like ennumeration we have also in the Book of Commonprayer, the public Liturgy
of this Church by Law established, where we shall find it thus expressed, That
these shall be accounted holy days and none other; that is to say, all
Sundays in the year, the feast of the Circumcision, the Epiphany, with all the
rest before specified in the Act of Parliament. Nor does the Church only rank
the Lords day with other holy days in that enumeration of them, but has
appointed the same Divine offices (the Letany excepted only) to be performed
upon the Saints days and other festivals, as upon the Sundays, each of them
having his proper Lesson, Collect, Epistle, and Gospel, as the Sunday has, and
some of them their proper Psalms also; which the Sunday has not. And as for
the attendance of the people, it is required with as much diligence upon the
Saints days and other Festivals, as upon the Lords day, by the Laws of this
land. For so it is enacted in the Statute of the first of Queen Elizabeth, viz.
That all and every Person and Persons inhabiting within this Realm, etc. shall
diligently and faithfully endeavor themselves to resort to their Parish Church
or Chapel, etc. upon every Sunday, and other days ordained and used to be
kept as holy days, then and there to abide orderly and soberly, during the
time of common prayer, preaching, or other service of God. Nor was it only
enacted, that men should diligently repair to their Church or Chapel, as well
upon the other holy days as upon the Sunday, but that the same penalty was
imposed on such as without any reasonable let did absent themselves, as well
upon the one as upon the other. For so it follows in that Statute, viz. That
every person so offending, shall not alone be subject unto the censures of the
Church, but shall forfeit for every such offense twelve pence, to be levied to
the use of the poor of the same parish, by the Churchwardens of the same, etc.

Which grounds thus laid, the Lord Primates Argument from the Book of Homilies
will be easily answered. For if the weight of his argument lie in the first
words cited out of the Homily, that in the fourth Commandment God has given
express charge to all men, that upon the Sabbath day, which is now our Sunday,
etc. and therefore that the Sunday or Lords day may be called a Sabbath; this
will prove nothing but a (...), or a contention about words, and not within the
compass of the Homily neither, it being declared in the former words of the
same Homily, that we keep now the first day, which is our Sunday, and make that
our Sabbath, that is our day of rest. So that the destinating of the Sunday, or
first day of the week for the day of rest, makes it (at the most) but a tanquam
to the Sabbath, neither entituling it to the name nor prerogatives of it. But
if the weight of the Argument lie in these words, viz. That men upon the Sunday
or Lords day should cease from all weekly and work-day labor, etc. and also
give themselves wholly to Heavenly exercises of Gods true Religion and service.
For the first part thereof, touching the forbearing of all weekly and work-day
labor, is no otherwise to be understood, but of such labors as are prohibited
by the Laws of the Realm, or otherwise may prove an avocation from Gods public
service, at the times appointed for the same. And as for the last words,
touching men's giving of themselves wholly to heavenly exercises of Gods true
Religion and service; they are of a far differing meaning from the Article of
the Church of Ireland (for which the Lord Primate chiefly stickleth) in which
it is declared, that the first day of the week, which is the Lords day, is
wholly to be dedicated to the service of God. For certainly there is a great
difference between the dedicating of a day wholly to the service of God, as in
the Articles of Ireland; and the giving of our selves wholly to heavenly
exercises, as in the Homilies of England: the one implying that no part of the
day is to be otherwise spent then in the service of God, no place being left
either for necessary business, or for lawful pleasure; the other, that in the
Acts and times of public worship, we should give our selves wholly, that is,
our whole selves, souls and bodies, to the performance of those heavenly
exercises which are then required. It had before been told us in this very
Homily, that nothing in the fourth Commandment was to be retained, but what was
found appertaining to the Law of Nature: but it appertains not to the Law of
Nature, either that one day in seven should be set apart for Religious worship,
or that this one day wholly be so employed; vel quod per totam diem In Exodus
20. qu. 12.
abstineatur ab operibus servilibus, as Tostatus has it, or that there be an
absolute cessation, during the whole day, from all servile works. By
consequence there is no more required of us by the Law of Nature in this case,
but that at the times appointed for Gods public worship, we wholly sequester
our selves, yea, our very thoughts, from all worldly business; fixing our souls
and all the faculties thereof, upon that great and weighty business which we
are in hand with. That does indeed appertain Ibid.
to the Law of Nature, Natural est quod dum Deum colimus, ab aliis
abstineamus, as Tostatus has it; and to this point we have been trained in the
Schools of Piety, Orantis est nihil nisi coelestia cogitare, as was said
before. So that the meaning of the Homily in that place will be only this,
that for those times which are appointed by the Church for the assembly of Gods
people, we should lay by our daily business, and all worldly thoughts, and
wholly give our selves to the heavenly exercises of Gods true Religion and
service, as in the Homily we are willed.

And that this only was the meaning of the Homily in that place, may be
convincingly concluded from the reasons following. First, from the
improbability that the Authors of that Homily should propound a Doctrine so
evidently contrary to the Declaration of the Act of Parliament in the 5, and 6.
of Edw. 6. which was then in force; and unto which not only the Commons and
the Lords Temporal, but even the Lords Spiritual, and the King himself did
most unanimously concur; or that the Queen should authorize a Doctrine in the
Book of Homilies (as by ratifying the 39. Articles she must be supposed to have
done) which was so plainly and professedly contrary to her own Injunctions.

Secondly, from the strong Alarm which was taken generally by the Clergy, and
the most knowing men of the Laity also, at the coming out of Doctor Bounds.
Book about the Sabbath, Anno 1595. In which book it is declared amongst other
things, that the Commandment of sanctifying every seventh day, as in the
Mosaical Decalogue, is Natural, Moral, and Perpetual. That there is great
reason why we Christians should take our selves as straightly bound to rest
upon the Lords day, as the Jews were upon their Sabbath; that there should be
no buying of victuals upon that day; no Carriers, Packmen, Drovers, or other
men to be suffered to travel; no Scholars to study the Liberal Arts; no Lawyers
to consult the case of their Clients, or peruse their Evidences; no Justices to
examine Causes for preservation of the peace; no Bells to ring upon that day;
no solemn Feasts or Wedding Dinners to be made on it; with so many other
prohibitions and negative precepts, that men of all sorts and professions
looked upon it as a common grievance.

Thirdly, from the great care which was presently taken by such as were in
Authority, to suppress those Doctrines, the said Book being called in by
Archbishop Whitgift, both by his Letters missive and his visitations, as soon
as the danger was discovered, Anno 1599. and a command signified in the Queens
name by Chief Justice Popham at the Assizes held at Bury in Suffolk, Anno 1600.
that the said Book should no more be printed; though afterward in the more
remiss Government of King James, it came out again with many Additions, Anno
1606.

Fourthly, and finally, from the permitting of all sorts of Recreations (even
common Enterludes and Bear-baitings) in the so much celebrated Reign of Queen
Elizabeth; as also by the Declaration about Lawful sports published by King
James, An. 1618. and revived afterward by King Charles, Anno 1633* which
certainly those godly and religions Princes would neither have suffered, nor
have done, had they conceived it to be contrary to the Doctrine of the Church
of England, of which they were such zealous Patrons, and such stout Defenders.
No breaking of Subscription here by the Historian, no crossing or opposing of
the Doctrine of the Church of England in the Book of Homilies, and consequently
no such need of Sophistry to elude the Lord Primates Argument which was drawn
from thence, as the said Honorable Person N. N. must believe there was.

SECT. VIII.
A further Argument to prove the meaning of the Homily, as before laid down.
The high esteem which the Church of England has of the ancient Fathers, as
also of the usages of the primitive times; with her respect unto the
neighboring Reformed Churches. No restraint from labor on the Lords day
imposed by the Council of Laodicea. Beza's opinion of the liberty in those
times allowed of. Lawsuits and Handy-crafts prohibited in great Cities on the
Lords day, by the Emperor Constantine, but Husbandry permitted in the country
Villages. Proof from Saint Jerome, Chrysostom, Augustine, that after the Divine
service of the day was ended, the rest of the day was spent in men's several
businesses. Husbandry first restrained in the Western Churches in the Council
of Orleans, Anno 540. and by the Edict of the Emperor Leo Philosophus in the
Eastern parts about the year 890. Several restraints laid on the Lords day by
the Council of Mascon, Anno 588. Pope Gregory offended at such restraints, and
his censure of such as did enioyn them. The liberty allowed in the Lutheran
Churches on the Lords day, as also in those of the Palatinate, till after the
year 1612. Nor in the Churches of the Low Countries, till the year 1618. Not
only servile Works, but Fairs and Markets continued on the Lords day in those
Countries, till the same year also. Necessary labor permitted on the Lords day
in the Reformed Churches of the Switzers, and honest Recreations in the French
and Genevian Churches; as also in the Kirk of Scotland. The conclusion and
application of the last Argument.

IT has been proved sufficiently in the former Section, that the passage
alleged by the Lord Primate from the Book of Homilies (and that twice for
failing) is capable of no such sense and meaning as he puts upon it; for if it
were, the Homily must not only contradict it self, but the Authors of it must
be thought to propound a Doctrine directly contrary to the Queens Injunctions,
and the public Liturgy of this Church, and several Acts of Parliament which
were then in force. And which is more, the whole body of Gods people in this
Land, by following their necessary business, and lawful pleasures upon the
Sunday or Lords day, when no attendance at the place and hours of Gods public
service was required of them, must be supposed to have run on in a course of
sin against Gods Commandments, and of contempt and disobedience to the public
Doctrine of the Church for the space of 80. years and upwards, without
contradiction or restraint; which to imagine in a Church so wisely constituted,
and in a State founded on so many good Laws, cannot find place with any man of
sober judgment. But there is one Argument yet to come, of as much weight and
consequence as those before, that is to say, that if any such restraint from
labor and honest recreations was by the Doctrine of this Church imposed on the
people of God; this Church must openly oppose the Doctrine of the ancient
Fathers, the laudable usages and customs of the Primitive times, together with
the general practice and persuasion of all the Protestant and Reformed Churches
in these parts of the world: a matter so abhorrent from the principles of the
first Reformers, and from the Canons and Determinations of this Church and the
Rulers of it, that no surmises of this kind can consist with reason.

The Church of England has always held the Fathers in an high regard, whether
we look upon them in their learned and laborious writings, or as convened in
General, National, and Provincial Councils; appealing to them in all
Differences between her and the Church of Rome, and making use of their
authority and consent in expounding Scripture; witness that famous challenge
made by Bishop Jewel in a Sermon preached at Saint Paul's Cross, Anno 1560. in
which he publicly declared, that if all, or any of the learned men of the
Church of Rome could produce any one sentence out of the writings of any of the
ancient Fathers, or any General, or National Council, for the space of the
first 600. years in justification of some Doctrines by them maintained, and by
us denied, he would relinquish his own Religion, and subscribe to theirs.
Witness the Canon made in a Convocation of the Prelates and C^ergy of England,
Anno 1571. Cap. De concionatoribus, by which it was ordered and decreed that
nothing should be preached to the people, but what was consonant unto the
Doctrine of the old and new Testament, quodque ex illa ipsa Doctrina Catholici
Patres and veteres Episcopi collegerint, and had been thence collected by the
Orthodox Fathers and ancient Bishops. And though H. B. of Friday-street in his
seditious Sermon preached on the fifth of November, Anno 1636. and the Author
of the Book entitled, The Liberty of Prophecy, published in the year 1647.
endeavor to make them of no reckoning; yet was King James (a learned and well
studied Prince) persuaded otherwise then so. And thereupon in some Directions
sent by him to the Vice Chancellor, and other of the Heads of the University of
Oxford, bearing date January 18. An. 1616. it was advised and required, That
young Students in Divinity be directed to study such Books as be most agreeable
in Doctrine and Discipline to the Church of England; and excited to bestow
their time in the Fathers and Councils, Schoolmen, Histories, and
Controversies, and not to insist too long upon Compendiums and Abbreviators,
making them the grounds of their study in Divinity. By which we see that the
first place is given to Fathers and Councils, as they whose writings and
decrees were thought to have been most agreeable to the Doctrine and Discipline
of the Church of England. The like may be said also of the usages and customs
of the Primitive times, which the first Reformers of this Church had a
principal care of; it being asfirmed in the Act of Parliament, 2. 3. of Edw. 6.
by which the first Liturgy of that Kings time was confirmed and ratified, that
the Compilers of the same not only had an eye to the most pure, sincere
Christian Religion taught in the Scriptures, but also a respect to the usages
in the Primitive Church. They had not else retained so many of the ancient
Ceremonies, as bowing at the name of Jesus, kneeling at the Communion, the
Cross in Baptism, standing up at the Creed and Gospels, praying toward the
East, etc. besides the ancient Festivals of the Saints and Martyrs, who have
their place and distinct offices in the present Liturgy. And as for the
neighboring Protestant and Reformed Churches, although she differ from them in
her Polity, and form of government, yet did she never authorize any public
Doctrine, which might have proved a scandal to them in the condemning of those
Recreations, works of labor, and other matters of that nature, which the
general practice of those Churches both approve and tolerate. And therefore if
it can be proved, that the spending of the whole Lords day, or the Lords day
wholly in Religious exercises, accompanied (as needs it must be) with a
restraint from necessary labor, and lawful pleasures, be contrary to the
Doctrine of the ancient Fathers, the usages and customs of the Primitive
times, and to the general practice of the Protestant and Reformed Churches; I
doubt not but it will appear to all equal and indifferent men, that there is no
such mind and meaning in the Book of Homilies or in them that made it, as the
Lord Primate has been pleased to put upon it, or to gather from it.

And first, beginning with the Fathers, Councils, and the Usages of the
Primitive Church; it is not to be found, that ever they required that the whole
day should be employed in Gods public service, without permission of such
necessary business and honest recreations, as men's occasions might require, or
invite them to. It was ordained indeed by the Council of Laodicea, spoken of
before, that Christians on the Lords day should give themselves to ease and
rest ( otiari is the word in Latin, which possibly may be meant also of a rest
from labor) but it is qualified with a si modo possint, if it may stand with
the conveniences of their Affairs, and the condition which they lived in. And
so the Canon is expounded by Zonaras in his gloss In Can. Con. Laod.
upon it. It is appointed (says he) by this Canon, that none abstain from
labor on the Sabbath day, which plainly was a Jewish custom, and an Anathema
laid on those who offended herein. (...), etc. But they are willing to rest
from labor on the Lords day, in honor of the Resurrection of our Lord and
Savior. But here we must observe that the Canon adds, (...), in case they
may. For by the Civil Law it is precisely ordered, that every man shall rest
that day, (...), the Hindes and Husbandmen excepted; his reason is the very
same with that before expressed in the Emperors Edict, (...), etc. for unto
them it is permitted to work and travel on that day, because perhaps if they
neglect it, they may not find another day so fit and serviceable for their
occasions. Besides which it is to be considered, that many Christians of those
times were servants unto Heathen Masters, or otherwise obnoxious to the power
of those under whom they lived; and therefore could not on the Lords day
abstain from any manner of work further then it might stand with the will and
pleasure of those Superiors to whom the Lord had made them subject. A
Christian servant living under the command of an Heathen Master, might
otherwise neglect this Masters business one whole day in seven, and plead the
Canon of this Council for his justification; which whether it would have saved
him from correction, or the Church from scandal, I leave to be considered by
all sober and unbiassed men. All that the Church required of her conformable
Children, during the first 300. years, was only to attend the public
ministration, or morning-service of the day, leaving them to dispose of the
rest thereof at their will and pleasure; the very toil of Husbandry not being
prohibited or restrained for some ages following. For proof whereof take these
words of Beza, a man of great credit and esteem not only with our English
Presbyterians, but the Lord Primate himself. Vt autem Christiani eo die a suis
quotidianis In Can. Sol. Hom. 30.
laboribus abstinerent, praeter id temporis quod in coetu ponebatur, id neque
illis Apostolicis temporibus mandatum, neque prius fuit observatum quam id a
Christianis Imperatoribus, nequis a rerum sacrarum meditatione abstraheretur,
and quidem non ita praecise observatum. That Christians ought, says he, to
abstain that day from their labor, except that part alone which was appointed
for the meetings of the Congregation; was never either commanded in the
Apostles times, nor otherwise observed in the Church, until such time that so
it was enjoined by Christian Emperors, to the end the people might not be
diverted from meditating on holy matters; nor was it then so strictly kept as
it was enjoined.

Now the first Christian Emperor was the famous and renowned Constantine, who
was the first that established the Lords day (which formerly had stood on no
other ground then the Authority of the Church, and consent of Gods people) by
Imperial Edicts; so by the like Imperial Edict he restrained some labors on
that day, and permitted others. The Judges in that age used to hold their
Courts of Judicature, even in the hours and times of Gods public service; by
which means many were necessitated to absent themselves from the public
meetings of the Church, and neglect their duties unto God. Many of the
Artificers also which dwelt in great Towns and populous Cities, whose penny was
more precious with them then their Pater noster, used to do the like. For
remedy whereof, it was ordained by the Emperors Edict, Vt omnes Judices,
urbanaeque plebes, and cunctarum Artium officia venerabili die Solis quiescant.
But on the other side it was permitted unto those who lived in Country
Villages, to attend their Husbandry, because it happens many times, Ut non
aptius alio die frumenta I^. omnes cap. de seriis.
sulcis, vineae scrobibus mandentur, that no day is more fit then that for
sowing Corn, and for planting Vines. And then he gives this reason for it, Ne
occasion momenti pereat commoditas coelesti provisione concessa; lest
otherwise by neglect of convenient seasons, they lose those benefits which
their God had bestowed upon them. And if the toils of Husbandry were not only
permitted upon that day, but in a manner seemed to be enjoined by the former
Edict, no question but such worldly businesses as did not take men off from
their attendance at the times of the ministration, might be better suffered.
And so Ad Eustochian.
Saint Hierom does inform us of Paula, a devout and religious Lady, that she
caused her Maidens and other Women which belonged to her, to repair diligently
to the Church on the Lords day; but so that after their return operi distributo
instabant, and vel sibi vel caeteris vestimenta faciebant, they betook
themselves unto their tasks, in making garments either for themselves or
others. Nor does the Father censure or reprove her for it, as certainly he
would have done, had any such Doctrine been then taught and countenanced in the
Church of Christ, touching the spending of the whole day (or the Lords day
wholly) in religious exercises. It appears also by S. Chrysoft. that after the
Divine duties of the day were finished, which held but 1 or 2 hours in the
morning ( unam aut duas hor as ex die integro, as it is in Origin) the people
were required only to spend In Number. Hom. 2.
some time in meditation at their coming home, (...), and were then suffered to
pursue the works of their several callings. Saint Austine in his Tract Hom. 5.
in Mat. 1.
De rectitudine Catholicae Conversationis advises us to be attent and silent
all the time of Divine service, not telling tales, nor falling into jarres and
quarrels, as being to answer, such of us as offend therein: Dum nec ipse verbum
Dei audit, nec alios audire permittit, as neither harkening to the word of God
our selves, nor permitting others. But for the residue of the day, he left it
in the same estate in which he found it, to be disposed of by Gods people,
according as their several necessities and occasions required of them.

Thus have we seen as well the Doctrine as the Practice of the African and
Eastern Churches: Let us now turn our selves toward the West, and we shall
find that some in France had begun to Judaize so far, as to impose many of
those restraints on the Lords day, which the Jews had put upon their Sabbath;
viz. that none should travel on the Lords day with Waines or Horses, or dress
Meat, or make clean the House, or meddle with any manner of domestic business.
Which being taken into consideration by the third Council of Orleance, Anno
540. it was there ordained, that since those prohibitions did savor more of
the Jew then of the Christian; Die Dominico quod ante licuit, licere, that
therefore whatsoever had formerly been lawful on that day, should be lawful
still. Yet so, that for the satisfaction and contentment of those troublesome
Spirits, who would not otherwise submit to the Determinations of the Council,
it was thought convenient, that men should rest that day from Husbandry, and
the Vintage; from sowing, reaping, hedging, and such servile works, quo
facilius ad Ecclesiam venientes, orationis gratia vacent, that so they might
have better leisure to go unto the Church, and there say their prayers. This as
it was the first restraint from Husbandry on the Lords day, which had been made
by the Canons of the Church; so was it seconded by a Canon made in the Synod of
Mascon in the 24. year of Ganthram King of the Burgundians, Anno 588. and
followed Conc. Matiscon. Can. 1.
by another in the Council of Auxerre in France under Clotaire the second,
about two years after. In both of which it was decreed, Non licere die dominico
boves jungere, vel alia opera exercere; that no man should be suffered to yoke
his Oxen, or do any manner of work upon the Sunday. But then we must observe
withal, that these Councils acted only by their own Authority, not charging
those restraints on God, or on his Commandment; it being positively declared by
the Canon of the Council of Mascon, that the Lord did not exact it of us that
we should celebrate this day in a corporal abstinence, or rest from labor; who
only looks that we do yield obedience to his holy will, by which contemning
earthly things, he may conduct us to the Heaven of his infinite mercy. Which
Declaration notwithstanding, the Doctrine of it self was so offensive to Pope
Gregory the first, that partly to encounter with some Christians of the Eastern
Countries, who still observed the Jewish Sabbath, and partly to prevent the
further spreading of these restraints in the Western parts, which made men seem
to Judaize on the Lords day also; he pronounced such as were active in
promoting the practice and opinion of either side, to be the Preachers of
Antichrist, qui veniens diem Sabbati and diem Dominicum ab omni opere faciet
custodiri, as his own words are. Less forward were the Eastern Churches, in
imposing any of these new restraints upon the people, then the Western were;
the toiles of Husbandry it self not being prohibited in the Eastern parts of
the Empire, til the time of Leo Philosophus, (he began his Government, Anno
886.) who grounding himself on some command of the holy Ghost, and the Lords
Apostles, which neither he nor any body else could ever find, decreed by his
Imperial Edict, ut omnes in die sacro, etc. a labor vacent. Neque Agricolae,
etc. that all men whatsoever, as well the Husbandman as others, should on the
Lords day rest from all manner of work. So long it was before any such general
restraints were laid upon Gods people, either in the West or East. In all which
time we neither find, that the setting of some whole day apart for Gods solemn
worship, was looked upon as Juris Divini naturalis, which is the Lord Primates
own opinion; or that the first day of the Week, which is the Lords day, was
wholly to be dedicated to the service of God, and therefore that men should be
bound to rest therein from their common and daily business, which is the
Doctrine of the Articles of the Church of Ireland.

Next let us look upon the Protestant Lutheran Churches, amongst whom, though
restraints from labor, formerly imposed by many Canons, Laws, and Imperial
Edicts, do remain in force, yet they indulge unto themselves all honest and
lawful recreations, and spare not to travel on that day, as well as upon any
other, as their necessities, or pleasures give occasion for it. If they repair
unto the Church, and give their diligent attendance on Gods public service,
there is no more expected of them; they may dispose of all the rest of the day
in their own affairs, and follow all such businesses from which they are not
barred by the Laws of the several Countries in which they live, without being
called to an account, or censured for it. And as for the Reformed or Calvinian
Churches, they give themselves more liberty on that day then the Lutherans do,
few of them having any Divine offices (until now of late) in the Afternoons; as
neither had the Primitive Christians, till toward the later end of the fifth,
or the beginning of the sixth Century. In those of the Palatinate, the
Gentlemen betake themselves in the Afternoon of the Lords day to Hawking and
Hunting, according as the season of the year is fit for either, or spend it in
taking the Air, visiting their Friends, or whatsoever else shall seem pleasing
unto them: as does the Husbandman in looking over his grounds, ordering his
cattle, or following of such Recreations as are most agreeable to his nature
and education. And so it stood in the year 1612. at what time the Lady
Elizabeth, daughter to King James, and wife to Frederick the fifth, Prince
Elector Palatine, came first into that Country; whose having Divine Service
every afternoon in her Chapel or Closet, officiated by her own Chaplains,
according to the Liturgy of the Church of England, might give some hint to the
Prince her Husband to cause the like religious offices to be performed in some
part of the Afternoon in the City of Heidelberg, and after by degrees in other
the Cities and towns of his Dominions. In the Netherlands they have not only
practice, but a Canon for it; it being thus decreed Collat. doct. Cathol. and
Protestant. cap. 68.
by the Synod of Dort, Anno 1574. Publicae vespertinae preces non sunt
introducendae ubi non sunt introductae, and ubi sunt, tollantur; that is to
say, That in such Churches where public Evening prayer had not been admitted,
it should continue as it was; and where they were admitted, they should be put
down. And if they had no Evening Prayers, there is no question to be made, but
that they had their Evening Pastimes, and that the Afternoon was spent in such
employments as were most suitable to the condition of each several man. And so
it stood till the last Synod of Dort, Anno 1618. in which it was Synod. Dordra.
Sess. 14.
ordained, that Catechism-Lectures should be read in their Churches on Sundays
in the Afternoon, the Minister not to be deterred from doing his duty propter
Auditorum infrequentiam, though possibly at the first he might have few
Auditors; and that the Civil Magistrate should be implored, ut omnia opera
servilia and quotidiana, etc. That all servile works and other prophanations of
that day might be restrained, quibus tempus pomeridianum, maxim in pagis,
plerumque transique soleret; wherewith the Afternoon, chiefly in smaller Towns
and Villages, had before been spent, that so they might repair to the
Catechizing. For both before that time, and since, they held their Fairs and
Markets (their Kirk-masses, as they used to call them) as well upon the Lords
day, as on any other, and those as well frequented in the Afternoon, as were
the Churches in the forenoon.

France, and even in Geneva it self (the New Rome of the Calvinian party) all
honest Exercises, shooting in pieces, long-bows, cross-bows, etc. are used on
the Sunday, and that in the morning, both before and after Sermon: neither do
the Ministers find fault therewith, so they hinder not from hearing of the Word
at the time appointed. And as for the Churches of the Switzers, Zuinglius
avoweth it to be lawful, Die dominico, peractis sacris, laboribus incumbere, On
the Resp. ad Call. Gent.
Lords day after the end of Divine Service, for any man to follow and pursue
his labors; as commonly we do, says he, in the time of Harvest. And possible
enough it is, that the pure Kirk of Scotland might have thought so too, the
Ministers thereof being very inclinable to the Doctrine of Zuinglius, and the
practice of the Helvetian Churches, which they had readily taken into their
Confession, Anno 1561, but that they were resolved not to keep those holy days
which in those Churches are allowed of: all Holy days but the Lords day only
having been formerly put down by their Book of Discipline. Nor could I ever
learn from any of my Acquaintance of that Kingdom, but that men followed their
necessary businesses, and honest recreations on the Lords day, till by commerce
and correspondence with the Puritan, or Presbyterian party here in England, the
Sabbatarian Doctrines began by little and little to get ground amongst them.

On all which premises I conclude, that the Authors of that Homily had neither
any mind or meaning to contradict the Ancient Fathers, the usages and customs
of the Primitive times, in the general practice of the Protestant and Reformed
Churches; and therefore that the words of the Homily are not to be understood
in any such sense as he puts upon them. The Doctrine of the Church of England
is clear and uniform, every way consonant to it self; not to be bowed to a
compliance with the Irish Articles of the year 1615. and much less with the
judgment and opinion of one single person in 640. No Sophistry in all this,
but good Topical Arguments, and such as may be more easily contemned then
answered. And so much toward the exonerating of the fourth charge, the most
material of them all, in which the Historian stands accused for opposing the
Doctrine of this Church in the Book of Homilies, to which he had formerly
subscribed.

SECT. IX.
The Historian charged for mistaking the affairs of Ireland in two particulars,
which he ingenuously confesses. The great cunning of the Puritan faction in
effecting their desires in the Convocation of Dublin, Anno 1615. which they
could not compass here in England. The Historian accused for shamelesness, etc.
for the second mistake, though only in a point of Circumstance; the Articles
of Ireland being called in, and those of England received in the place thereof
by the Convocation, though not by Parliament. The Lord Primates narrative of
this business; he finds himself surprised in passing the Canon, and makes use
of a sorry shift to salve the matter. The matter of a Commandment how, and in
what sense made an Article of the Faith; and made a matter of the faith in this
particular of the Lords day by the Assembly of Divines at Westminster. The
consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, as capable of being taken into the
Creed, as the Parity of Ministers. No verdict passed in behalf of the Lords day
Sabbath by the Church of England. The great difference between the Lord Primate
and the Church of England in this business of the Lords day Sabbath. A parting
dash bestowed by the Lord Primate on the Historian.

THis leads me on to the fifth and last charge laid on the Historian, merely
extrinsecal, as to the main concernments of the point in hand, though such as
has better ground to stand on then the other four. The Historian having
carried on his design as far as he could by the help of Books, was forced to
take up two passages, concerning the affairs of Ireland, upon information; an
information not took up upon a vulgar hearsay, but given to him by such hands,
from which he was confident he might receive it, without doubt or scruple. The
first particular is this, that at such time as his Majesty's Commissioners in
Ireland employed about the settling of that Church Anno 1615. there passed an
Article, touching the keeping of the Lords day, by which the English
Sabbatarians were much confirmed in their Courses, and has been often since
alleged to justify both them and their proceedings, Hist. Sab. p. 2. l* c. 8.
n. 9. But the Lotd Primate now assures us, that the said Article was passed,
and the Book of Articles published in Print diverse years before the
Commissioners (whom he means) came thither, p. 109. And thereunto Doctor
Bernard adds, that the said Articles were subscribed by the Archbishop of
Dublin, then Speaker of the House of Bishops in Convocation, by the Prolocutor
of the House of the Clergy in their names, and signed by the Lord Deputy
Chichester in the name of King James. If so, (as now I believe it was) I must
needs say that the Sabbatarians, and the rest of the Calvinian party in
England, were wiser in their generations then the children of light; who seeing
that they had no hopes of thrusting the nine Articles of Lambeth, their Sabbath
Speculations, and the rest of their Heterodoxies (of which particularly
hereafter) on the Church of England, they began to cast their eyes on Ireland,
which lying further off might be less looked after. And in that Realm they made
themselves so strong a party, that they obtained those Points in the
Convocation held at Dublin, Anno 1615. which neither their seditious clamours
in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, nor their Petition to King James at his first
entrance on this Kingdom, nor their motion at the Conference in Hampton Court,
nor their continual Addresses to the Houses of Parliament, were able to effect
in England. The outworks being thus easily gained, they made from thence their
Batteries on the Fort it self, of which they doubted not to make themselves
Masters in short time, as in fine they did. For after this, when the Sabbath
Quarrels were revived, and the Arminian Controversies in agitation, no argument
was more hotly pressed by those of the Puritan faction, then the Authority of
these Articles, and the infallible judgment of King James, to confirm the same.

The other particular, in which the Historian does confess himself to have been
too credulous in believing, and inconsiderate in publishing such mistaken
intelligence, is, that the Articles of Ireland were called in, and that in
their place the Articles of the Church of England were confirmed by Parliament
in that Kingdom, Anno 1634. For this mistake, though it be only in the
circumstance, not in the substance of the fact which is now before us, he
stands accused by the Lord Primate of no less then shamelesness. Nor shames he
to affirm (says he) that the whole Book of the Articles of Ireland is now
called in (which is a notorious untruth) and that the Articles of the Church of
England were confirmed by Parliament in this Kingdom, Anno 1634. Which passage,
with some others in this Letter, makes me apt to think, that it was never the
Lord Primates meaning, or desire to have it published in Print, though Dr.
Bernard has been pleased to adventure on it. For if it had been so intended,
he would have showed less passion, and more civility toward a Doctor in
Divinity, Chaplain in ordinary to the King, and one not altogether untravelled
in the ways of Learning; then to brand him with Sophistry, Shamelessness, and
extravagant Fancies, to tax him with notorious untruths, speaking
inconsiderately; and finally to send him back to School again to learn his
Catechism.

Egregiam vero laudem and spolia ampla tulistis
Tuque puerque tuus.
Assuredly the Lord Primate and his Chaplain too have reapt great praise and
micle meed for this notable victory, by which notwithstanding they have gained
nothing but the name and noise. For if it can be proved (as I think it may)
that the Articles of Ireland were called in, and that those of England were
received in their place; then, whether it were done by Parliament or
Convocation, is not much material. But on the contrary, it is affirmed by the
Lord Primate, That the House of Convocation in the beginning of their Canons,
for the manifestation of their agreement with the Church of England, in the
confession of the same Chrstian faith, and the Doctrine of the Sacraments, as
themselves profess, and for no other end in the world, did receive and approve
of the Articles of England: but that either the Articles of Ireland were ever
called in, or any Article, or Canons at all were ever here confirmed by Act of
Parliament, may well be reckoned amongst Dr. Heylyns fancies. This the Lord
Primate has affirmed, but takes no notice that the receiving of the Articles
of England imports no less then the repealing of those of Ireland; of which
since Doctor Bernard has discoursed more fully in his following Paper, I shall
reserve my Answer unto this Objection, till I come to him. In the mean time we
are to know, that the Lord Primate having been wrought on to propose the Canon
which he speaks of about the Articles of England, did readily consent unto it,
conceiving it to be without any prejudice to the other; and thereupon he did
not only propose it in the House of the Bishops, but commended it to the House
of the Clergy, where by his motion many assented the more readily, as Dr.
Bernard has informed us, p. 118. But afterward, the Lord Primate, upon
further consideration, conceiving that he had been surprised, and that he had
passed more away in that Canon then he first intended, began to cast about for
some expedient to salve the matter, and keep the Articles of Ireland in their
former credit. And thereupon it was thought fit that both the Lord Primate
himself, and some other Bishops of his party should at an Ordination, take the
subscription of the party ordained to both Articles, the Articles of England
not being received instead, but with those of Ireland, p. 120, 121. A sorry
shift, but such as was conceived to be better then none, though as good as
nothing.

But leaving this Dispute to another place, as before was intimated we now
proceed to the Examination of some other passages in the Lord Primates Letter
unto his Honorable Friend, in which he first charge the Historian for
speaking inconsiderately, in saying, that before that time, viz. Anno 1615. The
Lords day had never attained such credit as to be thought an Article of the
Faith, though of some men's fancies. And why was this so inconsiderately spoken?
Because (says he) he that would confound the ten Commandments ( whereof this
must he accounted for one unless he will leave us but nine with the Articles of
Faith, had need be put to learn his Catechism again. But this I look on as a
flourish, or a fancy only. For I hope the Lord Primate does not think the
Historian so extremely ignorant, as to mean there a justifying and salvifical
faith; but that he takes faith there in the general notion, as it imports a
firm persuasion, and belief that those things are undoubtedly true which are
commended to him by the Church in which he lives, or found in any creditable
and unquestioned Author; And in this notion of the word, the matter of a
Commandment being made a Doctrine, may be called an Article of the Faith,
without any such scorn, as to be put to learn the Catechism again. The Articles
of England by such as write of them in Latin, are called Confessio Ecclesiae
Anglicanae (praeter Consil. redeundi.
Confessionem Anglicanam quam mihi ut modestam praedicabant, etc. says the
Archbishop of Spalato.) In like manner and in the same sense and signification
as the Articles of the Belgic Churches, and the Kirk of Scotland, are called
confessio fidei Ecclesiarum Belgicarum, Confessio fidei Scoticana, and sit de
caeteris, that is to say, the confession of the Faith of those several
Churches. By which name the Articles of Ireland being also called by a most
eminent, learned and judicious person (as Doctor Bernard sets him out, p. 121.)
and the new Doctrine of the Sabbath being made a part of that Confession, it
may be said without any absurdity, or being put to School again to learn the
Catechism, that till that time, viz. 1615. the Lords day never had attained
that credit, as to be thought an Article of the Faith. But to make the matter
sure, and beyond exception, I must put Dr. Bernard in mind of a Book entitled,
The Humble Advice of the Assembly of Divines assembled at Westminster by the
Authority of Parliament, concerning a Confession of Faith. In which Confession
of the Faith it is said expressly, that, As it is in the Law of Nature, that in
general a due proportion of time be set apart for the worship of God; so in his
word by a positive, moral, and perpetual Commandment, binding all men, in all
ages, he has particularly appointed one day in seven for a Sabbath to be kept
holy unto him: which from the beginning of the world to the Resurrection of
Christ, was the last day of the week; and from the Resurrection of Christ, was
changed into the first day of the week, which in Scripture is called the Lords
day, and is to be continued to the end of the world, as the Christian Sabbath.
The institution and keeping of the Lords day here is made an Article of the
Faith, an Article of that Confession of the Faith which by the Assembly of
Divines (whereof the Lord Primate was nominated to be one) was recommended to
the two Houses of Parliament; and yet I trow, the Lord Primate will not send the
whole Assembly to learn their Catechism again, unless it were one of the
Catechisms of their own making, either the larger, or the lesser, it is no
matter which.

But the Lord Primate stays not here, he goes on and says, That he that would
have every thing which is put into the Articles of Religion, to be held for an
Article of Faith, should do well to tell us whether he has as yet admitted the
Book of the ordination of Bishops, and the two volumes of Homilies into his
Creed; both which he shall find received in the Articles of Religion agreed
upon in the Synod held at London, Anno 1562. But unto this it may be answered,
that the Book of the Ordination of Bishops, and the two Volumes of Homilies may
be so far taken into the Historians Creed, as to believe as much of either as
is required of him in the Book of Articles. For he may very warrantably and
safely say, that he does verily believe that the second Book of Homilies does
contain a godly and wholesome Doctrine, and necessary Artic. 35. 36.
for those times (that is to say, the times in which they were first published)
and that the Book of Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, and ordering of
Priests and Deacons, does contain all things necessary to such Consecration and
ordering, and that it has nothing that of it self is superstitious or ungodly.
All this the Historian does and may believe without making it an Article of his
Faith, except it be in that general notion of the word, which before we spoke
of; and in which notion of the word, the Article of the Consecration of
Archbishops and Bishops, etc. may as well find a place in the Confession of
the Faith of the Church of England, as that Article of the Parity of Ministers
has found admittance in the Confessions of the Belgic, Scottish, and other
Reformed Churches. For in the Belgic Confession, Art. 31. it is thus declared,
quantum vero attinet Divini verbi Ministros, ubicunque locorum sint, eandem
illi Potestatem and Authoritatem habent, ut qui omnes sint Christi, unici
illius Episcopi universalis, unicique Capitis Ecclesiae Ministri. The French
Confession bearing this Title, Gallicarum Ecclesiarum Confessio fidei, that is
to say, The Confession of the Faith of the French or Gallick Churches as the
Scottish Confession is called Confessio fidei Scoticana) does affirm as much,
viz. Credimus omnes veros Pastores ubicunque locorum collocati fuerint, eadem
and aequali inter se potestate esse praeditos sub unico illo capite, summoque
and solo universali Episcopo Jesu Christo. And so no question in the rest. The
Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops may as well be an Article of the Faith
amongst us in England, as the Parity of Ministers amongst those of France, or
the Low Countries.

These Interlocutories being thus passed over, the Lord Primate comes at last
to his final and definitive sentence; for what remains after the Verdict is
once given, but that Judgment in the Case be pronounced accordingly? And the
Judgment is given us in these Words, viz. By the Verdict of the Church of
England, the Lords day had obtained such a pitch of credit, as nothing more
could be left to the Church of Ireland in their Articles, afterward to add
unto it. But against this Judgment I appeal, and must reverse the same by Writ
of Error. For first, although the Lords day had obtained such a pitch of credit
in the Realm of England, as is here affirmed, it was obtained rather by the
practices of the Sabbatarians, who were instant in season and out of season to
promote the Cause, then by any countenance given unto it by the Church and the
Rulers of it. And secondly, if any such Verdict had been given, it was not
given by any Jury which was legally summoned, or trusted by the Church to act
any thing in that particular. And then the Foreman of this Jury must be Doctor
Bound, Master Greenham, Master Perkins, Doctor Lewis Bayley, Master Dod, Master
Clever, Doctor Gouge, Master Whateley, Doctor Sibs, Doctor Preston, Master
Bifield, Doctor Twisse, and Master Ley must make up the Panel; the five
Smectymnuans, and he that pulled down the Cross in Saint Paul's Churchyard,
standing by in a readiness to put in for the Tales, as occasion served. Unless
the Verdict had been given by these, or such as these, the Lords day never had
attained such a pitch of credit, as is here supposed; but how a Verdict so
given in may be affirmed to be a Verdict of the Church of England, I am yet to
seek. So that except there had been something left to the Church of Ireland in
their Articles to add unto it; The Sabbatarian Brethren would have found small
comfort from any Verdict given on their side by the Church of England. The
Church of England differs as much in this point from the Articles of Ireland,
as the Lord Primate differs in it from the Church of England. The Lord
Primate sets it down for a Proposition, that the setting apart of one day in
seven for Gods solemn worship, is juris Divini Positivi, recorded in the fourth
Commandment, p. 105. But the Lords Spiritual, the most eminent Representers of
the Church of England declared in the Parliament, in the 5, and 6. of Edw. 6.
That there is no certain time, or definite number of days prescribed in holy
Scripture; but the appointment both of the time, and also of the number of
days, is left by the Authority of Gods word to the liberty of Christ's Church,
to be determined and assigned orderly in every Country, by the discretion of
the Rulers, and Ministers thereof, as they shall judge most expedient to the
setting forth Gods glory, and edification of their people. The Church of
England has declared in the Homily of the time and place of prayer, that the
Lords day was instituted by the Authority of the Church, and the consent of
godly Christian people after Christ's Ascension. But the Lord Primate does
entitle it unto Christ himself, and to that end alleges a passage out of the
Homily De Semente, ascribed (but ascribed falsely) unto S. Athanasius, viz.
(...). The proper meaning of which words has been shown already in the first
Section of this Treatise. The Lord Primate in conformity to the Articles of the
Church of Ireland, affirms for certain, that the whole day must be set apart
for Gods solemn worship. But in the Church of England there is liberty given
upon that day, not only for honest Recreations, but also for such necessary
works of labor, as are not, or have not been restrained by the Laws of the
Land. Which makes the difference in this case between the Lord Primate, and the
Church of England to be irreconcilable. And here I would have left the Lord
Primates Letter writ to his Honorable Friend, the Contents whereof have been
the sole Subject of the present Section; but that the Lord Primate will not so
part with the Historian, he must needs bestow a dash upon him before he leaves
him, telling his Honorable Friend, How little credit the Historian deserves in
his Geography, when he brings news of the remote parts of the world, that tells
so many untruths of things so lately, and so publicly acted in his neighbor
Nation. This I must needs say comes in very unhandsomely, (...) dictum at the
best, and savours little of that moderation, humility, and meekness of Spirit,
for which Doctor Bernard has so famed him, not only in this present Treatise,
but his Funeral Sermon. But let this pass cum caeteris erroribus, without more
ado. I have some other game in chase, to which now I hasten.

SECT. X.
Seven Points of Doctrine in which the Lord Primate differs from the Church
of England. The Lord Primates judgment in the point of Episcopacy, and the
ordination of Ministers beyond the Seas. That Bishops and Presbyters did differ
Ordine, and not only Gradu, proved by three passages in the Book of
Consecration, and by the different forms of the Ordination of Bishops, Priests
and Deacons, used in the said Book. The form and manner of making Bishops,
Priests and Deacons expressly regulated by the Canons of the fourth Council of
Carthage. The Ordination of Presbyters by Presbyters declared unlawful, by the
Rules of the Primitive Church. The Universal Redemption of Mankind by the blood
of Christ, maintained by the Church of England; but denied by the Lord Primate,
not constant to himself in his own opinion* A Real presence of Christ in the
Sacrament maintained by the Church of England, and affirmed by the most eminent
Prelates of it; but both denied and opposed by the Lord Primate in his Answer
to the Jesuits challenge. That the Priest has power to forgive sins, proved
by three several passages out of the Book of Common Prayer. The meaning of the
two first passages subverted by the Lord Primates Gloss or Descant on them; but
no notice taken by him of the last, which is most material. That the Priest
forgiveth sins either Declarative or Optative better approved by the Lord
Primate; neither of which come up close to the Church of England, and the
reason why. The Church of England holds that the Priect forgiveth sins
Authoritative, by a delegated, not a sovereign power; and that she so holds
is affirmed by some learned men of the Church of Rome* The benefit of
Absolution from the hands of the Priest, humbly desired and received by Doctor
Reynolds at the time of his death. The Church of England maintains a local
Descent, and the proof thereof. The Church not altered in her judgment since
the first making of that Article, Anno 1552. as some men imagine; The Lord
Primate goes a different way from the Church of England, and the great pains by
him taken to make it good. A transition to the nine Articles of Lambeth.

England and the Lord Primate in the point of the Sabbath, we have showed
already; and well it were, if he differed from the Church of England in no
point else. But Doctor Bernard gives us some, and the Answer to the Jesuits
challenge has given given us others. First, the Lord Primate tells us in a
Letter writ to Doctor Bernard, and by him now published, Episcopus and
Presbyter gradu tantum differunt, non ordine, and consequently that in places
where Bishops cannot be had, the Ordination by Presbyters stands valid. And
howsoever (says he) I must needs think that the Churches, which have no
Bishops, are thereby become very defective in their Government, and that the
Churches in France, who living under a Popish power, and cannot do what they
would, are more excusable in this defect then the Low-Countreyes, that live
under a a free State; yet for the testifying my Communion with these Churches
(which I do love and honor as true Members of the Church universal) I do
profess that with like affection I should receive the blessed Sacrament at the
hands of the Dutch Ministers, if I were in Holland, as I should do at the hands
of the French Ministers, if I were in Charentone. And this I must needs say,
though I never saw it before in Print, is no news to me at all. For I have
heard long since, and from very good hands, that the Lord Primate did so fully
communicate his judgment in the point of Episcopacy to Doctor Preston then of
Cambridge (a man of quick parts, and deep comprehensions) that he used to say
many times to his Friends and followers, that if the Bishops of England did lay
the foundation of their calling on no other grounds then the Primate did, the
differences between them would be soon agreed. But on the other side it is the
Doctrine of the Church of England that a Bishop and a Presbyter do differ
Ordine in respect of some super our order which the Presbyter has not; and not
Gradu only, in respect of some superiority of Degree, which every Bishop has
above the Presbyters. And this appears plainly by the Preface of the Book
entitled, The form and manner of making and consecrating Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons; approved by the Articles of the Church, and established by the Laws of
the Land, in which Preface it is said expressly, that it is evident unto all
men, diligently reading holy Scripture, and ancient Authors, that from the
Apostles time, there have been these Orders of Ministers in Christ's Church,
Bishops, Priests and Deacons. It follows not long after thus, viz. And
therefore to the intent these Orders should be continued, and reverently used
and esteemed in this Church of England, it is requisite that no man (not being
at this present Bishop, Priest, nor Deacon) shall execute any of them, except
he be called tried, examined, and admitted according to the form hereafter
following. Here then we have 3. Orders of Ministers, Bishops, Priests and
Deacons; the Bishop differing* as much in Order from the Priest, as the Priest
differs in Order from the Deacon. But because perhaps it may be said, that this
Preface is no part of the Book which stands approved by the Articles of the
Church, and established by the Laws of the Land, let us next look into the body
of the Book it self; where in the form of consecrating an Archbishop, or
Bishop, we shall find a prayer in these words following, viz. Almighty God,
giver of all good things, who have appointed diverse Orders of Ministers in thy
Church, mercifully behold this thy servant, now called to the work and Ministry
of a Bishop, and replenish him so with the truth of thy Doctrine, and innocence
of life, that both by word and deed, he may faithfully serve thee in this
office, etc. By which Prayer, it does as evidently appear as it did before in
the Preface, not only that the office of a Bishop does differ from the Office
of the Priests and Deacons, but that the Bishop is of a different Order from
all other Ministers. And this appears yet further by the different forms used
in the ordering of the Priests and Deacons, and the form of consecrating an
Archbishop or Bishop. Which certainly the Church had never distinguished in
such solemnity (for frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora) if
the consecrating of a Bishop did not add some further Order to him, which
before he had not as a Priest or Presbyter.

But because possibly some may say that the Church of England is either
singular in this point, or else did borrow these forms from the popish
Ordinals, as it is said to have borrowed her public Liturgy from the popish
Missals; it will be found on the first search, that nothing is done, or
appointed to be done by the Church of England, but what was regulated and
prescribed by the fourth Council of Carthage, Anno 401. or Carthag. 4* Can. 3.
thereabout. In which Council it is first ordained, that in the ordination of a
Priest or Presbyter, the Bishop holding his hand on his head, and blessing him,
all the Presbyters that were present should hold their hands by the hands of
the Bishop. Whereas in the ordination of a Deacon, it suffices Ibid. Can. 4.
that the Bishop alone put his hands upon the head of him that is ordained;
because he is not sanctified to priestly dignity, but to the service of the
Church. But in the consecration of a Bishop it is there required, that two
Bishops holding the Book of Gospels over his head, the third (which regularly
was to be the Metropolitan of the Province) should pronounce the words Can. 2.
of Consecration, all the other Bishops which are present laying their hands
upon him as others did. I said that regularly the Bishop which pronounced the
words of Consecration, was to be the Metropolitan of the Province, in which the
New Bishop was ordained, because we find it so ordered in the Council of
Antioch, Anno 365. in which it was decreed, that Council. Antioch. Can. 19.
a Bishop should not be ordained without a Synod and the presence of the
Metropolitan, that the Metropolitan by his letters should call unto him all the
Bishops in the Province, if conveniently they might come together; if not, that
at the least the greater part should be present, or give their consent by
writing. By which it seems, that the consecration of a Bishop was esteemed a
work of so great dignity in it self, and of so great importance to the Church
of Christ, that all the Bishops of the Province were required to be present at
it, if they could conveniently. But to return again to the fourth Council of
Carthage, we find therein three several and distinct forms of Ordination, and
consequently three several Orders of Ministers to be so ordained. For otherwise
it had been very unnecessary to use one form in the making of a Presbyter, and
another in the consecrating of Bishops; the one to be performed by the Bishop
and some Presbyters only, the other not to be attempted but with the presence
(or the consent at least) of the Metropolitan, all other Bishops of the
Province consenting to it, and giving their assistance at that sacred Ceremony,
if not otherwise hindered. And though this fourth Council of Carthage was but
National only, yet was it universally received (and that too in a very short
time) over all the Church, and made the standing Rule, by which the
consecrating of Bishops, and the ordaining of Priests and Deacons was to be
officiated. A Rule so punctually followed by the Church of England, that it
seems to be rather of the Carthaginian then the Roman party, and more to
savor of the Primitive, then the popish Ordinals. And to this Rule the Church
did tie it self so strictly concerning the consecration of an Arch Bishop or
Bishop, that though a Bishop in some cases might ordain a Priest or Presbyter,
without the presence and cooperation of other Presbyters; yet was there no
case whatsoever, in which it was lawful for one or more Priests or Presbyters
to ordain another. And so it was adjudged in the case of Coluthus, whose
ordinations were therefore declared void and of no effect, because he was no
Bishop but a Presbyter only, as is affirmed by Athanasius in Apol. 2. Which as
it clearly contradicted the Lord Primates judgment in the point of the
lawfulness of the Ordination of Presbyters by Presbyters, without the
concurrence of a Bishop; so does it justify the Church of England against him
in the point of Episcopacy, which she affirms, and he denies to be a distinct
Order from that of the Priest or Presbyter.

But nothing does more fully manifest the Lord Primates judgment in this
particular (and consequently his dissent therein from the Church of England)
then his publishing the judgment and opinion of Doctor Reynolds in this point;
which he so far enlarged and explicated, that Doctor Bernard reckons it
amongst his works. The title of the Book runs thus: The judgment of Doctor
Reynolds touching the Original of Episcopacy, more largely confirmed out of
Antiquity, by James Archbishop of Armagh. The Doctors judgment is as
follows, viz. When Elders were ordained by the Apostles in every Church,
through every City to feed the flock of Christ, whereof the Holy Ghost had made
them overseers: they to the intent they might the better do it, by common
Counsel, and consent, did use to assemble themselves and meet together. In
which meetings, for the more orderly handling and concluding of things
pertaining to their charge, they chose one amongst them to be the President of
their Company, and Moderator of their Actions. As in the Church of Ephesus,
though it had sundry Elders and Pastors to guide it; yet amongst those sundry,
was there one chief, whom our Savior calls the Angel of the Church, and
writes that to him, which by him the rest should know. And this is he whom
afterward in the Primitive Church the Fathers called Bishop. So far the words
of Dr. Reynolds, then which there nothing can be said more contrary to the
first institution, nor more derogatory to the Order and Estate of Bishops. And
if the Lord Primate did magnify his own office no better in other things, then
he did in publishing this piece, Doctor Bernard might have spared that part of
the character which he gives us of him for so doing, p. 151. For by this
magnifying of his Office he made himself no better then the President of the
Presbyters within his Diocese (the chief Priest, or Archpriest we may fitly
call him) though possibly in regard of his personal abilities, he might be
suffered to enjoy that presidency for term of life; such a perpetual Presidency
as Calvin was possessed of when he reigned in Geneva, and sat as Pope over all
the Churches of his Platform; and was enjoyed by Beza many years after his
decease, till Danaeus (thinking himself as good a man as the best) made a party
against him, and set him quite beside the Cushion. Since which time that
Presidency has continued no longer in any one man, then from Session to
Session, from one Classical meeting to another; and loco libertatis erat quod
eligi coeperunt, in the words of Tacitus. Which fate would questionless befall
all the Bishops in Christendom, if their Presbyters were once possessed with
this fancy, that the Bishop was but a Creature of their own making, as is
affirmed by Doctor Reynolds; or that they and their Bishop did not differ
Ordine, but Gradu only, which the Lord Primate (to the great magnifying of his
office) has declared to be his own constant opinion.

3. In the next place the Church of England does maintain an Universal
Redemption of all mankind, by the death and sufferings of our Savior. This
first proved by that passage in the public Catechism, by which the party
catechized is taught to believe in God the Son, who redeemed him and all
mankind: secondly, by that clause in the Letany, viz. O God the Son Redeemer of
the world have mercy upon us, etc. thirdly, by the prayer of consecrating the
Elements of Bread and Wine, viz. Almighty God, our Heavenly Father, which of
thy tender mercy did give thine only Son Jesus Christ, to suffer death upon
the cross for our Redemption, who made there (by his own oblation of himself
once offered) a full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and
satisfaction, for the sins of the WHOLE WORLD, etc. Nor was it without some
such meaning that she selected those words of our Savior in Saint John's
Gospel, viz. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc.
to be used in the preparation to the Communion; as she reiterated some others,
viz. O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world, incorporated into
the Gloria in Excelsis at the end thereof. But in this point the Lord Primate
is of a contrary judgment to the Church of England. For as he seems not to
like their opinion, who contract the riches of Christ's satisfaction into too
narrow a room; as if none had any interess therein, but such as were elected
before the foundation of the world; so he declares his dislike of the other
extreme (as he is pleased to call it) by which the benefit of this satisfaction
is extended to the Redemption of all mankind. The one extremity (says he)
extends the benefit of Christ's satisfaction so far, ut reconciliationem cum
Deo, and peccatorum Remissionem singulis impetraverit, as to obtain a
Reconciliation with God, and a Remission of sins for all men at his merciful
hands, p. 21. Which though they are the words of the Remonstrants at the
Conference at the Hague, Anno 1611. and are by him reckoned for untrue; yet do
they naturally result from the Doctrine of Universal Redemption, which is
maintained in the Church of England. Not that all Mankind is so perfectly
reconciled to Almighty God, as to be really and actually discharged from all
their sins, before they actually believe (which the Lord Primate makes to be
the meaning and effect of that extremity, as he calls it, p. 2.) but that they
are so far reconciled unto him, as to be capable of the Remission of their
sins, in case they do not want that faith in their common Savior which is
required thereunto. And here I should have left this point, but that I must
first desire Dr. Bernard to reconcile these two passages which I find in the
Lord Primates Letter of the year 1617. in one of which he seems to dislike of
their opinion, who contract the Riches of Christ's satisfaction into too narrow
a room; as if none had any kind of interess therein, but such as were elected
before the foundation of the world, as before was said. And in the other he
declares, that he is well assured, that our Savior has obtained at the hands
of his Father Reconciliation, and forgiveness of sins, not for the Reprobate,
but Elect only, p. 21. Let Dr. Bernard reconcile these so different passages,
and erit mihi magnus Apollo, in the Poets language. If the Lord Primate did
subscribe the Articles of the Church of England, as Doctor Bernard says he
did, p. 118. I know who may be better blamed for breaking his subscription,
then he whom the Lord Primate has accused for it, p. 110. For in the second
Article of the Church of England, it is said expressly that Christ suffered, was
crucified, dead, and buried, to reconcile his Father to us, and to be a
sacrifice, not only for original guilt, but also for the actual sins of men.
In which as well the sacrifice, as the effect and fruit thereof, which is the
Reconciliation of mankind to God the Father, is delivered in general terms,
without any restriction put upon them; neither the Sacrifice, nor the
Reconciliation being restrained to this man or that man, some certain quidams
of their own, whom they pass commonly by the name of Gods Elect. The sacrifice
being made for the sins of men, of men indefinitely without limitation, is not
to be confined to some few men only, as the general current of the Calvinian
Divines have been pleased to make it; as if Christ really and intentionally
died for none but them.

4. The Church of England does maintain that Christ is truly and really present
in the Sacrament of his most precious body and blood. Which Doctrine of a Real
presence is first concluded from the words of the Distribution, retained in the
first Liturgy of King Edward the sixth, and formerly prescribed to be used in
the ancient Missals, viz. The body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for
thee, preserve thy Body and Soul unto life everlasting. The blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ, etc. Which words being thought by some precise and scrupulous
persons to incline too much toward Transubstantiation (and therefore not unfit
to justify a real presence) were quite omitted in the second Liturgy of that
King, Anno 1552. when Dudly of Northumberland, who favored the Calvinian party
carried all before him; the void place being filled up with the words of the
Participation, viz. Take and eat this in remembrance that Christ died for thee,
etc. Take and drink this in remembrance, etc. An alteration not well grounded,
and of short continuance. For when that Book was brought under a review, in the
first year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, those words of the Distribution
were re^^ored to their former place, and followed by those of the
Participation, as it still continues. It is proved secondly by that passage in
the public Catechism, in which the Party catechized is taught to say, that
the body and blood of Christ are verily and indeed taken and received of the
faithful in the Lords Supper. Now if a Question should be made, what the Church
means by verily and indeed in the former passage, it must be answered that she
means, that Christ is truly and really present in that blessed Sacrament, as
before was said; the words being rendered thus in the Latin Translation, viz.
Corpus and sanguis Domini quae vere and realiter exhibentur, etc. Verily and
indeed, as the English has it, the same with vere and realiter (that is to
say, truly and really) as it is in the Latin. And thirdly, this appears to be
the Doctrine of this Church, by the most Orthodox and Learned Prelates of the
same, the words of three of which only I shall now produce, that out of the
mouths of two or three witnesses the truth hereof may be established. God
forbid (says Bishop True subject. p. 779.
Bilson) we should deny that the flesh and blood of Christ are truly present,
and truly received of the faithful at the Lords Table. It is the Doctrine that
we teach others, and comfort our selves withal. Secondly, Bishop Morton, as
great an enemy to the Superstitions of the Romish Mass as ever wrote against
it, does expressly say, That the question is not concerning a real presence,
which Protestants, as their own Jesuits witness, do also profess: Fortunatus a
Protestant, holding, that Christ is in the Sacrament most really, verissime,
realissimeque, as his own words are. But none more positively and clearly, then
Doctor Lancelor Andrews then Lord Bishop of Chichester, who in his Apology
written in Answer to Cardinal Bellarmin, thus declares himself, as one, and one
of the chief Members of the Church of England, viz. Praesentiam credimus non
minus quam vos veram, de modo praesentiae nil temere definimus. We acknowledge
(says he) a presence as true and real as you do, but we determine nothing
rashly of the manner of it. And in his Answer to the eighteenth Chapter of
Cardinal Perrons Reply, he thus speaks of Zuinglius. It is well known, says
he, that Zuinglius to avoid Est (in these words, hoc est Corpus meum) in the
Church of Romes sense, fell to be all for significat, and nothing for est at
all: And whatsoever went farther then significat, he took to savor of the
Carnal presence. For which if the Cardinal mislike him, so do we; a further
declaration of the true sense and meaning of the Church in this particular we
have from Mr. Alexander Noel, Dean of Saint Paul's, and Prolocutor of the
Convocation in the year 1562. when the Articles, or Confession of this Church
were approved and ratified; who in his Catechism publicly allowed to be taught
in all the Grammar Schools of this Realm, thus resolves the point. The Question
is, Coelestis pars, and ab omni sensu externo long disjuncta, quaenam est?
That is to say, what is the Heavenly or Spiritual part of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper? To which the party Catechized returns this Answer. Corpus and
sanguis Christi quae fidelibus in Coena Dominica praebentur, ab illisque
accipiuntur, comeduntur, and bibuntur, coelesti tantum and spirituali modo,
vere tamen atque reipsa; id est, the Heavenly or Spiritual part is the Body and
Blood of Christ which are given to the faithful in the Lords Supper, and are
taken, eaten, and drank by them; which though it be only in an Heavenly and
Spiritual manner, yet are they both given and taken truly and really, or in
very deed, by Gods faithful people By which it seems, that it is agreed on on
both sides (that is to say, the Church of England and the Church of Rome) that
there is a true and real presence of Christ in the holy Eucharist, the
disagreement being only in the modus Praesentiae. But on the contrary, the
Lord Primate in his Answer to the Jesuits challenge, has written one whole
Chapter against the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament; In which though
he would seem to aim at the Church of Rome (though by that Church not only the
real presence of Christ in the Sacrament, but the corporal eating of his body
is maintained and taught) yet does he strike obliquely and on the by on the
Church of England. All that he does allow concerning the real presence is no
more then this, viz. That in the receiving of the blessed Sacrament, we are to
distinguish between the outward and the inward Action of the Communicant. In
the outward, wi^^ our bodily mouth we receive really the visible elements of
Bread and Wine; in the inward, we do by faith really receive the Body and Blood
of our Lord, that is to say, we are truly and indeed made partakers of Christ
crucified, to the spiritual strengthening of our inward man. Which is no more
then any Calvinist in the pack (which either do not understand, or wilfully
oppose the Doctrines of the Church of England) will stick to say.

5. The Church of England teaches that the Priest has power to forgive sins,
as may be easily proved by three several Arguments, not very easy to be
answered. The first is from those solemn words, used in the Ordination of the
Priest or Presbyter, that is to say, Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins ye
forgive they are forgiven, and whose sins ye retain they are retained. Which
were a gross profanation of the words of our Lord and Savior, and a mere
mockery of the Priest, if no such power were given unto him as is there
affirmed. The second Argument is taken from one of the Exhortations before the
Communion, where we find it thus, viz. And because it is requisite that no man
should come to the holy Communion, but with a full trust in Gods mercy, and
with a quiet conscience: therefore if there be any of you, which by the means
aforesaid cannot quiet his own Conscience, but requires further comfort or
counsel, then let him come to me or to some other discreet and learned Minister
of Gods word, and open his grief, that he may receive such ghostly counsel,
advice and comfort, as his conscience may be relieved, and that by the Ministry
of Gods word, he may receive comfort, and the benefit of absolution, to the
quieting of his conscience, and avoiding of all scruple and doubtfulness. The
third and most material proof we have in the form prescribed for the visitation
of the sick; In which it is required that after the sick person has made a
confession of his faith, and professed himself to be in charity with all men, he
shall then make a special confession if he feel his conscience troubled with
any weighty matter. And then it follows, that after such confession, the
Minister shall absolve him in this manner, viz. Our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
left power to his Church to absolve all sinners which truly repent and believe
in him, of his great mercy forgive thee thine offenses: and by his Authority
committed to me, I absolve thee from all thy sins; in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen. Of the first of these three
places, deduced all of them from the best Monuments and Records of the Church
of England, the Lord Primate takes notice in his Answer to the Jesuits
challenge, p. 109. where he treatech purposely of the Priests power to forgive
sins, but gives us such a gloss upon it, as utterly subverts as well the
Doctrine of this Church in that particular, as her purpose in it: and of the
second he takes notice, p. 81. where he speaks purposely of Confession, but
gives us such a gloss upon that also as he did on the other. But of the third,
which is more positive and material then the other two, he is not pleased to
take any notice at all, as if no such Doctrine were either taught by the Church
of England, or no such power had been ever exercised by the Ministers of it.

For in the canvassing of this point, he declares sometimes that the Priest
does forgive sins only declarative, by the way of declaration only, when on
the consideration of the true Faith, and sincere Repentance of the party
penitent, he does declare unto him in the name of God, that his sins are
pardoned: and sometimes that the Priest forgives sins only optative, by the way
of prayers and intercession; when on the like consideration he makes his
prayers unto God, that the sins of the penitent may be pardoned. Neither of
which comes up unto the Doctrine of the Church of England, which holds that
the Priest forgiveth sins authoritative, by virtue of a power committed to him
by our Lord and Savior. That the supreme power of forgiving sins is in God
alone, against whose Divine Majesty all sins, of what sort soever, may be truly
said to be committed, was never questioned by any which pretended to the
Christian faith. The power which is given to the Priest is but a delegated
gower, such as is exercised by Judges under Sovereign Princes (where they are
not tied unto the Verdict of twelve men, as with us in England) who by the
power committed to them in their several Circuits and Divisions, do actually
absolve the party which is brought before them, if on good proof they find him
innocent of the crimes which he stands accused for, and so discharge him of his
Irons. And such a power as this, I say, is both given to, and exercised by the
Priests or Presbyters in the Church of England. For if they did forgive sins
only Declarative, that form of Absolution which follows the general Confession
in the beginning of the Common Prayer Book, would have been sufficient, that is
to say, Almighty God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which desires not
the death of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wickedness and
live; and has given power and commandment to his Ministers to declare and
pronounce to his people being penitent, the absolution and remission of their
sins; and pardons and absolveth all them which truly repent, and unfainedly
believe his holy Gospel. Or if he did forgive sins only Optative, in the way
of prayers and intercession, there could not be a better way of Absolution,
then that which is prescribed to be used by the Priest or Bishop, after the
general confession made by such as are to receive the Communion, viz. Almighty
God our Heavenly Father, who of his great mercy has promised forgiveness of
sins to all them which with hearty repentance and true faith turn unto him;
have mercy upon you, pardon and deliver you from all your sins, and confirm and
strengthen you in all goodness, and bring you to everlasting life, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Or else the first clause in the form of Absolution
used at the visitation of the sick, would have served the turn, that is to say,
Our Lord Jesus Christ, who has left power to his Church to absolve all sinners
which truly repent, and believe in him, of his great mercy forgive thee thine
offenses. And there could be no reason at all imaginable, why the next clause
should be superadded to this prayer, viz. And by his Authority committed to me,
I absolve thee from all thy sins, etc. if the Priest did not forgive sins
Authoritative, by such a delegated and commissionated power as before we spoke
of.

And that this is the Doctrine and intent of the Church of Mont. Gag. cap. 11.
p. 78.
England, appears by the acknowledgement of two learned men of the opposite
faction. For thus says one of the great sticklers for the Church of Rome, viz.
Hereunto is also pertinent the Doctrine of those Protestants, who hold, that
Priests have power, not only to pronounce, but to give remission of sins. Yea,
it seems to be the Doctrine of the Communion-Book, in the visitation of the
sick; where the Priest says, And by his Authority committed unto me, I absolve
thee from all thy sins. Then which there could not come a clearer Testimony
from the mouth of an Adversary. And for the other side I will take Dr. Lewis
Bayley (afterward Bishop of Bangor) a man precise enough as to the perpetual
morality of the Lords day Sabbath, and Calvinist enough in some other Tenets of
that rigid Sect; And yet this man in his Book called the Practice of Piety, not
only does advise his sick Penitent to send in time for some godly Minister, to
whom he may unfold his griefs and confess his sins, that so he may receive the
benefit of Absolution; but tells him, that then he should not doubt in foro
conscientiae, but that his sins be as verily forgiven on earth, as if he did
hear Christ himself, in foro judicii, pronouncing them to be forgiven in
Heaven. And this he does exemplify in Doctor Reynolds, the ablest and most
learned man of all that showed themselves on the Puritan party, who being on
his deathbed, did earnestly desire to receive the benefit of sacerdotal
Absolution, according to the form prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, and
humbly received it at the hands of Dr. Holland, the Kings Professor in Divinity
in the University of Oxon, for the time then being; and when he was not able to
express his joy and thankfulness in the way of speech, did most affectionatly
kiss the hand that gave it: and yet this Doctor had not only a chief hand in
the Millenary Petition (as they commonly called it) presented to K. James at
his first coming to this Crown, wherein they excepted not only against the use,
but the very name of Absolution, as being a forinsecal word which they desired
to have corrected; but managed the whole business of it at Hampton Court. And
this he did with such fidelity and zeal, that to give that party some
contentment, it was ordered in the Conference there, that to the word
Absolution in the Rubric following the general confession, these words,
Remission of sins, should be added for explanation sake, as it still continues:
so powerful an Orator is death, as to persuade men in extremities of sickness
to apply those remedies, which in the times of health, they neither thought
lawful nor convenient to be used in such extremities.

7. But to proceed; in the Article of Christ's descending into Hell, the Church
of England does maintain a local descent, that is to say, That the Soul of
Christ, at such time as his body lay in the grave, did locally descend into the
nethermost parts, in which the Devil and his Angels are reserved in everlasting
chains of darkness, unto the judgment of the great and terrible day. This
proved at large by Bishop Bilson in his learned and laborious Work, entitled,
The Survey of Christ's sufferings; in which he has amassed together whatsoever
the Fathers, Greek and Latin, or any of the ancient Writers have affirmed of
this Article, with all the Points and Branches which depend upon it. And that
this was the meaning of the first Reformers, when this Article amongst others
was first agreed upon in the Convocation of the year 1552. appears by that
passage of S. Peter, which is cited by them touching Christ's preaching to the
Spirits which were in prison. And though that passage be left out of the
present Article, according as it passed in the Convocation of the year 1562.
yet cannot that be used as an Argument to prove that the Church has altered
her judgment in that Point, as some men would have it; that passage being left
out for these reasons following: For first, that passage was conceived to make
the Article too inclinable to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, which makes the
chief end of Christ's descent into Hell, to be the fetching thence the souls of
the Fathers who died before and under the Law; and secondly, because it was
conceived by some learned men, that the Text was capable of some other
construction than to be used for an argument of this Descent. The judgment of
the Church continues still the same as before it was, and is as plain and
positive for a local descent, as ever formerly: She had not else left this
Article in the same place in which She found it, or given it the same distinct
Title as before it had; viz. De Descensu Christi ad Inferos, in the Latin
Copies of King Edward the Sixth, that is to say, Of the going down of Christ
into Hell, as in the English Copies of Queen Elizabeth's Reign. Nor indeed was
there any reason why this Article should have any distinct place or Title at
all, unless the maintenance of a local Descent were intended by it. For having
spoken in the former Article of Christ's Suffering, Crucifying, Death and
Burial, it had been a very great impertinency (not to call it worse) to make a
distinct Article of his Descending into Hell, if to Descend into Hell did
signify the same with this being buried, as some men then fancied, or that
there were not in it some further meaning which might deserve a place distinct
from his Death and Burial. The Article speaking thus, viz. As Christ died for
us, and was buried, so is it to be believed that he went down into Hell, is
either to be understood of a local Descent, or else we are tied to believe
nothing by it but what was explicitly or implicitly comprehended in the
former Article.

Now that this is the Churches meaning cannot be better manifested then in the
words of Mr. Alexander Noel before mentioned, who being Prolocutor of the
Convocation in the year 1562. when this Article was disputed, approved, and
ratified, cannot in reason be supposed to be ignorant of the true sense and
meaning of this Church in that particular. And he accordingly in his Catechism
publicly allowed of with reference to a local Descent, does declare it thus,
viz. Ut Christus corpore in terrae viscera, ita anima corpore separata ad
Inferos descendit, pariterque Mortis ejus vis ad mortuos Inferosque adeo ipsos
usque eo permanavit, ut and Animae incredulorum tristissimae ipsorum
incredulitati maxim debitae condemnationis sensum perciperent, ipseque Satanas
Inferorum Princeps, tyrannidis suae and tenebrarum potentiam omnem afflictam,
profligatam, and ruina oppressam esse animad verteret. Id est, As Christ
descended in his body into the bowels of the earth, so in his soul separated
from that body he descended also into Hell, by means whereof the power and
efficacy of his death was not made known only to the dead, but the Devils
themselves; insomuch that both the souls of the unbelievers did sensibly
perceive that condemnation which was most justly due to them for their
incredulity, and Satan himself the Prince of Devils, did as plainly see that
his tyranny and all the powers of darkness were oppressed, ruined, and
destroyed. But on the contrary, the Lord Primate allows not any such local
Descent as is maintained by the Church, and defended by the most learned
Members of it, who have left us any thing in writing about this Article. And
yet he neither follows the opinion of Calvin himself, nor of the generality of
those of the Calvinian party, who herein differ from their Master; but goes a
new way of a later discovery, in which although he had few Leaders, he has
found many followers. By Christ's Descending into Hell, he would have nothing
else to be understood, but his continuing in the state of separation between
the body and the soul, his remaining under the power of Death during the time
that he lay buried in the grave; which is no more in effect, though it differ
somewhat in the terms, then to say, that he died and was buried, and rose not
till the third day, as the Creed instructs us. And yet to set out this opinion
to the best advantage, he has laid out more cost upon it, then upon all the
rest of his Answer to the Jesuits Challenge, thronging together so many
citations concerning the word Hades, out of old Greek Authors, so many Critical
Observations on their Words and Phrases, out of Grammarians, Scholiasts, and
Etymologists, as serve abundantly both to amaze the ignorant, and to confound
the learned. Nothing less meant in all those Collections, then to assert the
Doctrine of the Church of England in this particular, no more then he has done
in the other Points before remembered, though all of them are either to be found
in the Book of Articles, to which he had subscribed, as Doctor Bernard has
informed us, p. 118. or in the Book of Common Prayer which he was bound to
conform himself unto, both in judgment and practice, as being imposed by Act of
Parliament on the Church of Ireland.

7. I should now proceed to see what difference there is between the Doctrine
of the Church of England and the Lord Primates own judgment in the point of
Free Will, which he has given us in his Answer to the Jesuits Challenge p.
464. But because that point has some relation to the Nine Articles of Lambeth,
I shall take no other notice of it, then as it is comprehended in those
Articles; in the defense whereof the Lord Primate did appear with so great
affection as made him very gracious in the eyes of the Calvinian Party both at
Home and Abroad. But this together with the little esteem he had of the Orders,
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, is left to be the subject of the
following Section.

SECT. XI.
The Articles of Lambeth when made, and on what occasion; Dislik't and suppressed
by Queen Elizabeth, and rejected by King James at the Conference at
Hampton Court; Countenanced and defended by the Lord Primate, who for so doing
is much honored by the English Puritans. The History of Goteschalcus published
by him, and the great thanks he received for it from Doctor Twisse. What else
it was that made the Lord Primate so esteemed by the Brethren here. His
Inconformity to the Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies of the Church of England in
six particulars.

WE are informed by Doctor Bernard, that the Lord* Primate did fully approve
the Articles of Religion of the Church of England in points of Doctrine, as the
same more enlarged in the Articles of Ireland; and that he also did approve the
Discipline and Constitution of both Churches, p. 144. By which if Doctor
Bernard means that the Articles of England were the same with those of the
Church of Ireland (though more enlarged in theirs of Ireland, than in ours of
England) he is much mistaken, there being many things contained in the Articles
of the Church of Ireland extremely differing from the Doctrine of the Church of
England, as shall be shown particularly in a place more proper. But because the
Lord Primate is no otherwise concerned therein then in relation to the Nine
Articles of Lambeth, which are incorporated and contained in those of Ireland,
I shall confine my self precisely unto that particular. And I shall find enough
in that to show the Lord Primates further differences from the Church of
England; those Articles containing all the Calvinian Rigours in the Points of
Praedestination, Grace, Free Will, etc. which have produced so much Disturbance
in these parts of Christendom. Those Articles first occasioned by some
Differences which arose in Cambridge between Doctor Whitaker the Queens
Professor, and Doctor Peter Baro the Lady Margarets Professor in that
University; agreed on at a private meeting in Lambeth-house, Anno 1595. None
but the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop Elect of London, and the
Bishop of Bangor, with some learned men of Doctor Whitakers own party being
present at it; and being so made were sent to Cambridge, rather to silence
Doctor Baro, than to compose the Differences by any equal expedient. So that
being made on a particular occasion, at a private meeting, and by men not
empowered to any such purpose, they were never looked on otherwise, than as
private Opinions, not as the Tendries of this Church. So far disliked by Q.
Elizabeth when she first heard of them, that they were presently suppressed by
her command, and so suppressed, that we hear no more news of them till the
Conference at Hampton Court, where they found no better entertainment from the
hands of King James: for Doctor Reinolds having moved that the Nine Orthodoxal
Assertions (as he called them) which were made at Lambeth might be added to the
Articles of the Church of England; the motion was not only opposed by the
Bishops, but denied by the King: opposed by the Bishops by reason of their
inconsistency with the Doctrine of the Church of England; denied and rejected
by the King, because he held the matters therein contained to be fitter for the
public Schools than the Book of Articles. But on the contrary, the Lord
Primate always showed himself in favor of those Articles, those Orthodoxal
Assertions, as the Doctor called them, praetermitting no occasion to defend and
countenance them, and to that end caused them to be inserted into the Articles
of the Church of Ireland, Anno 1615. For if we may believe Dr. Bernard (as in
this case questionless we may) it was his doing that these Nine Articles of
Lambeth together with the precise observance of the New Lords-day-Sabbath, a
different explication of the Article of Christ's Descent into Hell, from that
allowed of by this Church, and almost all the other Heterodoxies of the Sect of
Calvin, were interserted and incorporated into the Articles of Ireland: we
being told by Doctor Bernard in the History of his Life and Death, p. 49. that
in the Convocation held at Dublin Anno 1615. he being then a Member of that
Synod, was appointed to draw up those Articles, which then and there were
approved and ratified for the established Doctrine of the Church of Ireland.
This did he toward the advancing of the Calvinian Doctrines in his own native
Country, and for so doing was much flattered and applauded by the English
Calvinists as the chief Patron of the Cause, the Cause of God, as some of them
were pleased to call it. Vissius, a Divine of the Low Countries, published a
Book entitled, The Pelagian History, demonstrating therein that the Fathers,
and other ancient Writers, in their several ages, maintained successively those
Opinions in the matters of Predestination, and the Points depending thereupon,
as the Remonstrants (or Arminians, as some call them) did in the Belgic
Churches. A Book which suddenly grew into great reputation with most knowing
and unbiassed men, who had not been before engaged in the present quarrels. And
thereupon to give a stop to it in the middle of its full carere, the Lord
Primate published the History of Goteschalcus; Of which thus Doctor Twisse in
his Letter to the Lord Primate of the 29. of May 1640. Where having first
spoken of his Singular Piety and Wisdom in reference to the necessitous
condition of those times, in inserting the History of Pelagius in his Book De
primordiis Ecclesiarum Britannicarum, so opportunely coming in his way; he
after adds, that his History of Goteschalcus was a piece of the like nature,
and that it came out most seasonably in respect of Vossius; for the relieving
of whose credit thereupon, there had been many meetings by some in London, that
by the coming forth of that Piece, he was the better enabled in the pursuit of
his Answer to Corvinus, which he was in hand with, and to meet with the
Dictates of N. N. who endeavored to justify some conceit of Vossius, but upon
very weak grounds.

Thus (says he) I have observed with comfort the hand of God to have gone
along with your Grace, for the honoring the Cause of his Truth, in so precious
a Point as is the glory of his Grace. And I nothing doubt but the same hand of
our good God will be with you still, and his wisdom will appear in all things
you undertake, whether of your own choice, or upon the motion of others. So he;
and in him we may partly see the minds of the rest.

But there was somewhat else which did as much indear him to that Party, as the
Nine Articles of Lambeth, namely the little esteem he had of the Orders, Rites,
and Ceremonies of the Church of England, which made him so agreeable to them,
that they plied him with continual Letters when he was in Ireland, Doctor
Bernard telling us (and I dare take it on his word) That he had seen diverse
Letters wrote unto him from those who were aspersed with the name of Puritans,
full of respect and large expressions of their love to him, p. 160. And at his
comings into England he was much visited by the Grandees and learned Men of
that Faction; not that they found any reason to make use of him for design and
counsel, but partly for the reputation which he brought with him to the Cause;
and partly for the benefit they received by conferring with him, who was indeed
a walking Concordance, and a living Library. Nor was he less courted by their
Followers, the Lay-Brethren also; by whom he was caressed, complemented,
feasted wheresoever he came, many good people being admitted to those Meetings
as well to feed on his Discourses, as to fill their bellies. For though Doctor
Bernard please to tell us that the Lord Primate did approve the Discipline and
Constitutions of both Churches, yet when he comes unto particulars he confutes
himself; giving us gratis several instances which are but sorry proofs of such
Approbation: whether we look upon the Canons of the Church of England
separately and in themselves, or on the public Liturgy also, which though
first fitted for the use and edification of the Church of England, were
afterward imposed by Act of Parliament in that Kingdom on the Church of
Ireland. In the particulars whereof we shall go no further then Doctor Bernard
does conduct us. First then,

It is appointed by one Rubric in the Liturgy or Common Prayer Book, That all
Priests and Deacons shall be bound to say daily the Morning and Evening Prayer
either privately or openly, except they be let by preaching, studying of
Divinity, or some other urgent cause: and in the rest it is directed in what
course and order, the said Morning and Evening Prayer is to be Officiated, on
what days the Letany is to be said or sung; as also upon what days the
Communion-service is to be used, and in what part of that service the Sermon is
to have its place, and what other parts of that service are to follow after it.
Which last observance being neglected by some who would not tie themselves unto
any Rule by others, because being Lecturers only, they were not charged with
Cure of Souls, it was required by King Charles in some Instructions which he
sent to all the Bishops severally and respectively in the Realm of England Anno
1628. That every Lecturer should read the Divine Service, according to the
Liturgy printed by Authority, in his Surplice and Hood before the Lecture. But
on the contrary Doctor Bernard tells us of the Lord Primate, That he was not so
rigid, as to tie all men in the private, to an absolute necessary use of it, or
in the public, that a Sermon was not to be heard, unless that did precede, p.
145. He took great care (as Doctor Bernard has informed us p. 155.) for the
often public reading of the Ten Commandments and the Creed before the
Congregation, according to the custom of other Reformed Churches, of which
care there had been no need, if the public Liturgy had been read as it ought
to be, as well the Commandments as the Creed being appointed to be read
publicly in the Course thereof. But being it is said with reference to the
Reformed Churches, I want reason to believe that the often public reading of
the Commandments and the Creed supplied the place of the Public Liturgy on the
days of Preaching, according to the Custom of some of the Reformed Churches
which were therein imitated.

Secondly, it is appointed by the Liturgy or Common Prayer Book of Both
Churches what days should be accounted holy, and observed as Festivals, each
of them having their several Lessons, Collects, Epistles and Gospels, as well
the Sunday or Lords day it self, or as the greater Festivals of Easter and
Whitsuntide, or those of the Ascension and Nativity of our Lord and Savior. No
difference made between them (except it be the addition of some proper Psalms
to some special Festivals) in the intent and purpose of the public Liturgies.
But whether the Lord Primate observed all these several Holy days which the
Church allows of, and in such manner as is prescribed by the Church, may be
very well doubted. Its true, that Doctor Bernard tells us, that it was the Lord
Primates judgment and opinion, That the Annual Commemorations of the Articles
of the Faith, such as the Nativity, Passion, Resurrection of our Savior, etc.
were still to be observed (which Saint Austin says in his time were in use
through the whole Catholic Church of Christ) and is now in other Reformed
Churches, as a means to keep them in the memory of the vulgar, according to the
pattern of Gods injunction to the Israelites in the Old Testament, for the
types of them, as appeared by his then constant preaching on those Subjects, p.
152. But then it is as true withal, that Doctor Bernard tells us nothing of the
Lord Primates observation of the other Holy days, as certainly he would have
done, had there been ground for it. And therefore if the Lord Primate were so
punctual in keeping the Anniversaries of the Nativity, Passion, Resurrection
and Ascension of our Lord and Savior, and of the coming down of the Holy
Ghost, as Doctor Bernard says he was; it may be probably conceived, that this
was done rather in compliance with some of the foreign Reformed Churches,
which observe those days, and those days only, than in obedience to the
prescripts of the Churches of England and Ireland.

Thirdly, the day of the Passion of our Savior, commonly called Goodfriday, is
by both Churches reckoned for jejunium statum, a standing, though but an Annual
Fast, as well as Lent, the Ember days, and Rogation week; and has its proper
and distinct office, that is to say, its proper Lessons, Collect, Epistle, and
Gospel, accommodated to the day, and every way instructive in the story of our
Saviors passion. And it is ordered by the thirteenth Canon of the year 1603.
That all Ministers shall observe the Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies prescribed
in the Book of Common Prayer, as well in reading the holy Scriptures, and
saying of Prayers, as in Administration of the Sacraments, without either
diminishing in regard of preaching, or in any other respect, or adding any
thing in the matter and form thereof. But on the contrary Doctor Bernard
tells us, that the Friday before Easter (Good Friday by no means, take heed
of that) appointed for the remembrance of the Passion of our Savior, was by
the Lord Primate at Droghedah in Ireland, observed duly as a solemn fast,
inclining the rather to that choice (that is to say, of making it a solemn, not
a standing fast) out of prudence and the security from censure, by the then
custom of having Sermons beyond their ordinary limit in England; and that when
the public prayers were ended, (that is to say, so much of the public prayers
as might be no hindrance to his preaching) be preached upon that subject,
extending himself in Prayer and Sermon beyond his ordinary time; which being
known to be his constant custom, some from Dublin, as other parts, came to
partake of it, p. 154.

Fourthly, by the 55. Canon of the year 1603. there is a form of Prayer
prescribed to be used by Preachers before their Sermons, the beginning of which
Canon is as follows, viz. Before all Sermons, Lectures and Homilies,
Preachers and Ministers shall move the people to join with them in prayer in
this Form, or to this effect, as briefly as conveniently they may. Ye shall
pray for Christ's holy Catholic Church, etc. But on the contrary Doctor Bernard
tells us of the Lord Primate, that he did not only spin out his own Prayers to
a more then ordinary length, as appears by the former passage; but that he
was also much for the Ministers improving of their gifts and abilities in
prayer before Sermon and after, according to his own practice, p. 150. and that
he required the like extemporary and unpremeditated prayers of his household
Chaplains in his Family-prayers at six of the clock in the morning, and at
eight at night.

Fifthly, it is appointed by the eighteenth Canon of the year 1603. That as
often as in the Divine Service the Lord JESUS shall be mentioned, due and lowly
reverence shall be done by all persons present, as it has been accustomed;
testifying by these outward Ceremonies and Gestures, their inward Humility,
Christian Resolution, and due acknowledgment, that the Lord Jesus Christ, the
true and eternal Son of God, is the only Savior of the World, in whom alone
all Mercies, Graces, and Promises of God to mankind, for this life, and the
life to come, are fully and wholly comprised.But on the contrary Doctor Bernard
tells us of the Lord Primate, p. 147. That as for bowing at the name of Jesus,
though he censured not those that did, either in our or other Reformed
Churches, according to the custom of each (which we of England must needs take
for a special favor) yet he did not conceive the injunction of it could be
founded upon that of the Apostle, Phil. 2. 10. and wondered at some learned
men's assertions, that it was the exposition of all the Fathers upon it; (a
touch for Doctor Andrews, the late learned and most renowned Bishop of
Winchester:) and as the wise composers of the Liturgy gave no direct injunction
for it there; so in Ireland he withstood the putting of it into the Canon, Anno
1634.

Sixthly, it is appointed by the said eighteenth Canon of the year, 1603. That
no man shall cover his head in the Church or Chapel in the time of Divine
Service (whereof I hope the Sermon did deserve to be accounted part) except he
have some infirmity, in which case let him wear a Nightcap or Coif; and in the
seventh Canon of the year 1640. that all good and well-affected people, members
of this Church, be ready to tender their acknowledgement unto the Lord (in
whose house they are) by doing reverence and obeisance at their coming in and
going out of the Church, Chancel or Chapel, according to the most ancient
custom of the Primitive Church in the purest times, and of this Church also
for many years in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth* What low esteem the Lord
Primate had of these two Canons, and how little he conformed himself to the
tenor and intent thereof, might be easily proved, but that I am to go no
further in these particulars, then Doctor Bernard does conduct me. All
therefore I shall add is this, that though these Canons did not bind the Lord
Primate unto any observance when he was in Ireland; yet at such time as he was
in England, and constantly repaired to one Church or other, he was obliged both
in obedience to the Law, and for the avoiding of scandal, to conform unto them.
Cum Romae sum jejuno Sabbato, cum hic sum non jejuno Sabbato, was the rule and
practice of Saint Ambrose, who was not only Archbishop of Millan, but perhaps
Lord Primate of the Diocese of Italy also.

All this considered, Doctor Bernard needed not to have told us of him, That he
did not affect some arbitrary innovations, not within the compass of the Rule
and Order of the Book; and that he did not take upon him to introduce any Rite
or Ceremony upon his own opinion of Decency, till the Church had judged it so.
p. 147. It was too manifest by that which has been said before, that there
were no works of supererogation to be looked for from him. It had been well if
he had readily observed what was commanded in the Book (as Doctor Bernard says
he did when he was in Ireland, and had applied himself to those Decencies which
the Church had judged to be fit, when he was i^ England. Nor needed so much
boast be made of his Conformity to the Discipline, Liturgy, and Articles of the
Church of England; or that many of those who were asperst by the name of
Puritans, received such satisfaction from him, as to concur with him in the
above said particulars. p. 160. For this might very well be done, and yet the
men remain as unconformable to the Rules of the Church (their kneeling at the
Communion excepted only) as they were before. Matters which had not now been
brought to the public view, if Doctor Bernard had not given as well the hints,
as the occasion for these Discoveries. So that it may be truly said in the
words of Tacitus, though not altogether in his meaning, Pessimum inimicorum
genus laudantes, Tacit. in^. Agric.
viz. that the Panegyrist is sometimes a man's greatest enemy: unless perhaps it
might be Doctor Bernards purpose to set forth the Lord Primate as the pattern
of a complete Prelate (as Xenophon set forth his Cyrus for the example of a
gallant and perfect Prince) by telling us rather what he should have been, then
what he was. Finally, whereas the Doctor tells us that each party had a great
and reverent opinion of him, p. 163. I am sorry that any part of it should be
lost by this unlucky Adventure, this most unseasonable publishing of his
private Letters. For my part, I had no intent of saying any thing to lessen
that great and reverent opinion which each party had of him, and am sorry that
Doctor Bernard has provoked me to say so much. And so I lay him down again in
the Bed of Peace, desiring heartily ut placida compostus morte quiescat, that
he may rest in quiet there, without more disturbances.

SECT. XII.
Doctor Bernards endeavor to revive the old quarrel touching the Lord Primate
and the Earl of Strafford; the Answerers resolution not to engage himself
therein. The Canon of the year 1634. for the approving and receiving of the
Articles of the Church of England. A Recapitulation of the Arguments used by
the Observator, to prove that the superinducing of the Articles of the Church
of England was a repealing of the Articles of Ireland. Doctor Bernards weak
Answers to those Arguments, and his weaker Arguments to prove the contrary. The
Difference between the Articles of England and Ireland consists not only in
some Circumstantials, as Doctor Bernard would fain have it. A view of some
material and substantial differences between those Articles. The Conclusion of
the whole Discourse.

ANd now we are come to Doctor Bernard, who promising no more then the
confirmation of something which the Lord Primate had written in one of his
Letters, viz. That the Articles of Ireland were not called in Anno 1634. as
Doctor Heylyn had affirmed, p. 173. must needs go somewhat out of his way, to
hook in the remembrance of some former Quarrels which Doctor Heylyn had
forgotten, and is not now willing to remember. The Author of the Book called
Extraneus vapulans, whosoever he was, declares himself unwilling to receive
that Question, Whether the Lord Primate had any sharp tooth against the Lord
Lieutenant or not, in regard the parties were both dead, and all displeasures
buried in the same grave with them, p. 292. He also wished that the Doctor by
his Panegyric had not awakened those enquiries, which were like to be so
little advantageous to the memory of that learned Prelate, p. 296. And finally
conceived, that Doctor Bernard would have done that reverend person, and
himself some right, if he had suffered such Enquiries to die with the parties
most concerned in them, without reviving them again by his double diligence, p.
298. Which passages if Doctor Bernard had laid to heart, he would not so
unseasonably have endeavored to revive that Quarrel, and brought Doctor Heylyn
on the stage, provoking him by several ways to resume that Argument, which he
had long since laid aside, and is resolved upon no provocation whatsoever to
take up again. He has laid the Lord Primate down again in the Bed of Peace,
and will not raise him from it by a new disturbance. But whereas Doctor Bernard
tells us that it is left to the prudence of a third person (who has a
convenient opportunity in his History) to clear the whole, in the Examination
and Moderation of all the passages between Mr. l'Estrange and him, p. 114. That
third person, whosoever he is, must be very prudent, if he can carry the matter
so, and with such Moderation, as not to give offense to both parties, and be
called to an account by each of them for his Examination. For so it happens
many times, that he who voluntarily steps in to part a fray between two
persons, gets some knocks on both sides, at the least from one. And therefore
it was well resolved by one of the old Heathen Philosophers, Se nolle inter
duos Amicos Arbitrum esse etc. that he would never arbitrate any business
betvveen two of his Friends, because he was sure that by his so doing, he
must make one of them to become his Enemy.

The preamble of Doctor Bernard being thus passed over, we next proceed unto
the Confirmation which he has in hand. And therein also pretermitting his
whole Narrative, touching the carriage of the business in the Convocation of
the year 1634. we will pitch only on the examination of this point, viz.
whether the superinducing of the Articles of the Church of England were not a
virtual repealing of the Articles of the Church of Ireland. And for the better
proceeding in it, I think it not unnecessary to produce that Canon, which is
the ground of the Dispute. The Title of it this, viz. Of the Agreement of the
Church of England and Ireland, in the profession of the same Christian faith.
The Body of it this, viz. For the manifestation of our Agreement with the
Church of England in the Confession of the same Christian Faith and Doctrine of
the Sacraments; We do receive and approve the Book of Articles of Religion,
agreed upon by the Archbishops and Bishops, and the whole Clergy, in the whole
convocation holden at London, Anno Dom. 1562. for avoiding of the diversities
of opinions, and for the establishing of consent touching true Religion. And
therefore if any hereafter shall affirm that any of those Articles are in any
part superstitious or erroneous, or such as he may not with a good conscience
subscribe unto; Let him be excommunicated, and not absolved, before he make a
public revocation of his error. These are the very words of the Canon it
self, and from these words the Observator did conclude that the Articles of
England were received in stead of the other; but Doctor Bernard makes this
construction of the Canon, That there was not a reception of the one in stead
of the other, but the one with the other, p. 119. That in the Canon the
Articles of England are received not in stead, but with those of Ireland, p.
120. But which of the two is in the right will be best seen by the Arguments
produced on both sides, and by the Answers which are made to those several
Arguments.

And first the Observator takes notice of some scandal given unto the Papists,
and the occasion of some derisions which they had thereby, that in the Churches
of three Kingdoms professing the same Religion, and being under the patronage
of one sovereign Prince, there should be three distinct (and in some points
contrary) confessions; and that for the avoiding of this scandal, it was
thought fit there should be one Confession, or one Book of Articles only for
the Churches of England and Ireland, not without hope that Scotland would soon
follow after. And thereupon he does infer, that if the superinducing or
receiving of a new Confession be not a repealing of the old, there must be two
Confessions in the same Church differing in many points from one another. Which
would have been so far from creating an uniformity of belief between the
Churches, and taking away thereby the matter of derision which was given the
Papists, in two distinct ( and in some points contrary) Confessions, yet both
pretending unto one and the same Religion; that it would rather have increased
their scorn, and made a greater disagreement in Ireland it self, then was
before between the Churches of both Kingdoms. The second Argument is taken from
these words of Saint Paul, Heb. 8. 13. viz. Dicendo novum veteravit prius, etc.
that is to say, in that he says a new Covenant, he has made the first old, as
our English reads it, and then it follows, that that which decays and
waxes old is ready to vanish away, that is to say, the old being disanulled by
the new, there must necessarily follow the abolishment of its use and practice.
So that unless it may be thought, that Saint Paul was out in his Logic, as I
think it may not, the superinducing of a new Covenant must be the abrogating of
the old. His third Argument is taken from the Abrogation of the Jewish Sabbath
by superinducing of the Lords day for the day of Worship; By means whereof, the
Sabbath was lessened in authority and reputation by little and little, and in
short time was absolutely laid aside in the Church of Christ; the fourth
Commandment, by which it was at first ordained, being still in force. His
fourth and last Argument was, that the first Liturgy of King Edward the sixth
confirmed in Parliament, with several penalties to those who should refuse to
officiate by it, or should not diligently resort and repair unto it, as appears
by the Statute 2, and 3. Edw. 6. c. 1. was actually repealed by the
authorizing of the second Liturgy of the 5, and 6. of King Edw. 6. which was
forthwith received into use and practice in all parts of the Kingdom, the
former Liturgy being no otherwise suppressed and called in, then by the
superinducing of this, the Statute upon which it stood, continuing unrepealed,
in full force and virtue, and many Clauses of the same related to in the
Statute which confirmed the second. Upon which Ground it was inferred that the
Articles of Ireland were virtually, though not formally abrogated, by the
superinducing of the Articles of the Church of England.

Of the first and last of these four Arguments, Doctor Bernard takes no notice
at all, and returns but one Answer to the second and third, which
notwithstanding may serve also for the first and last; just as an Almanac
calculated for the Meridian of London, may generally serve for the use of all
Great Britain. The Answer is, That the Apostles speech of making void the old
Covenant by speaking of a new, or taking in the first day of the Week to be the
Sabbath instead of the last, when but one of the seven was to be kept, does not
fit the Case; for in these there was a Superinduction and reception of the one
for the other; but in the Canon, the Articles of England are received not
instead, but with those of Ireland; which by his leave is not so much an Answer
to the Observators Arguments, as a plain begging of the Question: For if this
Answer will hold good in Ireland, it might have held good also in the Land of
Judaea, and the Parts adjoining, where both the Lord's Day and the Sabbath, the
old Law and the Gospel, did for a time remain together. As for the Doctors
Arguments, That the Reception of the Articles of the Church of England does no
more argue an Abrogation of the Articles of Ireland, than that the Apostles
Creed was abrogated by the reception of the Nicene and Athanasian p. 118. it is
easily answered. For as the Doctor well observes, the Nicene and Athanasian
Creeds are but Enlargements of the other, and that in some particular Points
only in which the Heretics of those times had disturbed the peace of the
Church. So that those Creeds are but the Explanations of the other in the
Points disputed, and were received by the Church with reference only to the
condemnation of some Heresies, and the Explication of some Orthodox or
Catholic Doctrines, which had been opposed by those Heresies. More easily is
the Argument answered, importing That the reception into our use the form of
the Lords Prayer according to S. Matthew, should by the same reason abrogate
that of S. Luke being the shorter. For first the Lords Prayer as it stands in
S. Lukes Gospel was never received into the Lyturgie of the Church, and
therefore could not be abrogated by the Churches making choice of the other
which we find in S. Matthew. And secondly it was not in the power of the Church
to have abrogated that Prayer as it stands in S. Luke, because it is a part of
the Gospel of the word of God, which the Church has no Authority to change or
alter, and much less to abrogate. All that the Church can be said to have done
in this particular, is that the Church made choice rather of the Lords Prayer
as it stands in S. Matthew, then as it stands in S. Luke, when it was
absolutely in her power to make choice of either. No contrariety to be found in
any one clause of the said two Pater Nosters, nor any the least contradiction
to be met with between those three Creeds, or any one Article of the same,
differing no otherwise in a manner but as the Commentary and the Text. But so
it is not in the Case which is now before us, nor in the supposition of making
one general confession of all the Reformed Churches, if they were severally
subscribed with the Irish Articles. He that subscribes unto the Articles of
Ireland may without any doubt or scruple subscribe unto the Articles or
Confessions of all the Reformed (or Calvinian) Churches. But if he take the
Articles of England also into that account, he must of necessity subscribe to
many plain and manifest contrarieties.

Against this nothing has been said, but that there is no substantial
difference between those Articles, as was conceived by the Lord Primate p. 118.
that both Confessions are consistent as is affirmed by Doctor Bernards most
eminent, learned, and judicious person, p. 121. and finally that there is no
difference in substance, but only in Method, number of Subjects determined,
and other circumstantials, as is declared by Doctor Bernard p. 119. But if the
contrary be proved, and that it shall appear that there is a substantial
difference between those Articles, that the Confessions of both Churches are
inconsistent, and that they do not only differ in the Circumstantials of
Method, Number, and the like; I hope that then it will be granted that the
approving and receiving of the Articles of England was virtually and in effect
an Abrogating of the former Articles of the Church of Ireland. And for the
proof of this I shall compare some passages in the Articles of Ireland as they
passed in Convocation Anno 1615. with the Doctrines publicly professed in the
Church of England, either contained expressly and in terminis in the Book of
Articles, or else delivered in some other public Monument of Record of the
Church of England to which those Articles relate: First then,

The Articles of the Church of Ireland have entertained and incorporated the
Nine Articles of Lambeth, containing all the Calvinian Rigours in the Points of
Predestination, Grace, Free Will, etc. which Articles, or any of them, could
never find admittance in the Church of England, by reason of their
inconsistency with the authorized Doctrines of it, as before was said: so that
by the incorporating of those Nine Articles into the Articles of Ireland, there
are as many aberrations from the doctrine of the Church of England. Secondly,
It is said of Christ ( Number. 30.) that for our sakes he endured most grievous
torments immediately in his Soul, and most painful sufferings in his Body. The
enduring of which grievous torments in his Soul, as Calvin not without some
touch of Blasphemy did first devise, so did he lay it down for the true sense
and meaning of the Article of Christ's descending into Hell. In which expression
as the Articles of Ireland have taken up the words of Calvin, so it may
rationally be conceived that they take them with his meaning and construction
also; the rather in regard that there is no particular Article of Christ's
descending into Hell, as in those of England, and consequently no such Doctrine
of a local Descent as the Church of England has maintained.

Thirdly it is declared ( Number. 50.) That the Abstinencies which are appointed
by public order of that State, for eating of Fish, and forbearing of Flesh at
certain times and days appointed, are no ways meant to be Religious Fasts,
nor intended for the maintenance of any superstition in the choice of meats,
but are grounded merely upon Politic Considerations for provision of things
tending to the better preservation of the Commonwealth. But the Church of
England not taking notice of any Politic Considerations, for the breeding of
Cattle, increase of shipping, or the like, as the Statists do, (nor intending
the maintenance of any Superstition in choice of meats, as the Papists do)
retains both her Weekly and her Annual Fasts ex vi Catholicae consuetudinis,
as Apostolical and Primitive Institutions; and she retains them also not as
Politic, but as Religious Fasts, as appears by the Epistle for Ash Wednesday,
taken out of the second Chapter of Joel from verse 12. unto verse 18. and by
the Gospel for that day, taken out of the sixth Chapter of S. Matthew from
verse 16. unto verse 22. And more particularly from the Prayer appointed to be
used on the first Sunday in Lent, viz. O Lord, which for our sakes did fast
forty days and forty nights, give us grace to use such abstinence, that our
flesh being subdued to the Spirit, we may ever obey the Godly motions in
righteousness and true holiness to thy honor and glory, which live and
reignest, etc.

Fourthly, It is affirmed Number. 56. That the first day of the week which is the
Lords day, is wholly to be dedicated to the service of God; and therefore we
are bound to rest therein from our common and daily business; and to bestow
that leisure upon Holy Exercises, both public and private. How contrary this
is to the Doctrine of the Church of England in the Book of Homilies, we have
seen already; and if it be contrary to the Book of Homilies, it must be also
contrary to the Book of Articles by which those Homilies are approved, and
recommended to the use of the Church. Besides, it is declared in the seventh of
those Articles, first, that the Law given by Moses as touching Ceremonies and
Rites do not bind Christian men, nor ought the Civil Precepts thereof to be
received in any Commonwealth; and secondly, that no Christian whatsoever is
free from the obedience of the Commandments which are called Moral. So that the
Ceremonial part of the Law of Moses being wholly abrogated, there is no more to
be observed in any of the said Commandments then that which is naturally and
plainly moral. For otherwise the Old Testament must be contrary to the New,
which is denied in the first clause of this Article; and secondly, this Article
must be contradicted by the Book of Homilies, which in another of these
Articles is approved, as before was said. As Adversaries to which truth the
Author of the Book entitled, The Faith, Doctrine, and Religion professed and
protected in the Realm of England, etc. being a Commentary on the 39. Articles,
Perused, and by the lawful Authority of the Church of England allowed to be
public, does account all such as have taught and published, first, that
whereas all other things were so changed, that they were clean taken away, as
the Priesthood, the Sacrifice, and Sacraments, this day (that is* the Sabbath
day) was so changd that it yet remains; and secondly, that the Commandment of
sanctifying every seventh day (as in the Mosaical Decalogue) is Natural, Moral,
and Perpetual. If so, then no such thing required of Christians, as to dedicate
the first day of the week wholly to the service of God, or to rest thereon from
our common and daily business, as it is positively determined in this Article
of the Church of Ireland. Add here, those desperate consequences, which have
been raised by some men from these Sabbath-Doctrines; It having been preached in
some of the Pulpits in this Kingdom (as Mr. Rogers tells us in his Preface to
the Book above mentioned) that to do any servile work or business on the Lords
day, is as great a sin as to kill a man, or commit adultery; that to throw a
Bowl, to make a Feast, or dress a Wedding Dinner on the Lords day, is as
great a sin, as for a man to take a knife and cut his child's throat; and that
to ring more Bells then one on the Lords day, is as great a sin, as to commit a
wilful murder. Most desperate consequents indeed, but such as naturally do
arise from such dangerous premises.

Fifthly, it is declared, ( Number. 71.) that we ought to judge those Ministers to
be lawfully called and sent, which be called and chosen to the work of the
Ministry, by men who have public Authority given them in the Church. This
serves to countenance the Ordination of Ministers beyond the Seas, ordained (if
I may so call it) by the imposition of the hands of two Lay Elders for each
single Presbyter, without the assistance or benediction of the Bishop; and is
directly contrary to the Book, entitled, The form and manner of making and
consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons; according to which Book (justified
and approved by the 36. Article of the Church of England) no Priest or
Presbyter can be otherwise ordained, then by the laying on of the hands of the
Bishop.

Sixthly, it is declared ( Number. 74.) That God has given power to his
Ministers, not simply to forgive sins (which prerogative he has reserved only
to himself) but in his name to declare and pronounce unto such as truly
repent, and unfainedly believe his Holy Gospel, the absolution and forgiveness
of sins. Which Doctrine, how contrary it is to the Doctrine of the Church of
England, has been showed at large in the tenth Section of this Book. To which
I shall now only add, that for the better encouragement of the penitent
party, to make a true and sincere confession of his sins, that so the Priest
may proceed to Absolution on the better grounds, it is ordered by the 113.
Canon of the year 1603. That if any man confess his secret and hidden sins to
the Minister, for the unburthening of his conscience, and to receive spiritual
consolation and ease of mind from him; the said Minister shall not at any time
reveal and make known to any person whatsoever any crime or offense so
committed to his trust and secrecy (except they be such crimes, as by the Laws
of this Realm his own life may be called into question for concealing the same)
under pain of Irregularity: By incurring of which pain of Irregularity, he does
not only actually forfeit all those spiritual promotions of which he is at
that time possessed, but is rendered utterly incapable of receiving any other
for the time to come.

Seventhly, it is declared ( Number. 80.) That the Bishop of Rome is so far from
being the Supreme head of the Universal Church of Christ, that his works and
Doctrine do plainly discover him to be that man of sin, foretold in the holy
Scriptures, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and
abolish with the brightness of his coming. Of which opinion the Lord Primate
also was, as is affirmed by Doctor Bernard, p. 162. where he tells, that the
Lord Primate had in two learned Sermons given his judgment at large, that the
Papacy was meant by Babylon in the seventeenth and eighteenth of the
Revelation. But there is no such Doctrine concerning Antichrist in the Book of
Articles, or in any other public Monument or Record of the Church of England,
but the contrary rather. And this appears by a prayer at the end of the
second Homily for Whitsunday, viz. That by the mighty power of the Holy Ghost,
the comfortable Doctrine of Christ may be truly preached, truly received, and
truly followed in all places, to the beating down of Sin, Death, the Pope, the
Devil, and all the Kingdom of Antichrist. In which words, the Pope, the Devil,
and the Kingdom of Antichrist, being reckoned as the three great enemies of the
Church of Christ; it must needs be, by the Doctrine of this Church in the Book
of Homilies, that the Pope and Antichrist are as much distinguished, as either
the Devil and the Pope, or the Devil and Antichrist, which no man of reason can
conceive to be one and the same.

Eighthly, the Church of England in the tenth Article speaks very favorably of
the will of man in the act of Conversion, and all the other Acts of Piety which
depend upon it, viz. That we have no power to do good works pleasant and
acceptable to God, without the grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we
may have a good will, and working with us, when we have that good will;
according to that memorable saying of Saint Augustine, the greatest Champion of
Gods grace against the Pelagian Heresies, Praevenit nos gratia Dei ut velimus,
subsequitur, ne frustra velimus. Whereas it is declared in the Articles of
Ireland, that man is merely passive in the work of his own Conversion, velut
inanimatum quiddam, as was said by Luther, the Article affirming ( Number. 32.)
That no man can come unto Christ, unless the Father draw him; that is to say,
unless the Father does so draw him, that nothing be ascribed to man's will,
either in receiving of Grace preventing, or working any thing by the assistance
of Grace subsequent, or Grace concurring; no other kind of drawing by our
Heavenly Father being allowed of in this Act in the Schools of Calvin. For on
this ground Calvin dislikes that saying of Saint Chrysostom, that God draws
none but such as are willing to come. Illud totum a Chrysostomo repetitum
repudiari necesse est, Quem trahit volentem trahit. So he in the second Book of
his Institutions, Cap. 3. Upon which Dictate of their Master the Calvinists, or
Contra-Remonstrants, (whom the Lord Primate in compiling the Articles of
Ireland follows point per point) affirmed expressly in the Conference holden
at the Hague; Sicut ad Nativitatem suam nemo de suo quicquam confert, neque ad
sui excitationem a mortuis quicquam confert de suo: Ita etiam ad Conversionem
suam nemo homo quicquam confert; That is to say, that as a man contributes
nothing either toward his natural Generation, or Resurrection from the dead;
so does he not contribute any thing toward his Conversion and Regeneration.

Ninthly, the twentieth Article of England ascribes unto the Church a power in
determining Controversies of the faith; of which the Articles of Ireland are
utterly silent, as if the Church were vested with no such authority, contrary
to Acts 15. v. 6, etc.

Tenthly, it is declared in the 34. Article of the Church of England, That
whosoever through his private judgment, willingly and purposely, does openly
break the Traditions and Ceremonies of the Church, which be not repugnant to
the word of God, and be ordained and approved by common Authority, ought to be
rebuked openly (that others may fear to do the like) as he that offends
against the common order of the Church, and hurts the Authority of the
Magistrate, and wounds the consciences of the weak Brethren.But of this there
is nothing said in the Articles of Ireland, and thereby a wide gap laid open to
all private men, either out of singularity, faction, or perverseness of spirit,
to oppose the Ceremonies of the Church, and deny conformity thereunto at their
will and pleasure.

Eleventhly, the 36. Article of England approves the Book of the Consecration
of Archbishops and Bishops, etc. of which Consecration we find nothing in the
Articles of Ireland, as if such Consecrations had something in them which of it
self is superstitious and ungodly, or that the calling of Bishops was not
warranted by the word of God.

Twelfthly, it is declared in the 38. Article of England, That the riches and
goods of Christians are not common, as touching the right, title, and
possession of the same, as certain Anabaptists do falsely boast. Of which the
Articles of Ireland are as silent as in the point of Consecration of
Archbishops and Bishops; the dangerous consequence whereof may be felt too
soon. I know that these two last passages may rather argue some deficiency in
the Articles of Ireland, then any contrariety unto those of England: But I have
cause enough to think that many of those who willingly subscribe the Articles
of Ireland (as being totally Genevian both in the matter and method) will be
apt to boggle at these two; the first as being contrary to the common
Principles of the Presbyterians; the second as being no less opposite to that
levelling humor which does affect as great a Parity in the Civil State, as the
others have contended for in the Ecclesiastical.

And thus far I have gone along with Doctor Bernard in answering all the
several Charges which are laid upon me, and freeing my self from all such
opposition to the public Doctrine of this Church as I stand accused for; A
crime for which I could not easily acquit my self, and not take notice by the
way, how much the Doctrine, Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England were
opposed by him who laid that heavy charge upon me. In the pursuit of which
particulars I have not gone much further (though somewhat further I have gone)
then I am warranted and instructed by Doctor Bernard himself, and possibly had
not gone so far, but that I knew how speedily the examples of some men may be
drawn into practice, their practice made exemplary, and the Obliquities of
their judgment taken up as a Rule for others, if warning of the danger be not
given in convenient time. Magnos errores magnorum virorum authoritate
transmitti (as was well observed by Vadianus) is a thing too ordinary. It is my
wish, that the business may rest here, though I fear it will not; the Doctors
Book being such a (...), such an occasion of creating new contentions, and
reviving the old, as if it had been published and intended to no other end then
(...), to put the whole State of Greece into fresh combustions. Others there
are, who either are concerned by name, or interessed in the defense of that
which they have formerly written in the Churches cause, who may conceive
themselves obliged to the like engagements; as well to do themselves right in
the eyes of the world, as to maintain the dignity of the Episcopal calling in
behalf of the Church. And to these last I shall refer the further prosecuting
of the point of Episcopacy, as it relates to Doctor Bernards actings in it; who
by furnishing the Lord Primates naked Affirmation with some Armor of Proof,
and citing many Foreign and Domestic Authors of the same opinion, has made
himself a second party in the Quarrel, and consequently stands bound by the
Laws of Duel to abide the Combat. If in that part which I have done, I have
done any thing amiss (as I hope I have not) I shall crave pardon for my errors;
though I may say with truth and modesty enough, Si fuit errandum, causas habet
error honestas, in the Poets language: if well in any thing, I shall expect no
thanks for it from the hands of men, considering that when I have done the best
I can, I am but an unprofitable servant in the Church of Christ.


