THE PREVENTION of POVERTY; OR, NEW PROPOSALS HUMBLY OFFERED, FOR ENRICHING the
NATION ADVANCING His Majesty's REVENUE, AND Great Advantage both of the City of
LONDON and COUNTRY, By Increase of Trade from our own Manufactures, setting all
Poor People at Work, preventing unnecessary Lawsuits, restraining the
Insolences of Bailiffs, Extortions of Goalers, promoting the Relief of
distressed Prisoners, and suppression of Beggars, Vagrants, etc.

Saepe etiam est olitor verba opportuna locutus. In all labor there is profit,
but the talk of the lips tends only to penury. Prove. 14.23. LONDON, Printed
for H. H. in the Year 1677.

THE PREVENTION of POVERTY, OR, NEW PROPOSALS Humbly offered for enriching the
Nation, etc.
IT IS a good Maxim, No Man ought to be wiser than the Law; yet it is hoped what
tends to public advantage, may with modesty, and due submission to Authority,
be offered to consideration, especially in such Particulars not yet determined
by Law, but additionally adapted to present Emergencies.

1. The first Riches of a Nation is the Multitude of its Inhabitants; The next
Care, is by good Education, and strict Laws, to keep and enure them all to
Labor, Frugality, and Industry; -- I will not undertake, because I fear it is
but charming a deaf Adder, to persuade some City Shopkeepers and ordinary
Tradesmen out of their fancy, That the more there are of their way of dealing
(Caeteris paribus) the worse it is for them: But let them but look into the
Suburbs (if they never were in Holland) and examine whether it be not true,
That where there are a Multitude of People, there the Consumption is augmented,
and every one makes business for his Neighbor; where there is best choice,
flock most Buyers. Since Wars, Pestilence, and especially Plantations abroad,
have much drained away our People, I submit it whether the prudence of the
present, or after Ages, may not think an Act of Endenization convenient for
encouragement of foreign Artificers, etc. to cohabit amongst us. This I am
pretty confident, it will at present not be unnecessary to suppress the
numerous Swarms of Beggars and Vagrants which in all parts abound, to the vast
scandal, detriment, and danger of the Nation, notwithstanding the wholesome
Statutes heretofore made; to acutate and enliven which with execution, a
competent reward for every Person that shall apprehend such sturdy Vagrant, and
bring him, or her, to the Officer of the Parish, where taken, may perhaps not
be unuseful.

2. When in any Nation Commodities are Imported to a greater value than what
are Exported, Impoverishment seems unavoidable, for then our ready Money must
go out to even the Balance; whence it appears a Kingdom may be in as much
danger by a great Trade ill managed, as by too little; it seems therefore
proposable that special care be taken to improve Commodities of our own growth
and Manufacture, and restrain the bringing in of superfluities and
unnecessaries.

3. Hence it is considerable, whether the vast quantity of Linen Cloth now
purchased abroad might not be spared, and a sufficient supply raised at home,
by encouraging the growth of Hemp, and Flax, etc. which will not only raise the
Rents of our Lands, but also continually set at work thousands of idle hands
(especially of Women and Children, our greatest burden;) To which I know not
why we may not add, The sparing (at least in a great degree) of French Wine, by
promoting Sider (altogether as pleasant, and possibly more wholesome and
agreeable to English Bodies) in its stead.

4. To keep our Money from crossing the Sea, I acknowledge there are excellent
Laws provided, how well observed I shall not say, only add, That it is the
opinion of many sober and observing Men, that the end will scarce ever be
attained, unless it be made Men's Interest as well as Duty, not to Export it; To
which purpose an Expedient was offered about two years since in Print, by R.
Haynes of Sullington in Sussex: Printed for Major Brooks in Cornhill, lately
deceased; To which I refer the inquisitive.

5. If scarcity of Money be objected as the grand hindrance of Trade amongst
us, and cannot be suppl'yd by such Expedient, there want not means otherwise to
raise credit that may answer that End: To this purpose the late Lumbard at
Devonshire-house was Erected, and in pursuance thereof, only altering the
Vesting of it in the Chamber of London, from private hands Proposals have since
been made.

That the Chamber of London Erect an Office, with convenient Warehouses and
Storage for Goods of all sorts, furnished with Officers as well responsible in
regard of Estate, as skilful in valuing and keeping such Commodities, and the
Accounts thereof. Upon the bringing in of Goods into which Office, Bills of
Credit may be advanced to two Thirds, three Fourths, or upwards, according to
their Nature; And the same being apprais'd, marked, and a Bill of Sale
Registered for the Offices security; the Goods are entered Debtor, the Deliverer
Creditor, who may have a Bill of Credit payable at seven Months, more or less,
as the Goods are more or less perishable, allowing Three per Cent. which Credit
he may (as his occasions require) write off to any that he is, or shall be
indebted unto; and has liberty at his pleasure, to see and sell such Goods;
which being done, before removal, he satisfies the Office: or if not redeemed
in the limited time, they are sold by Inch of Candle, and the overplus
returned, etc. Nor need I spend time to show how these Bills of Credit may be
transferred from one to another, and serve to all intents, as well as Money, in
considerable Commerce amongst us, none having reason to refuse or distrust such
Security, since it is built upon a real Found deposited in safe hands, as
aforesaid.

Many other lesser Offices of the same nature might be set up in every City, to
furnish the Poor with Credit (or Money in some cases) on their Wares or Goods,
whereby their ruin by unconscionable Brokers, Tally-men, etc. would be
prevented.

6. It Is sad to consider, what vexations Poor People in the Suburbs of this
City undergo, by means of unjust and trivial Arrests; how many hundreds are
thereby yearly ruined, and their Families brought to Parish maintenance; which
within the Franchise of London is avoided, by that excellent Court established
by King James P. M. deservedly called The Court of Conscience; Judicatures of
which kind might be as easily Erected in the Suburbs, where they are more
necessary, by reason of greater Confluence there, of People mean and indigent.

7. The whole Business of Arrests and Imprisonment for Debt (at least by Capias
before Judgment) deserves Consideration, if not Regulation; This is certain,
From the beginning it was not so; Nor shall I dispute what our Ancestors did to
make Trusting Fools wise, or Ticking Knaves honest; However the present Course
seems a little Incongruous.

1. In Nature, consequently in Law: Nothing being distrainable but what can
satisfy, which must be an Estate either in Land or Goods; for the Body is
neither saleable, nor eatable.

2. In Discretion. The Creditor hereby disabling the Debtor, renders his Debt
more desperate.

3. In Reason of State. Depriving the Sovereign of his Subjects, whose Bodies
thus immured might otherwise be serviceable in Peace or War.

4. In Justice and Conscience. That a Man should be debarred of his Liberty
(the greatest Enjoyment temporal) on a suggestion, before it be judicially
proved that he is either Debtor or Trespasser; Experience witnessing, that
hardly one Arrest in ten, but is either wholly causeless, for Spleen, Revenge,
or some Inconsiderable Trifle.

5. In Commerce. Spend-thrifts are allured to Rookings, and the trusting Dealer
is but smoothered in his own Feathers; For to pack off his Wares at any rate,
he readily Books the loose Gallant beyond the reach of his Purse; and if his
Fortune fall short, curses his confidence; and to eke out his revenge, takes
forth a Capias for his Carcass, which proves but throwing good Money after bad;
for where one crawls out, twenty are swallowed up, or devoured by excessive
Fees, and debaucheries commonly incident to Goals.

In a word, If it be true (what not a few judicious and inquisitive Men affirm)
That there is more money spent in England, in less than seven years space,
amongst Bailiffs, Goalers, and Suits of Law, as would pay all the Debts in the
Nation; If we may find above fifty thousand Persons constantly in Prison upon
Civil Actions, besides short Interlopers, and such as Death delivers from the
Imprudence (not to say Cruelty) of their Adversaries; what recompense can the
Kingdom have for its being deprived of so many members? what confusion and
misery is there amongst so many wretched Persons and their Families? How can
our Country be without store of Beggars, Rogues, and Vagrants, till so vast an
Inconvenience find a Remedy? And will it not be Pity (or rather shame) if in
one of the most ingenious Nations in the World for Knowledge, Virtue, and
Religion, the Expedient should be yet to seek; or if found, not put in practice.

FINIS.

