THE DECLARATION OF Duke Hambleton At the head of His ARMY, UPON His joining
with Maj. Genesis Langdale in the North of ENGLAND, concerning His most Gracious
and Dread Sovereign CHARKES King of Great Britain. LIKEWISE Major General
Langdales Propositions to the Lord Duke, concerning the KINGS Majesty, and the
Dukes answer thereunto. AND The Resolution of the Scots Army, with the manner
of their march, their trumpets sounding, Drums beating, and Colors displaying
with this Motto, For Religion, King and Kingdom. Also, the Duke of Buckinghams
Representation to the Lord Major of London, and his Declaration, concerning the
KINGS Majesty

Printed for general satisfaction of all true Subjects. 1648

The Declaration of Duke Hambleton, and his joining with Major General
LANGDALE.
Honored Sir,
DUke Hamleton with his Army is marched to the confines of England, his Army
numerous and impregnable to ours, their whole body of horse and foot
consisting of about 12000 besides 500 Curisiers; their Motto in their colors
are, For Religion, Crown and Kingdom. Their train of Artiliry is said to
contain 27 pieces of Ordnance, great and small; but the greatest part of them
Scotch-cases (as they call them) each carriage and frame, carrying 7 or 8 small
pieces. Their Army is now joined with Major General Langdale, and Duke
Hambleton has declared to each Regiment throughout his Army, the chief grounds
and principles that invited them to this loyal engagement, intimating, that
they were all bound and obliged, both by their duty toward God, and their
loyalty toward their King, to rise up as one man, for the preservation and
defense of Religion, Crown and Kingdoms, against all opposers whatsoever.

Major General Langdale upon his uniting with Duke Hamleton, propounded
several particulars touching their pr^sent relaying, and obstructing the great
work in hand, in relation to their dread Sovereign the King, but the Duke
replied, That the present commotions and distempers in their native Kingdom,
was the chief cause of obstructing the prosecution of their design, and
engagement; but now they were resolved to leave no ways of advantage
unattempted.

Duke Hamleton has further declared, that by the new raised Army, they will
defend the Covenant, and the King, and use their utmost endeavors for the
preservation of the Peace of both Kingdoms, and that they had no evil intents
against the Kingdom of England, (as is falsely suggested) but to use their
utmost endeavors for the reinvesting of the King, in his triumphant throne,
settling of Religion, and the peace of the Kingdom, disbanding the Army and
suppressing of heresy.

Our forces has had a late fight with Langdales the particulars whereof, I
shall refer you to the enclosed paper, a Copy whereof being sent to the
Honorable William L^^thall Esquire Speaker of the House of Commons, by our
Governor Sr. Arthur Hazelrig, which follows in these words. viz.

Mr. Speaker,
YOu have heard how Langdale retreated upon Major General Lamberts
approaching, and would not engage his Forces upon terms of advantage, resolving
to preserve his Body whole to join with the Scots, and upon his retreat to
Carlisle, he sent Collonell Tempest with Seven or Eight hundred of his horse
for to meet Colonel Gray, that was before that time kept up in Berwick by our
Northumberland Horse, with the assistance of Major Sandersons two Troops; but
upon Colonel Tempests coming into Northumberland, ours drew toward
Newcastle, and Colonel Gray with his Forces from Berwick joined with Colonel
Tempest about Alnwick: I sent for Bishopric Regiment, under Colonel Wren, to
come into Northumberland to join with Colonel Fenwick (who commanded the
Northumberland new raised Regiment) and Major Sanderson, I also mounted about
one hundred of my foot as dragoons, and sent them to them: I writ also to Major
General Lambert, letting him understand that the Enemy was joined, and
entreated him to send some assistance immediately to our forces.

Upon Friday last Col Lilburne with three troops of horse, came to them to
Collerton, and that Evening they marched toward the Enemy that lay at
Eslington, and Whittingham, and all along Cocquet water; having marched all
night, the next morning they fell into their quarters, the Enemy having no
Scouts out, and they fell so close in from town to town for about 7 miles, that
they suffered the enemy to take no Alarm: there are taken most of the
considerable gentlemen of Northumberland and Bishprick that were the very first
beginners of this War, and incouragers of the Scots to come into England, and
at least three hundred private Soldiers, and between five and six hundred
Horses, aod good store of Arms, without the loss of one man of either side.

I have enclosed a letter sent to me from Colonel Lilburne, in which you will
see the enemies intention, and have cause to give God the greater praise, that
when the enemy thought nor to fight, that God was pleased then to give them up
into our hands, without striking a stroke, and that to their everlasting shame.

I have also sent you a list of the Commanders and Gentlemen that are taken, I
beseech you do not apprehend that the work in the North is done, God having
bestowed this great mercy upon us; for be assured the Scots are come very near
the Borders, and Langdale is joined with them, and their numbers will be far
too great for what we are able to withstand in these parts, only to God nothing
is impossible.

Some of the foot Soldiers of this Garrison, and some of our new raised horse
ran away to the enemy, and we have taken diverse of them, and we intend to try
them by a Counsel of War, unless you please to dispose otherwise of them; if
so, we desire we may speedily know your pleasure; if not they will be suddanly
knit up: Col. Gray compounded at Goldsmiths Hall and did take the Covenant, and
so have some others, and there is not a man in the North of England, that has
done you more mischief then Colonel Gray: I shall take the best care I can to
keep them safe in Tinmouth-Castle, till I know what your commands are, and you
have now in custody your chiefest enemies in Northumberland and Bishopric, for
the beginning of ^his new War in the Nothern parts, and the taking of Barwick.

Your humblest servant A. H.
Newcastle, 5. Iulii 1648

The Declaration of the Duke of Buckingham, and the Earls of Holland and
Peterborrough, concerning their taking up of Arms for the King.
WE do here declare that we do take up arms for the King and Parliament,
Religion, and the known Laws and peace of all his Majesty's Kingdoms:
professing before Almighty God, that we have no other design in this
undertaking; but to see this well, and truly established, and will with
readiness and joy lay them down whenever God shall give us the enjoyment of
such a blessing, professing that whatsoever may be our success and prosperity
in this good cause, we shall not say by way of menace to the Parliament, that
we will use the power God has put into our hands; but shall bless God that he
has made us the instruments to serve the King, the Parliament and Kingdom in
the way of peace, in a just and equal composure between them: and we hope the
City and the Kingdom, will well weigh and consider whether they may not more
reasonably and conscionably join with us in these pious and peaceable
resolutions. This we thought fit both to desire and to declare that the
discourses that may be raised upon our actions, may not have power to abuse the
Kingdom, as if we did only move in a way to set up his Majesty in a tyrannical
power, rather then in his just Regal Government, the which has been always
found in this Nation, very well consistant with the due rights and freedoms of
Parliament, the which do here most faithfully protest the endeavoring a
preservation of, and call God to witness of our sincerity in this intention.

G. Buckingham. Holland. Peterborough.


To the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City in Common Council
Assembled.
HAving a long time beheld the sad calamities and miseries of these Kingdoms,
and finding no other means for redress, we are forced into this undertaking,
which we desire may be rightly understood of all well-affected, especially of
this City, whose actions and endeavors do sufficiently evidence their good
affections. To this end we have enclosed a breife account of our intentions,
which we hope may give satisfaction both to you, and the whole Kingdom, whose
assistance, (with Gods blessing) we desire no farther, then our designs are
real for the good and happynes both of the King Parliament, and Kingdom,
according to our Covenant.

Your humble servants, G. BUCKINGHAM. HOLLAND. PETERBORROUGH


Finis.

