A FRIENDLY PERSWATION, AND Christian Exhortation
To all who profess the Guidance of the Spirit of Christ and Christianity, to
keep out of False-Reports, Whisperings, and Backbitings which disturbs the
Peace of the Church, and are the occasion of Offenses.
OFten it has been on my heart the Consideration of the great Love of God who
visited me in my tender Youthful days, for then was I earnestly seeking after
the Knowledge of God and Life Eternal in solitary Places where I might be
alone; there did I often Mourn, Cry, and Travel in the Bitterness and Anguish
of my Soul; till he appeared who gives relief to the Oppressed and Needy: And
blessed be the God of Israel who took pity of me in my distressed state, and
did for the Cry of the Poor, and Sighing of the Needy, arise in an acceptable
day to give my Soul relief from those disquietings and dissatisfactions I was
then under, while I was amongst the Professors of God in that day. Now since
Gods blessed day has dawned, and his Arm of Salvation has reached unto me, I
can say it has been a great Care upon my Spirit to keep to that Sure Rock,
Foundation, Habitation and quiet peacable Dwelling which he has in some
measure given me a possession of, and an Inheritance in that Eternal Life that
is with the Father External, praise to his Name for ever.

Now Friends, the intent of this Paper is earnestly to persuade all, who
profess the Truth, to keep out of those very hurtful Evils of Strife, Debate,
and Division that are too commonly agravated and heightened, by letting in
Jealousy, False Reports, Whispering and Backbiting. This I have seen with
grief of Spirit in the light of the Lord has been the means by which the
Enemy, the evil Seeds-man, the Devil, the Common Enemy of man's temporal and
eternal Good has wrought to break that Sweet Unity and Heavenly Conversation
amongst Brethren: The Apostle Paul in the 1st Romans 29. had a sight of these
evils, and declares them as his Judgment, to be tokens of a deelining and
reprobate mind: when they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God
gave them up to a reprobate mind to do those things which are not convenient,
being filled with envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity, Whispering and
Backbiting.

1st. Whispering, Backbiting and False Reports are the common Enemies of Civil
and Spiritual Society, it has a Secret and Close way of smiting in the dark,
and goes about from one to another, and privately vents its slander, not with
an intent to make it less public: it is a Malicious Enemy, this way the
Whisperer has to deliver false reports, that thereby he may make them the more
believed and spoken of too for that person that receives a false report as a
secret from one, thinks to please some body else by delivering it as a secret
to others also; so it passes from one to another till at last it spreads over
City, Town, and Country. This thing, whoever thou art that is guilty herein,
proves very injurious to thy Neighbor, therefore I earnestly warn all to watch
against this growing evil, for mark you, in more public Accusations the person
grieved may have remedies to clear himself, and detect his Adversary: but here
against the Whisperer there is no possibility of that, because the Whisperer
and Backbiter smites in the dark and we know not who it is, till at length his
Whispers break out. Ah, the Tongue is a little Member, but does much mischief,
and is used oftentimes as a sword that wounds the reputation of innocent
persons by false reports, Solomon speaks of it in 18 Proverbs, A Whisperer
separates Chief Friends.

2ly. I beg of you to watch against the Whisperer and False Reporter, as
neither to give way to or to be an encourager of those that come with slanders,
for they that entertain them give encouragement to them that practice it: we
have a Proverb in England, That if therewere no Receivers there would be no
Thieves, so if there were none that would give an Ear to Tales there would be
no Tale-bearers; if we are subject to give too easy credit to them, this
encourages the Whisperer and Backbiter, and so begets an ill opinion of the
person, which is a great evil to believe ill without a just ground: when the
Enemy has thus far gained his end upon any to receive the accusation, then the
next thing is to report it to others, and so become a Companion with the
Whisperer and Backbiter, and after he has unjustly withdrawn thy own good
opinion of thy Neighbor, endeavourest to rob him of that with others also; for
he that can take delight to hear his Neighbor reproached, may well be presumed
to give us to believe, will not stick to spread the slander.

Therefore Friends take my Christian Advice to keep in innocence in this
matter, and not in the least to encourage any that are given to false Reports,
by which the Sweet Conversation and Unity comes to be broken.

3ly. This sin of Whispering, Backbiting and False Reports is a mischievous
Enemy that lessens if not wholly destroys the Credit of man, not only in
Spiritual things but Natural. 1st. Consider the thing he is robbed of: 2ly. The
difficulty of making satisfaction; a good name is better than Riches, a thing
to be accounted in great esteem to every innocent man, very near to a man's
life: now the making of Reparation for the injury done in this case of
Defamation is very hard, nay, it seems almost impossible, for mind you, when
men are possessed with an ill opinion of a man, it is no easy matter to remove
it out of their minds: Therefore these things being considered, how wary, how
careful, and how conscientious should we be in this matter, how we speak of, or
give entertainment to such as are Tale-bearers, Whisperers and False-reporters,
that do such great mischiefs to men.

4ly. In your common conversation or visiting one another, keep out of these
reports, and rather let it be in the love of God, stirring up one another to
Love, and Charity, and Good Works, according to the gift that is in you that
your visits may be in the edifying and building up one another in the most holy
faith, telling one another of your experiences, and what the Lord has done for
our souls, who is watering daily his pleasant plants, and causing them to grow
as fruitful plants, to the praise of the good Husbandman, and here as we are
opened one to another we shall be kept fresh, and green, and tender in the Love
of God, here none will be hurt, but rather if any are gone out of the way or
have slipped, to restore such with the spirit of meekness and tenderness, this
will be far from loading any with scorn and calumny, which does but drive
farther from God, and from Unity with the Brethren: read the 14th Ephesians. 31,
32. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil-speaking be
put away from amongst you with all malice, and be you kind one to another, and
tender hearted, forgiving one another, as God for Christ's sake forgave you.

5ly. Take not up an occasion against any from bare report without certain
testimony or knowledge of matter of fact against the person, and whoever thou
art that reproves another for any thing that is wrong, had need be innocent in
thy conversation, and clear of those things thou reprovest others for,
otherwise it may be said of thee as Christ taught in the 7th of Matthew, Judge
not, least thou be judged, for with what judgment ye judge ye shall be judged,
and with what measure ye meet, it shall be measured to you again: and why
beholdest thou the mote that is in thy Brothers eye, and considerest not the
beam that is in thy own eye; thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of
thine own eye, and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy
Brothers eye: most certain it is without this rule be observed thou will
certainly pull down more than thou can build up by all the best words in the
world.

6ly. And lastly I shall give these directions as the proper means to stop and
prevent the current of those growing evils of strife, debate, division,
whispering, backbiting and false-reports; you know it is the part of a good
Physician not only to show what the grief and distemper is, but to apply such
proper means as may be most suitable for the perfecting the Cure. The disease is
the subject which this Testimony is against, viz. backbitings and whisperings:
the Infallible cure for it, is our close walking and abiding in Christ who is
the peaceable Savior, and Prince of everlasting peace; for most certain and
without all controversy if we keep in the Love and Life that is in him, we
shall keep out of all that is evil, and all that offends, for mark you in Christ
Jesus there is neither giving offense cause lesly nor taking offense, but a
dwelling in Love that is the fulfilling of the Law 2ly, Put on Charity, it is
the bond of perfectness, and has these several effects: It will certainly keep
the mind in a peaceable and meek temper, so far from seeking occasion of
contention that no provocation shall draw us to it; Charity is not easil^
provoked, so that whosoever is uncharitable shows his heart is far from a
Christi^ Temper; and it is to be considered the nature of this Charity is such,
that it (...) most certainly cause a tender compassion toward all the miseries
of others w^ have erred or gone out of the way, to lend a hand to restore them
back aga^

To close up this my Friendly Persuasion I commend you to read weightily, and
practice sincerely these directions of Christ and the Apostle Paul gives in
this case of Charity one toward another, which if truly observed will put an
end to these Controversies amongst professors of Christianity, Mat. 18. 15. If
thy Brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee
and him; if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy Brother. Romans 14. Him that
is weak in the faith receive you, but not to doubtful disputations. Romans 14.
19. Let us follow after the things that make for peace, and things wherewith
you may edify one another. Now the God of peace that brought again our Lord
Jesus from the dead, that great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of
the Everlasting Covenant make you perfect in every good work to do his Will,
working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ,
to whom be glory for ever, Amen.

London 25. 12. Month 1683/4. By one that wishes well to Sion, and that she may
abundantly prosper, John Heywood.

London, Printed for Thomas Howkins in George-yard in Lumbardstreet. 1684.


