THE Voice of Providence ASSERTED, AND The Followers of God in the Ways of his
PROVIDENCE justified; In a Letter sent by John Hind to a Minister in London,
who denied the former and condemned the latter.

Micah, 6.9. Hear ye the Rod.

Psalm. 107.43. Whosoever is wise, and will observe those things, even they shall
understand the Loving kindness of the Lord.

LONDON: Printed for Peter Cole, at the Printing-press, by the Royal Exchange.
1653.

To the READER.
Good Reader.
HEre is presented to your view, the Copy of two Letters sent to Mr. White,
Minister at Mary-Hill, London, to which he has refused to give Answer; The
grounds of my publishing of them, is not in the least to bespatter the Person
of the man, but to vindicate two precious Truths from the injuries offered to
them by him; the one, That it is the Saints duty to follow God in the ways of
his Providence; For should the Lord declare his Anger, and we not fear, should
the Lord give us merciess and we not return praises, we should not only cease
to be Saints, but Men: the other is, That there is a Voice in every Providence,
which he was pleased absolutely to deny unto me. The former Truth, has been
confirmed by the constant practice of his Brethren, our City Ministers, in
giving thanks to God, for the several Victories he was pleased to vouchsafe the
Parliaments Forces, under the Command of the late Lord General Essex: If this
their practice be not also a confirmation of the latter Truth, some of them in
their Pulpits have formerly held it forth for a truth, who I hope will not now
deny it: and one of them, a learned and godly * Divine, in a Comentary lately
published, has this passage, Every Providence has a Voice, though sometimes
it be so still, and, low, that it requires some skill to hear it.

When I first put pen to paper, it was far from my thoughts to appear in
public, but upon perusal of the Letters, you will find how I was necessitated
thereunto; for I dealt so civilly with him, as to crave (by my Messenger) an
Answer to my Letter, which he flatly denied; and since the expiration of the
Months time mentioned in my last, by providence meeting with him in the street,
and assuring him that I held my resolution to publish my Letter, unless he
would yet promise me an Answer, which he would not; then acquainting him, that
if upon the sight of my Letter in Print, he thought fit then to answer me, I
should take it kindly, and if I received satisfaction by it, return him thanks,
but if not, I should reply; whereupon he told me, that he scorned to answer me
(a speech unbecoming a Minister of Christ to the meanest of his Members.) What
he scorns to answer, I here humbly submit to your Christian and candid
Judgment, and shall count it a glory to be any ways serviceable to the least
of the Truths or Servants of Christ.

Now that the Lord would open the eyes of our minds, that we may see and
approve things that are excellent, and persuade our hearts to receive the Truth
in the Love of it, and direct our steps, to follow him in the ways of his
Providence, is the prayer of

Your unworthy Brother in the common Savior John Hind.
February, 11. 1652.
Honored Sir,
IN your Sermon at Paul's on the last Lords Day, you were pleased to speak
against the following of Providence, a Truth which lies upon my spirit as a
Duty, and that from Scripture grounds; yet though you spoke against following
of Providence, I hope you light not the hand of Providence (as too many do
amongst us) but finding you (in your Discourse with me after Sermon) to deny
the Voice of Providence, and to acknowledge your self only an admirer of
Providence, which I was the more confirmed in, by your negligent (I will not
say wilful) omitting, to take notice in your Prayers of the great Works of
Providence, now on foot amongst our selves, and betwixt us and the neighbor
Nation, which certainly call for more than mere admiration from us, and
questionless do speak forth Instruction and Caution to all the People of the
Land; I therefore thought it might be very seasonable to clear up (if I may)
this Truth unto you, That there is a Voice in the Providence of God, and that
his Providential Workings do hold forth unto us both Instruction and Caution:
And that I may not exceed the bounds of an Epistle, I will wave al Apologies,
and come presently to the Work it self; which shall be in the first place, to
set down that stumbling block which you laid before me, and then to endeavor
the removal of it, by asserting it to be your duty (as well as mine) to follow
God in the ways of his Providence.

For the First, You laid down this Position, That they only which love Gods
Law, can have the peace of a good Conscience; In prosecution of which, you
showed, that there were many people in the world, who neglecting the Rule of
the Law, thought to find peace of Conscience, by following the imaginations of
their own hearts: and then you told us of one sort of men, that cry up Custom,
as if that were the only Rule to walk by: And secondly, Of another generation
of men more holy than the other, who will follow the examples of the Saints:
And then thirdly, "Of another sort of men, and they (forsooth) are followers of
Providence; men that pretend themselves followers of Providence; and these
men, let a thing be never so wicked, if it be successful, they will mask it
over with the name of Virtue: Those that are followers of Providence, had they
been in the same Ship with Dyonisius, when he did rob and spoil the Temple,
they would have been of the same mind with him, that the gods did approve it,
because he had a prosperous gale, and a fair wind to carry him away; These
people, had they lived in Jeroboams days, they would have worshipped Jeroboams
Calves; had they lived in Jeremiahs days, they would have had their hands
busied in making Cakes for the Queen of Heaven: Beloved, I am as great an
Admirer of Providence as any, and I know God is holy in all his ways, and
righteous in all his Works, but God did never ordain that his Providence
should be the Rule of Life; God will not have us to follow his Providence, but
his Precepts; show me a place in all the Scriptures, that directs us to follow
the Providence of God: Beloved, those that are followers of Providence,
assure your selves, they are seekers of themselves, and what ever they find in
the present, in the end they shall find no peace to their souls, for there can
be no peace to those that follow this Rule: These are your own words.

Now I shall appeal to your Conscience, whether herein you have not condemned
the just with the unjust, in saying, That let a thing be never so wicked, if it
be successful, the followers of Providence will mask it over with the name of
Virtue: I deny not, but some men may do so in some particular act, I justify
them not; but must the followers of Providence be condemned for them? Remember
what Solomon says, He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the
just, even they both are abomination to the Lord. And whereas you take upon you
to affirm, what they would have done, had they lived in such and such time,
take heed, lest in judging another, you condemn not your self, says our Savior
to his Disciples, ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of; and faith the
Apostle, Let him that stands, take heed lest he fall. And though you take
upon you, to pronounce them that are followers of Providence to be seekers of
themselves; I dare not judge others, I desire to look inwards, and to know my
own heart, which never yet told me, (though I have followed Providence,) that
I sought my self, and not the public good, or my self more than the public
good; and I wish that the jeerers at, the slighters of, and the admirers of
Providence, prove not indeed self-seekers. And although you peremptorily
conclude, That there can be no peace to those that follow Providence, and what
ever they find in the present, in the end they shall find no peace to their
souls; I dare not believe it because you say it, but desire your Rule for it;
and I shall be so charitable as to hope that there may be peace in the end,
even for them that slight Providence, yea, for them that for the present
oppose and walk contrary unto Providence, if the Lord take but off the vail
that is before their eyes: Your affirmation, that God did never ordain that his
Providence should be the Rule of Life, if you mean the only Rule of Life, I
agree it: and your saying, that God will not have us to follow his Providence,
but his Precepts; and your desire to see a place in all the Scriptures, that
directs us to follow the Providence of God, brings me to the fecond part of my
work, which is,

The asserting it to be your duty (as well as mine) to follow God in the way of
his Providence: and here I shall lay down this Position:

That the Providential Works of God, are Instructions and Cautions to lesson
men; they are not casual, indeterminate, wild, childish, arrows shot at random,
none knows from whom, or at what scope, or mark; no, all the Works of
Providence, they are grounded in a wise, and fixed Cause, and they are carried
on unto most excellent ends: It is true, the Providential Works of God, they
are many times dark and mysterious, and I confess likewise as to our narrow
conceptions and apprehensions, they seem to admit of changes, and
contradictions one to another; and I acknowledge likewise, that many persons
cannot see into the intentions and meanings of God in Providential Works,
partly from the imbecility of their judgments, and partly from the obduration
of their hearts; but notwithstanding all the difficulty, mysteriousness, and
contrariety in the works of Providence; it is yet a real truth, that
Providential Works are Instructions and Cautions; not only personal
Providential Works, such as are terminated in this or that particular person,
but also the common and public Works of Providence which are conversant about
Nations, or Churches in all their Changes and turnings; all of them contain
Instruction and Caution.

And that Instructions and Cautions, are not only to be taken out of the Word
of God, but out of the Providential Works of God, I shall clear to you, First
by Scriptures, and then by Arguments.

First, by Scriptures; In the 2. Psalm 10. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings,
be instructed ye Judges of the Earth; In the beginning of that Psalm is
reported unto us, the rage of the great ones of the Earth against the Lord, and
against his Christ; there is likewise reported the successlessness of all that
rage, and counsel; in the 6. verse, Yet have I set up my King; and then the
dreadful judgments of God upon all those that did so oppose Jesus Christ in his
Government, Thou shall break them with a rod of Iron, thou shall dash them in
pieces like a Potters Vessel; now from all these works of Providence, does
Instruction and Caution follow in the 10, verse; Be ye therefore now wise, O ye
Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the Earth; Serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoice with trembling; Kiss the Son lest he be angry. In the 3. of Zephaniah
6, 7. I have cut off the Nations, their Towers are desolate; I made their
streets wast that none passes by; their Cities are destroyed, so that there is
no man, that there is none inhabitant: I said, surely thou will fear me, thou will receive Instruction, so their dwelling shall not be cut off: Howsoever I
punished them, but they rose early and corrupted their doings. Here are strange
works of Providence, destruction upon destruction; and here also is an
expectation of God himself, that his people should have received instruction,
should have feared him, and amend their ways, even upon their consideration of
those judicial acts of Providence: In the 5. of Daniel, 18, 19, 20. and so on:
There we read of Gods Providence in raising up Nebuchadnezzar to a Kingdom,
and Majesty, and Glory, and Honor; this ascribed to the Providence of God; and
likewise of his being deposed from his Kingly Throne, because of his exceeding
pride, and loftiness of heart, in the 20. verse; and these Providential Works
did continue so long upon Nebuchadnezzar, until he had taken out the right
Lesson, that which God meant by these Providential Works of his, which is set
down in the 21. verse, Till he knew that the most high God ruled in the
Kingdoms of men, and that he appoints them to whomsoever he will: And besides
this, God did upbraid his son, that he was no more cautioned by these his
Providential Works upon his Father; And thou his Son, O Belshazzar, have not
humbled thy heart, though thou knew all this, but have lifted up thy self
against the Lord of Heaven etc. and because he went on in the same sins of his
Father, God has numbered thy Kingdom, and finished it, at the 26. verse. In the
46. Psalm, 10. which Psalm Luther styles, Speculum Providentiae, which
contains in it, First, a Narration of the near and effectual Providence of
God with all his people, in all their straights and distresses: In the 1.
verse, God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble:
Secondly, the Heroical faith of the People of God in the apprehensions of that
gracious and Providential presence of God, in the 2. verse, We will not fear
though the Earth be removed; in the 3. verse Though the Waters roar and swell:
Thirdly, Advice unto the Enemies, and to the People of God, the matter of which
advice is threefold, First, To a wise consideration of the wonderful Works of
God, in the 8. verse, Come and behold the Works of the Lord, what desolations
he has made in the Earth: Secondly, To an absolute Cessation, in the 10.
verse, Be still: Thirdly, To an humble and Righteous acknowledgment of God,
Know that I am God; so that it is unquestionable by Scripture, that the
Providential Works of God, they are grounds of clear Instruction and Caution.

Now for Arguments, take these,

1. The Works of Providence, they are but the fruits of Gods actual Government
of the World: As the making of the World was, so the government of the World
is, proper unto God: That which is the object of Gods Creation, falls also to be
an object of Gods Providence. Now this is an unquestionable Truth amongst
Christians, that Gods Actual Government, or Administration of the World, as it
is Powerful, so it is Wise, Holy, and Righteous; I think no one dare deny this,
and if it be so, then it will demonstratively follow, that his Works of
Providence are foundations for Instruction and Caution: It cannot be rationally
imagined, that all the Visible Works of Providence in the ordering and using of
all the Creatures in the World, appearing in permissions, restraints,
disappointments, judgments, and executions, upon evil men; in directions,
defenses, supplies, recoveries, and successes vouchsafed to the people of God,
by the hand of God, by weak and mean Instruments; it is not imaginable, to a
sollid rational man, that all these Acts and Works of God, should be but so
many Idols that cannot speak, and so many Ciphers, that must mean nothing at
all: If we should see a Master of a Family, laying out himself, in ordering all
that is in the Family, turning, winding, disposing of this business, that
servant, no man will imagine, that this man has no end, no design in all that
he does: That the most holy, Righteous, Wise God, should so turn the World
about, do this, make that, fall upon his Enemies, fall in to the help of his
People, and yet no Instructions, no Cautions to be formed out of all this, it
is most irrational.

2. The Providential Works of God, are many times a clear help to expound the
secret will of God, and many times to expound our selves unto our selves:
sometimes they serve to clear out the Mind or Will of God to us; As we say, the
Old Testament is unvailed in the New, so may we many times say, that the secret
Will of God is unvailed, and revealed in the Doing will of God; As Paul upon
that Vision which appeared unto him of a man of Macedonia, saying, Come over
and help us; he gathered assuredly, that God had called him to preach the
Gospel there; so may we, by many actions that have a general foundation,
receive a special encouragement, and hint, even by the Providential Works of
God, that such things may be done, and ought to be done; so clear a Commentary
is Providence many times upon the secret will of God; And so many times Gods
Providential Works do clear up our selves unto our selves; they many times
discover that unto us, which the Word of God does not; what is the reason why
Divines wish, and advise some persons in their afflictions and doubtful
conditions, concerning the reason of their present correction and affliction,
amongst other things, to look into the very correcting hand of Providence, into
the very kinds, times, and circumstances of their afflictions? Surely I think
this is the end of it, Because in that glass of Providential Chastisement,
there is to be seen many times, the very face of our sins, by which we have
moved God thus to afflict us, and because we may learn how to carry, and order
our selves under our afflictions; and usually men do by these. Providential
Works of God, find out the particular and hidden sins, which they would not (at
least) find out by the Word of God; as is clear in Joseph's Brethren, not to
speak of Adonibezek; and so David's own case by a stroke of Providence upon
Vzzah, he learned that which he did not well think of before, how the Ark of
God should have been brought into the City of God.

3. It is a special part of Wisdom to take our times and seasons: the Scripture
says it is so, in the 8. of Ecclesiastes 5. A wise man's heart discerns both
time and judgment; and he proceeds in the 6. verse, Because to every purpose
there is time and judgment, therefore the misery of man is great upon him: what
means he by times and seasons? certainly nothing else can be meant by them, but
the peculiar hints, advantages, and opportunities of Providence: It is a part
of Wisdom to lay hold of those advantages, and hints that Providence puts into
our hands, and because men are not always wise, to lay hold of those
opportunities, much misery attends upon them; and when the Lord puts into men's
hands an opportuniry by his Providence of doing good, and they let such an
opportunity slip, they are unanswerable to God in the day of judgment, for
neglecting such an opportunity: Certainly there are then Instructions and
Cautions founded upon the Providence of God.

4. The People of God have made use of Gods Providential Works to this purpose;
The Prophets preached it, and the Ministers of Christ daily make use of the
daily Providential Works of God, to exhort, encourage, ourage, dehort, and
Caution men; All the Arguments drawn from ex^mple, either out of Scripture, or
elsewhere, they are but so many Arguments drawn from the Providence of God;
Nay, the People of God ^n their most serious, and choice occasions, amongst
other Arguments, have generally used these two Arguments, the Covenant of God,
and ^he Providence of God; in the 51. of Isaiah, 9. Awake, awake, put on
^trength, O arm of the Lord awake, as in the ancient days, in the generations
^f old: art thou not it that has cut Rahab, and wounded the Dragon? Mark here
how they plead with God from his Providential Works of old; Art thou not it
which has dried the Sea, the waters of the great deep, that has made the
depths of the Sea, a way for the ransomed to pass over? Therefore the redeemed
of the Lord shall return and come with singing into Zion. The Church raised up
her self upon and from former experience of Gods wonderful Providential Works,
to an expection of some answerable Work of Providence.

5. Consider how frequently God himself makes his inferences and Conclusions
from his own Providential Acts, when he would deter his People from sinning,
besides other Arguments, he presents some Providential Works, in the 7. of
Jeremiah, 12. Go ye now to my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my Name at
the first, and see that I did to it for the wickedness of my people Israel: He
would take them off from sinning, from the consideration of a former
Providential Work against those that did so sin; in the 1 of the Corinthians
10.9, 10. Paul disswades the Corinthians, and so other persons from diverse
sins, amongst the rest, from murmuring, and upon what grounds? upon a
Providential ground, Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were
destroyed of the destroyer. Now these things were our examples, to the intent
we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted: And so when God
would encourage his people to depend upon him, he remembers his people of his
great Providential works, in the 41. of Isaiah, 2. and so on; Who raised up the
righteous man from the East, called him to his foot, gave the Nations before
him, and made him Rule over Kings? he gave them as the dust to his Sword, and
as driven stubble to his bow, he pursued them and passed safely, even by the
way that he had not gone with his feet, who has wrought and done it, calling
the generations from the beginning? I the Lord, the first, and with the last, I
am he: Thus the People of God, and God himself did use Arguments, even from his
Providential Works, which certainly testify to us, that there are Instructions
and Cautions that are grounded, even upon the Providentia^ Works of God.

Now for your further satisfaction, and conviction, I shall instance in some
Cases, or Occurrences, wherein providential Works may be looked upon as
Instructions and Cautions to the Sons of men; which to resolve exactly, as to
every individual contingency, or Occurrence to every particular Person, or
Nation, I confess is a knot beyond my ability to untie, although I doubt not
but that there is a particular special Lesson in every individual Work of
Providence, whether it be in the way of a causing or permitting Providence:
Nevertheless, there are seven Cases, wherein unto me it seems unquestionable,
that the Providential Works of God, should either Instruct, or Caution men, or
do both.

1. When the Work of Providence serves the Word of Precept, questionless,
there Instruction and Caution is to be grounded upon Providence. When God
expressly commands a Work to be done in his Word, whether of Justice or Mercy, a
Work that reaches unto such persons, whom God calls out for such a Work, and
Providence make way, and point out the Duty, in giving time and other
occasions to act this duty, that God now has put upon a man; I think it is
unquestionable to any Christian, that here is Instruction or Caution to be
looked upon now in Providence: And the neglect of a work of Precept, when
Providence has served an occasion, for the acting of it, it has cost men very
dear; as in Ahabs case, when Benbadud by Providence was fallen into his hand,
in the 1 of Kings 20.42. and he spares him, Well, (says God) because thou have
let go out of thy hand, a man whom I appointed to utter destruction, therefore
thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for his people; which clearly
makes out, that a Work of Providence joining with a Word of Precept, is to
instruct and order men: Because you granted this Case, (and this only) to me in
our Discourse, I shall say no more of this, but proceed to some other Cases.

2. When Divine Providence is the accomplishment of any Divine Prediction, no
question but that Providence of God holds out some special Instruction, and
Caution, answerable to the Nature and Matter of that Prediction: As the
Predictions of the Babylonian and Roman Captivities, and Providence bringing
about these Predictions, and fulfilling of them, there are Lessons expressly to
be Learned from such Providential Acts, which have such a respectedness to
Divine Prediction; as to Caution men to take heed of Idolatry, that brought the
Babylonian Captivity, and of slighting and contemning Christ, which brought
upon them the Roman Captivity.

3. When Providential Works, are the Executions of Gods threats: As suppose the
drowning of Pharaoh, the cutting off Ahah in the day of battle, the renting
away of the ten Tribes, and giving of them to Jeroboam; God had expressly
threatened these things, and his Providence ordered the bringing about of these
things; Now in such cases as these, and in Cases parallel to them, when God
still threatens the same sins in such like persons, and by his Providence cuts
off such persons, here is a manifest finger of God to point out Instruction and
Caution unto men. When the rent was made of the ten Tribes, the Israelites they
would go and recover all again; God contradicts them by his Word, as well as by
his Providence, in the 1 of Kings, 12.24. Ye shall not go up, nor fight against
your Brethren the Children of Israel; return every man to his house, for this
thing is of me, says the Lord: So that this is true, that when Providential
Works are the executions of the threatenings of God, they are Instructions and
Cautions.

4. When providential Works step out to the support of the Gospel, and the
Servants of Christ, and the avenging of the enemies of the Gospel, it is most
apparent that such Providential Works are grounds of Caution to the Enemies of
the Church, and of Instruction to the Servants of Christ, who reap the
sweetness of such Providential mercies. The Scripture is so clear for both of
these in the Psalms, in the Prophets, and In the Revelations, that a man must
profess himself to be stark blind that will not acknowledge it.

5. When Providential Works wait upon a righteous Cause, and the pursuance of
that Cause in ways of Righteousness, and those attendances of Providence, are
in some respect the very births of the Prayers of the people of God, who would
give no rest unto God until he did manifest himself in such and such ways of
Providence: undoubtedly, such providential Works ought to be regarded, as well
as the Cause it self ought to be regarded; and the persons who have by their
prayers engaged God in his Providence, to own and maintain his cause for their
safety, they are bound likewise to maintain and own those very providential
works, that they have wrestled from God, unless they mean to play the fool with
God, and their own prayers in finding fault with God for owning them and his
cause, and doing them good: The Lord lay not this sin to the Charge of the
people of this Land; so that in such a case, when providential Works, are the
support of the Cause of Christ, unquestionably they are Instructions and
Cautions.

6. In the alteration of Kingdoms, setting up, and pulling down, in setting a
period to, or putting a change upon them: And as there is no hand in the world,
that has such an operation in the alteration of Kingdoms, and change of
Government, as the hand of God: so the providential Works of God, in such great
alterations, are in a special manner to be regarded, and have exceeding much of
Instruction and Caution in them; Daniel 4. a Vision there falls into
Nebuchadnezzars thoughts, the great tree that flourished so high, and that
spread it self so broad, and was at length cut down to the stumps; that Vision
shortly interpreted by Providence to Nebuchadnezzar, it was for this intent, in
the 17. verse, That the Living may know that the most high rules in the
Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he Will; If the alterations which
Providence makes upon any particular person, or in his estate, bind that
person to receive Instruction, and to look well to his ways what he does; much
more do those great Changes that are wrought by the hand of Providence in
Kingdoms and Nations.

7. In parallel Cases of Providential Works; when you can match persons and
Nations, bring them into the like conditions, and when you can match the
providential Works of God, bring them into the like appearance; look what
Instructions and Cautions, God did give upon his former providential Works, the
like Instructions and Cautions are to be taken out from his present
providential Works; and what his people might warrantably do in the former
condition, what course and way they might warrantably take under the former
providential works, that very course and way they may take in their present
Providential Works, as warrantably as the former.

Here you see several Cases, wherein the Providential workings of God, do hold
forth Instruction and Caution unto us: If by what has been here set down, you
are not yet convinced that it is your duty to follow Providence, take but a
definition of Providence, as I find it laid down by Vrsinus, and I shall
trouble you no further: Providence is the Eternal, most Free, Unchangable, most
Just, Wise, and good Council of God, whereby he works all good things
whatsoever are found in all Creatures, and permits also evil things to be
done, and directs all things both evil and good, to his glory, and the safety
of his chosen.

Where observe, he calls Providence, the Council of God; so that (says he) we
are to understand by the name of Providence, not only the bare science, or
knowledge of things present, and to come, but also the decree, and effectual
will of God: and further, Providence therefore is not the bare foreseeing, or
foreknowledg, but the foreknowledg, together with the will of God, whereby he
works all good things whatsoever, which are found in all Creatures, and
permits evil things to be done, and whereby he directs all things both evil
and good, to his own glory, and the safety of his Chosen.

Now I pray, to what end does God exercise all these glorious Attributes of
his, in advising upon, and acting of all things that come to pass in the world?
Think you, it is only to work admiration in us, and not to instruct us, Caution
us? Consider but our times, what a continuation, what a series, what an
harmonious consent there has been in Works of wonderful Providence;
Providence acting strongly, constantly, highly, universally, and should all
these work only admiration? or is there not Instruction and Caution to be
learned out of them by us? I make not success an infallible Character of a
righteous Cause, yet I say, when the Lord declares himself so extraordinarily
from Heaven, in the Works of his Providence (as he has done for us in this
Land) it is our duty to eye those Providence, and to search out what
Instructions and Cautions the Lord would have us learn from them, that so we
may follow God in the ways of his Providence, and God may take delight in
using us, as Instruments in his hand for the perfecting of those great Works
that are upon the wheel amongst us.

I cannot but take notice of the hand of Providence in keeping me in London to
hear you, (when as I had appointed some time before to have been some scores of
miles distant from it on that day) that so I might have an opportunity thus in
meekness to instruct you, who oppose this Truth, if God peradventure will give
you repentance to the acknowledgment of it.

Having trespassed so much upon your patience already, I shall only desire you
(laying self by) seriously to weigh what is here set down; and if upon serious
examination of what is here laid down, you are convinced of the truth thereof,
own it, and practice it, and that in the practice thereof, you may both for the
present, and in the end, find peace to your soul, shall be the prayer of

Sir, Your most humble Servant John Hind.
Aldersgate, Aug. 11. 1652.
Art thou a Master of Israel, and know not these things? John, 3.10.
For his Honored friend, Mr. White, Minister at Mary-Hill, these --
Sir,
TAking offense at a passage in your Sermon at Paul's on the 8. of August last;
upon the 11. of the same, I writ a Letter to you concerning it, wherein I
recited the passage that was the occasion of offense, and endeavored to
convince you of your mistake and error therein, by holding forth the contrary
to be Truth, which I did by Scriptures and Arguments: I also instanced in
several Cases, hoping thereby to bring you to the acknowledgment of that Truth,
and practice of that Duty, which is so clearly held forth in Scripture; which
effect had it been wrought in you, it would have become you, to have manifested
it, by giving glory unto God, in the confession of it: but if the Scriptures
and Arguments there laid down, have wrought no such effect, but notwithstanding
all therein written, you still continue in darkness as to that Truth, adjudging
your own Doctrine true, and my Position erroneous, it would then have been your
Duty, to have defended what you before delivered by Scriptures and Arguments
(if you could have produced any) that should have been cleerer, and more
prevalent for the making good of your Assertion, than those produced by me,
were for the confirmation of mine; that so by comparing Scriptures and
Arguments on each side, the Truth might be made manifest, and apparent, which
was the end I aimed at in writing to you: It being a Christians Duty, to try
all things, and to hold fast that which is good: and the nobleness of the
Bereans above those of These alonica, consited in their searching the
Scriptures, whether those things, Paul himself delivered to them, were so: and
it being likewise the duty of a Minister of the Gospel, to endeavor to give
satisfaction to those, who stumble at any thing delivered by him, by answering
their Objections against it. Having discharged my duty in making known unto
you, what I took offense at, and asserting the contrary Truth, I expected from
you, the discharge of yours also; but whence the neglect arises, I know not,
neither will I take upon me to judge, as not delighting in censuring my Brother;
yet considering that within three days after the offense given, I required
satisfaction, and have patiently waited three months in expectation of your
Answer, and yet have received none: I cannot but let you know, that the Lord
has put such a resolution into my Spirit, for the vindication of this his
wronged Truth, that in case within one months space from the date hereof, I
receive no Answer from you, I shall then in discharge of my duty to the truth
(as a son thereof) endeavor the wiping off those foul aspersions, you have
publicly cast upon it, in your Sermon, by printing, and publishing to the
world, the Copy of my former Letter sent you, and shall submit to the judgments
of all ingenuous and disinterested Christians, whether I have held forth the
Truth therein or not. Having thus expressed my thoughts and intentions to you,
I commend you to God, and the Word of his Grace, which is able to build you up,
and to give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified, and shall
remain,

Cornhil, November 11. 1652 Sir, Yours in defense of the Truth, JOHN HIND.

For his respected friend Mr. White, Minister at Mary-hil, these --

