A DISCOURSE OF THE SOULS OF Men, Women, and Children; and of the Holy and
Blessed Angels in Heaven, and of the Evil and Damned Spirits in Hell: SHOWING
That they are Immortal, Spiritual substances, as well as the Angels in Heaven.

Written because this Author met with Four wilful Ignorant men at one time,
which said, the Souls of Men, Women, and Children, were nothing but breath, and
vanished into air, when as the Body went to the Grave. These unfaithful people
ought to be answered and reproved:

By the Author, THOMAS HICKS.

LONDON, Printed by T. Newcomb, and are to be sold by the Author, 1657.

A Discourse of the Souls of Men and Women and Children, and of the Holy and
Blessed Angels in Heaven, and of the evil and damned Spirits in Hell, showing
that they are immortal spiritual substances, as well as the Angels in Heaven.
LOving Christians, my desire at this time is, to write of high and powerful
spiritual creatures, the highest and noblest creatures by Creation, which God
has revealed unto the sons of men; that is, of the Angels in heaven, and of
the souls of men and women, and of the evil wicked spirits which are kept in
chains of darkness for the day of wrath, these three great creatures, and all
three spiritual substances, shall by the assistance of Gods help, be my
Discourse at this time, because I have been opposed by ignorant simple men
against the truth of the spiritual substances of men and women's souls; these
men see the gross substances of sea and land, and of their bodies, but want the
eye of Faith and Knowledge, to know the excellent spiritual creature which God
has given to them, therefore although the souls of men and women are the
youngest spirits of the three, which we discourse upon; yet the elected souls
of men, women and children, being great spiritual Princes and Heirs to the
kingdom of heaven; In order, we speak of them first: The souls of men women and
children are spiritual substances, as well as the Angels in heaven; but they
are young growing spirits, and have not yet attained to perfection, yet the
Lord almighty bears great love and good will unto them; he gave for a ransom
for these young spirits, and their own bodies, his dear and only Son Christ
Jesus, who being perfect and glorious, God coequal with the Father, and Holy
Spirit, yet he took a reasonable soul and body upon him, and so died for the
soul and body of mankind: Wonderful love unto these young spiritual souls, he
sends his own Holy Spirit into them: Open your gates, your everlasting gates,
and the King of glory shall come in; that is the soul of man twice spoken of in
the four and twenty Psalm: The Spirit of God daily teaches this young heir
knowledge, to make him grow more holy and righteous, and has given his holy
Word unto him plainly, to make him know how to order his thoughts and desires,
and to take good heed that that old, and subtle evil Spirit, the Devil, does
not deceive him. Christ Jesus commands this noble young spirit, to come unto
him by faith and prayer, and to trust in him that he will protect them in this
world, where he must stay while he come to that state of grace and knowledge
which God has appointed him: Mortal men cannot see the immortal substance of
their souls, with their bodily eyes; no more they cannot see the Angels which
tarry about them, unless they do assume a body to themselves, no nor they
cannot see the Devil and evil spirits although they do go throughout the world
continually with malice and envy to tempt and entice the souls of men and women
to sin and rebellion, as it does appear plainly in Job; and the evil spirit
was ready as soon as he had Commission to be a lying spirit in the speech of
all King Ahabs Prophets; yet we cannot see these spirits, and it is Gods great
mercy unto us for mortal men cannot see invisible spiritual creatures without
great fear and trouble. Daniel was much troubled at the sight and appearance of
good angels, our eyes are made to look upwards to behold the Sun, and the Moon,
and the Stars, and all earthly substances, but the invisible spiritual
creatures of Angels, and the spirits of men, women, and children, are more
excellent and lasting substances; and the souls of the righteous which are
redeemed by Christ Jesus alone, they and the holy Angels shall stand firm for
ever, when all the earthly substances in the world shall be consumed and burnt
to nothing; then shall these invisible spirits of men, women, and children, be
made perfect, and have their own bodies made a glorious body, and fit for such
a noble and perfect spirit. They are simple and foolish men that think they
have no spirits because they cannot see them, they may as well deny the good
Angels, and the evil spirits to be no spiritual substances, as to deny the
souls of men to be immortal spiritual substances, which none but Atheists and
madmen will deny. For the holy Angels do appear plainly by holy Scripture, to
be creatures by Gods commission of mighty force and power, to be messengers to
help Gods people, and to destroy the wicked; the Angel of the Lord slew in
Zenacheribs host many thousands of men, and saved Jerusalem, and the people of
God; the Angel of God brought S. Peter out of prison, and guided him through the
streets; the Angel of the Lord by commission slew of the plague in Jerusalem,
and in the country in three days seventy thousand men; the Angel of the Lord
smote the men of Sodom with blindness; the Angel of the Lord was a messenger to
Zacharias, and to the Virgin Mary, and thousands of Angels, proclaiming good
will and joy to men; at our Saviors Birth the Angels appeared; at Christ's
suffering, and comforted him, the Angels appeared at Christ's Resurrection, and
told Mary he was risen from the dead, thousand thousands, and ten thousand
thousands wait upon God, the holy blessed Trinity; are ready to do his will at
all times, and by commission and appointment they wait upon men also: For take
heed (says our Savior) that ye offend not one of these little ones that
believes in me, for their Angel beholds the face of my Father which is in
heaven continually; the Angels of the Lord do tarry about the righteous to save
them, and S. Paul bids women to be covered on their head, modestly, because
of the Angels, the Angels see us all, though we cannot see them; then what
simple men are they that have so little care of their souls, when the very
Angels wait on them: for the Angels in heaven, do joy at the conversion of one
sinner, and when S. Peter knocked at his friends door, they said, It was his
angel; they are ministering spirits (says Saint Paul) sent forth for the good
of his elect, the Angel of the Lord appeared to Gideon to instruct him in the
war; the Angel of the Lord persuaded Hagar to return, and humble her self to
her Mistress: The Angel of the Lord told Cornelius what he should do; The Angel
of the Lord rebuked Moses, because he had not circumcised his sons; The Angel
of the Lord rebuked Balaam for covetousness: The Angel of the Lord delivered
Lot out of Sodom; The Angel of the Lord smote Herod; The Angel of God declared
Sampsons birth. Now you may see plainly the wisdom, and power, and offices, of
these glorious creatures, that they receive of God for the good of our souls
and bodies; and shall any of us dare to say, our soul is not a spiritual
substance upon whom these Angels do wait: The soul of man has sometimes
revelations and dreams of truth, as Daniel, Joseph, and 1 Kings 3.5. in Gibeon
the Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream by night, and God said, Ask, what I
shall give thee. No man need to doubt but that this was his soul that God
appeard unto; and the word of the Lord was like fire in the Prophets: I saw the
souls of the Martyrs under the Altar, says S. John, crying for justice,
although when they were in this world they cried for mercy; the souls of
faithful believers in the world do pray for the young children of God their
friends and alliance, and desire the good of all men, but when they are grown
holy and perfect in the world to come; then they shall stand boldly against
their enemies, and rejoice in Gods righteous judgment upon them.

Now by Gods help I will speak something in particular of the souls of men and
women; the soul is a spiritual substance, not seen of mortal eyes, unless God
open their eyes, as S. John in the Revelation, the soul gives life and heat to
the body; the soul is the master, the body the servant, the body runs and
goes at the souls command; if the desires and the love, and the lusts of the
soul be wicked and ungodly, it sets the tongue and the whole body to doing of
wickedness; it is most certain God has placed the soul and body in a very near
union and friendship, so that the body is maintained and preserved by the
wisdom of the soul; the five senses, seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and
feeling; and hands, and feet, and strength are of the body, with the help of an
active spirit, but the soul is of a more excellent nature; it has the image of
the holy Spirit of God, it has wisdom, knowledge, and understanding, and
remembrance, and imaginations, and it has love and affection, the will, and
the thoughts; now this soul being young, and not come to perfection, the holy
spirit of God comes and teaches him more wisdom, and knowledge, and
understanding, and gives him many graces, he gives faith and hope, and gives
him humility and love, to love the good, and hate the ill, he places in this
young spirit judgment and conscience, being composed of the highest parts of
the soul, and understanding, and knowledge, and remembrance; he sits like a
Judge too, examining what his soul and body has done. Understanding and
knowledge being enlightened by the word of God, he commands the will and
remembrance to tell him the sins of his very youth, and then his soul is
troubled; and then that evil, old, subtle spirit, the Devil watches to put
in his soul thoughts of despair, or else to sear up his conscience, and to
blind his understanding until worse things befall him; but the holy loving
Spirit of God, will come into the young spirits of all his elect people, and
give them faith, and hope, and experience in the love and mercy of Christ
Jesus, which has paid the ransom for all true believers, which pray unto him
with faith and humility, he will surely perform his promises, and save them for
ever, and place them in glorious dwelling places in heaven, with their souls
fully perfect, and their bodies made glorious and spiritual, bearing the image
of the Lord of heaven; for as we have been troubled with our earthly bodies, so
shall we have joy and gladness of our heavenly bodies. And our Savior Christ
Jesus himself will account us for his brethren and friends: Now I hope any
reasonable man or woman will be satisfied in this, that this great Prince, his
soul is a spiritual substance; take some more proofs, Luke 16. verse. 22. And it
came to pass, that the beggar died, and was carried into Abraham's bosom by
the Angels: Will any man be so simple to think that these heavenly Angels were
sent on a message to carry nothing? No, no, they were sent to carry this young
princely spirit to eternal rest. Another proof the faithful Thief which died
that lamentable death upon the Cross who had been a foolish mad spirit, but by
the help of Christ, now a patient and faithful man, and so our Savior tells
him, This day shall thou be with me in paradise; this was that his soul should
be in Paradise; another proof is in Eccles. 12. v. 7. Then shall the dust
return to the earth as it was, and the spirit return to God that gave it: Here
then let no man nor woman undervalue the souls of themselves or others, lest
they prove like the spies of the land of Canaan, which brought up an evil
report upon that good land: For certainly the souls of men, women and children,
which are guided by his holy Spirit, shall be highly advanced in heaven, and
their bodies made glorious bodies, and there to live in joy and pleasure for
evermore, which have obeyed the heavenly wisdom of their souls, when they were
in this world, and suffered so much pains and sickness, and natural death, and
lying in the grave, and turning into dust again, which often feared and
troubled their loving souls when they were in this life, but now being departed
out of their earthly houses, their bodies they there first rest in heaven; and
have there acquittance and pardon for all their sins made fully known unto
them, and have full knowledge and assurance, that they shall have their own
very bodies, and their own eyes and senses restored to them again, at the day
of the resurrection of their bodies; at the day that God has appointed,
glorified, and freed from all sickness and pains, for proof of this see John 5.
verse. 21. For as the Father raises up the dead, and quickneth them, even so
the Son quickneth whom he will: And verse. 25. Verily, verily, I say unto you,
(twice spoken) the hour comes, and is already, and now is, when the dead shall
hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live. And verse. 28.
of the same Chapter, Marvel not at this, for the hour it coming in the which
all that are in the grave shall hear his voice: And shall come forth, they that
have done good to the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, unto
the resurrection of damnation; and in the eleventh Chapter of S. John, v. 23.
Jesus said unto her, Thy brother shall rise again; Martha said unto him, I know
he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day: Mark Marthas faith, I
know he shall rise again says she, but Jesus says plainly: I am the
resurrection and the life, he that believes in me, although he were dead, yet
shall he live: And in Revel. 20. verse. 11. And I saw a great white throne, and
him that sat upon it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away, and
there was found no place for them. And I saw the dead, both small and great,
stand before God: and the books were opened, and another book was opened, which
was the book of life, and the dead were judged of those things which were
written in the books, according to their works. And the sea gave up her dead
which were in her; and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them,
and they were judged every man according to his works. This has been written
for the dignity and high noble birth of the souls of men, women, and children,
which are regenerated by faith and repentance. For he that will not believe
that his soul is a spiritual substance, and carried into heaven at the day of
his departure from his body by the Holy Angels, and there to rest in joy until
the day of the resurrection that he receive his own body again, with
extraordinary joy and comfort; that man or woman that is so weak in faith will
be very doubtful of the resurrection too: Therefore loving Friends and
Christians, let us give no place to any vain disputers against these truths,
but let us learn by the Word of God to silence them. I promised to write
something of the evil spirits which we call Devils. These spirits are envious
and malicious, lying and murdering Devils, and deceitful damned wretches. The
Apostle S. Paul calls him, A Prince of the air, which rules in the children of
disobedience; he being a spirit, a subtle old spirit of experience, that
rangeth about the world, seeking whom he may destroy; he is a tempter and an
accuser to: he always desires of God commission to do mankind hurt; see Job,
Chap. 1. verse. 11. But put forth thine hand, and touch all that he has, and he
will curse thee to thy face.

What a lying bold impudent Devil was this to accuse that righteous man so
falsely, and having got Commission he raises up troops and bands of wicked men
to spoil his estate: And so would he spoil the Estates and Lives of Gods people
now at this day, and in all ages, were he not chained up by Gods power; but he
rules and blinds the understanding of rebellious sinners, that they may not
come to the knowledge of the truth, and so be saved. This Devil is the greatest
Liar that ever was: He told our Savior, That all the Kingdoms of the world
were his, and the glory of them, and that he could give them to whomsoever
pleased him: All the cheaters and couseners in the world could not tell a
bigger lie; for he is chained up by the power of God, and has nothing that is
good for himself; our Lord and Savior was too wise and strong for that lying
Devil; but our Grandfather and Grandmother Adam and Eve, were plainly cheated
and cousened by this abominable Liar. For says he, you shall not die at all,
if you eat this fruit; when as the poor cheated souls were judged to die, and
their bodies to turn to dust presently after; and their souls had died
eternally had not our merciful Lord God found out a way to save faithful
believers.

Now any man or woman that read this little Book, may well know what chearing
lying Devils there are; although knowledge be sufficient for understanding men
to beware, yet those children of disobedience whom this Devil does so much rule
in their souls, must take heed this envious cheating Lier do not cheat them
still, for he will tell them that they be brave wisemen, and will tell them an
hundred lies, that they be the happiest men in the world; and that they that
dare not do as they do, are but Punies; but let those brave Sparks take heed
they do not catch a serpent, instead of a fish: And so I am glad I have done
with the Devil at this time.

I now will write a Word or two more of the holy and blessed and good Angels;
in the second and third Chapters of the Revelation, we read of Ministers called
Angels, and those that divide the Word of God aright amongst us, and administer
the two Sacraments, which our Lord Jesus Christ has left to his Church, are
Angels and good Angels indeed, and their lips shall preserve knowledge; but our
writing has been of invisible Angels which are ministering spirits sent forth
for them which are heirs of Salvation: Hebrews the first, and the last Verse;
these glorious Spirits are an innumberable company, thousand thousands
ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him,
before the all-seeing God, whose eyes behold all the inhabitants in the world
at one time, and knows all the secrets of their souls, and hears all their
voices: In Dan. 7. verse. 10. A fiery stream issued, and came forth before him,
the judgment was set, and the books were opened: The holy Angels have diverse
great Offices, as you see in many places of the Revelation; and in the sixth of
Daniel, verse. 22. My God has sent his Angel, and has shut the mouth of the
Lions, that they have not hurt me. Now you may know certainly that God has
made these spiritual creatures of great force and power: And so I desire Gods
blessing on this labor, Amen.

FINIS.

