The ORDER OF CAUSES.

Of Gods Foreknowledge, Of Election, and Of Predestination.

AND Of Man's Salvation or Damnation.

Laid down so clearly, and proved so plainly by the Scriptures, that even the
meanest capacity amongst Rational men may understand it, to their great
satisfaction.

AS ALSO, Whether Christ died for All, or Not for All: With the Causes and
Effects that may follow or not follow, seriously considered, meekly
controverted, and plainly proved by the Scriptures of Truth; to the great
satisfaction of all Rational people fearing God.

By HENRY HAGGAR, a Servant of Christ, and of the Congregations of his Saints.

Nevertheless, the foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The Lord
knows them that are his: and let every one that names the name of Jesus
Christ, depart from iniquity.

2 Timothy 2.19. For therefore we both labor and suffer reproach because we trust
in the living God, who is the Savior of all men, but especially of those that
believe.

1 Timothy 4.10. London, Printed by James Cottrel, for Richard Moon, at the seven
stars in Paul's Churchyard, near the great North-door, 1654.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Have presented thee with a small Volume, in which is contained much Truth,
which may through the blessing of God give thee great satisfaction if thou
search the Scriptures diligently, and ask wisdom in faith, of him who is the
giver of every good and perfect gift; without whose help, I can promise thee no
profit.

The matter I treat of, is about Gods Predestination, Election, and
Reprobation, according to his foreknowledge; and of the death of Christ for the
sons of men. The body and substance of all objections I have labored to
answer, briefly and plainly, and that both by Scripture and Reason, to the
satisfaction of all rational men fearing God. And I am conscious to my self
before God that I aim at nothing more, then the glory of the great God, in whom
we live, move, and have our beings; and to whom we must all give an account of
all our actions, at the great day: and in the next place, at the good and
benefit of all that shall read or hear the holy Scriptures, and by them try
these following lines. They are so few, that thou may easily purchase them;
and if thou find no profit in them, it will be but three or four pence lost:
but if they prove profitable to thee, it will be very well bestowed.

The times are now drawing nigh, in which the Lord himself will appear from
Heaven, to take an account of every man, how they have spent their talents of
wisdom and understanding which he has lent them: and happy will every man be,
that can give up his account with joy, can say with Paul, that they have
labored to have consciences void of offense toward God and toward all men;
and walked in all the Ordinances and Commandments of the Lord blameless: the
which while some men are laboring after, I find them drowned and lost in a
labyrinth about Predestination, Election, and Reprobation; of which
distractions I my self have formerly had my share: but now through mercy having
escaped them by the help of the Lord, I think it no less then my duty to inform
others; and to that end I have composed these few lines, which new I commit to
thy serious consideration; desiring thee to search the Scriptures, and see
whether the things I have written be so or not: and judge impartially; and the
Lord give thee understanding in all things: into whose hands I commit thee, to
be guided here by his Counsels, that afterward thou may be received into
glory with him: in whose service I desire to continue

A servant of all that fear God, and keep his Commandments, till death. Henry
Haggar.

The Order of Causes, etc.
THe Scripture says, Ephesians. 14. speaking of Gods Election, that he has chosen
us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and
without blame before him in love etc. and Peter also, 1 Pet. 1.2. calls the
Saints elect, according to the foreknowledge of God the Father through
Sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience, etc. and Paul (2 Thessalonians. 2.13)
says to the Saints, that God has from the beginning chosen them to salvation,
through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth, whereunto he
called you by our Gospel, to the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

From all which places we must needs conclude, that God has chosen some to
life and glory, even before or from the foundation of the world, because the
Scripture says it; and (as Christ says in another case) the Scripture cannot
be broken. Therefore the wisdom of all Christians is, To labor to have
judgments informed according to the Scriptures, and that the Scriptures and
their Judgments may speak both one thing: and to that end, Let us consider the
manner of Gods speaking to the sons of men.

Romans 4.17. He says to our Father Abraham, As it is written, I have made thee
a father of many nations, before him whom he believed, even God, who quickneth
the dead, and calls things that are not as though they were etc. Observe, God
speaks then in that present time to Abraham, saying, I have made thee a Father
of many Nations, notwithstanding Abraham was not the Father of one Child at
that time, but Ishmael: see Genesis 17.5. how then must we understand, I have made
thee a Father of many Nations?

Answ. The Apostle tells us plainly, Romans 4.17. that it was so before God,
who calls things that are not, as though they were: and so he calls Abraham
the Father of many Nations, though he was not as yet; no not the Father of
Isaac, in whom his seed should be called.

The like may again be observes when he called Christ a Lamb slain from the
foundation of the World, Rev. 13.8. yet he was not slain many thousand years
after.

Therefore the same may again be considered about Gods Election from the
foundation of the would, thus:

God calls Abraham, a Father of many Nations, though not so God calls
Christ, a Lamb slain from the foundation of the World, though not slain many
thousand years after, till he was a man in the flesh: even so he calls men
elected from the foundation of the world, though not elected many thousand
years after, till they are men in the flesh: yet it is all so and done before
God, who foreseeth and knows all things, even from eternity to eternity, and
therefore calls things that are not as though they were: for he sees the
beginning and end of all men's actions, whether good or evil, at once; and
knowing as well from the foundation of the world what men would do in their
generations, as they can know when their lives and actions are finished. He
therefore could as well conclude of men's salvation or damnation then, as men
can know themselves at the end of their days, or at the day of judgment.

By all which it is clear, that as Christ was called a Lamb slain from the
foundation of the World, and yet not slain nor touched till the day of his
death: so also, although God callech men Elect from the foundation of the
world, yet they are not Elect nor chosen, until the very day of their
conversion, and turning from sin to God: for God calls things that are not as
though they were: from whence it is evident they were not Elect, although so
called.

Again, if we consider Election according to the foreknowledge of God, it is
plain from that text in 1 Pet. 1.2. Elect according to the foreknowledge of
God, through sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience. From whence I reason
thus:

If the Elect are Chosen through the sanctification of the Spirit, then they
were not chosen before they had the Spirit, and were sanctified by the Spirit.

But they had not that sanctifying Spirit before they had a being, either in
the World, or else in their Mothers Womb at leastwise.

Therefore not chosen from the foundation of the World, but only as aforesaid.

Again, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. We are bound to give thanks always to God for yon
Brethren, beloved of the Lord, because God has from the beginning chosen you
to salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth,
whereunto you were called by our Gospel. From whence I argue thus:

If the Saints are chosen to salvation through sanctification of the Spirit,
and believing of the truth, and were called to believe that truth by the
hearing of the Gospel, then they were not chosen before they had believed the
truth, and before they did hear the Gospel, by which they were called to
believe.

But they were chosen through believing the truth, and called to believe it by
the Gospel, as aforesaid; and Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17.

Therefore not chosen before they had a being, no more then Christ was slain
before he had a being.

For according to the Scripture they were chosen through sanctification of the
Spirit, and belief of the truth: and if through is, then not without it
(observe that:) but it is through it, therefore not without it. Moreover, they
were called to this-faith by the Gospel; which they never heard before they had
a being.

Therefore it is clear, their Election was not before their Conversion, though
God saw it before: neither indeed can it be, because the Elect are all chosen
in Christ, Ephesians. 1.4. but I can prove that those very Elect Ephesians where once
our of Christ, chap. 2.11, 12. Remember (says the Apostle) that at that time
ye were without Christ, without hope without God in the world: from whence I
argue thus:

If at that time they were without God, and without Christ, then at that time
they were not in him: for they could not be without him and within him both at
one time: and if not in Christ, then not chosen in him, as all rational men
will grant. From all which I conclude,

That men were elected in Christ, according to the Scripture, yet never in him,
before they believed in him: and they never believed in him, before they heard
the Gospel: and they never heard the Gospel before they were born. Therefore
not Elected, though so called by God who justifieith the ungodly, and calls
things that are not as though they were.

Again, how plain is it Ephesians. 1. 11, 12. where Paul says, that they whom God
did predestinate according to the counsel of his own will, to be to the praise
of his glory, were such as did first trust in Christ: and in ver. 13. he says,
that they trusted in Christ after they heard the word of truth, the Gospel of
their salvation; (not before) the which they never heard before they were born,
all men will grant that have but reason.

Again, how clear is that text, 1 Pet. 1.2. Elect according to the
foreknowledge of God: whence it is plain, if God knew them, before he Elected
them, then he knew them as men in the flesh, and not as they were nothings: and
if he knew them as they were men, they must needs be born first; for of
nothing, nothing can be known before time, nor chosen in time. Therefore I
conclude, that the real and absolute act of Election comes to pass in time,
though known of God before time, who according to his foreknowledge calls
things that are not as though they were; and so calls men that are not
Elected as though they were Elected.

And thus is the great Objection about Gods Election answered, and the
stumbling block taken away, to the end that men might work out their salvation
with fear and trembling, and make their Calling and Election sure.

The same may also be considered of Gods predestination, or foreappointing all
obedient believers to Life and Salvation, (not without, but) according to his
foreknowledge of all their words and actions from the foundation of the World.
And so likewise he predestinateth or fore-appointeth all disobedient
unbelievers and apostates to death and damnation (not without, but) according
to his foreknowledge of all their words and actions, from the foundation of the
world.

Thus I do believe that God foresaw all men and things past, present, and to
come, at once, at once,: I do believe that God foresaw Adams fall long before
he was a creature in being: for nothing is hid from his eyes, but all things
are naked and bare before him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13.

But it may be some will say, If God did foreknow Adam would fall when he had
created him, why then did he make him?

To which I answer two things: first, what have we to do to reply against our
Maker? shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me
thus? Shall Adam say to his Maker, Why have thou made me thus[subject to fall?]
What is that to Adam, seeing God has given him and his posterity means to rise
again to as good or a better condition, and the neglect of tha^ means is that
which will rise up in judgment against all slothful disobedient ones that will
not make use of their talents of power, wisdom and understanding which God has
given them, to work out their salvation with fear and trembling while they may?
This well considered, will give light into Romans 9.10, 11, 20, 21, 22. and if
men will needs understand that God loved Jacob and hated Esan before they were
born, they should consider that God knew them both before they were born and
after they were born [alike] according to his foreknowledge, as aforesaid.

But I know that this is brought to prove that Gods Election is not because of
works foreseen.

To which I answer; but what works? It is true, God does not choose us because
of any works of righteousness; that we have done, or can do, out of Christ; for
out of him no works are accepted: therefore it is said, Not of works, lest any
man should boast: therefore no works are required of unbelievers, but the very
prayers of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord: but it is because of
works of righteousness that Christ himself has wrought for us, in his own
person and does work by us and in us, by his Spirit, when we are believers. And
though boasting in the works of the Law, and boasting of works before believing
be reproved; yet Paul says, As the truth of Christ is in me, no man shall stop
me of that boasting, 2 Cor. 11.10. and although be cried down works before
faith in so many places, yet he preaches up works after believing, loud
enough, in these words, Tit. 3.8. This is a faithful saying, and these things I
will that thou constantly affirm, That they which have believed in God might be
careful to maintain good works; for they are good and profitable, etc. and
Phil. 2.12, 13. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling: for it is God
which works in you both to will and to do, of his good pleasure. Thus we may
see, that although it be not for our workings without Christ, that we are
chosen or predestined to life and glory; yet it is by our workings with
Christ, when he by his Spirit dwells in our hearts by believing, and is in us
the hope of glory: for then he works in us, and our works are acceptable,
because he works them by us, and we work them in him. Therefore Paul says, We
therefore as workers together with him, beseech you etc.

Therefore if men would but open their eyes, they might easily see what works
the Apostle speaks of, when he says Election is not of works. But of this more
plainly anon.

Secondly I answer: Although God saw Adam would fall, yet he saw him a creature
first, or else he could not have foreseen he would fall when he was a creature:
therefore God is the God of order, and not of confusion, 1 Cor. 14.33. and
fore-seeth all things orderly, and not confusedly.

So then I conclude, that first he saw Adam created.

Secondly, He saw him fallen, and all his postery in his loins.

Thirdly, He saw Christ crucified for them.

Fourthly, He foresaw the Gospel preached to all men in their generations.

Fifthly, He foresaw all men's receiving, or refusing; believing, or not
believing; obeying or disobeying his Gospel, in their several generations, as
it was, is, or shall be communicated to the end of all ages in order at once.
And seeing as well then, what men would do in their ages and generations to
come, as they do know themselves when their lives and actions are finished, God
could thereupon make up his Election and Reprobation, choosing or electing
obedient believers, according to his foreknowledge to Life and Salvation; and
refusing and reprobating disobedient unbelievers, to eternal death and
damnation.

And thus is Election and Reprobation to be considered, according to the
sorekowledge of God in Christ, or out of Christ, from the foundation of the
World according to the Scriptures. Which if well considered, it would put an
end to all the confused and distracted thoughts in men about these things.

But it may be that some will yet object, that I hold faith and obedience in
us, to be the cause of Gods electing or choosing us, to life and glory.

Answ. That faith in Christ, and obedience to Christ, is [a cause] without
which God chooses none to Life and Salvation, I affirm, because we never read
that God chose any disobedient unbeliever to life and glory which lived and
dyed so: but that it is [the cause] for which he does choose any, I shall
utterly deny, and show the contrary in the Order of Causes, thus:

Suppose I should affirm my obedience to be the cause of my Election to
Salvation, then what is the cause of my obedience?

Answ. My love to Christ.

But what is the cause of my love to Christ?

Answ. The preaching of the Gospel of Christ, (viz.) that he died for my sins,
and rose again for my justification, without which there could be no believers:
for take away Christ, and take away faith; and then believe who can.

But what is the cause of the preaching of the Gospel to us?

Answ. Christ's dying for us.

But what is the cause of Christ's dying for us?

Answ. Even Gods great love of pity wherewith he loved us even when we were
dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.4. at that time he commended his love
toward us, in that while we were yet sinners Christ's died for us, Romans 5.8.

Thus all men may see, that I do not hold that God chose any to Life and
Salvation for any good in them, before he put it in them; as I shall now make
appear more at large, by the Scriptures, considering the causes in order,
descending from God to us or ascending from us to God.

1 Cause.

Gods love to the sons of men, as they were sinners against him, and enemies to
him, was the cause of his sending his Son to die for sinners, for his enemies,
for the ungodly, for the unjust; as appears by these following Scriptures:
John 3.16. Romans 5.6, 8, 10. 1 Pet. 3.18. God so loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but
have everlasting life. For when we were yet without strength, in due time
Christ died for the ungodly. And, God commends his love to us, in that while
we were yet sinners Christ died for us. For if when we were enemies we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we shall
be saved by his life. For Christ also has suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust, that he might bring us to God.

2 Cause.

Christ's dying for our sins, and rising again from the dead, is the cause of
the Gospels being preached to sinners; as appears by these Scriptures: Mat.
28.18, 19. Mark 16.15, 16. 1 Cor. 15.13, 14. And Jesus came and spoke unto
them, saying, All power is mine both in Heaven and in Earth. Go ye therefore
and teach all Nations, etc. And again he said unto them, Go ye into all the
world, and preach the Gospel to every creature, etc. But if Christ be not
risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is vain; and ye are yet in
your sins. etc.

3 Cause.

The Gospels being preached to sinners, is the cause of their believing; as
appears by these Scriptures: Romans 10.14, 15, 17. How then shall they call on
him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom
they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? and how shall
they preach except they be sent? As it is written. So then faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God.

4 Cause.

Men's believing is the cause of their justification from sin, as appears by
these Scriptures: Act. 13.38, 39. Romans 3.26, 28. chap. 4.3, 23, 24, 25. Be it
known unto you therefore, that through this man is preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins, etc. By him all that believe are justified from all
things, etc. To declare his righteousness, that he might be just, and the
justifier of all that believe in Jesus. Therefore we conclude, that a man is
justified by faith without the deeds of the Law. For what says the Scripture?
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. Now it was
not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him for righteousness,
but for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him that raised
up Jesus our Lord from the dead; who was delivered for our sins, and raised for
our justification.

5 Cause.

Our knowing our selves justified from our sins by faith in the blood of
Christ, is the cause of our love to Christ; according to these Scriptures: Joh.
4.10, 19. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent
his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. [Therefore] we love him, because
he loved us first.

6 Cause.

Our love to Christ is the cause of our obeying of Christ, according to these
Scriptures: 1 John 5.3. John 14.15, 21, 23. If ye love me, keep my
Commandments. And he that has my Commandments and keeps them, he it is that
loves me. And if any man love me, he will keep my words. For this is the love
of God, that we keep his Commandments; and his Commandments are not grievous.

7 Cause.

Our obeying of Christ is the cause of his giving us eternal life; as it is
written, Mark 16.16. Rev. 22.14. Heb. 5.9. He that believes and is baptized,
shall be saved. And, blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may
have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the
City. And, Christ being made perfect through sufferings, he became the Author
of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him.

Thus are the causes of Gods Election and man's Salvation laid down in order, so
clearly, that the meanest capacity may understand them: which more briefly are
thus: 1. Gods love was the cause of his sending his Son to die for sinners. 2.
Christ's dying for sinners, and rising again for their justification, is the
cause of the Gospels preaching. 3. The preaching of the Gospel is the cause of
our believing. 4. Our believing is the cause of our justification from sin. 5.
The knowing our selves justified from sin by the blood of Christ, is the cause
of our love to Christ. 6. Our love to Christ is the cause of our obeying of
Christ. 7. Our obeying of Christ is the cause of his becoming the author of
eternal Salvation to us, and all them that obey him.


Now if we consider the causes in order from us to God, it is as clear,
beginning at the last. 7. Our obedience is the cause of our salvation. 6. Our
love is the cause of our obedience. 5. The knowing of our selves justified from
sin by the blood of Christ is the cause of our love to him. 4. Our believing is
the cause our justification. 3. The preaching of the Gospel is the cause of our
faith. 2. Christ's death and resurrection, is the cause of the Gospels
preaching. 1. Gods love is the cause of sending his Son to die for us.


Thus it appears, that it is not for any works of righteousness that we have
done, but of his love and mercy he saved us, by sending a Savior, Titus 3.4 5.
From all which, these following things are considerable, and ought to be
considered of all that desire to fear God a right.

1. There was a necessity of Gods love in sending his Son to die for us;
without which, he had not come to die: 1 John 4.10. 2. There was a necessity of
Christ's love in dying for us; without which, the Gospel could not be preached,
1 Cor. 15.3, 4. 3. There was a necessity of the Gospels being preached; without
which, there could have been no believing, Romans 10, 14, 15, 17. 4. There is a
necessity of our believing the Gospel; without which, we cannot be justified
from our sins by faith in the blood of Christ: Romans 3.25. 5. There is a
necessity of our being justified by faith in the blood of Christ; without
which, we cannot come to know that he loved us and washed us from our sins in
his own blood Rev. 1.5. 6. There is a necessity of our knowing his love
wherewith he first loved us; without which we cannot love him again: For, we
love him, because he loved us first. 1 John 4.19. 7. There is a necessity of
our loving Christ who loved us first; without which, we cannot keep his
Commandments: For, this is love that we keep his commandments; and his
Commandments are not grievous 1 John 5.3. 8. There is a necessity of our
keeping his comandments, and obeying his voice; without which, we cannot
inherit the promises nor be heirs of eternal life. For Christ is become the
Author of eternal salvation to all those that obey him. Heb 5.9. And, blessed
are they which do his Commandments, that they may have right to the tree of
life, and enter it through the gates into the City. Rev. 22.14. And, we have
need of patience, that after we have done the will of God, we might inherit the
promises. Heb. 10.36. for the doers of the Lords work are blessed in their
deeds. James 1.25. But those that are contentious, and do not obey the truth,
but obey unrighteoussness, he will render indignation and wrath: tribulation
and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil. And, Those which will not
hear him (even Christ, that great Prophet) in all things whatsoever he shall
say unto them, shall be destroyed from among his people with an everlasting
destruction from the presence of God, and from the glory of his power, when he
shall come in flaming fire, to render vengeance on them that know not God and
obey not the Gospel of our Lord jesus Christ. See Romans 2.8 9. Act. 3.22.23.2
These. 1.7 8.9.
By all which we see, that there is as great a necessity of our keeping the
Commandments and Ordinances of Christ, as there was of Gods sending his son to
die for us, and as there was of Christ's dying for our sins, and rising again
for our justification: for, without faith in Christ and obedience to Christ,
there is no promise of life and salvation by Christ.

All which may serve sharply to reprove three sorts of people.

First, Those which are ignorant, and know not Christ, nor his commands, what
they are; and are contented with their ignorance, and think to make that a
cloak for their sins.

Secondly, Those which are careless, and when they know God, and Christ, and
his Commandments, will not do them, but presume upon mercy and salvation
without obeying of Christ. These are those which think to be saved by faith
only, without doing the will and work of God in their generation; the which
James calls vain men. James 2.14, 17, 20. saying. What does it profit if they
have faith and not works? Can faith save them? But will thou know, O vain man,
that faith without works is dead? was not Abraham our father justified by
works, when he had offered up his son Isaac? See thou not how faith wrought
with his works, and by works was his faith made perfect?

Thirdly, It serves to reprove those most sharply, who after they have known
the truth, and walked therein, having tasted the good word of God and found it
sweet and pleasant to their souls and have had their hearts ravished with the
powers and consolations of the world to come; if they fall away, and turn from
the holy Commandment once delivered to them their latter end will be worse then
their beginning. And it had been better for them they had never known the way
of truth: for they chiefly shall be punished. 2 Pet. 2.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. For in them is fulfilled the true proverb: The dog
is turned to his own vomit again, and the sow that was washed to her wallowing
in the mire, verse. 22.

But it may be some will yet say. All this is nothing to many thousands in the
world that never hear of God nor Christ.

To which I answer with the words of Paul, Romans 10.18. But have they not heard?
yes verily: their sound went into all the earth, and their words unto the ends
of the world. And again Act. 26.26. Paul says, He was persuaded that none of
those things were hidden; for it was not done in a corner. And certain it is,
that the knowledge of God is manifest throughout the world. For Psa. 19. The
heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handiwork: day
unto day utters speech and night unto night shows knowledge: And, There is
no language nor speech where their voice is not heard.

Obj. But it may be some will say, But what knowledge is this?

Answ. I answer with Paul, Romans 1.19 20. That which may be known of God is
manifest in them: for God has showed it unto them. For the invisible things of
him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the
things that are made; [even] his eternal power and Godhead: so that they are
without excuse. Now if all know enough to leave them without excuse, then the
dispute is at an end. Notwithstanding it is yet further remarkable, That as we
hear there is a people in the other parts of the world, which worship Idols, or
the Sun, Moon, and Stars; yea, that worship the devil: so also those people do
as well hear that there is a people in this part of the world which worship God
and Christ; and do as familiarly call us Christians, as we call them Heathens.

Again, all that worship any thing for a God, do by that acknowledge that there
is a God: and all that offer sacrifice to a God, do by that confess there is a
God offended, or may be offended and is reconcilable by sacrifice: and it is
apparent, that those which have not the Law are a Law to themselves, as Paul
says, Romans 2.14, 15. which show the work of the Law written in their hearts,
their conscience also hearing them witness, and their thoughts the mean while
accusing or else excusing one another; In the day when God shall judge the
secrets of all men by Christ Jesus [according to my Gospel,] says Paul, verse
16.

And thus are all cavils of this nature easily answered, and all men left
without excuse.

Having thus briefly gone through Predestination and Election according to the
foreknowledge of God: I shall now speak a word or two about Christ's death, and
the offer of grace by his death to the sons of men.

The main question is, Whether Christ died for all, or but for some?

To which I shall answer by the Scriptures, showing, I. the testimony of all
the Prophets: 2. of the Angel of God: 3. of Christ himself: 4. of the holy
Apostles of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

1. The Prophet Isaiah, chap. 53.4, 5, 6. says thus: Surely he has born our
griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of
God, and afflicted. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised
for our iniquities, and the chastisements of our peace was upon him: and with
his stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have gone astray: we have every
one turned to his own way: and the Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us
all. Thus Isaiah shows plainly, that the iniquities of all those that went
astray, were laid upon Christ. And to him the testimony of all the other
Prophets agrees, Acts 10. 43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that
through his name whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins.
The same says that great Prophet John Baptist John 1.7. who came to bear
witness of the light, that all men through him might believe. And again, verse.
29. Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world. Thus have
all the Prophets, with one consent, testified, that God laid upon Christ the
iniquities of all that are gone astray, that he was the Lamb of God that takes
away the sin of the world, that all men through him might believe; and that
through his name whosoever believes in him, should receive remission of sins.

Likewise the Angel of God testifies ( Luke 2.10.) the same things in effect,
saying, Fear not; for I bring you glad tidings of great joy, which shall be to
all people: which was, that there was born unto them that day in the City of
David a Savior, which was Christ the Lord. By all which it still appears,
that Christ died for all men, or else it could not be glad tidings of great joy
to all people; but rather sad tidings to all those for whom he died not, if
there were any such.

And now we come to the words of Christ himself, who knew his own business
better then any man else: and therefore if his testimony agrees with those
that have gone before, we must needs be convinced that it is a truth. For
which, see John 3.14, 15, 16. in these words: As Moses lifted up the serpent in
the Wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life: For God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in him should not perish, but have everlasting life, etc. For God sent not his
Son to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved. Thus
we see the words of Christ agree with the words of the Prophets:therefore it
must needs be owned for a truth, that Christ died for all as aforesaid.

And now we will hear what the Apostles speak concerning this thing, 2 Cor.
5.14, 15. The love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if
one died for all, then were all once dead; and that he died for all, that they
which live should not henceforth live to themselves, but to him that died for
them and rose agin. And Paul says, 1 Timothy 2.5, 6 that there is one God and one
Mediator between God and man, the Man Christ Jesus who gave himself a ransom
for [all] to be testified in due time. From whence the Reader may do well to
consider, that if we may understand the Scripture as it is written, that there
is one God and one Mediator; so also we may understand from the same scripture,
that the same Mediator gave himself in due time a ransom for all. Again Paul
says in the same Epistle, chapter 1.15. that it is a faithful saying and worthy of
all acceptance, that Christ came into the world to save sinners, of whom Paul
was the chief. Whence I conclude, If he came to save the chief of sinners, then
surely he left none without a Savior and means of salvation. Again he says to
Titus, chapter 2.11.that the grace of God that brings salvation to all men, has
appeared. And Heb. 2.9. That he by the grace of God should taste death for
every man. And 1 John 2.2. that he is the propitiation for our sins; and not
for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. And chap. 4 14. he
says (speaking of himself and the rest of the Apostles) We have seen and do
testify, that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the world.

Thus we have the testimony of all the Prophets, the Angel of God, Christ the
Lord himself and all his holy Apostles, agreeing together in one, to prove that
Christ died for all mankind; and by him grace, mercy and eternal life is
offered to all and the worst of sinners. The substance of which I shall in
order once more put down, that you may take notice of the sweet harmony of
Scriptures in the proof of this precious truth: which is thus:

That the Lord laid upon him the iniquities of all that went astray, Isa, 53.6.
that he gave himself as ransom in due time for all men, yea, the chief of
sinners, 1 Timothy 2.6. chap. 1.1 5. that he by the grace of God tasted death for
every man, Heb. 2.9. that he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours
only, but also for the sins of the whole world, I John 2.2. that the Father
sent the Son to be the Savior of the world, 1 John 4.14. that he is the Lamb
of God which takes away the sin of the world, that all men through him might
believe, Joh. 1.7, 29. and to him give all the Prophets witness, that through
his name whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins, Acts
10.43. and Christ testifies of himself, that God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life, John 3.16. and this is glad tidings of great joy to
all people, Luke 2.10.

And thus the pleasant harmony of Scriptures, out of the mouths of so many
faithful witnesses which none dare deny, must needs make sweet melody in the
hearts of all true believers.

But now it remains for me to speak to those Objections which are usually
brought against these Scriptures. To which I shall give a brief, yet (through
the help of the Lord, I hope, a) satisfactory Answer. And to that end I shall
sum them all up into four heads, thus:

The common Objections are raised against the word [all men] and the word
[every man,] the word [world,] and the word [whole world.] Which are managed
thus: that Christ died for [all] the [Elect] for [every] one of die Elect for
the [world] of [believers,] or the [whole] world of the [Elect.]

To which I answer: That Christ died for the Elect, I freely grant, because he
died for all men every man, and the whole world as aforesaid: that but he died
for the Elect as they were Elect or because they were Elect, I utterly deny,
and will show the contrary by the Scriptures anon. But first I will consider
the Objections, whether they arise naturally from the Scriptures or no: which
will appear thus:

If the Scripture nowhere speaks of a world of believers and Elect persons,
then we have no ground to believe that Christ died for a world of believers and
Elect persons.

But the Scripture nowhere speaks of such a world:

Therefore we have no ground to believe Christ died for such a world.

Nay, the Scriptures are so far from calling believers and Elect persons a
world, that they are opposed against the world; as appears by the words of
Christ, John 15.19. If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but
because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you.

But now if we should grant these men their Argument, it would destroy their
own principle, which is, That none of the Elect can perish. But that some that
Christ died for may perish, is evident in these words of Paul; And so shall thy
weak brother perish for whom Christ died, 1 Cor. 8.11. But if Christ died for
none but the world of Elect, as they say, then some of the Elect may perish.
And thus their folly is manifest. Therefore I shall now show by the Scriptures
what world Christ died for. Romans 5.6. When we were yet without strength, in due
time, Christ died for the ungodly, verse.8. But God commends his love toward
us, in that while we were yet sinners Christ died for us. verse.10. For if when
we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more
being reconciled we shall be saved by his life. From all which we clearly see,
that Christ died for the world of ungodly, and for the world of sinners, and
for the world of his enemies, yea for the world of unjust. 1 Pet. 3.18. For
Christ also has once suffered for sins the just for the unjust that he might
bring us to God. But the Elect, as Elect, are not unjust: for who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that justifies, who is he that
condemns? etc. See Romans 8 33, 34. Therefore he died not for the Elect, as or
because they were Elect, but even for the world that John speaks of, when he
says, We know we are of God, and the whole world lies in wickedness. 1 John
5.19.

Obj. But the Saints and those that shall be saved were once sinners as well as
others. Ephesians. 2.

Answ. But that was not as they were Elect in Christ, but as they were
reprobates, or void of judgment concerning the faith, out of Christ, without
God, without hope, yea enemies in their minds by evil works: See verse. 1, 2,
3, 11, 12, 13, etc. all which has been the condition of the best of Gods
people, until they be justified by faith, and made nigh by the blood of Christ:
for Jews and Gentiles are all under sin, and every mouth stopped, and all the
world guilty before God, until they be set free by believing in the blood of
Christ. See Romans 3.19 20, 21, 23, 23, 24, 25. Therefore to affirm that Christ
died for the Elect, or believers, as they were, and because they were Elect and
believers, is absolute nonsense; as I shall now prove, thus

They which hold that God intended to send his Son to die only for the world
of believers, most also of necessity hold that there was a world of believers
before God intended to send his Son to die; and they were the cause of Gods
sending his Son.

Answ. If there was a world of believers before God intended to send his Son to
die, then I pray tell me, I. what they believed; and 2. whom they believed in,
before there was a Christ intended for them; and I am satisfied: but till then,
I must needs conclude it is absolute nonsense and confusion.

Again, they which believe that Christ was sent to die only for a world of
Elect must also needs conclude that there were a world of Elect before God
intended to send his Son to die.

To which I answer: Those which are Elect, are chosen in Christ, Ephesians. 1.4. and
out of him there is no Election: therefore if there was a world of Elect before
God intended a Christ to die for the Elect, I pray tell me, I. who were they
Elected in, 2. and what they were Elected unto; otherwise I must needs conclude
as aforesaid, (namely) that such reasoning is without sense and without
Scripture.

But to end the controversy, I shall commit these following things to the
consideration of all rational men fearing God.

1. The Scripture says, that Christ came to seek and to save that which was
lost Luke 19.10.

But the Elect as they bear the name of Elect, are not lost, but a found and
saved people, 1 Cor. 1.18. 2 Timothy 1.9 Isai, 64.5.

Therefore he died not for the Elect, as or because they were Elect; for that
had been to seek and save that which was found and saved before.

2. The Scripture says, that he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance, Mat. 9 13.

But the Elect are all righteous. Isa. 60. 2l. chap. 26. l, 2. Luke 1.6.
Zacharias and Elizabeth were both righteous before God, and he that does
righteoussness is righteous, 1 John 3, 7.

Therefore Christ died not for the Elect as they were, and because they were
Elect and righteous: neither could he; for there is none righteous, no not one,
until they be made righteous by faith in Christ: See Romans 3.10. with chap. 4.5.
for then he had come to call them to repentance and righteousnese, that had
repented and were righteous before.

3. The Scripture says, that in due time Christ died for the ungodly. Romans 5.6.

But the Elect are not ungodly: for God has chosen to himself the man that is
godly, Psalm. 4.3.

Therefore Christ died not for the Elect, as or because they were Elect; for
that had been to redeem them by his blood that were redeemed before.

4. The Scripture says, that Christ died for the unjust, that he might bring
them to God, 1 Pet. 3.18.

But the Elect are not unjust, but a justified people: and who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods Elect? for it is God that justifies, who then
shall condemn? Romans 8.33, 34.

Therefore Christ died not for the Elect, as Elect; for that had been to
justify them that were just before, and to bring them near to God that were
near before.

5. The Scriptute says, that he came to preach deliverance to the captives.

But the Elect are not captives and prisoners under Satan, but set at liberty
by Christ, and are his Soldiers and do fight the Lords battles against sin,
the world, and the devil; standing fast in that liberty wherewith Christ has
made them free. See Ephesians. 6.11 12. with 2 Timothy 2.3 4. Gal. 5.1.

Therefore Christ died not for the Elect, as or because they were Elect: that
had been to set them at liberty, that were at liberty before.

6. The Scripture says that he came to give sight to the blind, and light to
them that sit in darkness. Luke 4.18. with Mat. 4.16. But the Elect are not in
darkness, nor yet blind; but, blessed are their eyes, for they see, Mat.
13.16. and they are all the children of the light, and of the day, 1 Thessalonians.
5.4, 5.

Therefore Christ died not for the Elect, as or because they were elect; for
that had been to give light to them which had light before, and to open the
eyes of them which saw before.

7. The Scripture says. ( Ephesians. 2.5, 12.) that he quickened them that were dead
intrespasses and sins; such as in times past were without Christ aliens from
the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenant of promise; having
no hope without God in the world.

But the Elect are not dead in trespasses and sins, but alive in Christ, and
their life is had with Christ in God: neither are they without Christ; for they
are chosen in him: nor strangers and forraigners to the Commonwealth of Israel,
and coverant of promises; but they are fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of
the household of God, Ephesians. 2. 19. and are made nigh by the blood of Christ, verse
13. neither are they without hope; for their faith and hope is in God, and they
have put on hope as an helmet of salvation. 1 These. 5.8.

Therefore Christ died not for the Elect, as they were elect, nor because they
were elect: for that had been to quicken them that were alive before, to bring
them into covenant that were in covenant before, to make them near to God by
his blood that were near before. And thus, by these men's account, the Lord
Christ lost his labor of love, and accomplished a solemn nothing.

And thus have I showed plainly by the Scripture and found Reason, that it is
absolute Nonsense for any to say that Christ died for the Elect, as they were,
or because they were elect: Because, 1. That had been to seek and save them
that were found and saved before. 2. To call them to Repentance that had
repented before. 3. To preach deliverance to them that were delivered before,
and to set them at liberty that were at liberty before. 4. To give light to
them that were out of darkness, and had light before; and to open the eyes of
them which had their eyes opened, and saw before. 5. To make them near by his
blood that were near before. 6. To justify them that were just before. 7. To
bring them into covenant, and make them fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of
the household of God, that were in covenant and had those privileges before. 8.
To make them members of his own body, that were members before. 9. To quicken
them that were alive before. 10. To make them children of God that were so
before, and to preach glad tidings to them that were in a happy condition
before, and had no need of it.


Thus having showed the contradictions of those that hold that Christ for died
none but the Elect, I shall now proceed to prove by undeniable reasons that it
must of necessity be a truth, that Christ died for all men, and tasted death
for every man, and was a propitiation for the sins of the world; that all men
through him might believe and that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life.

Reas. 1. Because all the Prophets, the Angel of God, the Lord Christ himself,
and his holy Apostles, do testify it with one consent,

Reas. 2. Because there is not one Scripture, from the beginning of Genesis to
the end of the Revelation, that does deny it; either negatively, in saying that
he did not die for all; nor yet affirmatively, in saying that he did die but
for some. Therefore, what so many faithful witnesses affirm, and none deny,
must needs be a precious truth.

Reas. 3. Because, as Christ died for every man, Heb. 2.9. so he commanded the
Gospel to be preached to every creature Mark 16.15, 16. He said unto them, Go
ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature.

Reas. 4. Because he calls all men everywhere to Repentance. Acts 17.30. At
the times of this ignorance God winked; but now he calls all men everywhere
to repentance.

Reas. 5. Because those which are damned, are damned because they believe not
in Christ the only begotten Son of God: Joh. 3.18. He that believes not is
condemned already, because he believes not in the Name of the only begotten
Son of God: which could not be except Christ died for them.

Reas. 6. Because they which are damned, might have been saved: 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10,
11. They received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved;
therefore God shall send them strong delusions to believe lies, that they all
might be damned.

Reas. 7. Because some deny the Lord that bought them. but how can they deny
the Lord that bought them, except the Lord bought those that deny him, and
bring upon themselves swift destruction? See 2 Pet. 2.2.

Reas. 8. Because they which follow after lying vanities forsake their own
meries Jonah 2.8. but what mercies can those forsake, for whom Christ died not?

Reas. 9. Because some men may and do neglect their own salvation, Heb. 2.3.
but what salvation can they neglect, for whom Christ never died, to offer it to
them?

Reas. 10. Because we are commanded to make prayers, and supplications, and
giving of thanks for all men, 1 Timothy 2. but to what end should we, or how can
we in faith pray for all men, if Christ did not die for all men? and that
prayer that is not of faith, is sin: for, whatsoever is not of faith is sin,
Romans 14.23. and without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6.

And now having given these reasons for the confirmation of Christ's death for
all men, I shall briefly show the dreadful absurdities which follow their
judgments which believe that Christ died for none but the Elect.

1. If Christ died not for all men, then Despair is no sin in them that perish
by it. seeing there is not any thing for those men to believe unto salvation
for whom Christ died not. 2. If Christ died not for all men then it would be a
sin for some men to believe that Christ died for them, because they should
believe a ly; and all will confess it is a sin to believelyes. 3. If Christ
died not for those that are damned, then they shall not be damned because of
their unbelief, acording to the Scriptures, John 3.18 Mark 16.16. 4. Satan
does no evil in persuading men that Christ died not for them, but does persuade
them to believe the truth, if it be true that Christ died but for some few of
the world. 5. If Christ died not for all, then the devil deceives not those
that are damned for unbelief: and as for the Elect, these men affirm they
cannot be deceived; and so the devil is no deceiver. 6. If Christ died not for
all men, then it is no heresy to teach some men to deny that Christ bought
them: contrary to 2 Pet. 2.21, 22. where he says plainly that some men bring
in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon
themselves swift destruction. 7. If Christ died not for all men then it is a
virtue in some men to be unbelievers, and not to believe in Christ that he died
for them, but rather to believe that he did not die for them: for if that be a
truth, it is a virtue to believe all truth: And then it follows those that
believe that Christ died not for them, do as well as they which believe Christ
did die for them, seeing both are true; and it is as much virtue to believe one
truth as another. 8. If Christ died not for all men, then the Apostles and
those which according to the command of Christ ( Mark 16.16.) do preach the
Gospel, the glad tidings of grace and peace to all men, and every creature, do
sin, in that they preach lies to most men. 9. If Christ died not for all men,
then in vain does God by the Gosp^l call all men every where to repentance: for
what good can repentance do to those for whom Christ died not? 10. If Christ
died not for all men, why then do the Ministers of the nation baptize all, and
say they make them members of Christ, children of God, and heirs of Heaven, in
their baptism? 11. If Christ died not for all, why do the Ministers of the
nation give the Sacrament (as they call it) to all, and tell all that come, The
Body of the Lord was broken for thee; Take eat, this, etc. and The Blood of the
Lord Jesus was shed for thee; Take, and drink this. etc. What will they offer
to tell untruths when they are about such a work as that? How then can men
believ them in any thing else? 12. If Christ died not for all, why do the
Ministers of the nation take Tithes of all? What will they take Tithes of those
that Christ died not for? How can they think to do them any good for that they
have of them, if Christ died not for them? Would they take it well if a man
should yearly take the tenth part of their goods, and yet do nothing for it?
13. Lastly, if Christ died not for all, why then does the Lord say, (2 Pet.
3.9.) that he is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come
to repentance? Now if the Lord be not willing that any should perish, then did
he not give his Son for all? Consider and judge what shall hinder these men
from pleading thus: Lord, thou said thou wast not willing that any should
perish; but yet thou wast willing that we should perish, or else thou u would
have sent thy Son to die for us, as well as others, and then possibly we might
have been saved; or however we had been left without excuse. But now how shall
the Lord judge the world in righteousness by that man Christ Jesus whom he has
ordained, if the man Christ Jesus did not die for the world? And therefore the
Scripture says, that to this end Christ died and rose again, and revived, that
he might be Lord both of the dead and living, Romans 14 9. which quick and dead
he will judge at his appearing and his kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1. And when he does
judge them, he will judge them according to the Gospel: but how can he judge
them in righteousness according to the Gospel when there was never any Gospel
for them, or mercy offered to them?
Obj. But if Christ died for all and God was willing that all should be saved;
why then are not all saved?

Answ Because they believe not in the only begotten Son of God, who is their
Savior, John 3.18. and God called, and they refused; he strerched out his
hand, and they regarded not; he counseled them, but they would none of his
counsels; he reproved them, but they set at naught all his reproofs but
followed after lying vanities and so forsook their own mercies, and denied the
Lord that bought them, and brought upon themselves swift destruction: and
because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved.
therefore (if you would know wherefore) God gave them up to strong delusions to
believe lies that they all might be damned who believed not the truth but had
pleasure in unrighteousness. Sec Prove 1 24, 25 26. 27 28 29 30, 31, 32. 2 Pet.
2 1, 2.2 These 2. 10, 11.12. And again Christ says, How often would I have
gathered yon together, as a Hew gathers her Chickins under her wings? and ye
would, not Mat. 23. 37, And this is the reason why some men are not saved: for
God never promises life and salvation to any man whether he will or no; but
threatens death and everlasting destruction to them which believe not, and
obey not the Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9.

Obj. But then you hold freewil and that men may be saved if they will.

Answ. I hold nothing but what the Scripture salth, and that you shall give me
leave to hold: neither do I believe that any man has or ever had any will or
power of himself, without God, to do any thing that is good for in him we live,
move, and have our being: but in, and through, and by God and Christ, we may do
all things, for the Lord is a Sun and a Shield and will give grace and glory,
and no good thing will he withhold from them that will walk uprightly. Psalm.
84.11. and he has given Christ to death for all men, as I have proved already
at large; and He that spared not his only Son, but delivered him up for us
all: how shall he not with him give us all things? Romans 8.32. and his hand is
streched out all the day long to a stift-necked gainsaying people. What man is
there that knows not that if he make use of all the will power and
understanding that God has given him, the Lord will double his talent and give
him more? And that the Lord have given all men enough to leave them without
excuse, I have already proved in the former part of the book; and if any man
would have more, they must improve that which they have faithfully, for he that
is faithful in that which is least will be faithful also in much:. but he that
is unjust in the least will also be unjust in much: Luke 16.10. And what man is
he that does not know, that he is not condemned for not doing that which he
cannot possibly do, but for leaving undone that which God has given them power
and ability to do? let any man deny it if he can.

And now whereas it is a question, whether all men may be saved if they will;

I answer, What should hinder them if they be willing? for first, God is not
willing that any should perish. Secondly, God is willing that all men should
come to the knowledge of the truth, and be saved. 2 Pet. 3.9. (...)m. 2.4. and
Chust is willing. for he came not to judge the world but to save the world: and
how did he weep over Jerusalem? and how often (as a foresaid) would he have
gathered them together as a Hen does her Chickins? but they would not. And now
what hinders men's salvation, but that same, [they would not?] Consider well,
and judge.

Obj. But it is not in him that wills nor in him that runs; but in God
that shows mercy. Romans 9.16.

Answ. Very well: then it seems by that Scripture that men have freewill to
be saved; and indeed I wonder what man alive desires not to be saved: but it
seems their willing etc running in their own ways will not attain it: it was
not Cains sacrifice, nor the Scribes and Pharisees long prayers and fastings
with disfigured faces, nor yet their giving alms to the poor, and Tithes of
all they possessed, that could give any of these a mansion in Heaven: (and
why?) Because they sought it not by faith, but by the works of the Law, Romans
9.30, 31, 32. and so it is to this day; men would with Balaam, gladly die the
death of the righteous; and O who would not be saved! but then they should come
at Christ's call, and turn at his reproof and wait for his counsels who is the
wonderful Counselor and live to him that died for them, walking in all the
Commandments and Ordinances of Christ blameless, hearing him in all things
whatssoever he shall say to them, and following him wheresoever he go; and when
they have done all this with a good conscience, be contented to bear the
reproaches and shame that belong to the Cross of Christ, and to have men yea,
wicked men, and some devout and honorable men and women persecute and revile
them, and say all manner of evil sayings on them falsely, for his name sake,
and endure all this patiently, with such a spirit as can pray for the salvation
even of their worst enemies, as for their own soul; as Christ, who when he had
fulfilled all righteousness, was numbered amongst the transgressors, and
crucified between two thieves and at that time prayed for his enemies: when we
can thus follow Christ, then happy are we, for the Spirit of God And of glory
does rest upon us. See 1 Pet. 4.12, 13, 14, 15. and the greater is our reward
in heaven, for in like manner persecuted they the Prophets before us. But I
confess this way is so narrow and this gate is so straight, that few can enter
and walk therein, except they learn of Christ who is humble and meek, and then
they will find rest to their souls; and by and through him who is the Door.
they will go in and out and find pasture. See Mat. 5.10, 11, 12.

Thus we see that although it be not in him that wills, nor in him that
runs in his own ways, and after the imaginations of his own heart; yet it
is in him that will run in Gods ways, and follow Christ in his Commands and
Ordinances wheresoever he go: for it is in God that shows mercy, who has
indeed showed mercy unto sinners and the worst of sinners, in sending his only
begotten Son to die for them, to take away their sins, to call them to
repentance to give them the knowledge of Salvation by the remission of their
sins through his [mercy] yea, through the [tender mercy] of our God, whereby
the Dayspring from on high has visited us, to give light to them that sit in
darkness and in the shadow of death, and to guide our feet in the way of peace,
Luke 1. who before did not know the way of peace

Therefore now let all men take heed how they sin against such rich mercy and
freegrace. as is offered to them, even to the worst of sinners, by the Lord in
the Gospel of Truth, (which is the glad tidings of our Salvation) lest mercy
rise up in judgment against them in the great day, and lest they sin against
that true Light that is come into the world to enlighten every man (which is
Christ) who by his word and spirit has made known to the sons of men
whatsoever he saw in the bosom of the Father; yea, even the whole counsel of
God, which is necessary to Salvation. Therefore let all men take heed of
shutting their eyes against the light of the glorious Gospel of of Jesus
Christ: For this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and
men love darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil,

Reader, consider what is written for thy instruction in the Scriptures of
truth; and read them and consider them again and the Lord give thee
understanding in all things.

Henry Haggar.

FINIS.

