THE GRAND QUESTION Concerning the IVDICATVRE Of the HOUSE of PEERS, Stated and
Argued.

And the Case of THOMAS SKINNER Merchant, complaining of the East India
Company, with the proceedings thereupon, which gave occasion to that Question,
faithfully related.

By a true Well-wisher to the Peace and good Government of the Kingdom, and to
the Dignity and Authority of Parliaments.

by Denril Lord Hollis. who dyed Feb: 17th. 10 1679/80

Judicium Dominorum Spiritualium and Temporaliu^ est Secundu^ Vsum and
Consuetudinem Parlamenti.
Vsus and Consuetudo Parlamenti est Lex Parlamenti.
Lex Parlamenti est Lex Angliae,
Lex Angliae est Lex Terrae,
Lex Terrae est Secundum Magnam Chartam:
Ergo, Judicium Dominorum Spiritualium and Temporalium est secundum Magnam
Chartam.
London, Printed for Richard Chiswel, at the two Angels and Crown in Little
Britain, 1669.

THE JURISDIC-TION OF THE House of Peers ASSERTED:
THe Power of the House of Peers in Point of their Judicature having been
lately called in question, upon occasion of a judgment given by them in a
particu^ar Case, which they conceived not ^yable elsewhere in the Ordinary
Course of Law; It will not be amiss, ^or the removing of all prejudice out of
^ens minds, to make a clear Narrative ^f the matter of Fact, with some
Observations upon it, and the Additions of ^ome Presidents and Arguments: Such
(...) may serve to evince and set forth the ancient way of Proceeding in that
House as to their Judicial Capacity; even the same which they have continued to
practice in succeeding times, and so leave it to the Judgment and conscience
of every unbiassed indifferent man, to satisfy himself, If now there has been
any Innovation, any new Incrochment of Power, any Variation from the constant
usage and Privilege of the Peerage in all times, Ancient and Modern. The
business was sincerely thus.

Soon after his Majesty's happy Restoration, one Thomas Skinner preferred a
Petition to him in Council, purporting great Oppressions and Spoils Sustained
by him in the Indies from the East India Company, robbing him of a ship, and
goods of a great value, dispossessing him of a Plantation he had there, a
dwelling House and Warehouse at Iamby, and an Island called Barella (which he
had bought of that King) assaulting his person to the danger of his life and
several other Injuries done him; For which he prayed the Kings Justice, to
appoint a Court, Constable and Marshall to Hear and Determine those matters,
they not being otherwise Determinable by the ordinary Course of Law, or to put
it into any other way for Just Relief. After some years Attendance and
Solicitation and several Petitions of this poor man's, the King at last referrs
it to certain Lords viz. The Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord
Chancellor, the Lord Privy Seal and the Lord Ashley, to call all Parties before
them, and compose the matter if they could; The Order of Reference runs thus.

Whereas upon the Petition of Thomas Skinner Merchant, Setting forth his
Sufferings under the barbarous oppressions of the East India Company, His
Majesty was Graciously pleased by Order of the 27. of August last, to defer
theclearing of the matter for erecting a Court to determine affairs of this
nature till the second meeting of this Board at White Hall, and in regard the
said Company have Slighted the Orders of this Board, and not complied with any
References or Mediations, designing to we are out the Petitioners Life in
tedious Attendances; He did by his Petition this day read at the Board, humbly
pray that the said Court may be now Erected, to relieve the Petitioner
according to Justice and put a Period to his grievances; Whereupon his Majesty
present in Council did Order. That his Grace the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor, Lord Privy Seal, and the Lord Ashley do send
for the Governor and some of the Members of the East India Company, to treat
with them, and to induce them to give the said Mr. Skinner such reasonable
satisfaction, as may in some measure be answerable to the loss and damage he
has suffered under them.

Signed John Nicholas.

These Lords Referrees met, took much pains in it, spent several days; Ordered
Mr. Ayloff of Counsel with Skinner to give them under his Hand a true State of
the business, whose report I will here set down in Terminis.

The Case of Thomas Skinner Merchant and his demands against the East India
Company for damages done him in the year 1659. in India.
IN the year 1657. was a general Liberty of Trade into the East Indies; Then
Thomas Skinner furnished and set forth his Ship called the Thomas from London
on a trading voyage to the Indies, and arrived there, in 1658.

The Compan by their Letters the 7o. Maij 1658, which arrived in India in
November following, commanded their. Agents to Seize all ships and goods of
English trading there, and dispose half to the Commonwealth, and half to the
Company.

The Agents of Bantam direct those of Iamby to seize the Estate of Frederick
Skinner in the hands of Thomas; saying, Thomas had nothing there of his own;
and that Thomas Leaver chief of Jamby, should secure in his hands what Estate
he had of Fredericks, for a Debt suggested owing by him to the Company; upon
which pretenses they seized Thomas Skinners Ship and Goods, broke open his
Warehouse; assaulted him in his House, and dispossessed him of his I stand
Barella; for which Injuries he hopes satisfaction, and therefore in particular
demands,

For 128 Peculls of Pepper, 24 Peculls of Nutmegs, and for Beef, strong Waters,
and other Provisions and Merchandises, taken out of his Ship by the Agents of
Jamby and the Crew of the Ship Dragon, then in the Companies service. Ryals
3355

The Company agree the Value 3160 Ryalls brought to their Account, but it being
proved, That the rest was laden on Board Skinners Ship, this imbezlement or
subduction by the Agents is just to lie upon the Company.

Ryals. For his Ship and Furniture, sworn by two Witnesses to be worth, when
set out, five or six and twenty thousand pounds sterling, and that she was
worth as much or more in India when taken, yet abate a fist for ware and tare
rests, 8000. For eleven small Copper Ordnances, and their Field Carriages, 350
Ryals, and two Quoyles of Ropes 80 Ryals, in all, 0430. Ryalls. For 10 Barrels
of English Powder, at 25 Ryals per Barrel, and Sword Blades, Spectacles,
Prospective Glasses, Boxes, Knives, Cisors, and other small Merchandises, Iron
Works, Nails, Pistols, Pictures, and Looking Glasses with Ebony Frames on
board, and Shipplanks, and other Wood on shore, and in the Warehouse, valued
by Marmaduke Grimston, and Peter de Barrier Purser of the Ship at 1730. For
Moneys owing by Thomas Leaver to Frederick Skinner assigned to Thomas, and
accepted by Leaver with promise to pay, but detained by Order of the Company,
who have in their hands a greater Sum of Leavers to indemnifie them against
this Demand. 1521. For his Charges at Jamby six Months under that trouble, and
coming home over Land from India 19 Months travel; the Companies Agents
refusing to give him passage in their Ships, 1800. Total 16836 Ryalls.

Interest for 16836 Ryalls for six years.

Ryals are valued at Jamby 5 s per Ryal: But what they produce here, being
brought over in black Pepper to the Company clear of all Charges, is expected,
they will ingenously own.

For The Assault of his Person, Loss of six years Time, Disappointment of his
Trade, Attendance and Charge here, Disseizin of his Island.
Being valuable at more than all the other particulars, are humbly submitted to
your Lordships Discretion.

Signed Joseph Ayloff.

The Lords Referrees to this requiring the Answer of the Company, receive this
as follows.

To the Right Honorable the Lords Referrees, concerning the Demands of Thomas
Skinner upon the East India Company.
IN obedience to your Lordships Order and Direction, the Court of Committees of
the said Company have considered of the Matter proposed by your Lordships, and
do humbly offer to your Lordships; That for the Nutmegs, white Pepper, and
other things, which were seized by the Justice of the place in part of a Debt
due to the Company from Frederick Skinner, which said Goods were brought to the
Companies Accounts, though the same were afterward lost in the Ship Dragon;
and in the regard the Accounts between the Company and Frederick are concluded,
and the said Goods not included therein; the said Company have always offered
to pay for the said Goods, and are now ready to pay 3160 Dollars for the same,
which at 4 s 9. d per Dollar, amounts unto the sum of 750 l 10 s And
concerning the 1521 Dollars demanded by Thomas Skinner, as a Debt due unto him
from Thomas Leaver; they in compliance with your Lordships desires will be
ready and willing to pay the said fifteen hundred twenty one Dollars, amounting
to 361 l 4 s 9 d to the said Thomas Skinner, so as they may be discharged by
the Administrator of the said Thomas Leaver, to whom only they are liable, it
being very reasonable that the Company pay the Debt but once. But the Company
do utterly disavow, that the Company can by any Law or Equity be liable for
their Factors Debts.

Concerning Skinners other Demands for his Ship and for other Goods pretended
to be seized on shore, The Company do humbly offer to your Lordships; That the
Company are not liable for the Debt or Action of their Factors, unless done by
their Order; and if the Company should be liable to every ones Clamors, and
pretenses for wrongs done, or pretended to be done by their Factors (when if
any such thing were done, the same was not by their Order or Knowledge, nor
appliable to their use and account) the same will necessarily impoverish and
ruin the Company: And the Company gave no Order for the seizure of Thomas
Skinners ship, nor nothing else of his; nor was the same brought to the
Companies account, and the Agents at Bantam expressly ordered the Factors at
Jamby not to meddle with the said Thomas Skinners ship, who acted accordingly:
For it appears clearly, That Captain Allnut and his Mariners had his Provisions
and Stores for their Wages, and that the King of Jamby and Jehore seized and
kept the ship; And his Goods on shore were seized on by Chinenses, and other
his Creditors; and therefore they hope that his continual clamours of
oppression shall not take any Impression in your Lordships great Judgments, the
Company not being able to put a price upon an oppression, where none was, at
least that they are concerned in: Yet for the procuring of their own peace and
quiet, and to prevent all further trouble unto your Lordships and the Company,
they do submit unto your Lordships disposal such further sum as will make the
whole amount to 1500 l which is more than his ship and Goods were ever worth,
or valued at upon the Insurance at her going forth, so as the Company may have
thereupon full and final Releases and Discharges from the said Thomas Skinner
and Frederick Skinner.

September 28. 1666. By Order of the said Company. Signed Jo. Stanyon Secr.

To which Skinner makes this Reply.

To the Right Honorable the Lords Referrees, concerning the Damages done to
Thomas Skinner Merchant, by the East India Company.
The humble Reply of Thomas Skinner, to the Proposals of the said Company.
THat since the Rapine and Spoil of the Companies Agents by their commands,
took from me Nutmegs, white Pepper, Provisions, etc. Of 3355 Ryals value, if
but 3160 Ryals came to their Account, yet are they answerable for the whole,
which as the Justice of Jambyes Attestation, That they took all without Reason,
monishes them of the duty of Restitution, so the perishing thereof in and with
the Companies Ship Dragon threatens them with the Improsperity of ill gotten
goods; And then though Ryals Cost put on Shipboard in England but 4 s 9 d or 5
s as they go for India, yet they come home at above 15 s clear, as by Oath of
the Companies own Servants appears, that when Pepper was sold at London but 11
d a pound, though the Company sold ever since Anno 1660 at 11 d 13 d 14 d and
upwards; therefore they are justly so demanded with Interest.

The 1521 Ryals owing formerly by Leaver is become the Companies Debt, not only
because he was their Servant and Agent, but because it was seized for them, and
they have so much in their hands for my satisfaction, and therefore are
Receivers thereof to my use, and may now pay it as safely, as they ought
honestly to have paid it long since with Interest in manner as those above
mentioned.

Concerning, my ship and goods taken on shore, my Persecution in Jamby and
tedious Journey home, for which the Company offer payment by Fictions and
Reproaches, the sense which the King of Jamby (who would have made that Factory
a Public Example, had not my importunate Intercessions in Confidence to find
Justice at home prevented it) had of the Agents Inhumanity; And which, as their
own Letters witness against them, was by their Order, what ever pretended
against Frederick, executed against my self, and afterward owned by the
Company, cannot but goade their private Consciences, how Insensible soever the
Politic Conscience of a Corporation be, as it did Allnuts upon his death bed,
(who confessed and repented sorely, That he had been enticed and incited by the
Agents unjustly against me, and had nothing of the depredations;) With what
modesty do the Company then upbraid me with pretended debts, and calumniat the
King and people of those parts, and so much undervalue my Ship and Oppression,
when the contrary (to the Companies Knowledge) is so clearly manifest; Nor are
they ignorant of the hopeful Design in my Plantation and valuable Trade they
have destroyed me of; (which, though it plainly appears) That my Ships intended
Voyage for Maccassor, and freight thence, for which Consideration above 2000
Ryalls is deducted from the Ships worth, and other particulars in a Schedule,
would have rendered alone above 20000 l sterling yearly: Yet I submit that, and
my whole Sufferings and Concerns, to your Lordships Determination, in hopes,
That if I do not receive an adequate Recompense; yet I shall by his Majesty's
Grace, and your Lordships direction, be enabled, by the restoring of my Island
Barella in India, to reap a future benefit without the East India Companies
further molestation or interruption, His Majesty's late Charter granted the
third of April 1661. prohibiting the Company expressly to undertake any thing
against any Christian Colonie settled in India before the date thereof.

October the 6. 1666. Signed Thomas Skinner

THe Lords Referrees finding this vast disproportion between the demands and
Pretenses of the Petitioner, and the real loss and damage which he had
sustained; and the Offers on the other Side of the Company for his Reparation
and Satisfaction, and seeing no possibility of reconciling them, though much
pains had been taken in endeavoring it, at last resolved to report it back to
the King and Council; and made their Report as follows.

IN pursuance of his Majesty's Order in Council dated the three and twentieth
of March last; we have treated with the Governor and Company of Merchants
trading into the East Indies, and have heard the Council both of the said
Company, and Thomas Skinner Complainant, in the disquisition whereof we found
the said Thomas Skinner to have suffered much wrong by the said Company, and
their Agents: and therefore endeavored to persuade the said Company to give
satisfaction to the Petitioner: but there being a great difference between the
Petitioners Demands of Reparation for Damages, and the Companies Offer toward
the same, our Mediation proved ineffectual therein.

As to the Island of Barella in the East Indies claimed by the said Thomas
Skinner; We conceive that he ought to enjoy the same, and from thence to trade
into any part of the world, except into England. Given under Our Hands the
sixth day of December. 1666.

Signed Gilb. Cant. Clarendon C. J. Roberts. Ashley.

HIs Majesty upon this finding the East India Company would be brought to no
reason, thought fit to recommend the business to the House of Peers, to do the
Petitioner Justice according to the merits of his Cause, which Message was
brought to the House the 19. of January 1666 by the Lord Privy Seal, and all
the Proceedings in Council transmitted thither, and withal a Petition from
Skinner himself was presented to them setting forth the wrongs done to him by
the East India Company.

The House of Peers, thus possessed of this business, Order a Copy of Skinners
Petition to be given to the Governor and Company, and they to bring in their
Answer to it upon Friday the 28 of January: They accordingly bring in for
Answer a Plea to the Jurisdiction of the House of Lords, and say; That the
Petition is in the Nature of an Original complaint, not brought by way of
Appeal, Bill of Review, or Writ of Error, nor intermixed with Privilege of
Parliament, nor having Reference to any Judgment of that Court; therefore
offer; If it will please to take any further Cognizance of that Cause: And then
plead over and say, That the Company was incorporated by several Charters in
the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James, and likewise by a Charter from
Oliver, which excluded all others not Members of the Corporation from trading
in any part of the East Indies within the limits of the said Charter, and that
therefore if any such Injuries were done, it was by virtue of the Charter, and
whether Criminal or Civil they were for ever released and discharged by the Act
of Oblivion.

The Lords upon debate of this Plea, well knowing their own Right to retain
even Original causes, when accompanied with such Circumstances, as this then
before them had; A poor man oppressed by potent Adversaries, by a rich and
numerous Society, where there was a Peer of the Realm, the Lord Berckley of
Berckley, Gentlemen of great Estates, very many wealthy Merchants incorporated
in one body, driving on a great trade in the Indies with one joint stock,
resolved to employ that whole stock for the destruction of any man, that should
presume but to touch upon that trade without their leaves, which was this poor
man's Case, and in a time when he had been encouraged thereunto by a general
Liberty then taken to trade in that Country; who after the spoil of his goods
and Plantation there, to save his life (they having beset his passage by Sea)
was glad to expose himself to the hazard and charge of a Journey of many
thousand Miles over Land, to return into England, that he might here endeavor
to get some reparation for all those losses, which that Company with their
great purse and power opposed, and had already made him spend that little
Estate he had left, and seven years attendance to prosecute that reparation
without any fruit: So as to go to Law with them, and abide all the delays and
formalities even of the ordinary Proceedings at Law, much less what such
Adversaries would have raised to him, he was no ways able; The Lords I say
knowing all this, and that what was pretended of the Indemnity by the Act of
Oblivion was of no validity, that Act not at all intended for things of this
nature, betwixt party and party not relating to the War, made no difficulty to
overrule their Plea, and enter into the disquisition of the Fact, and to do the
poor man Justice and give Releife if they found cause for it, as a work worthy
of them, much conducing to the administration of the public Justice of the
Kingdom, and most agreeable to the constant practice of that House from the
very beginning of Parliaments: Wherefore they appointed Tuesday the 24 of
January for the Counsel of both sides to be heard at the Bar. But such art was
used, so many delays cast in by the Company and their Counsel, as the cause
could not be brought to hearing during all that Session of Parliament.

At the next meeting of the Parliament in the year 1667. Skinner renewed his
suit and presented a Petition the 30. day of October, In haec verba.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE etc.
The Humble Petition etc.
THat in the year 1657. Private Trade being open in the East Indies, the
Petitioner set forth his ship Thomas on a trading voyage to the said Indies,
where being arrived in 1658 he possessed himself of a Warehouse on the River
side of Jamby on which his ship rode, wherein he put a great part of his goods,
and also had a house at Jamby and goods therein, and purchased of the King of
Jamby the Island of Barella, and built a house for habitation, and had
contracted for planting of Pepper and other Commodities thereon. That in May
1659. the Agents of the Governor and the Company of Merchants of London
trading into the East Indies, by direction of the said Governor and Company,
and of Maurice Tompson, and Sir. Andrew Riccard, seeing the Petitioners hopeful
design in his Plantation and way of trade with his Ship, did seize for and on
the behalf of the said Governor and Company his said Ship, goods, houses,
Istands and 1521 Dollars of the Petitioners in the hands of Thomas Leaver the
Companies Chief Agent at Jamby, which has damaged him 17172 l Sterling,
besides the disappointment of his trade, disseizin of his said Island, loss of
above six years time with attendance and vast charges here in endeavors for a
just satisfaction etc. being much more valuable then all the other damages; And
the said Agents used many violences upon his person in the said Indies,
notwithstanding that the Petitioner proffered Bail and good Security there, to
answer all their pretenses; which inhumane and unreasonable dealing, forced the
Petitioner through infinite hazards and expense to come most over Land for
England, to seek redress.

That in the year 1661 and continually since he has humbly besought his
Majesty for Justice against the said Governor and Company, and persons
aforesaid; and though his Majesty has been graciously pleased to convene the
said Company and Persons, and to hear the said Matters; and also to refer it
diverse times to several Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
to hear them and mediate an End; yet they could not be reduced to Reason nor
Justice, albeit the Petitioners Wrongs and Damages were made to appear, as well
by their own acknowledgement, as other evidence produced before the Lords
Referrees; but endeavored by the strength of their Joynt-Purse to bear down
the Petitioners Relief, though never so just, by wearying him from further
Prosecution.

That the Petitioners whole Case not being remediable by the Courts below, he
is constrained humbly to address himself to your Lordships, his Majesty's great
Council and Supreme Judicature, whom the Petitioner most humbly petitioned the
last Sessions, and your Lordships were pleased to order their Attendance, but
by their Dilatory Pleas and several non-attendances upon slight excuses at the
day appointed by your Lordships, they frustrated the Petitioner of obtaining
your Lordships Justice that Session.

Wherefore he most humbly prays, That your Lordships will be pleased to cause
the said Governor and Company and persons aforesaid to answer the premises
before your Lordships by a short day, and that he may receive from your
Lordships such Relief as shall be consistent with Justice and Equity.

And he shall pray, etc. Signed Thomas Skinner.

The Lords upon this, order the Company to put in their Answer in Writing upon
Wednesday the 6th. of November. They bring in a Plea as before; First by way of
Protestation, That all the Injuries supposed to be committed by them and their
Factors are untrue; Then plead as formerly, That the Petition is in the Nature
of an Original Complaint, not brought by way of appeal, etc. as in their Plea
of the last Session: but add, And therefore these Respondents do humbly demand
the Judgment of this honorable Court, whither it will please to take any
other or further Cognizance of the same; the rather, because the matters of
Complaint in the Petition are such, for which remedy is ordinarily given in the
Courts of Westminster Hall, wherein these Respondents have Right to be tried,
and ought not to be brought hither per saltum, nor drawn ad aliud examen: and
so pray to be dismissed.

The Lords having received this Plea, to show the clearness of their
Intentions, and their tenderness of doing any thing which might but carry a
Semblance, That they desired to engross to themselves the judging of particular
Causes, (when determinable elsewhere, and nothing extraordinary in the Case to
induce their Lordships to take Cognizance of the Matter, which apparently was
in this Case of Skinners, as has been said before) would have the Opinion of
all the Judges, before they proceeded any further; And therefore made an Order,
Monday the 2d. of December, That it be referred to all the Judges to consider
of Skinners Petition, and to Report to the House upon the Wednesday following,
whether the Petitioner were relievable upon the matters therein mentioned in
Law or Equity; and if so, in what manner, upon the several parts of the
Complaints of the said Petition.

The day appointed the Judges came, and the Lord Chief Justice of the Kings
Bench, reported, That all the Judges had considered of the Matter referred to
them, and having met and considered thereof, were of Opinion; That the Matters
touching the taking away of the Petitioners Ship and Goods, and assaulting of
his Person, notwithstanding the same were done beyond the Seas, might be
determined in his Majesty's Ordinary Courts at Westminster; And as to the
dispossessing him of his House and Island, That be was not relievable in any
ordinary Court of Law.

Here then clearly by the Judges own Confession, part of the Case was not
within the Power of Westminster Hall, and under favor of better Judgments, I
think it will be but a venial Sin, if notwithstanding this Declaration of our
Sages in the Law, the Doubt do still remain with us, if some of the other
points also, as that of the taking of his Ship, a Robbery committed super altum
mare, be punishable by the Law of Westminster Hall; Nay! may not one be bold to
affirm, That it is not? And may it not be doubted further, if any part of
Skinners Case be tryable there, and if their Fiction in Law will reach any part
of it? being all for Injuries and Violence against his Person and Estate in
India: We know, that some Judges and Lawyers make it to extend to Contracts and
Bonds made beyond the Sea, which they ground upon a Case in the Year Book of 48
E. 3. fol. 2. where Sir Ralph Pole brings his Action against Sir Richard
Tochester, upon an Obligation bearing date at Harfleet in Kent, Lou de rei
veritate Il fust fait en Normandy; the Book says; and his Action was held
good: And Brook (who makes it to be at Roan, not Harfleet) gives the reason in
his Abridgement, Faits 98. le lieu n'est traversable, the place is not
traversable which is to be understood, when it is expressed in the Bond, for a
man cannot traverse the place against his own Act. But the Law was ever
understood to be otherwise till then, that the Judges would ampliare
Jurisdictionem.

And (to show what the Law was before E. 3.) it was adjudged, Michaelmas 2 E.
2. That no Action would lie for a Bond made at Barwick (which did not then
belong to England) ou cest Court nau' conisans, where the Court has not
cognizance, says Fitzherbert, Obligation 15. And so Perkins, Faites 121. But
both before and since the Courts of Law were so far from punishing Injuries and
Trespasses done beyond Sea, That even Treason was not tryable till the Statute
of 26 H. 8. cap. 13. which says, That if any of the Kings Subjects shall
commit Treason, though out of the Limits of this Realm, it shall be tried in
any place that the King shall appoint by Commission under the great Seal: So a
special Commission was to be issued for it: And several other Statutes were
afterward made of the same Nature; But for Trespasses, as this of the East
India Company against Skinner, there is no Act of Parliament to authorize the
Prosecution at Common Law, nor (I think) any Book Case to warrant the practice
of it; Book Cases against it there are many, even for Trespasses in the Isle of
Jersey, though within the Kings Dominions, because a Venire Facias could not go
thither to summon a Jury from thence, Mich. 42 (as Mr. Prin cites it, or 41. as
Sir Edw. Cook) E. 3. Coram Rege, rot. 109. An Inhabitant of Jersey complains to
the King and Council of false Imprisonment and several Injuries done him in the
Island: They send this Bill of Complaint to the Judges of the Kings Bench, and
there the Bill is dismissed, Quia compertum est (says the Record) quod
negotium praedictum in Curia hic terminari non potest, eo quod Juratores
Insulae praedictae hic venire non possunt, etc. Other Cases there are of the
same nature. And if a Fiction could not help for Jersey being part of the Kings
Dominions, much less could it help for Foreign parts, where the King had no
Authority at all. Yet the House of Lords has in all times exercised
Jurisdiction upon Crimes done and committed in Foreign parts, as well as those
within the Kingdom, both Treasons and other Offenses, As in the Cases of the
Lord Latimer for the loss of St. Savior in Normandy, and Oppressions done by
him in Britany, 50. E. 3. n. 21. Of William de Weston, for the surrender of
Outherwick in Flanders, 1. R. 2. n. 38. John de Gomeniz for Ardes, 1. R. 2. n.
40. Pierce de Cressingham and John Spickworth, for the Castle of Drinkham in
Flanders, 7. R. 2. n. 17. The Bishop of Norwich, for not doing Service beyond
Seas according to promise, and as he ought to have done, for delivering up
Graveling to the French, not mustering his Army at Calice, as he should have
done, and not having his Number complete. n. 18. Sir William Elinsham, Sir
Thomas Trevit, Sir Henry Ferrers, Sir William de Hurnedon, and Robert
Fitz-Ralph, for delivering strong Holds and Fortresses for Money, n. 24. John
Hall a Servant to the Duke of Norfolk, for Murdering the Duke of Gloucester at
Calice, 1 H. 4. n. 11. Sir William Richill for but taking the Examination of
the Duke of Gloucester at Calice, 1 H. 4. n. 93. And multitudes of others, who
could not have been tried by the Common Law, were tried by the House of Lords:
And in truth a man may say the whole Case of Skinner in every point of it was
only cognisable before them; However, it being out of all dispute, even by the
Confession of the Judges, That some things in it are not tryable in Westminster
Hall, I hope it may be thought reasonable, to leave as great an extent of Power
to the House of Peers, which is the supreme Judicature of the Kingdom, as to
the Court of Chancery, where the ordinary practice is to retain a Cause, when
there is Equity in any part of it. The Lords therefore Ordered the hearing of
the Cause, spent several days in it, and having with much patience heard all
that could be said on both sides, appointed a day to consider what was fit to
be done super totam materiam: Upon which day, after a solemn debate, they came
to this Resolution only in general, That Thomas Skinner was to be relieved by
that House: And referred it to a Committee to consider what damages he had
sustained by the Governor and Company trading to the East Indies, and to
report their Opinions, what Recompense was fit to be given him for the same.

Whilst the Business was under the consideration of the Committee, and before
the House of Peers had made any Determination of it, a Petition was said to be
presented by the East India Company, unto the House of Commons; which I will
set down word for word before I give it any Epithete, and upon reading it, I
think every unprejudicate man will say, one cannot give it an Epithete bad
enough; the Petition was thus,

TO THE HONORABLE, The Commons of ENGLAND in Parliament Assembled.
The Humble Petition of the Governor and Company of Merchants of London,
trading to the East Indies.
Humbly shows,
THat Thomas Skinner lately exhibited a Petition to the Right Honorable, the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled, against your Petitioners
(many of which are and were Members of this Honorable House, when the said
Petition was exhibited) for Injuries pretended to be done by your Petitioners
Factors in the East Indies, in seizing his Ship, Goods and Money, and
dispossessing him of a small Island there; all which Matters (excepting what
concerns the Island) are Matters clearly determinable in his Majesty's Ordinary
Courts of Law, as by the Judges attending their Lordships, has been resolved
and reported And for the Island, the same is parcel of the Dominions of a
Foreign Prince, and so the Right thereof only determinable by the Laws of that
Prince. That though the Petitioners did humbly tender a Plea to their
Lordships, for that the Petition was in Nature of an Original Complaint
(concerning Commoners only) and not brought to their Lordships by Writ of
Error, or Bill of Review, or any way of Appeal, and that the Matters therein
were relievable in the Courts of Westminster Hall; and thereupon prayed the
Judgment of that High Court, whether it would please to take further
Cognizance thereof: Yet their Lordships have been pleased not only to give a
hearing to all the Matters in the said Petition contained, but have denied to
gran^ the Petitioners a Commission, or so much a^ time to send for their
Witnesses now inhabiting upon the place, where the Injuries were pretended to
be done, and without whos^ Testimony it was impossible for the Petitioners to
make their Defense.

That upon the said hearing, their Lordships were further pleased to appoint a
Committee to assess damages against your Petitioners, which Committee is now
proceeding thereon accordingly, whereby several Members of this Honorable
House, who are of the said Company as well as others your Petitioners, may be
highly detrimented. All which proceedings as your Petitioners humbly submit to
your Honorable Judgments, are against the Laws and Statutes of this Nation,
and Custom of Parliament. In tender Consideration whereof, and for as much as
these unusual and extraordinary Proceedings of their Lorships are not only
grievous to your Petitioners at present, but may also be a President of ill
Consequence to all the Commons of England hereafter, and for as much as your
Petitioners have no way of Relief in this Case otherwise than by making their
humble Addresses to this Honorable House, your Petitioners do therefore most
humbly pray, That your Honors will be pleased to take the Premises into your
grave Considerations, and to interpose with their Lordships for your
Petitioners Relief therein, in such way and manner as to your great Wisdoms
shall seem meet.

And your Petitioner as in duty bound, shall pray, etc. Signed by the Order and
in the Name of the said Governor and Company. Robert Blackborne Secr.

Copies of this flew about, were in every man's Pocket, and in every man's mouth,
That the Lords were even forced to take notice of it, yet scarce could believe
the House of Commons would receive such a Petition against them, so scandalous
and so false; nor did they in the whole debate so much as mention the House of
Commons, but looked upon it as a thing done without doors, thrown abroad, only
to blast and asperse the House of Lords, and to bring them into the ill opinion
and dis-esteem of the people; which after a serious consideration and debate,
their Lordships voted, To be a scandalous Libel against the House of Peers. And
certainly so it was, both in Matter and Manner, and had the Matter been true,
yet the Manner was scandalous: For though all had been true which was
suggested, if the House of Lords had committed an Error, had done some thing
grievous to the Petitioners, yet was it most unfit for private men to censure
their Proceedings, declare them to be unusual and extraordinary, to be against
the Laws and Statutes of the Nation, and Costome of Parliament, grievous to the
Petitioners at present, and of ill consequence hereafter to all the Commons of
England. Can the tongue of man utter more reproachful and stabbing words
against any man or society of men? If this were true, do they deserve to live
who are guilty of such things, to continue so much as Members of any State or
Commonwealth, much less to have Power and Jurisdiction in it? Certainly to
revile in this manner, and throw dirt upon the Highest Judicatory of the
Kingdom, was a most transcendent Presumption, and of a most dangerous
Consequence to the whole Nation, even to those Commons of England, whom these
Petitioners pretend for so much, making themselves as it were, their Patrons
and Protectors, Tribunes of the people, and withal endeavoring to bring an
Odium upon the whole Peerage. What is this but sowing sedition between the two
Houses of Parliament, and between the Peers and the Commons of England? And
what can it tend to, but to the very dissolution of the Frame of Government?
The Scripture says, Thou shall not speak evil of the Rulers of thy People, and
Elihu in Job moves this question, Is it fit to say to a King, Thou art wicked,
and to Princes, Ye are ungodly? Yet these Rabshakehs dare heap up Reproaches
against the Lords of Parliament, and bring railing Accusations against the
Highest Order of Magistracy under the King in the Kingdom. And how little Cause
was given them for this, the preceding Narrative of the proceedings of the
Lords, is, I think, an evident demonstration. Their Lordships had proceeded
with all the tenderness imaginable, nothing of heat, nothing of Precipitation
had appeared in the whole Transaction; They were not come to a full Conclusion
and Determination of the business, which these Merchants had no reason to
suspect that it would be severe upon them; And they might at least have staid,
till it had come what ever it had been, and not have prejudged a Court, before
it had declared it self, what Judgment it would give: All it had then done, was
but what the East India Company it self had, by their own offer of Reparation
for the wrong done, acknowledged to be Just; For the Lords had only declared,
That Skinner was fit to be relieved; But what relief, how much and in what
sort, the Quid and the Quomodo, they had not determined, that was under the
Consideration of a Committee. They themselves in their Answer to the Lords
Referrees appointed by His Majesty in Counsel, had offered to pay unto Skinner
for Nutmegs, White Pepper, and some other things, which had been unjustly taken
from him by their Factors and had been brought to their account, 3160 Dollars;
And 1521 Dollars more they offered, for so many taken from him in Specie: And
by this they confess they had done him wrong, and were willing to give him some
Reparation: So without condemning themselves, they can not say the Lords had as
yet done amiss: and notwithstanding all this moderation and Circumspection,
that opprobrious railing Petition was preferred against them; and which besides
was full of untruths.

For the main matter in it, and which in truth had carried a show of Injustice
had it been true, is absolutely false; And that is, that the Lords denied them
a Commission, or time to send for Witnesses inhabiting upon the place, without
whose testimony it was impossible for them to make their defense; First it is
not true, that the Lords denied them a Commission or time to send for
Witnesses, for they never insisted upon it, which must have brought on a
Resolution of the house, and have been entered in the Clerks Book, which was
not: Some such thing was once said by some of the Council at Bar, but
themselves went off it, knowing it would have grossly manifested their intent to
delay longer a Poor man, who had already spent seven years in the prosecution
of that suit; And as untrue is it, that they could not else make their defense,
for multitudes of Witnesses were produced by them, and all fully heard with
Patience, and enough acknowledged even by their own Witnesses (and more by
their own offer (formerly mentioned) of giving Skinner so many thousand Dollars
Reparation) which they had then declared, which was only. That Skinner should
be relieved: A second untruth is; That they say all the matters complained of
were clearly determinable in the ordinary Courts of Justice, excepting what
concerns the Island, whereas it appears there was likewise a dwelling house at
Jamby, and a Warehouse by the Riverside, of which they dispossessed him, which
were not so determinable even by the report of the Judges in their Opinion (but
in truth one may say no part of the Complaint was so determinable,) they say
untruely then in saying there was only the Island, that he could not be relieved
in, and as untruely do they vouch the Opinion of the Judges for it, who
expressly mention the House as well as the Island. A third untruth is, to say the
Island was parcel of the Dominions of a Foreigne Prince, and the Right to it
only determinable by the Laws of that Prince: Whereas that Prince had made an
absolute bargain and sale, and a Total Alienation of it from his Dominion, and
so had put it out of the Protection of his Laws. A fourth (and which they had
inserted to be a Bait to draw on the House of Commons to espouse their
Quarrel) is, that they suggest the complaint to be concerning Commoners only,
Whereas the Lord Berckley of Berckley a Member of the House of Peers is
likewise of that Company, which intitles yet more particularly that House to
the Cognizance of the whole business upon point of Privilege, one of their
Members being a party. All these untruths are in matter of Fact. Then for their
Inference upon them, the Judgment they give against the House of Lords, their
censure of their Proceedings, to be against the Laws of the Land, and the
Custom of Parliament, to be unusual and extraordinary, to be a President of
ill consequence to all the Commons of England now and hereafter, this I hope no
man will say to have truth in it, but to be a false Imputation and a Slander or
(as the Lords themselves tern it) a Scandalous Libell against the House of
Lords. And as untrue it is, what they say in the close of their Petition, and
withal most Injurious to the House of Peers viz. That the Petitioners had no
way of relief in this Case otherwise then by making their humble Addresses to
the House of Commons: Whereas ever since Parliaments have been in England, the
constant practice has been, (and multitudes of Presidents there are of it,) of
Appealing to the next Parliament from any Judgment given by a former
Parliament, which was grievous and unjust; And never in this world before was
there any Appeal to the House of Commons from a Judgment of the House of Peers,
much less to take a business out of their hands, or give a stop to their
Proceedings, before they were come to a conclusion; Then which nothing can be a
greater Violation of the Rights and Privileges of either House; Nor would the
House of Lords ever have endured, that any should have used the House of
Commons so in any application unto their Lordships. Yet upon the examination it
appeared that this Petition had been really presented to the House of Commons,
and was there received.

The Lords then fell upon the consideration of the main business in question
between Skinner and the East India Company, and making Reflection upon what had
been alleged on both sides and the proofs, gave this Judgment, That the
Governor and Company should pay unto Thomas Skinner, for his losses and
damages sustained, the Sum of 5000 pounds, one thousand within two days after
the serving of this Judgment, two thousand pounds in three months after, and
two thousand pounds more in three months after that.

And they referred to the Committee for Privileges to examine, who was the
publisher and disperser of that Scandalous Paper or Petition, which they had
voted a Scandalous Libell, and to make Report thereof to the House.

In the disquisition of this business, which held many days at the Committee
and in the House, and where the Lords found much shuffling in the Persons they
examined, who were Servants and Officers to the Company, It appeared at last,
that the Petition had really been presented to the House of Commons, and well
received by that House, that it had been prepared by a Committee of the
Company, that Sir Samuel Barnardiston Deputy Governor of the Company, Sir
Andrew Riccard, Mr Rowland Winn, and Mr. Christopher Boon, were of that
Committee and Actors in it, but especially Sir Samuel Barnardiston the most
Active man, who gave no Satisfaction to their Lordships in his Answers, which
the others did, and by their submission obtained favor, but the Lords adjudged
him guilty of contriving that Scandalous Paper, and fined him 300 l. to the
King, and to remain a Prisoner in the Custody of the Black-Rod till he paid his
Fine.

And now the House of Commons ownes the Cause, and seems not only to Justify
these Actings of the East India Company, but to lay blame upon the House of
Lords, and passes certain votes to that purpose, which they brought up to the
Lords and delivered at a Conference.

And began with telling the Lords, That they had examined the East India
Companies Petition, and found the Allegations in it to be true, That such
Proceedings had been in the House of Lords: And that the Lords had since
adjudged them to pay 5000 l to Skinner, and that the House of Commons thought
these Proceedings to be of so very high Concernment to the Right of all His
Majesty's Subjects, that they had passed those Votes upon it.

The Votes were these: 1. That the House of Lords taking Cognizance of, and
their Proceedings upon the matter set forth and contained in the Petition of
Thomas Skinner Merchant against the Governor and Company of Merchants of
London trading to the East Indies, concerning the taking away of the
Petitioners ship and goods, and assaulting his Person, and their Lordships
overruling the Plea of the said Governor and Company, the said cause coming
before that House Originally, only upon the complaint of the said Skinner, and
being a common Plea, is not agreeable to the Laws of this Land, and tends to
deprive the Subject of his Right, Ease and Benefit due to him by the said Laws.

2. That the Lords taking Cognizano of the Right and Title of the Island in the
Petition mentioned, and giving damages thereupon against the said Governor and
Company, is not War anted by the said Laws of this Land.

The Lords were much surprised with these Votes, which gave them cause to make
a serious Reflection upon what had passed in the business of Skinner, and to
take a due examination of all Circumstances, The way that it came unto them at
first, upon the Kings Recommendation, Their own Right to take Cognizance of,
Judge and determine and give redress in causes of that nature; Then the merits
of this particular cause, A poor man oppressed by great Ones, very unable to
contest with them at Law, and so very unlikely there to receive relief, and
have any reparation from them (admitting it had been in the power of the Law to
have helped him, which it was not) and The manner of their Proceeding in the
hearing, examining and determining of it, in which they had used all the
moderation Imaginable, going by steps and dgrees, taking first the Opinion of
the Judges, to know if the man were relievable else where; who said he was but
in part, and not for all relievable in Westminster Hall, which made them
undertake it; Then giving way to and bearing with many delays of the
East India Company, suffering the business upon several Pretenses and excuses
of theirs to be put off many days, when their Lordships were prepared to hear
it, and had laid aside other business for it, by which means a whole Session
was lost to the poor man; And when at the next meeting of the Parliament it was
heard, in which a great deal of time, and very many days were spent, yet not
presently to come to a resolution, but appoint a day for the debate of it, and
when that day came, not to give a full Judgment, but only pass a previous Vote,
That some Relief was fit to be given, and take longer time to consider What and
How much, and referr it to the Consideration of a Committee to prepare it for
the House; And that then, in that Interim of time, before any thing was
determined, whilst but in Agitation and under consideration what should be
done, a Scandalous false railing Petition to be delivered to the House of
Commons against the House of Peers contrary to all usage, Right and Privilege
of Parliament, and what was expressly forbidden 9. H. 4. N. 22. And this not
withstanding (not known upon what mistake, for a mistake it must have been) to
be received with approbation by the House of Commons, and seconded and
confirmed by those forementioned Votes, which were brough^ up to the Lords, and
declared unto them at a Public Conference: A^^ these things considered, made
the Lord very sensible, who thought, if there ha^ been failings, that a gentler
application had yet been more convenient; but conscious to themselves of none,
and very confident that what they had done was most Justifiable by the constan^
course and practice of their House, and in it self most Just and Equitable,
they conceived it absolutely necessary for the Vindication of themselves and
the asserting of their Rights, to pass likewise two votes in Answer to the two
of the House of Commons.

1. That the House of Commons entertaining the Scandalous Petition of the East
India Company against the Lords House of Parliament, and their Proceedings,
Examinations and Votes thereupon had and made, are a Breach of the Privileges
of the House of Peers, and contrary to the fair cor-respondency which ought to
be between the two Houses of Parliament, and unexampled in former times. 2.
That the House of Peers taking Cognizance of the Cause of Thomas Skinner
Merchant, a Person highly oppressed and injured in East India by the Governor
and Company of Merchants of London trading thither, and overruling the Plea of
the said Company, and adjudging 5000 l damages thereupon against the said
Governor and Company, is agreeable to the Laws of the Land, and well warranted
by the Law and Custom of Parliament, and Justified by many Parliamentary
Presidents Ancient and modern.
Two Conferences past between the Houses upon this occasion: One asked by the
House of Commons, the other by the Lords, and what past at both, the objections
of the one side, and the others Answers, What was said by the Commons against
the Proceedings of the Lords, and what by the Lords to maintain what they had
done; the substance of all that was said on both sides, I shall here set down
as briefly as can, as I find them entered in the Journal Book of the House of
Lords, where they are now a Public Record.

The Gentlemen of the House of Commons, that managed the Conference on their
parts, endeavored to maintain their votes by showing the reasons of them.

They said, that Pleas being of two natures, Common Pleas and Pleas of the
Crown, in this Case they said they did not meddle with any part of their
Lordships Judicature concerning Pleas on the Crown, this being of the First
sort, and those being of two natures Personal, or Real actions, and in both all
proceedings must be by the Kings Original Writ. And this being a Case between
Person and Person, and so a common Plea, ought to be proceeded in the Ordinary
way by the Kings Original Wri^: Presidents were brought for this, vshered in
with a Preamble That where the party never pleades to the Jurisdiction of the
Court, it is ordinary for Courts to proceed, though in Cases not within their
Jurisdiction. The Presidents cited were out of the Placita Parliamentaria, four
in Ed. 1. time.

1. President. 18. E. 1. Johannes de Insula against the Bishop of Winton fol.
33. John de Insula prosecutes for the King, Complains that the Bishop had
disposed of an Hospital which belonged to Queen Eleenor the Kings Mother, and
ejected her Tenant, the Bishop Pleads, that he found his Church seized of that
advowson, and petit Judicium si debeat sine Brevi Domini Regis inde respondere;
The Judgment is, Et quia praedictus Episcopus invenit Ecclesiam suam seisitam
de praedicta advocatione tempore Creationis suae, Ideo ipse quoad hoc eat inde
fine die ad praesens, and Dominus Rex habeat Breve versus ipsum Episcopum, quod
reddat ei Advocationem etc. and quoad Ejectionem inquiratur veritas per Patriam.

2. President, in the same Parliament 18. E. 1. The Case of Hugh de Louther and
the Heirs of Henry de Edelynthorp, F. 43 Where it was much insisted upon these
words, Nec est Juri consonum vel hactenus in Curia ista vsitatum, quod ali quis
sine Lege Communi and Brevi de Cancellaria de Libero Tenemento suo respondeat,
Et maxim in Casu vbi Breve de Cancellaria locum habere potest, There fore,
dictum est praedicto Adae, quod sibi perquirat per Breve de Cancellaria, si
sibi viderit expedire.

3. The Case of William de Valentia Earl of Pembrook, Jone his Wife and Isabell
le Marshall 18. E. 1. p. 44. Isabell Complains of the Earl for assuming
Jurisdiction in the Commote or Hundred of Esterlow, ( which is in the Kings
County of Kermerdyn, and not in Pembrook-shire which belongs to the Earl,) and
ejecting her; He pleads that he is seized of it in the Right of his Wife, and
they crave Judgment, si sine Brevi Domini Regis inde debent respondere; The
Judgment is Quia praedicti Willielmus and Johanna sunt in Seisina de praedicta
Jurisdictione per discensum haereditarium, and non per Usurpationem seu
Purpresturam, quod eant inde sine die ad praesens, and Dominus Rex habeat Breve
si voluerit. The Gentlemen of the House of Commons observed upon this, That if
there had been a Crime, as Usurpation or Purpresture, such Cases had usually
been tried in the Lords House, But then added, That if that had been the Case,
much might be said now, how the Constitution of the Government has been
altered since.

The 4 th. President in the 18. of E. 1. F. 51. was the Case of Roger de
Somerton and the Prior of Buttele; Somerton follows for the King, and by
Petition Complains, that the Prior unjustly withheld from the King the manor
of Somerton: The Prior Answers, that he holds it in the Right of his Church of
Buttele, and petit Judicium si debeat inde sine Brevi Domini Regis respondere;
The Judgment is, Ideo praedictus Prior quoad hoc eat inde sine die ad praesens,
and Dominus Rex habeat Breve etc. And this though the King was concerned, as
was observed by them.

By these Presidents they said it did appear, that in Cases of Freehold there
is no Proceeding without an original Writ, and then necessarily and
Demonstratively it must follow; That the Lords can not Judge in these Cases,
for there was never any Writ Returnable Coram Dominis Spiritualibus and
Temporalibus, none such is found in the Register or Fitzherberts Natura
Brevium: And the reason they said was the same for Personal Actions, as those
that concern Freehold, that Magna Charta and several Statutes made in Ed. 3.
time provide for our Trial by our Peers.

Some other Presidents they mentioned out of the Roll of Petitions answered in
the Parliament of 14. E 2. as that of William le Rous F. 408. Complaining of
the Kings Bailiffs, who had twice dispossessed him of a house in Westminster,
and praying remedy; the answer was; Habeat Breve novae disseisinae in suo casu.

Then that of the Bishop of Winton Elect in the same page, Complaining that the
Kings Officers had cut down the woods of the Bishopric during the vacancy and
praying remedy; The Answer is, Habeat Breve de Transgess. in Canc.

Next of Joane the widow of John Fouks p. 409. by Petition Complaining of a
wast committed in the Manor of Radewynter; The answer is, sequatur ad Legem
Communem.

Another President of Mariote the wife of Robert de Carle in the same page,
praying remedy for a breach of the Peace by the Parson of Wormele and others,
the Answer is, Adeat Cancel. and habeat ibi Breve in suo Casu.

And to a Petition of Robert le Sausser p. 410 for a debt due to him, Answered,
habeat in Cancel. Breve de debito.

The last President cited was p. 411. Ralph de Draiton Parson of Luffenham
complaining against Robert de Vere and others for imprisoning him, till he
resigned his living, taking away his goods, and committing other violences, for
which he had a Commission of inquiry in the Country of York, and now prayed,
remedy, The answer is, quoad Resignationem nonpertinet ad Regem, and quoad
Commissionem habendam, ostendat in Cancellaria primam commissionem and ibi
respondeatur. Et habeat similiter in Cancel. Brevia de Transgressionibus sibi
factis contra pacem etc.

To this first part of that Conference, the Lords when they came to theirs,
gave for Answer in the first place, That they could not but observe some thing
unusual in the very title of the Petition, differing from the ancient Style of
those presented to the House of Commons; Then that they were much surprised,
reading the Petition to find so many falsities, and yet to hear the Gentlemen
that managed for the House of Commons say, that their House had examined it,
and found all the Allegations in it to be true; Whereas in truth there were in
it almost as many Falsehoods as Lines; those Falsehoods have been mentioned
before, so as it is not needful again to repeat them. The Lords took notice
after, of the unusual Proceeding of the House of Commons, to take Cognizance of
any matter depending in their House, before their Lordships had given any
Judgment therein, or communicated the same unto them; And to examine, proceed
upon, and censure by vote the Proceeding of the House of Peers, which they said
the House of Commons could not Legally do, because they were not a Court of
Judicature in any case, much less of the House of Peers, which is the Highest
Judicature: And that in truth they had not means to come to the Knowledge of
the truth, whereby to found a Right Judgment, because they have not power to
give an Oath; Nor in this particular had they heard any more then one side,
having not heard Skinner at all: Nor yet had they conferred with the Lords, by
which means they might have come to the knowledge of the grounds and reasons,
upon which their Lordships had proceeded; So as the Lords could not but wonder
at this Judgment, which had been past upon them.

Then they came to that Assertion concerning Common Pleas, That they must be
proceeded in by the Kings Original writ, and consequently not before the Lords,
for which the House of Commons brought some Presidents, to prove that
Free-holds were never examined in Parliament but always left to the remedy at
Law; And in the next place the Lords took into Consideration how they began
their Presidents with this Preamble; That where the party never Pleads to the
Jurisdiction of the Court, it is ordinary for Courts to proceed though in Cases
not within their Jurisdiction.

To which the Lords said in the first place, as to the Assertion viz. That all
Common Pleas must be proceeded in by Original Writ and Consequently not before
the Lords, That it was as easy for them to assert the contrary, and upon better
grounds; Being able to show Presidents all along from the first and the most
ancient Records we have, down to the latest and most modern ones of the
Proceedings of Parliaments, even within the memory and knowledge of every young
man, that the House of Peers have still exercised this Jurisdiction, even in
particular Cases of Meum and Tuum, between man and man, when they have thought
good, (though that but rarely) and when moved to it by some thing extraordinary
in the Case; and that no House of Peers has done it less, and been more tender
of entertaining such businesses, and more unwilling to be troubled with them,
then this present House of Peers, upon which so much blame is laid, and which
is the only House of Peers that ever Private Persons (found guilty and censured
by it for foul Oppressions) did presume in that manner to accuse and impeach to
any Court or Council or Company of men, no not to the King himself; Or that
ever were censured, and such votes passed upon before. But we shall hereafter
in its due place examine the matter of this Assertion, and shall show that it
holds not true even in the ordinary Courts of Westminster Hall, whither of
common Law, or Equity, where Cases of men's Free-holds are tried every day
without any original Writ, and much less in Parliament. In the mean time we
will take things in order as they were delivered.

And to the Preamble which usherd in the Presidents, That where the Party never
pleads to the Jurisdiction, it is ordinary for Courts to proceed, though in
Cases not within their Jurisdiction, upon which the Inference must be, that
Presidents then signify nothing to prove a Jurisdiction though never so many,
though a constant Series of them in all times be made appear, except there be
still a pleading to the Jurisdiction, and that Plea overruled; The Lords
thought this a strange Argumentation, and took the force of the Argument to lie
rather the other way, That it is a clearer Proof of a Jurisdiction, to have it
never or seldom questioned, and be still exercised and submitted unto, then if
it be some times opposed, though it be made good and maintained against that
Opposition: And they thought, that in this particular Case, they had good
Warrant for their Jurisdiction, finding it so seldom opposed, even by the
House of Commons own showing, who could bring but four Presidents, where any
had pleaded to their Jurisdiction, and the Plea seemingly admitted, (for it is
but seemingly, as will be showed upon the Examination of the Presidents
themselves:) Whereas multitudes were produced of the exercise of their
Jurisdiction, and some, Where the parties had desired a try all at common Law,
and the Lords would not grant it, as that of William Paynell and Margaret his
Wife in the Placita Parliamentaria of the 30 of Ed. 1. p. 231. The Case was
this; Margaret had been formerly the Wife of John Cameys, and he yet living bad
left him, (as she alleged) with his consent, and lived with Paynell as his
Wife, and was married to him: Cameys dying, Paynell and she sue for the Thirds
of the Manor of Torpell which had been the Land of Cameys. It was objected on
the other side, That she lived in Adultery with Paynell in Cameys life time,
and so had forfeited her Dower. They upon that desire to be tried by their
Country, if Adultery or no; What say the House of Peers? Do they send them into
the Country as is desired? No, Videtur Curiae quod non est necesse contra
tantas tamque manifestas Evidentias, Praesumptiones, Probationes etc. ad
aliquam Inquisitionem Patriae Capiendam procedere etc. Et ideo consideratum est
quod praedicti Willielmus and Margareta nihil Capiant per Petitionem suam, sed
sint in Misericordia pro falso Clamore etc.

This shows that the Lords some times would retain Causes, though sometimes
they did dismiss them, not for want of Jurisdiction, but as it seemed to them
convenient, and their Occasions would give leave, and as they had or had not
leisure for it from the greater Affairs of the Kingdom, or that some
Circumstances in the merits of a Causemade it more or less worthy of their
Consideration. As if one of the parties was powerful in his Country, and
suspected to have an Influence upon the Juries, the Lords would then some times
retain a business, and determine it themselves.

As in 3 R. 2. N. 24. The Case of John Earl of Pembro^k and William le Zouch
Complaining that they were sued for certain Lands in Yorkshire by Thomas the
Son of Sir Robert Roos of Ingmanthorp, and allege, That the said Thomas
sought to come to a trial in the Country, which he had gained and corrupted.
And therefore pray for redress, and a trial by Parliament, giving this reason
for it, Que Ils par tells Malveis Compassemens, et Procuremens en pais ne soient
desheritez. That they may not lose their inheritance by such wicked
contrivances and practices in the Country. Do the Lords then suffer it to go on
to trial in the Country? No, They take the matter into their own hands,
appoint John Knevet, and John Cavendish Chief Justice, and John Belknap Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas to examine it and make Report to them, which they
did.

And so likewise in the Case of Pontyngdon and Courtney 4 H. 4. N. 21. Sir
Phillip Courtney a great man in the Country oppresses Pontyngdon, dispossesses
him of his Land by force, he comes to the Lords, prays Pur Dieu Et en oeuure
de Charity d'ordeigner remedies en cell Cas; For Gods sake and as a work of
charity that they would give remedy in this case. Setts forth in his Petition,
that he had before in a Parliament held at Winchester made his complaint, at
which time Sir Phillip laid the Bastardy of his Father as a Bar, and that the
Lords Answer then was, That he should have right done him, and committed the
business to the Archbishop of Canterbury to take care of it; That before the
Archbishop, Sir Phillip and he agreed to go to a trial upon that Issue, and
that there should be a sufficient Jury of the principal Knights and Esquires of
the Country, But that Sir Phillip had named some of those principal men, and
withal poor men of less sufficiency, to the intent, that the great men making
default, the poor should stand, and that these poor men durst not against Sir
Phillip, maintain the truth (les queux poures hommes n'oisent envers le dit Sir
Phillip la verite dire) That thereupon he Petitioned again the Lords in the
next Parliament sitting at Westminster, and informed them of all these
Particulars, whereupon they Ordered a Writ to go to the Judges of Assize of
that Country, commanding them to admit none to be of the Jury, but such as had
40 l a year Land, and those to be chosen out of the whole Country
notwithstanding any usage or Challenge to the Contrary; But that now Sir
Phillip finding that the charge of Bastardy would not hold, contriving still
the wrongful disinherison of the Petitioner, had started a release unduely
gotten from one Thomas Pontyngdon a Parson, whose heirethe Petitioner is, And
the Petitioner is thereby like to be ruined si il neit vostre tres Hautissime
et tres excellent secours et aid) if the Lords would not afford him their most
High and excellent succor and help. This was the effect of the Petition. The
Lords upon this make an Order to direct the trial, the Point in Issue to be
the Bastardy, that the Release should be laid aside as null and void, that if
the Bastardy be proved, Pontyngdon shall be for ever barred to sue hereafter,
and if not proved, but that his Father was Mulier, he should then recover the
Land with Costs and damages; And they further Order a Writ to the Sheriff to
Impannell none of the Jury, that had not 40 l per annum Land. So then three
several times, in three several Parliaments did the Lords take Cognizance of
this Cause, being a Common Plea for a man's Freehold, and that Originally in
the first Instance, not upon an appeal, or Writ of Error, or any of those ways
to which the House of Commons would now limit them; They direct the trial, the
Issue, the Condition and Qualification of the Jury, and the Judgment: and if
this be not taking Cognizance of a Cause, I know not what is: And well was it
for that poor Gentleman, That the Lords had that Jurisdiction, that they could
take Cognizance of his Cause, to give him relief then: As now it was well for
Skinner, That the Lords took Cognizance of his: Otherwise this powerful
Company had trampled him in the dirt and ruined him, as that violent man Sir
Phillip Courtney (for so he appears to have been by several Complaints against
him in the Parliaments of those times) had served Pontyngdon: And well will it
still be for many a poor man to have such an Asylum, such a City of refuge to
fly unto, to save himself from the violence and Oppression of power and
greatness. And perhaps some of those who now endeavor to lay low the House of
Peers, who would make it to be of no signification, to have no power, no
Influence upon the Kingdom, be as salt that has lost its Savor, only Magni
Nominis Umbra, a Name of Peerage without ability to help themselves or any body
else; perhaps I say, even some of them, should they prevail now, may hereafter
repent it, and wish they had not removed an Ancient Land Mark, which heretofore
was in Veneration, and looked upon, as that which bounds both power and
Liberty, and is a guard to both by keeping both within their due limits, and
has ever been held most necessary to the Constitution the Government of this
Kingdom for the Preservation of it, and as servicable to Monarchy for the
keeping up of Regal Dignity and Authority, as useful to the subject for the
maintaining of his just Liberty and Freedom.

But let us go on with the Conference, and see what was said by the Lords to
the Presidents cited by the Commons.

To the first of John de Insula against the Bishop of Winchester, the Lords
said, it was no dismission of the Bishop for want of Jurisdiction, for then it
would not have been said, Eat inde ad praesens, but rather ad perpetuum; This
is but a Temporary dismission, no more but as if they had said, Well, the
Bishop says, he was seized of that advowson in Right of his Church; Let the
King (for whom John de Insula prosecutes) take his Writ out of the Chancery,
and try for that; And for the Ejection Complained of, let that be tried by a
Jury of the Country, and see if things can be so ended; If not, come again
then, and we will hear you; But for the Present we dismiss you. So the Lords
concluded, That this President made nothing against their Jurisdiction.

To the 2d of Hugh de Louther and the Heir of Edelyngthorp, upon which the
Commons did so much insist, and particularly upon the expression, Nec est Juri
Consonum, nec hactenus in ista Curia usitatum etc. The Lords said, That neither
this President well examined would make much against them; For that Adam
concerning whom and upon whose occasion that was said, was not at all before
the Lords, as a Party in the Cause before them, but came in of himself, unsent
for, unlooked for, lays in a claim which the Lords of that Parliament had not
heard of before, nor did at all then question; So as it cannot be said that
there was any dismission of him or of his business; But the Lords say, Let him
pursue and recover his Land by a Writ out of the Chancery if he will, and that
he sees it convenient for him (si sibi Viderit expedire) and they go on to
determine the business, which was before them; The Case was thus, Thomas de
Normanvil an Escheator had order concerning Hugh de Louther for certain Lands
then in his Possession which had been seized into the Kings hands, as held of
him in Capite formerly by Henry de Edelyngthorp, to whom one Eston had granted
them and to the Heirs of his body lawfully begotten, and having none to return
to Eston, under whom now Louther claimed. The order was, That Louther should
give Pledge to come and Answer at that Parliament for the profits of those
Lands to the King: Louther comes as he was bound, and at the same time one Adam
comes also, pretends himself to be Son and Heir to Edelyngthorp, and demands
the Land, Louther said, he is a Bastard, and the Lands belong not to him: And
the Lords they say, they have nothing to do with him, let him sue for his Land
where he thinks best, and so send him away, But Louther they adjudge to do his
homage, and to be Answerable to the King for the Rent; And for the Title of the
Land, What do they? do they let it alone, and meddle no more with it, as a
thing not at all within their Cognizance or Jurisdistion? Nothing less; They
Command the Escheator Normanvil to make enquiry upon Oath; if Edelyngthorp had
any Heir lawfully begotten, who he was, and upon what Title he claimed, and to
give on account of it at the next Parliament, Ita quod idem Escaetor ad
proximum Parlamentum post Festum Sancti Michaelis Domino Regi distinct et
aperte inde respondeat. So as the Lords then were far from thinking they must
not meddle with such things: And for that expression of Non est consonum etc.
rendered as the ground of that Judgment of dismission; First it is answered, it
was no Judgment at all, not only of dismission, for Adam was no party in the
Cause; Then it is no part of the Judgment, if there were a Judgment, but
precedes it; The Judgment such as it is, or rather the Answer to Adams demand,
follows in these words, Dictum est praedicto Adae quod sibi perquirat per
Breve de Cancellaria si sibi viderit expedire, So as the preceding words, may
perhaps have been but inserted by the Clerk that entered the Order; But take it
at the strongest, Admit that the Lords then present in the House had inserted
those words, as their sense at that time, Is that binding to the House, that it
may not be of an other opinion at an other time? In that very Parliament of 18
E. 1. How many times have they been of an other mind? How many examples are
there of Particular Causes Judged and determined by them? And shall one Swallow
make a Summer, one single President overballance multitudes of Presidents to
the Contrary?.

In the last place it was said, That this President did not Quadrare, sure with
this present Case of Skinners, fort at was merely concerning a Liberum
Tenementum and within the Realm where the Law had free Course, here is Rapine,
Oppression, Spoiling of goods, dispossessing one of an Island in Fortein parts,
extra potestatem Legis, assaulting the Person of a fellow Subject, a violent
Interruption of the trade and commerce of the Nation; Which concerns the
Government of the Kingdom, is a matter of State, and highly entrenches upon
the Authority of the King, which will suffer much, if he suffer one subject to
exercise a Tyrannical Dominion over an other, though in an other Country: And
is against the profit of the King, which is much concerned, That no violence be
used in the management of trade, to bring a Scandal upon the Nation, make it
stink in Foreign parts, that none will have to do with us, which must needs
become the ruin of our trade and so of all His Customs.

If one Merchant do that which is prejudicial to an other, or to a Company, let
them Complain of him to the King, who will command him home and punish him: And
if he will not come (for that may be objected) being so far off, out of reach,
then the King will give them leave that are wronged and grieved by him to right
themselves. But that they should do it of themselves and in their own Case be
Judges, Witnesses and Executioners, against all reason and Justice. So the
Lords were not at all convinced with this President neither, but still thought,
they had done very well in Censuring the East India Company for their
Misdemeanors and wrongs done to Skinner, and in adjudging them to give Skinner
Reparation for it.

The 3d President was that of william de Valentia and Isabell de Marshall, in
which the Lords observed the dismission to have been only ad proesens; But
withal observed, that the bare reading of the Case in the Book will satisfy
one of the Jurisdiction of the Peers, to retain such Causes: It says, That
William de Valentia had at the fore going Parliament been Ad querelas Isabellae
le Mareschall allocutus et ad rationem positus, impleaded and put to Answer, by
what right he assumed such an Office and such Power in the Hundred of
Hosterelegh, and that he then alleged he did it in the Right of his Wife, and
that it being his Wifes Inheritance he ought not to be put to answer without
her, Ita quod datus fuit dies ei ad hunc diem ad Parlamentum Domini Regis viz.
a die Paschae in ires Septimanas. And then his Wife and he appeared by their
Attorney, and after pleadings, The Judgment is, Quia praedicti Willielmus Et
Johanna sunt in seisina de praedicta Jurisdictione et de Haeredicate ipsius
Johannae per descensum haereditarium et non per Usurpationem seu Purpresturam
etc. Consideratum est, quod eant inde sine die quoad praesens; Et Dominus Rex
habeat Breve si voluerit etc. The Lords knew they had Jurisdiction, else they
would have dismissed the Cause the Parliament before, and not have adjourned it
to the next Parliament upon that ground to make the Wife a Party, as we see
they did: And whereas the Commons had upon this President observed, that if
there had been Crime in the Case, as Usurpation or Purpresture, then they
acknowledged that in such Cases the House of Lords did usually proceed and try
them, but withal added, That if that were the question, much might be said how
the Constitution of Government has been since altered: So as they soon
retracted their admittance of but so much of the Lords Right, and what they had
given with their right hand, they would soon take again with their left.

But first, for their Concession of Judging Crime, the Lords say, that suffices
for their Jndemnity, as to what they have done in this particular Case of the
East India Company and Skinner, for here is Crime sufficient, and Usurpation
and Purpresture, taking them in the larger sense for invading any other man's
Right, and not only where the King is concerned, as those terms are taken some
times: And then for the Qualification of their Gift upon the Change and
alteration of the Government, The Lords Answer, That when they show the Time,
when that alteration was made, and the Persons by whom, and the Manner how (if
Legally done) they shall then believe and submit, and not till then: But they
never heard of any thing, that till now so much as looked that way, except that
Vote of the Assembly called the Rump, which declared the House of Lords useless
and dangerous and therefore to be abolished and taken away; and by a Clubb Law
they did take it away. But even they that passed that Vote, and did make that
Clubb Law, thought the Judicature necessary and fit to be continued, for they
immediately assumed it to themselves, and fairly voted themselves into that
Power by the Name of the Commons of England, the very same Title that the
East India Company do now make use of in their Petition to the House of Commons.

To the 4th of Roger de Somerion prosecuting for the King, and complaining of
the Prior of Buttele, for unjustly withholding from the King the manor of
Somerton; And the Judgment upon it, Ideo praedictus Priot quo ad hoc eat inde
sine die ad praesens: The Lords say, it is but a Temporary dismission as the
others were, and signifies nothing as to the point of Jurisdiction: And they
wish the Commons would have pleased to cast their eye upon the ensuing Case in
the same leaf, of William de Valentia again, and of him upon the same occasion
(concerning his Wifes Inheritance as formerly,) where there is not a Dismission
of the Cause as formerly, but a determination of it, and that determination
again referred unto and confirmed by a suceeding Parliament, to show that the
House of Lords sometimes would, and sometimes would not Judge and determine
such causes as were brought before them: That Case was thus, William de
Valentia Complains of the Lords of the Counsel for admitting, during the Kings
absence beyond the Seas, one Dionisia a pretended Daughter of William de Monte
Caniso Tenant to the King of Lands held in Capite and formerly enjoyed by her
Father in his life time, Whereas his Wife was true Heir to that William, and
the Land belonging to her; The Lords of the Council justify what they have
done, say that Dionisia was notoriously known to be the true Daughter of that
William, and that the Bishop of Winchester, in whose Diocese she was born,
testified it, The Judgment is, Ideo videtur domino Regi quod praedictus Comes,
Thesaurar. and Alij de Consilio been et rite processerunt It is not now sibi
perquirat per Breve de Cancel. They do not referr him to the Chancery, as they
did in the other Case. This was in 18 E. 1. In 20 E. 1. p. 103. he comes again
to Parliament, and renues his Complaint, and that Judgment given before is
confirmed; the words are these, et de alijs Petitionibus suis viz. De
hoereditate Willielmi de Monte Caniso petenda, et etiam quod procedatur juxta
Bullam quam jidem Williemus et Johanna impetrarunt ad inficiendum Processum,
perquod Dionisia filia proedicti Willielmi Legitima censebatur, alias eis
responsum fuit viz. in Parliamento post Natale Domini Anno 18. ut patet in
Rotulis ejusdem Parliamenti, Ad quam Responsionem se teneant etc. Nothing can
be clearer then the continual practice of this Jurisdiction in the House of
Lords, whenever they pleased. Not that it has always pleased them to
trouble themselves with exercising this Jurisdiction, their time having been so
taken up some times with businesses of a higher Nature, that they could not
attend it, so as many times they have tied up themselvesby an Order of the
House, not to receive any private business: As in the Close Roll 18 E. 1. There
is a memorable Order to that purpose; I will set it down at length in the very
words, which are these, Pur ces Ke la gent Ke venent al Parliament le Roy sunt
sovent destaez et destourbez a grant grevance de eux e de la Curt par la
multitudine des Peticions Ke sunt botez devant le Roy, de quevx le plus
porreient estre espleytez par Chanceler et par Justices, purveu est, Ke tutes
les Petitions Ke tuchent le sell vegnent primes al Chanceler, e ceux Ke tuchent
Justices v ley veynent a Justices, e ceux Ke tuchent Juerie veynent a Justices
de le Juerie. Et si les besoings seent si grans v si de graces, Ke le Chanceler
e ces autres ne le pussent fere sans le Rey, dunk Ils les porterunt par lur
meins de meine devant le Roy pur saver ent sa volente. Ensique nulle Peticion
ne veigne devant le Roy e son Conseil fors par les majns des avaunt ditz
Chanceler e les autres Chef Ministres. Ensike le Rey e sun Consail pussent Sanz
charge de autre busoignes entendre a grosses busoignes de sun Reaume e de ses
Foreines Terres. Thus in English, In regard the People who come to the Kings
Parliament, are often delayed and disturbed to the great grievance of themselves
and of the Court, by the multitude of Petitions exhibited before the King, of
which most could be dispatched by the Chancellor and Justices; It is provided,
That all Petitions, that concern the Seal shall come first to the Chancellor,
and those that concern the Exchequer to the Exchequer, and those that concern
the Justices or the Law shall come to the Justices, and those that concern the
Jews to the Justices appointed for the Jews; And if the businesses be so
great, or so of Grace, as the Chancellor and the rest can not end them without
the King, then they shall with their own hands bring them before the King to
know his pleasure therein; So as no Petition shall come to the King and his
Counsel, but brought by the Chancellor and those Chief Ministers: that so the
King and his Counsel may without the trouble of other business attend the great
businesses of his Kingdom, and of his foreign Dominions.

This is the Order, in which two reasons are expressed, for their not receiving
particular Petitions, one in the beginning the other in the end, First the ease
of the Petitioners, and of the House it self, which for their multitudes could
not give every one his dispatch; and secondly, that freed of them it might
attend the Public business of the Kingdom; Not for want of Jurisdiction. And
yet be all manner of businesses so put by? No! Great ones, and such as need
grace and favor are still reserved: But take it at the strongest, admit they
had put all out of their own power, yet it will be granted, they had power,
till they did in this manner divest themselves of it; It appears they had by
the Order it self, which mentions such multitudes of Petitions; I then ask, if
such resolution of the House at that time could be binding to perpetuity? The
Houses of Parliament we know are masters of their own Orders, and themselves
when they please alter the Orders they have made; much less then be they
binding to succeeding Parliaments. And it is obvious to every man, who will
either look into the Records of Ancient Parliaments or will but recollect his
Memory and call to mind what has passed in our late Parliaments, that in all
times the House of Peers has acted contrary to this Order; Taking
Cognizanceeven of smaller matters, which the ordinary Courts of Justice do
every day dispatch: And no House of Peers did ever do it less then this, which
in truth has not done it at all, though it be now so quarrelled with for
having relieved one poor man from the oppression of the mighty, when no
inferior Court could do it: And this too the only Cause of this Nature, that
they have meddled with during this whole Parliament, which has lasted so many
years, and has had so many Sessions; And a Cause particularly recommended unto
them by the King (who is the Fountain of all Justice;) not one taken up by
themselves, which makes not their Case the worse, as it may well be hoped.

But suppose there had been no Reservation at all in that Order of 8 E. 1. of
any Cause or any business, but that the King and Lords had at that time bound
up themselves absolutely from meddling with any of those Petitioners Cases, and
for the Present waved the exercise of their Jurisdiction in all such matters,
had this been a Renouncing of their Jurisdiction and quitting it for ever? No
Court but may upon some particular occasion suspende and wave it is
Jurisdiction, it does not therefore follow that it must never make use of it
again. The Court of Chancery does sometimes appoint a Trial at Law of points
in a Cause, which it might have determined it self, if it had pleased: And at
an other time it will determine things of the same nature, The House of Peers
may do the same and wave their Jurisdiction when they please. It did it 13 R.
2. N. 10. in Changeours Case. Adam Changeour ( So is his Name in the Record
though the Exact Abridgement call him John) petitions the King and Lords
against Sir Robert Knolls, Setts forth, how owing 2000 l to Sir Robert and his
Wife Constance, he had let him have Lands to receive the Rent till he was
Satisfied his debt; That Sir Robert had received more then his money due, yet
kept the Land, so prays remedy. The Answer is indorsed upon the Petition, Let
a Writ be directed to Sir Robert Knolls to appear in Parliament the Friday
after Candlemas next, to Answer the things contained in the Petition. Upon
hearing the business the Lords leave it to be tried at the Common Law. This
seems a stronger President for trying all at Law and not in Parliament, then
any which the Gentlemen of the House of Commons urged at the Conference; For
here was an absolute dismission of the Cause, and not ad praesens only, as was
in their Presidents. But I believe such wise and knowing men could not but see,
that this President would not so much have helped one way, as done prejudice to
their Case an other way. The Prejudice, it would have done, had been this, that
themselves by their own showing had overthrown one of their maine Arguments,
which was, That all Proceedings in cases of Freehold should be by the Kings
Writ, and that no Writ was ever made Returnble Coram Dominis Spiritualibus et
Temporalibus; Whereas here had been in their own President mention of a Writ
returnable in Parliament, which is Tantamount, and signifies the same thing:
But I have in this Discourse given Examples of several others in the same kind,
where Writs are issued by Order of Parliament returnable in Parliament: and
many more there are, if it were necessary and worth the trouble to set them
down. And then, what had they gotten by telling us, That the Lords once would
not retain a Cause, which was tryable at Law, and would for once wave their
Jurisdiction in such Matters? When it was showed to them by multitudes of
Presidents, That the Lords had most frequently done otherwise at other times in
Cases of the same Nature.

And Presidents in the Affirmative are those that prove a jurisdiction,
especially when many in number are produced, and some of all times and in every
Kings Reign (of which the Records can be had,) which shows a Continuance of,
and so an unquestionable Right to such a power. One, or two, or twenty then in
the Negative (that the Lords did not do so in such and such Cases) Nay I say
more, were the Number equal, as many in the Negative as in the Affirmative,
yet it could not disprove their Jurisdiction; It would only show, that their
Lordships were free Agents, to do it, or not do it, as they saw Cause; But
their Jurisdict on remained still enure to do it, whenever they would.

And when all is done, I may say, all this is Nihil ad rem, and concerns not
the point in question, which is, If the Lords have done well or ill in
relieving Skinner against the East India Company, for he was not relievable a^
the Common Law (as has been showed:) And if he had not been relieved, there
had been a failer of Justice: So as there was a necessity of their Lordships
acting in that particular, to keep up the public Justice of the Kingdom. And
all Presidents, and all that can be said and urged, to show that the House of
Peers ought not to meddle with matters determinable at Law, are in truth out of
doors, and can not concern this House of Peers, which never did it, but the
contrary; For whenever it appeared, that any business before them was proper
to be tried at Law, they presently dismissed it: Yet since their Right is
questioned, they must defend it, though they gave no Occasion for it, having
not at all put that Right in execution, nor (as it may well be presumed by
their proceeding hereto) ever intending it.

As to the 6 other Presidents, o^ Petitions Answered in the Parliament of the
14 of E. 2. which the Gentlemen of the House of Commons themselves seemed not
to lay so much weight upon; The Lords thought they did wisely in it, for they
were not such as would bear weight to build upon; The Lords of that Parliament,
according to the several natures of the businesses Petitioned for, dismissed
the Petitioners with several directions; Which shows they took Cognizance of
those matters; One was directed to take out his Writ novaedisseisinae; and an
other to bring his action of Trespass; the third they send to the Common Law;
the fourth into the Chancery; the fifth they Order to bring his action of debt;
the sixth who complained of several things, to him they gave particular
Answers, and particular Directions to every point; One of which (they said)
pertained not to the King, that is, to his Laws, so they could give no Order in
it; it was concerning the Resignation of a living, which was to be tried by the
Laws of the Church; For the other points, they disposed them into their proper
Channells. Was this to be done by a Court, that had no Jurisdiction in these
matters? No rational man can think so.

But it would be considered, that in this Case of Skinners the Lords could give
none of those Answers, neither sibi perquir at per Breve de Cancellaria not
Sequatur ad Legem Communem, or tobring this or the other Action. For neither
Law nor Equity in the Ordinary way of the Inferior Courts could relieve him for
the loss of his real Estate in the Indies: the Judges said, he was not
relievable for his House and Island: So as none of those Presidents are
applicable to the point in question. Not that the Law, even in the ordinary
execution of it, provides not for the punishment of all Crimes: It declares
against and condemns the Fact, but can not reach the person to punish him, when
he has committed that Fact in a Foreign Country, Ubi lex Angliae non currit.
And the House of Peers has but helped the Law to inflict such punishment upon
Offenders, as by the Law was due to them, which otherwise they had escaped. And
were it but this, it sufficiently justifies the Proceedings of the Lords in
that particular Case. Then as to the Jurisdiction of that House in the general
it will be made as apparent as the Sun at Noone, how they have in all times
exercised it to the relief of all persons, who stood in need of their relief,
even for things done within the Kingdom.

Where the Law had provided a remedy, they applied it; Some times themselves
would take the pains, in Cases that deserved it, where there was some thing
extraordinary to move them to it, and when they were at leisure from the more
weighty and important Affairs of the Kingdom, Some times they would send it
down to the Inferior Courts to do it for them, and give them Authority for it,
(which they could not have done, if they had not had it themselves, for Nemo
dat id quod non habet) as in the Case of certain Rioters 11 H. 4. N. 38. in
the Exact Abridgement, Whom they turned over to the Kings Bench, and gave those
Judges Authority to the end the business. where the Law had not provided, there
they would not meddle themselves, and declared it so, That none else neither
should presume to meddle: As upon the Petition of Martin Chamberlain in that 14
E. 2. p. 409. Who upon the suppression of the Knights Templers desired to be
put into the possession of a manor, which the Templers (whilst they stood)
had held of him, The Answer is, Quod non est Lex ordinata, there was no Law
ordained in the Case; And because the Law had not determined, how those Lands
should be disposed of, the Lords would say nothing to it.

But will it not be said, that this makes good what the Commons objected,
against the Lords retaining this Cause of Skinners, because some parts of it
were not determinable in Westminster Hall; Whereas, there being no Law
concerning those points, till there had been one made, their Lordships should
not have meddled with them? As the Lords in that Parliament of E. 2. would do
nothing in Chamberlains Case, because the Law had not provided for it; And as
in those two Cases mentioned by the House of Commons, That of an Inheritrix
Forfeiting by her husbands default, where (as the Statute of Westminster the
second expressed it) a Durum est was in the Case; And that of the Hospital of
St. Leonards 2 H. 6. N. 37. which had a clear Right to a Corn Rent, Yet the
Lords could not relieve them, but both were feign to have Acts of Parliament.

This receives a twofold Answer; One, That there are other Motives in this Case
to make the Lords retain it, and give Skinner Relief; Here is a poor man
oppressed by a rich Company, with whom he was no ways able to wage Law: And
that Consideration has in all times prevailed with that House, which is
composed of Persons of generous and noble Spirits, who can not see poor men
oppressed without feeling in their hearts an Inclination and a desire to
relieve them: But secondly we must distinguish between a Fact not being a Crime
in the eye of the Law, which is neither Malum in se nor Malum prohibitum, and
when the Fact it self being odious and punishable by all Laws of God and Man,
only a Circumstance, as the Place where it was Commit, dputs it out of the
Power of the ordinary Courts of Justice to take Cognizance of it, which are
kept to forms, and may not trangresse them; In the first Case, the House of
Lords can not punish that for a Crime which the Law does not make a a Crime,
but in the second Case God forbid there should be such a failer of Justice in a
Kingdom, that fellow subjects should robb and worry and destroy one an other
(though in Foreign parts) and there should be no punishment for the wrong doer,
nor Relief for the party wronged, when they come home; For then the King might
be deprived of many a good subject, the Land loose many of her people, Trading
receive much prejudice, and so King and Kingdom suffer great loss, and all
without remedy.

But then say the House of Commons, Where the Law has provided, and there is
an ordinary remedy, an extraordinary ought not to be tried: to this the Lords
Answer, that their House is not an extraordinary remedy, but the ordinary
remedy in extraordinary Cases, and this of Skinners was so, both in point of
difficulty, and point of Compassion.

And to what is said, That it is the Interest of all men in England to be tried
by Juries, and there is remedy against willful Juries by Attaint, but here is
no remedy nor no Appeal, It is Answered, That the Court of Chancery disposes
of men's Estates without a Jury, Every Court of Justice, Every Judge in his
Circuit sets Fines on men's heads upon several occasions without a Jury; Many
are tried for their lives and their Liberties (which is more then Estate) in
the House of Peers upon an impeachment of the House of Commons, who are not a
Jury, nor are sworn; therefore that Assertion holds not, That all men in all
cases are tried by Juries: And for matters of Appeal, there does lie one to the
next Parliament, or the next Session; But it will be said, That is to the same
Persons; And what hopes of any remedy? For they will make good their own Act; To
this is Answered, It is what the Law of the Land has established; We must not
be wiser then the Law; It is what our Ancestors thought sufficient, what has
been the practice of all time; And if we leave Posterity in as good a Condition
as our Ancestors left us, they will have no Cause to Complain. Then we must
presume, that Courts of Justice will do Justice, and will do Right; that upon
better reason showed upon the Appeal, they will alter their minds, and give an
other Judgment: They have done so heretofore; How many Judgments of
Parliament have been reversed by succeeding Parliaments? And where there is
Cause for it, we must hope, they will do so again.

Then where as it is said, That the greatness of the Charge and the
Inconveniences of attending Causes in the Lords House is an Argument against
their Judicature; They Answer, That it is not the House of Lords, that appoints
such great Fees to Counsel; it being left to their Consciences that take them,
and to the will and discretion of their Clients who give them, and who (without
an Act of Parliament to restrain it) may give what they will, or rather what
they must: However The Lords say, that the charge in Chancery is greater, there
having been some times forty, fifty Orders made in one Cause; and the delay
much greater, so as some Causes have lasted there very many years: And even at
the Common Law, how many Verdicts have been given in one Cause, contrary
Verdicts, one for the Plaintiff, an other for the Defendant? Contrary Rules of
Court, the Judges give a Rule one day, and three days after give an other
clean contrary? As an Instance of it can be given but of last Trinity Term in
the Kings Bench. These are Inconveniences, that lie not in the House of Peers.
But admit there were Inconveniences: Many Laws are found inconvenient, which
yet are put in execution, and all obedience given to them, whilst they stand
unrepealed. And the Question is not now of Convenient or Inconvenient, but
matter of Right. Is it the Right of the House of Peers? has it still been the
Custom and Usage of Parliaments, and consequently the Law of Parliament, that
they should exercise such a Power of Judicature? If it be so (as it is and will
be sufficiently proved) then the point of Convenience or Inconveniency is out
of doors; Well may it be a motive to alter it by the Law. But we will play with
them at their own Weapon, and join Issue upon that point, that the
Inconveniency is but imaginary, and so far from an Inconvenience, that it is
the great advantage of the subject that it should be so: As well to give relief
in Cases otherwise unrelievable, as to assist and help on the administration of
Justice, when sometimes the greatness and power of some persons would else bear
down, or much obstruct and hinder the Proceedings of Inferior Courts.

An objection also was raised, How shall the Lords Judgments be executed after
the Rising of the Parliament? For so the subject may be deceived: And when he
thinks, that with much Charge he has made an end of his business, he is never
the nearer; And it is Answered, that the House of Peers is not as the House of
Commons, whose Orders are only of force, whilst they are sitting, they have
power sufficient to require Obedience to their Judgments; Nor has it been
known, that ever any Judgment of the House of Peers was not submitted unto
and obeyed, till now in this Case of Skinners, that the East India Company
stands out in defiance, and refuses all Obedience to it. In 15 R. 2. N. 17. in
the Case of the Abbot of St Oseches complaining against John Rokell for diverse
Embraceries, and for not obeying an Order of the Duke of Lancasters made
therein, the Lords Confirm that Order; and charge the Lord Chancellor to see
Rokell perform it. Why may not the Lords do the same still, if they doubt of
Obedience to their Orders? But there was never question made of it before: And
there are many Presidents of Orders given to persons to act some thing in the
Intervalls of Parliaments, and to give an account of it to the Lords at the
next ensueing Parliament, which shows, that their Authority still continues, to
empower those persons to act and to execute their Orders even when the
Parliament is risen; 15 E. 3. N. 48. The Bishops of Duresme and Salisbury, the
Earl of Northamton, Warwick, Arundell and Salisbury are appointed to take the
Answer of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and to report it to the next
Parliament: And 51 E. 3. N. 96. It is there specified, How in the Parliament
before, one Hugh Staffolk had been accused of diverse Extortions, and that a
Commission was then granted to the Earl of Suffolk and Sir John Cavendish to
inquire into it, who so had done, and had found him guiltless by 18 Enquests,
which Sir John Cavendish did in that present Parliament witness to be true: By
all this it appears, that the Authority of the House of Peers ends not with the
Parliament, but their Judgments still continue in full force and power; And
they may appoint Persons to see them executed if they please.

And whereas the House of Commons does not deny them a power of Judicature upon
Writs of Error and upon Appeals, Will not the same objection lie as well
against their Judgments in those Cases? For seldom that they be put in
execution before the Parliament rise, so it takes away their whole Judicature,
as in truth all the other objections would do, could they be made good.

And whereas it was said, That none of the Kings Courts can give remedy, where
the Kings Writ can not run; And where his Majesty's Sovereignty does not come,
the Jurisdiction of the Peers can have no place; It was Answered, that there
Chiefly the Power of the House of Peers is to give remedy, because it only can:
As for Treasons (till the Statutes of 26 H. 8. C. 13.32. H. 8. C. 2. and 5 E.
6. C. 11. which have made them tryable within the Realm) and all Misdemeanors
committed in Foreign parts, which never were, nor yet are, tryable at the
Common Law: Of this there are multitudes of Presidents, Gomeniz, Weston,
Segrave, Hall, Richill etc.

And here within the Kingdom the the Kings Writ does not originally run in all
places, as for example, in the Counties Palatine, yet no man will deny the
Authotity of the Lords in Parliament taking place there; 9 R. 2. N. 13. The
Duke of Lancaster Complains of Sir John Stanley for not suing out his Livery
for the Manor of Latham in the Dukes Court of Chancery, and yet entering upon
it; They declare his Entry unlawful, and Order him to sue out his livery in the
Dukes Court. The Kings Writ did not run there, but the Authority of the Lords
did.

Another Objection was, That all Proceedings ought to be in Latin, and n^
Record to be in English: But the Lords had thought, That none had ever yet
doubted, but the House of Peers had been a Court of Record, where all the
Proceedings and Orders and Judgments have been in English ever since H. 6^
time. All Acts of Parliament in English. All impeachments, even those brought
up by the House of Commons, the Proceedings, and the Sentence, all in English.
The Ancient Records were in French, and the Pleadings likewise, till the
Statute of 36 E. 3. Which appoints Pleadings to be in English, and to be entered
and enrolled in Latin (so the Print says, but in Sir Robert Cottons
Abridgement of the Records it is observed that the Record it self warrants no
such thing:) Then the Chancery Proceedings are all in English, The Pleadings,
Orders, and Decrees: Yet it will not be denied but that is a Court of Record:
Sir Edward Coke, who alone is of an other Opinion concerning the Chancery, and
upon that ground, because the Proceeding is in English, yet makes the House of
Commons it self a Court of Record, where every body knows all is in English;
Jnst. 4. part p. 23. so he does not sibi constare.

The last Objection and indeed the the Chief one (if true) was, That it
deprives the Subject of the benefit of Magna Charta, which will have all men to
be tried by their Peers, or by the Law of the Land; And the 25 of Ed. 3. C. 4.
that none shall be apprehended upon Petition to the King or Counsel, (and
Counsel here they interpreted to be the House of Lords) but upon indictment or
presentment, or by Writ Original; And the 42. of E. 3. which is to the same
purpose; It was urged further that no Writ was ever made returnable Coram
Dominis Spiritualibus et Temporalibus; And it was said in Regard of the Island,
being in a Foreign Princes Jurisdiction, that it ought to have been done by Act
of Parliament, for that no Court of his Majesty can give remedy, where his
Majesty's Writ can not run, nor can the Jurisdiction of the House of Peers have
place there: An other observation they had upon Lex Terrae in Magna Charta,
That in the Arguments of the Kings learned Counsel 3. Car. They made Lex Terrae
to be the pleasure of the King, And the Lords were desired to consider upon
this, if by arguing that the Proceedings of their House were maintained to be
Secundum Legem Terrae, it may not as well be said that Magna Charta will have
men to be tried Per Judicium Parium aut per Legem Terrae, That is, by the will
of the Lords.

This is the substance of what was most materially urged against the Lords at
that Conference. Some other things were said, rather to entertain the
Bystanders, then for any thing else; as the question asked How the Lords should
see further beyond sea then other men; Indeed the Lords thought they might see
as far as other men, and as far as the Court of Chancery or any other Court,
but never undertook to see further: But they think, if some may have their
wills, they may be laid so low, that they shall then see but a very little way;
but that is not yet.

And another pretty Dilemma was made, which was this, Are the Lords bound to
recieve all Petitions or not? if bound, they may refuse none, for Magna Charta
says Nulli negabimus, and the King is Debtor Justitiae to all his subjects;
If they be not bound, then they must be partial, to receive some and dismiss
others: But this Argumentum bicorne hurts with neither horn; For the Lords in
these very Presidents brought by the House of Commons in Ed. 1. Ed. 2. time did
not deny Justice, when they sent the Petitioners unto those several Courts,
where they should receive it, one to the Chancery, an other to the Common Law,
and directed one to bring such an Action, another a differing one, according to
their several Cases: And in those multitudes of Presidents brought by the Lords
where Causes have been retained and determined in that House, they can not
justly be charged with Partiality, when they are moved thereunto by some thing
extraordinary in those Cases, which requires their Relief, and that it can not
be had else where; And a Question may be put on the other side, whither it can
be believed, that Partiality was imputed to all the Parliaments heretofore,
which at their first sitting appointed Committees, Tryers of Petitions for
England, for Ireland, for Gascony, nay for Flanders (where the King had no
Dominion) and sometimes in general, for all places beyond the Seas, to examine
which were fit to be received, which not; And those Parliaments that the Modus
Parliamenti speaks of, when a little before the rising of the Parliament,
Proclamation was made in Public places, to know if any had business to the
Parliament, if any had Petitioned the Parliament and their Petition had not
been answered; Certainly those Parliaments then did not apprehend to be
reproached either with Partiality or denial of Justice. And I would ask this
further, If they can think that such a Committee of Tryers would have rejected
Skinners Petition, and have said The Lords can take no Cognizance of your
business, because it is concerning things done beyond Sea, when themselves were
a Committee appointed only for such businesses.

But to let these Sarcasmes pass, and see rather what was said and may be said
to the more solid objections, concerning Magna Charta and those other Statutes,
which they will have to condemn the Proceedings of the Lords. First it may be
observed as a thing very strange, that in above 400 years since Magna Charta
was first made a Law, it was never till now found out, that the Lords had
broken that Law by the exercise of this Jurisdiction, nor were they ever
charged with it before. But besides, do they by this any more break it, then
the Court of Chancery, which by a Decree disposes of a man's Lands, or the Court
of the Constable and Marshall, which takes away a man's life, or any other Court
where the Judge for a Contempt presently sends a man to Prison or claps a Fine
on his head, so takes both person and Estate, or the same House of Lords, when
it Commits a man upon an Impeachment of the House of Commons, Judges, and
Condemns him; Here is no Judicium Parium (that is most certain) nor Lex
Terrae, if you take it for an Original Writ; And yet no man will say, any of
this is contrary to Magna Charta: Why then may not the Proceedings of the House
of Peers, when it punishes a man for robbing and assaulting his fellow subject
in as strange Country, which puts the business out of the Cognizance of the
ordinary Courts of Justice, receive as favorable a Construction? It can not be
said, that the House of Commons, by their taking Cognizance of a Fact, and by
their previous examination of it, and declaration upon it, giving it the
Denomination of Treason or of any other lesser Crime, can create a Jurisdiction
in the House of Peers, which it had not before, and give it new power and
Authority to pass a condemnation upon the guilty Person, yet is it the Ordinary
practice of the House of Commons (who have a Grand Committee of Grievances for
that purpose) to impeach men so before the Lords.

They could receive not long since a Petition of one Tailor complaining against
the Lord Mordant for oppression and falss imprisonment, and the injurious
taking away of an Office from him at Windsor: All which were properly tryable
in Westminster Hall, yet they could bring this up to the Lords, and crave
Reparations and Damages in the Name of the Commons of England. And the Lords
must not, though at the Kings recommendation, receive a Petition from Skinner,
and give him relief for his whole Estate by violence and with a strong hand
taken from him, part at Sea, part upon Land, in a strange Country, in neither
of which the Courts of Westminister can afford him any help; For this must be
against Magna Charta; So rather then the Lords shall do it, this must be a
Failer of Justice in the Land, the King shall not be able to protect his
subjects, the oppressor shall go free, and the cry of the oppressed shall go up
to heaven for Judgment upon the Land, because he finds not Justice in it for
his Relief.

But I remember what the Gentlemen of the House of Commons said at the
Conference, That therefore the Lords should not have given Relief in this Case,
because there was no remedy at all at Law; This Objection has been already
answered, therefore I shall not repeat it here; only use one Argument more ad
hominum, that they forget what themselves have done this very Parliament,
entertaining a Complaint of one Farmer against the Lord Willoughby (who is
since dead) for dispossessing him of his Estate, and other wrongs done him in
the Barbados, which could not be tried in Westminster Hall, which yet they
were preparing to bring up to the Lords, by way of Impeachment, if the Lord
Willoughby had not dyed; And there is reason to believe, that if Skinner had in
the like manner applied himself to them, there had been no breach of Magna
Charta, nor no exceptions taken at the great charge of the Subject appealing to
the House of Commons and prosecution there (though the charge be every whit as
great and becomes much greater to the party that prosecutes, for when he has
done there, then he must begin again in the House of Lords, so the charge is
double,) and the Judgment when it comes is never a whit more in Latin to make
it a Record, then if the business had begun first in the Lords House, and as
much is it without Jury or Appeal, and no less danger of the non-execution of
the Judgment after the rising of the Parliament: In Fine all that is said
against the Lords Proceedings now, might as well be said against them then; And
to say the truth, if it be well considered, it will be found, that the
consequence of this opposition (should it work it is effect, and prevail) would
be the overturning of the very foundation of all Authority of Parliament; that
it might then well be said of the whole Parliament, that it did sit only to
make Laws and give Subsidies.

But all this proves not the exercise of the Lords Judicature to be warranted
by Magna Charta, it only says, that other Courts, and the House of Commons it
self do as bad: Which is no Justification of the Lords; For to err with
Company is not to be free from fault. Let us then see, what may be said to
clear them all, but principally and Chiefly this Judicature of the House of
Peers, which is the mark shot at.

And to do this, we must examine the Disjunctive proposition in Magna Charta,
which says, that every man shall be tried Per Legale Judicium Parium suorum,
vel per Legem Terrae; For if the Lords judge by either of these, they are well
enough: And Sir Ed. Coke shall determine the question, whom no man can suspect
of partiality for the House of Lords: He tells us in his 2. Inst. F. 51. That
Lex Terrae is Lex Angliae, not Voluntas Regis as the Commons said the Kings
Counsel would have it to be 3 Car. And less voluntas Dominorum; Fot it is not
in an arbitrary way the Lords proceed, but according to the Law of the Land; to
punish nothing but what the Law makes punishable, and Judge every thing
according to Right, secundum aequum et bonum. So then Per Legem Terrae is all
one with Per Legem Angliae, or secundum Legem et Consuetudinem Angliae, and
what ever is done secundum Legem Angliae is done Per Legem Terrae; And in his 1
Inst. l. 1. c. 1. Sect. 3. He tells us what Lex Angliae is, he says there are
diverse Laws within the Realm of England, and reckons them up, Lex et
Consuetudo Parliamenti is in the front of them; He names many more, the Civil
Law by which the Court of Constable and Marshall, and the Court of Admiralty
and Ecclesiastical Courts do act, the Law of War for the Court Martial to act
by, the Law of Merchants, the law of Stanneries, Particular Customs in several
places of the Kingdom, Statute Laws established by Authority of Parliament.
Whoever and whatever is tried by any of these Laws be it for life, Lands, or
goods, it (is still according to Magna Charta and though not Per Judicium
Parium, yet Per Legem Terrae. The Law and Custom of Parliament is one of
these, and the Lords now acting agreeably to that, act agreably to Magna
Charta, and that they have acted so, is I think sufficiently proved all ready,
and will be further hereafter, when we show you Presidents for it, from the
beginning of Parliaments.

So for the other Statutes of the 25 of E. 3. c. 4. and the 42. c. 3. They do
not at all concern the House of Peers, and were made only to prevent Vexation
by Petitions and false accusations before the King and his Privy Counsel, as
appears by the Preambles of those Statutes. Though the Gentlemen of the House
of Commons who managed the Conference were pleased to give them an other
Interpretation, and to say, that the Petitions and suggestions to the King or
his Counsel, which are condemned by those Statutes, are to be understood of
those brought to the King and House of Lords; But can it be rationally
believed, That the House of Peers of those times should themselves make so many
Laws, pass so many Acts of Parliament (five in the space of 17 years the 25 of
E. 3. c. 4. the 28 c. 3. the 37 c. 18. the 38 c. 9. the 42 c. 3. all of them
prohibiting that any man should be apprehended, imprisoned or disinherited upon
an accusation or suggestion to the King or his Counsel, and enjoining all
Proceedings, to be by Original Writ, or by Indictment, or by Presentment of
good and lawful People of the Neighborhood;) And they know themselves to be
intended by those Acts, and yet still should act contrary to them, judge and
determine so many Causes both Criminal and Civil, as they did from time to time.

Nay can it be believed, That the House of Commons in those days would bring
up Impeachments against men to have them tried at the Lords Bar, if they did
then conceive that those Acts of Parliament did forbid the Lords to meddle; For
though the Commons House are sometimes called the Grand Inquest of the Kingdom
to present the Grievances thereof, it is presumed they will not say, that their
Presentment is the Presentment intended by those Statutes; For the Presentment
mentioned there is the very description and true Character of your Country
Juries: The words of the Statute are; The Presentment of good and lawful people
of the same neighborhood, where such Deeds be done; And can any man think,
that this is to be understood of the House of Commons? No certainly; What then
is it that makes the Lords Proceedings upon the Impeachments of the Commons to
be Legal and not contrary to those Acts of Parliament; Since there is neither
Writ nor Indictment nor Presentment, and yet men are brought to trial condemned
and executed by their Judgments? but only this, that it is the Common Law of
the Land, being the Ancient, unquestioned, and undoubted Law and Usage of
Parliaments. And thereby is there a clear demonstration of the true meaning of
those Statutes, that it was the Regulation of the Kings Privy Counsel they
aimed at, and not of the House of Lords; that Counsel, of which Sir John Lee
was one in that 42 of E. 3. n. 23. who was tried and censured by that very
Parliament, in which that Act was made: One of the Articles against him was,
That being of the Kings Counsel, and Steward of his House be caused sundry men
to be attached and and brought before him, and made them answer singly to him,
as if it had been to the body of the Counsel; He was fined for it, and
committed to the Tower. The Lords John Nevil was likewise of this Counsel, and
for misbehaving himself in it, Judgment of Imprisonment, and loss of Lands,
goods, and Office was given upon him, 50 E. 3 n. 34. And in the same Parliament
n. 18. The Lord Latimer was accused for diverse miscarriages being a Counselor,
and for them he was by the Bishops and Lords committed to the keeping of the
Marshall of England; and adjudged to make Fine and Ransom at the Kings
pleasure, It is true he was enlarged presently by the Earl Marshall, one
Archbishop, three Bishops, the Prior of St. John, three Earls, fifteen Barons;
and thirteen Knights being his Manucaptors, but the Commons desired further,
that he might be no longer of the Kings Counsel which was granted;; And this
was not to put him out of the Lords House, for he continued still a Member
there, and had his Writ of Summons to come to the next Parliament in the 51th.
year of that King. There is nothing more clear, then that those Statutes are
all to be understood to mean the Privy Counsel; and so did the two Houses of
Parliament interpret them 3 Car. in their Petition of Right, where the
expression is, That against the tenor of those Statutes diverse were detained by
his Majesty's special command certified by the Lords of the Privy Counsel; and
one may bodly affirm that never any Statute, or Act of Parliament did term the
House of Lords the Kings Counsel.

So that Article of Magna Charta urged likewise at the Conference, Communia
Placita non sequantur nostram Curiam, concerns not them neither; It was to fix
the Court of Common Pleas, which (as all other Courts) was before that
Ambulatory, and followed the King where ever he was, if he was in the Kingdom;
and the Writs were made returnable Coram nobis ubicunque fuerimus, which was a
great Grievance to the subject, and cause of many discontinuances in suits; The
following words clear it, Sed teneantur in aliquo certo loco; Now the place of
the meeting of the Parliament was always certainly known, being expressed in
the Writ of Summons, which shows, it was not meant for them.

And whereas it was said, That in Cases of Freehold there is no Proceeding
without an Original Writ; Scarce any that walks Westminster Hall but knows the
contrary, and the Course of Proceeding to be so fart otherwise, as that not one
Trial for Land of forty comes on upon such a Writ; But by the delivery only of
a Declaration of Trespass and Ejectment, any man's Inheritance of never so much
value may be questioned, and brought to Trial if it shall continue his or no;
Nay, There is an Act of Parliament 18 El. c. 14. which provides expressly, That
after a verdict given, the want of an Original Writ shall be no Cause of Error
to be pleaded in Arrest of Judgment, but that Judgment and Execution shall
follow; So far is it from being true, that no Freehold can be judged without
an Original Writ. And feign would I ask, what Original Writ they use in
Chancery to sue men there for their Freehold? Is it any more, then for the
Complainant to put in his Petitionary Bill of Complaint, then take out a Writ
of Subpoena for the Defendant to come in and answer by such a day? just what
was heretofore used in the House of Lords, the Plaintiff put in his Petition,
and the House ordered a Writ of Summons to Issue out to call in the Defendant;
But in later times that House (as is usual for all Courts to alter their
Method of Proceeding, and find out some more compendious and easy way both for
themselves, and for Suitors) so have they instead of a Writ as formerly, (which
asked more time and charge to take out) made it now, that an Order of the House
shall be sufficient for that purpose, but they may return to their Writs of
Summons again when they please.

And as to Original Writs, ow unseasonable is it and ggainst all reason, to
make it now an Objection against the Judicature of the House of Peers, That the
Proceedings there not being upon those Writs, they ought not to meddle with
matters of Freehold, Since the Practice of the Law is now so changed, that even
Inferior Courts have left off the use of them: whereas heretofore, when all
other Courts were by the Law and the practice of those times tied to those
Forms, the House of Lords was not, but exercised still their Judicature in
their own Parliamentary way without Original Writs; yet no such exception was
then taken, but all their Judgments were still allowed of, approved and
obeyed, and punctually executed.

And the other Assertion does not operate much neither, viz. That it was never
heard of a Writ Returnable Coram Dominis Spiritualibus et Temporalibus. For if
it be meant of Original Writs, what does that signify, seeing they are not at
all necessary, no not used now for Commencing of suites even in
Westminster Hall, much less in Parliament, where the use has ever been
otherwise? And if meant of other Writs, it is a foul-mistake: For it has been
the Common practice of the House of Peers, especially in former times, upon any
Complaint made to them by Petition, to Order a Writ to Issue out with the
Petition annexed, or containing the matter of it, directed sometimes to the
party himself petitioned against, commanding him to appear, sometimes to the
Sheriff of the County, commanding him to summon the party, to appear before
them at a certain day, and the Writ withal to be then returned, so to enter
into the examination of the business, and afterward proceed to Judgment:
Ancient Presidents of this are sans nombre: 25 E. 1. m. 14. Upon Complaint of
the Archbishop of York, That the Advouson of the Rectory of Bridgeford was
detained from him by Boniface de Salucijs, a Writ reciting the matter
complained of is ordered to be sent unto him, requiring him to appear in
Parliament the morrow after St. Gregory the Pope at Carlisle, and show cause
Quare ad finalem expeditionem praedictorum negotiorum minime fuerit
procedendum, why the House should not proceed to a final dispatch of the
business; and be was enjoined to bring the Writ with him, habeas ibi tunc hoc
Breve is the Close of the Writ. The Printed Book of the Placita Parliamentaria
in Ed. 1. time, is full of Presidents of this Nature, and I have in this
discourse cited very many both out of that Book and other Records of Parliament
under the other Kings: I shall not therefore heap uy any number here, though it
were easy to do: I will only give a short account of one, which seems to me a
memorable one out of that Book of the Pacita Parliamentaria p. 1.57. the 21 of
E. 1. Magdulphus son of Malcolin Earl of Fife in Scotland complains in
Parliament to King Edward, That John King of Scotland had wrongfully
dispossessed him of certain Lands in Scotland called Reyes and Crey, Whereupon
King Edward directs his Writ to the Sheriff of Northumberland, commanding him
to go into Scotland, (taking persons with him to testify it) and there deliver
a Writ of Summons to the King of Scotland to appear before him such a day, ad
respondendum praedicto Magdulpho super praemissis et ad faciendum et
recipiendum ulterius, quod Justitia requireret: Which was by the Sheriff
performed at Striveling the morrow after St. Peter ad vincula, who made his
return accordingly to the Parliament: And the King of Scotland appeared at his
day, and was asked, if the Kings Writ had been delivered to him by the said
Sheriff, which he acknowledged, and said further Quod semper paratus est et
erit Brevia et mandata Regis ut Domini sui admittere: Then be was bid to
deliver in the Writ, and he said he had delivered it to his Chancellor, and the
Chancellor examined said he had it not there: But yet upon the Kings
acknowledgement that he had received such a Writ, his appearance was admitted,
and be was willed to Answer to the matter of complaint put in by Magdulphus.
His Answer was, That he was King of Scotland, and could not, without the
Counsel and Advice of the good men of his Kingdom, speak to any thing that
concerned it. This was judged by the Parliament to be Contempt us manifeslus et
Inobedientia expressa, and it was further Ordered that three of the Principal
Castles of Scotland should be seized into the Kings hands, and so remain
Quo-usque de contemptu et Inobedientia praedicta cidem Domino Regi
satisfecerit. But the King of Scotland came before the pronouncing of the
sentence Coram Rege et Consilio suo, et fecit Domino Regi quandam
Supplicationem ore suo proprio per verba subscripta, which words were these,
Sire Ieo suy vostre home du Royaulme d'Escoce, et vous pry que de ceo que vous
me avez mis adevant que touch les gents de mon Royalme aussy come a moy,
voillez mettre en soeffrance, jesques a taunt que ieo ay a eux parle, que ieo
ne sey suppris per defaute de Conseil, desicum les gens que cy sont oue moy ne
moy voillent ne osent conseiller sauns autre du Royaulme; et quand ieo me
averay a eux consaile, ieo vous respondray a vostre primer Parliament apres
Pasch le Conseil qil moy averont donnez, et fray envers vous ceque fere
deveray. Sir I am your liege man for the Kingdom of Scotland, and do pray,
that as to what you have proposed unto me, which concerns the People of my
Kingdom as well as my self, you will have patience till I can speak with them,
that I be not surprised for want of Counsel, seeing those who are here with me,
will not nor dare not give me their advice without the rest of the Kingdom:
And when I shall have advised with them, I shall give you for Answer at your
first Parliament after Easter that which they shall counsel me, and shall do
unto you that which I ought to do. This request of his did King Edward grant,
the Record says, Et Dominus Rex habito super hoc Consilio ad Rogatum
praedictum praedicti Regis Scotiae, et etiam ad Instantiam Procerum et Magnatum
de Consilio suo, et Gratia sua speciali, et similiter de Consensu praedicti
Magdulphi, concessit ipsi Regi Scotiae supplicationem suam, et diem ei dedit ad
Parliamentum suum post Pascha viz. in Crastino Sanctae Trinitatis etc, in
omnibus in eodem statu quo nunc, Idem dies datus est praefato Magdulpho. Et per
ipsum dominum Regem dictum est praefato Regi Scotiae, et injunctum, quod habeat
ad praefatum terminum praedicta Brevia, quae cognovit se recepisse ut supra
dictum est: He must not forget to bring the Writs with him.

1 R. 2. n. 29. A Scire facias is awarded against the Earl of March to appear
before the Lords at the next Parliament, and to abide further Order: And 2 R.
2. n. 33. the Sheriff of Shropshire makes his return, that the same Earl was
not found in his Bayliwick, it seems he was dead, for there was then an other
Scire facias ordered to warn his Son, who was then Earl, to be and Answer at
the next Parliament after.

13 R. 2. n. 12. Upon a complaint of the Bishop and Dean and Chapter of
Lincoln against the Mayor and Townsmen for some wrongs done them in Execution
of their Charter, by order of Parliament a Writ was directed to the Mayor and
Bailiffs of the Town, to appear at a certain day before the Lords, with
Authority from their commonalty, for abiding their Lordships determination;
they appear, but not coming with full Power, they are adjudged in Contempt. By
the same Parliament such a Writ is directed likewise to the Mayor and Bailiffs
of Cambridge upon (...) Petition and Complaint from the Vice Chancellor and
Scholars, and they run the like fortune, to be adjudged in Contempt for the
like cause. So then there are Writs made returnable in Parliament. And many
other examples may be given and some more will be given in this Discourse, and
Presidents cited upon other occasions where Writs have been Issued so
returnable; Which shall be observed as we go along: And these few shall in this
place suffice to disprove that Assertion; Nor indeed was there any thing said
on that side, that did not receive a full and satisfactory Answer.

For what was said of an Act of Parliament to give Skinner relief for his
Island, does in truth deserve no Answer, for it were ridiculous to think an Act
of Parliament, or any thing else but an Army, could put him into Possession of
his Island again; And it would be altogether useless unto him could he so
obtain it, his Plantation there being utterly destroyed, and all his goods
spoiled and lost both there and at Jamby, so as it would be impossible for him
to carry on his trade to any advantage; Therefore it is Reparation and
Satisfaction for his Damage, which he must have: And that is not the work of an
Act of Parliament, but of a Court of Judicature. That advice then is not to be
followed, and so we will leave it.

It now remains but to set forth the Presidents, which the Lords did on their
part allege, with some few more Ancient ones, which shall be added for the
Vindicating and Asserting of their Right unto this (never before controverted)
point of their Judicature, in all Cases of what nature soever, when some thing
extraordinary in those Cases did induce them to exercise it; Of which they were
the sole Judges, that being a Trust lodged in them by the very Frame and
constitution of the Government.

In the black Book in the Tower, which is Printed by the Name of Placita
Parliamentaria, 30 E 1. F. 231. is the Case of Sir William Paynell and
Margaret his Wife suing for Dower upon the Lands of John Cameys, who had been
Margarets former Husband, and whom she had left he yet living; And they now
desiring tobe tried by their Country upon the point of Adultery, and the Lords
not allowing of it; This has been at large expressed before, therefore I only
mention it now.

In the same Book p. 266.33. Ed. 1. The Case of Nicholas Segrave, who was tried
in Parliament for leaving the Kings Army then in Scotland, and goeing over into
France to fight with one John de Crumbwell upon a falling out between them,
they being together in the Kings Army: This was a case not tryable in
Westminster Hall, nor punishable in any ordinary Court of Justice by the
Common Law of England, yet the House of Lords could try him, and adjudge him
worthy of death: And one thing more is observable in that Record, That a Writ
is Issued to the Sheriff of the County to take four Knights with him and in
their presence to Summon Segrave, Quod esset Coram Domino Rege in proximo
Parliamento suo apud Westminster. ad audiendum voluntatem ipsius Regis, et ad
faciendum et recipiendum ulterius quod Curia Domini Regis consideraret in
Praemissis: So here is a Writ returnable in Parliament, and the Sheriff did
accordingly make his return, that he had Summoned and charged him, Quod esset
coram Domino Rege in isto Parliamento nunc juxta formam et Tenorem Mandati
praedicti etc. It was therefore a gross mistake to say That never any Writ was
made returnable in Parliament, as it was likewise one to say, That the House of
Peers could give no remedy, where there was not remedy at Law, this President
proving the Contrary to both.

21. Ed. 1. p. 135, 136, etc. The Archbishop of York is questioned in
Parliament for excommunicating the Bishop of Duresme: The ground of the
Excommunication was, For that the Bishop of Duresme had imprisoned two Persons
employed by the Arch Bishop to cite the Bishop to appear before him. The Arch
Bishop appeals, Et dicit quod de sententia a Canone lata, and per ipsum
declarata, in Curia Domini Regis non debet respondere. The House of Lords goes
on; The other side alleging, That the Bishop in his Temporal Capacity, as
Count Palatin, had committed those men, and it pertained to the King, and not
to the Archbishop, to take cognizance of the Imprisonment, if or no it was
lawful; The Judgment is, Videtur Domino Regi in pleno Parlamento, praedictis
Comitibus, Baronibus, etc. Quod praedictus Archiepiscopus quantum in ipso fuit,
nitebatur usurpare super Coronam and Dignitatem Regiam, etc. Propter quod per
Comites, Barons and Justiciarios and omnes alios de Consilio ipsius Domini
Regis unanimiter concordatum est, quod praedictus Archiepiscopus committatur
Prisonae pro Offensa and Transgressione praedictis. Et super hoc ante Judicium
pronunciatum, (licet unanimiter de Consilio praedict. Magnatum and aliorum
concordatum fuisset tenendum in hoc Casu and similiter in Casibus consimilibus
in perpetuum) praedictus Archiepiscopus Magnates and alios de Consilio ipsius
Domini Regis rogavit, quod pro eo Dominum Regem requirerent, ut ante
pronunciationem Judicii ipsum ad gratiam suam admitteret and voluntatem suam.
They interceded for him, and he made Fine to the King of 4000 Marks, and was
received to favor. They did not only give a Judgment in this particular Case,
(which being Contra Coronam and Dignitatem, was tryable in Westminster Hall)
but they declare it to be a Standing Rule for the Judging of all Cases of like
nature; which shows the absoluteness of that Power of Judicature, which is
lodged in that House.

It was said, That the Lords could not take a Cause to themselves per Saltum,
and before it had passed all the formalities below; That a Writ of Error did
not lie from the Common Pleas to the Lords House, but must first be brought to
the Kings Bench; And the Case of the Bishop of Norwich was urged, 50. Ed. 3.
And it is acknowledged, The Lords would not receive that Bishops Complaint, but
sent him away with that Answer, nor could they give him any other: For Writs of
Error have their Walk, and their gradual Proceeding chalked out, and settled by
several Statutes, and by the Common Law of the Land; But what does that
signify against the Judicature of the House of Peers? No man, says the Lords,
can either take Cognizance of Causes, or judge Causes against the Law of the
Land, and take them per saltum, when the Law prohibits it: But they do say and
affirm, That by all the Examples and Presidents of former times, it has been
the usage of that House to receive Complaints, and give remedy in all Cases,
where the Law has not expressly otherwise determined; and if there be any thing
in the Case which merits, or requires, and needs something above the ordinary
Power and Proceeding of the Inferior Courts of Justice, to administer that
Relief which is just and due. As in Cases of difficulty where a Court cannot,
or of delay where it will not proceed, the Lords, who have a general inspection
into the Administration of the Justice of the Kingdom, and into the Proceedings
of all other Courts, have ever, upon Application made to them, assumed to
themselves the Cognizance of such Causes. 14. Ed. 3. Sir John Stanton, and his
Wife, had passed a Fine of certain Lands to Thomas Cranthorn, who reverts them
back, and by that means settled them upon the Wife; Sir Jeffry Stanton, as next
Heir, brings his Formedon en le descender in the Common Pleas, where (after
some Proceedings) upon a Demurrer in Law, Sir Jeffry could not get the Judges
to proceed to Judgment; Upon which he Petitions the King in Parliament (which
no man will deny to have been in the House of Peers.) They examine the Matter;
And afterward order a Writ under the Great Seal containing the whole Matter to
be sent to the Judges there, willing them thereby, if the Matter so stood, to
proceed to Judgment without delay: They not doing it, an Alias is sent; And the
Judges doing nothing then neither, and Sir Jeffrey renewing his Petition; The
Lords commanded the Clerk of the Parliament, Sir Thomas de Drayton, to go to
Sir John Stoner, and the rest of the Judges of the Common Pleas, and to require
them, according to the Plea pleaded, to proceed to Judgment, or else to come
into the House with the whole Record, so as in Parliament Judgment might be
given for one or the other of the Parties. The Judges come at the day, and the
business was heard, and it was adjudged, That Sir Jeffrey should recover; And a
Writ under the Great Seal was sent to the Judges to give Judgment accordingly:
Here then the King in Parliament, (that is the House of Peers) upon a Petition,
assumes the Cognizance of a Cause, depending in the Court of Common Pleas;
which was so far from having passed all the formalities below (that is to say,
an Appeal to the Kings Bench and Chancery) that it was as yet undetermined in
the Common Pleas. Nor did it appear unto them upon what ground it was, that the
Judges gave not Judgment; So they might have answered Sir Jeffrey Stantons
Petition with saying, that they would first see what the Court would determine,
and what the Kings Bench afterward; But they apply themselves to give him
relief: And yet no Votes past against that House for so doing, as now has been
in the Case of Skinner against this.

So in the Parliament of 18. E. 1. p. 16. of the Placita Parlamentaria, William
de Wasthul complains of Matthew del Exchequer, for cosening him upon the
levying of a Fine before the Judges of the Common Pleas, by procuring an
Attorney to slip in other Lands unknown to Wasthul, and which be intended not
to pass in the Fine: This is returned back to those Judges, because the Fine
had been levied before them, Et dictum est iisdem Justiciariis, quod Recordum
istud in Rotulis suis faciant irrotulare, and tam super Recordo isto quam super
aliis ipsum Matthaeum coram eis contingentibus procedant ad Judicium and
debitum and festinum faciant Justitiae Complementum. True! the House of Lords
is not so bound up to forms, but that it may, when it thinks good, vary, and
retain a Cause at one time, which it will not do at any other time. Yet we see
they were proper Judges in this Cause, for they order Wasthulls Complaint, and
the Proceedings before them to be entered, as a Record in the Common Pleas, and
those Judges to proceed upon it, which, if they had not had Cognizance of the
Matter, had been all Coram non Judice, and could have signified nothing.

And I must observe one thing, which I think will not be denied, That all those
Placita Parlamentaria, whatever is said to be done Coram Rege in Parlamento, is
to be understood of the House of Peers, where the King was in those times
commonly present, and always understood to be there representatively; So as
his Name was ever mentioned in the Proceedings, even when his Person was
absent, being sometimes out of the Kingdom, sometimes detained away by
sickness, or other occasion; As 50. E. 3. n. 35. it is said, The King ordains,
That from thenceforth no Woman should for Maintenance pursue Matters in the
Kings Courts upon pain, etc. And then was the King sick at Eltham, and could
not come to Parliament, as appears by n. 42. and it was only the House of Peers
that made that Order. So in Judgments, though in Ancient Times they were mostly
entered as given by the King, yet it was the Lords House, which was Curia Regis,
that gave them.

For we must know the KING has a double Capacity of sitting in the House of
Peers, a Legislative Capacity, when he has in himself a Negative Voice to what
even both Houses have concluded and done, which signifies nothing without his
Assent, and his single Dissent makes it all null and void; This is in passing
Acts of Parliament, and making of Laws; The other is a Judicial Capacity, when
he will please to assist, and be present at the ordinary Transactions of the
House, as heretofore was usual; which alters not the Constitution of it as it
is a Court, gives it no more Power nor Jurisdiction then it had before, he
being then but in a manner as Chief Judge, and not doing any thing singly, but
according to the Plurality of Opinions; As when the Kings would in Person sit
in the Kings Bench, which they have in former times done, (where still all is
said to be done Coram Rege, though now he never come there) and in Our Memory
King James has set in the Star Chamber; I think no body will say the
StarChamber then, or Kings Bench before, did or could vary from their ordinary
Forms and Rules of Proceeding: No more can the House of Peers alter their
Proceedings, or assume greater Authority by reason of the Royal Presence, to
take Cognizance of other Causes, or do any thing, which by the Custom and
Usage of the House, and the Law of Parliament, it could not else have done: But
their Jurisdiction, and their way of exercising that Jurisdiction is still one
and the same. And therefore 26. H. 6. n. 52. When the King had given a Judgment
of himself, without the advice of the Lords, in the Case of William de la Pool
Duke of Suffolk, who stood impeached for Ireason, banishing him the Realm for
five years; The Lords entered their Protestation against it, as not done by
their Assent, and so no Act of the House. And 5. H. 4. n. II. The Earl of
Northumberland coming into the Parliament before the King and Lords, and by
Petition acknowledging to have done contrary to his Allegiance, in giving of
Liveries, and gathering of Power, for which he prayed pardon, in regard he
yielded himself, and came in to the King at York upon his Letters; And the King
delivering this Petition to the Justices to be considered, The Lords made their
Protestation, That the Judgment appertained only to them; And therefore as
Peers of Parliament, to whom such Judgment belonged, in weighing the Statutes
concerning Treasons, and concerning Liveries, they adjudged the Fact of the
said Earl to be no Treason nor Felony, but only a Trespass finable to the
King; Whereupon the King received him into Grace, and pardoned him his Fine.
All Power of Judicature in Parliament is then questionless in the House of
Lords, where the King always is Personally or Virtually, and the Judgment
proceeds from them by the Authority and in the Name of the King: For the Power
of Judicature in Parliament is lodged in them, together with the King, as is
declared 1. H. 4. n. 80. where it is said, That the Commons were only
Petitioners, and that all Judgments appertain to the King and the Lords, unless
it were in Statutes, Grants, Subsidies, and such like. This has ever been the
Practice, and Custom, and Law of Parliament, since there have been Parliaments,
and when this shall cease to be, the Ancient way of Free Parliaments will cease
likewise.

1. R. 2. n. 30. Sir John de Cobham shows, That by the delivery of a Ring of
Gold for seisin to Edward the third, he had settled the Reversion of several
Manors there named in the Crown, and now prays it may so remain according to
his Intention, diverse Lords are examined, the Judges Opinions are asked, who
declare it to be a good Livery and Seisin: And so it is settled.

N. 32. William Fitzhugh, a Goldfiner and Citizen of London, exhibits a Bill of
Complaint in the Name of the Co^monalty of that Mystery, against John
Chichester and John Bolsham of the same Mystery, for diverse Oppressions done by
them; The Lords send for them, examine them, they deny those Oppressions: And
Fitzhugh refusing then to avow his Bill, the Lords commit him to the Tower.

N. 35. Rober Hawley and John Shakell, are by the Lords sent to the Tower for
refusing to bring forth a Spanish Prisoner taken in Battle, whom they had in
their keeping, and others laid claim to.

N. 41. Alice Perrers (...) Pierce, who bad been much in favor with Ed. 3. is
questioned in the Lords House, Sir Richard Scroope Lord Steward of the Household
managing the Trial, for that contrary to an Order made by the King and Lords,
50. Ed. 3. n. 35. That no Woman, and she by Name, should pursue any Matters by
way of Maintenance, upon Pain of perpetual Banishment, and loss of the whole
Estate; She notwithstanding had persuaded King Edward to countermand Sir
Nicholas Dagworth from going into Ireland, when he had been ordained by the
Council to go thither for urgent business, which would have been profitable for
the King and the Realm: And an other Charge against her was, for persuading the
King to pardon Richard Lions, who had been Farmer of the Customs, and for
abuses and extortions had been censured in Parliament to forfeit his Estate,
and be committed to Prison; she got all to be remitted, and his Estate to be
restored unto him, even that part of it which the King had given to two of his
own Sons for their lives. The hearing of this Cause took up several days; Many
that had been Counselors and Officers to the late King were examined as
Witnesses. At last she is found guilty, and Judgment of Banishment and loss of
Estate given upon her.

3. R. 2. n. 24. The Case of the Earl of Pembrock, and William le Zouch,
complaining of Thomas Roos for sueing them concerning Lands in Yorkshire, and
endeavoring to get a Trial in the Country, (the Record is, Desitant D'estre
a Lissue du pays trop suspecieusement, his desiring it being suspicious) so
they pray, Que Ils partels Malueis Compassements and Procurements en pais ne
soient desheritez. That they may not loose their Inheritance by such wicked
practices and procurements; The Lords upon this retain the Cause, appoint some
Persons to examine and report it: But this President has been cited before at
large, so I do but touch it here.

N. 22. Sir Philip Darcy complains, That the Prior of St. John's of Jerusalem
sues him in Chancery for the Manors of Temple-hurst and Templenewsom, which
Ed. 3. had granted to John Darcy his Father, and produces a Deed showing that
the Priors Predecessor had passed the Fee of them to Ed. 2. The Lords order
that Deed to be sent to the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer, to examine
the Kings Title, and in the mean time stop Proceedings in Chancery. This is
more then taking Cognizance of a Matter Originally, for they take it out of one
Court, where it depended and was undetermined, and send it to be examined in an
other Court, which shows the Ascendant they had upon all other Courts.

4. R. 2. n. 17. Sir Ralph de Ferriers had been seized by the Duke of Lancaster
upon the Marches of Scotland upon suspicion of Treason, for holding
Intelligence with the French the Kings Enemies, upon some Letters of his to
several French Lords found and taken up by a Beggar. He was brought into
Parliament before the Lords, and put to his Answer. He first desired Counsel,
then offered the Combat against any that would acouse him, both were denied
him. Then he applied himself to his Answer; And after several days hearing,
the Lords still remanding him to Prison, he so well defended himself, That the
Lords suspected the Letters to be forged, and therefore committed the Beggar,
and bayled Sir Ralph, delivering him to his Manucaptors.

5. R. 2. n. 45. The Chancellor and University of Cambridg, Petition against
the Major Bailiff and Commonalty of the Town, for breaking up their Treasury,
burning their Charter, and by force compelling them to make Releases of some
Actions they had brought against the Town, and enter into Bonds to them for
great Sums. The Lords direct a Writ to issue out to the Mayor and Bailiffs to
appear in Person, and the Commonalty by Attorney. They appear, The Chancellor
exhibits Articles against them. They being asked why their Liberties should not
be seized, plead to the Jurisdiction, that the Court ought not to have
cognizance of them: They are told, Judgment should be given, if they would not
answer: Then they answer, and the business is heard. The Townsmen are ordered
to deliver up those Deeds forced from the University, which are presently
cancelled: The Town Liberties are seized into the Kings hands, and part of them
granted to the University: Some are granted back to the Town, for which they
were to pay an increase of Rent. Note, here is a Plea to the Jurisdiction, and
that Plea Overruled.

8. R. 2. n. 12. The Earl of Oxford complains of Walter Sibell of London for a
Slander, in having to the Duke of Lancaster and other Noblemen accused him of
Maintenance. The Lords hear the business, Commit Sibell to Prison, and give 500
Marks damages to the Earl.

9. R. 2. n. 13. The Case of the Duke of Lancaster complaining, That Sir John
Stanley had entered upon the Manor of Latham which held of him, and had not
sued out his Livery in his Court of Chancery. The Lords order him to sue out
his Livery. But this has been already mentioned.

15. R. 2. n. 16. The Prior of Holland in Lancashire complains of a Riot
committed by Henry Trebble, John Greenbow and others, and of an Entry made by
them into the Parsonage of Whit wick in Leicestershire. John Ellingham the
Sergeant at Arms is sent for them, who brings them into the Parliament: The
Lords commit them to the Fleet.

N. 17. The Abbot of St. Oseches complains of John Rokell for Embracery. This
Case has been already cited.

N. 18. Sir William Bryan had procured a Bull directed to the two Archbishops,
to excommunicate some that had broken up his House and carried away Writings.
This was read in Parliament, and adjudged to be prejudicial to the King, and to
be in Derogation of the Laws; for which he is committed to the Tower.

N. 20. Thomas Harding accuses Sir John Sutton and Sir Richard Sutton, and
lays to their charge, that by their Conspiracy he had been kept Prisoner in
the Fleet: Upon hearing of both Parties, for that the two Knights were known to
be men of good Fame, The Lords adjudge him to the Fleet.

N. 21. John Shad well complains against the Archbishop of Canterbury for
excommunicating him and his Neighbors wrongfully, for a Temporal Cause
appertaining to the Crown and to the Laws of the Land: The Lords hear the
business, find the Suggestions untrue, and commit him to the Fleet.

1 H. 4. n. 93. Sir William Richill one of the Justices of the Common Pleas
(who by express Order of Ri. 2. went to Calais and took the Examination and
Confession of the Duke of Gloucester, after murdered by Hall) was brought a
Prisoner into the Lords House, the King present, and by Sir Walter Clopton
Chief Justice apposed: And answered so fully, showing his sincere dealing, that
the Lords one by one declared him innocent: And Sir Walter Clopton pronounced
him such.

4 H. 4. n. 21. The Case of Pontingdon and Sir Philip Courtney, where the Lords
direct the Trial, appointing what the Issue shall be; and what kind of Jury
shall be impannelled to prevent Sir Philip 's practices in the Country: It has
been cited before at large.

1. E. 4. m. 6. n. 16. The Tenants of the Manor of East-Maine belonging to the
Bishop of Winchester, the King being in his Progress in Hampshire in the
Summertime, complained to him of their Bishop for raising new Customs among
them, and not suffering them to enjoy their Old ones: The King bids them come
to Parliament in Winter, and they should be relieved: They come, and the King
recommends their business to the Lords: They commit it to certain Justices to
examine, Upon their Report, and upon mature Deliberation, it was adjudged, That
the Tenants were in fault, That they complained without cause, and they were
ordered to continue their said Customs and Services. Here observe, there was
the recommendation of the King in the Case, just as now in Skinners, and this
difference, that a question of Custom betwixt Lord and Tenants was properly
determinable by the Common Law, and a Jury of the Visenage, and this of a
Trespass in the Indies, to be punished in Parliament, or no where: which
justifies the Proceedings there.

43. Eliz. the 18th of December, A Complaint was made to the Lords by the
Company of Painters against the Company of Plaisterers, for wrong done them in
using some part of their Trade. Their Lordships referred it to the Lord Mayor
and Recorder of London, to be heard, examined, adjudged, and ordered by them:
Which was all one as if they had done it themselves: For it was done by their
Authority and by their Order: Qui facit per alium, facit perse.

18. Jac. The Lords took notice of the Proceeding of the House of Commons in
the Case of one Flood, whom they had convented before them for insolent and
scandalous words spoken by him against the Prince and Princess Palatine,
examined Witnesses, and given Judgment in the Cause; which they looked upon as
deeply trenching upon the Privileges of their House, all Judgments properly
and solely belonging to them. Thereupon they sent a Message to the House of
Commons and desired a Conference; At which Conference the Commons confessed,
That out of their Zeal they had censured Flood; But they left him now to their
Lordships, and hoped their Lordships would censure him; In order to which they
sent up a Trunk of Writings concerning his Case: Then the Lords proceeded to
the hearing of it, examined several Witnesses, and heard all Flood could say
for himself; which done, they adjudged him, Not to bear longer the Arms of a
Gentleman, To ride with his face to the Horse tail, to stand upon the Pillory
with his Ears nailed, to be whipped at a Carts tail, to be fined Five thousand
pounds, and to be imprisoned in Newgate during life.

21. Jac. Thomas Morley was convented before the Lords, for delivering a
Scandalous Petition to the House of Commons (as himself affirmed) against the
Lord Keeper Coventry. Upon examination it appeared, that it had not been
presented to the House of Commons, only to their Committee of Grievances, and
that he had published very many Copies of it, even since his being convented
before their Lordships, They adjudge him to be imprisoned in the Fleet, to pay
1000 l Fine, to stand with his neck in the Pillory, to make his Submission and
Acknowledgment at the Bar.

22 Jac. Mary Brocas petitioned the Lords to be relieved for a Debt of 1000 l
due unto her by Bond from the Muscovia Company. Upon hearing both sides, their
Lordships order the Company to pay the Debt, with 5 l per cent. Interest, out
of the Leviations, which the said Company had made among themselves for the
payment of their Debts.

The same Parliament, May 28. Thomas Pynckney petitions the House in the behalf
of himself and other Creditors of Sir John Kennedy, to be relieved for Debts
owing to them from Sir John, by the sale of Barn-Elms, Lands in the possession
of his Heir John Kennedy. The Lords, upon examination of the business, find
cause, and so they order it, That Barn Elms should be sold to the best value,
and the Profits to be sequestered in the mean time into indifferent hands; And
that a Recognizance of 2000 l in which Pinckney stood bound in Chancery should
be withdrawn and cancelled.

The same Parliament again, Grizell Rogers Widow, petitions the Lords for the
settling her Title to certain Lands in Heygrove in the County of Somerset, and
for quieting and ending diverse Suits and Differences between her and Sir Arthur
Ingram, Sir William Whitmore, etc. They order her Satisfaction out of
particular Lands, And all Suits to cease between them, And appointed Releases
of all differences on both sides to be drawn and sealed.

4. Car. 31. Jan. The Lords Committees for Petitions make report to the House
of a Petition of Benjamin Crokey against John Smith, in behalf of a
Grammar School at Wotton-Underedge in the County of Gloucester, which School was
endowed with great Possessions by the Widow of the Lord Berkly in Richard the
2ds time, which were now much abated and brought to an undervalue by the
cunning practices of the said Smith. Upon which the Lords awarded a Commission
to issue out of the Chancery, to survey all the said Lands; And ordered also a
special Habeas Corpus to be directed to the Warden of the Fleet (where Crokey
was a Prisoner) to bring the Body of the said Crokey before the Lord Keeper, to
the intent he might attend the said Commission; And ordered further, That if
Crokey did make it appear the value of the Lands to be so as be said, and that
to be approved by the Lords Committees for Petitions, then Smith to repay to
the said Crokey such Charges as he shall disburse in the Prosecution.

In the Parliament of 1640, December. 16. Upon report from the Lords Committees
for Petitions, That Mistress James complained against Sir Edmond Sawyer for
sheltring himself under a Royal Protection which he had procured, by which
means she could not sue him upon a Bond of 500 l for so much Money borrowed of
her, and two years Interest, and so was debarred from helping her self by any
Legal course; The Lords ordered, that the said Mris James should proceed
against the said Sir Edmond Sawyer for the recovering of her Debt in any Court,
where she thought best, notwithstanding his Protection.

December 21. The Lords Committees report a Petition of Katherine Hadley,
complaining that she had been kept a long time a Prisoner in the Common-Gaol in
the Old Bridewell, without any cause shown; the Lords ordered her Release.

The 22th of December. Upon a Report from the Lords Committees of Sir Robert
Howard's Case, complaining, that he had been committed Close-Prisoner to the
Fleet by the High -- Commission Court, and kept there three months, till he was
fain for his enlargement to enter into several Bonds with Sureties in the sum
of 3500 l For which he desired Reparations, and his Bonds to be cancelled; The
parties interessed were summoned and heard. And after due consideration, the
Lords ordered a thousand pound damages to Sir Robert Howard, of which 500 l to
be paid by the Archbishop of Canterbury, 250 l by Sir Hen. Martin, and 250 l by
Sir John Lamb, the Bonds to be forthwith cancelled, and delivered to Sir
Robert Howard.

The 23d of December. They reported the Case of William Dudley, that he having
arrested the Lord Wentworth ( son to the Earl of Cleveland) for a Debt of 400 l
entered a Caution in Mr. Justice Bartley's Chamber for good Bayl to be taken,
yet Justice Bartley had released the said Lo. Wentworth upon such Bayl, as the
said Dudley was utterly disabled to recover his debt. Justice Bartley being
called, made no good Answer thereunto. The Lords thereupon order, that the said
Justice Bertley should forthwith assure unto the said Dudley his House and Land
near Barnet, for securing the said Debt with Interest and Damages.

The same day they report likewise the Case of Mris Mary Stanhope Widow,
Daughter-in-law to the Earl of Chesterfield, complaining, that the said Earl
refused to assure unto her 40 l per Annum during her Widowhood, according to a
former Agreement made between them, which appeared to be true by a Letter
produced under the Earl's hand; And his counsel being heard, and no good cause
shown, why the Petitioner should not be relieved: The Lords ordered the Earl of
Chesterfield forthwith to assure to the said Mris Mary Stanhope, his
Daughter-in-law, 40 l per Annum during her Widdowhood, and to pay unto her such
money as was in arrear of the 40 l per Annum due to her for the space of two
years.

The 30th of December, the Lords Committees for examining Abuses in Courts of
Justice, report the Complain^ of John Turner, a Prisoner in the Gatehouse
committed thither by the High Commission Court, where he had lain fourteen
years, for refusing to take the Oath Ex Officio: The Lords ordered him to be
forthwith released.

The 21th of January, the Committee for Petitions, report the Complaint of
William Waters and Thomas Waters, How they had suffered much by an untrue and
false Certificate, made by Dr. Clerk and Dr. Sibthorp unto the Counsel-Table,
for their refusing to pay Ship Money; whereby they were forced to pay the sum
of 34 l for Fees: Upon which Dr. Clerk and Dr. Sibthorp were heard at large:
The Lords ordered them to pay back the 34 l to the Complainants, which they had
paid for Fees, and 100 l Damages; And to be turned out of the Commission of the
Peace.

The 22th of January, the Committee for Courts of Justice reported the
Complaint of the Lady Frances Weld Widdown, against the Archbishop of
Canterbury and Mr. Dell, suggesting, That she had been much prejudiced by them
in the recovering of a Debt of 1300 l due to her upon Bond from Mr. Child: Upon
hearing of all Parties, the Lords find the Archbp. and Mr. Dell free from
blame, and order them to be discharged concerning that business.

The 5th of February, the Committee reports the Complaint of Jeremy Powel, That
the Bishop of Hereford had admitted a Clerk to the Vicarage of Burknill in
Shropshire, though the said Powel in the Right of himself and of Mary his Wife,
had caused a Ne Admittas to be directed to the Bishop. The Lords upon bearing
the business, found, that the Bishop had done contrary to Law, and thereupon
ordered him to pay unto Powel, by way of Damages, the sum of 30 l And the said
Powel, as Patron, to be left in the same condition for trial of his Right, as
he was before the Bishop had put a stop to his business.

The 9th of Febr. the Committee for Courts of Justice reports the Case of
Nicholas Bloxam, That Andrew Sandeland Clerk had procured a Sentence against
him in the High Commission Court, by virtue whereof the said Sandeland had
violently gained from him the possession of the Rectory of Great Waldingfield
in the County of Suffolk. The Lords judging this proceeding of the
High Commission to be most injurious and contrary to Law, ordered, That the
Cause should be left to a trial at Law at the next Assizes for that County;
That Sandeland should appear gratis, and plead, Not guilty, that so the Cause
might come to a final Determination that Assizes.

The same day the same Committee report, That John Radway, William Newark, and
Walter Cootes were presented Ex officio mero in the Ecclesiastical Court of
Gloucester, and afterward Excommunicated for going to Church out of their own
Parish, and upon pretense of a Significavit which was imperfect, were arrested
and cast into Prison, where they continued Eleven days, whereas there was no
Writ justly taken out. The Lords Ordered that Dr. Baber Chancellor of Gloucester
should pay to those three persons 40 l for Damages, and the Undersheriffs
Deputy Richard Byford 20. l upon the account of the Arrest.

The 23d of Febr. the same Committee report, That Abraham Hill, a poor aged
man, was committed to Prison in the year 1636, by Robert Buxton then Mayor of
Colchester, by verbal command only, without any Warrant, or Cause showed, and
continued a Prisoner sixteen weeks, to his utter undoing: The Lords Ordered,
that the said Buxton should pay unto him 16 l by way of damages.

The 5th of March, the Committee for Petitions inform the House, that Complaint
had been made before them, That Nicholas Haws Gent. an ancient man, had not yet
sued out his Livery in the Court of wards, the Lords order him to do it without
delay.

The 11th of March, the Committee for Petitions gives account to the House,
that according to their Lordships direction, there had been a Trial at the last
Assizes for Suffolk, between Bloxam and Sandeland, and that the Verdict had
passed for Bloxam; whereupon the Lords Order, That Bloxam should discharge the
Cure as Lawful Incumbent. And that Sandeland should deliver unto him the quiet
Possession of it. It is worthy Observation, That the Lords, after they had
referred the Decision of the Title for Matter of Fact, as to the forcible Entry
to the Common Law, remained still Judges of the Cause, and their Judgment
settled the Possession.

The second of April, 1641. The Committee Reports, That Lambert Osbolstone
Clerk, had complained of a Sentence in the Star Chamber, by which he was
degraded, and deprived of all his Spiritual Livings and Preferments, being a
Prebend of Westminster, and Parson of Whethamsted, Fined in 5000 l to the King,
and adjudged to pay the like Sum for damages to the Arch bishop of Canterbury,
and to be Imprisoned; The Lords Order, That be shall be freed and discharged of
his Fine, Damages and Imprisonment, and be restored to his Prebendary and
Parsonage.

The sixth of April, 41. The Committee Reports, That the Lady Dyer had made her
Complaint, That, primo Caroli, she had lent Sir Richard Tichburn 400 l upon
Bond, and sued it to a Judgment, but Sir Robert Pie, Mr. Button, and others
had extended all the Lands liable to that Judgment at a far undervalue, to
deprive her of all the benefit of it: The Lords Order, That Counsel of both
sides should agree to draw up Assurances for settling the payment of all the
Parties upon the Judgment and Extent, to be all Signed and Sealed by them, and
that the Lady Dyer should be first satisfied, and enjoy the Lands till then.
One thing by the way is to be noted, That Sir Robert Pie was then a Member of
the House of Commons.

The twelfth of April, 41. The Committee Reports a Complaint of Dr. Walker,
That Sir John Lamb had unjustly taken from him his Offices of Commissary of
Leicester, and of Official to the Archdeaconry there, which he enjoyed by
Patent for life; That now Sir John Lamb took the Profits of them to himself,
And had forced him by many Menaces and Oppressions to release all Suits and
Actions to his utter ruin and undoing, and to his Loss and Damage of above
1500 l The Lords Order, That Sir John Lamb should pay unto the said Dr. Walker,
by way of Damages, the sum of 1500 l to be levied upon his Lands and Chattels,
should be brought to the Bar as a Delinquent, and there receive a Reprebension.

The twelfth of June, 41. The Committee Reports a Complaint of Edward Bagshaw,
his Brother Henry, and Sisters Mary and Margaret, against their Brother Thomas,
concerning Portions and Annuities given them by their Fathers Will: That all
parties have been heard, and their Witnesses. Upon hearing the State of the
Matter, The Lords Order Thomas to put in Security within four days for the
payment of the Portions according to the Will; And to give security by Land for
the paying of an Annuity of 20 l per annum to Edward for term of his life; That
then the said Edward shall release by a Fine to the said Thomas, all his
Estate, Right, Title and Interest in the Lands and Goods of his Father
deceased: And that a Statute of 1600 l entered into by the said Thomas Bagshaw
to John Gell, Esquire shall be discharged and made void; And that Thomas Bagshaw
shall make a Release to the said Edward of all Debts and Demands.

The sixteenth of June, 41. The Lord Audley Complains by Petition, That the
Lord Cottington kept from him the Manor of Fonthill, and prayed Relief
therein: Upon hearing Counsel on both sides, the Lords dismissed the Petition.

The twenty third of June, 41. The Committee for Petitions, Reports, That
Mistress Walter had preferred a Petition setting forth, That William Walter her
Husband will not permit her to cohabit and dwell with him, nor allow to her and
three Children any thing for their support. The Lords Order her to repair to
her Husband, and offer to live with him, and if he shall refuse to admit her,
that then he shall allow her 60 l per annum, for her Maintenance.

The 21 th of July 41. A Petition was exhibited before the Lords by sundry
Officers and Clerks of the Court of Common Pleas, showing, That the disposing
of the Offices of Protonotaries, Phitizers, Exigenters, and other Offices of
the said Court, had time out of mind belonged to the Chief Justice of that
Court for the time being, but several Grants and Patents had been obtained from
his Majesty for the disposing of the said Offices, and therefore they prayed,
That all those Grants, and Letters Patents might be recalled, The Lords heard
Counsel upon it, and after mature deliberation declared, That the said Offices
do of Right belong to the disposition of the Lord Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas, And the Grants formerly made by Letters Patents of the said Offices to
be Illegal, and void, And Ordered the said Patents to be brought into the House.

There is likewise in the Journal Book of that Parliament, mention made of a
Petition of one Thomas Smithick, preferred the tenth of June, 1641. Complaining
of wrongs sustained from the East India Company, and likewise of a Petition
from the East India Company, full of Respect and Submission to the House of
Lords, and praying a longer day (then it seems was appointed) for hearing the
Merits of the Cause, which the Lords granted, and Ordered all such Books,
Certificates, and Writings as were in the Custody of the Company concerning
that business, should be produced, and Smithick to peruse and take Copies of
them. What was more done upon this Petition of Smithicks, appears not by the
Journal Book, probable they compounded the business among themselves. But
however it is observable the different Spirits of the East India Company then
and of this now, The Modesty of that, and the Carriage of this so far
differing. In those times no question was made of the Power of the Lords in
point of their Judicature, nor no Complaint against their practice of it. Yet
we see the frequency of it, in Causes of all Natures, Criminal, Civil, Mixed,
between King and Subject, between Subject and Subject; no Protection, no
Privilege did exempt any body from their Jurisdiction.

The Lords at the Conference (as they said to the Gentlemen of the House of
Commons) were the more Copious in the enumeration of these later Presidents,
especially those of 1640, and 1641. not that they thought themselves at all to
stand in need of them, the ancient ones before produced showing the usage all
along from the very first and best times, which in their Lordships Opinions
were of much more weight, and sufficiently convincing, but the House of Commons
having a little before at an other Conference delivered it for a Maxim, That
the later Presidents were best, and having accordingly insisted upon one single
President of the same Parlialiament of 1640. to Oblidge the House of Lords to
commit a person upon a general Impeachment of Treason, without special Matter
shown, and opposing that one President to what their Lordships alleged to the
contrary, and made appear to have been the usage of all former times; no Record
being, of any Man ever sent to Prison by the House of Peers without a
particular Crime expressed in the Impeachment of some Act done by him, before
the Earl of Strafford, which was the President stood upon. This made the Lords
heap up so many Examples of the Proceedings of their House in that Parliament
of 1640. in the point of Judicature, to use it, as Argumentum ad heminem, and
what the House of Commons could no ways except against, themselves having
declared it to be of greatest Authority.

Until Henry the Eights time, the very House of Commons was to be beholding to
the House of Lords for their Administration of Justice even concerning their
Members; as the only Judges and Conservators of their Liberties and
Privileges. Themselves could not before that have punished any one, that had
never so much offended them: So far were they from exercising a Power of
Commitment, or of inflicting any punishment for Crimes at large and against the
Laws of the Land, where neither the Offense nor the Offender had particular
relation to their House, as in these later times has been often practiced by
them. But (as I say) the first time that ever they punished any, (and it was
for breach of Privilege) was in the Parliament 34 H. 8. in the Case of George
Ferrers, Burgess for Plymouth, who was arrested and put in the Counter; The
House informed of it, sent their Sergeant to demand their Member (not so much
as to summon Sheriff, or Bailiff that made the Arrest, or Party at whose suit
it was made, and less to bring any of them as Delinquents to the Bar, as now a
days) nor could they obtain that; But their Sergeant coming to the Counter,
found resistance, the top of his Mace was broken off, his Man knocked down, and
he glad to get off without the Prisoner; So back he comes to the House yet
sitting, and makes his Complaint; They presently all rise with their Speaker,
come up to the House of Lords, and the Speaker makes the Complaint to Sir
Thomas Audley Lord Chancellor sitting on the Wooll-sack. The Lords judge the
Contempt to be very great, and refer the punishment of it to the Order of the
House of Commons. Then indeed they return to their House, and send for the
Sheriff of London, the Clerks of the Counter, all the Officers there that had a
part in the fray with their Sergeant, one White at whose Suit Ferrers was
Arrested, and the Bailiffs that did Arrest him, all to appear personally before
them at eight of the Clock next Morning; and when they came, they sent some of
them to the Tower, some to Newgate, where they continued till they were
delivered at the suite of the Lord Major.

We do not find that before this the House of Commons committed any body, no
not for the Breach of their Privileges: nor were themselves so much as Judges
of the Elections of their Members, but were fain to come up to the Lords, and
pray their aid to redress what was amiss, and punish those that had offended:
All the Presidents show it so to have been, and not one, no not one to the
contrary.

5. H. 4. n. 74. The Commons Petition, That all such Persons as shall Arrest
any Knight or Burgess of the Commons, or any of their Servants, and know them
so to be, do Fine at the Kings Will, and render treble Damages to the Party
grieved. The Answer is, There is sufficient remedy for the Cause; Which remedy
it seems was, That the King and Lords would set them at Liberty, which was as
they conceived sufficient. For,

8. H. 6. n. 57. Among the Petitions of the Commons, one is, That William Lake
Servant to William Mildred Burges for London, was Arrested and carried to the
Fleet upon an Execution, and they pray he may be delivered according to the
Privilege of their House, It is granted, but withal, Authority is given to the
Chancellor, to commissionate Persons to apprehend him again after the
Parliament.

39. H. 6. n. 9. The Commons complain by Petition to the King and Lords, That
Walter Clerck one of their Members, Burgess for Chippenham in Wilts, had been
Outlawed, and put in Prison, and pray, That by the Assent of the King and Lords
he may be released; Which was granted, and their Member set at Liberty.

14. E. 4. n. 55. The Commons among their Petitions bring up one of a Member of
theirs William Hide Burgess likewise for Chippenham, being taken in Exeoution
for Debt, and a Prisoner in the Kings Bench, praying he may be delivered by a
Writ of Privilege out of the Chancery, the which is granted, with this saving,
That bis Creditors may renew their Execution after the Parliament.

17. E. 4. n. 36. At the Petition also of the Commons, the King with the Assent
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal grants, That John at Will Burgess for
Exceter condemned in the Exchequer during the Parliament upon eight several
Informations, at the Suit of John Tailor of the same Town, shall have as many
Supersedeas therefore as he will, until his coming home after the Parliament.

One memorable Case of this Nature must not be omitted, which happened 31. H. 6.
n. 25, 26. and c. Thomas Thorp Chief Baron was Speaker of the House of Commons,
and in an Interval of Parliament) the Parliament being upon a Prorogation,) he
had been Arrested, and carried to Prison at the Duke of York' s Suit, who had
got a Judgment against him in the Exchequer upon an Action of Trespass, for
carrying away the Dukes Goods from Durham-House; The Parliament meeting, the
House of Commons send up some of their Members to make Complaint to the King
and Lords, That their Speaker was a Prisoner, and desire his Release. The Duke
of York gives the Lords an account of the business. They ask the Judges Opinion
in the Point; The Judges Answer was in these words, It has not been used
before time, nor becomes it us, to determine matters concerning the High Court
of Parliament, which is so high and mighty in its Nature, that it is Judge of
the Law, and makes that to be Law, which is not Law, and that to be no Law,
which is; And the Determination of its Privileges belongs to the Lords in
Parliament, and not to Justices: But to declare the Use in Lower Courts, they
said, That as Writs of Supersedens of Privilege of Parliament were brought
unto them concerning any particular Member of Parliament, who had been
Arrested, so it were not for Treason, Felony, Surety of the Peace, or for a
Condemnation before Parliament, they did always release him, that be might
freely attend the Parliament: After which Answer made, It was by the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal agreed, assented and concluded, That the said Thorp
should remain in Prison notwithstanding his being Speaker of the House of
Commons, or any other Privilege of Parliament. And they Ordered the same to be
declared unto them, that were come from the Commons by Walter Moyle a Sergeant
at Law, because it was Matter of Law; but in the presence of the Bishop of Ely,
and many other Lords; And then the Bishop of Ely was to charge them in the
Kings Name to choose an other Speaker: This was accordingly performed: And the
House of Commons did choose an other Speaker (Sir Thomas Charleton) in the place
of Thomas Thorp, and sent some Members to acquaint the Lords with it; and the
Lord Chancellor answered, The King likes him well; It is to be noted, That the
King lay then sick at Windsor, and yet all is done in the Kings Name, as if he
had been present.

These Presidents show, That the House of Commons did not in those times
exercise any Jurisdiction, nor themselves lay any punishment upon those that
broke their Privileges, and that the Sheriffs and Bailiffs of London in that
Parliament of 34. H. 8. were the first, who felt any effects of their Justice
in that kind. Nor after that, did they constantly put that Power in Execution,
and for some time it seems they absolutely waved it; For the very next year,
the 35th of H. 8. One Trewinnard a Burgess for Cornwall had been imprisoned at
the suite of one Skewis, and was delivered only by a Writ of Privilege, (But
Skewis not sent for by the Sergeant at Arms to be committed and punished by the
House, as the use is now) So far from that, That the Executors of Skewis in the
Trinity term of the 36th of H. 8. brought their Action of Debt against Chamond
the Sheriff of Cornwall for the Escape, but were cast in their Suit, and the
Privilege allowed, as Dyer mentions it in his Reports, p. 59. And in the 18th
of Queen Elizabeth, a Servant of one Mr. Hall a Member of the House being
Arrested upon Complaint made to the House, it was referred to a Committee to
consider of the Business, and how he should be released, who made their Report,
That it could be only by a Writ of Privilege, as appears by the Journal of
that Parliament.

And there is some reason to believe, That they never or very rarely sent for
by their Sergeant, or meddled with the Persons of such as broke their
Privileges by arresting or misusing their Servants and Attendants, till 43.
Eliz. For I find in a Journal of that Parliament (which I have by me) That a
Complaint being made to the House, How a Servant of one Mr. Cook, a Member of
the House, was arrested, that President was urged of the 34th of H. 8. And it
was said, that the House had committed the Sheriffs of London and the Bailiffs,
for abusing their Sergeant, and for arresting of Ferrers: Whereupon it was then
resolved and ordered, That the Sergeant attending the House should go to
Newgate, and bring away both the Prisoner and his Keeper; and likewise command
the Bailiff who made the Arrest, and the Person at whose suit it was made, to
appear before the House. This was done, the Prisoner discharged, and the
Bailiff, and he who procured the Arrest, brought to the Bar, and upon their
humble sumbmission pardoned, with a check from the Speaker, and paying their
Fees. Three Presidents only there are, which Sir Edward Cook produces, of
their exercising a Judicature, two of them upon their own Members for
Miscarriages, and the third upon one no Member for striking a Member, this
primo Mariae, the other 8. Eliz. and 23. But they did not constantly nor
frequently do that neither, that is, not judge and punish either their own
Members for any Offense, whether against the House or out of the House, or any
other for arresting or assaulting them, till after Queen Elizabeth's time. For
in the 27th of her Reign, as appears by the Journal of that Parliament, A
Member of the House having been served with a Sub-poena, the House sent to the
Lord Keeper, and signified unto him, That it was against their Privilege. The
Lord Keeper returned answer, That he should not submit to any Opinion of the
House concerning their Privileges, except those Privileges were allowed in
Chancery, and would not recall the Sub-poena.

So in Matters of Elections, they were glad to pray the aid of the House of
Peers upon any Miscarriage or Neglect of the Sheriffs; as in the 18th H. 6. n.
18. The Sheriff of Cambridgshire (Gilbert Hoar) had made no return of the
Knights for the County: upon Complaint made to the House of Peers, it was
Ordered, That he should go to a New Election, and make Proclamation, That no
Person should come armed thereunto.

Any of the Members to be dispensed of their Attendance in the House, come to
the King and Lords for it. So did Sir Philip Courtney Knight for Devonshire 16.
R. 2. n. 6. who being accused of some heinous Matter, comes to the King in
Parliament, (for the King did then ordinarily sit in Person in the House of
Peers) and prays to be discharged his Attendance, until he was purged, which
was granted; This was upon the Wednesday, and the Monday after at the Request
of the Commons, he is restored to his place in their House, and to his good
Name, for that he had submitted himself to reasonable Arbitrament, says the
Record.

All this is said with great Respect to the House of Commons, and not any ways
to impugn or question their exercise of Jurisdiction upon their Members, and
for the defense of their Privileges, but only to show how things were in the
beginning, and how extensive the Power of the House of Peers has ever been in
their Judicature, reaching all Crimes, all Persons, all Places, none exempt:
And how necessary it is, it should be so, That there be not a failer of Justice
in the Land, that no Offender may escape unpunished, and no oppressed Person go
unrelieved; All other Courts having their Bounds and Limits, which make them
too narrow for some Cases: And this trust being in the House of Peers, there is
remedy in those extraordinary Cases.

But before I wind up all to a Conclusion, a word must be said to answer some
Objections, which I have met with in a Book entitled the Commoners Liberty,
printed in the year 1648. The first Objection is an Order of the House of Peers
with the Kings Assent to it 4. E. 3. n. 6. by which the King and Lords declare
an Agreement made betwixt them, That the Lords shall not be held nor charged to
give Judgment on others but their Peers; And that the Judgments then given
shall not be drawn into Consequence, to oblige the Peers in time to come, to
judge other then their Peers against the Law of the Land: This the Author of
the Book will have to be an Act of Parliament, because it is said to be done in
full Parliament: To which I answer, The Record it self shows it to be
otherwise, The Title is, Concordia ne trabatur in Consequentiam; That is, an
Agreement an Accord between Parties, that what is done shall not be drawn into
Consequence, no Law to impose upon them, and to oblige them; And the
expression, That it was done in full Parliament, and so the Commons present;
signifies nothing, as to enforce what he would infer upon it. For admit that,
yet it makes it not a Law, the Commons might be Witnesses to what was done, but
were no Parties; Which must have been to make it a Law. They must either have
Petitioned for it before, or have given their Assent and Approbation after; it
must either have begun or ended in their House, before it had gone to the King
for his Royal Assent, and then it had been binding and the Law of the Land; but
there was no such thing here. The Occasion of it was this, The King had
prevailed with the Lords, against their Wills and Protestations to the
contrary, as appears by the Record of that Parliament, n. 2. even in a Manner
forced them, to condemn the Earl of March, Sir Simon de Beresford, John
Matrevers, Bogo de Bayons, John Devaral, Thomas de Gourney, and William of
Ogle, for the murder of Edward the Second, and the death of the Earl of Kent,
all of them Commoners, except the Earl of March, and none of them called to
answer, yet some of them in hold, and others not; Those that were in hold were
presently executed, and great rewards promised to who should bring in the rest,
quick or dead. The Lords afterward troubled in Conscience at what they had
done, and moved with just indignation against themselves, made first a
Protestation, That they would not for the future be Tenus and Chargez a render
Jugement sur autre que sur leurs Pairs, be tied and charged to judge any but
their Peers; and this they get the King to consent unto, and happily for the
more Solemnity of the business, would have the King declare so much before the
Commons; And their Indignation, together with their Precaution not to be again
necessitated to do the like, might carry them further to say, They would not be
obliged to judge any but Peers against the Law of the Land; though it will very
well bear an other Construction, that it was their being in that Manner forced
and pressed to do, what otherwise they would not have done, which they declared
to be against the Law of the Land, because it is against the Freedom of
Parliaments; and not their Judging of Commoners to be against the Law of the
Land. But admit it, those Lords then thought it to be so, and that they ought
not to judge any but their Peers; Does that bind up the House of Peers, that
they may never be of another mind? They are still Masters of their own Orders,
and alter them and change them as they think good. And I look upon this Order,
as no other, nor of no more force, then that made 8. E. 1. which is in the
Appendix to the Placita Parliamentaria, p. 442. concerning Petitions, which I
have mentioned before, and which succeeding Parliaments would not observe. And
that they did not observe this neither, of their not Judging Commoners, is
apparently proved by the constant practice of the House of Peers in all
succeeding times. And one thing more would be taken notice of in the
Proceedings of the House of Peers at that time, after their precipitate and
Illegal Condemnation of those Persons, without ever calling them to answer; The
Earl of March a Peer of the Realm, was condemned and executed as well as the
Commoners, and this was looked upon as a President of ill Consequence for the
Peerage, and therefore they would have a Law to prevent it, and that the Nobles
of the Land should not be put to answer but in open Parliament by their Peers,
which they long endeavored before they could obtain it: So as in 15. Ed. 3. n.
6. they adjourned the Parliament several days upon that point, and at last
appointed four Earls, four Bishops, four Barons to draw it up into form, and
got it passed into an Act; but two years after the King got that Act to be
repealed: And so far they likewise took care of Commoners in that Parliament of
15. Ed. 3. as to have it enacted also, That no man should be impeached by
Commandment, without process of Law. These were Acts of Parliament and Laws
which did bind, but the other of their judging none but Peers was a mere
particular Order of the House, an Agreement betwixt the King and them, which
was no ways binding to posterity, and alterable still at pleasure by the same
House that made it.

Another Battery raised by that Author against the Jurisdiction of the House of
Peers, is from the Statute of Appeals 1 H. 4. c. 14. And with that he would
overthrow the force of that President of John Hall, condemned by the Lords in
that first year of H. 4. for the death of the Duke of Gloucester in the 21 of R.
2. as if that power were now taken from them by that Act, and that the Commons
by it had taken care, it should not be so done by them any more, for so he
says p. 23. Which by his leave concerns nothing the proceedings against Hall,
and will less (I may say) concern the present question of the proceedings of
this House of Lords in the Case of Skinner: For that Statute provides only for
Trial of Appeals, where a private person next of kin is or shall be
prosecutor, which was not in Halls Case, the prosecution being in the ordinary
way at the Kings suit: It is true, that in the 21 of R. 2. an horrible abuse
had been in point of Appeals: Certain Lords, not by Law capable of it, taking
upon them to be Appellants, and in their own Names acousing in Parliament
several persons, Peers of the Realm and Commoners, of diverse Treasons and
Murders, making themselves Judges and Parties, and condemning them to die,
without, nay against, all forms of Law, and rules of Justice, by which means many
innocent men lost both lives and Estates. This it is that is provided for by
that Statute, and care taken it shall be so no more; not the Ordinary
prosecution of Offenders in the Kings Name, as Halls was; Though one particular
in that Trial is confessed to have been most Irregular and Illegal, which was
examining him against himself upon Oath, but that is not material to the point
in question, which is, Whether the Statute of Appeals forbids such Trials, as
assuredly it does not, nor any of those formerly instanced in to have past in
the House of Peers; And least of all can it concern the late Proceedings in the
business of Skinner and the East India Company, in which there is no charge
either of Treason or Felony, where an Appeal only can take place, to bring it
within that Statute.

In the same 23d page, an other Argument is used against this Jurisdiction of
the Peers, in which that Author has certainly missed his Mark, for nothing
could be produced, that makes more for that Jurisdiction: He says That the
Subject of England has moderated Parlaments, and by express words determined,
that some things cannot be done in Parliament, as that any should be impeached
there of that concerns his Francktenement or Hereditament, and vouches for his
Authority, Rot. Parl. 10. H. 6. n. 35. where indeed there is such a desire of
the House of Commons, That none shall be compelled to answer in Parliament
concerning his Francktenement. But let him tell us, how they sped with their
desire, if their Petition was granted, to make it a Law and binding: Far from
it; The Answer is, Le Roy saduisera, The King will advise, which in
Parliamentary Language is a flat Denial; So then no alteration was made of what
was formerly the Usage and Power of Parliament, but all continued as it was
before; And that before they did in Parliament try and judge such matters, is
apparent by the desire of the Commons, that it should not be so hereafter; for
if no such thing was, their desire, it should be no more so, was ridiculous;
but it was so it seems, and their desire that it should be altered being
rejected, leaves it in the same state it was, that the Parliament might
continue still to do it.

And by the Parliament in these Cases is to be understood only the House of
Peers, for there singly lies the Judicial Power, as is confessed and
acknowledged by the House of Commons themselves, 1. H. 4. n. 79. (so it is in
the Record, but in the Exact Abridgment it is n. 80.) That all Judgments
appertain to the King and Lords, and not to them, but when out of especial
grace some are communicated unto them, and therefore they there desire, that
the Records may be so entered, as they may not be made Parties to them; So
careful they were then not to seem to encroach upon that Power. And whereas the
Author of that Pamphlet would make a difference upon the Personal presence of
the King in those times in the House of Lords, That though they might do it
then in some Cases, it followed not, the Lords might do it alone the King not
there, it is but a fancy of his, making a difference, where in truth there is
none. I have proved it before, that the Court is the same, be the King present
or absent; The King in Person can judge no man, nor dispose of no man's Life or
Estate, therefore it is a Maxim, That the King can do no wrong; the reason is,
because he of himself and by his own particular and personal Authority can give
away no man's Right, no not any ones pretended Right, where a man has only a
possession, though without right, the King alone in propria Persona can give no
Rule in it, but it must be tried in one of his Courts; And his Judges and
Ministers (whom he intrusts with his Regal Power, that with which he is himself
invested in his Politic Capacity, and which he conveys to them, making them
thereby the Dispensers of his Royal Justice unto all his Subjects,) they must
be the Persons that do the wrong, if any be done, It is Curia Regis that does
it, and not the King, though he sit in Court in Person; And so the style is
Videtur Curioe; And the Pleas Commonly end with this Declaration of the Party,
Hoc paratus sum Verificare pro at Curia ordinaverit; and when mention is of any
thing done contrary to the forms of proceeding, Non sic in Curia ista usitatum
est, is the expression; as it is in the President of the 18. E. 1. so much
insisted upon by the House of Commons. So has it been in all times the
Authority of the Court, to which the Law requires obedience; When Henry the
third would have his Brother Richard Duke of Cornwall confirm the grant of a
Manor to one Waleran a Germain (to whom King John had given it, and which the
Duke of Cornwall said belonged to his Duchy of Cornwall, and had therefore
taken possession of it) his Answer was, That he was willing Curioe Regioe
subire Judicium and Magnatum Regni, that was to say, the Judgment of his Peers
in Parliament: and when the King said angrily to him, He should then quit the
Kingdom, it he would not deliver up the Manor; his reply (as Matthew Paris
Records it) was, Quod nec Walerano Jus suum redderet, nec sine Judicio Parium
fourum e Regno exiret; He would neither quit his Right nor the Kingdom, but by
the Judgment of his Peers: Such difference was then made betwixt the Kings
Personal Command, and an Order of the House of Peers in disposing of men's
Rights, which makes it very apparent, That the Kings Personal presence could
not add any thing to, or make any alteration in, the Jurisdiction of any Court.
But enough of this; especially considering what is said before upon the same
Subject.

Some other Evasions I find in that Book to elude the Lords Judicature, and
take off the force of some Presidents which have been cited in maintenance of
it, which I think are but evasions, and work no great effect. As that of the
Banishment of Alice Perrers or Pierce, which that Author will prove to have
risen from the Commons, and to have been at their Petition; because Walsingham
a Cloistered Monk says so, contrary to the Record in the Tower, where he finds
no such thing, where certainly it would not have been omitted, had it been so,
that being so essential a part of a Transaction of Parliament, that it could not
have been left out by the Clerk in the Journal Book; And whereas to fortify
Walsingham's Testimony, he says he then lived, as if he had been Testis
Ocularis, I doubt much if he was then born, or so young he must have been, that
he could little take notice of the passages of the time, for Baloeus in his
Book De Scriptoribus Britanicis, says he flourished in the year 1440. under
Henry the sixth; when he died we know not, but had he died then, or soon after,
he must have been sixty three years old, if so be he was in the World when
Alice Pierce was banished; for the Judgment of Alice Pierce was the first year
of Richard the second, which was in 1377. So as what he writes could be but by
hearsay. Which is observed by me, only to show what weak proofs that Author
brings to make good his Assertions, and shows the badness of his Cause; Not
that I think it at all material to the point in question, whether or no it was
at the request of the Commons, that Alice Pierce was judged by the Lords, which
would not at all evince what he would infer upon it, that the House of Lords
has not of it self Cognizance of the Cause of a Commoner, nor can judge him
for an Offense, whether Capital or of a lesser Nature, but that the House of
Commons, making it their desire, qualifies them for it: Which is a strong
Argument of the contrary, and proves that the House of Commons does thereby
acknowledge their Judicature: For ridiculous it were to think, That any Act of
that House could create a new Power in the House of Lords, which it had not in
it self before, and which afterward must cease, till it please the House of
Commons to give again a new life and being to it: As if the House of Lords were
but a Property, which cannot move of it self, to have the Verse said of it,
Ducitur ut nervis alienis mobile lignum. I am sure it has not been so
heretofore, nor do I think the House of Commons will own that Authors Opinion.
And so the Judgment of Hall for the death of the Duke of Gloucester, that too
forsooth must be at the request of the Commons, and so be an Act of Parliament,
and the proof for it is, that at the end of the Roll they thank the King for
his just Judgment. But if the Gentleman would have perused the whole Roll, he
would easily have been satisfied, that the thanks of the Commons related not to
Halls condemnation, but to the proceedings of the King and House of Peers
against Sir William le Scroop, Sir Henry Green, and Sir John Bussy, who had
been active for Richard the second, and were looked upon as principal Authors
of the Miscarriage of his Reign: For at the request of the Commons, the Lords
confirmed a Judgment formerly given against them in some of the Kings Courts,
(not in Parliament) and the King declaring, That though he took the forfeiture
of their Estates according to the Sentence given upon them, yet he understood
not, there should be by it any Infringement of the Statute, which said, That no
man's Estate should be forfeited after his death, who had not been convicted
whilst living, for these persons he said had been so convicted; Whereupon the
Commons thanked the King for his righteous Judgment, and thanked God for giving
them such a King: This had no relation at all to the business of Hall; And in
the Record it is an Article by it self of what had passed in Parliament another
day. So for the proceeding against Gomeniz and Weston, that too must be at the
request of the Commons, and consequently an Act of Parliament; Whereas the
Commons had only in general desired, that all such as had delivered up any of
the Kings Forts and Castles unduely, might be called to account for it in that
Parliament, and be punished for it according to their demerit by the Judgment
of the Lords, who thereupon commanded the Lieutenant of the Tower to bring
before them those two, who were already in hold for their several Facts in that
kind, whom they tried and condemned, and proceeded likewise against several
others, as Cressingham, Spikesworth, Trevit, and many more guilty of the same
Crime, whom they convented before them; and Sentenced, some to death, some to
other punishments according to the Quality of their Offense: Now, I do ask if
in common sense it can be construed, that the Commons were at all Parties in
the prosecution of these several Offenders: But admit, they had particularly
impeached every one of them (which is more, then to desire such a Delinquent
may be brought to his Trial, and that the Lords would do Justice on him as they
find Cause, and much more, then only to design the Crime, and leave it to the
Lords to find out the Persons; For in an Impeachment they examine the matter,
and first find themselves the Party to be guilty, and then they follow it
against him, and prove him so, before the Lords) Does this at all give them any
part in the Judgment? or must it not necessarily be understood, that the
Judicature is naturally and constantly lodged with the Lords, and the House of
Commons part then is only to bring the Offender before the Lords to be tried?
This very Record of the Proceedings in the Lords House against Gomeniz and
Weston shows it so to be, and proves the Judicature of the House of Peers as
strongly as can be; It runs thus, Item par la ou supply est par les Communes,
que tous ceux qunt rendus and perdus Chatels ou Villes par dela par uray defaut
des Capitaines, puissent estre a Response a Cest Parliament and selon leur
desert fortement punis par agard des Seigneurs and Baronage, eschievant le
malueis ensample qils ont donnez as autres qui sont Gardens de villes and
Chatels, Command est a Sire Alein de Buxhall Conestable del Tour de Londres qe
y face venir deuant les Seigneurs en Parliament a Westminster le Vendredy 27
Jour de Novembre lan susdit Jehan sire de Gomeniz and William de Weston, etc.
Item, Whereas it is prayed by the Commons that all those, who have delivered up
and lost Castles and Towns on the other side of the Sea by their own default,
being Captains of them, may be put to their answer at this Parliament, and
according to their desert be severely punished by the award of the Lords and
Baronage, for the eschewing of the evil example, which they have given to other
Guardians of Towns and Castles; Command is given to Sir Allen de Buxhall
Constable of the Tower of London, to bring before the Lords in Parliament at
Westminster, upon Friday the 27th of November of the aforesaid year, John Lord
of Gomeniz, and William of Weston, etc. Here the Commons desire that all such
may be severely punished by the award of the Lords and Baronage; So it is their
Award and their Judgment must punish, and this by the Commons confession; And
you may observe further, that the Commons do not make any mention of any
particular Person, but the Lords they command Sir Allein de Buxhall to bring
Gomeniz and Weston before them such a day; But it is easy to trace the Author
of the Pamphlet, where he was led out of the way, and that was by an other
Pamphlet of the Privileges of the Baronage, which goes under Mr. Seldens Name,
but has as many mistakes in it as leaves, and there indeed it is said p. 15.
That at the supplication of the Commons, that all those who have rendered
Castles, be put to their Answer, and that Allen Buxhall, Constable of the
Tower, do bring before the Lords such a day, Gomeniz and Weston, to answer the
Articles which there shall be preferred for the said Cause, they were so
brought, etc. But the Record it self you see is otherwise, which that
Pamphleter it seems never read. And for what he further would infer, to make
that and all other Judgments at the prosecution of the Commons (admit they had
been so, which these were not) Acts of Parliament, is a Fancy so ridiculous, as
it is not worth the answering, which makes no difference betwixt an Act of
Attainder, that passes both Houses, and afterward has the Kings Assent, (as
all other Laws have, which is an effect of the Legislative Power, in which
either House has an equal Vote) and a proceeding before the Lords against a
Criminous Person in a Judicial way, wherein the Commons have nothing to do, as
to the judging of him.

But one thing more in that Pamphlet I cannot let pass, which is in p. 12. The
words are these, viz. For the Kings giving Judgment in Parliament with the
Lords Assent, I do confess Judgments there ought to be properly and punctually
entered, as given Par nostre Seigneur le Roy que est Souverain. Juge en tous
Cas, and par les Seigneurs Spirituels and Temporels ouel Assent des Communes de
la Terre, ou a leur Petition, and Nenny par les Seigneurs Temporels Seulement;
That is, As given by our Lord the King, who is Sovereign Judge in all Causes,
and by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, with the assent of the Commons of the
Land, or upon their Petition, and not by the Lords Temporal alone. And for this
he quotes in the Margent, Rot. Part. apud Leicester, II. 16. which he delivers
so Magisterially, as any man would swear he had good Authority for what he
said, and that his old French was some old Oracle of Parliament: And I must
confess upon the first reading of this I was at a stand, finding here such a
positive Precept, contrary to what I had still believed, both in the
Affirmative (it must be by the Kings and Lords, with the Assent of the Commons)
and Negative (not by the Lords alone.) But when I came to examine this
Assertion by the Record, I found there was a foul mistake, whether purposely or
ignorantly I judge not: For what was delivered by Counsel, to bolster up his
Clients pretentious, is there produced, as the Rule of the Court; And an Error
assigned to reverse a former Judgment, which is but the Allegation of a Lawyer,
that draws up his Clients Plea, is made an Argument to control and condemn a
constant usage of the House of Peers, It was in the Case of the Earl of
Salisbury, Who brought a Writ of Error in the Parliament 2. H. 5. to reverse
the Judgment given 2. H. 4. n. 30. by the Lords Temporal alone with the Kings
Assent, by which Judgment the Earls of Kent, Huntington and Salisbury, and some
others, who had been some slain, some taken in actual Rebellion by other the
Kings Subjects, and by them put to death without form of Law, were declared
attainted of Treason, and their Estates forfeited; For the reversal whereof
Thomas the Son Earl of Salisbury, amongst the Errors assigns this for one, as a
principal one, that it was given by the Lords Temporal alone with the King,
whereas it should have been by the King, Lords Spiritual and Temporal, with the
Assent of the Commons, or at their Petition; And what follows upon this? Indeed
if the Judgment had been reversed, though perhaps upon some other Error, (for
several others were assigned) there might have been some color for the
Gentleman's Assertion, and the Inference he would make upon it: But so far from
it, that the Judgment formerly given by the Lords Temporal alone, with the
Kings Assent, is fully ratified and confirmed: Which is as strong an Argument
to evince and prove the Right of Judicature lodged in that House as is possible.

And so I shall leave that Pamphleter, and now conclude, only adding this as
mine own sense and wish concerning the Lords exercising this Judicature, and in
truth what has been my Observation of their Lordships own Intention and
Resolution, which themselves have still declared and practiced in their
execution of it; which is this.

First, That though they have an undoubted Right to such an universal unlimited
Power; of taking cognizance of all Manner of Causes of what nature soever, and
of the Judging and Determining them, if no particular Law do otherwise dispose
of those Cases.

Secondly, That their Ancestors have so exercised this Power in all times
Ancient and Modern, which conveys down that Right to them, according to the
Maxim, usus and Consuetudo est Lex Parlamenti, what has been always used by
Parliaments is the Law of Parliaments.

Thirdly, That this House of Lords has ever been careful not to entertain any
business, which was determinable in Inferior Courts, so as charged with doing
it, they may well take up the Psalmists complaint, and say, They have laid to
our charge things that we knew not, and would have us restore what we took not
away; Though if the Lords had now taken upon them to exercise such an universal
Power of Judicature, they had meddled but with their own, that which belongs to
them, and had done no man wrong, had given no just cause of complaint, they had
but trodden in their Ancestors steps, continued that in the House of Peers,
which it has ever been possessed of. And would it not be a shame for them to
leave their Posterity in a lower and more curtalled condition then their
Predecessors left them, to give up a Right and a Privilege o^ theirs, which
(as has been showed) i^ so necessary to the Public Justic^ of the Kingdom?
But they have no^ done that, which is said of them: An^ there is no color for
any complaint. Why then quarrel with them? Why at this time stir a question
which lay asleep, and for ought we know had never awaked, not had else ever
been stirred? Is this a time to divide, to cause needless differences? Were it
not more desirable, nay more necessary to reconcile affections, to unite
endeavors, and to conjoyn the Counsels, and Power, and Authority of the two
Houses of Parliament, for composing the differences which already are, rather
then to create new, and especially when no cause is given for it? For it may be
truly said, Here is not Causa litigandi, if there be not Animus litigandi. Let
it be calmly and coolely considered, what the Lords have done, if they have
given any cause of difference, if this Apple of Dissension grew with them,
which has been maliciously cast in by some of the East India Company, and too
readily taken up by those whom they had surprised and abused by
misinformations. Their Lordships have now only done Right to a poor man, that
was oppressed to ruin by potent Adversaries, who had done the wrong in a
Foreign Country, and so were no ways punishable for it here in the ordinary
Course of Law, nor the poor man any ways relievable, (for no part of his Case,
as has been showed, was within the Compass of the Common Law: Their new devise
of a Fiction, which is in truth merely a Fiction, in the whole of it, without
any real foundation in Law, Reason, or good Conscience as being grounded upon a
falsehood, and yet this Fiction (I say) such as it is, not applicable to
Trespasses) so as here had been an absolute Failer of Justice, if the Lords had
not undertaken it; And they undertaking it also, not of themselves, as making
it their own Act, but upon the Kings earnest Recommendation, when his Majesty
and Counsel had in vain spent some years in endeavoring to persuade those
severe Adversaries of this poor man, to make him some reasonable Reparation,
and they would not.

Fourthly, And notwithstanding all this, that their Lordships should be
quarrelled with, decried, misrepresented by Offenders, whom they had before
them; and that, even before they had determined any thing concerning them: yet
the Petition of those Offenders full of Falsities, not only to be received,
which (under Correction, and with great respect be it spoken of them who did
receive it) was a Manifest Breach of Privilege, but to be believed, and Votes
to be passed thereupon, That the Lords had done that, which was not agreeable
to Law, and which tended to deprive the Subject of the benefit of the Law.

Fifthly, Though these things might well provoke their Lordships to vindicate
themselves, not only by asserting their Right to so great and extensive a
Power, (which they have done upon good grounds, and with evincing Argaments)
but even employing and exercising it in its full latitude; And the same Maxim
would justify them in their so doing, which the Poet brought to justify
Caesar in his vast undertakings, when the Senate by denying him his just
demands, gave him the occasion and the boldness to make himself Master of all,
take that which was denied him and all the rest, which happily he had else
never attempted, the Maxim is, Omnia dat qui justa negat: So quarrelling with
the Lords now upon so unjust a ground, and denying them such an apparent Right
as they had to give Relief to Skinner, would plead their excuse to all the
World, if they should extend their Power as far, as their Ancestors ever did.

But we will hope better things from them, and that (as the Apostle says)
their Moderation shall appear to all men, and that no ill usage will make them
depart from their resolution of not interposing their Power, where the Law can
give a remedy, nor entertaining any Cause, which is properly determinable in
Inferior Courts, For that certainly, however it might be Lawful, would not be
expedient, and good men will only do that which is expedient, as being that
which is most acceptable to God, and most beneficial to men, which Parliaments
will I hope ever do, It shall be my Prayer they may, to which I am sure all
good people will say Amen.

FINIS.

