CONTEMPLATIONS MORAL AND DIVINE.

The Second Part.

LONDON: Printed for William Shrowsbury at the Bible in Duke-lane, and John
Leigh at the Blew-Bell in Fleet Street, 1676.

THE PREFACE.
PArt of these things now published were intended to have been Printed and
Published in the former Volume; but not being so well Transcribed as I thought
was necessary for the Press, being not in place to see it corrected my self,
and the Term being so near that they could not be made ready and Printed before
that time, at the request of the Booksellers, who were loath to lose the
opportunity of that Term for the publication of that Volume, I was content to
let them publish that alone as it is without any more: but notwithstanding
afterward intended this other Volume, adding thereunto some other small things,
more than at first were intended, to make it a just Volume near the proportion
of the former, provided it could be so timely finished, as that it might appear
to be but a part of the former Trespass, though with a continuando, and not a
new presumption against the worthy Author: But when part of it had been so
long detained in the hands of the Licencers, that by reason thereof, and of
some other interventions, that could not be, I was unwilling to appear to the
World to be guilty of a second Trespass against so excellent a person,
especially, having both craved and obtained his pardon for the former, and
therefore wrote to the Booksellers to desist from proceeding any farther
therein, till some fair occasion might offer it self to do it either with the
Authors express consent, or at least without offense to him.

But it was not long before I was much importuned by some special friends of
the Authors to let them proceed, and among the rest by a Person of Quality, who
has a very high respect and esteem both for Him and his Writings, and to whom
I am very much obliged; and besides, I perceived that the Author himself was
very much importuned by some friends and persons of Quality for more of his
Writings of this nature; that which I did before foresee would be one
consequence of the publication of the former Volume; for although he has
written much of this nature, it having been long the employment of his Horae
Sacrae, yet has scarce any, even of his most intimate friends or acquaintance,
except my self, and some of his own Family, known so much. But by the advantage
of these importunities of other friends, I did the more easily prevail with him
to give leave that the Booksellers might go on with what they were about. And
thus the Reader comes to enjoy the benefit of this second Volume.

For the Treatises contained in it, there is one upon the same Subject with one
of those in the former Volume, that is, Of Afflictions, but such (to say no
more) as doubtless will not seem tedious to any Pious person, who has already
read the former. For his Meditations upon the Lords Prayer, they are so
excellent, and so far beyond what I am able to say in commendation of them,
that I shall leave it to the sense of the Reader, who if he have any relish of
sincere Religion, Piety, and Devotion, cannot but be highly affected with them.
For those shorter Meditations I must acquaint the Reader that they were written
when the Author was not only in his Journeyes, but in such Journeyes, wherein
he had less freedom by reason of the Company, which was then with him, than he
did ordinarily take, when he had none but his own Attendants about him; for I
find in diverse of them noted when and where they were written. And these I was
the more willing should be published in this Volume with the others, because if
the Importunities of friends, which have not, nor will be wanting, can possibly
prevail with the Author to publish any more of this kind himself, I supposed he
would rather make choice of some of his larger and more complete writings, than
of these (whereof some were never finished) which yet I doubt not but will be
very acceptable and profitable to the Pious Reader, but possibly otherwise
might not have been published at all. And even from these shorter Meditations
the Reader may receive a double benefit: The matter of them may be such to him
of it self; but besides they exhibit an excellent Example in their Author, as
of the constant Pious and virtuous dispositions of his mind in general so in
particular of his constant care to employ those precious portions of time, as
he calls them, his Horae Sacrae, in suitable and profitable Meditations, from
which he would not suffer himself to be wholly diverted, either by his Company,
or any other of those occurrences, by which we are often too apt to excuse our
selves from the Duties and Exercises of Religion and Piety.

Let the pious Reader pray for the Prolongation of his Life, and the
Restitution of a competent measure of Health and Strength unto him; which if it
please God to grant, doubtless his Studies in Private will be no less
beneficial to Posterity, than his Actions in Public have been to the present
age, though the Consequence of these will reach to Posterity also.

Being far distant from the Press, I must again crave the Readers favor to
pardon and correct the mistakes of the Printer.

The several Treatises comprised in this Second Volume are:
AN Inquiry touching Happiness, page. 1. Of the chief End of Man, p. 19. Upon
Eccles. XII. 1. Remember thy Creator, etc. p. 43. Upon Psalm. LI. 10. Cor
mundum crea, etc. p, 55. A Poem, p. 73. The Folly and Mischief of Sin, p. 75.
Of Self-Denial (not finished) p. 82. Motives to Watchfulness in reference to
the Good and Evil Angels, p. 97. Of Moderation of the Affections, p. 101. Of
Worldly Hope and Expectation, p. 116. Upon Heb. XIII. 14. We have here no
continuing City, p. 125. Of Contentedness and Patience, p. 136. Of Moderation
of Anger, p. 141. A Preparative against Afflictions, p. 146. Of Submission,
Prayer, and Thanksgiving, p. 220. Of Prayer and Thanksgiving, on Psalm. CXVI.
12. p. 229. Meditations upon the Lords Prayer. A Paraphrase upon the Lords
Prayer.
AN INQUIRY TOUCHING HAPPINESS.
1. ANy man that compares the Perfection of the Humane Nature with that of the
Animal Nature, will easily find a far greater Excellence in the former than in
the latter: For 1. The Faculties of the former are more Sublime and Noble: 2.
The very External Fabric of the former much more Beautiful and fuller of
Majesty than the latter: 3. The latter seems to be in a very great measure
ordained in a Subserviency to the former: Some for his Food, some for
Clothing, some for Use and Service, some for Delight: 4. All the inferior
Animals seem to be placed under the Discipline, Regiment, and Order of Mankind;
so that he brings them all, or the most of them, under his Order and Subjection:

2. It is therefore Just and Reasonable for us to think, that if the Inferior
Animals have a kind of Felicity or Happiness attending their being, and
suitable to it, that much more Man, the nobler being, should not be destitute
of any Happiness attending his being, and suitable to it.

3. But rather consequently, that Man, being the nobler Creature, should not
only have an Happiness as well as Inferior Animals, but he should have it
placed in some more Noble and Excellent rank and kind than that wherein the
Brutes have their Happiness placed.

4. It is plain that the Inferior Animals have a Happiness or Felicity
proportionate to their Nature and Fabric; which as they exceedingly desire, so
they do in a great measure Enjoy: namely, a sensible Good, answering their
sensible Appetite. Every thing has Organs and Instruments answerring to the
Use and Convenience of their Faculties; Organs for their Sense and Local
motion, and for their Feeding, for their Generation of their kind: Every thing
has its peculiar Instincts and Connatural Artifices and Energies for the
Exercises of their Organs and Faculties for their Preservation and Nourishment:
Every thing has a supply of External Objects answering those Faculties,
Desires and Instincts; Meats proper for their Nourishment; Places proper for
their Repose; difference of Sexes in their several kinds answering their
Procreative Appetite: And most commonly such a proportion of Health and
Integrity of Nature, as goes a long to that period of time allotted for their
duration; and in default thereof they are for the most part furnished with
Medicines naturally provided for them, which they naturally know and use, so
that they seem to want nothing that is necessary to the complement of a
Sensible Felicity.

It is true, they are in a great measure Subjected to the Dominion of Mankind,
which is sometimes over severely exercised, but then they have the Benefit of
Supplies from them, Protection under them, and, if they meet not with Masters
more unreasonable than themselves, they find Moderation from them. They are
also exposed to the Rapine one of another, the weaker Beasts, Birds and Fishes,
being commonly the prey of the greater: but yet they are commonly endued with
Nimbleness, v. Lactant. de Opific. Dei. c. 2.
Artifices or Shifts to avoid their Adversaries. But be these what Abatements
of their Sensible Happiness may be, yet they have certain Negative Advantages
that conduce very much to their Happiness, or at least remove very much of what
might abate it, and thereby render their fruition more free and perfect and
uninterrupted, for instance, they seem to have no Anticipations or Fear of
Death as a common Evil incident to their nature: They have no Anticipations of
Dangers till they immediately present themselves unto them: They have no great
sense or apprehensions of any thing better than what at present they enjoy:
They are not under the Obligation of any Law, or under the Sense of any such
thing, and consequently the Sincereness of what they enjoy, not interrupted by
the strokes of Conscience under a sense of deviation from Duty, or Guilt.

5. It is therefore plain, that if the Humane Nature have no greater or better
Happiness than what is accommodate only to a Sensible Nature, they have no
greater Happiness than the Beasts have, which is not reasonable to be supposed
for a Nature so far exceeding them.

6. Farther yet, if the Humane Nature were not under a capacity of a greater
Happiness than what is terminated in Sense, mankind were much more Unhappy than
the basest Animal; and the more Excellent the Humane Nature is above the
Beasts, nay, the more excellent any one individual of the Humane kind were
above another, the more miserable he were, and the more incapable of being in
any measure happy: for the more Wise and Sagacious any man were, the more he
must needs be sensible of Death, which sense would sower all the Happiness of a
sensible Good: the more sensible he must needs be, not only of the shortness
and uncertainty of sensible Enjoyments, but also of their Poorness, Emptiness,
Insufficiency, Dissatisfactoriness. It is evident, that a Fool sets a greater
rate upon a Sensible Good than a Man truly Wise, and consequently the Fool
could be the only man capable of Happiness: for it is most certain, that
according to the measure of the Esteem that any man has of any good he enjoys,
such is the measure of his Happiness in that Enjoyment, Since the Happiness is
somewhat that is intrinsecal to the Sense or Mind that enjoys it. A thing
really Good can never make that man Happy, who is under a Sense of Evil or
Inconvenience by that enjoyment, so long as he is under that sense. Since
therefore it is preposterous and unreasonable to suppose that Man, the best of
terrestrial Creatures, and Wise men, the best of men, should be Excluded from
at least an equal degree of Happiness with the Beasts that perish; and since it
must needs be that a bare Sensible Good can never communicate to a man an Equal
degree of Happiness with a Beast, nor to a Wise man an Equal degree of Happiness
with a Fool, it remains, there must needs in common reason be some other
subject wherein the Happiness of a Man, of a Wise Man, must consist, that is
not barely Sensible Good.

7. All the good things of this Life they are but Sensible Goods, and therefore
they cannot be the true matter of that Happiness, which we may reasonably think
belongs to the reasonable Nature as such, the former will appear by an
induction of particulars, which I shall pursue in order, with the particular
instances of their Insufficiencies to make up a true Happiness to the
Reasonable Nature, as well as that general that they are but Sensible Goods,
and merely accommodated to a Sensible Life and Nature.

1. Life it self is not as such a sufficient constituent of Happiness: and the
Instance is Evident, because it is possible that Life it self may be Miserable:
there may be Life where there is Sickness, Pain, Disgrace, Poverty, and all
those External Occurrences that may render life Grievous and Burdensome. Life
may indeed be the Subject of Happiness, when it has all those contributions
that concur to make it such; but Life alone, and as such, cannot be Happiness,
because there may be a Miserable Life.

2. Those Bona Corporis or Compositi, the Goods of the Body, are not sufficient
to make up a suitable Happiness to the Reasonable Nature; as Health, Strength;
for the Beasts themselves enjoy this, and for the most part, the Brutes enjoy a
greater measure of these than Mankind: and besides still, there is that which
is like the Worm at the root of the Gourd, that spoils the Happiness that must
arise from it; viz. Mortality and Death, which will certainly pull down this
Tabernacle, and Man has an unintermitted Pre-apprehension of it, which sowers
the very enjoyment it self. And in this as has been said, the Beasts that
perish have a pre-eminence over Mankind; for though both are Mortal, yet the
Beast is not under that Pre-apprehension of it that Man incessantly has,
whereby his Fruition of that Happiness of Health is the more Sincere, and this
consideration must run through all those other contributions of Sensible Goods,
that hereafter follow. And as for Beauty, the Happiness thereof as it is but
fading and empty, so the Felicity that it gives, is not to the party that has
it, but to others, unto whom perchance it may be a delightful and amiable
spectacle, but not to him that has it.

3. There are a secondary sort of Bodily Goods, namely, Pleasures of the
Senses, as delightful Meats, Drinks, Sights, Music, pleasant Odors, and other
Gratifications of the Sensitive Appetite; or Lust, as the Lust of the Flesh,
the Lust of Revenge, the Lust of Desire, etc. These cannot make up a competent
Happiness to the Humane Nature: 1. They are but Sensible Goods, common to the
Beasts as well as Men. 2. Though they may be competent to make up the Happiness
of the Sensible Nature, yet they are not such to the Reasonable Nature; because
they are still accompanied with a present concurring Sense of Mortality, which
Embitters their very Enjoyment, and renders them insipid, if not bitter. 3. The
wiser the Man is, the less he values them, and consequently are at best a
Happiness to Fools, and such as degenerate from the Nobleness of the Humane
Nature into the degree of Beasts by setting an Overvalue upon them. Again. 4.
They are transient, and the Happiness of them is only before their Enjoyment;
when they are Enjoyed to Satiety, they lose their Use and Value. 5. These
placenta sensus, especially of the Sensual Appetite, are not for their own
sakes, but in order to something else, viz. To invite and excite the Appetite
in order to the Preservation of the individual, or the species; and therefore
cannot be in themselves in relation to a Reasonable Nature any Happiness, since
they terminate in something else.

4. Those Bona Fortunae, as Wealth, Honor, Power, cannot at all pretend to
make up a Happiness for the Reasonable Nature; for though in truth we do not
find so eminently, in the animal Nature, any such thing as Wealth or Honor,
but only somewhat analogal to it, as in Ants and Bees; yet these are of a far
inferior nature to the Bona Corporis, whether Health or Pleasure; for they are
in their true Use only in order to them. The primary Corporeal Good is Health,
and Conservation of the individual in his being: next to that, and indeed in
order to it, are the Refreshments and Supports by Eating and Drinking. Wealth
again is Subservient and in order to that, viz. To have a convenient Store and
Provision for the supply of the exigencies of Nature and preserving the
individual: what is more then Necessary for that, is Superfluous, Vain, and
Unnecessary. Power again is only desirable to secure those Provisions from
Rapine and Invasion: so that in truth these are so far from making up a
Happiness, that they are only Provisional and in Order to those Goods of the
Body, which are before shown incompetent to that End; and without that respect
they are vain and impertinent things. But besides this, there are certain
Specifical Defects that accompany these Goods, that render them utterly
incapable of making up a Happiness to Mankind: 1 It is impossible they can be
as large as the Humane Nature; because unless there were some Poor, none could
be Rich; unless some were Under, there could be none in Power; if all were
equal in Wealth and Power, there could be no such thing as Wealth or Power: and
consequently the supposition of Happiness in those who are Rich or Powerful,
would exclude the greatest part of Mankind from any share in that which must
make up their common Happiness. 2. In the fruition of all Wealth, Honor and
Power, besides the common fate of Mortality, which imbitters their very
Enjoyment, there is annexed a certain peculiar Infelicity that renders them
incapable of making up a Happiness: For, 1. They are the common mark of
Covetousness, Envy, Ambition, and Necessity, which most ordinarily render Rich
and Powerful, and Great Men less safe than others, and ordinarily they stand
tottering dangerously, and subject to fall. 2. There is always Care and Anxiety
attending the possessors of Great Honor, Wealth, or Power, which imbitters the
very enjoyment, and puts it out of the capacity of being a Happiness; for it is
impossible that great Cares and great Fears can consist with true Happiness.
And thus far of Sensible Goods.

8. Besides these Sensible Goods there seem to be two sorts of Goods that
Mankind is peculiarly capable of, which are not common to the Beasts; viz.
First, The Good of Esteem, Glory and Reputation, wherewith perchance the Beasts
are not affected, though some seem to have somewhat analogal to it, but this
cannot at all make up a Happiness to the Humane Nature: 1. Because it is not
accommodate to all Uses and Exigents: Laudatur and alget. 2. Because it resides
not in the party, but in those who give it; a man may have a great esteem with
others and a low esteem of himself. 3. It is of all others the most brittle and
unstable possession: those that perchance deservedly give it, may undeservedly
resume it: a Word or Action mistaken by others, a false Report, Envy,
Emulation, want of success in any one Action: the mis-interpretation of the
Superior or the Vulgar, may quite overturn the greatest, and perchance most
deserved Reputation, and render a man more despised and contemptible than he
was before eminent or esteemed: he that bottoms his Happiness upon such an
unstable blast, inherits the wind.

9. But yet there (are) certain Bona Animae which are competible to Man, but
not to Beasts, which are of two kinds, according to the two great Faculties in
Man, his Understanding and Will: viz. Knowledge, and Moral Virtues, and although
these are excellent Goods, yet (exclusively of true and sound Religion) they
cannot make up that Happiness which we may reasonably Judge to be proper and
specifical to the Humane Nature: First, Therefore for Knowledge there are these
Incompetences in it, in reference to our Happiness: 1. Our Knowledge is very
little and narrow in respect of the Object of it: What we know is the least
part of what we know not: Though we daily converse with things natural, even
with the frame of our own bodies, we scarce know the nature or cause or motion
of any one Nerve or Muscle. 2. Even in those things we think we know, our
knowledge is very Dark and Uncertain; and from these arises: 3. That our
increase in Knowledge is our increase of Sorrow and Trouble: Trouble to attain
that little Knowledge we have, and Sorrow in that we can acquire no more: 4. The
whole Scheme of Knowledge we attain, for the most part serves only the meridian
of our short, unstable, uncertain life: And what kind of Happiness can that be,
which while we are attaining, we cannot secure to be of any long or certain
continuance, and vanishes, or proves utterly unuseful when we die? Of what use
will then the knowledge of Municipal Laws, of History, of Natural Philosophy, of
Politics, of Mathematics, be in the next World, although our Souls Survive us?

As to the 2. Namely, Moral Virtues: It is true, Aristotle, 1. Ethicor. Cap. 7.
Tells us that Happiness or Blessedness is the Exercise or Operation of the
Reasonable Soul, according to the best and most perfect Virtue, in vita
perfecta, in a perfect Life: But he tells us not what that vita perfecta is,
nor where to be found, and yet without it there is no Happiness.

But even this exercise of Virtue (though much more noble than the bare habit
of Virtue, which is but in order to Action or Exercise) if considered singly
and apart, and abstractively from the reward of it, is not enough to constitute
a Happiness suitable to the Humane Nature: 1. The Actions of Virtue for the
most part respect the good and benefit of others more than of the party that
exercises them, as Justice, Righteousness, Charity, Liberality, Fortitude; and
principally (if not only) Religion, Temperance, Patience, and Contentation, are
those Virtues that advantage the party himself; the rest most respect the good
of others. 2. We find it too often true, that most good men have the least
share of the comforts and conveniences of this Life, but are exposed (many
times even upon the account of their very Virtues) to Poverty, Want, Reproach,
Neglect, so that their very Virtues are occasions oftentimes of such
Calamities, which must needs abate the perfection of Life, which is a necessary
ingredient into Happiness. 3. But if their life be not rendered grievous upon
the account of their Virtues, yet they are not thereby privileged from many
Calamities, which render their lives unhappy, and oftentimes renders them
incapable of the exercise of those Virtues, which must make up their Happiness:
Poverty disables them from acts of Liberality; Neglect and Scorn by great Men
and Governors renders them incapable of acts of distributive Justice; Sickness
and tormenting bodily Diseases many times attack them, and render their lives
miserable, and many times disables even their very intellectuals; and to these
disasters they are at least equally liable with others; and if all these
Calamities were absent, yet there are two states of life, which they must
necessarily go through if they live, that in a great measure renders them
necessarily incapable of these actions of Virtue, namely, the Passions and
Perturbations of Youth, and the decays and infirmities of Old Age. 4. The
highest Good attainable by the exercise of Virtue in the party himself is
Tranquillity of Mind; and indeed it is a noble and excellent portion; but as
the case stands with us in this life, (without a farther prospect to a life to
come,) even such a Tranquillity of mind is not perfectly attainable by us, and
has certain appendances to it, that abate that sincereness of Happiness, that
is requirable in it, to complete the Happiness of the Humane Nature: and these
are principally these two: 1. The necessity that we are under (considering the
weakness of our nature) by our daily failings, Errors, and Sins, to turn aside
from the perfect rule of Virtue; whereby we are under a kind of moral necessity
of violating or abating that Tranquillity of mind; so that it seems in it self
morally impossible either fully to attain, or constantly and uniformly to hold
that Tranquillity of mind: 2. Still Mortality, Mortality, Death, and the Grave
terminates this Felicity, if it only respect this life; and the fear and
pre-apprehension of such a termination sowers and allays even that Felicity,
which Tranquillity of mind otherwise offers: This fear and anticipation of
death (as the Apostle says, Heb. 2.) detains men Captive all the days of their
life, and in a great measure breaks that Tranquillity of mind, which is the
constituent of this Happiness. Again, though Virtue, and Virtuous actions have
had their Elogia by excellent Philosophers, Orators, Poets, and we are told by
them, that Si Virtus oculis cerneretur, it would appear the most beautiful
thing in the World; yet it has had but few followers in respect of the rest of
the World; and possibly would find a much colder entertainment, if the
recompense of Reward were not also propounded with it and believed: Therefore
there is and must be somewhat else besides bare Platonic Notions of Virtue and
naked proposals of it, that must give it a conquest over the satisfaction of
our Lusts and Pleasures, especially in the time of our Youth and Strength, and
before old age overtake us.

And hence it is, that in all ages wise Rulers and Governors have annexed
sensible Rewards and Honors, and such things as have a lively and quick relish
with them unto the exercise of Virtue.

And hence it is that the most wise God himself has not propounded Virtue and
Goodness to the children of men singly as its own and only Reward, but has
also promised and really and effectually provided a Recompense of Reward for
it, that Happiness which I have been all this while in quest after, and has
made Virtue and Goodness the way, the method to attain that happiness, which is
in truth the end of it.

Upon the whole matter I therefore conclude that the Happiness of Mankind is
not to be found in this life, but it is a flower that grows in the Garden of
Eternity, and to be expected only in its full complement and fruition in that
life which is to succeed after our bodily dissolution: that although Peace of
Conscience, Tranquillity of mind, and the sense of the favor of God, that we
enjoy in this Life, like the bunches of Grapes brought by the Spies from
Canaan, are the prelibations and anticipations of our Happiness, yet the
complement of our Happiness consists in the Beatifical Vision of the ever
blessed God to all Eternity; where there is a vita perfecta, a perfect life
free from Pain, from Sorrow, from Cares, from Fears, vita perfecta, a perfect
life of Glory and Immortality, out of the reach or danger of Death, or the loss
of that Happiness, which we shall then enjoy in the presence of the ever
Glorious God, in whose presence is fullness of Joy, and at whose right hand are
Pleasures for evermore, Amen.

OF THE Chief End of Man, what it is, AND The Means to attain it.
Thesis I. The Chief End of Man, is to Glorify God, and everlastingly to enjoy
him.
WHen we come to any reasonable measure of understanding, the first question we
propound concerning the actions of our selves or others, is to enquire
concerning the End, why this or that is done: and the propounding of an End to
what we do, is one thing that gives us Reasonable Creatures a privilege above
the Beasts: And the wiser we grow, the more we enquire after, and propound to
our selves more excellent Ends, and of the more concernment.

The End which most concerns us to enquire after, is the end of our Being, why
or for what end we were made: for as that is the thing of the greatest moment
to us, so the ignorance or mistake therein is of the greatest danger.

Now touching this End of Man, we must know,

1. That in all wise workers that act by deliberation and choice, the
appointment of the end of any work belongs to him that makes it.

2. In as much therefore as Mankind is in its Original the workmanship of God,
therefore it belongs to him to appoint the end of his own workmanship; and of
him it must be inquired.

3. That in as much as God is the wisest worker, and in as much as Mankind is a
piece of excellent workmanship, it becomes the Wisdom of God, as to appoint man
to an end of his own designing, so to appoint him to an end answerable to the
excellency of the work, an end as much above other creatures, as man exceeds
them in worth and excellency.

So that certainly Man is ordained by God to an End, and to an excellent End,
beyond the condition of other inferior Creatures; for we see them all appointed
for the use and service of Man, to feed and cloth and heal and delight him.

What therefore is common to the Beasts as well as Man, cannot be the End of
Man. The Beasts Eat, and Drink, and Live, and Propagate their kind with as much
delight, and much more contentment than Man; they are free from Cares and from
Fears, which Man is not, and though they die, so does Man also; therefore to
live, and eat, and drink, and perpetuate their kind is too low an End for Man.
And if so, then much more is it below him to make Wealth, and Honor, and Power
his End: For they are but in order to his temporal life here, either to provide
for it, or to secure it: And besides that, they cannot answer the desires and
continuance of an Immortal Soul, which Man bears with him: And hence grows the
Weariness, and Vexation, and Unquietness, and Restlesness of Man, in the midst
of all Wealth, and Honors, and Pleasures, therefore there is some other End, to
which Man was appointed. Which is, 1. In reference to God, to glorify him. 2.
In reference to Man; an everlasting enjoyment of God.

1. To glorify God, two things are considerable.

1. What it is for Man to glorify God.

1. There is a Glorifying of God, common to all the Works of God, in as much as
they all bear in them the visible footsteps of the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness
of God. Thus the Sun and Heavens glorify God, Psa. 19.2. There is a glorifying
of God properly belonging to Intellectual Creatures, Angels, and Men.

1. In his Understanding, whereby he learns to know God in his Word, and in his
Works, his Power, Goodness, Wisdom, and Truth; and with his heart admires, and
with his tongue praises him.

2. In his Will; whereby he submits to him, Worships, Fears him, and in the
course of his life Obeys him; whereby he acknowledges his Sovereignty, and
submits to it, Psalm. 50.23. He that offers Praise, glorifieth him, and to him
that orders his conversation aright, will I show the Salvation of God. Both
these are imperfectly done here, but shall be perfectly done in the life to
come.

2. Why the Glorifying of God is made the Chief End of Man.

1. It is the Chief End that God proposed in all his Works of Creation. Prove.
16.4. He made all things for himself; that is, his own Glory: In his Works of
Preservation and Providence, Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I
will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. In his Work of Redemption,
Ephesians. 1.6. To the praise of the glory of his Grace, whereby he has made us
accepted in the beloved. In his Work of Sanctification, Matthew. 5.16. That Men
seeing your good Works, may glorify your Father who is in Heaven.

2. It is but just it should be the Chief End of Man to glorify God; because
it is a most Reasonable Tribute to pay to him, for all his Mercies and
Goodness: From him we receive our Being, and all the Blessings of it, and it is
but just for God to require, and for Man to perform, the due acknowledgment of
the Goodness of that God, from whom he receives them, which is his Glorifying
of God.

2. To enjoy God for ever.

1. Two things are to be explained. 1. What it is to enjoy God. 2. Why this is
part of the Chief End of Man?

1. To enjoy God, is either, 1. In this Life, which is to have Peace with God,
Assurance of Reconciliation with him; for then we have Peace with our selves,
Contentment and Quietness of Soul, Access to him as to our Father for all we
want, and Hope and Assurance of Everlasting Life, which will make the Comforts
of our Life safe, and the Afflictions thereof easy, and the End and
Dissolution thereof Comfortable. 2. In the life to come, the fullness of
fruition of the Knowledge, Goodness, Glory, and Presence of God, according to
the uttermost measure and capacity of our faculties, which in the Resurrection
shall be great and capacious; and this is called the Beatifical Vision.

2. Why this is part of the Chief End of Man? Because this is the Happiness and
Blessedness of Man to enjoy God; and nothing besides can make him Happy, which
appears, 1. in all other enjoyments, without the enjoyment of God, there is a
great deal of Vanity and emptiness, whether in Pleasures, or Profits, or
worldly Advantages: Men expect great matters from them, but after a little
enjoyment of them, they are weary and find themselves disappointed, and that
there is not that comfort in them that they expected; and then they travel to
some other worldly enjoyment, and there they find the like. This therefore
cannot afford Man his Happiness.

2. In all other enjoyments without God, there is a great deal of Vexation and
Trouble; The Cares, and Fears, and Sorrows, and Disappointments, that we meet
with in the enjoyment of them, does out weigh all the Contentment and Benefit
that we receive in them; and therefore this cannot be our Happiness.

3. All other enjoyments without God have their End and Term: Sometimes we over
live them; the Pleasures and Contentments of youth leave us when we are old:
And sometimes we see our Riches, our Health, our Earthly Comforts taken from
us; but, if not, yet when we die, we leave them; and yet our Souls continue
after death; and our Bodies and Souls continue after our Resurrection for ever.
The enjoyments therefore of this Life, cannot be our Happiness; but that
Happiness which continues as long as we continue; which is the enjoyment of the
Favor, Love, and Presence of God for ever.

Now put both together. The Glorifying of God, and the enjoyment of him for
ever, is the Happiness and Blessedness of Man, the Chief End for which he was
made. Such is the Goodness and Bounty of God, that he does not only enjoin Man
his Duty to Glorify him, but also joins with it Man's Happiness to enjoy him
for ever: He that observes the former, shall be sure not to miss of the latter:
In the same path and tract which leads us to Glorify God, which is our Duty,
we are sure to meet with our enjoyment of him, which is our everlasting
Happiness and Blessedness: And the business of the true Religion revealed in
the Scriptures, is to lead us to that Duty, and to that Happiness which is the
Chief End of Man: He that wants this, will be miserable in the midst of all
worldly Enjoyments; and he that attains this, his Comforts here shall be
blessed, his Crosses Sanctified, and his Death a gate to let him into a most
Blessed and Glorious and Everlasting Life.

Thesis II. The Scriptures of both Testaments are the only perfect Rule for
Man's attaining his Chief End.
This is the End, why Man was made, and which he ought principally to attend
and look after; but because to the attaining of the End, it is necessary that
the due means of attaining thereof, be known and used: And because, as Almighty
God, the Maker of Man, is he that alone must design the End of his own Work, so
likewise it belongs to him alone to choose and appoint and order the means
belonging to that end; therefore, as he is not wanting to us in appointing a
Fit and Blessed End to Mankind, so neither is he wanting in designing and
discovering unto Mankind the Means for attaining to that End.

This means is called a Rule, a fixed and settled direction, teaching and
showing us what is to be known, and what to be done and avoided, in order to
that end, Beasts follow instincts of Nature in their actions: But Man, that is
endued with higher faculties, and ordered to a better End, is to be directed to
that End by a Rule given by that God, who has appointed his End. This Rule
therefore that must guide Man to his great End of his Creation, requires

1. That it be a Rule given by God himself: For as he appoints the End of
Mankind, so he alone must appoint the Means of attaining it; and therefore the
discovery thereof must come from him.

2. That it be a certain Rule, in respect of the great consequence that depends
upon it, Man's everlasting Happiness.

3. That it be a fixed and settled Rule; for Mankind is apt to straggle and
wander, full of vain imaginations, which, were not the Rule fixed and stable,
would corrupt and disorder it.

4. A plain and easy Rule; because it concerns all Men, as well the unlearned
and weak, as the wise and learned; their concernment is equal, and therefore
the Rule, that tends to that common concernment, is fit to be plain and
familiar.

Since it is necessary therefore that there should be a Rule, and such a Rule,
we are to consider whether God has afforded such a Rule, and what it is, which
is set down in these three particulars.

1. That God has given his own Word to be this Rule.

2. That the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, are that Word of God.

3. That those Scriptures are the Rule, and the only Rule, whereby Man may
attain his Chief End.

1. That God has given us his own Word to be this Rule. And this, as before
appears, was necessary that the Direction to our Chief End should come from God.

2. The Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are the Word of God.

Herein is to be observed. 1. What those Scriptures are They are the Canonical
Books of the Old and New Testament, excluding the Books commonly called
Apocrypha. These were written in several Ages by holy Men inspired with the
Spirit of God. 2 Timothy 3.16. Some parts thereof, as the Five Books of Moses
above Three thousand five hundred years since; and that of the New Testament
above One thousand six hundred years since. And Almighty God, who has had a
most special care of the Everlasting Good of Mankind, has by a wonderful
Providence hitherto preserved them uncorrupted, and has dispersed them over
all Nations in their several Languages, that as the common Salvation concerned
all Men, so the means of attaining it, might be likewise common to all Men.

2. Why the Divine Providence has ordered it to be put into Writing? It is
true, in the first Ages of the World, till the time of Moses, which was near
Three thousand five hundred years, the Will of God was not put into writing,
but was delivered over by word of mouth, from Father to Son. And this was the
direction that Men had to know and to obey God. 1. Because in those ancient
Ages of the World, Men lived long: For Adam, the first Man, lived above Twenty
years after Methusalem, the eighth from Adam, was born; and Methusalem lived
almost an hundred years after Sem was born; and Sem lived above sixty years
after Isaac was born. So that in these three Men, Adam, Methusalem, and Sem,
all the Truths of God for above Two thousand years were preserved and delivered
over. 2. Because the select Churhes of God were preserved in Families, and were
not National; and so the knowledge of the true God kept in a smaller compass.

But when after the Ages of Men were shorter, and when the Church of God grew
to be National, as it was after the Jews came out of Egypt, then God himself
wrote his Law in Tables of Stone, and Moses wrote his Five Books: And then, and
from that time forward, the Sacred Histories and Prophesies under the Old
Testament, and the Gospel, and other parts of the New Testament was committed
to Writing, for these Reasons principally.

1. That they might be the better preserved from being lost or forgotten.

2. That they might be the better preserved from being corrupted: For that
which is delivered only by word of Mouth, is many times varied and changed in
the second or third hand.

3. That it might be the better dispersed and communicated to all Mankind. And
this was done in the Old Testament, by Translations of it into Greek, about two
hundred years before Christ, and dispersing it into a great part of the World:
And after Christ's time, both the Old and New Testament Translated into several
Languages, and since dispersed over the World; which could not have been so
well done, had it not been at first in Writing.

Thus the Wisdom and Providence of God provides for the exigence of all times
most wisely and excellently: And having preserved part of this precious Jewel,
the Old Testament, for the most part, within the Commonwealth of the Jews, till
it was broken, about the time of Christ, by the Romans, has now delivered both
to all Mankind.

3. It is to be inquired, Which the Author has elsewhere more largely
considered.
What evidence we have to prove those Writings to be the Word of God. And
omiting many others, we insist upon these principally.

1. In the Writings of Men, especially when written by several Men at several
times, their Writings do seldom or never agree, but differ and cross one
another. And the reason is, because they are written by several Men, who are
all guided by several Minds and Judgments. But the Scriptures, though written
by several Men in several Ages, many unacquainted with one another Writings,
yet they all consent and speak the same Truth; which is an evidence that it was
One and the same Spirit that did dictate them.

2. It is not possible for any Man, without Revelation from God, to foretell
things to come. Now these holy Writings foretold things that most certainly
came to pass in their several seasons, though many Generations after the
Prophecy written; therefore they were written by Inspiration from God. As for
instance, the Babylonian Captivity, and the Deliverance from it, by Jeremy; the
Persian and Grecian Monarchy, by Daniel; the Birth and Death of Christ; the
final destruction of Jerusalem, and Dispersion of the Jews; the Conversion of
the Gentiles, by Isaiah, and the rest of the Prophets.

3. The Matter contained in these holy Writings is that of the greatest
importance; the Will of God concerning Man, the discovery of the Creation of
the World by God; of assurance of the Life to come; of the means of Peace
between God and Man. These are things of the highest concernment in the World,
yet things which could never be discovered but by God himself; and such as
never any writings of Men only, ever could discover, or durst pretend unto: The
height, and rarity, and excellence, and weight of the matter of these Books do
evidence, that they were the Revelations of God to Man, and by his Providence
committed to writing and delivered over to Mankind, as the Rule to attain their
Chief End.

3. As the Rule to attain our Chief End must come from God; and as the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are the Word of God; so we say, That
these Scriptures are the Rule, and the only Rule to attain our Chief End. Good
Books of other Men, good Education, good Sermons, the determinations of the
Church are good helps; but there is no other Rule but this. It is by this Rule
we must try other Men's Books and Sermons, yea, the very Church it self. Thus
the Bereans tried the Doctrine of the Apostles themselves, by the Scriptures
which they then had, and are commended for it. Acts 17.11. And Peter prefers
the evidence of the Scriptures before a voice from Heaven. 2 Pet. 1.18, 19. And
Christ himself appeals to the Scriptures to justify himself and his Doctrine.
Joh. 6.39. And if the Scriptures be the only Rule,

1. Then not a Natural Conscience, especially as the case now stands with
Mankind; for that is many times corrupted and false principled, puts good for
evil, and evil for good: It is, and may be a great help, guide, and direction,
not a perfect Rule.

2. Then not the Writings and Traditions of Men: God that appoints the End, and
Means must be the discoverer of the Means of our Salvation.

3. Then not pretended Revelations; those may be Men's imaginations, or the
Devils delusions; to prevent and discover which, God has set up this great and
standing Revelation of his Scriptures.

4. Then not the Church, for that may err, and it has no way to evidence it
self but by the Scriptures, which are its Foundation.

The business of Man's Salvation is of that importance, and the Wisdom of God so
great, that he will not commit so weighty a matter to such uncertain Rules as
these, but has provided one of his own making, the Holy Scriptures.

Thesis III. The Principal Subject of the Scriptures is what Man is to believe
concerning God, and what duty God requires of Man.
It is the Principal Subject of the Scriptures. 1. Because it is of the
greatest importance and concernment. Eccles. 12.13. Let us hear the conclusion
of the whole matter, Fear God and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole
duty of Man. Fear God, which cannot be without the knowledge of him, and keep
his Commandments, which contains his duty of Obedience to him. 2. Because all
the other Matters of the Scriptures have a kind of dependence upon, and
connection with this Principal Matter or Subject.

But though this be the Principal Matter or Subject of the Scriptures, yet they
also contain very many other matters, that do very much concern us to know and
believe; as namely, What we are to understand concerning our selves, the State
of our Creation, the Fall of Man, the State wherein that Fall has put all
Mankind, the means of our recovery, the Immortality of the Soul, the
Resurrection, the different estate of the good and bad after death, the History
of the Church and Household of God, from the Creation of Man, till some thirty
years after the Resurrection of Christ, and diverse other and necessary Matters
to be known both for our direction, instruction, and comfort.

And as the Scriptures do principally teach the Knowledge of Good, and our
duty, as the principal Subject, so they do principally teach it above other
teachings or means. It is true, that the very Light of Nature does teach us
much of what is to be known concerning God and our duty to him: As namely, that
there is a God, and that there is but one God; that this God is the first
Cause, and also the preserver of all things, That he is Eternal, without
beginning or end, Infinite, Spiritual without mixture, most Perfect; and
therefore most free, most Powerful, most Holy, most Wise, most Just, most
Bountiful and Merciful. And upon all these Grounds, the Light of Nature
teaches that he is to be Honored, to be Feared, to be Worshipped, to be
Obeyed. This the Apostle shows us, Romans 1.20. For the Invisible things of him
from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead, so that they are without
excuse. And this light of Nature gives this Manifestation of God, 1. By the
Works of Creation and Providence. 2. By the Workings of the Conscience. 3. By a
Traditional delivery over of some truths from man to man, which by the study
and pains of some wise men and Lawgivers, raised up by the Providence of God,
have been perfected and delivered over to others.

But the Pre-eminence of the Scriptures in their instruction of Mankind in the
Knowledge of God, and his duty to God, appears partly in these considerations.

1. The knowledge the Scriptures give in these things, is more easy to be
attained; because it sets down these truths plainly, that the most ordinary
capacity may understand: Whereas the knowledge of these things by the Light of
Nature, is more difficult, requires much observation and industry, and
attention, deducing and drawing down one thing from another, and so arriving at
their knowledge by much pains and study.

2. The knowledge of these things delivered by the Scripture is much more full
and perfect, than that knowledge which can be attained by the Light of Nature;
as appears in these two respects. 1. Those things concerning God, that the
Light of Nature does in some measure discover, are more fully, completely and
clearly discovered by the Light of the Scriptures. 2. The Scriptures do
discover those things concerning God, and his Works, and our selves, that were
never discovered, nor indeed discoverable, by the Light of Nature, which as
they are of greatest importance to be known; so being discovered by the
Scriptures, they do wonderfully clear and satisfy the defects of the Light of
Nature. As for instance in both kinds; the Light of Nature discovers that there
is a God; but the manner of his subsistence in Three Persons, yet in Unity of
Essence, is only learned by the Scriptures. The Light of Nature discovers, that
he is the first Cause and Preserver of all things; but the manner how all
things were produced, and when, is only learned by the Scriptures. The Light of
Nature tells us, that this God is to be worshipped and obeyed; but in what
manner he is to be worshipped, and the particulars of his commands wherein he
is to be obeyed, it discoves not, or, at least, very darkly: The Scriptures
only show us clearly the manner of his worship, and the certain Rule of our
Obedience. The Light of Nature shows us, that there is a great defection and
disorder in our Natures; but whence it did arise, or how it is to be helped,
the Scripture only teaches. The Light of Nature shows us, that all Sin is an
offense against the Purity, Justice, and Will of God, and therefore deserves
his anger and displeasure; but how the guilt of Sin may be done away, and the
favor of God again procured, is not within the reach of the Light of Nature to
discover, but is only learned from the Scriptures. The Light of Nature
teaches, that surely there is a Reward for the Righteous, and a punishment of
the obstinate sinner; but how it shall be inflicted, and when, and how Mankind
should be put into a capacity of receiving Rewards or Punishments by
Resurrection from the Dead, the Light of Nature discovers not, or, at least,
but darkly and diffidently and confusedly; the Light of the Scriptures only
discovers all plainly, clearly, and evidently. These and diverse other Truths
are discovered in the Scriptures, which the Light of Nature, either not at all,
or if at all, yet but darkly points at.

3. The Light of Nature is very uncertain and easily corrupted, either by
lusts, or weakness, or variety of Imaginations. And from hence grew all the
false gods, false worships, idolatries, and supersititions, among the Heathen
that were only led by the Light of Nature, changing the Truth of God into a
lie, and changing the Glory of the Incorruptible God into an Image made like to
a corruptible man. Romans 1.23, 25. But the Light of the Scriptures is an
unchangeable, stable, fixed Light, not adulterated, nor to be corrupted, but
though Men's imaginations and fancies, be as unstable as the Waters, and thereby
corrupt and pervert themselves, yet the Light of the Scriptures continue firm
and stable, unchangeable in the successions of thousands of generations.

Now the things that the Scriptures thus principally teach, are two, in order
to the two great Powers, or Faculties of Man. 1. In order to his Understanding,
what is to be believed, and to be believed principally touching God. 2. In
order to his Will, or practical faculty, What God requires to be done.

As touching the former, What is to be believed? Believing, and knowledge, and
opinion, differ in this.

1. Knowledge is that whereby we certainly know any thing to be, or nor to be
by our Senses, or Reason, or Experience.

2. Opinion is a doubtful uncertain Persuasion of mind that any thing is, or is
not; yet not without a mixture of doubting or distrust.

3. Belief is a certain persuasion of the truth of any thing upon the Credit
and Authority of another. Now if we be assured, that whatsoever God says, is
most certainly true, (as needs it must be, because Truth is an essential
Attribute of God,) and if we be persuaded surely, that these Scriptures are the
Word of God, then of necessity we must believe whatsoever Almighty God in the
Scriptures reveals: And this is Belief. So that the very same Truth that may be
known by Reason or Observation, may likewise be believed as revealed in the
Word of God. Though many things are to be believed, because revealed in the
Scriptures, which cannot be fully demonstrated by Reason. Thus though it be
partly evident to Reason that God made the World, and so is the object of our
knowledge; yet the same Truth, as revealed in the Scriptures, is to be
believed, and so is the object of our Faith. Heb. 11.3. Through Faith we
understand that the Worlds were framed by the Word of God; that is, We do
acknowledge and subscribe unto it as true, because God in the Scriptures, which
are his Word, has revealed and discovered it unto us.

And as touching things to be done, the duty God requires of us, here is the
difference between the performance of duties, by a Man believing the
Scriptures, and another Man. A Believer does a good work, (for example, a Work
of Mercy) and a Heathen, or another Moral Man, does the same work; and yet
though the work be, for the matter, the same, they very much differ in the
value: The Believer understands by the Word of God, that it is a duty enjoined
him of God, to be merciful, as our Father who is in Heaven is merciful; he
believes it to be the command of God, and he does it in obedience to that
command, and so it is accepted of God; but another Man many times does it, or
may do it not upon the same account, but it may be merely upon the inclination
of his natural temper, or for vainglory; and so it is not so much an act of
obedience to God, as love to himself. And therefore in the former, it is the
Obedience of Faith, in the latter, an Action of Nature.

ECCLES. XII. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the
evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh when thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them.
TWo things are principally commended to us in this Text. 1. A Duty enjoined,
to remember our Creator. 2. The principal Season of that Duty, The days of our
Youth. Which Season is recommended for this duty by way of preference above the
evil days; not as if the Remembering our Creator were unseasonable at any time,
but because the time of our Youth is more seasonable than that Evil time, or
those Evil days, wherein we shall say, We have no pleasure in them.

1. The Duty enjoined, is to Remember our Creator, which imports two things. 1.
To know our Creator; for we cannot remember what we have not some knowledge of.
2. To Remember him, often to call him to mind.

1. The former part of this Duty is to Know our Creator. This is that which
aged David commended to his young Son Solomon. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou Solomon,
my Son, Know thou the God of thy Father. And we have Two excellent Books,
wherein the Knowledge of God is discovered to us; the Book of his Works, the
Works of his Creation and Providence; and the Book of his Word, contained in
the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, wherein he is more fully, and
explicitly, and plainly discovered unto us: These Books we are often to read
and consider. And this is the chief reason, why Understanding and Reason is
given unto Mankind, and not unto the Beasts that perish, namely, that we might
improve it to the attaining of the Knowledge of Almighty God, in the due
consideration of the Works and Word of God; and hereby we learn his Eternity,
his Infiniteness, his Wisdom, his Power, his Goodness, his Justice, his Mercy,
his Alsufficiency, his Sovereignty, his Providence, his Will, his Purpose
concerning Mankind, his Care of them, his Beneficence toward them. And the
Nature of this Knowledge is not barely Speculative, but it is a knowledge that
is Operative; that perfects our Nature; that conforms it to the Image of that
God we thus know; that sets Mankind in its due state and station; keeps it in
its just subordination unto the God we thus know, which is our greatest
Perfection. This Knowledge must necessarily make us love him, because he is
Good, Merciful, Bountiful, Beneficent; and therefore the Wise man chooses to
express him by that Title of Creator, from whom we receive our very Being, and
all the good that can accompany it. This Knowledge teaches us to be thankful
unto him, as our Greatest Benefactor; to depend upon him, because of his Power
and Goodness; to fear him, because of his Power and Justice; to obey him,
because of his Power, Justice and Sovereignty; to walk before him in Sincerity,
because of his Power, Justice, and Wisdom. In sum, the several Attributes of
Almighty God do strike upon the choicest parts, and faculties, and affections,
and tendencies of our Hearts and Souls, and do tune them into that order and
harmony that is best suitable to the perfecting of our Nature, and the placing
of them in a right and just posture, both in relation to Almighty God, our
selves, and others.

2. The second part of our Duty is, To Remember our Creator thus known; which
is to have the Sense and Exercise of this Knowledge always about us; to set
Almighty God always before our eyes, frequently to think of him, to make our
application to him: For many there are that may have a knowledge of God, but
yet the exercise of that knowledge is suspended; sometimes by Inadvertence and
Inconsiderateness; sometimes by a wilful Abdication of the exercise of that
Knowledge. And these are such as forget God, that have not God in all their
thoughts, that say to the Almighty, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge
of thy ways.

The Benefits of this Remembering our Creator, are very great: 1. It keeps the
Soul and Life in a constant, and true, and regular frame. As the want of the
Knowledge, so the want of the Remembrance of God, is the cause of that disorder
and irregularity of our minds and lives. 2. And consequently the best
Preventive of Sin, and Apostasy, and Backsliding from God and our Duty to him.
3. It keeps the Mind and Soul full of constant Peace and Tranquillity; because
it maintains a constant, humble, and comfortable converse of the Soul, with the
Presence and Favor of God. 4. It renders all conditions of life comfortable,
and full of contentment; because it keeps the Soul in the presence of God, and
communicates unto it continual Influxes of Contentment and Comfort; for what
can disturb him, who, by the continual Remembrance of his Creator, has the
constant acquaintance with his Power, Goodness, and Alsufficiency? 5. Though no
Man has ground enough to promise to himself an Immunity from Temporal
Calamities, yet certainly there is no better expedient in the World to secure a
Man against them, and preserve him from them than this: For, the most part of
those sharp Afflictions that befall Men, are but to make them Remember their
Creator when they have forgotten him, that he may open their ears to
Discipline, and awake them to Remember their Creator, Read Job 33. A Man that
keeps about him the Remembrance of his Creator, prevents in a great measure the
necessity of that severe Discipline. 6. In short this Remembrance of our
Creator is an Antidote against the Allurements of the World; the Temptations of
Satan; the deceitfulness of Sin. It renders the best things the World can
afford inconsiderable, in comparison of him, whom we remember; it renders the
worst the World can do, but little and contemptible; so long as we Remember our
Creator, it makes our lives happy, our deaths easy, and carries us to an
everlasting Enjoyment of that Creator, whom we have here remembered.

The Injunction of the Duty of Remembering our Creator, is the more importantly
necessary. 1. In regard of the great consequence of the benefit we receive from
it, as before. 2. In regard of the great danger of omitting it. The truth is,
the greatest part of the miscarriages of our lives, are occasioned by the want
of the remembrance of our Creator; then it is that we fail in our Duty, when we
forget him. 3. In regard of the many Temptations this World affords to make us
forget our Creator; the Pleasures, and Profits, and Recreations, and
Preferments, and Noise, and Business of this Life; yea, many of them, which are
in themselves, and in their Nature lawful, are apt to ingross our Thoughts, our
Time, our Cares, and to leave too little room in our memory for this great Duty
that most deserves it, namely, The Remembrance of our Creator. Our memory is a
noble Cabinet, and there cannot be a more excellent Jewel to lodge in (it) than
our Great and Bountiful Creator; yet for the most part we fill this noble
Cabinet with pebles and straws, if not with dung and filth; with either sinful,
or, at least, with Unprofitable, Impertinent, Trifling Furniture.

2. The Season for this Duty, that is here principally commended, is, The days
of our Youth. And the Reasons that commend that Season for this Duty are
principally these:

1. Because this is the most Accepted Time. God Almighty was pleased under the
Old Law to intimate this, in (the) reservation to himself of the first fruits,
and the first born. And surely, the first fruits of our Lives, when dedicated
to his remembrance, are best accepted to him.

2. Because this Season is commonly our Turning Season to Good or Evil. And if
in Youth we forget our Creator, it is very great difficulty to resume our Duty:
Commonly it requires either very extraordinary Grace, or very strong
Affliction, to reclaim a Man to his Duty, whose Youth has been seasoned with
ill Principles, and the Forgetfulness of God.

3. Because the time of Youth is most Obnoxious to forget God; there is great
Inadvertency and Inconsiderateness, Incogitancy, Unstableness, Vanity, Love of
Pleasures, Easiness to be corrupted in Youth; and therefore necessary in this
season to lodge the Remembrance of our Creator in our Youth, to be an Antidote
against these defects, to establish and fix the entrance of our lives with this
great Preservative, the Remembrance of our Creator.

4. When Almighty God lays hold of our Youth, by a timely Remembrance of
himself, and thereby takes the first possession of our Souls, commonly it keeps
its ground, and seasons the whole course of our ensuing Lives; it prevents and
anticipates the Devil and the World. It is true, it may possibly be, that
Natural Corruption and Worldly Temptations may suspend the actings of this
Principle, but it is rarely extinguished: It is like that abiding seed
remaining in him: spoken of by John. 1 John 3.9. Which will recover him again.

5. The last reason is because there are Evil Days that will certainly come,
which will render this work of Remembering our Creator difficult to be first
begun: and therefore it is the greatest Prudence imaginable to lay in this
stock, before they come, for it will certainly stand us in great stead when
they come. It is the greatest Imprudence in the World to defer that business,
which is necessary to be done, unto such a time, wherein it is very difficult
to be done: and it is the greatest Prudence in the World to do that work, which
must be done, in such a season wherein it may be easily and safely done. He
that lays in this store of Remembrance of his Creator before the Evil Day come,
will find it of the greatest use and service to him in that Evil Day.

Now those Evil Days are many, and all of them befall some, but some of them
will certainly befall all Mankind.

1. An Evil Day of Public or Private Calamities. He that beforehand has laid
in this stock of Remembering his Creator, will be easily able to bear any
Calamity when it comes; but a man, that has not done this before hand, will
find it a very unseanable time to begin to set about it, when Fear, and
Anguish, and Perplexity, and Storms, and Confusion are round about him, and
take up all his thoughts.

2. The Evil Day of Sickness is an unseasonable time, or at least a very
difficult time, to begin such a business. When Sickness, and Pain, and
Disorder, and uneasiness shall render a man Impatient and full of Trouble, and
his Thoughts full of Disorder, and Discomposure, and Waywardness, then it will
be found a difficult business to begin the Remembrance of our Creator. It is
true, no time is utterly unacceptable of God for this work, but surely it is
best to begin before this Evil day come, for then it will be a comfort and
mitigate the Pains and Discomposure of Sickness, when a man can thus reflect
upon his life past, as Hezekiah did in his Sickness; Remember, O Lord, that I
have not failed to remember my Creator in the days of my Health.

3. The evil Day of Old and Infirm Age, which is a Disease and burden of it
self, and yet is ever accompanied with other Sicknesses, Pains and Diseases,
and a Natural frowardness, and Morosity, and Discontentedness of mind, and
therefore not so seasonable to begin the undertaking of this work as the
flourishing Youth. And indeed, a man cannot reasonably expect that the Great
God, who invites the Remembering our Creator in the Days of our Youth, and has
been ungratefully denied, should accept the Dreggs of our Age for a Sacrifice,
when we have neglected the thoughts of him in our strong and flourishing age.
But on the other side, that man, that has spent the time of his Youth and
Strength in the remembrance of his Creator, may with comfort and contentment,
in his old and feeble age, reflect upon his past life with Hezekiah, Remember,
O Lord, I pray thee, that I have not failed to remember thee in the days of my
Youth and Strength, and I pray thee accept of the endeavors of my Old Decayed
Age to preserve that Remembrance of thee, which I so early began, and have
constantly continued, and pardon the defects, that the natural decays of my
strength and age have occasioned in that duty.

4. The evil day of Death: when my Soul fits hovering upon my lips and is ready
to take its flight, when all the World cannot give my Life any certain truce
for a day, or for an hour, and I am under the cold embraces of Death, then to
begin to remember my Creator is a difficult and unseasonable time: But when I
have began that business early, and held on the Remembrance of my Creator, it
will be a Cordial even against Death it self, and will carry my Soul unto the
Presence of that God, which I have thus remembered in and from the days of my
Youth, with Triumph and Rejoicing.

Briefly therefore:

1. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth; because thou know not
whether thou shall have any other Season to Remember him: Death may overtake
thee, and lay thee in the Land of Forgetfulness: thy Spring may be thy Autumn,
and thy early bud may be the only fruit that Mortality may afford thee.

2. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth; because it is a time of
Invitation: neglect not this Season, because thou know not whether ever thou
shall be again invited to it.

Remember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, that thy Creator may remember
thee, in the days of thy Sickness, and Old Age, and in the Evil Day.

4. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, lest thy Creator neglect
thee in the Evil Day. Neglected Favors, especially from thy God, may justly
provoke him never to lend thee more; Because I called, and ye refused, I also
will laugh at your Calamity, and mock when your Fear comes. Prove. 1.24, 26.

5. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, because it will heal the
Evil of Evil days, when they come; it will turn those days, that are in
themselves Evil, to become days of Ease and Comfort; it will heal the Evil of
the day of Affliction, of Sickness, of Old Age, and of Death it self, and make
it a passage into a better, a more abiding Life.

OF THE Uncleanness of the Heart, and how it is Cleansed.
Psalm. 51.10. Cor mundum crea in me Deus.
THis Prayer imports, or leads us into the Consideration of these things: 1.
What the condition of every man's Heart is by Nature: It is a foul and unclean
Heart. 2. Wherein consists this uncleanness of the Heart. 3. What is the ground
or cause of this uncleanness of the Heart. 4. Whence it is that the condition
of the Heart is changed: It is an act of Divine Omnipotence. 5. What is the
condition of a Heart thus cleansed, or wherein the cleanness of the Heart
consists.

I. If the Heart must be created a new, before it can be a clean Heart;
Certainly, before it is thus new formed, is is an Impure and unclean Heart. And
this, that is here employed, is frequently in the Scriptures directly affirmed:
Genesis 7.5. The imagination of the thoughts of the Heart of Man is only Evil
continually: Jer. 17.9. The Heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, who can know it? Mark 7.21. Out of the Heart proceed evil
Thoughts, Adulteries, etc. And indeed all the Evils that are in the World, are
but evidences of the Impurity of the Heart, that unclean Fountain and Original
of them.

II. Concerning the second; wherein the Uncleanness of the Heart consists. The
Heart is indeed the Crasis, or Collection of all the Powers of the Soul in the
full extent of it; and therefore takes in not only the Will and Affections, but
the Understanding and Conscience, and accordingly has its Denomination proper
to those several faculties, as a Wise Heart, a Foolish Heart, a Believing
Heart, an Unbelieving Heart, an Hard Heart, a Soft Heart, and the like. But
answerable to the propriety of the Epithete, Clean or Unclean, it principally
concerns the Heart under the notion of Will or Desire, and the Consequents that
are thereupon; and consequently according to the propriety of Application; a
Clean Heart is such a Heart as has Clean Desires and Affections; an unclean
Heart is that which has unclean and impure Desires, a Heart full of evil
Concupiscence. And because the Cleanness or Uncleanness of the Desires are
denominated from their Objects, and not from the Affections or Desires
themselves, which are diversified according to their Objects; Hence it is that
a Heart, that fixes her Desires upon pure and clean Objects, is said in that
act to be a Clean Heart, and that which fixes its Desires upon Unclean or
Impure Objects is an Unclean Heart in that Act: Therefore, before we can
determine what an Unclean Heart is, it is necessary to know what are Unclean
Objects, the tendency of the Desires of the Heart whereunto does denominate an
Unclean Heart. Generally whatsoever is a thing prohibited by the Command of
GOd, carries in it an Immundities, an Impurity and Uncleanness in it: But that
is not the Uncleanness principally intended; it is more Large and Spacious than
the intent of the Text bears: But there are certain Lusts and Impure or
Immoderate Propensions in our Natures after certain Objects, which come under
the name of Unclean Lusts; and those are of two kinds: the Lusts of the Mind,
and the Lusts of the Flesh: for so they are called and distinguished by the
Apostle. The Lusts of the Mind are such as have their Activity principally in
the Mind, though they may have their Improvements by the Crasis and
Constitution of the Body: as the Lusts of Envy, Revenge, Hatred, Pride,
Vainglory. These are more Spiritual Lusts; and therefore though they are more
Devilish, yet they are not properly so Unclean, as those we after mention. The
Lusts of the Flesh are such Lusts, as arise from our sensual Appetites after
sensual Objects; as the Lusts after Meats, Drink, and Carnal Pleasures. And
though these Objects are not in themselves sinful, nor consequently the
Appetites of them unlawful, (for they are planted in our Natures, by the Wise
and Pure God of Nature, to most necessary and excellent Ends; for the
Preservation of our selves and our Kind;) yet they do accidently become
Impurities and Uncleanness to us, when inordinately Affected or Acted. And
these are those Unclean Objects, the Desires whereof do denominate an Unclean
Heart; but principally the Latter, the Lust of Carnal Concupiscence, called by
the Scriptures in an eminent manner the Lust of the Flesh, 1 John 2.16. Fleshly
Lusts, that fight against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. Walking after the Flesh in the
Lusts of Uncleanness, 2 Pet. 2.10. Perchance bearing some Analogy to those
Legal Uncleanness in the Levitical Law, especially to those of Levit. 15.
Even the very natural Infirmities; nay, those that are not only tolerated, but
allowed, carry in them a kind of Impurity and Uncleanness. And hence grow those
many Legal Impurities which disabled the Jews from coming into the Camp or
Tabernacle till they were Purified, as that of Leprosy, touching of dead
bodies, unclean issues, uncleanness after Childbirth, uncleanness of natural
Commixtions, Lev. 15.18. Exodus 19.15. The uncleanness of natural Secessions,
Deuteronomy. 23.13, 14. The washings of Aaron and his Sons, Exodus 30.20. All which are
but Emblems of the Impurity of the Heart, and of the great Care that is to be
used in the keeping of it Clean: and the Reason is Morally and Excellently
given, Deuteronomy. 23.14. For the Lord thy God walks in the midst of the Camp, to
deliver thee, and to give up thine Enemies before thee: therefore shall thy
Camp be Holy, that he see no Unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee.
The Conclusion therefore is, that this Carnal Concupiscence, the Lust of the
Flesh, predominate in the Heart, is that which principally and by way of
Eminence, in respect of the subject matter of it, denominates an Unclean Heart.
But in as much as this Concupiscence has somewhat in it, that is natural, and
consequently is not simply of it self Sin or Uncleanness; therefore it is
requisite to give a denomination of Uncleanness and Impurity to those desires,
that there be some Formalities requisite to the denomination of this to be
Unclean and Sinful, which is, when those Desires are not in subjection to right
Reason; for it being a proceed of the inferior Faculties, the sensual Appetite,
when the same is not in subordination to that Empire which God has given the
more Heavenly and Noble Powers of the Soul; it becomes Confusion and inverting
of the order of Nature; and this is principally Discovered when these Desires
are. 1. Immoderate. 2. Unseasonable. 3. Without their proper end. 4. Irregular.
5. Unruly, and without the Bridle of Reason.

III. The Causes of this Uncleanness of the Heart, are principally these two:
1. The Impetuousness, and continual solicitations of the sensual Appetite,
which continually sends up its foul Exhalations and Steems into the Heart, and
thereby taints and infects it. The Soul of Man is like a kind of Fire, which if
it be fed with clean and sweet materials, it yields sweet and comfortable
Fumes; but if it be fed with impure and unclean, and stinking oil and
exhalations, it is tainted with them, and makes unsavory thoughts, which are a
kind of Fume that rise from this Fire; and therefore if the distemper of the
Body, or sensual Appetite send up choleric Steems into this sacred Fire, it
yields nothing but thoughts of Anger and Indignation: If it sends up Melancholy
and Earthy fumes, it fills the Soul with black, and dismal, and discontented
thoughts: If it send up, as most ordinarily it does, sensual and fleshly
Steems, it fills the Heart with sensual and wanton thoughts. 2. The Weakness
and Defect of the imperial part of the Soul, the Reason, and Understanding, and
this Defect is commonly upon these two occasions. 1. The Soul wants a clear
Sense and Judgment, that these Desires are not fit to be gratified, but to be
denied, at least, when they become Immoderate or Unseasonable. It is ordinarily
our Infirmity to judge of things as they are at present; and therefore if the
Present presents it self pleasing or displeasing, we accordingly entertain it,
or refuse it, without any due prospect to the event or state of things at a
distance; either because we Know it not, or Believe it not, or Regard it not.
If a Man, being solicited to unwarrantable or unseasonable carnal Pleasures,
has not a prospect that the end thereof will be bitterness; or, if he have
such a Prospect, yet he believes it not; or if he do, yet if his Judgment
prefer the satisfaction of a present Lust, before the avoiding of an endless
pain, it is no wonder if he submit to the solicitation of his sensual Appetite.
2. But if the Judgment be right, yet if the Superior and more noble part of
the Soul have not Courage and Resolution enough to give the Law to the
Inferior, but yields, and submits, and becomes base, the sensual Appetite gets
the throne and Captivates Reason, and rules as it pleases; and this is
commonly the condition of the Soul after a fall: for the sensual Appetite once
a Victor, becomes Imperious, and Emasculates and Captivates the superior
Faculty to a continued Subjection. And this is the Reason why, when Lusts of
any kind, especially that of the Flesh, having gotten the Mastery, makes a Man
endued with Reason and Understanding, yet infinitely more Intemperate and
Impure than the very Beasts themselves, which have no such Check or Advantage
of Reason: for those noble Faculties of Fantasy and Imagination, and Memory,
and Reason it self, being prostituted to Lust, does bring in all the Advantages
of its own perfection to that service, and thereby sins beyond the extent of a
bare sensual Creature; the very Reason it self invents new and prodigious
Lusts, and Provisions for them, and fulfillings of them; the Fantasy improves
them; the Heart and Thoughts feed upon them; and so by that very Perfection of
his Nature, which was placed in him to Command and Regulate these Lusts or
Desires of the sensual Appetite, becomes the most exquisite and industrious
Advancer of them, and makes a man infinitely worse than a Beast: for a Beast
has no antecedent speculations of his Lust, no provisions for them, but when
the opportunity and his own natural propensions incline him to them; when he
has fulfilled his Lust, thinks no more of it: but Man, by the advantage of his
Reason, his Fantasy, his Memory, makes Provisions for his Lusts; yields up
his thoughts to speculations of them; studies stratagems and contrivances to
satisfy them, So that by how much his nature is the more perfect, his sensual
Lusts are the more exquisite and unsatiable: and by this means his Heart
becomes Unclean, a very Stews of Wantonness and Impurity, a box full of
nothing, but stinking and unsavory Vapors and Steems, the very sink and
receptacle of all the Impure desires of the Flesh, where they are cherished,
and entertained, and sublimated into Impurities, more exquisite, and yet more
filthy, than ever the sensual Appetite could arrive unto, and this is an
Unclean Heart.

And upon these Considerations a man may easily see how little ground there is
for to think there should be a Communion between Almighty God, or his most Holy
Spirit, with a man thus qualified; 1. The Heart, as it is the seat of the
Desires, is the only fit Sacrifice to be offered up to God; as it is the
Chamber of our thoughts, it is the only fit Room to entertain him in; as it is
the fountain of our Actions, the fittest part to be assisted with the Spirit of
God; it is the only fit thing that we can give to God; and indeed the only
thing in effect that he requires of us. 2. Again, that God is a most Pure God,
his Spirit a most Pure and delicate Spirit; and let any man then judge, whether
such a nasty, impure, unclean Heart is a fit Sacrifice to be offered to such a
God; or a fit receptacle for such a Spirit. It therefore imports such a man,
that hopes to have Communion with God, to have his Heart in a better Temper.
Again, it seems more than probable to me, that as a Body fed with poisonous and
unwholesome Food, must needs by such a Diet contract foulness and putrefaction:
So the very Soul of Man, which has so strict a Conjunction with, and union to
the Body, by continual Conversation with, and Subjection to such unclean and
fleshly thoughts, receives a Tincture and an imbasement by them; which, if
there were no other Hell, must needs make it Miserable in its Separation upon
these two Respects: 1. Upon the Consideration of that Ugliness, which it has
contracted by those impure Conversations, and which it might have avoided, if
it had in the Body exercised its proper Empire over them. 2. By that
Disappointment, which it finds in the State of separation from the fulfilling
and satisfying those sensual Inclinations, which it effected here, and now
carries with it, but stands utterly disappointed of any satisfaction of them.

IV. We consider How it comes to pass, that a Heart, thus naturally unclean, is
Cleansed, which in general is by a Restitution of the Soul to its proper and
native Sovereignty and Dominion over the sensual Appetite, and those Lusts that
arise from the Constitution of the Body, and the Connection of the Soul to it.
And this Restitution is answerable to the Depravation or Impotence, whereby the
Soul is Subjected and Captivated under those Lusts, which are principally these
following:

1. The first ground of the Impotency of the Soul, in subduing of the sensual
Appetite is in the Understanding, which is so far weakened or darkened by natural
Corruption, that it is ready in point of Judgment to prefer the present
fruition of Corporal Pleasures, and the satisfaction of the sensual Appetite,
before the denying of it; for it sees and finds a present contentment in the
former, but sees not the danger and inconvenience that will ensue upon it, nor
the benefit and advantage that will ensue upon a due Restraint and Moderation
of them; It finds a present Contentment and Satisfaction in the one, but it
has not the Prospect of the other, or if it have, yet the Conviction thereof
is so Weak and Imperfect, that the Pleasures of Sin for a season do overcome
and subdue it. For the Cure therefore of this Error and Impotency in the
Judgment, there ought to be: 1. A Conviction that there is a Danger and
Inconvenience, that will certainly attend the Dominion of Lust over the Soul;
and a Benefit and Advantage that will attend the Victory of the Soul over these
Lusts.

2. And because there may be an Inconvenience in the former, and a benefit in
the latter, but yet not such as may with Considerable Advantage preponderate
the Contentment of Lust, [which is present and sensible,] there ought to be a
Conviction of such an Inconvenience in the former, and such a Benefit in the
latter, as may most evidently and clearly preponderate the Contentment and
Advantage of the satisfying of a Lust.

3. And because, though these Inconveniences and Benefits be never so great,
yet if there be but a faint, and weak, and imperfect Conviction of it, it will
work but a weak resistance against the Invasions or Rebellions of Lust, and a
sensible present enjoyment of what delights, will easily preponderate the weak
and faint, and imperfect Convictions, or Suspicions rather, of what is Future.
It is necessary that such Convictions, should be Sound, Deep, and Strong; or
otherwise they will be but Sluggish and Languishing opponents against the
Rhetoric of Lusts, that yield a present Delight or Advantage.

4. And because, though the Convictions are never so strong, yet if they be not
Accompanied with Constancy, Vigilance, and supplemental Excitations, as the
opportunity requires, the Constant and perpetual Importunity of Lust may happen
upon a time of Intermission, and gain an Advantage against a Soul habitually
thus Convinced, it is further necessary that there be a Frequent Constant
Acting of that Conviction upon the Soul, or otherwise it may be Entangled by
the Assiduous Importunities of his Lusts.

These things being thus premised, it is necessary to see what kind of Means it
must be that must work such a Conviction of such weight and evidence, that may
rectify the Judgment in reference to this Contest with the sensual Appetite,
and actuate such a Conviction to attain its due effect. Moral Philosophy
contains in it excellent Precepts and Reasonings to the subjecting of the
sensual Appetite to the dictate of Reason, and to a Moral Cleansing of the
Heart: But it cannot attain its end; for though it propounds Inconveniences on
the one side, and Conveniences on the other, yet they have great defects that
make it Ineffectual: The things which it proposes are in themselves of unequal
weight to the Pleasure and Content of satisfying the sensual Appetite, viz. On
the one side Fame and Glory, and Reputation and Serenity of mind; on the other
side, the Baseness of Lust in Comparison of the excellency of Reason, that it
is a thing common to us with the Beast; and such like: and therefore, though
these be fine Notions, and such as may be weighty with old Men, whose Lusts
have left them, yet with young Men, they Import nothing: And therefore the
Philosopher well provides for it by determining that Juvenis non est idoneus
auditor Moralis Philosophiae, and Consequently it is a kind of Physic, that
may be good for them that need it not, but of no use for them that want it: for
the truth is, the Fame and the Infamy are not of weight equivalent to
Counterpoise the satisfaction of a Lust in those that are Inclinable to them.
2. Another great defect in the things propounded is this, that is also common
to Humane Laws, that though they may be of some efficacy to prevent the
External Act, when it meets with Infamy in the Action, or Reputation in the
forbearing, yet it does inevitably give a dispensation to Sin, if committed
with Secrecy; much less does it at all Cleanse the Heart from the love of Lust,
the delight in it, the Contemplation of it. We are therefore to search for a
higher, or more effectual Conviction than this; and therefore, 1. We must see
whether there be any thing that propounds some thing that may over balance the
Advantage of Lust, or the love of it in the Heart; 2. A means of Conviction of
the truth and reality of the thing so propounded.

For the former, it is apparent that the Sacred Scriptures, and they alone, do
furnish us with such materials; prohibiting not only the Acts of Lust, but also
the very Motions and Inclinations to it; the Desires of the Heart, of it; the
Love of the Heart to it; and this under pain of the displeasure of God,
everlasting Death, Hell fire, on the one side; on the other side, in case of
Obedience to this Command, the Favor of God, Everlasting Life, and Happiness:
and in order to the discovering whether our Hearts walk in Sincerity, according
to the Command of God, assures us that God beholds and observes the Motions,
Desires, Inclinations, Thoughts, and Purposes of our Hearts, and will one day
lay them open, When the secrets of all Hearts shall be Revealed. And these are
things that are of such a Nature as preponderates all the good, that can be in
Lust; furnishes the Soul with such Arguments against it, as carries thunder in
them. 2. And that these may be effectually assented to by the Soul, without
which they Import nothing to the end we speak of, there are these effectual
Means, which Almighty God affords us: First, The word of God, which does not
only contain Materials and Persuasions for the Cleansing of the Heart; but also
a high evidence of the Truth and Reality and Benefit of those Materials and
Persuasions: it is a Convincing and a Cleansing word: Jo. 15.3. Ye are clean
through the word, which I have spoken unto you. Secondly, A high Congruity of
the word of God, in relation to a future life of Rewards and Punishments, unto
the very Sentiments of Reason and the light of Nature it self; the Sense of
which life of future Rewards and Punishments carries with it, not only a
Conviction of the great Advantage of a Clean Heart above an Unclean Heart, but
also a very effectual motive to the Cleansing of the Heart, greater and more
vigorous than all the Arguments of the best Philosophers. Thirdly, The Powerful
Spirit of God works up in the Soul an assent unto them; and that of such a
strength as is no less Convincing than Science it self, which is Faith: and
therefore Faith thus wrought, purifies the Heart, as well as the life. 3. And
for a Constant and un-intermitted Application and re-minding us of these
Truths, God is pleased to assist us with the continual assisting Grace of his
Spirit acting in and by the Conscience, which is in a great measure cleansed,
quickened, and actuated, which watches us and our very Thoughts, and Chides
them, re-minding us of these great Truths, which we have received; and thereby
actuating and acting our Faith of these Truths, as often as the occasion offers
it self.

5. And by this means, 1. The Intellectual Power of the Soul is restored in a
great measure to its primitive Dominion, or at least is qualified aright in
order to the exercising of it.

2. The Will, wherein indeed the Empire of the Soul is principally seated, is
likewise restored to its Domination and Rule.

1. Partly by these Impressions, which are as before received by the
Understanding and the practical Determination thereof: for it is clearly
presented now to her, that it is the Greater Good to deny Lust both in the
Practice and Love of it, than to Entertain it; And Consequently the Will moves
toward the Greater Good, according to its proper and natural Inclination. 2.
There is yet a further Effect wrought upon the Will: viz. The sense of the Love
of Christ, the end of his Death, to redeem us from these Lusts, whereby, even
by an obligation of Gratitude, it takes up Resolutions of Obeying him. This
Truth, though it be first received in the Understanding, and entertained by
Faith, yet it does immediately work upon the Will and Affections: viz. An
Aversion to that Lust, that Crucified her Savior, and which the same Savior,
upon the Indearment of his own Blood, begs us to Crucify. 3. There is yet a
further work upon the Will by the secret and powerful working of the Spirit of
God, strengthening, and persuading, and restoring it to its Liberty and Just
Sovereignty over the sensual Appetite.

A Poem.
THe Great Creator gave to Brutes the light
Of Sense and Natural Instinct, that might
Conduct them in a Sensual Life; by this
They steer their course, and very rarely miss
Their instituted Rule, nor yet reject
Its Guidance, or its Influence neglect:
But the Creators great Beneficence
Gave unto Man, besides the Light of Sense,
The Nobler Light of Reason, Intellect,
And Conscience, to Govern and Direct
His Life and Actions, and to keep at rights
The Motions of his sensual Appetite:
But wretched Man unhappily deserts
His Makers Institution, and perverts
The End of all his Bounty, prostitutes
His Reason unto Lust, and so pollutes
His Noble Soul, his Reason, and his Wit;
And Intellect, that in the Throne should sit,
Must lacky after Lust, and so fulfill
The base commands and pleasure of her will:
And thus the Humane Nature's great Advance
Becomes its greater ruin, does inhance
Its Guilt, while Judgment, Reason, Wit
Improve those very sins it does Commit.
Dear Lord, Thy Mercy sure must overflow,
That pardons Sins, which from thy Bounty grow.
THE FOLLY, AND Mischief of SIN.
1. IT is a most Unprofitable and Foolish thing; The Content that is in it, is
but Imaginary, and dies in the compass of a Thought; The Expectation of it is
nothing but Disappointment, and the Fruition of it perishes in a moment.

2. It is the infallible Seed of Shame and Mischief, which, without it be
intercepted by Repentance and the Mercy of God, does as naturally, and
infallibly grow from it, as Hemlock and Henbane do from their proper Seeds: and
though the nature of some Sins is more speedy, and visible in producing that
Fruit; yet most certainly, sooner or later, every Sin yields his Crop even in
this life. The best Fruit it yields is Sorrow and Repentance, which though it
be good in comparison of their Fruit ensuing, if omitted; yet certainly, it is
not without much Trouble and Discomposure of Mind; and the Bitterness even of
Repentance it self infinitely over-ballanceth the Contentment that the Sin did
yield.

3. Sin does not only produce an Ungrateful Fruit, but there is also a certain
Spite and Malignity in the Fruit it yields, carrying in it the very Picture,
Resemblance and Memorial of the Sin for the most part, which dogs a Man in the
punishment of it, with the very Repetition of the Guilt, a^lex talionis.

4. It Poisons and Invenomes all Conditions: If a Man be in Prosperity, it
either makes it an occasion of new Sins to cover or secure them that are past;
or it sowers and infests the very State it self, with sad Preapprehensions of
the Fruit due to his Sin; Or hants him in his Jollity, like as I have seen an
Importunate Creditor, a young Gallant, which blasts all his Comfort and
Contentment. If a Man be in Adversity, it adds Affliction to Affliction; The
best Companion of Affliction, is a clear Conscience, but when a Man has
outward Troubles, and a Mis-giving Guilty Soul, it makes his Affliction black
and Desperate.

5. It Discomposeth and disorders, and unqualifies a Man for any Good Duty,
either to God or Man: I pray, but I bring along with me a sense of Sin, that
makes me Ungrateful to my self, and how can I expect to be Acceptable to God,
the Pure and Holy God, who hates nothing but Sin? I beg Blessings, but how can
I expect to receive a Blessing from him, whom I but lately presumptuously
offended? If my Son or Servant has offended me, and comes to ask a benefit of
me, I look upon it as a saucy Presumption, and can I expect to have better
Entertainment from my Maker, than I think fit to allow my fellow Creature? The
truth is, there is no Petition comes seasonably from a Man under the Guilt of
Sin, but Pardon, Forgiveness, and Mercy.

If I do a Good Work, the Sin, that I stand guilty of, makes the Comfort I take
in it, or in other commendations of it, Insipid and Empty: my Heart tells me
there is a Sin in my Conscience, that makes me ashamed to own the Good that is
in the Action.

If I see a fault in another, that my Place or Condition requires me to
Reprove, the sense of my own Guilt makes me either backward to Reprove, or
Condemn my self, while I am Reproving another, with such thoughts as these: I
am Reproving a Sin in another, where I stand as Guilty in the sight of God as
the person reprehended: if he knew my Sin, how justly might he throw my
Reprehension into my own face, and if he know it not, yet the God of Heaven,
before whom I stand and the Conscience which I bear within me, makes my
Reprehension of another, a Condemnation of my self. If I go about any action of
my life, though never so Honest, Just and Lawful, yet my mis-giving thoughts
make me either un-active in it, or fill me with pre-apprehensions of mischief
or disappointment in it; how can I expect a blessing from God, whom I have
offended, in any business I undertake? I carry along with me in all I do, the
Curse that the Lord threatened, Deuteronomy. 28.20. The Lord shall send upon thee
Cursing, Vexation, and Rebuke in all that thou set thy hands unto, and
verse 29. Thou shall not prosper in thy ways, and verse 34. So that thou shall
be mad for the sight of thine eyes which thou shall see, and verse 67. In the
morning thou shall say, Would God it were Evening; and at Evening thou shall
say, Would God it were Morning, for the fear of thine Heart wherein thou shall
fear, and for the sight of thine Eyes which thou shall see.

And Certainly all this grows from the Inconguity and Dissonancy, that is
between sin and the true right constitution of the Nature of Man, that is
thereby made unuseful for his proper Operations; just as a sore, or a bone out
of joint disables the proper serviceableness of a Limb; or, as a noxious humor
disorders the Stomach, Liver, or Spleen, in its proper Office; or, as a
Disease, or ill disposition of the Body makes it unserviceable to its proper
Actions; so does the Sins, and Defilements, and Guilt, the result of it upon
the Soul, disable it in its Works and Offices; and this is the evidence of it,
Every thing is then in its right Constitution when it is in that state, that
the Wise God of Nature ordered it; and so far as it declines from that position
or state, so far forth it loses its Usefulness and proper Happiness; and
therefore it is consequently evident, that every thing, that loses its
Usefulness and Happiness, is out of that Constitution that God Almighty meant
for it; and therefore, in as much as apparently all Sin does introduce this
Disorder and Irregularity, it is plain that Mankind thereby is in another
condition than God at first made him, and intended he should be in.

Hence therefore, It is apparent, That all Sin is against Nature, and a
Violation and Breach even of the Law and Order of Nature; which is nothing else
but the Station, Course, and Frame, that God with most Admirable Wisdom and
Goodness framed for Man. Man stands in a double subordination: 1. A
Subordination within himself, viz. Of the Faculties inferior to the Superior;
And 2. A Subordination to something without himself, viz. To the Will of his
Creator, which though it seems extrinsecal, yet in truth it is essential and
necessary.

The Internal Subordination is of the inferior parts and faculties to the
Superior, viz. The Sensual Appetite and Passions to Reason and to Judgment.
God has committed the Body of Man, and those Faculties, that are subservient
to it, unto the Government of the Light of Judgment and Understanding, that he
has put into the Soul: and because, as it is most just that the Soul and its
Superior Faculties should be subordinate to the Will and Direction of God, so
the Soul stands in need of that Direction in order to the Government of his
little Province committed to him; and therefore, as it happens in Government,
when the People break the subordination to the Intermediate Magistrate, or the
Intermediate Magistrates break the subordination to the Supreme, presently
there insues Disorder and Mischief and Confusion, so when the Body, or those
Faculties, that are exercised in order to it, as the natural Lusts and
inclinations of the Body, or those that result much from it, as the Passions,
prevail upon the Judgment or Reason, either by their Violence, or want of due
Vigilance and Severity in the Soul in its Administration, or if the Reason and
Judgment do neglect or cross the Commands of God, or make not use of the Divine
Directions to assist and guide her in her Administration, this is Sin, and
presently brings Confusion, and Disorder, and Discomposure in the whole man,
and makes it Unserviceable for the Ends to which it was ordained.

Of Self-Denial.
1. GOd Almighty has substituted the Soul of Man, as his Deputy or Vieegerent
in that Province which is committed to him, and expects an Account from the
Soul at his return, or sooner, how he has managed that Province or petty
Dominion committed to him.

2. The Province, or Territory committed to the management of the Soul, are his
Body, and those Affections, and Inclinations incident to it; and the Place,
Condition, Relation, Abilities, and opportunities put into his hand by
Providence and Divine dispensation, together with that Body in this World.

3. The end of this Substitution of the Soul in this Province is, first the
Improvement of the Revenue of this Principle, viz. The Glory of his Name,
Secondly, The improvement of the perfection and advantage of the Soul, the
perfecting of the Soul thereby in a Conformity to his Masters will, and fitting
of it self and the Body with it for a more noble and divine condition and
employment.

4. The Breach of that Trust committed to the Soul, consists either in the want
of that due Improvement of the Province committed to the Souls Vicegerency,
according to the Advantages that it has; (which is the Case of the
unprofitable Servant, that did not mis-imploy his Talent, but did not Improve
it to his Masters Advantage;) or, which is worse, Mis-government and
Misimployment of the Province committed to its Charge to the disadvantage of
the Sovereign and it self.

5. The Mis-government of our Province consists principally in one of these
particulars: viz. Either in the original and primary Defection of the Soul it
self in its Commands and Proceedings, whereby it Studieth, Practices, and
Commands Originally and Primarily against its Principal; and this is Devilish:
or, Secondly, in the want of Exercise of a due Superintendency over its
Province, whereby the Subjects, which should be under its Rule and
Superintendency, are not kept in their due Subjection, neither to the
Vicegerent, nor to the Sovereign; but rebel, and by their Rebellion, either
wholly cast off their Vicegerent and Sovereign together, or by degrees draw
over the Vicegerent or Deputy to their Defection.

6. The great Engines of this Defection are the Corrupt Inclinations of the
sensual Appetite, Lusts, and Passions of the Body, and especially those, which
are the great Favorites, and most powerful in respect of their Congruity to the
Natural Inclinations, and temper, or rather distemper of the Body; or those
Temptations which the World offers, especially such as are most incident to the
Place, Station, Relation, or Condition, wherein we stand in the World. The
former come under the name of the Lust of the Flesh, the latter under the name
of the Lusts of the Eye, and Pride of Life.

7. Those Lusts and Temptations are the Instruments in the hand of Satan,
either by Solicitation to Corrupt, or by Power to oppose the Vicegerency of the
Soul under God, and to bring it over by Allurements or Force, to a Defection
from him, and in both ways fight against the Sovereignty of God, and
consequently his Glory; and against the Perfection of the Soul, and
consequently its Happiness.

8. Those Lusts are of greatest Power, that have the greatest dearness to the
Body, either in respect of Age, Complexion, Inclination, Condition, or Station;
and therefore of greatest Danger to the Soul, and fight against it with
greatest Advantage: In a young Man, or a strong sanguine Complexion, Luxury,
Wantonness, and Uncleanness are most ordinarily most prevalent; In an old, or
Melancholy Man, Covetousness; In a middle Aged, or Choleric Man, Anger,
Ambition, Violence; In a Rich or Powerful Man, Oppression, Disdain, Pride: In a
Poor Man, Discontent, Rapin. And there is scarce any Man, but has some Beloved
Lust or Sin, that he will be content to sell all the rest of his Lusts for the
enjoyment of that: tempt him to a Lust not suitable to his Complexion, Age or
Condition, he will easily reject it; but if it be a Lust suitable to his Age,
Complexion, or Condition, he will hardly, or with difficulty enough refuse it.

9. As every Lust suitable to our Age; Complexion, or Condition, is of greatest
power, and consequently of greatest Danger, so every such Lust once entertained
in Practice, becomes of greater Strength, and Consequently of greater Danger
than before, and this upon a double reason: First, Because the Soul is made the
weaker, and more emasculated by the reception and entertainment of a Lust: then
it is like amisa pudicitia, which is the likelier to make a Prostitute: Sense
of Reputation is a great matter to keep Innocence, but a lost Reputation makes
way for a further degree of Guilt. Again, the Soul, by admittance and
entertainment of Lust, gains a kind of intimacy and dearness with the Lust, and
admits it with less difficulty a second time; because it is become now an
acquaintance. And lastly, every sin causes a withdrawing of Divine assistance
from the Soul, and an estranging of the Soul from it, a kind of shameful
absenting of the Soul from God; and so as it loses its strength, it loses its
confidence of address for it; which every Man's experience will teach him.
Secondly, On the part of Lust, it is made more bold, and confident, and
adventuring, than it was before it was entertained: It was then more modest and
bashful, because it knew not how-it should be entertained; but now it grows
Confident and Imperious.

10. When Lust has gotten the Victory in the Soul, it either makes the Soul,
which is Gods Vicegerent, his Vassal, or his Prisoner; either the Soul becomes
servant and vassal to Sin, or at best it is led away Captive by it: And in both
cases, God is dethroned, the Soul imbased, and Lust gets the Empire and
Dominion; and the Soul has either broken his trust with God, or not performed
it as it should: The Province committed to his management lost, the Government
abused, the Sovereign injured, and the Vicegerent is either become a Rebel, or
at best a Prisoner, by his own default.

11. The Means of Prevention of this inversion of the Order settled by the
great Sovereign is. First, That the Deputy take due notice of his Instructions;
for he is not placed in that Province without his Rules of Government, which
his Sovereign has delivered him. Secondly, That he be very Vigilant over the
secret Confederacies, motions, and risings of Lust against those Instructions;
for Lust is busy, troublesome, and active, and studies and watches all
opportunities of Defection. Thirdly, That he keep his Authority with Resolution
and Courage; for Lust, if it be worthy the name of a Subject, it is a petulant
and saucy, but yet a slavish base-minded Subject; a little countenance will
make it insolent, and a severe hand over it will make it servile; and
especially, that this severity be held over those Lusts, that have or pretend
to the greatest interest in the Age, Complexion, Disposition, Quality, Station,
or Condition of the Province; for as they have the greatest opportunities to do
mischief, so they will soonest grow Insolent.

12. Though a slight and gentle superintendency over Lust will teach it to
command, yet under a severe and rigid government the most it will adventure
upon, will be to ask admission: and upon such addresses the Duty of this Deputy
is to be so far from giving admission to it, that it ought not to Complement,
or Treat, or hold Conference or Debate with it, but flatly deny it; As a severe
Deportment of the Soul must keep Lust from commanding, so it must check and
discountenance it in asking: the holding of conference, and debate, and
reasoning with any Lust, is but a preparatory to its admission, and gives but
the more Confidence, Boldness, Importunity and hope of success to it. Eves
reasoning with the Serpent was the first breach of her Innocence: Lust must not
be mannerly treated withal, but flatly denied. This is that great Doctrine of
Self-Denial which the New Testament so solemnly enjoins: for though in truth,
our Lusts are not our selves, yet those that grow out of our natural
Constitution or Condition, are next to our selves, and by mistake we are apt to
esteem them, our Eyes, our Hands, our Selves.

13. This kind of dealing with Lusts and Temptations will in a little time
dis-acquaint the Soul with them, and make the Soul and them strangers one to
another. It is easily seen, that those things which a Man uses himself unto,
so that they seem to become another nature, yet some desuetude from them do
evidence to him, Asperam nobis, and insuavem virtutum viam nimia facit vitiorum
Consuetudo, quae si in partem alteram transferatur, invenietur (sicut Scriptura
dicit) Semita Justitiae linis. S. Hier. Ep. 14.
that they are not so necessary and unseparable as he once thought them: A man
that has accustomed himself to vain Swearing, so that he can scarce speak a
sentence without an Oath, and when he is told of it, professes he cannot help
it, yet let him resolvedly break the custom of it, he will not find that he
misseth that unhappy Rhetoric in his Discourse; the like is easily seen in
Drinking, Gaming, Wantonness, and those other Sins that are precious and dear
to a man in his custom and use of them; by a little resolute dis-user of them,
he will soon find he does not miss them; he can easily spare them, and be
without them: nay, he finds as great an inconvenience and burdensomness to
reassume them, as before to leave them. And besides the Reasons before given,
there is this more in it, that the Value and Contentment that is taken in them,
is by the great Expectation and Contentment that the mind seeks in the
pre-apprehensions and Image that the mind makes to it self of them: for the
Contentment of the things themselves barely considered, and in themselves, is
but flat and empty; but the Imagination dresseth them up beyond themselves,
both in their pre-apprehension and fruition: and so the Value and Contentment
of them is due more to the Fancy and false Idea of the mind, than to the things
themselves: and therefore, if once the mind can be estranged from Conversing
with the thought and Imagination of them, they will soon lose their Estimate
and Delight; because they are separated and kept asunder from that which gilds
and dresseth them into that delightful and amiable shape, which cousens and
deceives men into their actings of them. Now this severe hand against them,
denying their access, refusing Converse with them, does prevent the mind from
fashioning of Imaginations of them, and dressing up those Imaginations of them
in pleasing and delightful representations, and then in a little while they are
quite laid aside, and not missed, nor thought of; and their own natural worth,
without that secret brooding of the mind upon them, does not with any strength,
solicit or subdue the mind to the actings of them. We are in this kind like
Children, who have gotten some toy into their hands, that, it may be, may be
hurtful, and they mightily prize them and set a great rate upon them: but let
them be taken away, in a little while they will not miss them, but be as merry
and contented, as when they had them.

14. The Success of this Uncourteous dealing with our Lusts and Temptations,
will much countervail the unpleasingness of the Duty. A man is tempted to a
Sin, he holds conference with it, and is enticed to treat with it, and to think
of it, and it pleases him; but it is a Thousand to one if it stay there; but
unless some great diversion by the Grace of God, or some External restraint by
Shame or Punishment, prevent him, he commits the Sin; and so Lust, when it has
Conceived, will bring forth Sin, and Sin, when finished, will bring forth Shame
and Death, or at the best Shame and Sorrow. How will a Man reckon with himself;
What am I the better for that Contentment that I took in this Sin? the
Contentment is past, and that which it has left me, is nothing else but a
mis-giving Conscience, a sense of a displeased God, ashamed to bring my mind in
his presence, a pre-apprehension of some mischief or inconvenience to follow
me, a despondency of mind to draw near to God under it, and either a great deal
of Sorrow and Vexation, or Affliction under it, or, which is the usual
gratification of Satan after Sin committed, to put away the remembrance of a
Sin past, with the committing of another, till at last the Guilt grows to such
a moles, that a Man is desperately given over to all kind of Villainy; and as
his Sins increase, his Guilt and Shame increases. On the other side, I have
denied my Lust, or my Temptation, and it is gone: First, I am as well without
it, as if I had committed it; for it may be the Sin had been past, and the
contentment that I took in it, and I had been as well without it; but, besides
all this, I have no Guilt cleaving to my Soul, no sting in my Conscience, no
dispondent nor mis-giving Mind, no Interruption of my Peace with God or my
self; I enjoy my Innocence, my Peace, my Access to God with Comfort: nay, more
than all this, I have a secret Attestation of the Spirit of God in my
Conscience, that I have obeyed him, and have pleased him, and have rejected the
Enemy of his Glory and my Happiness: I have a secret advance of my Interest and
Confidence in him and Dependence upon him, and Favor with him, and Liberty and
Access to him, which does Infinitely more than counter vail the satisfaction of
an impure, and unprofitable, and vexing Lust, which leaves no footsteps behind
it but shame, and Sorrow, and Guilt.

15. As Resolution and Severity to a man's self is one of the best remedies
against the flatttery and deceit of Lust, so there are certain Expedients that
are subservient to that Resolution: as namely, First, Avoiding of Idleness; for
the Soul in the Body is like a flame, that, as it were, feeds upon that oily
substance of the Body, which according to the various qualifications or temper
of the Body, gives it a tincture somewhat like it self; and unless the Soul be
kept in action it will dwell too much upon that tincture that it receives from
it, and be too intent and pleased, or at least too much tainted, and
transported, and delighted with those fuliginous foul Vapors that arise from
the Flesh and natural Constitution. Keep it therefore busied about somewhat
that is fitter for it, that may divert that Intention and Complacency in those
fumes, that the inferior part of the Soul is apt to take in them, and so be
tempted, transported, or abused by them. Secondly, A frequent and constant
Consideration of the Presence of God and his Holy Angels, Luke 15.7, 10. 1 Cor.
4.9.
who are Spectators of thy Constancy to God and his party, and delighted in it;
or of thy Apostasy, Bruitishness, and Baseness of mind, and grieved at it. If
a good Man were but acquainted with all my Actions, and Motions of my mind upon
the Advance of Lusts and Temptations, it would make me ashamed to offend in his
sight: but much more, if a pure and glorious Angel did in my view attend,
observe, and behold me: but when the Eternal God does behold me, who has given
me this Command to deny my Lusts, and has told me the danger of yielding to
them, that they bring forth Sin and Death, and Hell, offers his Grace to assist
me, promises Reward to my Obedience and Constancy, how shall I then dare to
offend with so much presumption? Thirdly, A frequent Consideration of Christ's
Satisfaction, Sufferings, and Intercession. These Lusts that now solicit me to
their observance, were those that Crucified my Savior; it was the end of his
Passion to Redeem me, not only from the Guilt, but from the subjection to them;
It is he that beholds me; how shall I trample his Blood under foot? If I
prostitute my self to them, how shall I despise, and as much as in me lies,
disappoint him in the very end of his Incarnation? How shall I shame his Gospel
before men, and as much as in me lies, put him to shame in the presence of the
Father, and all the Holy Angels, when they shall be witnesses of my preferring
a base Lust before him? How can I expect the Intercession of my Savior for me
at the right hand of God, who beholds me thus unworthily to serve a Lust,
though to my Damnation, rather than obey my Redeemer to my Salvation. 4.
Frequent Consideration of Death and Judgment. A base Lust solicites me to obey
it: Shall I accept or deny it? It may be this may be the last action of my
Life, and possibly Death, that might have been respited, if I shall deny my
Lust; may be my next event, if I obey it; and as Death finds me so will
Judgment find me: Would I be content that such an act as this should be the
Amen of my Life, and it may be, seal me up to eternal rejection? Would I be
content that my Soul should be presently carried into the presence of God,
under the last act of my Life to his dishonor? Or, on the other side, if I deny
this base importunate Messenger of Hell, and it should please God to strike me
presently after with Sickness or Death, would it not be a more comfortable
entrance into that black Valley with a clear Conscience, and an Innocent Heart,
that could with Comfort say, as once Hezekiah did upon the like occasion. Isai.
38.3. Remember, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth,
and with a perfect heart? Fifthly, A due Consideration of the Issue of those
solicitations of Lust; if assented unto, the end of it is Death; it will be
bitterness in the end; it cannot with all its pleasures countervail that
bitterness that will most certainly attend it; nor can it give any security
against it. Suppose thou art solicited to a thought or act of Injustice,
Impurity, or Intemperance; if thou will needs be talking with the Temptation,
ask it; whether it be not a Sin against that God, in whose hands thy Soul is?
and if it be, whether his Anger and Displeasure be not a necessary consequence
of that Sin? and if it be, may not he inflict the issues of that wrath of his,
when, and in what measure he pleases? and if he may, what security can this
Temptation give against it? has it an Arm of Omnipotence to secure me against
the power of him, that is Omnipotent? and if it cannot, what Compensation or
amends can it make me, to countervail the Damage of his Wrath, or the very
Danger of it? Can the Pleasure or Contentment of the Sin do it? alas! the
Pleasure will pass away, in, it may be, a Life, a Day, a moment; but the Guilt
and Torment continues to Eternity.

Motives to Watchfulness, In reference to the Good and Evil ANGELS.
AS we see Plants in a Nursery, when they come to a due growth, are
Transplanted into Orchards; and those that are unuseful are pulled up and cast
into the Fire; or as we see Boys in a Free School, such as are
undisciplineable, are after some years of probation sent away to Mechanical
Employments; and those that are Ingenious and Diligent are Transplanted to the
Universities: So among the Children of Men in this Life, those that are Vicious
and Incorrigible are by Death rooted out and cast into a suitable Condition,
and those that are Vessels fit for their Masters use, Towardly Plants, are by
Death Transplanted into another Region, a Garden of Happiness and Comfort. And
possibly, as by continuance of time, they received Improvement and Perfection
here: So in that other Region they add to their Degrees of Perfection, and are
promoted to further Accessions, and Degrees, and Stations of Happiness and
Glory, till they come to the state of Spirits of just Men made perfect.

Could we see the Invisible Regiment of the World, by the subordinate
Government of Good and Evil Angels, as once Elisha's servant saw the Fiery
Chariots and Horsemen in the Mount, it would give us another kind of
representation of things, than now they appear to us. We have just reason to
believe that there are infinite numbers of Spirits of both kinds, that have
their passings to and fro, and Negotiations, as well among themselves, as among
the Children of Men, and as Ravens, Kites, and other unclean Birds haunt
Carrion; and as Vermin haunt after Putrefaction, and are busy about it; or as
disorderly, debauched Companions and Ruffians, ever haunt out, and hang upon a
dissolute and foolish Heir, till they have sucked out all his Substance and
Wealth: So the Impure and corrupted Angels haunt and flock about a Man given
over to Vice, till they have wholly corrupted and putrified his Soul; and those
Good Men, whom they cannot win over to them, they pursue with as much Malice
and Envy as is possible; and though they cannot come within them, yet as far as
they can, they raise up External Mischiefs against them, watch opportunities to
ensnare or blemish them, though the Vigilance of a better Guard, and their own
Prudence and Circumspection do for the most part disappoint and prevent them.
Besides the displeasure of the great God, there be some Considerations, even in
reference to these Good and Evil Angels, to make Good Men very Watchful, that
they fall not into presumptuous or foul Sins.

1. It cannot choose but be a Grief to the Good Angels, Luke 15.10.
to be present and Spectators of the Enormities of those, Matthew. 18.10.
for whose Preservation they are employed.

2. It must in all probability work in them a nauseousness and retiring
themselves from such Offenders, at least, till they have renewed and washed
themselves by Repentance, and made their Peace with God in Christ: For there is
no greater Antipathy than between these Pure and Chaste Spirits, and any Sin or
Foulness.

3. It cannot choose but be a most grateful Spectacle to these Envious and
Malignant Evil Spirits, who upon the discovery of such a fall of a Good Man,
call their impure Company together, and make pastime about such an object, as
Boys do about a Drunken Man, and upbraid the Sacred and Pure Angels. Look here
is your Pious Man, your Professor: Come see in what a condition he is, and what
he is about.

4. It lays open such a Man to the Power and Malice of those envious Spirits;
they have gotten him within their Territories and Dominions; and unless God in
great Mercy restrain them, renders a Good Man obnoxious to their Mischief: And
as the contagion and noysomness of Sin, drives away the Pure and Holy Spirits;
so it attracts and draws together those Impure and Malignant Spirits, as the
smell of Carrion does Birds and Beasts of prey. It concerns us therefore, to be
very vigilant against all Sin, and if through Inadvertence, Infirmity, or
Temptation, we fall into it, to be diligent to make our Peace, and wash our
selves as soon as we can, in the Blood of Christ, and Water of Repentance.

OF THE MODERATION OF THE AFFECTIONS.
Phil. 4.5. Let your Moderation be known unto all Men.
MOderation, is that Grace or Virtue whereby a Man governs his sensual
Appetite, his Passions and Affections, his Words and Actions, from all Excess
and Exorbitancy.

It refers, 1. To the sensual Appetite: 2. To the Passions of the Mind: 3. To
Speech and Words: 4. To the Actions of our Life.

1. Moderation in the sensual Appetite: and this is properly Temperance, which
is a Prudent Restraint of our Appetite from all Excess in Eating, Drinking, and
those other inclinations that gratify our senses.

And certainly this becomes us not only as Christians, but as Reasonable
Creatures; for the sensual Appetite, and those inclinations that tend to the
gratification of our External senses, are in a great measure the same in Men
and in Brutes, and they are in the due order and use Good and Convenient for
both: we cannot live without them But Almighty God has given to Mankind a
Higher and a Nobler Nature; namely, Understanding and Reason, which in the
right posture and constitution of the Humane Nature is to Govern, Guide,
Moderate, and Order that inferior Faculty, that is common to the Brutes, as
well as to Man. And that Man that keeps not this Regiment and Superintendency
of his Nobler Faculty, degrades himself into the condition of a Brute, and
indeed into somewhat worse; for even the Instincts of Brutes do for the most
part regulate their sensual Appetite from Excess and Immoderation. But because
this belongs to that distinct virtue of Temperance, I forbear further Instances
herein.

2. Moderation of our Passions and Affections; and these are here principally
intended; namely, Love, Hatred, or Anger, Joy, Grief, Hope, Fear, and those
other mixed or derivative Passions, that arise in Man upon the presentment of
their several Objects.

And although the Passions of the Mind considered simply in themselves are a
part of our Nature and not Evil: but when duly regulated and ordered, are of
excellent Use to us; yet if they once become unruly, mis-placed, or over-acted,
they occasion the greatest troubles in the World, both to the persons
themselves in whom they are, and to others. Jam. 4.1.
We may easily trace almost all the Sins and Enormities, and Distempers, and
Troubles, and Disorders, that we observe in our selves or others, to the
Immoderation, and Disorder of the Passions.

And therefore the due Moderation of them is of great consequence, both for the
attaining of true Tranquillity of Mind, of great Regularity in all we do or
say, and to the common Peace, Order and Benefit of Mankind.

The Moderation therefore of all our Passions consists principally in these two
things: 1. That they be not mis-placed or set upon wrong Objects; as to Love
that which we should not Love, but possibly Hate; or to Hate that which we
should Love; and so for the rest; 2. That being rightly placed in respect of
their Objects, yet that they be not intended or acted beyond that degree that
may be justly allowed to those Objects: And this is properly Immoderation, the
former is merely Misprision, Error, Enormity, Folly.

And therefore when we speak of Moderation of our Passions, it is intended in
relation to those things, about or upon which our Passions may be lawfully used
or exercised, so that they be kept within their just bounds and measures.

And since all the Objects of our Passions are either something that is Good or
so thought, as the Objects of our Love, Joy, Hope, or something that is Evil,
or so esteemed, as the Objects of our Hatred, or Anger, Sorrow, Fear, the true
measure of these Affections or Passions is to be made according to the true
measure of that Good, or that Evil that is the present Object of my Passion. If
the Good or Evil be Great, it deserves a greater intention of that Passion, or
Affection that is employed about them; if it be but little, the measure of my
Passion or Affection ought not to exceed it, if it does, it becomes Immoderate.

And hence it is, that the same Passion or Affection may be, and indeed ought
to be variously acted or intended about Objects of the same Nature; yet under
different degrees of Good or Evil: I may at the same time have different
objects of my Love, different sorts or kinds of Good, and of different allayes,
some more, some less Good, and my Love may be extended to them all at the same
time; but the degrees of my Love are diversified according to the diversity of
the degrees of Good, that each Object has, all circumstances, adjuncts and
consequences being considered. The like may be said, touching Evils that are
the Objects of my Hatred, Anger, Sorrow, or Fear.

The Moderation therefore of Affections requires these things principally: 1. A
Right Judgment or Estimate of things Good or Evil, according to their true
natures or degrees; for without this we shall not only mistake in the degrees
of Good or Evil, but even in their very natures: we shall not only take the
Lesser Good or Evil for the Greater, or the Greater for the Less; but we shall
be apt to mistake the things themselves, and call Evil Good, and Good Evil. Now
it is certain that according to the Judgment that we have touching things Good
or Evil, and their Values and Degrees, accordingly are our Passions, and their
Extents and Transports measured out. If I Judge or Esteem that to be truly Good,
which indeed is not, I deliver over to it my Affection of Love, Joy, or Hope:
and if I Judge that to be a Great and Important Good, which is but Small or
Inconsiderable; yet according to the measure or proportion of such Estimate, I
measure out the degree of my Love, Joy or Delight in such Good. A Child will
set as great a Rate, and consequently allow as great a measure of his Love or
Delight to a Rattle, as a Boy does to his Top and Scourg, or as a Man does to a
Diamond, all arising from the variety of their Judgment, or Estimate of the
Value of the thing. And the like may be said of Evils, and their several
Degrees, with relation to the Passions of Hatred, Sorrow, or Fear: 2. The
second thing required to Moderation, is a Prudent stayed Deliberation before
the Passion be put into motion, that so the Judgment be consulted, touching the
nature of the Object; first, whether it be Good or Evil; and then what Degree
of Good or Evil it has: for be the judgment never so Good, yet if Passion run
before it, and be precipitate upon the first and sudden apprehension of the
thing proposed, or objected, and so antivert the use of Deliberation, and the
ripening of the Judgment, there must necessarily, or at least ordinarily follow
either Mistake or Disorder, or Immoderation in the Passion of what kind soever;
and then the Mind is disturbed, and put into disorder suddenly, it is difficult
then to make a right Judgment, or at least, it comes too late, and many times
after the mischief is done by the hasty and precipitate Passion, either without
or at least within the Mind; thus transported with Passion of any kind.

And therefore the General Rule for Moderation of all kind of Passions, is,
resolutely to prescribe to a Man's self this Law: That before he any way gives
leave to his Passion, he will pause and consider a while, touching the Object
presented, what it is, whether Good or Evil, and if either, then what Degree or
Value it bears. And when once a Man has thus peremptorily resolved to give
himself this Law, and has a little while inured himself to the practice of it,
he will find it easy and familiar.

This will better appear in the several instances of the several Affections or
Passions of the mind, principally in these of Love and Hatred, or Anger, Joy
and Sorrow, Hope and Fear.

1. The Affection of Love, is the Principal and Governing Affection of the
Mind, and the Root of all other Passions: For whatsoever I love, renders that
hateful and displeasing, which either prevents me from it, or deprives me of
it, and so occasions the Passion of Hatred or Anger: whatsoever I love, makes
me joyful, or delighted in the Enjoyment of it, or Sorrowful in the loss or
deprivation of it, and so produces Joy and Sorrow: whatsoever I love, I hope
for, if absent, or I fear the loss or deprivation of it, and so produces Hope
and Fear.

The Object of this Affection is something that is Good, or so apprehended: The
greater that Good is, the greater is the Love of it: Therefore the chiefest
Good draws out the chiefest Love; and an Infinite Good an Unmeasurable and
Boundless Love: and since Almighty God is the chiefest and an Infinite Good,
there cannot be any Immoderation or Excess of Love to him: and therefore this
Moderation of our Affection of Love, has no place in relation to my Love of
God; for I cannot love him too much. But this Moderation of this Affection
principally respects the good things of this World; as Wealth, Honor, Power,
Reputation, Relations, Friends, Health of Body, Pleasures, and External
Contentments, Recreations, Good Clothes, Equipage, and State, and such like.

These good things of this life, have in themselves a just measure of Good; and
therefore according to that measure of Good that is in them, they deserve a
proportionable measure of our Love; for External Blessings are really Blessings.

And among the several good things of this World, there are several Ranks and
Degrees of Good; some are Good, some are Better; and accordingly the proportion
or measure of love, that I lend to them, is to be moderated and distributed and
expressed, according to these different Degrees and Ranks of Good that we find
in them, or the relation they bear to me; for instance, I may love my Wealth,
but since Wealth is but a useful Instrument directed to other ends, as to
support my Life, my Health, my Relations, I am to love it less than these,
because these are more valuable, and my Wealth is only Desirable or Good to
these Ends, and subordinate to these Uses.

Moderation of the Affection of Love in relation to Externals, consists
therefore principally in these things;

1. That we have a just Estimate of the Good that is in the things we set our
Love upon, and that we do not overvalue them, or Expect that Good to be in
them, that really is not, we must look upon them as they are; it may be they
are such as have not a perfect sincere Good in them, but mixture of Evil, or
such as have not a stable or permanent Good in them, but are mutable or mortal;
or such as have a Good in them, proportionate only to our present condition,
and when our condition is altered, the Good that is in them vanishes: And if
they be such, we must esteem them as such, and love them as such; and such for
the most part are all Worldly things, Health, Wealth, Friends, Relations, nay
our very Lives.

2. That we look upon all the Good that is in the World, as derived from the
Goodness of God, and infinitely below that Good that is in him: and therefore
all our Love to them must be subordinate to that Love that we owe to God, and
must be controlled by it, and in all competitions must give place unto it.
Suppose I have great Wealth, or many Relations, I may, nay in reason I ought to
bear some Love to them; but I must remember it is but a derivative and a
subordinate Good, and therefore I must Love them with this reserve and
qualification, that if God please to call for them, I must quietly part with
them; for as I have them under that condition, so the Love I owe to God, the
supreme Good, engages me to submit to his Will, and to obey it; for if I Love
him best, I must be pleased with what his Will is pleased, for I judge him the
best Good, and therefore his Will the best Will; and the Good Pleasure of his
Will must be the rule of my subjection, otherwise his Love has not the
pre-eminence.

3. That we make aright a due Comparison between Good things of several kinds,
and give that the preference in our Love, which upon a due Judgment ought to be
preferred, and this concerns and principally discovers it self in the
Competition of several good things, and of our Affections to them. The Merchant
loves his Goods well, but in a Storm to save his Life, is content to throw his
Goods overboard. And the exercise of Wisdom in this kind, principally consists
in the due weighing the several values of Good things of several natures, and
ranging of them in their several Ranks; and also in the diligent consideration
of the several Circumstances, that accompany several things, for many times
some good things that are in themselves preferrable before others, receive an
abatement and allay by circumstances, and others less preferrable receive an
advance by the circumstances that attend them. 1. Therefore touching the
Different Ranks of things themselves, in matters of my own private concernment,
I am to prefer my Soul and the Good thereof, before all my External advantages,
for what shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul; I am to prefer the Good of
my Health, before the Good of my Wealth. Again, in things relating to my self
and others; I am to prefer the safety of the State wherein I live before my
Wealth, yea, and before my own safety, because I am sure when the whole is in
danger, I must needs be in danger, and many more; I am to prefer a Great Good
that may accrue to many, before a Smaller Good; nay, possibly an Equal Good
that may accrue to my self; nay, I am to prefer an apparent greater good to any
person, than a small and inconsiderable good to my self. But above all I am to
prefer the Honor and Glory of God, before my own Honor, Reputation, Estate,
Contentment, or Life it self; Because he is the Greatest Good, and most to be
Loved, and the Love to his Honor is but the result of my Love to him. Again in
things relating to others; I am to prefer a Greater Good, that may accrue to
one, before a smaller Good to another; The good of one Neighbors Soul before
the good of another Estate, where, the one, but not both are justly in my
power; I may prefer an Equal Good to a Relation, before an Equal Good to a
Stranger, where the concernment or condition of both are equal, because I have
just reason to love a Relation before a Stranger. Again, 2. As there are
different Ranks of Good, so differing Circumstances make one Good preferrable
before another; If I see two Men in danger, and I can relieve but one of them,
both being equal to me, I am to prefer the relief of him whose danger is
greater, or more imminent, before the relief of him whose danger is less or
more remote; and herein Prudence and Integrity of Heart must be the director of
my Love, and of the Emanations of it, always provided that nothing unjust or
dishonest, be mingled with what I do.

4. That as among Goods of different Sizes or Degrees I am to prefer the Best,
so among Good things, that at least seem equal, I do prefer the most Lasting
and Durable; for Lastingness and Durableness is a special part of the Goodness
of any thing; nay, oftentimes a Good, that in its present degree or extent is
greater; yet if it be less Durable, is not so Valuable as a less, but more
lasting Good; as the greater Wealth, that must be spent in a year, is truly
less Valuable, than a smaller portion that lasts two years.

5. That we observe that General Rule before given; namely, That we never give
our Affection of Love leave to run out alone without Judgment, and
Consideration, going before it, and going along with it: That we suffer not our
Passions to deal out their own measure, but our Judgment and Deliberation: That
we always keep this Affection especially under Discipline, and Government, and
suffer it not to run away from us, as an unruly Beast without a Chain; for it
is certain, the due Government of this Affection governs all the rest.

And now if we look abroad into the World, or indeed but strictly and
impartially observe our selves, we shall easily observe a mavelous want of
Moderation of this Affection. For, not to mention the misplacing of this
Affection, upon what we should really hate, we may see a great Irregularity, in
the Measure and Order of Exerting this Affection about things, that we may in
their measure and kind love: we talk indeed of loving of God above all, and of
the great value we set upon our Souls and Everlasting life, and of Self-Denial,
and against loving of the World, and how vain and contemptible a thing the
World is: But for the most part they are but Words and Speculations; when we
come to Practice and Life, there appears nothing, or very little that answers
these Notions, and Speculations; little of that Moderation that those Notions
import. We love the World, the Wealth, the Honor, the Pleasures, the Profits
of it, with all our Souls; we make it our principal business to attain and
enjoy it; we account it our greatest Calamity when we are crossed or
disappointed in it. One Man sets his whole heart upon his Greatness, another
upon his Wealth, another upon his Pleasures and Recreations, another upon his
Preferment, another upon the Favor of Great Men, another upon Applause of his
Learning or Eloquence, another upon the Beauty of a Mistress or Servant: nay,
so Childish we many times are, that we are inamoured on very Toys, as fine
Clothes, handsome Furniture, a fine House, splendid Entertainments, a fine Head
of Hair, or Mad Antic Postures, or Complements, Affected Words, Gestures or
Phrases, Apish Imitations, Plays, and Gaming, new Fashions; that many there
are, that make such Feathers as these, the Principal Objects of their Love, the
Business and Study of their Lives, and are as much concerned in their
disappointment herein, as if they were undone. These are preposterous, and want
Moderation in their Affection, because they have no true Judgment or Estimate
of things, according to their true Values.

THE VANITY AND VEXATION THAT Arises from Worldly Hope and Expectation.
IT is very evident to every Man's experience, that Hope and Expectation of
Good, is the great Wheel, or rather Weight that moves Man to all Actions and
Undertakings. The Plough-man ploughs in Hope, and the Merchant-Adventures in
Hope; and the Scholar Studies in Hope; and the Soldier Fights in Hope; and so
for all Humane Actions. And thus it must needs be, for in Hope or Expectation
there are these Ingredients.

1. Some End that a Man has in prospect, which carries a Complacency and
Suitableness to the mind; as to be Rich, or Powerful, or Learned, or Applauded.
These are the ordinary ends of ordinary Men; but there are ends of a nobler
Condition, as to be everlastingly happy, etc. But of these nobler and higher
Ends, I do not now speak.

2. That end is also represented as an End Possible and Attainable.

3. That there be also a Means proposed probably conducing to the attaining of
that End; and the Hope or Expectation of that End, is the Spirit or Life that
puts a Man upon the use and exercise of that Means, thus conducible to it: For
the most part the Complacency that is taken in the Exercise of the Means to the
attaining of the End proposed, is at all times equal, and most times exceeds
the Complacency, that is taken in the enjoyment of the End when attained; for
the reason hereafter given: For the End is present in Expectation in the most
ample and Comprehensive Image or Idea thereof that can be: And this is that
which quickens and drives on Action with intensiveness proportionable to that
measure of Worth and Value, that the Soul puts upon the End thus prospected.
And therefore he that has a great and high Expectation and Value of the End
propounded, acts with Vigor and Industry; he that sets but a low Price or
Valuation upon the End, as a business but little preponderating the Trouble and
Industry to attain it, is cold in his Prosecution of it: But if the Labor and
Industry, that is required in the use of that means, appear to equal the Good
that is attained in the End, the whole action is for the most deserted; as he
that sets a great Value upon Wealth or Honor, spares no pains to attain it: So
he that sets but a low value upon it, is flat and lazy in his prosecution of
it; and he that looks upon it as not countervailing the pains in acquiring it,
sits still and is idle in it.

For the most part the Good Things of this World, are presented to Men in
expectation, not only in their best dress, but in an Elevated Value above what
is in truth in them; and this is therefore so upon a double Reason.

1. The Wise Providence of God permitting it, and that for this excellent End,
to keep Men in Action and in Motion; which is of singular use for Mankind: For
if the things exciting the ordinary Actions of Life did appear with no greater
an Elevation than possibly they do really and intrinsically bear, the most part
of Mankind would sit still and do nothing. This very fallacy, that Men put upon
themselves in over expecting, is a Spur to Action and Motion; which in most Men
would be wholly intermitted, unless the very Worldly concerns did set them in
Action, as the end stands thus represented to their Expectation.

2. Mankind being endued with a Fancy or Imagination, that has not only a
power of separating the Good of every thing from the Evil that may possibly
accompany what it expects, but also of stuffing and filling the Good with great
Imaginary Advances, it does (to please and gratify it self) exercise both
these Delightful Deceits. If it finds any good in what it expects, it does upon
choice thrust away and remove all that Evil that is really annexed to it; that
so it may not be vexed with the pre-apprehensions of it; and it multiplies, and
augments, and advances and magnifieth that Good that it has left, that so he
may with the greater delight expect what he, by this fantasy, has wrought
himself up to a belief that he shall enjoy.

The misery and unhappiness that falls upon Mankind, from this advance of the
Hope and Expectation of Worldly Ends, is observable in one of these Events
thereof.

1. It may be there is an utter Frustration of the whole thing designed and
aimed at, and so his Expectation is like the dream of the Hungry Man in the
Prophet, Isai. 29.8.
that dreamed he had Eaten, and he wakes and behold he is hungry.

2. If he attain the End he expected, be it Wealth, or Honor, or Pleasure, or
the like, yet many times there does attend it some signal Mischief or Evil,
that he had not before the patience to think of, that does render the whole
enjoyment to be utterly a thing mischievous, and worse than a disappointment.
And indeed the things of the World are generally of such a Consistency, that a
very little evil joined to it, will sour and make it unsavory. A want of a
little spot of Ground for a Garden, will make the fruitions of a Kingdom but
insipid to Ahab; and a want of a Mordecai's Knee, will disrelish all the Honor
of the great Courtier Haman. The truth is, the Mind is that which makes any
thing uneasy; and it falls out, that a small cross or trouble to a Mind,
especially filled with expectation of a full and entire Happiness, will be as
troublesome as a small Thorn in a great Man's Foot.

3. But yet further, suppose we that the thing projected, is attained without
any mixture of mischief attending it; yet here is an inseparable unhappiness
that does attend the most perfect enjoyment of the best Worldly advantage
projected and expected; it is always less than it was expected. The Expectation
flattered it self with much more than what it finds; and a Man does infallibly
find that his Mind and Fantasy had dressed up and adorned the Image and
Phantasm of what was projected, much finer and goodlier than he finds it when
he attains it. A Man projecting Happiness in Honor, Wealth, Friends, Applause,
Pleasure, or any other Earthly thing, is much like a Builder, that has much
more content in his contrivance and expectation of the Beauty, Comeliness,
Usefulness, Contentment, and other Complacency of his Building, than when it is
finished; and when he has done all, nay, though exquisitly suitable to his
Mind, yet his Contentment vanishes in the fruition; and the Contentment as it
falls short of the Expectation, so for the most part it dies and vanishes with
the enjoyment.

Take therefore this Counsel: First, In all thy Designs of Temporal Advantages,
keep thy Expectations and Hopes low, clog them with Suspicions, and Abatements,
and Allays; otherwise thy Expectations will cheat thee; and not only so, but
render that good that thou shall attain (even upon honest designs) insipid and
flat, because less than what thou expectest; whereas a low Expectation gives a
relish to a low enjoyment. Secondly, Set not thy heart upon an earnest
prosecution of Temporal Advantages: For, if they do not vex thee by
Disappointment, or some Thorn or Gall that does adhere to them, yet it is Ten
to One they will cheat thee, appear more glorious at a distance and in
Expectation, than nearer hand, and in Fruition. They are trimmed up with Report
and Expectation; but in reality, and in themselves are like the Apples of
Sodom, Beautiful to the Eye, but vanish into dust when touched. Solomon, was
certainly the Wisest and Externally Happiest King that ever the World knew: He
had the greatest opportunity that ever any Man had, to take a full Estimate of
the World in its choicest Enjoyments, by reason of his Wealth, and Peace, and
Power, and Interest, almost with all the Princes and Potentates that then
Reigned. He had a vast Judgment and Understanding of all things in Nature, and
could with exquisite Skill and Relish, search into, and attain all that was
Externally Good and Desirable in this World. And besides all this, he made it
his chief business to search out what was that Good for the Sons of Men, under
the Sun; and this he did neither bruitishly, as led thereunto by sensuality,
nor superficially, or barely by speculation; but he made it his business not
only strictly to inquire into it by his Reason and Judgment, but also really to
experiment and try the matter he thus sought after: And having with much
industry and observation climbed, as it were, to the top of all Worldly
Felicity and Enjoyment, and beholding the rest of Mankind, as well as they were
able, Reaching and Clambering, as it were, toward this precipice of Worldly
Felicity: -- Dum monte potitus
Spectat anhelantem dura ad fastigia turbam.


From this high Mountain he bespeaks Mankind in his critical Book of
Ecclesiastes, as it were in this manner: Ye Children of Men, I see ye are full
of great Expectations of and by Worldly Contentments; and you take much pains
for the acquest of them: Listen a while what I shall say to you; I have had
those Opportunities of a full discovery of the best that this World can afford,
Wealth, Honor, Pleasures of all sorts and kinds, and such Opportunities as none
of you ever had or can expect to make the like discovery; and I have denied my
self nothing that this World can afford to give me Content, and the most
exquisite Taste and Relish of them; and I have now arrived to the very
Fastigium, the very highest point of this Mountain of Pleasure and Worldly
Fruition; and I find my self wholly deceived in what I expected: I expected
indeed as great Contentation as you do, but now I have tasted of every dish, I
find them all to be but Vanity and Vexation of Spirit. I have not been only
disappointed in what I expected from them, but instead thereof I have reaped
nothing but Sorrow, Anxiety, Vexation, you do therefore deceive your selves in
all the pains ye take, while ye think from these Worldly Enjoyments, ye shall
acquire Happiness, yea, or Contentation in them. Be wise therefore, and take
warning by me, the greatest example that ever the World knew of this kind. Give
over these laborious busy and vain pursuits of yours; and take out but this
concluding Lesson of mine, which I have learned by infallible Experience. Fear
God, and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole Duty of Man.

Heb. XIII. 14. For here have we no continuing City but we seek one to come.
I Have in my course of life, had as many Stations and places of Habitation as
most Men. I have been in almost continual Motion; and although of all Earthly
things I have the most desired Rest, Retiredness, and a Fixed Private Station,
yet the various changes that I have seen and found, the Public Employments,
that without my seeking, and against my Inclination have been put upon me, and
many other Interventions, as well Private as Public, have made the former part
of this Text true to me in the Letter, that I have had no continuing City, or
place of Habitation. When I had designed unto my self a settled Mansion in one
place, and had fitted it to my convenience and repose, I have been presently
constrained by my necessary employments to leave it and repair to another: And
when again I had thoughts to find repose there, and had again fitted it to my
convenience; yet some other necessary occurrences have diverted me from it; and
thus by several vicissitudes my dwellings have been like so many Inns to a
Traveller, though of some longer continuance, yet almost of equal instability
and vicissitudes. This unsettledness of Station, though troublesome, yet has
given me a good and practical Moral; namely, that I must not expect my Rest in
this lower World, but must make it as the place of my Journey and Pilgrimage,
not of my Repose and Rest, but must look further for that Happiness. And truly
when I consider that it has been the Wisdom of God Almighty to exercise those
Worthies, which he left as Patterns to the rest of Mankind, with this kind of
Discipline in this World, I have reason not to complain of it, as a Difficulty,
or an Inconvenience, but to be thankful to him for it as an Instruction and
Document, to put me in remembrance of a better Home, and to incite me to make a
due provision for it; even that Everlasting Rest which he has provided for
them that love him; and by pouring me thus from Vessel to Vessel, to keep me
from fixing my self too much upon this World below. But the truth is, did we
consider this World as becomes us, even as Wise Men, we may easily find,
without the help of any such particular Discipline of this Nature, that this
World below, neither was intended, nor indeed can be a place of Rest, but only
a kind of Laboratory to fit and prepare the Souls of the Children of Men for a
better and more abiding State, a School to exercise and train us up into habits
of Patience and Obedience, till we are fitted to another Station, a little
narrow Nursery, wherein we may be dressed and pruned, till transplanted into a
better Paradise. The continual Troubles and Discomposures, and Sicknesses, and
Weaknesses, and Calamities that attend our lives, the shortness and continued
Vexations occurring in them; and finally, the common examples of Death and
Mortality of all Ages, Sexes, Conditions of Mankind, are a sufficient
instruction to convince reasonable Men, that have the Seriousness and Patience
to consider and observe, That we have no abiding City here. And on the other
side, if we will give our selves but the leisure to consider the Great Wisdom
of Almighty God, that orders every thing in the World to ends suitable and
proportionable; the excellence of the Soul and Mind of Man; the great Advances
and Improvements his Nature is capable of; the admirable means, the Merciful
and Wise God has afforded unto Mankind, by his Works of Nature and Providence,
by his Word and Instructions, to enable him for a Nobler Life, than this World
below can yield, will easily confess that there is another State, another City
to come, which becomes every Good, and Wise, and Considerate Man to look after
and fit himself for. And yet let a Man look upon the generality of Mankind with
a due and severe consideration, they will appear to be like a company of mad or
distempered People. The generality of the World make it their whole business to
provide for a Rest and Happiness in this World, to make these vain acquests of
Wealth and Honor, and Preferments, and Pleasures of this World their great, if
not only Business and Happiness; and, which is yet a higher degree of frenzy,
to esteem this the only Wisdom, and to esteem the careful Provision for
Eternity, the Folly of a few weak, melancholy, fanciful Men: Whereas it is in
truth, and in due time it will most evidently appear, that those Men that are
most sedulous and solicitous touching the attaining of their Everlasting Rest,
are the only true Wise Men, and so shall be acknowledged by those that now
despise them. Wisd. 5.4. We Fools accounted his life Madness, and his end to be
without Honor. How is he numbered among the Children of God, and his Lot is
among the Saints?

When I come to my Inn I have this consideration presently occurs to me. If my
Lodging be good and fair, the Furniture splendid, the Attendance great, the
Provisions good and well ordered; yet I straight consider this is not the place
of my Rest, I must leave it to morrow, and therefore I set not my Heart upon
it. And again, if my Inn be but poor, my Entertainment mean, my Lodging
decayed, I do not presently send for Painters, Carpenters, and Masons to
Repair, or Beautify it; but I content my self with it, and will bear with the
inconveniences, because I consider it will be but for a night, and to morrow I
shall be gone, and possibly come to my home, where I shall be better
convenienced. And although the truth is, that this World is little other than
our Inn to entertain us in our Journey to another Life; and our stay in it is
many times very short, yea, our longest stay here in comparison of Eternity, is
infinitely more short than a nights lodging at an Inn in comparison to the
longest life here; yet it is a wonderful thing to observe how much we are taken
up with the concerns of this our Inn, what a stir we keep about it? what pains
and cost we employ in it? how much of our time is laid out upon it? as if it
were our only home. If our Lot cast us upon a handsome Lodging (as it were) and
in it furnished with Wealth, or Glory, or Honor, How we pride our selves in it?
how goodly we look upon our selves? how happy we think our selves? what care we
have to make it more Rich, Glorious, and Splendid: And on the other side, if
our Lot cast us upon a lower, meaner Station; if we are Poor, or Sickly, or
Neglected, or under Hatches, what a deal of Impatience, and Discontent, and
Unquietness appears? Nay, though our Lodging and Entertainment in this Inn of
the World be pretty well, and will serve till we take our Journey; yet if it be
not so Fine, and Splendid, and Rich, and Comely as another; if our Meat be
enough to suffice nature, if our Clothes enough to protect us from cold, if our
House good enough to keep off the Storms, and defend us from Injuries, yet if
these be not so good as such a Man's, or such a Neighbors, not so good as my
Ancestors or Relations, Lord! What a deal of Unquietness, and Complaining, and
Envy, and Impatience, and Turbulency of mind there is in Men? What Designs, and
Frauds, and Plots, and Underminings, and Undue Means Men take to advance their
own condition, and to depress others? and all this while never consider that
which would easily cure the extravagance, as well of one hand, as of the other:
Namely, This is not my home, it is but my Inn; if it be Beautiful, Splendid,
Convenient; if my condition in it be Wealthy, Honorable, Prosperous, I will not
set my heart upon it, nor think any better of my self for it, nor set up my
Rest in it: It is but my Inn, I must leave it, it may be to morrow. On the
other side, if it be but Poor, Weak. Infirm, Ignoble, Low, I will content my
self, it is but my Inn, it may serve for my passage, I shall, it may be, leave
it to morrow, and then if I have taken that due care that becomes me in my
provision for my Eternal State, I am certain the case will be mended with me;
however my Inn be Poor, Mean, Inconvenient, Troublesome, it is but for a night,
my home will be better; I have learned, that I have here no abiding City, but I
seek one to come. The benefits of the consideration of this Text are many.

1. It will teach a Man a very low esteem of this present World, and never to
set the heart upon it. Will thou set thy heart upon that which is not? It is
not an abiding City: Either like the old feigned enchanted Castles, it will
vanish and come to little, while we think we have fast hold of it; or else we
must leave it, we know not how soon: It is full of trouble and vexation when we
enjoy it; and very unstable and uncertain is our stay in it. 2. But let it be
as good as it will, or can be, yet this Text tells of a City that is better
worth our thoughts, an abiding City, a City that cannot be shaken, where there
are no Troubles, no Thorns, no Cares, no Fears, but Righteousness and
Everlasting Peace and Rest.

2. Consequently it will teach us to seek that which is most of value first and
most, and make that our greatest Endeavor, which is our greatest Concernment;
namely, to seek that City that is to come, Peace with God in Christ Jesus, and
the Hope of Eternal Life. It is true, while we are in this City that continues
not (this Inferior World) God Almighty requires a due care for Externals, and
Industry in our Employments, and Diligence in our Callings: It is part of that
service we ow to God, to our Families, to our Relations, to our Selves; and
being done in Contemplation of his Command, it is an act of Obedience and
Religious Duty to him: But this Consideration will add this Benefit even to our
Ordinary Employments in our Calling, it will be sure to bring a Blessing upon
it. Seek first the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof, and all these
things shall be added unto you. It shall be given in, as an advantage and
over-measure. 2. It will add great Cheerfulness to the Employments of your
Calling, and to those Worldly Employments that are requisite for your support
and subsistence, when you shall resign up your endeavors therein to the Good
Pleasure of Almighty God. 3. It will remove all Vexatious Solicitousness and
Anxiety from you, when you shall have such Considerations as these. Almighty
God (it is true) has placed me in this World, as in a passage to another, and
requires of me an Honest Employment for my support and subsistence; or else
has lent me a reasonable liberal portion, whereby I may comfortably subsist
without much pains or labor; I will use it Soberly, Cheerfully, Thankfully: If
he bless me with Increase or greater Plenty, I will increase my Humility,
Sobriety, and Thankfulness; but if it be not his pleasure to bless me with
Plenty and Increase, his Will be done, I have enough in that I have, there is
another more abiding City, wherein I shall have supplies without Want, or
Fears, or Cares.

3. This Consideration will give abundance of Quietness, Patience, Tranquillity
of Mind in all conditions. Am I in this World Poor, or Despised, or Disgraced,
or in Sickness, or Pain; yet this Text gives me two great Supports under it. 1.
It will be but short, this lower World, the Region of these Troubles and
Storms, is no continuing, no abiding City, and consequently the Troubles and
Storms of this inferior City are not abiding or long. 2. After this flitting,
perishing City, that thus passes away, this sower life which is but the Region
of Death, there succeeds another City that indureth for ever, a City not made
with hands, Eternal in the Heavens, a State of Everlasting Blessedness, where
are neither Cares, nor Tears, nor Fears, nor Poverty, nor Sorrow, nor Want, nor
Reproach: I will therefore with all Patience, Cheerfulness, and Contentedness
bear whatsoever God pleases to exercise me withal in this life; for I well
know that my light Afflictions, which are but for a moment, shall be attended
with a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory.

These Considerations will seem but dry and empty, to Men that do not deeply
and considerately weigh matters: Ordinarily young heads think them, at least,
unseasonable for their youth; but they must know that Sickness and Death will
overtake the youngest in time, and that will undeceive People, and render the
best appearances of this World, either Bitter, or at least Insipid, and without
any pleasant relish; and then the Hopes and Expectations of this City to come,
will be more of value to us than the best Conveniences and Delights this lower
World can afford. Let us therefore in our health make it our business to secure
our Interest in it, and it will be our Comfort and Benefit both in Life and
Death.

OF CONTENTEDNESS AND PATIENCE.
COntentedness and Patience differ in this; that the Object of the former is
any condition, whether it be Good, Bad, or Indifferent; the Object of the
latter is any present or incumbent Evil. But though they differ in the Latitude
or Extent of their Object, yet they both arise from the same Principle, which,
if rightly qualified, gives both.

The Measure and Original of all Passions is Love; and the Object of Love, is,
That which is really or apparently Good. If our Love be right, it regulates all
our Passions: For Discontent or Impatience arises from the absence of somewhat
that we love and value, and according to the measure of our love to the thing
we want, such is the measure of our Discontent or Impatience under the want of
it.

He that sets his love upon that, which the more he loves, the more he injoys,
is sure to avoid the danger of Discontent or Impatience; because he cannot want
that which he loves: and though he love something else, that may be lost, yet
under that loss he is not obnoxious to much Impatience or Discontent, because
he is sure to retain that which he most values and affects, which will answer
and supply lesser wants with a great advantage: The greatest bent and portion
of his love is laid out in what he is sure to enjoy, and it is but a small
portion of love that is left for the thing he is deprived of, and consequently
his discontent but little, and cured with the fruition of a more valuable Good.

He that sets his love upon the Creature, or any result from it, as Honor,
Wealth, Reputation, Power, Wife, Children, Friends, cannot possibly avoid
Discontent or Impatience; for they are mutable, uncertain, unsatisfactory
Goods, subject to Casualties; and according to the measure of his love to them,
is the measure of his Discontent and Impatience in the loss of them, or
disappointment in them.

He that sets his love upon God, the more he loves him, the more he injoys of
him, and the surer hold he has of him. In other things the greatest danger of
disappointment, and consequently of impatience, is when he loves them best; but
the more love we bear to God, the more love he returns to us, and Communicates
his Goodness the more freely to us. Therefore we are certain that we cannot be
disappointed, nor consequently have any ground of impatience or discontent in
that which is our unum magnum, the thing we chiefly value.

He that sets his intirest love on God, yet has a liberty to issue a
subordinate portion of love to other good things; as Health, Peace,
Opportunities to do Good, Wife, Children, Friends: And in these he may be
crossed and disappointed. But the predominant love of God delivers the Soul
from Discontent and Impatience, even under these losses.

1. Because the Soul is still assured of what it most values, the love of God
returned to the Soul, which compensates and drowns the other loss, and the
discontent that may arise upon it.

2. Because the Heart is satisfied, that these losses come from the hand of
him, whom he loves, of whose Truth, Wisdom, Love, and Goodness he has
assurance, and therefore will be delivered out in measure, upon most just
Grounds, and for most excellent ends. He sends an Instruction along with his
Rod; and the Soul reads love as well in the Rod of God, as his Staff.

3. Because the Love of God, taking up the principal bent and strength of the
Soul, leaves but a gentle and moderate Affection to the things it loses, and
consequently a gentle and easy parting with them, or being without them. The
great tumult and disorder that is made in the mind upon Losses, Crosses, or
Discontents, is not so much from the Intrinsical Value of the things
themselves, but from the Estimation that is put upon them; were the love to
them no more than they deserve, the Discontent and Impatience in the loss would
be very little. Our chiefest love, when it is placed upon God, it is placed
where it should be; and the mind is then in its right frame and temper, and
dispenses his love to other things regularly, and orderly, and proportionably
to their worth; and thereby the Discontent or Trouble, that arises upon their
Loss or Disappointment is weighed out according to their true value, agreeable
to the just measure of Reason and Prudence: But when our love is out of his
place, it becomes Immoderate and Disorderly; and consequently the Discontents
that arise upon Disappointments in the things we immoderately love, become
Immoderate, Exorbitant Discontents, Impatience, and Perturbation of Mind.

4. Our love to God brings us to a free Resignation of our will to His: For we
therefore love him, because we conclude him most Wise, most Bountiful, most
Merciful, most Just, most Perfect; and therefore must of necessity conclude,
that his Will is the best Will, and fit to be the measure and rule of ours, and
not ours of his: And in as much as we conclude that no Loss or Cross befalls us
without his Will, we do likewise conclude that it is most fit to be born: And
because he never Wills any thing, but upon most Wise and Just Reasons, we
conclude that surely there are such Reasons in this Dispensation; and we study,
and search, and try whether we can spell out those Reasons of his.

OF MODERATION OF ANGER.
THe Helps against Immoderate Anger are of two kinds. 1. Previous
Considerations before the occasion is offered, to habituate the Mind to
gentleness and quietness. 2. Expedients that serve to allay or divert Anger,
when the occasion is offered.

Of the first sort are these:

1. The consideration of our own Failings, especially, in reference to Almighty
God, and our duty to him; which are much greater than any demerits of others
toward us. I provoke my Creator daily, and yet I desire his Patience toward
me, and find it. With what face can I expect gentleness from my Creator, if
every small provocation from my fellow Creature puts me into passion?

2. The consideration of the Unreasonableness of that Distemper in respect of
my self: It puts me into a Perturbation, and makes me unuseful for my self or
others, while the distemper is upon me: It breaks and discomposeth my thoughts,
and makes me unfit for business: It disorders my Constitution of Body till the
storm be over: It discovers to others my Impotency of Mind, and is more
perceived and observed by others, than it can be by my self: It gratifies my
Adversary, when by my Passion I improve his Injury beyond the value of it, and
injure and torment and damnifie my self more by my own Perturbation, than he
can by the injury he does: It evidenceth a Prevalence of my more inferior and
sensual part, common to me with the Beasts, above my Reasonable and more Noble
part. Sometimes indeed a Personated Anger, managed with Judgment, is of
singular use, especially in persons in Authority; but such an Anger is but a
painted fire, and without perturbation: But a Passionate Anger upon Injuries
received, or upon sudden Conceptions of them, is always without any end at all
of Good, either intended or effected: Nay, It is an impediment to the attaining
of any Good end; because it blinds the Judgment, and transports Men into
inconsiderate Gestures, Words, and Actions.

3. Consideration in respect of others, even of the very persons provoking. It
may be they are Instruments, permitted by God as his Instruments, either to
correct, or try me. Peradventure God has bidden Shimei curse David; be not too
violent against the Instrument, lest peradventure thou oppose therein the
principal Agent. Again, many Men are of such a pitiful constitution, that their
injuries arise from very Impotence of Mind in them: Shall I be angry with them,
because they want that understanding they should have? And yet it is very
strange to see the weakness and folly of our nature in this Passion, that it
will break into a Perturbation even with Children, Drunken Men, Madmen,
Beasts; yea, very dumb things: Witness our anger with the Cards and Dice, when
their chances please us not; which shows the Unreasonableness and Frenzy of
this Passion.

2. There be some Expedients against it, even when the occasion is offered.

1. Carry always a Jealousy over thy Passion, and a strict Watch upon it. Take
up this peremptory Resolution and Practice. I will not be angry, though an
occasion be administered. And let the return upon that Resolution be the first
act after the Provocation given: For if a Man can but bring himself to this
pass, that he take not fire upon the first offer, the Passion will cool: A Man
calls then his Reason about him, and debates with himself: Is there cause I
should be angry? Or, is there any Good end attainable by it? Or if it be, what
is the just medium, or size, or measure of Anger proportionable to that end?
And these Considerations will break the first onset of Passion, and then it
seldom prevails: For, it is the first Wave that carries on the Perturbation to
the end, which if it be broken at the first, Serenity of Mind is preserved with
much Contentation, and sense of advantage.

2. Take up this Resolution, never to give thy self leave to be angry, till
thou see the just Dimensions of the Provocation. First, Learn whether there
be any such thing done or no: For many times we shall find that a false report,
or a mis-conception in the Mind, sets up the Image of an Injury, and presently
the Passion swells upon it; when, it may be, upon a due examination, there is
no such thing at all. Secondly, Admit there be an injury, yet learn what the
Circumstances of it are: For till that be known, though thou have a mind to be
angry, thou know not what Proportion or Measure of Anger to allow, till thou
know the Measure of the injury done. It may be it is not so great; or it may
be it was done by mistake; it may be it was done upon some provocation given by
thee, or at least so understood; and then it is not so malicious: and it may be
the Man is coming to make thee amends, or to ask thee pardon. This will give
leisure to thy Reason, to thy Grace, to come in; and will break the first
shock, which the choleric blood gives to the Heart, which raises the
combustion; and then a Thousand to one it comes to nothing, and either dies
presently, or languisheth below the name of a Passion.

3. In case of Provocation to Anger by Words, consider this, that there is
nothing so much gratifies an ill Tongue, as when it finds an angry hearer: nor
nothing so much disappoints and vexes it as Calmness and Unperturbedness. It
is the most exquisite and innocent Revenge in the World to return gentle words,
or none at all to ill language. But on the other side, Anger and Perturbation
does not only produce what thy adversary desires, but also puts a
Discomposedness and Impotence upon thee, that thou becomest unable to keep
silence, or to speak with that reason and advantage thou should.

A PREPARATIVE A AGAINST AFFLICTIONS; WITH Directions for our Deportment under
them, and upon our Delivery out of them.
1. IT is the great folly that ordinarily possesses Men, especially in a
prosperous condition, that they cannot suppose a change of their Estates: a
living Man can hardly think of dying; a healthy Man can hardly think of
sickness; a Wealthy Man can hardly think of Poverty; a Man in the Applause and
Glory of the World, can hardly think of being under Disgrace end Reproach.

2. The Reasons of this Difficulty seem to be these: 1. The present condition
is a thing that falls under our present sense, and takes up our whole
consideration: things that yet are not, are made present only by Contemplation:
and that, as it does not so strongly affect the mind, so there is a long
operation that must precede before it can be brought home: a Man must consider
whether the State wherein he is, be changeable, and what may change it; and
whether it may change for the worse; or unto what degree of badness; and the
probabilities or possibilities of it; and so it requires a long process of the
mind, before a Man can bring himself under a supposition that his condition may
change, and change extremely for the worse. 2. When that supposition is
received or admitted, yet it being but notional and imaginary, has not the
like strength of impression upon the mind, as that which is present and
sensible; and so it soon passes away, and has not strength enough to hold out
for any time upon the mind, to work a due preparation and temper in the mind
for a change. 3. The present condition, when it is grateful to the sense, we
are for the most part willing to embrace and make the most of it: we have not
patience to give an allay or abatement to our present fruition, by mingling any
such sad considerations with it, as that it may change, when the mind begins to
put it self upon thoughts of a change of a beloved condition, such replies as
these do often meet with it: What? shall I be dying while I live? be Sick when
I am Well? be Poor when I am Rich? be in Disgrace when I am in Glory? make my
self Miserable while I am Happy? it will be time enough to take and bear that
Lot when it comes, and not to dye, or be in Sickness, Poverty and Disgrace by
anticipation: I will take the benefit and sweetness of my present happiness,
and not sour or abate it by the pre-apprehension of a change, if it happens,
it will come before it is welcome. I will therefore think as little of it as I
may before hand, and not make that present by a needless Contemplation, which I
would willingly be freed from, if it should at all attack me. These and such
like considerations do make Men rather procrastinate the evil day, than put
themselves under the supposition of it.

3. The Inconveniences that arise to the Children of Men, by this aversness
from thinking of a change of a prosperous condition for a worse, are very
great: 1. A mind, that oftentimes in a prosperous condition casts it self in
worse by supposition and contemplation, does ordinarily use his present
condition Warily, Moderately, Watchfully; but on the other side, this
incogitancy of a change makes Men Presumptuous and Confident in their Estate,
Voluptuous, Imperious, Proud, Immoderate, Vainglorious; for they want that
Correction that should allay and discipline it into Moderation. If I am Rich,
or in any other prosperous condition, and begin to pride up my self, and to
take upon me; presently a mind accustomed to assume upon it self, by
preapprehension, a contrary condition will presently check that Pride and
Vanity with such a kind of expostulation as this: How unseemly, Imprudent, and
Vain is this? what if to morrow I should be cast down from my Greatness, or
cast upon my Bed of sickness, or under the cloud of Disgrace, or, it may be,
taken away by Death? what will then become of this Immoderation? carry it along
with me I cannot; for the change of my condition will not bear it; and if, with
the change of my condition, I do, as I must, put off these Follies that attend
me in this, that which is now my Excess, my Sin, will then be my Shame, my
Sorrow and Vexation. 2. As a frequent pre-apprehension of disadvantageous
changes tutors the mind to a right use of the present condition; so it
admirably fits a Man with such a temper of Spirit, as becomes his changed
condition: does his change require Patience to bear it, Contentedness under it,
Preparedness for it? He has learned this in the Theory, and has them laid up
ready to be put in ure if the occasion call for them: if there be no occasion
to practice them, they are no burden; but if there be, he has put himself to
School to Affliction by Premeditation before it comes, and is ready to exercise
those Virtues when it comes. But on the other side, a Man, that being in a
condition of Prosperity, never puts himself under the sad thoughts of a change
of his present Happiness, if such a change befalls him, he is at his wits end;
he is surprised, and overwhelmed with it; he knows not how to bear it, but
falls into Impatience, or his very Soul dies within him; he is taken before he
is prepared, and none of those dispositions, or rather distempers of mind, that
were bred up upon his former condition, will at all serve the present, but do
distract, and disquiet, and perplex him; as his former Pride, Haughtiness of
mind, Greatness of Spirit, Intemperateness, Luxury, they are so far from being
at all serviceable and useful to him, that they are as so many Haggs and Furies
to torment him; and the things called Patience, and Contentedness, and
Humility, and Calmness of Spirit, which are of absolute necessity for his
present change, he knows not how to attain or use. It Is a miserable, or, at
least, a very great Improvidence for a Man then to be learning those Virtues,
when the present necessity calls for the use of them: it is like a Thief, who
is to learn to read, when he is to pray his Clergy.

4. It is therefore a most useful and necessary course for Men in Prosperity to
take up the frequent Contemplation of their Change. Bilney, when the true
profession of the Gospel in this Kingdom was under Persecution, was used to put
his finger into the Candle to inure himself the better to undergo Martyrdom;
which he at length suffered, possibly with more Resolution and Patience, than
if he had omitted that experiment. And surely this practice of Patience would
be with more ease, and no less advantage, if in the time of our external
Happiness, we did sometimes, and oftentimes, take up such serious
Contemplations as these, both in reference to Death, and other external
Afflictions: I am now alive and well, but I cannot but know that I am mortal
and must dye, and my own reason, and every days experience tells me that my
time is very uncertain and casual: a small distemper or disorder in any little
Vein or Artery, a little cold, a little meat undigested, may cast me into a
mortal Disease; a Crum going aside, a contagious Air, the fall of a Stone on
me, or of me upon a Stone, may suddenly take away my life. There are such
infinite Casualties that may be mortal to me, that it is no wonder that I
should die, but it is that I live. What if it should please God by any Disease
or accident suddenly to call me to account for my Stewardship? are my Accounts
ready? is my Peace made? are my Sins pardoned? is my pardon sealed? is all as
ready as it becomes that hour? if it be, well, if not, it becomes me speedily
to set things in order, especially my great concernment: for as this Tree of
mine falls, so it will lie to all Eternity. Such thoughts as these, often and
seriously iterated, would not hasten a Man's death, but would much amend his
life: it would put and keep the Soul in a right order and temper. Again, I am
now in Health and Strength, free from Disease and Pains; if I am not out off by
an untimely end, I must expect that Disease and Pains will lay hold of me; it
may be, a burning Feavor, or a languishing Consumption, or some such Disease as
may make the nights long, and the days troublesome, every place uneasy, all
things I eat or drink insipid, every Limb or Vein, Bone or Sinew contributing
some Pain, or Weakness, or Faintness, or Anguish to the common stock of that
Disease, which I must suffer. How am I furnished with Patience to bear it? can
I amend in my self that Frowardness, Unquietness, Peevishness, and Impatience
that I behold in others in the like case? Believe it, Sickness is not the
fittest time either to learn Virtue, or to make our Peace with God: it is a
time of distemper and discomposedness: those must be learned and practiced
before Sickness comes, or it will be too late, or very difficult, to do it
after. Again, I am now abounding with Wealth; but Riches many times make
themselves Wings and fly away; a Thief, or a Robber, a Plunder, or a
Sequestration, a false Information, or a false Oath, the change of Times or
Casualties of Fire or War, Oppression from those above, or Tumult from those
beneath, the Chaldean or the Sabean, a Word or Action mis-understood,
mis-apprehended, or mis-interpreted, and a Thousand Contingences, may take away
all my Wealth, So that I may stand and see my servants deserting me, my
Children utterly unprovided for, my self in Extremity and Want, So that I, that
have relieved Thousands, must be fain to gain Bread for my self and my little
Children, either by the sweat of my own brows in some low Employment, or by
the charity of others: This may, and may be speedily: Experience of these times
have made it visibly possible, wherein Thousands, that never dreamt of a
change, have unexpectedly felt it; can I come down to so low a condition with
quietness and serenity of mind, without murmuring against Providence, or
Cursing, or studying Revenge upon the Instruments of it? Nay, can I entertain
this change with Patience? nay, with Cheerfulness? nay, with Thank fullness to
God, that he gives me my evil things in this life? if he be pleased but to
bless my Afflictions to me, and to reserve my portion of Happiness for the life
to come? can I still depend upon God? live upon him? and bless his Liberality,
if he allow me and my poor Children a piece of Bread and a cup of Water? can I
look through the darkness of my present condition, and behold that Hope of
Eternity that is beyond it, and gather more Comfort in that Hope, than all the
present Disasters can give Discomfort? If I can do this, my Loss will be my
Gain; if I cannot, it should be my business in the time of my Prosperity, to
lay up such a stock and treasure against the evil day, which will be above the
Malice, and Power, and reach of Men and Devils to deprive me of. Again, I am
now in Honor and Esteem in the World, my Place makes me Eminent, and if it did
not, yet my Reputation is fair and clear, and great, it may be I can without
Vanity or Ostentation own as much esteem as Job does in his 29 Chap. The young
Men saw me and hid themselves, and the Aged arose and stood up; when the Ear
heard me, it blessed me; and when the Eye saw me, it gave witness to me: but
for all this my condition may be changed, as his was, and my next Complaint may
be with him, Chap. 30. But now they that are younger than I, have me in
derision, whose Fathers I would have disdained to have set with the Dogs of my
Flock: and now I am their Song, yea I am their byword. I may be branded with
the Imputation of the highest Crimes; nay, my very Religion and Piety to
Almighty God, and my Justice, Honesty, and Fidelity to Men, may be covered with
an Imputation of the basest Hypocrisy and Dishonesty under Heaven, and though
this part of my Reputation has been my darling, that I valued highest of any
thing in the World, and consequently a blemish cast upon me in this behalf
would wound me deeper than any worldly loss; yet a consequent of greater
Importance would follow upon it, which I value higher than my Reputation, viz.
The Honor of God, the value and esteem of Religion, would be wounded through
this wound; yet if this should befall me, am I in a frame and temper of mind to
bear it as I should? can I be contented to sit under Reproach and Infamy with
Patience and Quietness of mind? can I content my self with the secret witness
of my own Conscience, attesting my Innocence, though the Imputations, under
which I fit, are as black as Hell? can I cheerfully make my secret appeal to
the Searcher of Hearts, and please my self with the Serenity of his Countenance
toward me, though I am clothed with Calumnies and Reproaches? can I wait his
time for my Vindication, and content my self, though the World never know my
Innocence, so as my God and my Conscience can attest it? if I have not arrived
at this temper and pitch of mind, it should be my labor to attain it; for
without it I sink under my Reproaches and Infamies, but if I have attained it,
then under the most dark and cloudy storm of undeserved Reproach and Infamy I
enjoy a Goshen within my self, I have a beam of light that follows me in the
blackest night, and I Conquer my Reproaches by suffering them.

5. But though this exercise, of putting our selves under Notional Afflictions,
is of singular use to habituate and fit us for such a temper as becomes such a
change; yet this is not all; Afflictions are not only Notional and Possible,
but there is something more in it; there is a greater Probability of them, than
to be freed and exempt from them: they are not only under that degree of things
that may be, but they come near to that degree of things that must be, and that
in these respects.

1. In respect of our Sin and Demerits. Although Afflictions many times are not
principally intended as Punishments, but are sent for higher ends; yet it is
most certain, that they are deserved to be inflicted as Punishments, and are in
their own nature a most necessary consequent of Sin. They are not expiatory or
satisfactory Punishments, but they are most certainly Fruits and Effects of
Sin: and worldly Crosses and Calamities do as naturally flow from precedent
Sins, as the Crop does from the Seed that is Sown. Now in as much as every day
I commit some Sin or other, it is no wonder if I reap the Fruits of it in
Affliction: It is a wonder rather that I meet with no more Calamities and
Crosses in this World; and it is a Mercy if I meet with them only in this
World, and not both in this and that which is to come. Wherefore does a living
Man complain, a Man for the Punishment of his Sin? Certainly, though they were
no Devil or Wicked Men to inflict Punishment upon me, as long as I carry Guilt
and Sin about me, its no wonder if it raise storms upon me: and therefore I
have no cause to hope for an Immunity from Trouble, so long as I have no
Immunity from Sin.

2. In respect of our Corruption, we have seen Troubles and Afflictions under
the former Consideration, Sub ratione poenae, under the nature of a Punishment;
in this Consideration sub ratione medicinae, in the nature of a medicine. The
former shows somewhat of the Divine Justice to inflict them, the latter much of
the Divine Mercy to apply them. The truth is, our Natural Corruptions are very
Many, and very Great; and for the most part they are most disorderly and
dangerous when our condition is Prosperous; it is indeed the Fuel of our
Corruptions. Pride, and Vainglory, and Carnal Confidence, and Security, and
Luxury, and Intemperance, and Insolence, and Arrogance, and Forgetfulness of
God, and of our selves, and of our Mortality, and of our Duty, and a Thousand
such kind of Vermin do grow and thrive upon Prosperity. God Almighty therefore
sends Crosses, and Afflictions, and Troubles, and those to cure, and chase
away, and starve these evil Beasts. And let any Man observe it either in
himself or others, we are generally the worse for Prosperity, and generally the
better under Adversity, what ever Sects or Professions we are of: and it is a
far greater difficulty to manage a Prosperous Glorious condition, than a low or
Afflicted condition. Many times when I have read in the Scriptures, that
Affliction is the Lot of the Righteous, and in the World ye shall have
Tribulation, I have looked upon it not only as the Issue of the Devil and
wicked Men's hatred, but also as the Wise Dispensation of Almighty God to suffer
it; for it is for their Safety and Benefit. Affliction does in no sort so much
endanger a good Man to lose his Innocence, Worth, and Virtue, as Prosperity,
Wealth, and Honor do: and therefore I have always thought that Man the
securest from Afflictions upon this account, that uses his Prosperity with the
greatest Piety, Watchfulness, Moderation and Equality of mind; because such a
Man keeps a check upon his Corruptions, and so stands in less need of this
Physic: he is like a Man, that in his health keeps a good and orderly Diet,
whereby in probability he stands in less need of a Corrective for Peccant
Humors.

3. As God, out of his Mercy to Good Men, sends many times Afflictions to cure
or allay their Corruptions; So the Devil or evil Men will be sure to inflict
them out of Hatred and Envy at their Graces, Marvel not if the World hate You,
it hated Me before it hated You. And it is a great marvel, if any Good Man
escape Afflictions upon this account: for if he be such a one, as being in
Prosperity sets his Heart too much upon it, then the Devil and the World
endeavors to deprive him of his Comfort, to draw him to Murmuring, and
Discontent, and using of unlawful Means, or unworthy Compliances, to preserve
that which he so much loves: or if he be a Man that in his Prosperity keeps his
Heart in a right frame and temper, then the World or the Devil, being
disappointed in that condition, endeavors to shake him with the other extreme:
and though in reference to both, there is Envy, and Malice in the Devil
inflicting, yet there is Mercy and Wisdom in God permitting it: in reference to
the former, for the checking and curing of this growth of Lust, and Corruption;
in reference to the latter, for the Trial of the Sincerity of his Graces, as in
the case of Job.

4. Another reason of the Necessity of Afflictions to Good Men, is to carry
their Hearts upwards, and to make them reach after their Everlasting Hope, and
set a price upon it. The Good things of this World, though in our judgment we
set not the like esteem upon them as upon Heavenly, yet they have this
advantage that they are present, and therefore affect the Sense and the Mind
more than things that are better, at a distance: and therefore we are apt to
set up our rest here, And this is the reason that even Good Men, though they
value and prize Grace and the inwa^d favor of God, yet they commonly love the
World a little too much; and divide their Affections too equally between God
and the World; and therefore study and endeavor such a Contemperation that
they may hold both. And hence it is, that God, who requires entirely the Heart,
does many times make the world bitter to us, to make us weary of his Rival,
that so we may with more Intireness and Integrity set our Hearts upon Him and
upon that Everlasting Hope, and long after and Integrity set our Hearts upon
Him and it, and satisfy our selves with the Expectation of it, and make it our
Treasure, and set up our rest upon it, and in it. And these are some of those
many reasons that evidence the Necessity of Afflictions.

6. And now we will come to consider these Three matters, 1. What Preparations
we should use before Afflictions overtake us. 2. What should be our Exercise
under it. 3. What should be our frame of mind in case of Deliverance from it.

I. And in the first place of the first of these; We have seen that it is a Lot
to be expected in this World: we cannot upon any terms promise our selves an
exemption from it; nay, if we should escape all other Temporal Calamities; yet
sickness, and infirmities of Body will most infallibly overtake us: they are
part of that black guard, that commonly attends death, which is the inevitable
Lot of the living. It concerns us all therefore to be prepared for that, which
must necessarily, sooner or latter, be our condition, in some kind or other, it
may be in many, it may be in all kinds.

1. Therefore the first Expedient Preparatory to Afflictions is this: In the
time of our Prosperity it must be our care to walk with as much Innocence,
Watchfulness, and Circumspection as can be: for it is a most certain truth that
the Malignity, and Sting, and Venom of Affliction is not so much in the things
I suffer, as in the sense of my former Guilt and Sin. No Man is in a better
condition to bear Afflictions, than he that has the cleanest Conscience: for,
as any distemper in any part of the Body draws all the mischievous and hurtful
humors of the Body to that part, so it is a most sure consequent of any manner
of Affliction, it brings all former Sins to remembrance, and calls the thoughts
of them together upon such an occasion. When Joseph's Brethren were under a
strait in Egypt, under the threatenings and seeming jealousies of their unknown
Brother, then comes in the remembrance of their injury to their Brother, and it
is represented to them with all the aggravations that can be, Genesis 42.21. We
are verily guilty concerning our Brother, in that we saw the anguish of his
Soul when he besought us, and we would not hear: therefore is this distress
come upon us. Conscience, that they had before stifled and injured, now takes
her time to be even with them, and flies upon them when they are in a strait,
and then she will be heard, though in their Prosperity she could not. And this
Return of the Remembrance of former Sins is the very Gall of Afflictions; and
that principally upon these two reasons: 1. It is that which weakens and
impares the strength that should bear them, for, for the most part all ternal
Afflictions they concern the Body, or the outward Man, whether it be Poverty,
or Reproach, or Sickness, or Pain; and if for all this the Mind be but free,
she will be able to bear them pretty well, will suggest Reasons for Patience,
Hopes for Deliverance, and Twenty allayes, at least to mitigate the present
sufferings: but when that Mind, and Reason, and Judgment, that should support,
is likewise wounded, and vexed, and tormented, with the sense of past Sins, and
the Storms that are within be as violent and turbulent as those without, there
is nothing to bear up against the Afflictions; the Soul it self, that should
support the outward Man, wants support for it self. 2. In all external
Troubles, as it is the Duty, so it is the Nature of Man to fly to God, and that
application possibly gains Relief from it, but howsoever it bears up the Man
with a convenient strength against them: the very liberty of recourse to God
gains a Dependence, a Hope, a Confidence, which supports in a very great
measure under the Greatest Troubles: but this Return of Sins past upon the
Conscience and Memory, if it does not wholly deprive, yet it does wonderfully
interrupt, discourage, and divert the Soul from this most admirable expedient.
When a Man shall have such thoughts as these: I am under a very great
Affliction either in my Estate, Friends, Name, Body, and I know no way to
extricate my self but one, and that is by application to the Almighty and
Merciful God; and if I could but do so, I were safe: but alas! the Memory of
my former Sins, my breach of Covenant with him, my frequent Relapses into Sin,
my Ingratitude to him, they fall in upon me, and I dare not, I know not how, I
have not the face, the confidence to come unto him; and so I must lie and sink
under as well my Guilt, as my Affliction. And although this is a very false way
of Argumentation and such as is most displeasing to God, and derogatory to his
high Prerogative of Mercy, as well in forgiving as in delivering, who has
given to the most heinous Sinner, and under the greatest Afflictions a
Commission to ask his mercy both to Pardon and to Deliver, and that with a
Promise of Mercy; yet it is most certain, that, what by our own weakness, and
what by the Devils subtilty, the Remembrance of our past Sins does most
ordinarily make our addresses to God under our Afflictions very difficult.
Little therefore do people consider in the time of their Prosperity, what a
stock of Venom and malignity they lay up against an evil day by a dissolute and
sinful life. Affliction without this most accursed contribution were much more
tolerable. If thou meanest therefore to make thy Affliction easy, keep thy
Conscience clean before it comes: thou have then the Strength of thine own Soul
to support thee, and the liberty of Access to the most Mighty and Gracious God
to deliver thee, when thou can in the sincerity of thy Heart with Hezek. Isa.
38.3.
appeal unto God: Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked
before thee in Truth, and with a perfect Heart, and have done that which is
good in thy sight. I say with reverence, keep God thy Friend in thy Prosperity,
and thou may with confidence resort to him, and rely upon him in Adversity.

2. But alas! when we have used all the Care and Industry, and Watchfulness we
can, who can say he has made his ways clean before God? our Prosperity, and
the Temptations that await us from without, and the Corruptions that are within
us, give us often falls that we know of, and many more that we know not of: if
therefore the necessity of our condition subject us to Afflictions, and the
prevalence of our Corruptions subject us to Temptations, what hope can I have
to have a comfortable Affliction, when I cannot hope to have an Innocent
Conversation? yet there is another expedient to ease and lighten Afflictions:
If thou can not be Innocent, yet be sincere and upright Hearted, an Honest
and Plain Heart, that holds no confederacy with any known Sin, keeps a quiet
Conscience even under Affliction it self. If thou have not a perfect Life, yet
be careful in thy Prosperity thou keep a perfect Heart.

3. But yet if thy Heart has proved deceitful to thee, and thou had fallen
into any Sin, yet there remains one expedient to stop and anticipate the
malignity of it from mingling with thy Affliction: Before Afflictions come, be
sure thou break of thy Sin by Repentance. Every Sin leaves a kind of Poison in
the Soul, and there it many times lies raked up till an evil day comes, and
then it begins to work to some purpose: Sound and Serious Repentance fetches
out this Core, this nest of malignity; cleanses this Ulcer that Sin has
gathered. And lest the malignity of Sin should remain in thy Soul, when
Affliction overtakes thee, be careful. 1. That thy Repentance be frequent and
iterated; and to that end let thy Examinations of thy heart and life be strict
and daily. Possibly thou may find a Sin upon the review that thou did not
before epsy, that may deserve a special Repentance: but if thou do not, yet
thy Sins of daily Incursion require a daily Repentance. 2. That thy Repentance,
upon any known Sin committed, be Speedy while thou art in thy Prosperity; let
it not lie upon thee till to morrow. Who can tell whether some bitter
Affliction may not overtake thee before thou have repented? and then that Sin
will reach out its Venom and Malignity into thy Affliction, and make it worse.
Therefore intercept that accursed influence of Sin by a speedy Repentance. Thy
Repentance will be the easier, and thy Affliction the lighter; thy Heart the
stronger to bear it, thy Access unto Heaven for Deliverance the readier. When a
Man lies under a Sin till Affliction come, he has two great Suits to dispatch
in the Court of Heaven: First, To gain his Pardon. Secondly, To gain
Deliverance from, or strength under Affliction. Be careful therefore to get the
former dispatched in thy Prosperity: thou have the less to do under thy
Affliction. When Guilt and Affliction come upon a Man together, they add to
each others weight and difficulty of removal: but Affliction meeting with a
Conscience cleansed by Faith and Repentance is always tolerable, and for the
most part Comfortable; it loses its nature, and becomes another thing; It is a
prevention of Sin, a Corrective of Corruptions, an Exercise of Grace, a
Conformity to Christ, an Assurance of Gods love, a Preparative for Heaven,
rather than an Affliction.

4. Above all things be very careful that thy Affliction be not the just
production of thy Sin or Folly: for in the one case thou suffer as an Evil
Doer; in the other thou suffer as a Fool; and in neither thou can take any
Comfort. If thou suffer without thy fault, or for thy Virtue, Piety, and
Goodness, thou need not be troubled for the one, and thou may most justly
rejoice in the other: but to suffer as an Evil Doer, or as a Busie-body in
other men's matters, or for ill Language or Passionate Words, or Disturbance of
the civil Power; these take away both the Comfort and the Glory of these
Sufferings. Nay, though the end intended in these Extravagances, may possibly
be good, and though the Punishment inflicted excede the due proportion, and so
has somewhat of injustice or extremity in the infliction, yet such a kind of
suffering brings little Honor to God, little Peace to a Man's self, and little
Advantage to others; but rather the contrary. A Man that has Sins about him
has ill Companions, and such as abate the Comfort, even of an Innocent
Suffering: but when a Man suffers for a Sin, or any unjustifiable Action, his
sufferings lose the name of Afflictions, and become formally, and in their own
nature Punishments: and in such a kind of suffering, though sometimes the
Goodness and Wisdom of God brings Good out of it to the party that suffers, yet
in such, a Man does not only undergo temporal Loss, Pain and Inconvenience, but
has the inevitable prospect of his Fault and Offense in them, which makes the
suffering the more bitter and distastful.

5. Be careful to bring thy self to a right Estimate of the World, and the Good
or Evil of it. Our over valuation of the World is that which makes us excede
either in the Comfort we take in the enjoyments, or in the Perturbation that we
suffer in the Losses or Crosses of it: and commonly according to the measure of
our Love unto, or valuation of the things of this life, such is the measure of
our Grief or Sorrow, or Dispondency, or Anger, or Vexation that we entertain in
our loss or disappointment in them: for indeed all other Passions and
Perturbations of the Mind are but the Handmaids of the Passions of Love, or
Love acted in a different shape or method, if I set too high a value upon my
Wealth, or my Health, or my Honor, or my Relations, or my Credit, then my loss
or disappointment of any of them will produce an Excess of Sorrow, or Vexation,
or Despondency, or Anger, or Revenge. Therefore let it be thy business in the
time of thy quiet and prosperity, in the first place to settle thy Judgment
aright, and consequently thy Affections aright, in reference to Externals.
Consider, first they are but Externals: they have no ingredient at all into the
Man; a Man may be a Fool, or a Vicious and wicked Man, and yet enjoy these
things in a great measure: and a Man may be a Wise, a Just, a Virtuous, a
Pious, a Man, a Man in the favor of God, and yet be without them. 2. They are
in their own nature very uncertain things: they are subject to a Thousand
contingencies: nay, if they stand secured unto me with the greatest stability
that may be, yet my Body is subject to many weaknesses and Distempers, and a
Disease in my Body will render all these things insipid and vain to me. What
good or content will all my Wealth, my Honor, my fine Houses, my great
Retinue, my great Power, do me when I am in a burning Fever, in a painful
Consumption, nay, under a fit of the Headache, or Stone? for so small a
Distemper will make me take no contentment or satisfaction at all, in all or
any of these enjoyments, the truth is, they are but Provisions for the Flesh,
and in order to the Body, and when the Body is under a distemper, they become
but insignificant useless things. He that is under a strong Pain or Disease
finds as little contentment, though he lie on a soft Bed richly furnished, in a
Chamber richly hanged, in it a Cupboard furnished with massy Plate, as if he
lay in a Cottage. 3. They are but for a time, Death will at last overtake me,
and as all my Riches, and Pleasures, and Honors, and Worldly Accommodations,
cannot prevent or buy it off, so neither will they be of any comfort or value
to me in that hour. Indeed they may make death more troublesome and unwelcome to
me, but they cannot at all secure me against it. The plain truth is, Death does
undeceive and open the eyes of the Children of Men; it teaches us to put the
true value upon every thing as it deserves. My Riches and my Honor, my
Pleasures and my Profits, my Gallantry and my Policy, which I made much
reckoning of in my life time, when Death comes, I shall perceive them to be but
Vanity at the best, and set no Esteem upon them: but Piety, and Prayers, and
Charity, and Interest in God, and in the Merits of Christ and the Promises of
the Gospel, that perchance in my life time I esteemed as dry and useless
things, I shall then see to be of greatest value, and accordingly prize them:
These I shall carry with me into the succeeding World; but all my Worldly
Comforts, when I pass through this strait Gate of Death, I shall leave behind
me, as a Snake leaves behind his antiquated Skin when he passes through a
brake, and never make use of them, or take comfort in them more. And when I
come unto the other side of this dead Lake, the Fruitions of all my life past
will be forgotten, or at least remembered as a Man remembers a Dream when he
awakes; only the Good or Evil of my past life will stick upon me unto all
Eternity. Why then should I set my Heart upon that which is of so small a
value, so little use, so short and so uncertain a continuance? they are things
which I may lose while I live, but I am sure I cannot keep them when I die; and
if they take their farewell sooner, they do but their kind, and at best, do but
a little anticipate their last and necessary valediction. I resolve therefore I
will not set my Heart upon them, but carry a loose and flaccid Affection
toward them: And if I lose them, I will not overmuch afflict my Soul for the
loss of that, which I had not much reason to value while I had it.

And as thus a Man should tutor himself to a just Estimate of the Good things
of the World; so a Man should bring himself to a just and due Esteem of the
Evil things of the World, such as Sickness, and Pain, and Imprisonments, and
Reproach, and Want, and the like. There are these two things that do much allay
the severity of those Evils. 1. They are but Corporal, they reach no farther
than the Body, the Husk, the outward Man, the Cottage, they cannot at all get
so deep as the Soul. 2. They are but Temporal: It is most certain that Death
will cure and heal these Evils; and possibly these Distempers and Sufferings,
the less severe they are, the more tolerable; the more severe, the more in
probability they will hasten and advance the cure: As nothing that has an end
can make a Man truly Happy; so nothing that has an end can make a Man truly
Miserable; because he has under his greatest Misery the Lenitive of Hope, and
Expectation of a Deliverance.

6. But yet farther, Gain Assurance of thy Peace with God in Christ, and
consequently of thy future Happiness; and be frequent in the Contemplation and
Improvement of it. This is the great Engine of a Christian, a Magistery, that
was never attained by the most exquisite Philosopher, nor is attainable but in,
and by the knowledge of Christ, who brought Life and Immortality to Light: It
is the great expedient whereby a Man attains Victory over the World; whereby he
is able to enjoy Prosperity with Moderation, and undergo Affliction with
Patience. 1 John 5.4.
This is the Victory which overcomes the World, even your Faith. When a Man,
under the severest Afflictions, shall have this Assurance, and these
Contemplations. It is true, I am in as low a condition as the World can cast
me; my Estate torn from me by the basest of Men, and I and my Children exposed
to extreme Want and Necessity, so that I am become little better than a
Vagabond upon the Earth, for the very attaining of Bread; or at best am driven
to the hardest and most sordid employment that can be consistent with honesty
for my supplies of Necessaries, and if by chance my own sweat or others charity
supply me to day, I cannot imagine what shift to make for to morrow; and if
this were a condition to which I had been born, or in which I had been bred,
use might have made it easy and familiar; but it is not so, I am fallen into
this low condition from a plentiful and liberal condition, wherein I had my
Table crowned with plenty; and as I wanted not Charity to employ my Plenty, so
I wanted not Plenty to supply my Charity. Again I was in the greatest
Reputation and Esteem among Men that may be, but now I am fallen under the
saddest, the basest, Scorn, and Obloquy, and Reproach, and Imputation that can
be, and all this without any cause: my Enemies Triumph over me with Scorns,
Derisions, and Exprobrations: my former Friends bestow upon me a kind of
Scornful Pity, that is more bitter than the upbraidings of my Enemies: the
abjects and dregs of the people make me their byword; and the Calumnies under
which I suffer, are of such a nature, that none dares be my Advocate, but the
silent Testimony of my own Conscience and Innocence. Again, under all these
pressures it had been some allay, if I were but a Citizen of the World, that I
had but the liberty to forsake the place of my suffering, and go to some more
auspicious or tolerable corner of the World; but in that I am also prevented,
my liberty is taken from me, and I am penned up in the narrow, dark, loathsome,
stinking confines of a most odious Prison, without the benefit of Light, or
Friends, or indeed of any other Company than such as make my Imprisonment the
more intolerable, Chains, and Vermin, and the most accursed Malefactors.
Again, I suffer not only under restraint of a loathsome Goal, but I am exposed
to lingering Torments, Racks, and Whips, and Famine, and Nakedness, and Cold,
and continual Threats, and sad Expectations of worse to follow, if worse there
may be. Again, dismal and painful and tormenting Diseases seize upon my Body,
no part of my Body free from pain, no place affords me ease, no Cordial gives
me comfort, my Breath short and painful, and even loathsome unto my self, my
eyes consumed and weary with expectation of Deliverance, my Heart faint, and
not able to support its weak and languishing motion, my Stomach gone and not
able to receive or digest the most pleasant meat, my exhausted consumed Body
standing in need of supply; and yet unable to receive it; my Intrails parcht
and scorcht with burning heat, which is nevertheless the more increased by that
which should allay it; my Limbs, and Joints, and Arteries, torn and racked with
tormenting Convulsions; my Sleep gone, or more troublesome, than if I were
awaked, no posture, no place affording me ease or relaxation; in the Morning I
wish it were Night, and in the Night I long for the Morning; my easy Bed
assords me no ease, and I desire to rise, and when I am risen, I cannot bear
it, I must presently lie down, importunately longing for this or that meat, and
when I have it, loathing the very sight of it: In sum, the whole mass of my
Blood corrupted, and my whole Body a bag full of putrefaction, stink, and
corruption, loathsome to my self and others, a very Carcass bound to a living
Soul, tired with her burden, exquisitly sensible of it, unable either to bear
it or deliver her self of it. These be some of those sad attendants that
accompany this condition, and it may be all those Calamities befall a Man at
once, together with the loss of Friends, or near Relations, as in the case of
Job, and then what remains to denominate a Man perfectly miserable, if the
calamities of this World can do it? But, if under any or all of those Pressures
I can, upon sound grounds and assurance, rest upon my Hope of Immortality,
these and a thousand more External miseries will not only be tolerable, but
easy: When I can upon sound Convictions and Experiences, practically entertain
my self with such thoughts as these. It is true, I am as miserable in Externals
as the World can make me, but in the midst of all my External Losses and
Poverty, I have in my prospect a Kingdom prepared for me, that cannot be
shaken, a Treasure in Heaven above the malice and reach of Men and Devils, and
after a few days spent in my poor Pilgrimage through this World, I shall as
surely possess it, as if I were already actually invested in it; and as this
Hope does allay the sharpness of my passage, so in my arrival to my Happiness,
my present suffering will make my future rest more welcome. That Beam of Light
and Comfort, that this Hope darts into my Soul, will inlighten my darkest Night
here, and walk along with me to my Canaan, when my Hope shall be swallowed up
in Vision and Fruition; in the midst of all the Storms and Reproaches and
Vilifyings that the World heaps upon me, I enjoy the Comfortable Presence and
Favor of my God in my Soul, and his Suffrage, and Attestation, and Acceptance
of my Innocence, which does infinitely more overbalance the Frowns and
Contempts of the World, than the favor of the greatest Prince does overweigh
the Reproaches of the basest Peasant. In the midst of my closest and darkest
Restraints, I have that converse, which the strictest guard, the strongest Bars
cannot exclude: I have the Presence and Conversation of my Savior Christ, and
his Blessed and Sacred Spirit, which does cure and heal the noysomness, and
supply the retiredness of my closest Restraints; and this company makes my
Prison a Temple, wherein I can with his Blessed Apostle, with a cheerful Heart,
magnify my God; my Soul and Mind is at liberty and free in despite of Gates
of Brass, and Bars of Iron. In the midst of all my Pains and Sickness, and the
tedious declination of my Body to its final corruption and dissolution, I can
satisfy my self with an expectation of a happy Resurrection, when this weak,
and frail, and dying Body of mine shall be made like unto the glorious Body of
my glorified Savior, and translated into the Company of Saints and Angels,
where there shall be no Sickness, nor Sorrow, nor Pain, nor Sin, nor Death, and
I shall meet with those Friends and Relations of mine, which died before me in
the same hope. I look upon these my present Pains, and Sickness, and Weakness,
as the Harbingers of that dissolution, which shall put an end to them, and
begin my Happiness; and hereupon I bear them not only with-Patience, but
Comfort (the greater their Violence is, the sooner they will finish their
business, and rend away this mortal corrupted Carcass from my Immortal Soul,)
and even in the instant of my dissolution can, by the eye of my Faith, discern
the Blessed Angels ready to transport my Soul, cleansed by the Blood of Christ,
into the joys of Heaven, and my Blessed Redeemer standing on the other side, as
it were, of this dead Lake, ready to receive me, and lead me into those
Heavenly Mansions of Rest and Happiness, which he went before to prepare for
me. This Hope and Assurance, as it makes the best things of this World, in
their best appearance and dress, but light and vain, and empty and nothing: So
it makes the worst things that the World and Mortality can inflict or suffer,
light and easy. For these light Afflictions, which are but for a moment, work
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, while we look not at
the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: For the things
which are seen are Temporal, but the things which are not seen are Eternal. 2
Cor. 4.17, 18.

These be some of those Preparations that will admirably fit and prepare us to
meet with Afflictions, and in them these two things are to be remembered.

First, That we do not only content our selves with Notions and bare
Speculations of these things, but that we may practically digest them into our
Hearts and Resolutions, for if they be but notional only Afflictions, when they
come, will easily rend and defeat these Notions. I have known many Men, that
have had very excellent Notions of this kind, and could discourse excellently
of them; nay, could urge them very effectually upon others, but when any little
Cross has overtaken them, they have been quite out of all Patience and
Comfort, and as much to seek how to entertain it, as those that had never known
any such matter; nay, a poor experienced Christian, that could not talk half so
much, has received the shock of Affliction with much more Christian Resolution
than the other; and the reason is, The former had digested these Matters barely
into Notion, and the latter he made it Practical and Cordial. When I read
Plutarch, and Seneca, and Tully, I find excellent Instances and Reasonings to
support the Mind in Afflictions; and many times upon the soundest Grounds that
can be. Plutarch de Animae Tranquillitate, tells us, That he that has learned
the Nature of the Soul, and thinks that by death it shall attain a better, or
at least not a worse condition, has a great freedom from fear of Death, and no
small viaticum to attain Tranquillity of mind in his life. And many such
instances are given by the Stoics, especially Seneca, and by Tully. But when
the latter came to an exquisite apprehension of his danger from Anthony, his
Philosophical Notions and Contemplations were too weak to bear up his mind
against those fears; and therefore in his Sixteenth Epistle, Lib. 10. to
Atticus he writes to him to this effect: If thou have any thing to comfort me,
gather it up, and write it not out of Learning or Books; (for I have these here
with me.) Sed nescio quomodo imbecillior est medicina quam morbus: But, I know
not how it comes to pass, the Physic is too weak for the Disease. And Job,
though a Wise and Experienced Man, and bore up pretty well in his Afflictions,
yet his friend Eliphaz tells him, and that truly. Job 4.3, 5. Behold thou have
instructed many, and thou have strengthened the weak hands; but now it is come
upon thee, thou faintest, etc. Men may have excellent Theories to support in
Affliction, and can apply them to others in that condition with singular
dexterity and advantage; yet when the case comes to be their own, their Spirits
sink under them, because these Theories many times flote in the Understanding,
but are not digested deeply, and practically in the Heart.

Secondly, What ever you do, gain this Habit and Temper of Mind. Actuate and
Exercise your Faith, make even your Reckonings, get your Peace and Assurance
settled before Sickness comes: For a Man in any kind of suffering besides,
possibly may learn them, because his mind is, or may be in his entire strength;
but most certainly Sickness is an ill time to begin to learn these
Contemplations, unless they are learned before the Distempers of the Body
discompose the Mind, and make it unfit to begin to learn. It is a time when
that, which has been before fitted and laid up in store in the Soul, must be
drawn out and exercised; but it will be a most difficult business, then to
begin that Lesson, which should be learned in Health, though practiced in
Sickness.

II. Thus much for our Preparation, to meet Afflictions. Now concerning our
carriage under them.

First, In the beginning, and first Onset of any Affliction, be very careful to
keep the Mind in a due temper: Call in all your Aids of Reason, Religion, and
Duty, to keep you in a right frame and temper of Moderation; for Affliction of
any kind, when it has lain a while upon a Man, will probably bring him into
order; but at the first Onset the Passions begin to fly out, and play reaks,
and disorder the Soul, and fill it with Perturbation. Then immoderate Anger, or
Murmuring, or immoderate Sorrow, or Fear fly out, and Men thereby become less
able to bear for the future, and many times fly out into that Immoderation and
Distemper at first, either in Thoughts, or Words, or Actions, that they are
sorry for after, and so draw upon themselves a double trouble: First to Repent
of their folly and immoderation; and then to fit themselves for sufferings; it
throws more grains of Sin into the Scale of Afflictions, and makes it heavier,
and many times longer than otherwise it would be: And after such Perturbation
and Exorbitancy of Passion upon the first inroads of Affliction, a Man has
much ado to bring himself into a right and due temper. This was Jobs case, in
the beginning of his Affliction he flies out into more Impatience and Disorder,
than all the rest of the time; therefore beware and see thou keep thy mind in
temper, and check Perturbation at the first Onset, call together all thy Grace,
and Resolutions, and Reason, to keep thy mind in due temper at first.

Secondly, On the first Onset of any Affliction, Lift up thy heart to God,
desire his Assistance and Grace to enable thee to carry a due temper and frame
of Heart. This is not only thy Duty, and expected from thee by God; but it is a
singular help to enable thee to avoid any present Distemper: For first it is a
means to supply thee with more strength from Heaven to order thy self aright.
2. It brings thy Soul into the Presence of God, before whom it were a shame to
bring any Perturbation; the Passions and Distempers of our Minds are under an
aw in his Presence. 3. It is a diversion of the present bustle and stir that
Passions are apt to make, and being diverted at first, they do not so suddenly,
nor so easily fall into a disorder. Commonly Passions are most disorderly and
impetuous upon the first occasion: And if they be then interrupted or diverted,
the succors even of common Reason, much more of Grace, have opportunity to
rally themselves, and prevent Immoderate Perturbation.

Thirdly, Make as speedy an Inquisition, as thou can, into thy own state, and
what the cause of this Affliction may be: Let us search and try our ways, is
the voice of every Affliction; and commonly every Affliction upon any person,
that lies under any Sin unrepented of, and not forsaken, soon leads the
Conscience to point out that Sin; and indeed most Afflictions in such a case
carry upon them the very Inscription of the Sin, and bear some Analogy or
Proportion with it. Adonibezeks Cruelty, and David's Adultery, were, as it were,
written in the Punishments they suffered, and might easily bring them to their
remembrance. If thou suffer in thy Estate, consider whether either
Immoderate Worldliness, and Covetousness, or Confidence and Glory in thy Wealth
went not before: If thou suffer in thy Name, consider whether thy Reputation
has not been thy Idol, or whether thou have not born thy self too high upon
thy Reputation; and so of other Crosses.

Fourthly, If upon this inquiry, thou find Sin written upon thy Sufferings,
or in the bottom of them, speedily Repent of that sin; Humble thy self in the
sight of God for it, take up Resolution against it. This is the voice, the
injunction that this Rod gives thee, and here thy special duty is Humiliation.

Fifthly, If upon search, thou find thy Heart and Conscience clear, look
upon this Affliction as a Dispensation sent from God, and with all Humility
submit to his hand; and know that the most Wise God sends it, for most wise
ends, though thou see not any Enormity in thy self that might deserve it. It
may be it is to exercise thy Patience, thy Faith, thy Dependence upon him: It
may be he discerns that some Temptation is like to meet with thee, or some
Corruption is growing in thee, that thou do not perceive; and he sends this
Messenger to divert the one, and to prevent the other: study to improve this
Affliction to that end, and here thy special duty is Patience and Vigilance.

Sixthly, But it may be, upon this search, thou do find the true cause of thy
suffering is for Righteousness sake, for keeping a good Conscience, for the
honor of thy Redeemer, for adhering to the Truth, and that this is the cause
that stirs up evil Angels and evil Men against thee: and then indeed thy
suffering loses the name and nature of an Affliction, and becomes an Honor, a
filling up of the measure of thy Saviors sufferings, a suffering that has not
only a Blessing in it, but it is a very Blessing it self; for Blessed are ye,
Mat. 5.10.
if Men persecute you for Righteousness sake. Suffering for or under a Sin
committed, requires thy Repentance and Humiliation, for it is a Judgment:
Suffering without any Sin before hand signally requiring it, requires thy
Patience and Vigilance, it is an Affliction: but suffering for the Testimony of
a Good Conscience requires thy Rejoicing it is a Persecution: But beware thy
Heart deceive the not, and make thee believe thou suffer for a Good
Conscience, when, it may be it is for thy Folly, or Frowardness: in this case,
though they that inflict Punishment may want somewhat of that Charity and
Moderation that is fit, yet thou have reason to repent for thy Folly, and not
to Glory in thy Suffering; we are wonderful apt to believe well of our selves,
and flatter our selves many times, into the title of Persecution, when it is
but the fruit of our Folly and Inconsiderate Rashness.

Seventhly, Receive and bear all thy Afflictions with Humility and lowliness of
mind: for it is a Message sent to thee from the most Wise and Sovereign Lord of
the World, though it may be by the hands of a most vile and unworthy Man. It
was an excellent temper in David, that, when his disloyal Subject cursed him,
restrained the just indignation of his followers: Let him alone, it may be the
Lord has commanded him to Curse. It may be the Instrument executes his own
Malice and Spite, and it may be thou can not find any Signal cause of this
Affliction even from the hand of God, yet be not Vindictive against the
Instrument; he does Gods Errand, though he vent his own Malice: receive Gods
Message, and leave the Revenge to him that has reserved it to himself as his
own Prerogative; and it may be he will burn the Rod, when he has done with it.
Neither storm at Gods dispensation, it may be thou have deserved it, though
thou do not see it; or If thou have not, give leave to thy great Sovereign to
deal with his Creature, as he pleases, and put thy mouth in the dust.

Eighthly, Receive it Thankfully, as well as Humbly. Know that it is sent from
the most Wise and Merciful God; what he does, he does upon most excellent
Grounds and Reasons. It may be it is Preventing Physic against a greater
mischief: It may be it is for an Improvement of thy Grace; it may be it is
intended, as an evidence, that thou art a Son, and not a Bastard; it may be it
is to wean thee from the World; it may be it is to fit and qualify thee for a
greater Blessing, and to give thee a capacity to receive and bear such a
Benefit, which without the Preparation of an Affliction would make thee Proud;
it may be it is to make thee an Example, a strengthening to others; it may be it
is because thy Good things are reserved for the better World, and therefore thy
Evil things are dispensed to thee here. If God be thy Father, trust his Wisdom,
because he is God, and trust his Love, because he is thy Father; and then thou
can not doubt that any thing that he sends deserves thy Thanks though thou
see not wherein the Benefit of it lies: Be contented herein with an Implicit
Faith, and be Thankful to him at all adventures. A Cup of Wormwood would not be
reached to thee from so Wise, and so Good a Father, but that his Love and thy
Benefit is mingled with the bitter Cup, though thou can not at present taste
the one or the other.

Ninthly, Bear it Patiently and Quietly. 1. If it come for thy Sins, thou have
reason to bear it patiently, for it is but the fruit of thine own Plant, the
Crop of thine own Seed. Why does the living Man complain? a Man for the
Puuishment of his Sin? Thou have procured it to thy self, be contented to bear
the issue of thine own way. 2. Bear it patiently, for it might justly have been
worse, and more severe; thou want somewhat that another injoys, but have not
thou somewhat that another wants? thou have lost a considerable part of thy
Estate, but have thou not somewhat left? or, if thou have lost all, have thou
not still thy Health, and thy limbs, that may supply thy necessities by honest
Labors? thou have lost thy Limbs or thy Health, but do thou not enjoy thy
Senses, and thy Understanding and Reason? thou have lost thy Reputation, Honor,
and Esteem in the World, but have thou not thy Integrity and Uprightness? the
Witness and Serenity and Peace of thine own Conscience? thou have lost many of
thy near Relations, but have thou not some left? thou art visited with Sickness
and Pain, but have thou not seen some that have had more acute, and less
strength to bear them, and less hopes to be delivered from them, and less means
to support them? but suppose thou have lost all thy Wealth, thy Reputation, thy
Health, thy Friends, yet have thou not Peace with God? the Light of his
Countenance? the Assurance of his Favor? the Hope of Eternal Life? and would
thou exchange this Hope for the return of all thy Temporal Comforts and
Advantages? believe it, that Man's condition cannot be exquisitely miserable,
where there is any Hope, much less where there is such a Hope, a Hope that
out-weighs whatsoever the World can afford, or inflict; a Hope that is so much
the nearer to fruition, by how much the greater thy External pressures are,
when thou do deserve the loss of all, thou have reason to be patient, if thou
do enjoy any thing; the Interrogation of the Prophet is pathetical: Why does
the living Man complain? a Man for the Punishment of his Sin? Where there is
Life, there is Hope; and for a sinful Man to complain while he yet is living,
carries with it the conviction of the unreasonableness of his complaint;
because he injoys somewhat that yet he deserved to lose. 3. Bear it patiently,
because it is but short, though it be never so sharp, it may be that the same
God that inflicted or permitted it, is at this instant resolving to turn thy
Captivity, to give thee Beauty for Ashes: And what an unseemly thing will thy
Impatience be? How troublesome will the remembrance of it be to thy Soul upon
the change of thy condition? How much will thou be ashamed at thy return of thy
undecency of thy carriage under thy Affliction? I am persuaded there was
nothing more sowred Jobs returning Prosperity, than the remembrance of his
former Murmuring and Impatience under the visiting hand of God. But again,
Suppose thy Affliction wait upon thee till thy dissolution, yet it is but a
Night, but an hour of Affliction: This Night, and this Hour will end with thy
life; and this life of thine is but a Span, and then thy day will dawn, and thy
Sun will arise, and thy Affliction will vanish and never return again. 4. Bear
it patiently, Because thy Patience will shorten thy Affliction. The Trial and
Improvement of thy Patience is one of the chief ends and business of thy
Afflictions: It is sent to teach thee that Lesson, and the sooner thou learnest
it, the sooner the business is dispatched, and the Discipline dismissed: Thy
Impatience does but protract and lengthen out thy Discipline: If thou would
be discharged of this importunate and troublesome Messenger, speedily dispatch
his business, and he is likely the speedier to leave thee. 5. Bear it
patiently, Because thy Patience will make thy burden the more easy and
tolerable. When God sends Afflictions to tame a Man, and bring him to a right
temper, believe it, he will not be over-matched, he will bring thee down, and
if one Affliction will not do it, he will add more, and make thy bond the
stronger, and can and will yet visit thee sevenfold more, till he has reduced
thee to Patience and Humility: Struggle not with him, for he will be too hard
for thee: If thou bear thy Yoke patiently, thou will bear it easily; but if
thou fling and toss, like a Wild Bull in a Net, thou may hamper thy self
worse, and thy Yoke will gall thee the more; but it will neither break the Net,
nor the Yoke. Be contented therefore, Resign up thy self to his Will with
Humility, and receive the chastisement of thy folly with Patience, thou will
have this double Advantage by it. First, The great God will then lay no more
upon thee, for he has attained his end and purpose, by what he has already
inflicted; but will either remove it from thee, or put his own hand to help
thee to bear it. Secondly, By the quietness and composure of thy mind, thou will be of greater strength to bear thy burden, and with more ease under it;
for it is a most certain truth, That the turbulency, and storming, and
struggling of the mind, is that which makes Affliction more sharp and
troublesome, than the nature, or quality, or measure of Affliction it self, it
is the mind that gives the value and weight of external Prosperity or
Adversity. Take two Men the one of a proud and great Spirit, as they call it,
the other of a mild, humble, patient Spirit, we shall easily see that a small
disgrace or loss shall more afflict and torture the former, than Five times as
much of either or both shall trouble the latter. And this is the true reason
why Afflictions at the first are more troublesome and grievous, than after,
though they continue the same. At the first, they meet with a mind unacquainted
with it, and contesting against it, as a Heifer unaccustomed to the Yoke; but
when by time and continuance, the mind is accustomed to it, though the Yoke be
the same, yet it finds no such severity and importableness in it. A Patient
Heart gains that habit quickly, which custom, length of time, and necessity,
does with more difficulty produce in another temper. 6. Bear it patiently,
because thou have an Example of greater Patience, under a greater Cross, in a
most innocent person: Thy Savior has left a Copy of his own Patience for thee
to imitate; and thy Affliction is sent to thee to teach thee to write after his
Copy, and to conform thee to the Captain of thy Salvation, who was made perfect
by suffering, consider the disparity of the persons; He most innocent without
any Sin to deserve it: Thou a person laden with Sin, that meritoriously
deserves as much, if not more than thou have a capacity to bear: He, the Son of
God clothed with Innocent Flesh, Thou a Worm clothed with Impurity and Sin.
Consider the disparity of the Sufferings; He a Man of Sorrows, under the
Persecution of those whom he came to save, subjected to all the scorns and
torments that the wit of most Exquisite Malice could inflict, and above all
this, under the sense even of the wrath and seeming desertion of his Father:
Thou, it may be have lost some Estate, or Reputation, or art in Prison, or
Banishment, or Sickness, or Pain, but under all this do or may enjoy that
Peace, and Pardon, and Favor of God that his sufferings purchased for thee: The
ingredients of His Cup, nothing but Gall and Vinegar, but thy Cup, though never
so seemingly bitter, yet sanctified and sweetened by His Sufferings: And yet
under all this, As a Sheep before his Shearers is dumb, so he opened not his
mouth; though his most Innocent Humane Nature shrunk at the pre-apprehensions
of this bitter portion, yet with Patience he resigned up his Will to his
Father, Not my Will, but thine be done. In sum, as His Patience was meritorious
and expiatory for thy Sin, so it was left as a Pattern and Example for thy
practice. 7. Bear it patiently, For it is reached unto thee from the hands of
God, though it may be by the hands of most vile and accursed instruments, and
this consideration is enough to tutor thee to an Invincible Patience. 1. It is
the Dispensation of God, who is Infinite in Mercy and Goodness; and therefore
it is most certain it is a Message of Mercy; for He does not afflict willingly,
nor grieve the Children of Men. Be sure that it coming from the Fountain of
Goodness and Love, it has a Blessing in it, though thou can not at the
present see it. 2. It comes from the Hands of the most Wise God, that does all
things for most excellent ends, and even in those Dispensations that are most
obscure and rugged, that we cannot unriddle, yet there is always a complication
of most Sovereign and Excellent designs, which shall not be disappointed. 3. It
comes from the hands of that God, that is under the relation of a most tender
Father, that has the very same Bowels of Mercy, Goodness, and Love to us, in
his corrections, as in his favors. A poor silly child, when a Father either
corrects him for a fault, or takes that from him that will hurt him, or keeps
him hard to his Book, or other employment, or denies him somewhat that is
noxious to him, thinks his Father deals hardly with him, when in truth the very
same tender and Fatherly love, that discovers it self in more grateful
dispensations, is the cause and companion of these. The same is thy case and
mine, be patient therefore; it is the hand of a Father that afflicts thee; and
that may assure thee that it is for thy good, and it shall be in measure. 4. It
comes from that God, that is thy absolute Lord, that has that unlimited right
over his Creature, that his only Will is a sufficient rule of his Justice, thou
owe an infinite subjection to him, from whom thou have received thy Being:
His Sovereignty over his Creature is even by the very right of Nature Infinite
and Boundless. Be contented therefore to bear whatsoever he inflicts without
the least disputing of the Justice or Injustice of it. This was that Excellent
Contemplation of old Eli, under the most severe denuntiation of Gods judgment.
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. And it was that great Lesson
that Jobs Afflictions was sent to teach him, though he could not learn it, till
God himself, as well for our Instruction, as His, taught him out of the
Whirlwind; but then he learned it, and abhorred himself in Dust and Ashes for
his former Ignorance and Frowardness. 8. Yet further, bear it patiently, for
that God, that sent thee this Messenger does behold and observe how thou
entertainest it; wherein we may with all due Reverence, suppose the Lord of
Heaven, thus resolving. Yonder is such a Man that professes to Know, and Fear,
and Love me, and I see him nevertheless fond of his Wealth or Honor, or some
other Blessing; I will give leave to Evil Men, or Evil Angels (as once in the
case of my Servant Job) to spoil him of Wealth, and to cast him into Disgrace;
and I will observe his carriage and deportment under it; and though I know what
it will be, yet I will make it now conspicuous both to Himself, and Men, and
Angels: And if his Deportment be not answerable to his Profession, if he storm
against my Providence, or use unworthy Means to free himself, or grow Impatient
and Disorderly under it, I will make his folly conspicuous, and send more and
sharper Visitations unto him, till this fire of Afflictions has brought him to
his due temper of Patience, Humility, Submission to my Will, Dependence upon my
Power, Subjection to my Sovereignty: But if on the other side, I see him humble
himself under my hand, Submit to my will, Justify me in his Sufferings,
Patient under them, and Waiting my time to be delivered from them, I will
exhibit him before Men and Angels as a Pattern of Patience, and I will make him
as Signal in his Deliverance, as he is Eminent in his Patience. Suppose thou
could hear such a Deliberation, and see and behold such Spectators of thy
Deportment, how would thou endeavor to compose thy self with all Patience,
and Contentedness, and Quietness, and Resignation of thy self under the most
severe Affliction? And how little would thou dare in such a Presence to
discover, or so much as entertain any Murmuring or Impatient thought? Assure
thy self, though thou can not with a bodily eye behold this Great Lord of the
World beholding thee, while thou art in this Scene of Affliction, yet he
beholds and observes thee, and the very motion of thy Soul, and the Glorious
Angels, though they cannot look into the secret retirements of thy Thoughts,
yet they behold thy external Deportment, and are grieved, if it be unseemly,
and unsuitable to the Honor of their and thy Lord, and are glad to behold a
Deportment suitable to the Ends and Glory of their Lord: And the Evil Angels,
which irritate and provoke thee to Impatience, are pleased and gratified if
they effect it, and ashamed and vexed if they are disappointed in it. Believe
it, in a signal and eminent degree of Prosperity or Adversity thou art like a
Man upon a Stage, a spectacle exposed to the view of God, and Men, and Angels,
and Devils; let thy carriage therefore be such, as if thou did as visibly
behold thy Spectators, as they most certainly do see thee.

Tenthly, As thus thou art to bear thy Affliction patiently, so endeavor to use
it profitably; and besides these advices before mentioned, add to them these
ensuing. 1. Learn by them to have a just Estimate of the World. Affliction
pulls of those fine gay Clothes from the World, by which in Prosperity it
deceives us, and renders it, as it is, a Vain, Empty, Vexing World. 2. From
that sound and just Estimate of the World, Discipline thy Affections to a
moderate and loose application to it. It is true, Afflictions do ordinarily
imbitter the World to us, and so for the present our Affections may be dull
toward it; but this arising merely from Sense, without a sound practical
established Judgment, it ordinarily lasts no longer than the Afflictions last,
and as they wear away, and worldly comforts begin to grow up and increase, so
our love to the World comes on, and grows up again: But when a Man by the
advantage of Afflictions digests this principle into his Judgment, commonly it
abides and moderates the love of the World, notwithstanding the return of the
Comforts and Advantages of the World. 3. Keep up thy heart in a dependence upon
Gods Power and Alsufficiency to deliver thee from Affliction, or to support
thee under it; and labor by Observation and Experience to rivet this Dependence
into thy Judgment and Choice. It is most certain, that almost every Man, as
long as he can have any thing to lay hold of besides, will make that his
Dependence: The Sick Man will depend upon his Physician; the Impoverished Man
upon his Friends, and the like; but when there is nothing else to rest upon,
then Men will to their Prayers, with the Mariners in the Storm; but this being
but an Act of Necessity, as it rises upon Necessity, so it vanishes with it:
When the Necessity is over, and other Dependances come to hand, we are apt to
throw off our Dependence upon God. Labor therefore for an Experimental and
Judicious Dependence upon God: Sometimes in Afflictions we begin to attain it;
but the best way is to begin to entertain such a Dependence before we are
driven to it; and then the Necessity of our Afflictions will fasten and improve
it, that it will stick with us after. 4. By thy Afflictions learn to value and
improve thy Hope and Assurance of Everlasting Life: And indeed thy Necessity
now does in a special manner drive thee to it; and it is a great End of Gods
sending Afflictions, that it may drive us off from the clasping of this present
World, and thereby carry us over to the valuation of our Eternal Condition: Thy
Wealth is gone, and thy Honor and Reputation is sunk and blasted, and thy
Friends have forsaken thee, and thy Body is mouldering to dust and rottenness,
and thy Soul sits hovering upon thy Lips ready to take her flight, and all thy
hold of this present life is broken and gone, so that thou have nothing now to
lodge and fasten thy Hopes upon, but the Promises of Everlasting Life, thy
interest in Christ, the Hope of Everlasting Life, and now, if ever, these
things will be welcome to thee. God has scattered and broken all other
Confidences; improve this Vnum Magnum, this one thing necessary, that alone
does stand by thee, when all things else forsake thee, and will accompany thee
in and through Death it self; and fix in thy Heart such a value upon this that
has been thy only Comfort, when all others forsake thee, as not to let go thy
valuation of it, though thy Temporal Prosperity should return unto thee.

Eleventhly, Wait Gods leisure for thy Deliverance out of Afflictions, and use
no Unlawful Means to be delivered from it. Use no base or unworthy Compliances
with the World, either by dissimulation or flattery, or violence, or falsity,
to extricate thy self; for that will either entangle thee worse, or at least
and Guilt to thy Sufferings. And above all, avoid that accursed temptation of
ridding thy self from thy Troubles by putting an End to thy own life; for
thereby thou do at once two great Evils; an Evil of extreme Folly and Madness
to exchange a Temporal Inconvenience by running the hazard of an Eternal
Misery; for the very same Impatience and Perturbation and Anxiety of Soul, that
puts thee upon such an accursed Resolution, goes with thee into the other World
with a great improvement of it, and makes thy Soul in its Separation infinitely
more vexed and tormented than it was before in the Body; and an Evil of
Rebellion against God, who has sent thee these Afflictions, and has made it
thy Province, and thy Task, and thy Service, that he injoyns thee, to bear with
Patience, and to his Honor till he deliver thee. Thou art just like an hired
Servant, who art set on work by a most righteous Lord, and thy labor set out to
thee, and thy Reward appointed in the end of thy day, and thou will run away
before the day be ended, whereby thou do not only lose thy Wages, but art
justly obnoxious to be pursued and cast into Prison for thy Disobedience and
Rebellion: Be contented, wait Gods time with Prayers and Patience, and thou
may be sure to find his Mercy in moderating thy Afflictions, his Power to
support thee under them, his Goodness in his time, which is always the best
time, to deliver thee from them, and his Bounty to reward thee for thy Patience
and Obedient bearing of them.

Twelfthly, Take this for a most certain expedient to be prevented from many
Afflictions, and to be delivered from them: Meddle as little with the World,
and the Honor, Places, and Advantages of them, as you can; and extricate thy
self from them as much, and as soon as thou can. Although the Divine Wisdom
and Providence governs the World in a most infallible and unerring method, yet
in the External Administration of it, it seems to be full of confusion and
uncertainty: When I have seen a Lottery with a goodly show of fine Plate, and a
great many persons parting with certain money for an uncertain Lot, and though
possibly one or two may gain a fair prize, yet a Hundred for one drawing
nothing but blanks, and when they have opened their Papers vexing and
tormenting themselves with their Loss and Disappointment; or, when I have seen
at Christmas time a few Apples thrown among a Room full of Boys, and one
scrambling, and another catching, some getting nothing but a fall, or bruise,
or a broken Shin, or a broken Limb, and another getting it may be two or three,
and those that miss falling upon him that has gotten; so the company fall
together by the Ears: Or, when I have seen a match at Footbal, one while one
getting the Ball, and then another kicking up his heels and getting it from
him, and then another doing the like by him. These give me a kind of
Resemblance of the World, wherein, though by the help of Civil Government there
are certain Rules put to the Game, yet they are not always kept, and when they
are, yet it is not without a mixture of Irremediable Deceit and Violence,
though it be of a finer sort.

If now my Child should run among this Company, and in the scuffle should
receive a knock, or a fall, or a bruise, or be tumbled in the dirt, and then
should come running to me, and complain of his usage, my answer would be to
him, What made you there? What made you in such boisterous and unruly Company?
If you mingle with such Company, you must be contented to share in the
prejudice, and to take your Lot; it is the Play, if you dislike with your
success, come no more among them. And indeed, this is in a great measure the
case of many of the true Children of God, they see fine gay things in the
World, as Wealth, and Honor, and Place, and External Advantages scattered among
the Children of Men, and gotten by scrambling for them, and sometimes are apt
to flatter themselves into the pursuit of them, with a pretense that if they
could come by their share of them, they would do more Good with them than those
do that get them; or, at least, they think it as lawful, and as fit for them to
have them as others; and thereupon they thrust themselves into the Crowd and
Scramble for them, or are, at least, cousened into an affectation of them; and
possibly they are rolled and tumbled into the dirt in their undertakings, and
it may be miss of them when they have all done: But suppose they gain them,
then they think they may keep them, and yet keep their Conscience and Integrity
and Religion too; and many times in that endeavor they lose somewhat of their
Integrity, and then God visits them with some Loss or Reproach; or in case they
stand to their Integrity, and will not part with it, but will make a scruple of
things that others down with, then commonly they are exposed and pillaged, and
lose all that they have thus gotten, and the Evil one, and Evil Men tell them,
Nay, Sir, if you come into our ground, if you will hold the World, pray be
contented to hold it upon our term, and as we do, or else leave it; it is part
of the game. And then the Man complains of his Affliction, and his hard Usage
in the World, and that he suffers for keeping a Good Conscience, and if he
would have done as the rest of the World do, it had been better with him. But
Sir, what made you in that Company? What made you to be tampering with great
Places and Preferments? Do not you know, that if you will be dealing and
trafficking with these kind of matters, you must take them upon those
conditions the World does usually afford them? Do not you know that by meddling
with them, you list your self in a manner under the Worlds command, put your
self into that Corporation? And therefore if you are minded to hold these
Temporal Advantages, you must observe the Orders of your Commander, and so
hazard your Conscience and Peace with God? And if you will not observe the
Orders of your Commander, you must be contented to be subject to the
Discipline, and Frowns, and Scorns, and Rejections of the World; for you cannot
serve God and Mammon. Therefore if thou would prevent or avoid very many
Afflictions, mingle as little as is possible, with the concerns of the World,
especially in great Places; and if through inadvertency or importunity thou art
drawn into the scuff^le and intanglements of the World, get out as soon as thou
can safely, and fairly, and honestly: For it is a Thousand to one but, first
or last, thou shall otherwise hazard thy Conscience, or receive some scratches
and worldly prejudices, which are in truth rather the Issues of thy Folly, and
Inconsiderate Adventure, than true Affliction.

But for meddling with Places of Magistracy, Honor or Public Employment, I
would not have it thought that it is my intention that Good Men, awfully
called, and duly qualified, should morosely or frowardly wholly reject their
due call unto them. The World cannot be kept in order without Magistracy: and
Good Men, if otherwise fitted for it, and duly called unto it, are likely to
administer it best for the Public good of Mankind: and it were an unreasonable
thing for them to expect the benefits of Magistracy and Government from others,
when under such circumstances they wilfully decline the communication of the
like advantage to others: and therefore the wisest Kingdoms, States and
Politicians have imposed a necessity upon Men of honesty and abilities to take
upon them Public Employments: Aristot. 2. Politicorum, although he condemns
Ambition after Magistracy, [that Men should be encouraged or permitted to stand
or solicit for places] Nemo enim Magistratum petet, nisi Honoris sit
affectator: atque pleraque eorum quae homines injuste faciunt, per Ambitionem
and Avaritiam committuntur: yet tells us, Oportet enim and volentem and non
volentem ad Magistratum assumere, si dignus sit eo Magistratu. That therefore
which I mean is, 1. That Men that love their own Peace and Tranquillity should
not seek great Employments, 2. That if they are offered, they do, as far as
consists with modesty and duty to their Superiors and Country, decline and
avoid them: 3. That if upon such an account they are persuaded to undertake
them, yet they be sure that before they undertake them, they have sufficient
abilities to perform them. 4. If by the Command of the Sovereign Power they are
required to undergo them, and are able and fit for the Employment, they do not
either frowardly or ungratefully refuse them: For 1. Herein they are but
passive; it is an act of their Submission and Duty, not of their Choice. 2.
Being thus called to it, if they meet with any rubs in their way, they have no
reason to blame themselves, so long as they observe their duty in the exercise
thereof; The Prince that enjoined them to this Province, is to be their support
in it. 5. Readily and Cheerfully to entertain a dismission from it when it
pleases the Prince to call them from it, or when by reason of disabling
occurrences they may fairly attain such dismission.

III. And thus I have done with some of those principal Considerations touching
our Deportment under Afflictions; now concerning the frame and temper of a Soul
under our Deliverance from them.

1. Accept of thy deliverance with all Thankfulness to God, and Humility in thy
self. Attribute it wholly to his Goodness and Mercy; Think not that thou art
delivered because of thy Worth or Desert; for any one sin that ever thou
committest would detain thee Everlastingly under the severest Affliction: Think
not thy Affliction has expiated thy Demerit, and that thou owe thy
Deliverance to the satisfaction that is made by thy suffering; for most
certainly the greatest Affliction under Heaven cannot satisfy for the least
Transgression; nothing but the Blood of the Son of God can countervail the
weight of the least Sin against God: Think not that thy Deliverance is due to
thy Wit, Friends, or Interest; for though God be pleased to use the
intervention of Means, yet he Administered that Means, and Blessed that Means,
and made it effectual; or otherwise it would have been but a flat and
unprofitable Means. As God sends Afflictions to evidence his Power, and Wisdom,
and Sovereignty; so he sends Deliverance to manifest his Goodness and Bounty:
and the Tribute that he most justly expects for the same, is but easy and
reasonable: Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will Deliver thee, and
thou shall Glorify me, Psalm. 50.15.

2. Forget not the time of thy Trouble, and the promises and engagements that
thou did then make. We observed in the beginning of this Discourse the
difficulty of Pre-apprehension of Adversity before it comes; and truly it is
almost as hard to think of Adversity when it is past. We please our selves with
what we enjoy, and never reflect upon what is past, unless it be to heighten
and advance our present enjoyments: and if we do chance to think upon the
serious resolutions we then entertained, we look upon them as the weak results
of our Infirmity, useful indeed for that time, but now antiquated and grown
unseasonable.

3. Not only call to mind thy Promises, but call them to mind with a Resolution
to observe and perform them, in such expostulations as these: Alas! the time
was when I was under great Afflictions, it may be of a painful and a desperate
sickness, and then I resolved, if God would restore my health, I would walk
more strictly with him; I would pray more frequently, and more constantly, and
more fervently than formerly; I would be more diligent to make even my Accounts
with him, to make sure my Calling and Election, for which I found the time of
my Sickness was very unseasonable; I would redeem my precious Time, and value
those minutes of life, that God shall lend me at a dearer rate than formerly; I
would neglect no opportunity of doing Good to others, or improving my
Everlasting Peace; how precious then was one hour of repose and quietness, and
freedom from pain? and how much should I then have valued it? and how
industriously should I have then improved it in the great concerns of my
Everlasting Soul? God has now heard my Prayers, restored my Health, put that
precious Opportunity into my hands of performing my Vows and Promises, which I
then made in the sadness of my Soul, and shall I deal falsely in my Covenant,
disappointing my God that has delivered me? No, I will up and be doing; I will
Perform all my Vows to him: nay, the sense of the Mercy and Condescension of
God to my requests shall increase my Engagements before him; As he has added
Mercy to me, so I will add new Obligations to my self of better Obedience, and
farther Duties than the sense of my Misery could suggest unto me, or draw from
me.

4. Be very Watchful over thy self, and remember thy Saviors Counsel, Go away
and Sin no more, lest a worse thing befall thee: and in a special manner
recollect and call to mind those Sins that did most trouble and disquiet thee
in the time of thy Adversity; renew thy Repentance for them, and take a special
care to avoid Relapses into them; Remember the mischiefs they then did thee,
and let them know they shall do thee no more: be most severe and strict against
them.

5. Make a frequent Use of thy Deliverance as a singular Preservative against
the Power of thy Temptations and Corruptions. Deliverance carries in the very
apprehension of it these two things: 1. A supposition of a former Misery or
Visitation: 2. A present enjoyment of a freedom from that Misery. Therefore if
any Corruption or Temptation unto Sin solicit thee, improve this
consideration to this or the like effect: I was lately under the Rack, under
the Rod, under extreme Want, Imprisonment, Disgrace, Losses, Sickness, Sorrows,
Fears, and an imminent expectation of the worst of Evils; and though these were
sore and sharp Afflictions, yet the sense of my former Sins, and the
importunate restlesness of that Guilt, that was contracted from them, were more
bitter and tormenting than all the rest of my sufferings; it was that which was
the sting and venom of all my Afflictions; and it has pleased Almighty God to
accept of my Humiliation, and to remove my Afflictions, and to give me Beauty
for Ashes, and shall I be so very a fool as by committing of a new sin to run
the hazard of another plunge, another scourge? which in all probability must be
much more severe than the former, because it would be the Issue not only of
Sin, but of Presumption, a Sin committed against the experience that I have had
of the bitterness of Sin; and with what face or hope could I expect any
possibility of Deliverance from a second Relapse into Misery occasioned by so
Desperate a presumptuous relapse into Sin? But suppose it were possible, that
notwithstanding my yielding to this Temptation, I might escape the Vengeance,
yet can I be so false, so ungrateful to that God, that has delivered me from
my Sufferings and from my Fears, as to recompense his Love and Mercy, and
Goodness with a Presumptuous Apostasy from him? shall I thus requite his Mercy
and Goodness, that heard me in my Anguish and Sadness of Soul, in my Extremity
and Misery, and so heard me that he has delivered me out of all my Troubles
and Miseries? Certainly, if either common Prudence, or common Ingenuity be left
in a Man, the sense of a former Calamity, and the sense of so great a Mercy,
will make a Man abhor the least submission to that Temptation that may at once
hazard the continuance of his present Comfort, and cannot be entertained
without the Presumptuous rejection of him, that thus Mercifully sent
Deliverance.

6. Let the remembrance of thy Misery, and thy present Mercy make thee most
jealously and passionately careful to keep thy Interest, and (if it be not too
bold a word) thy Friendship with God. Remember he was thy support in thy
Affliction, and he was thy Deliverer out of thy Affliction: let Gratitude bind
thee to it, as he was thy Benefactor; and let Prudence bind thee to it, thou
know not how soon thou may have the same necessity again, and where can
thou find such a friend? The truth is, when we are in extremity and have no
whither else to fly, O then we run to God, and we pray unto him, and promise
him fair: but when once our turn is served, and we have gotten our ends, and
think our selves out of Gunshot, we are like Mariners after a Storm, and God
hears no more of us: but this is, as extreme Ingratitude, so, extreme Folly. Oh
keep thy God thy Friend, for most certain it is, thou will have occasion to use
him again, and thou know not how soon: keep thine interest in him, and
estrange not thy self from him in thy Recovery, whom thou can not be without
in thy Affliction.

7. As I would have thee recollect what were the things in thy life past that
most troubled thee in thy Affliction, that so thou may avoid them; so think
what things or practices, or expense of time in thy life past was most
Acceptable and Comfortable to thee in thy Affliction, that so thou may
practice them after thy restitution. Consider, whether in thy Affliction thou
did remember thy past Recreations, thy Merriments, thy Feastings, thy Lusts,
thy Honors, thy Greatness, with any Comfort or Contentment, or whether the
remembrance of the Hours thou have formerly spent in Prayer, Reading the
Scriptures, Hearing Sermons, Relieving the Poor, Visiting the Sick, Relieving
the Oppressed, Harboring the Persecuted Members of Christ, gave thee more
contentment. And I dare appeal to any Man's Experience under Heaven, that when
the former sort of Transactions of our lives were either extremely bitter, or
at best very insipid, to his remembrance, yet the remembrance of these of the
latter sort were most Comfortable and Contenting. Thou art now recovered, it is
true, but as sure as thou shall dye, so sure thou shall pass through new
Afflictions, though it may be not of the same kind, yet of some kind: let it be
thy care, after God has thus delivered thee from thy former Affliction, to lay
up a stock of Good Works against another Evil day; such Cordials will lie warm
at thy Heart, even when the cold pangs of Death it self shall be ready to
invade and seize upon it, and the Comfort of them shall pass into the other
World with thee.

8. Though the portion of thy life before thy Affliction and under it, were
very well spent, yet remember that the Mercy of God in thy Deliverance does
call upon thee for a farther degree of Goodness and Perfection than thou had
before: it calls for more Humility, and more Thankfulness, and more Heavenly
Mindedness, and more Charity, and more Devotion, and more Self-Denial, and more
Sanctity, and more Jealousy for the Honor of God, For 1. On Gods part, thou
have more Engagements and Obligations put upon thee than before: Every increase
of Mercy calls for an increase of Duty. 2. On thy own part, thy Experiences are
greater, thou have past through the School of Afflictions, and that is a season
wherein God opens the Ear to Discipline, the Rod has a voice and a lesson to
teach; and thou have past through the experience of Gods Goodness, Tenderness,
and Faithfulness in thy Deliverance, and that tutors thee to more Dependence
upon him, Thankfulness to him, and Love of him, and these affections carry out
the Heart to Duty and Obedience.

9. Beware that after Deliverance from Afflictions thou be not secure: think
not with Agag, surely the bitterness of death is past; that now, thou have
escaped this brunt, all is safe, and the danger past; still be Watchful, and
stand upon thy Guard. 1. Thou have Sins and Corruptions within thee, that if
thou art not watchful, may surprise thee, and raise new storms. 2. Thou have
watchful and vigilant Enemies without thee, Evil Men, and Evil Angels, that
envy thee the more, because thou have escaped. 3. As long as thou live in the
World thy condition is uncertain and unstable in Externals, and though one Wave
be past; another may follow. And if there were nothing else to make thee
Watchful, yet be sure the hour of Sickness, and the hour of Death will overtake
thee, and that is an hour of Affliction, which thou must always prepare for,
lest it take thee unawares.

OF SUBMISSION, PRAYER and THANKSGIVING.
HF that freely Submits not to the Divine Disposition and Providence, gains
nothing by his Contumacy; for submit he must, whether he will or no.

But he gains this Loss and Disadvantage thereby, that those Providence, that
are not according to his desire, gall him more by the Unquietness and
Impatience of his mind under them.

He that with an entire freeness of Soul submits to the Divine Providence,
gains thereby these Advantages; namely, 1. That certainly, such a resolved
willing submission, never makes the Providence the more harsh or severe. 2.
That commonly they are even in themselves more gentle and easy, because the
Man needs not a severity to bring him to a right temper of mind; namely, due
subjection to the Divine Will. 3. But be the Providence never so harsh and
hard, they sit more easy upon a quiet, patient, resigning Soul.

A Man never loses by Prayer, for if the thing be Granted it makes the
Blessing both the sweeter and the safer, being the Humble Victory and Acquest
of his Prayer: and it makes the Man the Better, the more Thankful; for he looks
upon it as a Gift, and not a Chance; the more Dependent upon God, and the
readier upon all occasions to call upon him, who has honored the Prayer of
his Servant with a Concession.

And if it be Denied, yet he loses not; for it may be the thing he asked might
have done him harm, and been his prejudice. Again, though he be not gratified
in the thing he desired, a Thousand to one but he is gratified, with what was
fitter or better; But if not, yet the man receives infallibly this benefit by
being denied, that he is made the better, the more Humble and Patient, and to
be content that Almighty God should be Master of his own Bounty, and not to be
commanded by our Prayers. Or at least it discovers unto him the Distemper of
his Heart; if he be not contented to be denied, his Heart was Proud, and his
Prayer Hypocritical; he seemed to Pray, but indeed meant to Command, not to
pray for what he desired, which makes him thus Impatient of a denial.

Sense of Misery, Want, or Danger, when we find no other means of Remedy or
prevention, does carry us to prayer, and Invocation upon God. The Sailors did
this in the Storm. But commonly, though Deliverance follows even upon our very
Prayers, we rarely with that seriousness and intention of mind, return unto God
the praise and Acknowledgment of his Goodness. Of the Ten Leapers that were
cleansed, we read only of One that returned Thanks for the Benefit; and
commonly we either forget the Benefit, and our Benefactor, when our turn is
served, and are content to attribute our Deliverance to Chance, to Means, or to
any thing, rather than to the Goodness of God. And the Reasons may be these. 1.
The Pride and Naughtiness of our Hearts, that are unwilling to own our
Dependence upon God, when we think we stand not in need of him. 2. Necessity,
and Fear, and the Incumbent sense of Evil are more pressing and urgent, and by
a kind of force oftentimes drive us to Pray, when we cannot probably find help
elsewhere; But when the Necessity and Fear, and Incumbence of Evil is removed,
it is only a true Judgment, and the Grateful temper of our Hearts, that do
engage us to render Thanks for the Mercy received, which is ordinarily more
flat and less active than Evils felt or feared. Natural Necessity prompts a Man
to Prayer oftentimes, but it is sincerity and a right temper of the Soul that
prompts a Man to Gratitude and Thankfulness.

He that in his Necessity prays for Help and orbtains it, if his prayers were
the fruit barely of his Exigence, is seldom Thankful, and if he be not
Thankful, it is an Evidence that his Prayers did not move from a Heart sincere,
and truly principled with a Dependence upon God, and a habit of Dutifulness to
him. But if he be Thankful for the Mercy received, it is an Evidence that not
only his Gratitude, but his Prayers sprang from the same Principle; namely, a
Good and sincere Heart, principled with the same habit of Grace, Piety,
Dependence upon God, and Obedience to him.

There is an admirable Economy of the Divine Goodness and Wisdom, to bring his
Creature Man both to his Duty and Happiness; many times he invites us to come
to him by Persuasions, and Monitions, and secret Motions; and when we neglect
that voice, he oftentimes sends upon us Troubles, and Afflictions, and Dangers:
and this he does by a kind of moral force to make us fly to him by prayer for
help, and relief, and deliverance.

And it seldom misseth its effect, if there be but any Wisdom or the Common
Instinct implanted generally in the Humane Nature. When we know not which way
to turn, we then fly to God, 2 Chro. 20.12.
because all other ways are most commonly obstructed and hedged up, and this
passage only left open to an escape: In their Affliction they will seek me
early. Hos. 5.15.
Almighty God deals by us, as a wise Artist, that has a purpose to turn a
stream toward some designed place, stops all other egresses but that which
fits his design; or, as a Father, that is minded to bring an Extravagant Son to
his Duty and Dependence, obstructs all supplies but such as may be had from
himself. So oftentimes God Almighty does so methodise his Afflictions, that all
ways of relief are obstructed, but such as may lead a Man to him. It is true,
many times in such cases we will be shifting and trying every avenue to get out
at; but when we find every passage hedged up with Thorns, but that only which
leads to him, our Stomachs come down, and we are glad to seek relief in that
way where we find only it can be had. Like Jonas his Mariners in the Storm, we
try all experiments and Artifices to save our selves, throw out our Anchors,
take down the Sails, ply the Pump, throw over the Goods to lighten the Vessel;
and when all will not do, then we begin to call upon God, Lord save us, we
perish.

But yet the method of the Divine Goodness rests not here, but brings us a
step forward: He is often graciously pleased to grant the Deliverance we pray
for, to let us see that we call not upon his Name in vain, and to encourage us
to depend upon him, to draw near unto him, to make him our Confidence as well
as our Fear: And though sometimes he defers our Deliverance, yet he does it,
partly to give unto our selves an Experiment of our own Sincerity and Patience,
partly to Discipline and Tutor us to Constancy and Patient waiting upon him;
partly to carry us on to more Importunity and Continuance in Prayer; and by
this means our Souls are made the better by drawing nearer and nearer to him,
that is the Fountain of Light and Goodness; for the repetition of Prayers
rectifies the Soul, brings it nearer to God, lays more hold upon his Strength,
and Goodness, as the sinking Man draws himself nearer to the shore by the
repeated laying hold upon that Cord that is from thence thrown out to save him.

Neither does he rest here, for the Deliverance he sends, is not barely sent to
deliver us from the Affliction or Danger, nor barely to gratify our Prayers;
but to bring us yet nearer to God, and to make us active Instruments to give
Glory to that God, that has thus delivered us; whereby at once we are drawn
nearer to the Fountain of our own Happiness, and Almighty God receives and
attains the great end of his Goodness, in the active Glory and Gratitude that
he receives from his Creature. And this is attained,

1. By a kind of Natural Instinct, Ingenuity, and implanted Tendency, as I may
call it, of a Good Nature; whereby, unless a Man be a fool, or has put off the
common Rudiments of Humanity, he is carried out to Thankfulness, Gratitude, and
an endeavor of complacency to him that is his Benefactor; which, as it is the
most rational consequence imaginable, so it is a principle so riveted in the
very Constitution of Humanity it self, that even without any antecedent
ratiocination, or rational discourse, it does presently, and at first view, and
antecedently, antevert any rational discourse of the Mind. We are Grateful, and
study to be complacent to him that does us good, without any using of Topics
or Arguments, by a kind of Natural Instinct or Sympathy.

2. By a kind of Stipulation or bargain made by Almighty God with his poor
Creature, to have this Tribute of Gratitude and Benevolent Affection from his
Creature, as the Tribute and return of his Goodness and Beneficence, Psalm.
50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou
shall glorify me. And this Retribution, as it is most admirably Con-genious
and Con-natural to the right constitution of the Humane Nature, so it is the
most Reasonable, and the most Noble, and the most Easy, and the most
Beneficial Retribution in the World to him that makes it. For first, Whereas
the Creature in his Prayer seeks, and in the returns thereof, receives
something from God, in his Gratitude, and Glorification of God he performs
that, which his Maker graciously accepts, as a return made to him from his
Creature. Secondly, By this means he attains the two great Ends of his Being;
namely, the Glorifying of God, and the Improvement of his own Felicity; for
Gratitude and Thankfulness brings the Soul to a nearer approach to God, if it
be possible, than his very Prayers does; because it is the greatest motion of
Love and Beneficence in the Soul unto God that can be; and the nearer the Soul
is moved unto God, the nearer it is joined to its Life, its Perfection, its
Happiness: The more it participates of the Love, the Goodness, the Influence,
the Communication of the Divine Goodness.

OF PRAYER AND THANKSGIVING.
Psalm. CXVI. 12. What shall I render unto the Lord for all his Benefits toward
me?
THere are two great Duties that we ow unto God, which are never out of season:
But such as we have continual occasion and necessity to use whilst we live;
namely, Prayer and Thanksgiving.

Prayer, Is always seasonable in this life, because we ever stand in need of
it; we always want something, and have always occasion to fear something;
although we could be supposed in such a state of Happiness in this World, that
we could not say, we wanted any thing, yet we have cause to pray for the
continuance of the Happiness we enjoy, which is not so fixed and stable, but
that it may leave us: I said in my prosperity, I shall never be moved: Thou
hiddest thy face, and I was troubled. We are never out of the reach of the
Divine Providence, either to Relieve or Afflict us; and therefore we are under
a continual Necessity of Prayer, either to Relieve and Supply us, or, at least,
to preserve and uphold us.

Thanksgiving, is likewise always seasonable, because we are never without
something, that we receive from the Divine Goodness, that deserves and requires
our Thankfulness. It may be we want Wealth, yet have we not Health? If we want
both, yet have we not Life? If we want Temporal Blessings, yet have we not
Eternal Everlasting Blessings? If we have any thing that is comfortable to, or
convenient for us, we have it from the Goodness and Bounty of God. And though
we have not all we would, yet we have what we deserve not, and what we prize
and value; and therefore while we have any thing, we have occasion of
Thanksgiving to our great Benefactor.

But yet it seems, though both those Duties be highly due and necessary, yet
Thanksgiving has a kind of preference even above Prayer it self, in these
considerations especially.

1. The Duty of Thanksgiving seems to be a more Permanent Duty, even than
Prayer it self, and of a greater extent and durableness. The Blessed Angels,
and the Saints that are and shall be settled and fixed in a state of full and
unchangeable Happiness, that enjoy whatsoever they can desire, and therefore
have no reason to pray for more, because they cannot enjoy more than they do;
yet have an Everlasting occasion of Thanksgiving for that Happiness they
Everlastingly enjoy: And as this is their Everlasting occasion, so it is and
shall be their Everlasting business unto all Eternity to Praise and Glorify
God. And as the Beams of the Divine Goodness shall Everlastingly shine upon
them, so there will be an Everlasting Reflection, as it were, of the same
Goodness in the necessary and uncessant returns of Praise and Thanksgiving by
them.

2. The Duty of Thanksgiving seems to be a Duty of more noble Nature, than even
Prayer it self, because it answers more appositly and closely the noblest End
in the World; namely, the Glory of God, which certainly is a more ultimate and
noble End, than even the very Good of the Creature. It is true, Almighty God
receives no accession to his Happiness and Perfection by all the Honor and
Praise and Thanksgiving that all the Creatures in the World can pay him, yet
the Glory of his Majesty is the chief ultimate End why he made all things, Rev.
4.11. Thou art worthy to receive Glory, Honor, and Power; for thou have
Created all things, and for thy pleasure they were and are Created. It is true
the proximate immediate reason of the Creation of all things was, that the
Redundant Goodness of Almighty God might be communicated unto Being, derived
from him by Creation: But the ultimate and more universal End was, that by this
Communication of the Divine Goodness unto something without himself, the Glory,
and Honor, and Praise thereof might return unto himself, who only can be the
adequate End of himself, of all he does. Thanksgiving therefore and Praise
answers the greatest and most noble End in the World: If I want, and pray for
what I want, my immediate End therein is my own Good, and yet that End is too
narrow, if I propound not to my self to Praise and Glorify the Bounty of that
God which answers my Prayer.

3. Again, whereas all the Irrational and inanimate Creatures in the World do
passively praise Almighty God, in that they bear every one of them the
Inscription of his Wisdom, Goodness, Power. The Reasonable and Intellectual
Natures of Men and Angels have that noble Advance, that they can and may
Actively and Intentionally Glorify and Praise the Goodness of God: and it is
indeed the noblest Harmony that they can make when they summon all their
Understanding, Will, Affections, all that is within them, to Praise that God,
to whom they owe their Being and Benefits: And the Wise and Glorious God does
therefore Communicate the sensible, Experimental, Eminent Influences of his
Mercy, Goodness and Bounty unto the Reasonable and Intellectual Natures of Men
and Angels, that they might touch and strike upon those noble strings of the
Heart and Mind and Affections, that may thereupon return the Harmony of
Thanksgiving, and Praise to the great Lord of the World: And surely the Nature
of Man, in its true state and temper, is as naturally and effectually moved to
the returning of Thanksgiving to God for Mercies received, as a well tuned
Lute, or other Instrument does give an Harmonious sound upon the touches of a
skilful Artist. And most certainly that nature is strangely out of Tune and
Order, that upon Mercies received makes not a sweet return of Thanksgiving and
Praise. This therefore, as it is the noblest, so it is the most natural
production of the Reasonable Nature, the fullest of Congruity to the right
disposition of its Faculties.

Almighty God sends upon the Children of Men Benefits, Blessings, Deliverances,
Favors; And the fruit that he does (and that most justly) expect, is a Crop of
Praise, Glory, Honor and Thanksgiving, Call upon me in the day of Trouble, and
I will Deliver thee, and thou shall Glorify me. And it is a barren,
degenerate, stupid Heart, that yields not such fruit of such a Semination. So
that Praise and Thanksgiving is Con-natural to our very Faculties, the tribute
that the Rational Nature, naturally pays to the Divine Being as his
Benefactor, the very fruit that the great Lord of the Harvest expects for all
his Goodness and Mercy.

4. The truth is, Thanksgiving is the very End of Prayer: and as the End is
more noble than the means conducible to the End, so therefore is the Duty, the
business of Thanksgiving in its self, though equally necessary, yet more noble
than Prayer it self.

I want something that I would desire Almighty God to give me, and I therefore
pray; my Merciful Lord grants me my desire, and gives me what I pray for, and
therefore gives it, and gives it upon my Prayer to him, that therefore his
Mercy and Goodness may be more Evident unto me, and that thereupon I may
Praise, and Glorify, and give Thanks unto him.

And if, with the Nine Lepers in the Gospel I receive the Benefit I ask, and do
not with the Tenth give Glory to God for the Benefit I receive, I disappoint
both the Giver, of what he designed in the Gift, and disappoint my very Prayers
in that which is their just and proper End.

And hence it is, that our Blessed Lord in that absolute form of Prayer, which
he has taught us, premiseth the first and greatest Petition of the Hallowing
or Glorifying of the Name of God, and the first, the great, the regnant
Petition, that is to influence all the rest that follow, especially those that
are for the supplies of our own wants.

5. Whereas in Prayer we ask that we may receive from God, Almighty God has
been pleased to Honor and Dignifie our Duty of Thanksgiving, with so much
condescension of his Majesty, that he receives, or at least interprets it as a
Receipt from his poor Creature. It is true, our Praises add nothing to his
Perfection and self-sufficiency; Nay, our very Thanksgiving and Praise is but a
gift that he gives to himself; He gives us a Being that may be Capable to
Praise him, gives us Hearts and Affections that may be willing to Praise him,
gives us Grace that may enable us to Praise him, gives us Benefits that may
Excite us to Praise him, gives us Directions how to Praise him, gives us Laws,
Commands, Promises, Encouragements to Praise him: So that in truth our very
Thanksgivings and Praises to him, are but his own work, and yet such is his
Goodness, that he takes and accepts and Rewards our Praises and Thanksgivings,
as if they were our own Actions. And whereas in Prayer we receive from him, in
Thanksgiving he is pleased so far to Honor this Duty, as if he received
somewhat from us, and accordingly accepts and rewards it.

Meditations UPON THE Lord's Prayer.

MEDITATIONS UPON THE Lord's Prayer.
Matthew. 6.9. After this manner therefore pray ye, Our Father, etc.
BY the Sin of Adam, and the Corruption and Obliquity that thereupon entered
into the humane nature, Mankind had contracted a threefold mischief. 1. Guilt,
that needed an Expiation; 2. Blindness, that needed an Illumination; 3.
Perverseness and Rebellion, that needed Power and Victory to subdue it. In the
fullness of time God sent his Son into the World with healing for all these
Diseases:

1. He sent his Son to be our Sacrifice and our Priest: and not only so in his
own Person, but by derivation unto those that believe on him, he has imprinted
upon them and communicated unto them a participation of his own Office, and
has made them Kings and Priests: 1. By making an Atonement for them with his
Father, whereby they are accepted; John 16.26, 27. I say not unto you I will
pray the Father for you, for the Father himself loves you: not to Exclude the
continuance and Efficacy of his Intercession, but to intimate the fullness of
our Reconciliation, that having made us of his household, Ephesians. 2.19. we may
have access to the Master and Father of the Family; Ephesians. 2.18. for through
him we have access unto the Father. 2. By sending his own Spirit to instruct,
and warm, and fit our spirits to come into the presence; for through him we
have access by one Spirit, Ephesians. 2.18. teaching what to ask, and inabling us
to ask as we should, Romans 8.26. For we know not what we should pray for as we
ought.

2. As he made him a Sacrifice for our Guilt, so he sent him to be a Light for
our darkness, John 1.5. the World was all in Darkness and Error; the most Exact
Sublimate Wits inscribed their Altar, To the Unknown God. They were ignorant of
things to be known, and of things to be done. The Son of God that came out of
the Bosom of his Father, and knew all his Mind, received a Commission from him
to instruct Mankind in the way to Life. Joh. 17.8. I have given unto them the
Words which thou gave me. Joh. 3.34. He whom God has sent speaks the Words
of God. Matthew. 11.27. No man knows the will of the Father save the Son, and
him to whom the Son reveals it.

3. As he came with Light to instruct us, so he came with Power to conquer in
us: Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power: and to conquer for us
Death and Hell.

The Business that we are to consider respects principally the first and
second part of his Meditation, viz. in bringing the Will and Mind of God to us,
to teach us what to ask, which concerns his Prophetical Office: And again,
having formed desires in us according to that Will of God, to present them unto
his Father, which concerns his Priestly Office.

After this manner pray: Luke 11.1, 2. One of his Disciples said unto him,
Lord, teach us to pray, and he said, When ye pray, say, etc. In general we may
learn:

1. That Christ does not exclude other Prayers: The injunction of this excludes
not all other prayers. Our Savior himself, and those that were acquainted with
his Mind and Practice, used variety of prayers, according to the several
occasions, differing from this form, and therefore the Apostle commands, Ephesians.
6.18. Praying always with all prayers and supplications. Prayers formed for
every occasion. And that Spirit, that makes intercession for us with groans
that cannot be uttered, is not confined to any particular form, not to vary
from it.

2. Though thou art not restrained to this form only, yet in all thy prayers
pray after this manner. There is somewhat in this Prayer that must be
ingredient to all thy prayers.

1. Be sure thou have a Commission, a Promise, for what thou prayest; desire
those things that are warrantable by the Will of God revealed in his Word.
Christ was acquainted with the Mind of God, and gives us a pattern to ask those
things which are warrantable. Ask for thy good, but ask not for thy Lust, James
4.2.

2. Though the things thou ask be warrantable and agreeable to the revealed
Will of God, Yet in the particularity of thy desires refer thy self and submit
unto the Will of God: because thou art not wise enough to know what is fit for
thee in particular, Especially in the measure, time, and manner of the thing
thou ask. The Son of God has taught us to pray for the fulfilling of the
Will of God before the supply of our own Wants; and in his own Prayer in the
Garden, Matthew. 26. Nevertheless not as I will but as thou will. Whatsoever thou
desire, yet confine not God. Thou shall be sure thy Prayer shall not lose his
fruit, though the thing desired seem not to be granted. The Cup did not pass
from our Savior, though he asked it, Matthew. 26.39. Yet he was heard in that he
feared, Heb. 5.7.

3. As much as thou can let thy prayer be a reasonable service, a work of thy
Spirit and Understanding. 1 Cor. 14.15. not only of thy Lips and Tongue: for
thou have to do with the God of the Spirits of all flesh, that will be
worshipped in spirit and in truth. Pray with thy Lips, that thou may by that
means fix thy Mind the better to the work; but let thy words be the production
of thy Soul. Let thy Heart pray as well as thy Tongue. And this was one of the
Reasons of our Savior's inditing this Prayer in this short and pithy form, to
condemn the vanity of the Gentiles, who had confidence in their vain
repetitions of words, without the intention and application of the heart, Matt.
6.8.

4. Here we see Christ, the Wisdom of the Father, delivers out a Form of
Prayer, framed with a great deal of Wisdom, containing very much matter in a
few words: Learn that, though thou art not to put confidence in studied
Devotions, nor to make thy prayers the work of thy invention or wit, but of thy
Heart and Soul, yet let the Reverence and Awe thou bear to him, before whom
thou come in thy prayers, the seriousness of the business about which thou
go, put thee in mind to Prepare thy self and thy Soul, and to tune it by
these considerations to an humble frame of spirit; to a fore-casting of thy
desires; to an humble approach to the presence of God; to all beseeming
Reverence both in thy words and gesture. The Heart, it is true, should be in a
continual frame of prayer, and almost every occurrence of our Life requires a
lifting up of the Heart to God in Prayer, or in Thanksgiving; which cannot be
so ordered with preparation; but a solemn Prayer, though in private, requires a
just preparation of the Heart, and a performance of it with the whole
contribution of the whole Soul, and strength, and understanding, and affection.

3. Though thou art not bound to use no other form, yet use this frequently,
upon these Considerations:

1. It is the Command of thy Lord and Master. There is somewhat of Command in
these words. He, that commands to pray, after this manner, meant not that this
Prayer should be forgotten. That which was made a pattern to thy other prayers,
was not intended to be a thing only to be looked upon, and not to be used. Thou
may use other Prayers to give scope to thy spirit, but conclude with this.

2. It is a great means of strengthening the Heart in Prayer. When I shall
consider I am now using that very Prayer which the Son of God, when he was in
the flesh, at the request of his Disciples, gave unto them, not only as a rule
and pattern, but as a form, When ye pray, say, etc. I call the great God my
Father, and it is no presumption in me so to do; the Eternal Son of God, that
knew all his Father's mind, commanded me to call him so, and to come before him
as my Father. I am begging for the conveniences of my Life, for the pardon of
my Sins, for my preservation in and from temptation. Had they not been things
that I might hope to be granted, the Son of God would never have taught me to
ask them. O Lord, it is true, I can see nothing in my self why I should expect
that thou should hear me; my Sins are renewed every day, and I beged pardon
but yesterday, and I have sinned against thee the same Sin this day: But yet
thy Son, that knows all thy Will, that would never have put me to beg that
which were unfit for me to ask, or thee to grant, he it is that taught me to
beg my daily bread of thee, and as often in the same Prayer to beg thy
forgiveness: I will not learn hereby to presume in offending, but yet I will
learn to be confident in thy Mercy.

3. It is a Comprehensive Prayer, and therefore fit to be supplemental unto
thine own prayers. Thy present wants or fears or desires carry thy spirit in
thy own prayers eagerly and vehemently in pursuit of those thy wants, fears, or
desires; because they are things presently incumbent upon thee, and in thy
view; and by that means thou do many times in thy prayers overshoot many
matters, that are of more concernment, it may be, for thee to ask: as the Glory
of God, thy preservation from future inconveniences, that are not yet in thy
view; and this prayer gathers up thy omissions, calls home thy spirit unto that
frame and temper of heart that is fit; viz. Submission to the Will and Glory of
God in the first petition of this Prayer, furnishes in a short Compendium to
pray over that which thou have before asked, and to pray for that which before
thou have omitted.

4. As it is a Comprehensive Prayer, and contains much, so it is a Compendious
Prayer, and contains much in little. The Wise and Merciful God knows the
frailty of our Nature, and therefore has fitted us according to our own
narrowness with abridgments; he knows the shortness of our Memory, and
therefore he gave his Will under the Old Law in Ten Words. Christ he gave us
another abridgment of that abridgment: Love God and thy Neighbor. God also
knows the weakness of our spirits, and therefore he gives us a short Prayer,
that in the using of it our spirits may bear up, and the fire last till the
Prayer ended. It is true, when we have a continuing sense of Evil felt or
feared upon us, our spirits are able to hold out a Prayer long in warmth and
heat: But when the matters of our desires are not so apparent to our sense, our
spirits are apt to grow cold before we come at the end of it. Here is a short
Prayer, furnished in all things fit to be asked, and such as thy spirit may go
along with to the End, without being tired. It is true, that a Man shall
usually find more intention of spirit in his own prayers, than in this. Bless
God that thou have this intention of spirit in thy own prayers, and neglect
them not, but pray for pardon that thou want it in this, and strive to amend
it.

Now the great Cause of the unprofitable use even of this Prayer, and of diverse
other Ordinances, grows from this, That people use them without a distinct and
deep consideration of the things contained in them. The Sun in the Firmament is
the greatest Wonder in the World, and of infinite more consideration than the
appearance of a new Star or a Comet; But the commonness of the Sun makes
Mankind pass over that without any observation, and yet look upon the latter
with much admiration and astonishment. Just thus it is with this and other
Prayers: This Prayer, being taken up and learnt with our speech, we swallow by
wholesale, and never weigh it or consider it; but other Prayers of our own or
others, whilst they are new to us, we use more attentively, and it may be more
profitably. It should therefore be our care to rub out the Corn out of this
Ear; to Examine and Consider this excellent Prayer distinctly, that so in the
use of it a full understanding and affection may go along with it; without
which it is no Prayer: for in Prayer we have to do with the God of the Spirits
of all flesh, that judges not, neither regards the bare repetition of words,
the thing condemned by our Savior when he commanded this Prayer. But by the
uniting our Souls and Spirits to him, our words are not so much our prayers, as
the consequents and signs of our prayers.

The known Division of this Prayer, is first, the Preamble. Secondly, the
Requests. Thirdly, the Conclusion.

1. The Preamble, Our Father which art in Heaven. The general duty we learn
from it is this, that we come not suddenly and unseemly in our Requests to him,
but as much as may be to prepare our Souls, with fitting apprehensions and
affections before we come to ask of him; with apprehensions of his goodness,
that may draw us to him in that he is our Father; and with apprehensions of his
Greatness, that may make us consider our distance, and come before him with
Reverence, in that he is in Heaven. Eccles. 5.2. Be not rash with thy Mouth,
and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God; for God is in
Heaven and thou upon Earth: therefore let thy words be few. God is in Heaven,
and thou upon Earth: it teaches thee thy distance, and it is fit thou
should thoroughly digest that apprehension before thou ask, that thy asking
may be with Reverence. External Reverence of it self is inconsiderable, but as
it is the figure of that internal Reverence that is in the Soul. Where the
external Reverence is without the internal, it is base and odious Hypocrisy, a
dead and a despised performance, a picture of Piety without life. But the
internal Reverence of the Mind cannot be without an external expression of it.
The Forms or Natures, that God has put into every creature, are those which
shape their external figure, in some proportion answerable to their internal
Form. And it is as impossible for an heart sensible of the Majesty, Glory,
Greatness and Power of God, to come before him either with a petulant saucy,
presumptuous or unseemly carriage, as it is for the Form of a Lamb or a Child
to render it self either in the shape of a Lion, or a Wolf. Again, God is in
Heaven and thou upon Earth: As thou have a business to do to prepare thy heart
with the sense of thy distance, that thy desires may be with a suitable humility
when thou prayest, so thou have need of preparation to bring up thy heart out
of that Earth, wherein thou art, unto Heaven, to defecate that Earthy heart of
thine, that it may be fit to come into the presence of the God of Heaven. When
God beholds the highest things in nature, the Heavens, he humbles himself, he
descends below his own Excellency, Psalm 113.6. And if thou art a Suitor to this
great King, it is fit thou should come unto the Throne of his Majesty, and
not expect that he should come to thy Cottage to be importuned, though yet he
does this also in his great Mercy and Condescension; yet it is not fit for thee
to expect it: Again, thy lifting up of thy heart to him is thy Advantage; the
nearer thou drawest to his Glory and Presence, so it be with an humble and
clean heart, the more thou will partake of his Bounty and Goodness; the fitter
thy heart will be to have communion with him. The Holy and Glorious Angels and
Souls departed partake more of his fullness and perfection than Man does,
because by the purity of their nature they have a nearer approach to the
Fountain of Good, than Man has; and the nearer or farther off the Spirit of a
man comes or keeps off from God, the more or less of his Goodness he
participates. Now in this act of prayer we endeavor to lay hold of his
Goodness and Promises: Necessary it is therefore we bring our hearts by
preparation as near to him as we can. 1. That we may be near unto him; and in
this nearness consists an advantage of Communion with him. 2. That we may be
like him; and that likeness is every day increased by our beholding of him,
whereby we are in some measure translated into the same Glory. 3. That we may
be in our proper place. God has communicated his goodness to all things
according to their several degrees of perfection in those stations, wherein his
own Great and Infinite Wisdom placed them, and the place of Man was nearer to
God by his nature, than he can now arrive unto in this Life in his own Person,
(though we have a High Priest that continually bears our names before our
Father.) And certainly, if it be at any time seasonable for a Man to wind up
his heart in the greatest nearness to God, that he can do, it is when he comes
before him in Praises for the things he has, and Petitions for the things he
wants. Learn therefore in general to bring up thy heart as near as thou can
to the great God in preparation and meditation, before thou offerest thy
Prayer, that thy sacrifice may be mingled with a true fire, and thy Soul may be
raised up with the due consideration of what thou art about, and who thou art
to deal withal.

Touching the Particulars in this Preamble.
Our Father. Two things are herein considerable: 1. How God is said to be our
Father: 2. What Frame or temper of heart and spirit this blessed relation and
conception of him, as a Father, ought to raise in us, especially when we come
before him in Prayer.

As to the first, God has the appellation or relation of a Father principally
in these respects:

1 By Creation. Thus he is the Father of all things. But in as much as
Paternity and Filiation are relations of persons not of bare subsistency,
properly, therefore in this respect he is called Father in relation to Angels
and Men: to Men, Isa. 64.8. But now, O Lord, thou art our Father, we are the
clay, and thou our potter. Mal. 2.10. have not all one Father? has not one God
created us? Luke 3.38. which was the Son of Adam; which was the Son of God. And
as to Men, so in a more near relation to the Souls of Men, and the blessed
Angels, who participate more immediately of his Image and perfection, Jam.
1.17. The Father of lights. Heb. 12.9. The Father of Spirits. Zec. 12.2. The
former of Spirits: Job 38.7. And all the Sons of God shouted for joy.

2. By special susception, or undertaking, either without an intervenient
Contract; thus he is pleased to own a more special Paternity toward those that
have most need of him, Psalm. 68.5. A Father of the Fatherless: or by an
intervenient Contract; thus he was a Father in a more near Relation to the
Jewish People, who as a Child is called by the Name of his Father, so they did
as it were bear his Name, Jer. 14.9. We are called by thy Name, leave us not.
Isa. 63.16. Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us;
and accordingly he evidenced himself toward them in all the care and
tenderness of a Father, Deuteronomy. 32.11. As an Eagle fluttereth over her Young,
etc. Hos. 11.1. When Israel was a Child, I loved him, Romans 9.4.
and called my Son out of Egypt. But these Relations are yet too large and
spacious.

3. By Adoption in Christ. Which Relation is thus wrought, by an Eternal
Stipulation between the Father and the Son; the Son was to take upon him our
Nature by a supernatural Conception, and to stand as a public Person and
Mediator between the Father and lapsed Man, and appointed that as many as
should by true Faith lay hold on him, there should be a kind of Union wrought
between Christ and that Believer, and in that Union the Father looks upon all
that which was in the Believer as imputed to Christ, and all that which was in
Christ, as imputed to the Believer. Was there Sin and Guilt in the Believer? it
is laid on Christ, and he bears all Iniquities, Isa. 53.6. Is there
Righteousness in Christ? the Believer has that Righteousness, the
Righteousness which is of God by Faith. Is Christ the Firstborn of God? Psa.
89.25, 26. Though we cannot partake of his Primogeniture, yet we partake of his
Sonship. John 1.12. As many as received him, to them he gave power to become
the Sons of God. John 20.17. I ascend unto my Father, and to your Father, to my
God, and to your God. Gal. 4.5. That we might receive the Adoption of Sons. And
by virtue of this Union we partake of the inheritance of Sons, Joynt-Heirs with
Christ, Gal. 4.7. of the Spirit of Sons. Gal. 4.6. And because ye are Sons, God
has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, etc. And by virtue of
this Filiation we have the Privileges of Sons; Access with boldness unto the
Father, Ephesians. 2.19. Care and tenderness of our Father over us. Matthew. 6.32.
For your Heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all these things:
Audience from him, John 16.26. At that day ye shall ask in my Name, etc. For
the Father himself loves you. Now this Appellation and Relation of a Father in
the first Entrance into Prayers carries up our hearts unto these Considerations.

1. That we should by all means labor to be in this relation to God, viz. that
he should be our Father; for why do we call him so, unless he be so to us? and
that we should not be contented barely with the Relation unto him as we are
Men; for so were even the Athenians, who inscribed their Altar, To the Unknown
God, His Offspring, Acts 17.28. nor with the Relation arising out of an
external Profession and Covenant, but with that nearest Relation of Paternity,
arising by our Union with Christ.

2. And consequently that all our Applications to God in Prayer must be in, and
through Christ, for through him is this Relation wrought; and it is a Relation
of Nearness and Union, which is the greatest Nearness. Ephesians. 2.13. But now in
Christ Jesus, ye, who sometimes were a far off, are made nigh by the blood of
Christ; and 19. of the Household of God: our Union unto God grows by our
Union to Christ, who is one with the Father, John 17.23. I in them, and thou in
me, that they may be made perfect in one, and this is the meaning of asking in
his Name, John 16.26. through him we have an access to the Father, Ephesians. 2.18.

3. We learn with what Affections we should come to him in our Prayers. And
these arise either from the consideration of our duty, as Children; or from the
consideration of that which we are to expect from him, as a Father. Those of
the first part are principally these, Love, Reverence, Submission, and
Thankfulness.

1. Love to God. The very name of a Father imports in it self a relation of
benefit, and consequently of Love. God is the Father of thy being, as thou art
a Man, and of thy continual preservation; and if there were no more than this
in this comprehensive name of Father, it is enough to take up the whole stock
and compass of thy Love. The Motion from not being to being, is an infinite
Motion, and an act of infinite goodness as well as of infinite Power, and
deserves and challenges the uttermost extent of thy Love, as a just debt unto
it; so that thou have scarce a residue of love left within the compass of thy
uttermost power, which thou owe not to this great Love of thy Lord in giving
thee a being; and if this common Goodness of thy Lord requires and deserves
all thy Love to him as the Father of thy nature, what Love do thou owe him as
he is pleased to be thy Father in a nearer relation? to be thy Father in
Christ? and that after thou had rejected him and were Lost? and if thy debt
of Love, that thou owe to him as the Father of thy Nature, be more large than
the Comprehension of thy Power, how, or with what will thou pay that further
debt of Love, which thou owe to him for that undeserved, unsought for,
superadded relation of thy Father by Adoption? when he gave his own Son to dye
for thee, an enemy, that thou might receive the Adoption of a Son? This is a
love that passes not only thy Retribution, but also thy knowledge. Behold,
what manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called
the Sons of God, 1 John 3.1. And the Love of God to us, as it is the
meritorious Cause of our Love to him, so it is that which Excites and fires our
Love to him, 1 John 4.19. We love him, because he first loved us. And according
to the measure we have of the apprehension of the Love of God to us, according
is the measure of our Love to him again. This therefore is the first affection
that the name of Father calls out, viz. The intensest affection of our Love, in
that he has given us a Commission to call him Father, and Christ is not
ashamed to call us Brethren, Heb. 2.21.

2. Reverence; and this is but a consequent of the former. Perfect Love casts
out fear, 1 John 4.18. But it is the Mother of Reverence, Heb. 12.9. We have
had Fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them reverence, etc.
Mal. 1.6. If I be a Father, where is my honor? were there no other distance of
nature between thy God and thee, but the distance and relation of a Father, it
requires Reverence of thee, especially when thou come before him in thy
Prayers. And that inward Reverence of thy Soul will imprint a Reverence in thy
Words, and in thy Carriage; as all other Affections and Tempers of the Soul fix
a suitable correspondence upon the outward Man, but especially when we consider
he is our heavenly Father.

3. Submission to his Will. Consider thy approach is to thy Father, which
carries with it a relation of Authority, especially considering he is a Father
of Wisdom, that knows what is fittest for thee, and a Father of Mercies, that
is oftentimes more merciful to thee in denying thee what thou ask, than he
could be in granting it: it is thy duty to ask what thou want, because he is
thy Father; but not to limit him what he should grant.

4. Thankfulness, for all thou have received; because as he is the Author of
thy Being, so he is the Fountain of all thy Benefit.

5. And as the Name of Father carries upward these Affections of Love, Fear,
Submission and Thankfulness toward God, so it brings down those Apprehensions
of God, that are suitable to the business about which we are.

1. From the consideration that God is our Father thus placed in the Entrance
of this Prayer, we have Encouragement to make our access unto him with an
humble boldness. When we consider the Glory, and the Majesty, and the Purity of
the Great and Infinite God, in whose sight the Heavens are not clean, nor the
Stars pure, Job 15.15. and 25.5. that charge his Angels with folly, and in
his Presence the Cherubins cover their faces: How should dust and Ashes, Man
that is a Worm, under the apprehension of his Majesty and Glory, ever think
that this Glorious God should listen unto, or entertain his Person or his
Prayers? When David considered but of the Sun and Moon and Stars, which are
but the works of his hands, he found a great disproportion between us and them.
What is Man that thou should be mindful of him? Psalm. 8.4. Much more between
us and their and our Creator; the Son of God therefore, that knew his Fathers
Will, and the thoughts he bears toward us, presents him to us in the brink
of our Prayers under the Expression of a Father, that might invite us, before
he renders him under the apprehension of his being in Heaven, that might
Estrange us; under the conception of the Love and tenderness of a Father,
before conception of his Majesty and Glory. And is he thy Father? why should
thou not upon all occasions resort unto him? whither should a Child go with
boldness, if not to his Father? and to such a Father as he is pleased to render
himself unto us, with more tenderness and gentleness than lies within the
bowels of a natural Father? Isa. 49.15. Can a woman; whose affections are most
ardent and importunate, forget her Child, a piece of her self, her sucking
Child, to whom she is engaged by an additional obligation of Love and Care,
that she should not have compassion, when her natural Love is heightened by a
pityfull accurance, of the Son of her Womb, the perfection of her conception?
Yea, she may forget yet I will not forget thee, says the Lord, Hos. 11.8. How
shall I give thee up Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee Israel? how shall I make
thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? my Heart is turned within me, my
repentings are kindled together. I will not execute the fierceness of mine
anger; for I am God and not Man, Hos. 11.3. I taught Ephraim to go, leading him
by the hand; Ephraim like a weak Child was ready to stumble and fall upon every
occasion, and like a froward Child apt to snatch away his hand from him that
led him; yet the affection of a Father is not lost by the weakness or
frowardness of a Child, Deuteronomy. 32.6, 11. Do you thus requite the Lord, O foolish
People and unwise? Is not he thy Father that bought thee? As an Eagle stirs
up her nest and fluttereth over her Young, spreads abroad her wings takes
them and bears them on her wings, so the Lord alone did lead him. And all
these, and a world of the like Expressions in the Book of God, to unvail the
love of God to his Creatures, and thereby to draw out an aweful love to him,
and an humble boldness to make an approach unto him, Heb. 4.16. Let us
therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace; and to bless our Redeemer, who
by the price of his Blood has purchased this free liberty of access unto God
as our Father. Ephesians. 3.12. In whom we have boldness and access with
confidence. Who as he has purchased access for us, so when, notwithstanding
that we are fearful, and backward, and ashamed to come, is pleased in the
virtue of his own Mediation to stand between the Glory and Brightness of the
Father and us poor Creatures, and to show us more of his Goodness and Mercy
than of his Glory; and to receive our desires, and to bring both them and us
into the presence of his Father, and our Father.

2. As this Expression leads us unto God, and gives us access, so it gives us
assurance of success in our Petitions. This Prayer as is said, is a
comprehensive Prayer; we thereby in an Abridgement ask whatsoever is necessary
for this life or that to come, but the Name of a Father is a comprehensive
Name; the Petitions that thou art asking are large Petitions, and the Promise
is yet more large, John 16.23. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name he
will give it you. Matthew. 7.7. Ask, and it shall be given you: But here is the
Foundation, thy application is to thy Father: Matthew. 7.11. If ye being evil
know how to give good things to your Children, how much more shall your Father
which is in Heaven, give good things to them that ask him. Whatsoever thou
can find or expect from thy Natural Father, so much, and much more, may
thou expect from thy Heavenly Father: Patience, to bear with thy infirmities
and failings, Psalm. 78.18. Compassion, to pity thy suffering; Psalm. 103.13.
Goodness, to supply thy wants; Justice, to avenge thy injuries; Psalm. 105.14.
Protection, to defend thee from dangers; Vigilance and care, to support thee
against Temptations; Mercy to pardon thy backslidings; Jer. 3.14. Skill, to
interpret, and Tenderness to accept thy weak and stammering Petitions;
Providence and Bounty, abundantly to reward all thy sincere performances. Luke
12.32. Fear not little flock, it is my Fathers good will to give you a Kingdom.

And this Consideration of God, as our Father, when we come before him in
Prayer, as it teaches us our duty, so it does most naturally teach us the
three first Petitions to desire the Glory of his Name, the Increase of the
manifestation of his Kingdom and Power, the full submission unto, and desire of
the fulfilling of his Will. And as that relation looks downward upon us, so it
concludes the three last Petitions. From whom should thou desire or expect
Mercy to forgive thee, Conveniences to supply thee, Care and Protection to
preserve and deliver thee from Evil, if not from a Father? and as from this
appellation of a Father we gather Confidence in his love, so in the next
qualification or description of this Father we gather Confidence in his Power.

Which art in Heaven, or Heavenly Father, Matt. 6.26. To denote 1. The eminence
of his Glory and Power. The Heavens are the most Eminent and Glorious Creatures
that our Eyes behold, and speak much of the Glory and Majesty of God, Psalm.
19.1. and in this adjunct of Heavenly, we give him the acknowledgement and
attribution of the Greatness of his Power and Glory, Psalm. 1.5. For our God is
in the Heavens, and he has done whatsoever he pleases.

2. Heaven the Throne of his Majesty, Psalm. 11.4. Isa. 66.1. The Heaven is my
Throne, and the Earth is my Footstool. Psalm. 68.4. Extol him that rides upon
the Heavens. Deuteronomy. 33.26. who rides upon the Heavens for thy help, and in his
excellency upon the sky. 1 Kings 8.49. Heaven thy dwelling place. Which though
it be the Seat of his glory, yet it is not the circumscription of his Presence.
1 Kings 8.27. The Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee. Psalm.
113.4. his Glory is above the Heavens. Isa. 57.15. The high and lofty One that
inhabiteth eternity, an incomprehensible infinitude. Psalm. 139.8. If I ascend
into Heaven, thou art there; and if I make my bed in Hell, thou art there. Isa.
40.22. It is he that sits on the Circle of the Earth. So that his Presence
is in all places; and though, in respect of his Creatures, the greatest
manifestation of his Presence is above the Heaven, yet his Infinite and
Essential Glory is equally in all places. Now from this attribution we learn,

1. Our Duty in Prayer. As a Christian should always have his Conversation in
Heaven, from whenee he expects his Savior, Phil. 3.20. so in a special manner
when he comes to God in Prayer. Hence Prayer is called a drawing near to God,
Heb. 10.22. lifting up the Heart unto God. Know therefore thou do, or at
least, should, in Prayer bring thy Heart up into Heaven before the Throne of
the Infinite Majesty; which imports or inforceth these Consequents.

1. Let thy Spirit be mingled with thy Prayers, for there is no other way to
draw near to God, but by bringing thy spirit into his presence. He is a Spirit,
and will be worshipped in Spirit; thy Body is here upon the Earth, and thy
words vanish before they are gone far from thee. Thou can not get before the
presence of the Lord of Heaven, but with thy Spirit and Soul; and unless thy
Prayer be the drawing near of thy Spirit to him, thy Prayer is a Provocation,
and not a Service; unprofitable and useless for thee, and unaccepted and not
regarded by God; it dies, and is rotten in the Earth, and it cannot come up to
thy Father, which is in Heaven.

2. Let thy Spirit be a pure Spirit, and thy Prayers be pure Prayers; for what
has any thing that is impure to do with Heaven, a place of Purity and
Holiness! None, but the pure in spirit can see God, Matthew. 5.8. and none but
pure hands are fit to be lifted up to him, 1 Timothy 2.8. Psalm. 24.4. And that thy
Spirit may be pure, and fit to come up into this High and Holy Place, and to
have Communion with the Holy and Glorious God, get thy Spirit, and Soul, and
Conscience washed by the Blood of Christ, and thy Prayers mingled with the
Incense of Christ, Rev. 8.3. and labor to get an Inherent Holiness, a pure and
a sanctified Heart, and from that will thy Words, and thy Conversation, and thy
Services, and thy Sacrifices (all which are but the Emanations and Fruit of thy
Heart) be Holy, and bear some, though a weak proportion to that place, and to
that Person, whither thou art sending thy Prayers. And more especially and
particularly labor to cleanse thy Heart when thou art about to pray; because
thy Prayers are a drawing near unto God. Psalm. 73.28. The Priests under the
Law, when they were to come near unto God in their Administrations, were to be
washed and clean from their natural and external Impurities; and a Leper was
not suffered to come into the Tabernacle; but what is that to the Leprosy and
Impurity of thy Spirit, that very part of thee that only can have an immediate
access to God? and what Communion can there be between an holy God and an
unholy Soul? Psalm. 66.18. If I regard Iniquity in my Heart, God will not hear
me. Consider therefore that thy approach is unto Heaven, the dwelling place of
his Majesty, and of his Glory, and Holiness becomes such an Habitation. Psalm.
93.5. But who then is fit for such a communion? What is Man that he should be
clean? and he which is born of a Woman that he should be righteous? Behold he
puts no trust in his Saints, yea the Heavens are not clean in his sight, how
much more abominable and filthy is Man, which drinks iniquity like water? Job
15.14, 15, 16. But for this, thy Savior has given thee an Expedient; he
takes away the iniquity of thy Holy things, and mingles thy Sacrifice with his
own insense, and covers thy impurities with his own righteousness, and if for
all this the cense of thy own vileness cover thy Heart with shame, and the
burden of thy Sins and Corruptions keeps thy Soul under, that it cannot with
that clearness and confidence look up unto Heaven, but, with the Publican in
the Gospel, stand afarr off, and scarce dare ask for any thing, but what the
sense of Guilt inforceth, viz. Mercy to pardon thee; yet such is the Goodness
of God in Christ to thy low and humbled Soul, that though thou have scarce
confidence enough to draw nigh unto God, yet he has compassion enough to draw
nigh unto thee. Psalm. 34.18. The Lord is nigh to them that are of a broken
Heart. And though thy laden Soul can scarce get up into Heaven, into the
presence of thy Creator, yet he will bring down Heaven into thy Soul. Isa.
57.15. Thus says the High and Lofty One that inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name
is Holy, I dwell in the High and Holy place, with him also that is of a
contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive
the heart of the contrite ones.

3. Let thy Prayer be full of Reverence with thy whole Man: for as thou come
to a Father, and in that relation thou owe him Reverence, so thou come to a
Heavenly Father, the great Lord and Judge of all things. 1 Pet. 1.17. And if ye
call on the Father, who without respect of persons judges according to every
man's works, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear. And as a Father,
and such a Father calls for thy Reverence, so especially when thou considerest
that thou come to this great King in his Throne, in the place of his Majesty
and Glory. And therefore this Expression is added, to take up the whole
Latitude of thy thoughts, with the highest apprehensions of the Glory and
Majesty of the Lord, before whom thou come; and that thou may consider the
Infinite distance that is between thee and the Lord of Heaven; Isa. 55.9. For
as the Heaven is higher than the Earth, so are my thoughts than your thoughts,
and my ways than your ways. And upon this consideration to admire and magnify
the Goodness and Mercy of this great King, that is pleased to admit poor sinful
Worms to come into his presence, and beg for our Lives, and for our Souls, with
a Promise of Mercy and Acceptance.

4. Let thy Prayers be full of Intention: Thou do, or should, bring up thy
Soul into Heaven, into the Presence of the Great and Glorious God; and what
should thy wandering thoughts, thy Earthly business do there? leave them at the
foot of the Hill, when thou ascendest into the Mount of God. Consider, the
person, to whom thou come, exactly views and observes the frame, and
connection, and workings, and motions of thy thoughts and desires, and whether
they go along with thy words, or with thy External deportment: and if they do
not, so much of thy Prayer is not only lost, but a mockery and abuse of thy
Maker. And as the consideration of the Person to whom thou make thy address,
so the Place where thou come does not suit with those impertinent and vain
diversions. Therefore when thou prayest do it considerately, advisedly, and
with the whole Intention of thy Soul. Eccles. 5.2. Be not rash with thy mouth,
and let not thy heart utter any thing hastily before God, for God is in Heaven
and thou upon Earth.

2. As this Expression teaches us our duty toward God in Prayer, so it
teaches us what to Expect from him.

1. Hence learn the All-seeing Eye of God, that is acquainted with all thy
wants, and with all thy desires. It was a mistaken use that was made of his
being in Heaven, Job 22.14. Thick Clouds are a covering to him that he sees
not, and he walks in the circuit of Heaven. No, but Psalm 33.13. The Lord
looks from Heaven, he beholds all the Sons of Men. Psalm. 11.4. The distance
of the place is no disadvantage to his sight or hearing. Again, Though Heaven
be the Seat of his Glory, yet all places are filled with his Presence; but
especially he is nigh to them that call upon him, to all that call upon him in
truth, Psalm. 145.18. is nigh to such as be of a broken Heart, Psalm 34.18. is
round about his people, Psalm. 125.2. is nigh unto them in all they call upon
him for, Deuteronomy. 4.7. will bow down his Ear to hear, Psalm. 31.2. will bow the
Heavens and come down for their good, Psalm. 18.9. So that thy Prayers have no
great distance to go, for all places are Heaven where God is, and he is in all
places, especially where two or three are gathered together in his Name to call
upon him.

2. Hence learn the All-sufficient and Almighty Power of God, Psalm. 115.3. Our
God is in Heaven, he has done whatsoever he pleased. As the relation of a
Father carries with it a fullness of love, to be willing to grant thy largest
requests, so the Consideration that he is a Heavenly Father carries with it a
fullness of Power to grant them. These considerations of the Love and Power of
God bear up the Heart in Prayer, as once Aaron and Hur did Moses hands, Exodus
17.12. And therefore they are both placed in the Porch of this Prayer, like the
pillars of Jachin and Boaz, in Solomon's Temple, 1 Kings 7.21. To stablish and
strengthen thy Heart in thy Prayer to God.

3. As the consideration of Heavenly, or which art in Heaven, carries thy Heart
to confidence in his Power and All Sufficiency to grant thy Petitions, so it
improves thy Faith in his Infinite Tenderness and Goodness. When thou come to
the Father of thy flesh, thy Earthly Father, that relation imports and carries
with it, much love and compassion, as has been observed; but though he be thy
Father, yet he is an Earthly Father; and as his Power and Sufficiencies are
narrow and weak, and not adequate to the Extent of thy wants and desires, so
his Affections are limited, and mingled with the passions and frowardness of
his Temper or Age. A Woman may forget the Son of her Womb, Isa. 49.15. And the
hands of the pitiful Woman may sees her own Children, Lam. 4.10. And Fathers
are apt to provoke their own Children. Ephesians. 6.4. But were there not mixtures
of Distempers in the affections of Parents, yet their affections are finite,
and such is our condition, that in one day we should out-sin all that stock of
Patience to bear, and mercy to forgive, that the most tender earthly Father
ever had or could be capable of. We stand in need every day of the infinite
bowels of a Heavenly Father, to bear and pardon and receive us, as of infinite
Power to supply and support us. Isay. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his ways,
and the unrighteous Man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and be
will have Mercy, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon, for my thoughts
are not your thoughts, nor your ways my ways, says the Lord; for as the
Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and
my thoughts than your thoughts. Hos. 13.9. Oh Israel, thou have destroyed thy
self, but in me is thy help. I will not return to destroy Ephraim, for I am God
and not Man, Hos. 11.9. As if he should have said, Were all the Compassions,
and Bowels, and Patience, and Tenderness in the World combined in one Man, yet
thy Sins are grown to that height, and thy provocation to that perfection, that
all that Patience were too weak to bear, and all that compassion too small to
pardon thee; thou have out-sinned all the Compass and extent of a created
Patience, but I am God, and not Man, I have Patience enough for all this to
bear with thee; and Mercy enough abundantly to Pardon thee. Jer. 3.12. Return
thou backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to
fall upon you; for I am merciful, says the Lord, and I will not keep anger for
ever; Only acknowledge thine iniquity that thou have transgressed against the
Lord thy God. The Omnipotence of God runs through all his Attributes, and is
no less seen in his Mercy to pardon, than in his Power to create. Numb. 14.17,
18. And now, I beseech thee, let the power of my Lord be great, according as
thou have spoken, saying, the Lord is long-suffering and of great Mercy.

Now I come to the Requests themselves.
1 Hallowed be thy Name. Wherein shall be considered,

1. What we are to understand by the Name of God.

2. What we are to understand by Hallowing or Sanctifying his Name.

As to the First. The Ways of God and his Judgments are unsearchable, and past
finding out, Romans 11.33. and if his ways are such, how infinitely unsearchable
is his Essence and Nature? the Angels that are by God endued with an
understanding more receptive of this light than ours is, do behold his face.
Matt. 18.10. V. Isa. 6.2.
But yet that light is too bright for their pure Eyes, and too wide for those
perfect Intelligences to comprehend: but mortal Man cannot behold his Face.
Exodus 33.20. Thou can not see my face: for no man can see me, and live. But
yet such is his Mercy and Condescension to his creature, that he communicates
so much of the knowledge of himself unto us, as is convenient for us, and
sufficient to bring us to a more perfect Vision of him, when our Souls shall be
endued with an Angelical capacity to see him. Matt. 5.8. Blessed are the pure
in Heart: for they shall see God. And the means whereby we know him, is the
Manifestation of his Name unto us. John 17.6. I have manifested thy Name unto
the Men which thou gave me. The Name of the Lord therefore imports these two
things.

1. That which he has been pleased to manifest unto us in his Word concerning
himself, his Essence, and Attributes.

2. That Glory and Honor, which, as a beam from the Sun, does arise from that
manifestation.

1. Touching the First, God has been pleased to reveal himself unto us by
Names or Expressions, whereby we may have some conceptions concerning him; and
though every attribute given to God in the Scripture, is a part of his Name;
yet he has chosen some expression which he has in a special manner called his
Name, as being of a more special use to us, and therefore are to have a greater
impression upon us; sometime to signify his Absolute and Independent being,
Exodus 3.13. And Moses said unto God, when I come to the Children of Israel,
and shall say unto them, the God of your Fathers has sent me unto you, and
they shall say to me, what is his Name? what shall I say unto them? And God
said to Moses, I AM THAT I AM. Thus shall thou say unto them, I AM has sent
me. Sometimes to signify the greatness of his Authority, Esa. 42.8. I am the
Lord, that is my Name, and my Glory will I not give to another. Sometimes to
signify his Power. Jer. 10.16. The Lord of Hosts is his Name. Sometimes to
signify the Immensity of his Majesty, Exodus 6.3. I appeared unto Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, by the Name of God Almighty, but by my Name Jehovah was I not
known unto them. Psalm. 83.18. Thou whose Name is Jehovah, Deuteronomy. 28.58. That
thou may fear this Glorious and Fearful Name, the Lord thy God. Sometimes to
signify his Purity, Exodus 34.14. whose name is Jealous, Psalm. 93.3. whose Name
is Holy. But above all, when God himself was pleased, at the requests of his
Creature, to make his Goodness to pass before him, and to proclaim his Name,
consisting of all the ingredients necessary for our knowledge and use. Exodus
34.6, 7. The Lord, the Lord God, Merciful and Gracious, Long-suffering and
Abundant in Goodness and Truth, Keeping mercy for thousands, Forgiving
iniquity, transgression and sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty,
etc. And this was the Name that our Savior came to comment upon, showing his
Mercy in pardoning us, and his Justice in punishing our Sins, in his Son; his
Truth in fulfilling that first Gospel preached in Paradise, The seed of the
Woman shall break the Serpents head. And this Name of God he manifested to his
Disciples and to us.

2. The Name of the Lord is taken for that Glory and Honor that is due unto
his Essence, Attributes and Works, the reflection of his own Perfection. He
has proclaimed himself Merciful and Gracious, and his works of Mercy reflect
Glory upon this part of his Name: Isa. 48.9, 11. For my Names sake I will defer
mine anger: for how should my Name be polluted? and I will not give my Glory to
another: He proclaims his strength and Power; and the works of his Power
reflect Glory upon that part of his Name: Jer. 10.6. his name is great in
Power. Jer. 32.20. which have set signs in Egypt, etc. And have made thee a
name as at this day: He has proclaimed that he is long-suffering; and the
works of his Patience toward our backslidings and rebellions reflect Glory
upon that part of his name: Psalm. 106.8. Nevertheless he saved them for his
Name sake, that he might make his mighty power known: the power of his Patience
to forbear them, as well as of his strength to deliver them. And thus Psalm.
48.10. According to thy Name, so is thy praise in all the Earth: that is, all
the works of God, and his dispensations carry an impression of the Glory and
Truth of some Attribute of his Name. Psalm. 134.2. I will praise thy Name for
thy loving kindness and thy Truth, for thou have magnified thy word above all
thy Name: that is, thy word has proclaimed thy name to be Merciful, Bountiful,
etc. And all the course of thy Government in the World does Justify the truth
of that word of thine, and does attest it, every part of it bringing back to
some Attribute of that Name of thine, Glory, and a just suffrage unto the truth
of thy Word.

Hallowed, or Sanctified, be thy Name.
This Imports these things:
1 That all the works of God, and the actions and occurrencies of the World,
may bear upon them, and in them, an impression of the Glory of God, of his
Power, Majesty, Wisdom, Goodness, Justice. That they may have upon them that
Beauty, Comeliness and Usefulness, that he originally did put upon them. God
made all things for his Glory, and in conformity thereunto they were in their
original full of Beauty and Order; and the Excellence of the Work did speak the
Perfection of the Workman; but the Sin of Men and Angels brought upon some
parts of his works a deformity and disorder. Genesis 3.17. I have cursed the
ground for thy sake. And though in that curse, and in all other the consequents
of Sin, there is still a Glory of the Justice of God in punishing, and of his
Wisdom in managing of them; yet much of the beauty of the works themselves is
taken from them by that disorder that sin has brought upon them. When we pray
therefore that the Name of God may be hallowed, we desire that, as much as may
stand with his will, all things may bear in them the impression of his Glory;
that they may have a conformity, not only to his will, but to his good
pleasure; that in all things the Wisdom, and Goodness, and Power of God may be
conspicuous; that he would in Christ take out that disorder and curse, that
has by Sin defaced the Creature; that all things may in the highest measure be
restored to their primitive perfection; that all the occurrencies of the World,
and all the actions of Men and Angels, may carry in them the most eminent
inscription of his Presence, Wisdom and Goodness, and may be directed with the
best advantage to his Glory. Our love to God makes that, which he wills, to be
our wills; and as he wills his own Glory, so it makes us to desire his Glory;
And though we are to leave the particular manifestation thereof to his Wisdom,
yet it must be our chief desire that all things may, in the highest measure,
move to his Honor, and bear the inscription of it. And this is that praise
that David calls for from all creatures, Psalm. 148.150.

2. In as much as God has endued Reasonable Creatures with understanding and
Capacity, to discover the Wisdom and Goodness of God in his Creatures and
Works, we are to desire that the Works of God may not only carry in them a
Native or secret impression of his Power Wisdom and other Attributes, but that
it may be made evident, and discovered and manifested to the understandings of
Men and Angels, and that they may discern it, and be convinced of it, Psalm.
9.16. that the Lord may be known by the Judgment that he Executes, Ps. 64.9.
And all Men shall fear, and declare the works of God, for they shall wisely
consider his doings. Psalm. 58.11. So that a Man shall say verily he is a God
that Judges in the Earth. Psalm. 111.2. That as his works are great, so they
may be sought out; that as all the works of God contain an objective glory of
God in them, so that the same may be seen and observed by those parts of his
Creation, Men and Angels, that have a capacity to receive it, and for that
purpose that objective Glory of God is put into all creatures, and this
capacity or receptivity is placed in Intellectual Creatures, that they may
observe and discern the Glory of his Wisdom, Goodness, and Truth, and all other
his Attributes, in the Creatures.

3. And in as much as he has magnified his Word above all his Name, Psalm.
138.2. That is, he has evinced the truth of his Word, and every part thereof
in all the course of his Providence and Works, that Men and Angels may discern
and understand the fulfilling and making good of his Word. The Sun shining upon
a Glass does cause a reflection of his beams, but many may not see it, either
because they are blind and cannot see it, or they look another way, or stand in
such a position that they do not see it; and so it is with the Works of God.
When I pray that his Name be hallowed, I pray that God would be pleased to open
the Eyes of Men by his Spirit; to put them in such a frame and position, that
they may discern the Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness, and Justice, and Truth of
God, that reflects from his Works, that these impressions of his may not be
lost unto us, nor the Glory of them lost unto him.

3. That the observation and discovery of the Truth and Goodness, etc. of God,
may not only work a conviction thereof in our Understandings and Judgments (for
thus it does even to the devils themselves) but that that conviction may raise
up in the minds and affections those suitable consequences, that should arise
from such a conviction, such as are these: 1 A subscription and setting to our
seal that God is True, and Just, and Merciful. In the work of Conviction we are
in a manner passive, but herein we are active, when in our hearts we do
cheerfully and willingly subscribe and attest to all that Goodness and Truth,
whereof we are thus convinced. 2 An Inward Admiration of the Power, Truth and
Glory of God, that is thus discovered unto us. The natural effect of great
discoveries is Admiration. 2 These. 1.10. To be admired in all them that
believe. 3 Blessing of that goodness of his, not only that is discovered unto
us, but that so far condescends to his creature, as to show us so much of his
Glory, Truth and Greatness. 4 An Attribution of Infinitely more Glory, Majesty,
Mercy, Goodness, and all Perfection unto him, than possibly I can discover by
any of these Manifestations, considering that all his Works put together cannot
speak his Fullness. If I could see all the Glory of God, that all the Works of
God in the whole World do bear upon them, yet I must needs conclude in reason,
that they are infinitely short of that Perfection which he has in him: for he
must needs have a residue of Power and Wisdom, infinitely more than
commensurate to all his Works put together: but alas! I see but a part of his
Works, and so narrow is my capacity, that I find plainly I cannot reach to the
bottom of any Work, nor search it out, nor his Power, Wisdom and Glory that
lies in a fly or worm, to the uttermost; and yet I see so much as does astonish
me, and confound me, even in the least of all his Workings; what measure then
must his own Fullness amount unto? and this made David, and the other Saints of
God, whose Eyes he had opened, even to lose themselves in the Contemplations
and Expressions of the Goodness and Greatness of God. 5. Areturn of infinite
Fear and Reverence, Love, Dependence, Submission, and Obedience, and of all the
choicest and sweetest motions of our Souls to him, as the just desert of his
Goodness and Truth, and the just Tribute due to his Majesty and Glory. And this
is the Sanctifying of the Lord of Hosts, Isa. 8.17. And thus he will be
sanctified by all them that draw near unto him, Levit. 10.3. The Sanctifying of
the Lord in the heart, 1 Pet. 3.15.

4. And as these affections and motions are made in the heart, so by all
External Expressions of the tongue, to evidence that inward conviction and
affection of the Soul; and, as much as in us lies, to propagate and proclaim to
all the World the Glory due to God, by acknowledging openly his Truth, 1 Kings
18.39. When the people saw the miracle of the fire devouring the water, they
fell on their faces, and said, The Lord he is God, the Lord he is God. By
ascribing Greatness, Deuteronomy. 32. Strength, Psalm 68.34. Glory, Psalm. 96.8. unto
his Name; by publishing his Name, Deuteronomy. 32.3. Singing forth his Honor, Psalm
66.2. Exalting his Name, Psalm 34.3. causing it to be had in remembrance,
Psalm. 45.27. Magnifying his works; Job 36.24. by inviting and exciting all the
Creatures in the World, according to their uttermost activity, to praise his
Name, Psalm. 148.5. Out of the abundance of the Heart, thus possessed with the
sense of the Perfection of God, the mouth will speak.

5. That from the same Principle in the heart, the lives of Men and Angels may
bring Glory and Honor to God; that is, by Conformity of their Natures and
lives to the will of God concerning them. Other Creatures, by a passive
Conformity unto the Will of God, bring Glory unto him, viz. by moving as they
are moved by those natural Instincts that are put in them; but to Men and
Angels God has given that Honor to have in them an active Principle, not only
to be conformed, but to conform to the Will of God, and to bring Glory to his
Name: and when by our sin and contracted Corruption Mankind has disabled
himself to exercise that power, which God once gave him to glorify his
Creator, Christ came to restore him again to such a condition, that he might
actively bring Glory to God by an active Conformity to the Mind and Will of
God, 2 Cor. 5.15. For this Cause he died, that they which live should not live
to themselves but unto him that died for them. Tit. 2.14. ad idem. And this was
a principal part of that Reconciliation that he wrought, viz. as for the things
that were past, reconciling God to Man by Forgiveness and Pardon, so for the
time to come reconciling Man to God by Conformity to Him and his Will. Sin made
an unlikeness of Man to God, and thereby destroyed the Image of God in Man; for
an Image consists in the likeness of another thing. Christ came to restore that
Image again; Colos, 3.10. And that not to rest merely in the internal
Dispositions of the Soul, but that, as he that has called us is holy, we
should be holy in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1.13. Which is impossible
to be severed, so that the former should be without the Latter; for, as out of
the abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks, so out of the same abundance the
hand works; and the sanctification of the Mind can as ill be contained within
the Heart without some Expression in the Life, as any other temper or
disposition of the Mind can be restrained from discovering it self. That
Communion, that Moses had with God in the Mount, imprinted a Glory on his Face;
and that Image of God, the conformity of the Heart unto him, will shine through
into the Life; and that out of a double Principle: 1. As a connatural
Consequence of the inward disposition. 2. Out of the Love and Obedience to God,
Matthew. 5.16. That men may see your good works, and glorify your Father which
is in Heaven. So that when I pray that the Name of God may be Sanctified, I do
desire that God would in Christ re-imprint his Image upon Man, that he would
renew him in the Spirit of his Mind, and restore him to a Conformity unto his
Divine Will, which is our Sanctification; 1 These. 4.3. And that the outward
Conversation of Men may be suitable to this inward Conformity, in all Obedience
to the good pleasure of God; that as they profess his Name, so they may appear
to be his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. 2.10.
And walk worthy of God, 1 These. 2.12. That others beholding their good works
may glorify God, 1 Pet. 2.12.

Now the Opposites to this Petition, is, Blasphemy, and Cursing the Name of God
(for to that height of vill any the corruption of Nature has risen) That that
fearful and terrible Name, Psalm. 99.3. Deuteronomy. 28.58. has not escaped the
blasphemous Tongues of Men, despising his Majesty. Job 21.15. What is the
Almighty, that we should serve him? Exodus 5.2. Who is the Lord that I should
obey his voice? Taking his Name in vain, using of it lightly or irreverently;
It is a terrible Name, and not to be used without summoning up of all the awe
and reverence of our hearts: or falsely, either in solemn oaths, swearing falsely
by his Name; or pretending messages from him that he never sent. Jer. 14.14.
Prophesying Lies in his Name, whereby a dishonor is brought upon his Truth:
Pride, Arrogancy and Self-admiration, these intercept the Glory due unto God,
and usurp that which is only due unto him, and most dear to him. Isa. 48.11. My
Glory will not I give to another. Therefore God does in a special manner hate,
Pro. 6.17. Pro. 9.13. and resist it, and them, Jam. 4.6. when Herod intercepted
the Glory of the People, and entertained it, and gave not God the Glory, the
Angel of the Lord smote him, Acts 12.23. and when the great King was puffed up
with the greatness of his Glory and Power, then the Message comes that the
Kingdom is departed from him, Dan. 4.13. And commonly God takes that season to
punish the whole stock of Sins, that a man has committed, when his heart is
most lifted up: Pro. 16.18. Pride goes before destruction. Again, Presumptuous
Sins, these bid defiance to the Name of God, to his Truth, his Justice, his
Power, his Presence, Deuteronomy. 29.20. The Jealousy of God will smoke against such
a Man: Scandalous Sins in those that bear or profess the Name of God. 2 Samuel
12.14. by this occasion is given to the Enemies of God to blaspheme:
Inadvertence and want of Consideration of the Works of God; Because they regard
not the works of the Lord, nor the operations of his hands, therefore shall he
destroy them, and not build them up, Psalm. 28.5 God therefore does dispense
many of his works of Providence, that Men should wisely consider of his doings,
and declare his work, Psalm. 64.9. This Inadvertence partly disappointeth God of
his End, and robs him of his Glory: Misapplication of events either to false
causes, Idols, Fate, Fortune, or only to Second causes, without the due
attribution of all to the most Wise and Powerful Counsel of the Mighty Lord,
Deuteronomy. 8.17, 18. And thou say in thy Heart, my power, and the might of my hand
has gotten me this wealth; but thou shall remember the Lord thy God; for it is
he that gives thee power to get Wealth; So for promotion, Psalm. 75.6.
Victory, Isay. 10.5. O Assyrian the Rod of mine anger. 13. but, he says, by
the strength of mine hand have I done this, and by my Wisdom. And as in things
concerning others this Observation is to be used, so principally in the
Occurrences and Providence concerning thy self to labor to know that all
things that befall thee, come from the most Wise and Just hand of God; in all
thy Blessings acknowledge his Mercy, and labor to find him in them; in all thy
Afflictions acknowledge his Justice and his Wisdom; Labor to find out the
Cause, and give him the Glory.

Now concerning the Order of this Petition; it fell not in the first place by
Chance; but he that was the Wisdom of the Father placed it there upon most just
Reasons:

1. The Glory of God is that which is first to be sought for; because it is the
chief End of God in all things, and that which he principally intended. He made
all things for his Glory. Vide Isa. 43.7, 21.
The first and highest Duty of Man is to Love God, and Love to God will carry
the Heart to desire that first, which God first wills; in so much as if the
Glory of God must be lost, or the Soul that loves him, the perfection of Love
will choose the preservation of his Glory, rather than of it self, if it were
possible. Vide Exodus 32.33. Romans 9.3.

2. It is the Justest, and only Tribute that all Creatures can return to God
for their Being and Blessing. Such is his infinite Self-sufficiencie, that it
is impossible he can receive any good from them, that receive their Being from
him. Job 35.7. If thou be righteous what give thou him? Psalm. 16.2. My
goodness extends not to thee. But the return of the Honor and Glory, and
acknowledgment of his Goodness is all that the Creature can give, and that he
is pleased to accept. Psalm. 50.15. I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify
me. Psalm. 116.12. Whatshall I return unto the Lord for all his benefits to me?
I will take the cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. Revel.
4.11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power, for
thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created.
And according to this Debt of Duty, which the Creatures owe to God for their
being, so we find them, according to their several capacities and conditions,
bringing in their Tribute, Revel. 5.13. And every Creature, which is in Heaven,
in the Earth, and under the Earth, and in the Sea, heard I, saying, Blessing,
Honor, Glory, and Power be unto him that sits on the Throne, and unto the
Lamb for Ever and Ever.

3. It is the best preparative for the Heart that approaches to God in Prayer
to be first taken up withal: If in the ordinary Actions of our Nature the Glory
of God should affect our heart, and be the End, at which we should aim, 1 Cor.
10.31. Whether ye Eat or Drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of
God: And if the Son of God in this Pattern of Prayer begins his Petitions with
the sanctifying of his Name, it is certainly most necessary that the heart of
him that sets upon this Duty, be taken up with the consideration of the Honor
and Majesty of him, who will be sanctified by all that draw near unto him, and
to carry that End through all our Prayers; lest while we repeat the words of
this Petition, we take the Name of God in vain, seemingly praying for the
Glorifying of that Name, which we at the same time dishonor; either for want
of a due consideration of his Majesty, or for want of making his Glory the Rule
and End of our Prayers. This first Petition therefore requires that the Heart
be duly affected with the Glory of that Name which it invokes, and duly acted
and directed to that Glory; and that this Petition be drawn through all the
rest of our Requests.

These ensuing Considerations therefore arise from the placing of this Petition
first in this Prayer:

1. As thou prayest that his Name be hallowed, so in all thy Request labor to
Sanctify the Lord in thy Heart; Sanctify him in his Greatness and Majesty
with honorable and reverent thoughts of him in thy Heart; with an aweful and
humble carriage both of thy inward and outward man, as in the presence of the
Great and Glorious King of Heaven and Earth: Sanctify him in his Authority and
Sovereignty, by calling upon him in Obedience to his Command and Will, who has
Commanded it; by acknowledgment of thy dependence upon him: Sanctify him in
his Power and All-sufficiencie, by casting thy self upon him, who is Mighty to
Save, and to fulfill thy most Extensive and Large Requests: Sanctify him in his
Goodness and Mercy, which is infinite more large to pardon thy Sins; to supply
thy Wants, and to fill thee with all good Things, than thy Necessities or the
widest compass of thy Soul can be to ask: Sanctify him in his Truth and
Faithfulness, by a recumbence and resting upon his Promises, that no one thing
shall fail of all the good things that he has spoken, that no man shall seek
his Face in vain: that he that has said, Whatsoever thou shall ask in his
Son's Name he will give it; that has granted us access unto him upon the
purchase of his Son's Blood, will in no sort reject those Requests which he
himself has Commanded thee to make.

2. As thou prayest in the first place, that his Name may be sanctified, so let
that be the End of all thy Requests. Be sure thou ask not any thing which may
not be suitable to that End, much less contrary to it. And in what thou ask
agreeable to that End, let it be likewise for that End. Ask not thy daily Bread
for thy Lusts, but that thou may Glorify him by it, and for it. Ask not
Pardon for thy Sin barely for thy ease from Punishment, much less to make room
for new Offenses, but that thereby his Mercy and Truth may be magnified, and
his Creature restored to a condition actively to serve him and glorify him.
The End is first in intention, and is it that draws out all the Actions, and
orders and directs them to that End; and every Action tastes and relisheth of
that End: Since therefore the Sanctifying of the Name of God is, or should be
thy chief End, and therefore is first in thy Requests, Let all thy Requests and
Prayers be primarily and chiefly directed to this; that is, or should be thy
chiefest End.

3. As the Glory of God should be the chief of thy desires, so consequently
must it be the Measure of them. That which is the chiefest End must control and
overruled all other subordinate Ends, if they come in competition with it. For
as it is of greatest value, so it is of greatest force. Whatsoever therefore
thou ask, let it be still with subordination to the Glory of God; and be
rather contented to be disappointed in thy other inferior Ends, than that this
should in the least degree be disappointed: Only know, and rest assured of this
truth, that such is the great Goodness and Wisdom of God, that he has placed
all those Requests, which are of absolute necessity, to be granted thee, in
such an order, and path, that the granting of them always consists with his
Glory, and whilst thou seek them, thou can not miss of glorifying him;
and therefore thou may be sure the making of his Glory the measure of thy
Request, shall never disappoint thee in them: such as are the pardoning thy
sins, the delivering thee from being finally overcome with spiritual Evil: but
thy other requests for temporal Benefits or Deliverances, or the particular
Circumstances of those other, as the manifestation or assurance of Pardon, the
degrees of spiritual Blessings, or the seasons of granting them, these may not
always lie in the Road-way of his Glory. Be content in these to wait upon him,
and let them still be asked with subordination to this great End; but be
assured that by preferring his Glory as thy chief End, and subjecting the
fulfilling of thy Request to the Glory of God, thou shall be no loser in the
end. Never any man was a loser, nor ever shall be, that principally intends the
Glory of God, though to the disappointment of his own particular Ends. Thou
have done thy duty in asking, and in asking with this restriction, if it tend
most for the Glory of God. And thou have done thy Duty in being contented and
rejoicing that thy very request is disappointed, if God receive Glory thereby:
for thou have that which thou did in the first place desire; and had thy
particular Request been granted, and the Glory of thy Maker suffered thereby,
thou had been disappointed in this first and great Petition, Sanctified be
thy Name; which thou have carried along with thee as the qualification of all
the rest of thy Requests, and as that which thou have as it were prayed over
again in every other Petition thou have made. Assure thy self, if thou can
take delight in the Glory of God, though to thy own particular damage, God will
more abundantly recompense thy seeking of his Glory, than that very Petition
which is denied could have done, if granted. Thou servest a Bountiful Master,
that will surely recompense thy Love of his Glory above thy own particular
advantage. And thou servest a Wise Master, that will recompense thee in such a
kind, or at such a season, as shall be more suitable, and more comfortable, than
if thou had been thy own carver. And this thou shall clearly and sensibly
find, that which thou did in the first place ask, is granted in kind, viz.
the Honor of God; and that which thou did ask for thy self, though denied
in kind, is the more granted in value, thy own particular benefit. Our Savior
prayed that that bitter Cup of death might pass from him, yet with submission
to the Will and Glory of God, Matthew. 26.39. yet his Soul must be made an
offering for sin; and it was so. The Glory and the Truth of God required it:
yet he was heard in that he feared, Heb. 5.7. he suffers him to dye, but
raises him from death; and he saw of the travail of his Soul, and was
satisfied, Isa. 53.11. Thou prayest for deliverance from any affliction, from a
Disease, from Poverty, for knowledge, or Assurance in such a degree. It may be
it will not be so much for the Glory of God to grant it, or to grant it yet, as
for the present to deny it. First therefore pray, Thy Name be hallowed, and
though I am for the present denied, it is enough; I am abundantly answered, if
God be glorified, though I be denied. Thou shall find that none that waits upon
him shall be ashamed, if he grant thee not deliverance, he will give thee
sufficient Grace? if he deny thy recovery, he will give thee patience; if he
deny thee Riches, he will give thee Contentedness: If he deny thee that measure
of Grace, he will grant thee Humility: If he deny thee that degree of
Assurance, he will give thee Dependence. So that though thou walk in darkness
for a while, and have no light, yet thou shall trust in the Name of the Lord,
and stay upon thy God, Isa. 50.10. such is the Goodness of God, that while we
seek his Glory in the first place, and other things with subordination to it,
our other request shall be granted either in kind, or compensation.

Thy Kingdom Come.
The Kingdom of God has several acceptations:

1. His Universal Kingdom. The Kingdom of his Providence, which extends to
all the Actions and Events of all his Creatures, Mat. 10.39. Luke 12.6.
even to the falling of a Sparrow. Psalm. 103.19. The Lord has prepared his
Throne in Heaven; his Kingdom rules over all. Psalm. 66.7. He rules by his
Power for ever, his Eyes behold the Nations. And this he does by planting
originally in his Creatures their several Laws or Rules, by which they move; by
a derivation of a continual Influence whereby they are supported and preserved
in their several Motions, Operations, and Beings, which if he should withdraw
but one Moment, all things would return unto their Nothing; by correcting and
overruling of all things, sometimes contrary to their Nature, to show his
freedom and Sovereignty; but always by the mingling and interweaving of the
Actions and Motions of one Creature with another; by which conjunctures, though
to us accidental, he brings about most Wise and various Events according to his
own Counsel: So that while Natural Agents move necessarily according to their
Natures, Voluntary Agents move freely according to their liberty. Contingent
Agents move and are moved contingently; yet every one of them apart, and all of
them together, are guided and managed to the most infallible fulfilling of his
most wise and free Counsel. And by this Kingdom all things in the World, though
to us seemingly casual and confused, are led to Ends, and by Means, which they
themselves neither see nor intend. But the same is most admirably Evinced and
Discovered in the Sacred History; wherein we see how his determinate and
positive Counsels are most infallibly; and yet most strangely brought about,
through diverse varieties of Actions and Events, seemingly most casual,
sometimes expressly contrary, but always besides the Minds, Intentions, or
Designs of the Instruments and Means, as is evident among diverse others, so
especially in these, viz. that Counsel of God, Genesis 15.13. and the strange
conjunctures that were used to effect it, that happened from the dislike that
grew between Joseph and his Brethren, till the going of Jacob into Egypt, and
the Prophecy of Genesis 15.16. And the strange varieties that were used to fulfill
it, from the time that the Egyptian King grew jealous of them till their coming
into Canaan: That ever to be admired Connsel and Promise of God of sending
Christ, and his suffering for Mankind, first manifested in Paradise, Genesis 3.15.
And all the several particular Predictions of him and concerning him, and the
most wonderful Connection of Millions of Events, many of them seemingly
inconsiderable, all of them seemingly casual through the whole series of 4000
years led on to the fulfilling of it, even from the sin of Adam till the death
of Christ, and the Revelation of that Mercy, for the sake of which the World
was created. To these may be added the Counsels and Prophesies of the Rejection
of the Jews, the desolation of the Temple, the Conversion of the Gentiles, for
the most certain fulfilling whereof, it is most conspicuous, that all the
Conjunctures of Natural, Voluntary; casual Agents and Events were most
infallibly and certainly managed by the most powerful hand of God. And this
Kingdom is not that which is principally intended in this Petition; for this
Kingdom has been, and is come, Ever since the Creation; only it should be our
desire, that the true and wise knowledge and observation of this Kingdom may
enter into the hearts of all men, that thereby we may admire and adore his
Wisdom and Power in the governing and disposing of all things; that we may
depend upon his All Sufficiency, submit unto the Dispensations of this
Government, attribute all the Successes, Events and Occurrences in the World to
his Justice, Power and Providence.

2. His Kingdom over his Reasonable Creatures, Men and Angels, which though
they are under the general Kingdom of his Providence in the consideration above
mentioned, yet they are under a more especial Kingdom then other Creatures. To
these he has given Understanding and Will, and so they are capable not only of
a subjection to the Will of his Counsel, as they are Creatures; but of an
Active Obedience to the Will of his Command, [as they are reasonable Creatures]
and so are subjects of his Justice in Rewards and Punishments, as well as of
his Power. And in reference to this Kingdom it is said, Psalm. 89.14. Justice
and Judgment are the habitation of his Throne. And Psalm. 45.6. The Seepter of
his Kingdom is a right Scepter. Now the Administration of this Kingdom
consists especially in these things: 1. In giving the Children of Men a Law
to be their Rule. 2. In dispensing Rewards and Punishments according to the
obedience or disobedience of this Law. 3. In Protection.

1. As touching the Law given to Man: In the first Creation of Man he did
acquaint Man with his Will and Mind, and surely by some special Manifestation
of it, did reveal that Law unto him which should be a Rule of Righteousness to
him and all his posterity. And as he gave to all things propensions,
inclinations, and motions suitable to the several degrees of their beings, so
to Man he gave a Law or Rule suitable to his Nature, and by a Manifestation
convenient for the condition of his Nature. And though Man by his Fall
introduced that disorder and disconformity to that Law, whereby he became
unable to keep it, yet many of those Principles of Righteousness, which God had
manifested unto him, he retained in his knowledge, and traduced to his
posterity. And these as they grew corrupted by the corruption of our Nature,
and forgotten, so he did re-imprint them upon men by the several Acts of his
Providence: Sometimes by new publication of his Law unto some persons, which
was by that means traduced over to diverse others: thus the Law given to Noah,
the Law given to the Jews, was questionless propagated and derived over to
others by tradition and relation: Sometimes by inlightning and exciting men of
Eminence, as diverse of the Heathen Lawgivers, who were Eminent in their
generations: but most ordinarily and universally sending down into the
Consciences of men some discoveries of his Will, and inclinations to acknowledge
them, and to obey them. Romans 2.15. a Law written in their Hearts, their
Consciences also bearing witness. So that there can scarcely be found any time
or person wherein God's Providence did not by some of these ways convey, at
least some Directions of Righteousness, which should be the Rule, by which they
should live, and by which they should be judged. So that they that have sinned
without the Law, should perish without the Law; and they that have sinned in
the Law, should be judged by the Law, Romans 2.12. that is, Somewhat of the Will
of God touching Righteousness is derived to all men, though to some more, to
some less; to some by a more clear Dispensation; to some by a more obscure
Dispensation: yet such is the Exact Justice of God, that though he might Judge
all Mankind according to the Exactest Rule of his Law given to Man even in his
Innocence, yet, that Every Mouth may be stopped, he will Judge them according
to so much of his Law, as he has communicated to them. He will not Judge the
Heathen that never heard of the Law of God so clearly published to the Jews,
by that Law; but by that manifestation or conviction of Righteousness that he
has. Thus if he sin he shall be condemned without the Law, that is, without
calling in any other Law to Judge him by, then that Law which has been in some
measure declared unto him.

2. As the Administration of this Kingdom over men is by giving them a Law, so
there is likewise an Execution of that Law by Rewards of Obedience, and by
Punishments of Disobedience. And this God published in the infancy of the
World; Genesis 4.7. If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou
do not well, sin lies at the door. Psalm. 62.12. Thou rendrest to every man
according to his works. Disobedience to this Law of God obliges to Punishment
upon a double ground: 1. As a natural and a Just consequence of an unjust
violation of a Just Duty, in as much as every Creature owes an infinite
subjection and obedience to the Sovereign Commands of him that gives it Being.
2. As a consequence of that Sanction, that is expressly annexed to the Law so
given: In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall die the death. Obedience
on the other side is followed with a Reward, not out of a natural consequent,
or a proportion between the Obedience and the Reward; for every Creature owes
obedience to God, though there were no reward at all; we have therein done but
our Duty, and God cannot be a debtor to the best of his Creatures, for their
best works. Job 35.7. If thou be righteous what give thou him? but out of the
Free Goodness and Bounty of our Lawgiver, who is pleased to make himself a
debtor to his Creatures obedience, by his Free Promise of a Reward, and
annexing of it to the Obedience of this Law, Psalm. 62.12. Also to thee, O Lord,
belongs Mercy, for thou renderest to every man according to his works; As if
he should have said; O Lord, all thy Creatures owe an universal Subjection and
Obedience to thy Command, and when they have done what thou command, they
pay but the just tribute unto Thee for their Being; and therefore when they
have done all that thou requirest, they must sit down and say, We are
unprofitable servants, we have done but what was our duty, and cannot challenge
any reward at thy hands. They owe thee more for their Being, that thou have
already given them, than all their service and obedience can amount unto. It is
thy Mercy, not thy Justice, that has annexed any further Reward to that Duty,
which we owe unto thee. All the challenge that thy Creature can make to any
Reward of his choicest Obedience, is still founded upon thy Mercy, who (though
we are in all this but unprofitable Servants) art pleased to be to us a
Bountiful Master, in giving that Reward to the obedience of thy Creature, which
only thine Own Free Goodness did at first freely promise. Even so Lord, because
Mercy pleases thee.

3. In his most Wise and Special Providing for them, Disposing of them, and
Protecting of them. The General Providence of God reaches every Creature; but,
if that Infinite Wisdom and Power can admit of any degrees in the way of its
execution, it is more eminently, at least acted, in his Kingdom over his
reasonable Creatures: Luke 12.7. Fear not, ye are of more value than many
Sparrows. Matthew. 6.30. Shall he not much more cloth you? And this Special
Dispensation of this Kingdom is seen in more especially disposing and ordering
of the ways and events of Particular men: 2 Pet. 1.11. Prove. 20.24. Man's
goings are of the Lord. How can a man then understand his own way? of Societies
or Companies of Men. Acts 17.26. has determined the times before appointed,
and the bounds of their habitations: in protecting them against the power and
malice of Evil Angels, restraining them from those Evils, that their malice and
natural power is able and willing to Effect, Job 1.12.

3. His Kingdom over his Church: and this in a more special manner is the
Kingdom of God. And herein we consider:

1. The King of this Kingdom: God by an Eternal Decree has appointed his Son,
our Lord Jesus Christ, the King of this Kingdom, Psalm 26.7. I have set my King
upon my holy Hill. Psalm 110.2. Rule thou in the midst of thine Enemies. And
hence it is called frequently the Kingdom of Christ: Colos. 1.13. the Kingdom
of his dear Son. 1 Pet. 2.11. the Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ; and sometime the Kingdom of Christ, and of God, Ephesians. 5.5. The
Kingdom of Christ in the immediate administration of it, and the Kingdom of
God, who has delegated and substituted him unto this administration, Angels,
and Authorities, and Powers, being made subject unto him, 1 Pet. 3.22. first
the Kingdom of Christ, till he shall have Judged all men; and then the Kingdom
of the Father: when he shall deliver up the Kingdom to his Father, that God may
be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.24, 28. And the Regal Office of Christ over his Church
principally respects these two things: 1. In conquering to himself a people.
The whole World was by Sin reduced under a subjection to an Usurper, the Prince
of the power of the air, the spirit that works in the children of
disobedience. And this Kingdom of his was a Kingdom of darkness, Colos. 1.13.
Who has delivered us from the power of darkness. And the Subjects of this
Kingdom were a People of darkness: Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were sometimes darkness. And
by the advantage of this darkness, this Prince of darkness governed the World
as he pleased; for they knew not whither they went: and by and from this
darkness, this Prince led them into another Continent, or rather condition of
his Kingdom, a Kingdom of Sin; and Sin, as the Viceroy of this Prince of
darkness, did reign in the World, and had dominion over it, Romans 6.12, 14. and
by Sin he led his Subjects into another Region of his Kingdom, into the Kingdom
of death: Sin reigned unto death, Romans 5.21. and then death reigned, Romans 5.14.
Now as God was pleased, by a Mighty hand, to go and take him a Nation from the
midst of another Nation, Deuteronomy. 4.34. So Christ redeems him a People out of
every Tongue and Kindred, and People and Nation, Revel. 6.9. out of the midst
of his Enemies. He came to destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. binds
this strong man that kept the house, and rescues his prisoners from him.

1. He came a Light into the World, and dispelled and scattered that darkness,
which was the principal Engine whereby the Prince of this world did rule. John
1.5. The Light shined into darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. And
at the very dawning of this Light into the World, the Prince of darkness falls
from Heaven like Lightning, Luke 10.18. And this was that, whereby the Prince
of this world was Judged; that is, all his deceits and methods, and wiles, and
abuses of Mankind, were discovered and detected, John 18.11. And by this Light
we are translated from the power of darkness into the Kingdom of his Son,
Colos. 1.13. are become partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light,
Col. 1.12. are become light, and children of the light, Ephesians. 5.8.

And as he came with Light to take away that Egyptian darkness, which
overspread the World, Isa. 9.1. So 2. he came with a Treasury of Merit to
expiate the guilt, and a Treasury of Righteousness to cover the stain, and take
away the power of sin; to re-imprint the Image of God, that was defaced by sin;
to rescue the heart from the love of sin, and consequently from the power of
sin; to transmit into the Soul new Principles, new Affections, new Wills. Psalm
110.3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power. As he came with
Light to rectify the Understanding, so he came with Righteousness to rectify
the Will: The strength of a King rests in the Love and Will of his People: when
Christ conquers the Will from the Love and Submission to sin, he conquers Man
from the Dominion and Kingdom of sin.

3. And as thus by Light he conquered the Kingdom of Darkness, and by
Righteousness the Kingdom of Sin; so he comes with Life also, and conquers us
from the Kingdom of Death. When our Savior died, he entered into the Chambers
of Death, and conquered this King of Terrors; took away the malignity and sting
of it by taking away Sin, the sting of Death; healed these bitter waters by his
own passing through them, and by his Resurrection triumphed over the power of
death for us, by the virtue of that Resurrection, delivering our Souls from the
second death, and our Bodies from the first death, and giving us a most
infallible assurance of a final victory over death, by an assured and blessed
Resurrection. Thus Death is swallowed up in Victory, 1 Cor. 15.54.

2. And as Christ has purchased him a People by Victory, so his Regal Office
is considerable in the Government of this people, that he has so acquired. He
has given them a Law to Live by, the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus, which makes them free from the Law of sin and of death, Romans 8.2. The
Law of God vindicated from the false glosses, which the corruption of men had
in succession of time put upon it; a Law sweetened and strengthened and actuated
by the Love of God wrought in the Soul; a Law, though of the highest Perfection
and Purity, yet, accompanied with the Grace and Assistance of Christ, to Enable
us to perform it in some measure; and accompanied with the Merits of Christ to
pardon, and the Righteousness of Christ to cover our defects in our performance
of it. He has given them a new heart, and this Law of his written in this
heart: He has given them of his own Spirit, a Spirit of Life to Quicken them,
and of Power to Enable them to Obey. And because, notwithstanding this conquest
of Christ of a People to himself, they are still beset with Enemies, that would
reduce them to their former bondage, he watches over them, and in them, by his
Grace, wasting and weakening and resisting their corruptions by new supplies and
influences from him; quickening their hearts by renewed derivations of Life and
Spirit from him, which otherwise would sink and die under the weight of their
own Earth; encountering Temptations, that, like Foggs and Vapors, arise out of
our own flesh; or, like storms or snares, are raised or placed by the Devil
against us; either by diverting them, or by giving sufficient Grace to oppose
them. These and the like administrations does our Savior use, which though
they are secret and not easily discerned by us, and though they are ordered
without any noise or appearance, yet they are works of greater Power, and of
greater Concernment, and of equal reality, with all the visible administrations
of things in this world, which are more obvious to our sense, and are the
effects of that invisible Government of Christ, and of that Promise of his,
Behold I am with you always, even unto the end of the World, Matthew. 28.20. This
is that Kingdom of God within them, Luke 17.21. consisting in Righteousness,
Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. casting down Imaginations, and
every high thing, that Exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into Captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5.

3. As in his Government, so his Regal Office is Evidenced in his Judgment. And
this Judgment of his, being one of the Acts or Administrations of this Kingdom,
is oftentimes called the Kingdom of God. His Judgment of Absolution and Reward
to his Subjects, and his Judgment of Condemnation and Destruction to the Rebels
and Enemies of his Kingdom.

2. And as we have the consideration of the King of this Kingdom, and
consequently of his Subjects, Revel. 15.3. Just and true are thy ways, thou
King of Saints: So the various Administrations of this Kingdom are frequently
called the Kingdom of God, and the Mysteries of the Kingdom, Matthew. 13.11,
24, 31, 44, 45, 47. Matthew. 25.1, 14, etc. And as the Administrations of this
Kingdom are often called the Kingdom, so are the Instruments of this
administration.

1. The Word, or Gospel of the Kingdom, which must be preached through the
whole World, Matt. 24.14. and is therefore committed to the ministration of an
Angel to dispense it to all Nations, Revel. 14.6. That great Engine which though
seemingly weak, and dispensed by weak and despicable Men, God has chosen to
confound the things that are mighty, 1 Cor. 1.27. to pull down strong holds, 2
Cor. 10.4. to gather his Elect, for the perfecting of the body of Christ, the
fullness of him that fills all in all; and therefore this publication of the
Gospel is oftentimes called the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 3.2. The Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand. Luke 10.9. The Kingdom of God is come nigh unto you, and if
a Man consider the Mighty and Strange Effects that this everlasting Gospel has
had in the World for these many Hundred Years, notwithstanding the many
disadvantages upon which it entered and has continued in the World, we may well
say that it is the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. the Rod of
his strength sent out of Sion, Psalm. 110.2. that the Message of a Crucified
Christ, published by poor despised men, to a World that never saw him, or if
they did, saw no beauty or comeliness in him; to a World full of prejudicies
against him, prepossessed with an opinion of their own Wisdom, with Religions
extremely opposite, traduced to them from their Ancestors, of which Men are
naturally tenacious: that this Message of Christ, not with a promise of Glory
or Riches in this World, but with a plain prediction of poverty, scorns,
persecutions and Death to those that entertain it, and with a promise of future
Life that they never saw, nor can see till they see this no more, should
conquer Millions of Souls to the profession and Love of Christ, and to an
austere, self-denying, despised Life here, does evidence and convince that
there is the strength and Wisdom of God that is engaged in this wonderful, yet
most positively predicted conquest of the World.

2. The work of the Spirit of God, preparing and pre-disposing the Heart to the
receiving of the Gospel of the Kingdom; convincing the Heart of that Sin and
that Death, which has overspread the whole race of Mankind, and of the Truth
and Efficacy and sufficiency of that Redemption which came by Christ, and is
published in that Word; striving and contending with, and mastering and
overruling the opposition of the will against it; Calming and quieting and
rectifying the distempers and disorders and misplacings of our affections;
opposing and subduing the lusts of our sensual appetite; inlightning and
quickening and cleansing the conscience, and bringing it about to take part with
God and the actings of this Spirit upon our Souls; mingling the word of the
Gospel, conveyed into the Heart, with a secret and powerful Energy, whereby it
becomes a Seed of Life in the Heart growing unto Eternal Life. And thus, as at
first the Motion of the Spirit of God upon the face of the waters, and the
powerful word of Command produced the several Creatures; so by the like Motion
of the Spirit upon the Heart, and the powerful call of the Word of Christ by
the publication of the Gospel, is wrought this Second Creation of the new
Creature, Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou that sleep, stand up from the Dead, and
Christ shall give thee life.

And these two great Instruments produce in the Heart two active or operative
Principles, which after they are produced are not only an Effect of the work of
God, but also become instrumental for the increase of it; viz. Faith and Love:
Faith, whereby we receive this Message of Salvation, and entertain it, and rest
upon it; and Love, whereby, out of the apprehension of this great Love of God
to us, we love him again; we love him because he loved us First. And this Love
of God ingageth the Soul to a Sincere Obedience to the Will of God. The Misery,
from which we are redeemed, is so great; the Price, by which we are redeemed,
so invaluable; the Glory and Blessedness, to which we are redeemed, so full;
and all these appearing so to the Soul by Faith, that the Soul can think
nothing too much to return to that God, that has so freely done so much for
it. Thus Faith works by Love. And this is that Kingdom of God, that is within
us, Luke 17.20. the subjection of the whole Soul to the Scepter and Rule of
Christ. If he command Purity of Life, forsaking of all things, denying our
selves, crucifying our Lusts, laying down our Lives, the Soul is tutored to
that subjection unto the Will of Christ, that it cheerfully obeys him in this,
and whatever he commands. This is that Kingdom of God, Romans 14.17. consisting
in Righteousness, a full Conformity of the Soul to the Will of God, the only
and absolute Rule of Righteousness; Peace, upon the sense and belief of
reconciliation with God, through him that is our Peace; and Joy in the Holy
Ghost, upon the apprehension of the Protection and Love of Christ, our King,
and that Glory which he has most assuredly prepared for all his Subjects.

3. We have the Degrees of the Manifestation of this Kingdom, Here and
Hereafter: the Kingdom of Grace, and the Kingdom of Glory; both making but one
Kingdom of God under different degrees of manifestation. God by his Word and
Spirit casts into the Soul a Seed of Life, like that grain of Mustard Seed,
whereunto the Kingdom of Heaven is resembled, Matt. 13. And this seed of Life
abides in the Heart, 1 John 3.9. And there it quickens, and fashions, and
moulds the Heart to the Image of God: it opposes and struggleth against Lusts
and Temptations, which labor to stifle and to kill this Seed of Life; and,
like the leaven that was hid in the 3 measures of Meal, Mat. 13.33. It does by
degrees, assimulate the whole inward Man to this living principle, and conforms
the Life unto it. Now though this principle of Life is thus operative, yet in
respect of the outward view it is a hidden Life. The External appearance of
this Life, is reserved till Christ, who is our Life, shall appear; and then
shall that hidden Life be revealed, Colos. 3.4. Behold, now we are the Sons of
God. 1 John 3.2. But it does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that
when he shall appear, we shall be like him. By this seed of Grace, sown in our
Hearts, we become the Sons of God; and of this Sonship we have a secret
Evidence in our own Souls; but there shall be a fuller Manifestation of it when
Christ, who is our Life, shall appear. So then, the Kingdom of Grace and of
Glory are the same Kingdom, but under a different manifestation: that, a
concealed Kingdom, a seed in the ground; this, the Manifestation of that
Kingdom, a seed in the Tree.

To conclude; When thou prayest, Thy Kingdom come, let thy Soul enlarge it self
in these, or the like desires.

O Lord, I know thou art King of Heaven and Earth; and the least of all thy
Creatures, in their most seemingly Casual and inconsiderable events and
motions, are under thy most certain and powerful Providence. Yet such is our
blindness, and so mysterious are the ways of thy Providence, that sometimes we
are at a loss, and desire with thy Prophet Jer. 12.1. to expostulate with thee
touching thy Judgments. If it stand with thy Glory and Will, I beseech thee,
let all the events and occurrences of the World appear to be under thy
Administration and Government; that all may see thy Wisdom, and thy Power, and
thy Justice, and thy Goodness in all the passages of it; and that all men may
be convinced, that thou, the most High, rulest in the Kingdoms of Men, and that
all thy Works are Truth, and thy ways are Judgment, and those that walk in
pride thou art able to abase, Dan. 4.32, 37. That they may all acknowledge he
is a God that Judges in the Earth, Psalm. 58.11. And because thou have a more
peculiar Kingdom, even those that thou have given unto thy Son, let that
Kingdom of thine come; do thou send out thy Spirit and thy Word into the World,
and subdue the Hearts of all People to the Belief and Obedience of the Gospel
of Christ, that all the Kingdoms of the World may be the Kingdoms of God and of
Christ. Bring in the Jews, and the fullness of the Gentiles, that there may be
one Fold and one Shepherd; and let thy Son ride on victoriously, conquering and
to conquer; and preserve thy Flock from the mischiefs that are from without,
Oppression and Persecution; and from those that are from within, Divisions and
Heresies. Let them walk as becomes the Subjects of the Prince of Peace, Purity
and Truth, in Unity, Holiness and Truth, that they may appear to be the People
of thy Holiness. Rule every Member thereof by thy Grace; preserve them from
their Enemies within them, Lusts and Defections; from their Enemies without
them, the Incursions of Satan. Make have to fulfill the number of thine Elect;
and when thy Kingdom of Grace is consummate, then let thy Kingdom of Glory
come, the day of the manifestation of thy Righteous Judgment, when the Subjects
of thy Kingdom shall be delivered from all death and sorrow, and shall inherit
that Kingdom, which thou have prepared for and from all Eternity. And keep all
our hearts looking for and hasting unto thy coming, passing our time here in
all Holy Conversation and Godliness, 2 Pet. 3.11. that so, when our Lord
comes, he may find us so doing; and then come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.
Though the Will of God be one indivisible Act, yet in regard of the
Manifestation of it to us, it comes under a double apprehension: 1. The Will of
his Counsel. 2. The Will of his Commands. This is that which he wills to be
done by his Creature: The other is that he wills shall be done upon his
Creature.

1. The Will of his Counsel; whereby he has from all Eternity appointed and
ordered most Wisely, and Infallibly, and Irresistibly all the Acts and Events
of all his Creatures; so that those things that seem to us most naturally or
most freely to move, are subservient in all their actings to this most free and
eternal Counsel of his; and all those Occurences which seem to us most
inconsiderable or contingent, are preordained by the same most Infallible
Counsel, and make the Instruments of bringing about the greatest Concernments
in the world. Isa. 43.14. I will work, and who shall let it? Isa. 14.24. The
Lord of hosts has sworn, saying, Surely as I have thought, so shall it come to
pass; and as I have purposed, it shall stand. Isa. 14.27. For the Lord of hosts
has purposed, and who shall disannul it? and his hand is stretched out, and
who shall turn it back? Isa. 46.9, 10. I am God, and there is none like me,
declaring the End from the Beginning, and from ancient times the things that
are not yet done, saying, My Counsel shall stand, and I will do all my
pleasure. Insomuch that those various, and instable, and free motions of the
Will and Mind of Man, which seem to come under no Rule nor Government but of
himself, are most Exactly ordered to the bringing to pass the Purposes of God.
Prove. 19.21. There are many devices in the heart of man, nevertheless the
Counsel of the Lord that shall stand. Prove. 20.24. Man's goings are of the
Lord, how can a man then understand his own way? Jer. 10.23. O Lord, I know
that the way of man is not in himself; it is not in a man that walks to
direct his steps. And herein we may observe the most deep and unsearchable
Wisdom, Power, and Purity of God, that whiles Man works freely, yet therein
God works thereby powerfully; and while Man works Sinfully, yet God works
thereby Purely and Justly. The freedom of the Will of Man is not controled by
the infallibility of the Counsel of God, nor can interrupt or disappoint it:
and the sinfulness of the will and ways of man is not justified by the
Infallibility and Purity of the Counsel of God, nor does it pollute it. This is
admirably set forth in the actings of those two most Powerful Monarchs; the
Assyrian, Isa. 10.5, 6, 7. O Assyrian, the Rod of mine anger, and the Staff in
their hand is my indignation. I will send him against an hypocritical Nation,
etc. Howbeit he means not so. The Assyrian King did what he did most freely,
most presumptuously and proudly, and arrogantly, attributing his Successes to
his own Power; had no thought of Justice to punish the defections of Judah, or
vindicating the breach of their Covenant with God, but to satisfy his own
Covetousness and Ambition, Verse. 13. For he says, By the strength of mine hand
have I done this, and by my Wisdom, etc. Little thinking that the Wrath and
Justice of God was the Staff in his Hand, the Strength of his Power. But in all
this God does most wisely and justly manage the Distempers of a proud,
ambitious, injurious and covetous King, to the fulfilling of the most Wise and
Just Counsels of his own Will, without staining any part there of with the
Vices of that person, by which they were acted; but punishing those Vices in
the Instrument which were instrumental in the fulfilling of his Counsel. Verse.
12. Wherefore when I have performed my whole Will upon Sion and upon Jerusalem,
I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the King of Assyria, and the
glory of his high looks. And as thus in the Assyrian, so after in the Persian
Monarch, Isa. 45.1. Thus says the Lord to his Anointed, to Cyrus, whose right
hand I have holden to subdue Nations before him. Now this Will of Gods Counsel
is for the most part a secret Will till it be fulfilling. Psalm. 77.19. Thy way,
O Lord, is in the Sea, and thy footsteps are not known. Though sometimes, for
the vindicating of his own Power, and convincing men that he governs all
things according to the Counsel of his Will, he is pleased to proclaim it in
Prophecies and Predictions, the great and undeniable Evidences of his Eternal
Counsel and Government. Isa. 41.23. Show the things that are to come, that we
may know ye are gods. Isa. 48.3, 5. Isa. 42.9. Isa. 45.21. Who has declared
this from ancient time? Who has told it from that time, have not I the Lord?

2. The Will of his Commands. This is the Rule of our Actions, Isa. 59.21. My
words, which I have put into thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor
out of the mouth of thy seed, etc. Deuteronomy. 30.14. The word is very nigh unto
thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may do it. Micha, 6.9. He
has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee,
but to do justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? The Will
of Gods Counsel is Secret, but the Will of his Command is Revealed unto us in
these three great Directions of our Lives:

1. The Word of Conscience, the Law written in the heart, or natural
Conscience, Romans 2.14, 15. So much of his Will is by some means of Providence
discovered even to a Natural Conscience, as leaves a man unexcusable.

2. The Word of the Spirit of God speaking either secretly in the heart, or by
some occurrence or dispensation of Providence, thou shall hear a voice behind
thee, saying, This is the way, walk in it, Isa. 30.21.

3. The Word of both Testaments. The Natural Conscience is corrupted, and many
times does not his duty; the word of the Spirit of God is not so easily
discerned by our fleshly Nature, and many times we mistake the voice of our own
spirit for the Spirit of God: he has therefore in his infinite Wisdom and
Mercy given us a standing Rule, the Rule of his written Word, obvious to our
sense; and whatever other dictates there shall be, we are sure not to Err in
following it: Isa. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony: for if they walk not
according to that Rule, it is because there is no Light in them. This is to be
Light to our Steps, and the Lanthorn to our Feet, Psalm. 119.105. 2 Pet. 1.19. a
more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto we are to take heed as to a light that
shines in a dark place.

In this Petition therefore we desire two things, 1. That his Will may be done.
2. That it may be done here as it is done in Heaven. 1. In respect of the Will
of his Counsel: What thou have willed in Heaven, Let it be done on Earth.

1. Let the Will of thy Counsel be done. It is true, thy Counsels are secret
and unknown to me, but they are the Counsels of the most Wise and Just God, and
therefore certainly they are most Wise and Just Counsels, and therefore I will
be content therein to pray with an Implicit Faith; for Righteous art thou, O
Lord, in all thy ways, and Holy in all thy works. It is true, thy Counsels
shall stand, yet are not my Prayers impertinent; it is the Duty of thy Creature
to will what thou willest, and to pray thee to do what thou intendest to do;
that my will may not only Passively submit unto thy Will, but Actively to run
along with it.

2. Let me, with all contentedness and cheerfulness, resign up my will, and my
self, and my desires, unto thy Will, and bear a spirit conformable to my
Savior, who, when he depricated the worst of Evils, a bitter and a cursed
Death, yet he subscribed to thy will contrary to his own. Matt. 26.39. If it be
possible let this Cup pass from me, yet not as I will, but as thou will. I am
compassed about with dangers, with diseases, with wants, with reproaches, with
persecutions, and I come to thee, from whose hand they come, and to beg the
removal of them, and I am sure I am taking the fittest course to have them
removed, by suing to him, from whose hand they came; yet thy will be done; I
have done my duty in calling upon thy Name, but I will not offend thy
Sovereignty in prescribing unto thy Will: Thou art the God that have made me,
and therefore I owe a Universal Subjection unto thy Will: thou art a God of
Infinite Wisdom, and know best what is fittest to be done, and when thou art
a God of Infinite Mercy and Tenderness and Love unto all thy Creatures,
especially to those that seek unto thee in Christ, and do with as much Love
deny some of my requests, as thou grantest others, I will with all Patience and
Cheerfulness wait upon thee, and submit unto thy Will, both in what thou
inflictest, and in what thou denyest. 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord, Let him do
what seems him good. Job 1.21. The Lord gave, and the Lord takes away;
Blessed be the Name of the Lord. Thus I will hope, and quietly wait for the
Salvation of the Lord, putting my Mouth in the dust if so be there may be hope.
Lam. 3.26.

3. Let me, with all expectation and longing desire, wait for the fulfilling of
thy Prophesies and Predictions: This part of thy Secret Counsel thou have
revealed, that thy Truth and Wisdom may receive the Glory in it is
accomplishment; and that we thy Creatures look after it, and expect it. Thou
have declared that thy everlasting Gospel shall be preached to all Nations;
that the Kingdoms of the World shall be the Kingdoms of thy Son; that thou will
bring in the Jews and the fullness of the Gentiles; that thou will discover and
confound the Man of Sin; that thou will send thy Son in the Clouds to Judge the
World; These and the like parts of thy Counsels thou have published to the
World, be thou Glorified in the fulfilling of them. Thy Secret Counsels are
deep and mysterious, and when we see them in there fulfillings, yet they make us
to wonder and stagger, so that, though our duty teach us to acknowledge, that
thou art righteous when we plead with thee, yet we are apt with the Prophet to
Expostulate with thee touching thy Judgments, Jer. 12.1. As if things fell out
besides thy will, and in disappointment of thy Counsel. But in these
Manifestations of thy Counsels before they are fulfilled, we see and must
conclude, Dan. 4.17. That the most High rules in the Kingdom of Men, and
gives it to whomsoever he will, and sets up over it the basest of Men. Let
therefore this Will of thy Counsels revealed in the Prophecies and Predictions
of thy Word be fulfilled, that thou may receive the Glory of thy Power, and
of thy Wisdom, and of thy Truth in the fulfilling of them, and that every Man
may see and conclude that thou, whose Name is Jehovah, art the Most High over
all the Earth, Psalm. 83.18. And while I thus pray, my Prayers are not Idle, God
having often appointed that Prayers shall be the means to fulfill that, which
he has certainly promised, Ezekel, 36.37. Yet I will for this be inquired of
by the House of Israel.

4. Thou have another part of thy Counsel more precious and of greater
concernment to me then the former, which thou have also revealed, the Counsel
of thy Promises. When thou sentest thy Son out of thine own Bosom into the
World, thou did impart unto him this great and concerning part of thy
Counsel, and this he has imparted unto us; the promise of Pardon of our Sins
through his Blood; of Justification through his Righteousness; of thy Spirit
that should lead us into all truth; of his abiding with us unto the End of the
World; of conquering and subduing our Lusts and Temptations; of raising us up
at the last day, and giving us an Everlasting Kingdom that cannot be shaken.
These Promises, as thou have given to be the objects of our Faith, Hope, and
certain Expectation, Tit. 2.13. 2 Pet. 3.12. so are they the objects of our
desires, and consequently the subject of our Prayers, and therefore I will pray
with David, 1 Chronicles. 17.23. Therefore now Lord, Let the thing that thou have
spoken concerning thy Servants be established for Ever, and do as thou have
said.

And as thus the Will of Gods Counsel is the Subject of this Petition, so is
likewise the Will of his Command. And this falls under these Considerations:

1. As thou Willest in Heaven, so let it be done by us on Earth; and to that
purpose:

1. Let thy Will be discovered and made known unto us, and to all Creatures:
and in as much as none teaches like God, Let us be all taught of thee: Let thy
revealed Will in thy Word come unto us as light into darkness; and because our
Understandings are blind and sealed up, that they cannot receive this Light,
and our Hearts are perverse and will resist it, send down thy Spirit of Life
and Power to open our Understandings to receive it, to discern the Truth, and
Purity, and Perfection of it; open our Hearts to receive it in the Love of it,
and conquer that Cell of corruption and oppositions that lie there ready to
stifle it; mingle thy Word in our Hearts with Faith, that may purify our
Hearts, and make thy Word powerful to the subduing of all those strong holds
and oppositions, that stand out against it: thy Will in Heaven is a Perfect,
Pure, and Holy Will, send out such discoveries of thy Will, that we may know it
in the Spiritualness and Truth of it, vindicated from the false Glosses, that
the Corruptions and degenerations of the times or our own deceitful and false
Hearts are apt to put upon it: and that thy Will may be done on Earth as it is
in Heaven, let it be known on Earth as it is in Heaven.

2. Because the only true principle of Obedience is Love, shed abroad thy Love
in our Hearts: and because the sense of thy Love to us is the cause and ground
of our Love to thee, show us the greatness and fullness of thy Love to us in
Christ, and that will reflect acts of Love to thee again, and make us ready and
willing to obey thy Will, and exceeding thankful to thee that thou art pleased
to accept the sincere, though imperfect obedience of thy Creature.

3. And because the end of the manifestation of thy Love to Mankind in Christ
was to redeem us from all Iniquity, and to purify unto thy self a peculiar
People, zealous of good Works, Tit. 2.14. And in as much as our conformity to
thy Will, as it is our Perfection, so it is the Great and Just Tribute that we
owe unto thee for our Being, as Creatures, and much more for our Redemption as
redeemed, and purchased Creatures; Let all our Thoughts, Words and Works be
universally subject and obedient to thy Will revealed in thy Son, that we may
be Holy as thou art Holy in all manner of Conversation: purge our Hearts from
vain and unprofitable Thoughts, from sinful and polluted thoughts, from
Devilish and Atheistical thoughts; and let our thoughts be such as becomes the
presence of God, before whom they are all naked and legible, such as becomes
that Heart where Christ is pleased to make his residence; Pious, Charitable,
Pure, Chaste, Clean, Sober, Humble thoughts; fit to be attendants upon so
Heavenly a Guest: wash my Tongue from that fire of Hell that is naturally in
it: James 3.6. deliver it from blasphemous, Atheistical, calumniating,
uncharitable, false, vain, and unprofitable words; and let me use my Tongue as
one, whose words are all Registered, and that must give an account for every
idle word: Let my Speeches be seasoned with salt, glorifying thy Name, edifying
others, true, profitable, seasonable, serious, charitable, discreet; for by my
words I shall be justified, and by my words I shall be condemned. Deliver me
from all sinful, impure, unseemly, unjust Actions: in the first life of any
action or intention let me bring them to the Rule of thy Word, to the Rule of
my Conscience, to the Rule of thy Presence, and impartially measure them
thereby; and if they will not abide that Examination, or upon that Examination
want their due conformity; let me reject them without any more reasonings or
disputings. In all my actions relating immediately to thy Majesty, Let them be
warrantable, pious, sincere, reverent, humble; in all my actions relating to
others, let them be full of Justice, Charity, free from Revenge, disdain,
fullenness, measuring out impartially, as in the presence of God, the same
measure which I would desire to be done unto my self: in all my actions
relating to my self, let there be sobriety, temperance, moderation,
seasonableness. And let all this be done out of that only true principle of
obedience, Love to God, presented unto him upon that only ground of
acceptance, Jesus Christ; and seasoned with that acceptable grace of Humility.
If when I have done all that is enjoined, I am but an unprofitable Servant; how
unprofitable am I when I Infinitely fail of what I am Commanded.

And as I pray that the things that thou willest to be done in Heaven may be
done by us on Earth, so I desire that that Heavenly Will of thine may be done
on Earth as thy Will is done in Heaven by those Glorious and Pure Creatures,
that always behold thy Face; Perfectly, Universally, Speedily, Cheerfully,
Humbly.

1. Perfectly. The Angels do clearly discern and know the Will of God by a
double act: 1. On God's part, a Clear Emanation or Beam of the Mind of God
shining into their clear intellectual Nature, and conveying into them a perfect
discovery of the Mind and Will of God concerning them. 2. On their part, by a
clear Intuition of God, and beholding his Mind and Will in him concerning them;
the Wise God having fitted their Natures with such a measure of intuition of
him, whereby, though they cannot see all his Perfections, yet they are fitted
and enabled to see so much as is suitable to their Nature, conducible to the
fullness of that Perfection which they are capable of, and to the performance of
that active service which he requires of them. And as thus they perfectly know
His Will, so Their Wills are most purely inclined and moved to the obedience of
it; there is no mixture of impurity or resistance in their wills against the
Will of God; no mixture of Hypocrisy or base Self Ends: for their Pure Natures
are taken up with a fullness of Love of God, as large and comprehensive as their
Natures, and upon that principle they move in all their acts of obedience, and
they clearly see that their highest Perfection consists in the most Even and
Unbyassed Conformity to the Command of God, and so the more perfect their
Obedience is, the more absolute is their Perfection; they need no other motive
to obey him but this, that it is the most Perfect Command of the most Perfect,
and Wise, and Holy God. And as thus their Minds and Wills are fashioned and
fitted to a most perfect obedience, so they are endued with a Power from God,
exactly commensurate to an exact performance of his Will; whether it be in
their reflexed actions unto God, or whether it be in their instrumental actions
unto others. If God command an Angel to destroy an Host of the Assyrians, he
can dispatch 185000 of them in one night: if he command an Angel to deliver
Daniel out of the Lions Den, he can shut the Lions Mouth, that they shall be
rather his Guard, than his Executioners: Dan. 6.22. If he command an Angel to
deliver Peter out of the Prison, he can make his Chains fall off from him, like
the towe when it feels the fire, Acts 12.7. When he commands an Angel to
comfort his Son, though under a pressure and weight more heavy to his Soul than
the weight of the whole Earth, he can dart into the tender and vital parts of
the Soul such Comforts and Cordials, that can enable his humanity to bear that
burden, Luke 22.43. When he commands an Angel to attend the Resurrection of his
Son, he can at the same instant shake terror and amazement, and dissolution
into the Spirits of the Soldiers, and Comfort and Satisfaction, into the Souls
of those that expected his Resurrection, and cause that stone which the
Pharisees laid upon the Sepulcher, as a seal unto his Mortality, to start
aside, and give way to our Savior's Resurrection, Mat. 28.2, 3, 4. And little
do we know those wonderful Services, that these invisible Powers do in the
World, even for poor and weak Men, at the Command of their great Lord and
Sovereign, every hour in the day. And now, O Lord, it is true, that thy Will is
done in Heaven, by those thy glorious creatures, perfectly and exactly; but I
and all thy creatures upon Earth have in us a mixture of darkness, that we
cannot know thy Will; and a mixture of corruption, that resists the obedience
of thy Will; and a mixture of impotence, that we cannot perform that part of
thy Will, that we know and desire to obey; so that when we can at any time say
with the Apostle, To will is present with me, yet we must, with the same
Apostle say, that how to perform that good, we find not, Romans 7.18. Therefore I
cannot in this House of clay, hope to aspire to the full perfection of an
Angelical Obedience, nor to do thy Will on Earth, as it is done in Heaven; yet
there is an imperfect Perfection, which in Christ thou art pleased to accept
of, an Evangelical, though not an Angelical Perfection in our Obedience; a
Perfection of Integrity and Sincerity, free from Guile, base ends, or
Hypocrisy, a heart truly endeavoring to obey the voice of God in his Word;
and truly sorrowful for his defects and failings in that obedience: Thus the
heart of David, 1 King. 15.3. of Hezekiah, 2 King. 20.3. were perfect hearts,
the obedience enjoined by David to Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Serve him with a
perfect heart and willing mind: and this perfection of Obedience give unto thy
servants, that thy Will may be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven, Sincerely,
and Singly.

2. Which is a consequent of the former, Angelical Obedience is an Universal
Obedience: there is not any Command of God, not the meanest, but they perform
it, Psalm. 103.20. Bless the Lord ye his Angels, that excel in strength, that do
his Commandments, harkening unto the voice of his Word. For the same principle
of perfect Love to God, moves them to a willing obedience to every Command, as
well as any; and they find as much beauty in their obedience unto the Command
of God, when sent out to minister for the poor Members of the Son of God, Heb.
1.14. As when sent upon an employment, for the matter, more glorious. And, O
Lord, Let thy Will be thus done on Earth as it is in Heaven: let me have
respect to all thy Commandments, and let no sin be so much mine, so dear, so
natural, so suitable to my nature or condition, but that I may forsake it at thy
Command, and keep my self from my transgression; since it is the same God that
equally commands and forbids in all, and the same Love to God which is, or
should be, the principle and ground of all my Obedience, Jam. 2.10. Whosoever
shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty of all. A
heart that can observe some Commands, and yet dispense with it self in the
violation of others, obeys not for Love of God, but of himself.

3. Angelical Obedience is a Willing and Cheerful Obedience. Which still runs
upon the former reason; the principle of their obedience is perfect Love of
God; and Love is an active affection, as strong as death; so that they are glad
of any opportunity, to return the expressions of that Love, in a most hearty
and willing obedience, Mat. 18.10. Christ speaking of the Angels, says, They
always behold the Face of my Father, they watch and are attentive, and with
cheerfulness expect every Command of God. And thus also let thy Will be done on
Earth as it is in Heaven, that we may willingly and cheerfully perform thy
Will; glad that we thy poor creatures have any opportunity to do any service to
thee, though thou need it not, and thankful that thou art pleased to accept
of the obedience of thy creature.

4. Consequently an Angelical obedience is Speedy, Swift, Ready. They dispute
not the reason of the Command, nor delay not the performance of it: Like the
Centurion's servant, he says to one, go, and he goes, Luke 7.8. And Lord, as
thus thy Will is done in Heaven, so let it be done on Earth: when thou
command things that our flesh and blood have much ado to digest, would fain
be reasoning against, or at least linger in the observance, give us this grace
not to confer with flesh and blood, Gal. 1.16. but resolvedly and speedily to
obey thy Will. When Abraham was called to leave his own Country, he obeyed, and
went out, not knowing whither he went, Heb. 11.8. When commanded to sacrifice
his Son, he rose early in the morning, and goes about this hard employ, Genesis
22.3. Lingrings and Reasonings upon the Commands of God, as they carry in them
a want of Duty, so they always bring with them much disadvantage, either wholly
intercepting our obedience, or mingling with it much unwillingness and
aversness to it.

5. A Heavenly and Angelical Obedience, though it be full of Perfection, yet it
is full of Humility. They know that they owe an infinite Obedience to him, from
whom they receive their Being; and that their Obedience to God is but the
payment of that debt they owe to him, and cannot make him a debtor to them:
They know that infinite distance between the infinite God and themselves,
though glorious yet finite Creatures; and therefore they do not only pay their
Obedience, as a just Tribute to God, without arrogance of merit, but they do it
with all the Reverence and Acknowledgment that is imaginable. Both these we
find in the Adoration of the 24 Elders, Revel. 4.10, 11. They fall down before
him, and cast their Crowns before the Throne, saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord,
to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power. The distance between God and Man is
infinite; and though the Angels are nearer unto God in perfection of Nature
than men, yet still the distance between them is infinite: here is the odds,
the Angels see their distance, and see more of the Perfection of God; and the
more they see of him, the more they Adore and Reverence him, and the humbler
they are in their Services; because they see the greatness of their distance.
And if Angelical Obedience, that is so perfect, shall be mingled with so much
Reverence, with how much Humility should our Services, that are so imperfect,
be allayed? O Lord, Let thy Will be thus also done in Earth, as it is in
Heaven: Give us a sense of thy infinite Glory, and Majesty; of that infinite
distance between Thee and thy Creature; that with all Reverence to thy Majesty,
and all Lowliness in our selves, we may appear before thee in all we do for
Thee: Give us a sense of that infinite debt of Obedience, that we owe unto
Thee, for our Being, that product of an infinite Power, and an infinite Motion;
for our well-beings, our restitution in Christ, without whom our very Being
would have been our burden: Give us a sense of the great imperfections of all
our best performances, that need no less a Sacrifice than the Blood and
Intercession of Christ, to wash them from that guilt that would damn us, if we
had nothing else to answer for: Give us a sense of thy Great Condescension to
thy weak and sinful Creatures, that art pleased to deliver unto us the
knowledge of thy Will; and when we by Nature are unable to conceive it, or to
believe it, do give us Light to understand it, and Faith to assent unto it,
that thy Law is Holy, Just, and Good; and when for all these convictions of thy
Truth, our hearts, the seats of Rebellion, do oppose it in the love and
practice of it, thou art pleased to send down a powerful working of thy Spirit,
to chase out of us those oppositions of our corrupted Nature, and to make us
willing in the day of thy power, and to strive with and subdue our hearts to
any measure of the Love of thy Will; and when notwithstanding all this, our
poor and lean performances are mingled with much of our own deadness, contrary
motions, and pollutions, yet thou art pleased to sprinkle our Obedience with
the Blood of Christ; to mingle it with his perfect Righteousness; to forgive
the defects; to cover the imperfections; to rectify the deformities of all our
Obedience; to pardon what is ours, our sins and defects, and to accept and
reward what is thine own, as if it were ours, when thou workest all our works
in us, and yet rewardest us, as if we had wrought them.

And as in the distinct consideration of the Will, of the Counsels and Commands
of God, we are to desire that his Will may be done on Earth as it is in Heaven,
so in the conjunct consideration of both these Wills. There is not an Action or
Event in the world, but it falls out by the determinate Counsel and
Fore-appointment of God; and yet to the production of these Events, we find a
mixture of actions, that expressly thwart the Command of God. The greatest
Event, and of the greatest concernment that the World ever knew, or shall know,
was the Death of Jesus Christ; and though he was thus delivered by the
determinate Counsel and Foreknowledge of God, yet the Jews took and by wicked
hands crucified and slew him, Acts 2.23. The Counsel of God was a most Wise and
Merciful Counsel; the action of the Jews that fulfilled this Counsel, was a
most cruel and unjust action; yet the injustice of the instrument did no way
affect the Counsel of God, nor the Counsel of God no way justify the action of
the Jews; witness that heavy Curse that upon their own imprecation, lies upon
the actors and their posterity unto this day, His Blood be upon us, and upon
our Children, Matthew. 27.25. The man sins most willingly, and though the Wise
God intermingle occurrences, that make the sinful actions of men instrumental
to his Counsels, yet their Guilt is no less, and no less their own, by being
subservient to his Counsel. God has given thee a word of Command, He has
showed thee, O man, what is good, and what does the Lord require at thy hands?
Micah 6.8. Thou need not, nor may seek out for a Rule of thy actions, in
the Secret Counsel of God; nor endeavor to justify thy actions, because in
order to the fulfilling of those Counsels; but keep to that Rule which he has
given, To the Law, and to the Testimony. Deuteronomy. 29.29. The secret things belong
unto the Lord our God, but those things that are revealed belong to us and to
our Children for ever.

Therefore, O Lord, teach me so to wait upon the Will of thy Counsels, and to
be instrumental in them; that I may nevertheless ever obey the Will of thy
Command; that while I act thy Will as a Creature, I may never neglect it as a
Man or a Christian. Thy Wisdom, it is true, can bring about thy Counsels by the
sinful actions of men; and as thou turnest the hearts of men as Rivers of
waters, so thou turnest the sinful motions of the heart, as a skilful workman
can turn the streams of water, so that whilst it moves naturally, it shall
bring about Ends that are of a higher constitution: But surely if thou can
make those works of disobedience serve thy Providence, much more can thou use
such actions to the fulfilling of thy Counsels, that are suitable to thy
Commands; therefore as the Will of thy Counsels is done in Heaven by the Angels
and Blessed Spirits, in such a way as is suitable to thy Commands; So let thy
Will be done on Earth, that while we serve thy Providence, we may nevertheless
Obey thy Will; and whiles we closely observe what thou requirest, that we may
Contentedly, Patiently, Cheerfully, and Thankfully submit unto, and receive
what thou in thy most Wise Counsel dispensest.

Give us this day our daily Bread.
Our Savior directs us, Matthew. 6.33. to seek first the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness, and then promises that the things of this life shall be added
to us. And according to the Method of this Doctrine and Promise, so is the
Method of this Prayer; first to seek the Glory, Kingdom and Will of God, and
then for those things that are necessary for our selves. And though he has
promised that they shall be added to us, yet he directs to pray for what he
has thus promised to add. And this is the course of God's Will and our Duty,
that we should beg of God what he has certainly promised to give. The
Promises of God, as they are the warrants of our Prayers, so our Prayers are
required, though not as causes, yet as means of fulfilling his Promises. And
then a Promise is most suitable and fitly performed, when it is sued out by our
Prayers. When God had promised to build the ruined places, and plant that which
was desolate, and had engaged his own Name and Truth to perform it, I the Lord
have spoken it, and I will do it, Ezech. 36.36. yet requires their prayers to
precede the performance of it; I will yet for this be inquired of by the house
of Israel to do it for them; and that amongst other, upon these Considerations:

1. To show our Dependence upon him: All Creatures, as they are essentially
depending upon God in their being and preservation, so according to the measure
of their power they testify that Dependence, Psalm. 104.21. The young Lions
seek their meat from God. Psalm. 147.9. He gives the Beasts their food, and to
the young Ravens which cry. Psalm. 145.15. The Eyes of all wait upon thee, and
thou give them their meat in due season. There is a secret and unknown
testification, even in the sensible Creatures, of their dependence upon God for
their livelihood, and much more is required, and that most justly, from Man: It
is an act of Mercy and Bounty for God to promise and to give; and an act of
Duty and Recognition for Man to seek.

2. It brings the Soul more to see and to acknowledge and magnify that Mercy
that is given, when it is first sued out from God by Prayer. A Blessing
obtained upon Prayer carries a more immediate impression of the Liberality of
God, than when it is given unsought for.

3. It makes a Blessing the more acceptable, when obtained; and the more
comfortable and contenting in the enjoyment; when a man, together with the
Mercy he receives, receives also a sense of the Mercy and Goodness of God
coming with it: and as in respect of this concomitance, so it most times falls
out, that such blessings so obtained are more suitable, and seasonable, and
ample, and useful, than such as come in an ordinary way of Providence.

4. It fits a man with a better mind to use them with Thankfulness unto God;
with Sobriety, and yet with Cheerfulness; when a man shall consider that this
blessing I had from the hands of the Almighty God, derived to me by that means
that he has enjoined, Prayer bottomed upon his Promise. The disturbance that
grows to any man in any condition, is either out of a disproportion of his
condition to a right mind or desire, or a disproportion of his mind to a right
fruition: A Blessing obtained by Prayer avoids both; it brings a proportionable
good to his mind and desire; and it suits the Mind with a proportionable temper
to the blessing. Eccl. 6.2. Solomon tells us of a man to whom God had given
Riches and Wealth and Honor, so that he wanted nothing that his heart could
desire; yet God gave him not power to eat thereof: the discomposure of his Mind
robbed him of fruition as equally, as if he had not had the possession. But the
blessing of Wealth gotten By Prayer, is accompanied with a Mind to use it
comfortably and cheerfully, yet soberly and humbly. Sin has put a curse in the
Creatures, that they prove unuseful; and it has put a Curse in the Soul, that
it corrupts the Creature, as an ill stomach does good nourishment, so that
oftentimes they are occasions of Excess and Intemperance, of Pride and
Haughtiness, of Carnal Confidence and forgetting of God. Prove. 30.9. lest I be
full and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? Prayer is by the free Goodness of
God made a means to take out the Curse from both; it sanctifies the Creature. 1 Timothy 4.5. Every Creature of God is sanctified by the Word and Prayer: by the
Word of Command given to the creature to make it serviceable; and by the Word
of Promise given to the user; and by Prayer laying hold upon that Promise, and
suing out that Blessing that is contained in it; and it sanctifies the heart,
keeps it in dependence upon God, in confidence in him, in Sobriety before him;
it teaches him that the Blessings of this Life come from him, are his
Blessings; my Corn, and my Wine, and my Oil. And accordingly the Heart is
tutored to use them with all Moderation, Thankfulness and Contentedness.

1. Give us, etc. Give us our Bread, not Pay it us as a Duty. The best Title we
have to all our Blessings is Free Gift. God did not, nor could at first owe to
any thing its Being; and having given a Being to any thing, he owes it not
Preservation, nor the means of it; but the gift of the latter is as free as of
the former. When God said to man, In the sweat of thy brows thou shall eat thy
bread, Genesis 3.19. he gave him not his Bread as the wages of his Labor, but
annexed his Toil and Labor as the Curse of his Life; and yet such is his Mercy
that he gives us our Bread for asking it. Matt. 7.11. How much more shall your
Father which is in Heaven, give good things to them that ask him? O Lord, I
have no title to the necessaries of my Life, but thy free gift and bounty; and
had I any, yet my continual Sins do every moment forfeit that title. The
Beggar, that begs bread at my door, has a better right to the bread he begs,
as against me, than I have to the bread I eat, as from thee. I come therefore
before thee for the necessaries of my life with all abhorrence and detestation
of any Merit in my self to deserve them: they are thine before thou give
them; and they are not mine unless thou give them; and when thou have given
them they are still thine; and blessed be thy Name that thou art pleased to
give them me for the asking. Nor does my asking of my Bread at thy hands
deserve the Gift of it to me, but it is the means which thou have sanctified by
thy free promise to procure them for me.

2. Give us our Bread. We cannot give it our selves, our Good is not in our own
hands nor power; it is he that gives thee power to get Wealth, Deuteronomy. 8.16.19.
without his Blessings my Labors and Projections will prove fruitless; it is
vain to rise early, and to go to bed late, Psalm. 127.2. or if they arrive to
acquire the Bread I want, yet he can blow upon it and makes holes in my Bag,
Hagg. 1.6, 9. Can send Worms into my Manna, Exodus 16.20. or if my Store become
not unserviceable for me, yet it must be his Blessing that must enable me to
eat of it, Eccles. 5.19. and 6.2. I will therefore be honestly industrious to
get my Bread; for it is my Duty. Genesis 3.19. In the sweat of thy brows thou
shall eat thy bread. But I will not be solicitous touching the Event; for he
has said I will not leave thee nor forsake thee. Heb. 13.5. And if the
Providence of God second my Endeavors, yet I will not sacrifice to my Net.
Hab. 1.16. But with acknowledgment bless the hand of God that gives me the
Bread, and labor and pray to make it bread to me; for man cannot live by bread
alone, Matt. 4.4. But by that word of Blessing whereby he makes it my daily
bread.

3. Give us our bread, yet if thou give it not, give us Contentedness; for what
cause have we to murmur at the denial of that which thou art not bound to give:
or if thou turn our daily bread to bread of Carefulness, or of Affliction, yet
give us Patience, and we shall be able to live upon this bread. Our daily bread
is thy free gift, and therefore if thou give it not, it is no injury nor cause
of repining.

This Day, or Day by Day:
And why not bread for to morrow, as well as for to day? the reason of the
Prayer is contained in our Saviors Command, Matt. 6.32. Take no thought for to
morrow. And the Reasons of that Command are these:

1. To keep us in a continual Dependence upon God. And this our Savior
enforces upon the consideration of the very Fowls, Matt. 6.26. They sow not,
neither do they reap, nor gather into Barns, yet your Heavenly Father feeds
them; and that, in due season, Psalm. 145. And are ye not much better than they?
When Elias was at Gods immediate finding, the Ravens brought him Meat in the
Wilderness at seasonable times. Supplies beyond necessity of the present are
apt to make us either vainly profuse, or vainly confident. An Example of the
first we have in the Prodigal, Luke 15.12. that would have all his Portion at
once that belonged to him: he wasted it in riotous living, which he did not
before, when his Fathers care measured out his Supplies according to his
Exigencies and Occasions. An instance of the latter we have in the Rich Man,
Luke 12. When his Store out-grew his Receipt, so that he projecteth the
building of greater Barns, he then sets up his rest; thou have much laid up for
many years, eat, drink, and be merry. Israel was in less danger when fed as it
were from hand to mouth in the Wilderness, then when he had eaten and was full;
when his Herds, and Flocks, and Silver, and Gold were multiplied, then his
heart was in danger to be lifted up and to forget God, Deuteronomy. 8.3, 13, 14. And
accordingly it proved when Jesurun waxed Fat, he kicked, and forsook the Lord
which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his Salvation, Deuteronomy. 32.15.
And such is the baseness and falseness and pride of our hearts, that could we
have our turns served by any other means, than from the hands of God, we would
never seek unto him: and when we have any thing beyond the exigence of our
present condition, we presently make that our confidence. We had rather be
beholden to any thing than to him, and rather trust in any thing than in him.
Therefore in great condescension to the waywardness of our Natures, he is often
pleased to keep the Treasury of outward Blessings in his own hands, deliver
them out by little and little according to our present Exigencies, that so
though the baseness of our Natures will not, yet the necessities of our Nature
and his wise Dispensation enforces us to make our often Addresses to him to
beg our Bread of him, as often as we have necessity to Eat, that thereby we may
learn to depend upon him.

2. Though our foolish hearts cannot think so, yet certain it is, that God is
the best Treasurer of his own Blessings for us. He husbands them better for us
than we can our selves; dispenceth them with more Prudence, Seasonableness,
Convenience, than if they were at our own taking. He knows what proportion is
fittest, what time seasonablest: and therefore we are taught by this part of
this Petition to trust God with his own Blessings, and with the dispencing of
them. Our Father is a Wise and Merciful Father, and we are foolish and
inconsiderate Children. Let us trust him with our Portion, it shall certainly
be better managed in his hands than in ours. Though he gives not out to day
what is fit for to morrow, yet he has the same Store and Mercy and Wisdom to
morrow that he has to day, or had yesterday. And if he gives me enough for
this day upon my Petition, what need I trouble my self about to morrow? when to
morrow comes I will beg it, as I did to day; and I doubt not but he will deal
as bountifully to morrow, as he has done this day. Therefore I will beg to day
for the Bread of this day, and beg to morrow Bread for to morrow, and not
anticipate my Duty by begging to day Bread, for to morrow.

3. To put us in mind of our Mortality. Why shall I be solicitous for to
morrow, when I know not how God will dispose of me before to morrow comes? Who
can tell what a day may bring forth? I will wait therefore all my appointed
time till my change comes, Job 14.14. and if God spare me my life till to
morrow, it will be then seasonable to beg Bread for that Life, as I have done
for this day.

Our daily Bread.
Bread. We have herein these two Considerations:

1. The Extent of it: Bread is the Staff of Life, the strength of Life, Psalm.
104.15. Bread which strengthens man's heart. If this be wanting, it makes a
famine, though there be a supply of other things; and if this be had, the want
of other things may be born: and therefore it comprehends all the conveniences
for the support of our Natures. Isa. 55.2. Wherefore do ye spend your money for
that which is not bread? Psalm. 132.15. I will abundantly bless her provision,
and satisfy her poor with bread. So that when I beg my daily Bread, I beg for
all the conveniences for the support of my life.

2. The Restriction of it: Our Savior teaches us to pray for Food for our
necessity and convenience, not for our curiosity or superfluity; and with Agur
to desire food convenient for us, Prove. 30.8. The Israelites had their daily
supply of Bread from Heaven, and they were not contented, but tempted God and
asked Meat for their Lusts, Psalm. 78.18. And they were not estranged from their
Lusts, but while the meat was yet in their mouths, the wrath of God fell upon
them. A Petition for Supplies to be consumed upon our Lusts, is with more Mercy
denied than granted, James 4.3. When we are to ask for Temporal Supplies, our
Savior teaches us in this Petition, Modesty, Moderation, and Contentation; if
we have Food and Raiment, therewith to be content: not but that Abundance is a
Blessing, and such as wherein God not only allows, but requires a cheerful and
thankful use, Deuteronomy. 28.47. Because thou servest not the Lord thy God with
joyfulness and gladness of heart for the abundance of all things, therefore
shall thou serve thine Enemies, etc. Wealth and Abundance are Blessings of God,
such as we must receive with Thankfulness, and use with Cheerfulness, Sobriety,
and Liberality: But we have no promise to be Rich or to have Abundance; if God
gives it, he is better than his Promise, and we have great cause therein to
bless his Name: but we have a Promise of supply of our necessities of Nature,
and the Promise of God is the foundation of our Prayer. We have commission to
pray for Bread, not for Delicacies or Superfluities. These, if given, may be
lawfully, and must be thankfully used; but if not given, we must live
contentedly and thankfully without them. God knows what proportion best fitteth
us, and if he gives us our daily Bread, he gives us as much as we have a
commission to ask; and yet by asking only for daily Bread, we are not bound to
ask merely for the necessity of the support of Life, but for a comfortable and
convenient support according to that condition wherein God's Providence has
placed us. That may be Bread to ones Meal for his Convenience, which may be
Quails to another Meal for his Lusts. And this variety may arise by the
difference of stations or degrees (that may be but Bread for Solomon's Table,
which may be Quails for a meaner person:) the difference of relations and
dependencies, the difference of tempers and constitutions of body, the
difference of seasons and occurrences. There may be a Season when our Lord
gives us a commission to eat whatsoever our Soul desires, so it be done before
the Lord, and as in his presence, Deuteronomy. 14.26. And there is a Season when
slaying of Oxen, and killing Sheep, and eating Flesh, is an iniquity not to be
purged, Isa. 22.12, 13, 14. The Wise God, that orders and disposes all
times, and persons, and circumstances, does with the same Wisdom fit them with
suitable Concomitants and Adjuncts. He has made every thing beautiful in its
time, Eccles. 3.11.

But besides this Bread for our Bodies, there is Bread for our Souls, which
comes under this Petition: The Bread of Life, and the Water of Life, John 6.33.
this is the Life of our Souls. And as much as the Good and Support and Life of
our Souls is of more concernment to us, than the Life of our Bodies, so is the
Bread of our Souls of more concernment for us to ask, than the Bread of our
Bodies: this is Christ, John 6.34. I am the Bread of Life, he that comes to me
shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst. Bread like
the Widows Barrel of Meal, that shall never diminish unto all Eternity. This
Bread our Lord has been pleased already to give us, Christ and his fullness;
and nothing is wanting if we have but a hand to receive it. And this Bread we
eat when we believe the Truth of God concerning him; when we often contemplate
upon the Mercy of God in giving him; and upon that mighty Salvation which in
him he has given us; when we have often recourse unto him for Grace and Mercy;
when we carry unto him all our stock of Love, and Admiration, and Dependence,
and Recumbence, and Resolution of Spirit. And here we find Bread for our Souls
in the most comprehensive latitude, accommodate to every condition of the Soul:
Here is Bread to feed and to strengthen it, the Grace and Spirit of Christ;
Physic to cure and recover it, the Satisfaction and Merit of Christ; Varieties
to feast and to refresh it, the Promises of God, Joy in believing, unspeakable
and full of Glory; Bread that will satisfy, yet never satiate; but the more we
feed upon him, the greater is our plenty, and the better our stomach.

To conclude then the whole consideration of this Petition; When I pray for my
daily Bread, my Soul does or should run out into such thoughts as these: O
Lord, thou did at first freely give me my Being, I could not deserve it when
I was not: The same Title that I have to my Being, I have to my Preservation,
and Support of my Being; it is still free gift, and therefore I come to thee
for my Bread upon no other terms, than as a poor Beggar to a most bountiful
Lord. And because thou have commanded me to cast my care upon thee, therefore I
seek my Bread of thee for this day, which thou have hitherto lent me. I desire
to trust thee with my Portion, and it is my happiness that my Portion is not in
my own hands, but in thine. Give therefore, I pray thee, Bread for this day,
and when to morrow comes, I will beg Bread of thee for to morrow; and if thou
give me this day supplies beyond the expense of this day, I will use it
thankfully, and nevertheless dependingly; for I will renew my Petition for my
daily Bread, still. It is thy blessing that gives my Bread power to nourish me.
And that which is Bread to day, and sufficient for to morrow, may without thy
blessing upon it, like the Israelites Manna, kept beyond thy Command, be Worms
to morrow: And because thou have promised, that verily I shall be fed, Psalm.
37.3. upon that promise of thine I beg food and clothing convenient for me. If
thou give me no more, or not so much, give me Contentedness, and
Thankfulness; and if thou give me more, give me Thankfulness for it, Sobriety
in the use of it, and Liberality in the dispencing of it. In giving me but
Enough, I am Steward for my self; and in giving me more than Enough, I am but a
Steward of that abundance for others. But above all, Ever give me of the Bread
of Life, that whilst my Body is fed, my Soul may not be starved, either for
want of that Everlasting Bread, or for want of an appetite to it.

And forgive us our Debts, Matt. 6. Our Sins, Luke 11.
Sins. We are all under the guilt of sin. No man lives and sins not, Eccles.
7.20. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, 1 John 1.8. God made Man
Righteous at first, and gave him a Righteous Law; and in as much as Man owed an
infinite subjection to the Author of his Being, he owed an Exact Obedience to
the Law of his Maker: yet God was pleased to give him this Law, not only as the
Rule of his Obedience, but as a Covenant of Life and of Death; viz. that so
long as he and his Seed should observe that Law, so long they should enjoy
Blessedness and Immortality; and if they should break any part of that Law,
they should die the death. The first man made a stipulation for himself and his
Posterity, and this was but just; for he had in himself the Race of all
Mankind: all succeeding Generations are but pieces of Adam, who had not, nor
could have their Being but from him; and so it was but Reasonable and Just for
him to contract for all his Posterity. And as it was just in respect of the
Person contracting, so it was just in respect of the Manner of the Contract:
the Law that was his covenant was a just and righteous Law, a Law suitable to
the indowments and power of his Nature: Again, the Blessedness, which by his
obedience he was to hold, was not of his own creating nor obtaining; it was the
free gift of God, and it is but reasonable that the Lord of this gift might
give it in what manner he pleased; and it could not be unjust that the Lord,
that gave him this Blessedness should give it him under what Conditions he
pleased: but he gave it him under most reasonable and just Conditions, viz. an
Obedience to a most just and reasonable Law, which suited with the ability and
perfection of his Nature; and therefore when, upon the breach of Covenant by
Man, he withdrew that blessedness from him and his posterity, he did no more
than what was most just for him to do. And thus we stand Guilty of that Sin
which our first Father committed, and are deprived of that Blessedness and Life
which our first Father had; and the Privation of that Blessedness and
Immortality is Death. Romans 5.12. By one Man sin entered into the World, and
death by Sin; and Verse. 19. By one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners. 1
Cor. 15.22. In Adam all die. And by this Sin of Adam all were made Sinners, by
these two ways:

1. By actual participation of his disobedience; for we were then in him: but
that is not all, for upon that reason every Man should stand guilty of all the
Sins committed by any of his Progenitors since Adam, which seems not to agree
with the profession of Almighty God, Ezekiel. 18.20. The Son shall not bear the
Iniquity of the Father. But the case is not alike; for Adam was created in
integrity and perfection, in an ability to perform the Law, and so was a fit
person to stipulate for his posterity. 2 And as he was a person so qualified,
so the Covenant was made between God and him, both for him, and his posterity;
and 3 As we suffer in the penalty of his Disobedience, so we had enjoyed the
benefit of his Obedience; we had come into the World with the same Liberty of
Will, and Integrity, and Perfection of Nature that he had: But all these are
wanting in any other person in the World: 1. A defect of Nature is gone over
all, that none is fit to stipulate for himself and his posterity: 2. No such
contract has been at any time made between God and any other Man.

2. By a necessary Consequence; for God having justly withdrawn from Man his
Blessedness and Perfection; and Sin having corrupted and imbased his Nature, we
by propagation from him derive a corrupted, depraved Nature, full of impotence,
and rebellion, and disorder. Job. 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? God was pleased to communicate to Man a being in the Essence of a Man;
and to communicate unto him a degree of Purity, Immortality, Wisdom, and
Perfection beyond the compass of his Natural subsistence: but this latter was
communicated to him under a covenant, which when he broke he lost, and not only
lost that, but even stained, and corrupted, and imbased that very being, that
after he had sinned, he retained. And this is the old Man corrupt, according to
the deceivable Lusts, Ephesians. 4.22. A body of death, Romans 7.24. And this
Depravation of our Nature was followed with the continual Corruption, and at
last with the dissolution of Nature: and that not only in those who had sinned
after the similitude of Adams transgression, by an actual breach of an express
Law, Romans 5.14. But in all that were partakers of Adams corrupted Nature, even
Infants; and so Death passed over all.

And as thus we partake of Original Sin, as well by being virtually actors in
it, as also by derivation of a corrupted Nature; so this corruption of our
Nature produces in all our Lives continued and renewed Actual Sins, the
conceptions of Lust. Jam. 1.15. And these Actual Sins, according to the
difference of those commands of God, which are violated, are either Sins of
Omission, or of Commission: and both come under the extent of this Petition, by
the name of Sins or Trespasses, Luke 11. by the Name of Debts, Matt. 6. For we
owe unto God Duty and Obedience, and every Violation of that duty leaves us so
much indebted unto God: the least of which is impossible to be paid when once
incurred; because it is impossible for us to make that not to have been, which
has already been, and impossible for us by all our future Obedience, (were it
as exact as the will of God requires) to expiate a Sin past; for still that
perfect obedience is no more then we owe; we have therein but done our duty and
are but unprofitable Servants; but if it were possible to think that one act of
perfect obedience to God would expiate for any Sin past, yet such is the
Corruption of our Nature, that not one such act can be found: there is in our
best actions a mixture and adherence of some defect or other, that makes it
become the subject still of this Petition, that which needs Mercy to Pardon,
and therefore cannot contain Merit to Deserve.

So then all are concluded under Sin, Gal. 3.22. and consequently under Guilt,
the effect of Sin; and consequently under death, and a curse the wages of Sin.
And this Sin, guilt and curse is so closely bound to every one of Adams
posterity, that there is no possibility in the best of them to deliver
themselves from it: therefore O Lord teach us to pray:

Forgive us.
Forgiveness is an act of Free Grace, whereby our offended God freely, and
without any Merit of ours, remits the Sin, the Guilt and Punishment; the Person
offended is he only that can forgive: the rule was true though misapplyed, Mar.
2.7. Who can forgive Sins but God only? and Forgiveness is an act of most free
Mercy and nothing of Merit in the person forgiven. Isa. 43.25. I, even I am he,
that blotteth out thy transgressions for my own sake and will not remember thy
Sins. Misery; which is the effect of Sin, is the Object of Mercy, but it is not
the Desert of it, especially when that very Misery, under which we are brought
by Sin, is a Misery wilfully contracted by our selves, and not only so, but is
still a sinning Misery, a Misery accompanied with stupidity and senslessness,
with aversion and opposition against that God, and that very Mercy, that should
deliver us. God commends the freeness and fullness of his Goodness to us, by
taking that season to be Merciful, when our condition is most Miserable, not
because our misery deserves his pity. Ezekiel. 16.6. I said unto thee, when thou
wast in thy blood, Live: Yea, I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood,
Live. This Forgiveness is thus wrought: Man, that was infinitely bound to love
and obey the Author of his Being, most unrgatefully and unnecessarily sinned
against him, and thereby deservedly incurred the everlasting curse of the most
Just and True God, and forfeited his being: yet, though Man had destroyed
himself, Almighty God, of his own Free Will, and without any other Motive, and
by his own Infinite Wisdom, contrived a way, whereby his most exact Truth and
Justice might be satisfied, and yet his creature saved, and his Mercy and
Goodness might be infinitely evidenced unto Men and Angels: By an Everlasting
Covenant between the Father and the Son, the Son he must assume our Nature, and
offer it up as One Sacrifice for Sin for ever, Heb. 10.12. This was that
Mystery hid from Ages and Generations; the Mystery that the Angels desire to
look into, 1 Pet. 1.12. The Great Mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the
Flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. The great End of the Creation of Man. And by this Sacrifice
thus freely given by our offended Lord, we have Redemption, even the Remission
of our sins, Ephesians. 1.7. Colos. 1.14. And Pardon thus freely given by the
Father, and yet thus dearly bought by the Son, is with abundance of Love and
Grace, proclaimed and tendered unto all, in all the World, that will but come
in, and enter into Covenant with God in Christ. Jer. 31.34. I will forgive
their iniquity, and will remember their sin no more. And although this one
Sacrifice of Christ, offered up once for all, is a full satisfaction for all
the sins of his Elect, to the end of the World, yet the same eternal Contract,
that made it so, did likewise appoint certain Means actually to apply it; And
make it effectual to us, of Faith to lay hold upon it. And in as much as,
notwithstanding our giving up our Names to Christ, many renewed daily sins are
committed by us, our Lord teaches us to resort daily to this Sacrifice, this
Magazine of Mercy, this Fountain opened to wash for sin and for uncleanness,
thence to fetch new applications of this one Sacrifice for our renewed offense,
and to beg our Pardon as often as we beg our Bread.

So then,

1. We have the true Original of Forgiveness, the Free Love of God, which gave
Christ as the Sacrifice for Sin, and accepted that Sacrifice as the price of
our Pardon: So God loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believed in him should not perish, but have everlasting Life, John
3.16.

2. We have the Meritorious Cause of it, that Sacrifice of Christ, whereby
Pardon is impetrated for as many as lay hold upon it.

3. The Act, which that Eternal Counsel appointed to be the Means of the actual
Application of it to the Soul, receiving of the Pardon thus offered. To as many
as received him, to them, etc. Joh. 1.12. For as we live, and move, and have
our Being by God, and his Will, and Providence; yet the same Will of his has
appointed the means, whereby that Will of his is accomplished, our daily Bread,
and the use of it: So, although from God we have our Pardon, yet the same Will
of his has appointed Faith in Christ, to be the instrument of an Actual or
Effectual Application of it; and the Efficacy of Faith, as an instrument for
that purpose, depends likewise upon the same Will of God, which has so
appointed. When the Israelites were bitten with fiery Serpents in the
Wilderness, God commanded Moses to erect a brazen Serpent for their cure, Numb.
21.8. But, although the Divine Will had annexed a power of healing unto that
Serpent instrumentally, yet the same Will appointed the actual application of
that power, to the looking upon that Serpent: Every one that is bitten, when he
looks upon it, shall live: So though by the Eternal Will of God, a Pardon is
obtained by the Death of Christ, yet the same Will of his has appointed Faith
in Christ, the means of the receiving of that Pardon: and yet this very means
is not in our own power, but it is the Gift of God. John 6.44. No man can come
unto me, except the Father draw him.

4. The renewed Exercise of that Act, upon occasions of sin committed or
renewed. Prayer for Pardon, which as it does most naturally flow from the sense
of sin, and of a Pardon impetrated by Christ, so by the Divine Institution, it
is required to apply that Pardon actually to the Soul: and it is a high Mercy
of God to grant it for the asking; and an argument of a proud unbelieving
heart, to think to have it without it: and whenever the Spirit and the Word
of God, has wrought in a man a belief, of, and in the Sacrifice of Christ, the
same Spirit does work in the heart a desire of it, which is nothing else but
the Prayer of the Mind; for it makes intercession according to the Will of
God, Romans 8.27. And herein we therefore see two things:

1. Our Duty. Our sins are many, and daily, even after we have given up our
Names to Christ. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves 1 John 1.8.
And though meritoriously Christ has satisfied for those very sins, yet we are
to have often recourse to this Sacrifice, to fetch our cure and our cleansing,
in the actual application of this Sacrifice unto us. Had a man been bitten by a
fiery Serpent, he might look upon the brazen Serpent and live; and had he been
bitten again, he must have looked again, or else he had died: it is so with us,
only here is the odds; the man that had been once cured, if bitten again, might
perchance not have looked again upon the Serpent, and so have died: but it is
otherwise here; the same principle of Life, that abiding seed, 1 John 3.8. that
did at first make him to seek, and sue to Christ for his first actual Pardon,
will after a fall, a renewed sin, send the Soul to this Fountain, for a new act
of application, of that cleansing and pardoning: he cannot commit sin, that is,
lie in it, without recourse to God for Pardon, because his Seed abides in him,
1 John 2.8.

2. Our Privilege. If any man sin, we have an Advocate, 1 John 2.1. an
Advocate that knows the mind of our Judge, and out of that knowledge, has
taught us as often as we beg our Bread, to beg our Pardon, and that with
assurance that we shall be heard, if we do it in Faith and Sincerity. 1 John
1.9. He is faithful and just to forgive. It is the Proclamation of his Name,
Exodus 34.7. Forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin. It is his promise, Jer.
31.34. Jer. 33.8. I will forgive their iniquity, and remember their sin no
more: Even to a revolting and backsliding creature, upon true repentance. Isa.
56.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and
let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God,
for he will abundantly pardon. Jer. 3.12. Return thou backsliding Israel, and I
will not cause mine anger to fall upon you; for I am merciful, says the Lord,
and will not keep anger for ever; only acknowledge thine iniquity. Christ came
into the World to restore in Man the lost Image of God. And when Peter asked
him, Matt. 18.21. How often shall my Brother sin against me, and I forgive him,
till seven times? Jesus said unto him, I say not unto thee till seven times,
but till seventy times seven times. And surely that Mercy, that Christ required
in a poor mortal Man, is infinitely fuller in the merciful God, who delights in
Mercy and Forgiveness: Only remember,

1. To take heed of Presumptuous Sins, Premeditated Sins, Sins against
knowledge, and against convictions, Sins with a presupposition of Pardon. Deuteronomy.
29.19. That shall bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace,
though I walk in the imagination of my heart. The Lord will not spare him.
These, though they cannot exceed the Mercy of God to pardon them, they many
times shut and seal up the Soul against Pardon, hardening the heart to a great
difficulty, if not a final impossibility, of Repentance; and by that means the
Soul is disabled, with any comfortable ground or assurance to beg Pardon,
without the great Mercy of God to soften that heart again.

2. Make a frequent and serious Examination of thy past Actions; measure them
by the Rule of the Word of God; and find out that accursed thing, whatsoever it
be, that is displeasing to him: so that, as much as may be, thou may
distinctly, and with reference to particular sins, or faults, or failings, pray
over this Petition. There is not a day, but by a wary observation, thou will
not only find a general indistinct distemper, which is to be the subject of
this request, but particular, special, eminent Evils, that deserve a particular
reflection upon them, in the repetition of this Petition. Let us search and try
our ways, and turn to the Lord our God: And to this end,

3. Endeavor to keep thy Conscience always Wakeful, Vigilant, Tender; be
content to listen to her chidings; she soldom quarrels without a cause: but
suppressing, checking, and stifling the language of Conscience, makes her at
last either sullen, or senseless, or outrageous. A vigilant Conscience will
prevent thee from many sins: but if it do not, it will tell thee of them, and
bring thee upon thy knees, and make this Petition seasonable, and a Pardon
gotten thereupon acceptable and comfortable: for how can that Man, with any
sense beg Pardon for a sin, when he scarce finds himself sensibly guilty of
any? This Petition is delivered up but carelessly, and coldly, and fruitlesly,
by such a person.

4. Give God the Honor of his Justice, even when thou suest for the Benefit of
his Mercy, in aggravation of thy sins to the due height; in owning damnation
and utter rejection, as the just reward of every sin, humble thy Soul truly
and deeply for it. This will make thy Prayer earnest, and thy Pardon dear; it
gives to God the Honor of his Justice, and the Glory of his Mercy, which is
all the Tribute thou can pay unto him for his free Goodness, in giving thee
that Pardon, without which thou were eternally lost.

5. Give thy Mediator the Honor and End of thy Redemption. Thy Savior died,
it is true, to obtain thy Pardon, but will thou continue in sin, that Grace may
abound? sin, that thou may be pardoned? and renew thy sins, that God may
renew his Pardon? God forbid. Thou do, as much as in thee lies, disappoint
the End of Christ's Death, who therefore died, that he might redeem unto
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. Let the begging of thy
Pardon, be ever accompanied with a resolution not to offend again; otherwise
God, that sees thy heart, looks upon thy asking of Pardon, as a higher, and
more impudent, and presumptuous sin, than that which thou seem to beg the
forgiveness of.

6. Upon the discovery of any particular sin, which in a special manner
concerns thee, beware of these things:

1. Sleeping in it, without recourse to God for Pardon for it; or slipping over
it in thy Prayer without a particular animadversion upon it. Be content to open
this sore: The longer it is kept covered, the worse it is. Thou must know that
every sin is written before God with a point of a Diamond, and though thou art
contented to forget it; or by incursion of time to wear out the remembrance, or
at least the horror, of it; yet it is written, and thou shall be sure to hear
of it; and the longer it continues, the harder thy heart grows; and the deeper
does the canker and stain of that Sin work and spread into thy Soul; and the
more difficultly is thy Pardon obtained, and yet the less earnestly sought. It
is a secret curse in thy bosom, that makes all thy services to God unacceptable
and unsavory; and who can tell when the decree may come out? when this Sin will
ripen into an eminent Judgment? Therefore clear thy account with God betimes;
let not the guilt of a Sin lie long upon thy conscience, but make thy peace
betimes; sue out thy Pardon speedily. Thou know not what a day may bring
forth.

2. Yet after a Sin freshly committed, fall not presently to beg thy Pardon,
till thou have humbled thy Heart, and put it into a fit frame to come into the
presence of God; till thou have got a sense that it is an evil thing and a
bitter to depart from him; till thou have crept to thy Saviors Feet for his
Blood to wash thee, and for his Righteousness to cover thee, and for his
Mediation to bring thee, otherwise a defiled polluted creature, into his
Fathers presence, under his Patronage; till thou have mourned over him, whom
thou have pierced; and been ashamed before him of thy miscarriage; and acted
thy Faith upon his All-sufficient satisfaction; till thou have taken up
Resolutions of future amendment: and then in the Name and Mediation of thy
Savior, fall upon thy knees, and beg thy Pardon.

As we forgive our Debtors, Luke 12. For we forgive our Debtors.
Here we Learn,

1. That it is our Duty to forgive others, Matt. 18.21, 22. Upon their
repentance, Luke 17.4. If he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and
seven times in a day turn to thee, saying, I repent; thou shall forgive him:
and that upon these considerations: 1. From that conformity that is, or should
be, in our Nature to the Nature of God: he is slow to anger, and of great
Mercy, Psalm. 145.8. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and
passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retains not
his anger for ever, because he delights in Mercy, Mic. 7.18. And Christ
coming to renew the broken Image of God in Man, and to renew him after the
Image of him that created him, does enjoin and imprint this part of the Divine
Image, Luke 6.36. Be ye merciful as your Heavenly Father is merciful. And Mercy
in the Heart is that excellent habit, from whence forgiveness proceeds. And
hence it is, that where the Spirit of Christ comes, it assimilates the Nature
to that disposition, Gal. 5.22. The fruit of the Spirit is Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Meekness. 2. From that great commandment enjoined by God in the
Moral Law, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. And much more enforced
under the new Covenant, even to the Love of our very Enemies, Matt. 5.44. I say
unto you, Love your Enemies; and consequently forgive your Enemies; for Love is
that affection that produces Pardon, and this injunction lies upon us under
the same obligation whereby we are bound to love our Brethren; for the Love we
owe to God is that grand Obligation that binds to whatsoever he commands. Joh.
14.15. If ye love me, keep my Commandments; Therefore if ye love me, love and
pity, and pardon your Enemies. 3. From that great Equity and Reason, the
proportion of Gods dealing with us. Matt. 18.32. I forgave thee all that debt
because thou desiredst me. Should not thou also have had compassion on thy
fellow servant, even as I had pity on thee? Colos. 3.13. Forbearing one
another, and forgiving one another, even as Christ forgave you. If God should
require obedience to any command, though I saw no reason for it, yet the Love
of God would constrain me to reason thus: Though I see no reason of this
command, yet when I consider who it is that commands it, even the Infinite and
Merciful God, to whom I owe my self and all I hope for, I see reason enough for
me to obey, though I see not the reason why God should command. But in this
injunction of Forgiving my Enemy, I see a most just and proportionable reason
of my Obedience: I owed unto God a most Infinite Love and Obedience to the
uttermost possibility of my Being; for from him I had it; and when I broke that
Allegiance, I owed unto him an Infinite Debt of Guilt and Punishment; and with
this guilt I likewise contracted an innate enmity against that God, to whom I
owed so vast a debt of Duty and of Guilt: this very God freely without my
seeking, when I hated him, sent me his Son with a free Pardon of all this
Infinite Guilt, and commanded me to show Mercy to my offending brother: the
offense that I committed was against an Infinite Obligation of the creature to
his Creator; the offense that my Brother commits as against me, is only against
some petty relation; we are otherwise both equals; God freely forgave me, when
there was nothing to enjoin, or enforce, or deserve, or so much as to seek it,
and is it not reasonable that I should forgive my brother, that it may be seeks
my Pardon? but if he does not, our common Lord and Master enjoins it?

2. Consequently upon the former the not observing of this Duty, does most
Justly and Reasonably deserve that I should not be heard in this Petition. If I
can so boldly and unthankfully encounter a Command of God standing upon such
just and reasonable grounds, with what face I can expect a Pardon from him at
my request, when I refuse to Pardon my Brother at his command?

3. Consequently also the pardon of my Brother is no Meritorious cause for God
to pardon me: the Breach of any command is a meritorious cause of Punishment;
but the Observation of one duty cannot deserve the Pardon of the violation of
another; God requires me to forgive my Brother, and when I have done so, I have
done but my duty, and no not deserve my Pardon, and therefore when I say,
forgive me, for I forgave others; I make not the Pardon I ask, the wages for
the Pardon I gave; for as my Brothers offense against me holds not proportion
with my offense against God; so neither does my Pardon of him hold proportion
with Gods Pardon to me.

4. Nor consequently is my Pardon of others the measure of that Pardon I beg of
God: The offenses committed by my brother against me are not in truth so much
offenses committed against me, as against God; for it is therefore an injury to
me, because done against that law that he has interposed between him and me;
and so though I am concerned, yet in truth the foundation of my concernment is
that Law that God has set between him and me; and were it possible to suppose
no such Law, it were impossible to conceive any injury to be done from one man
to another. So then my Pardon of him is but of slender concernment of my own,
the chiefest interest is Gods. Again, my offense against God is against an
Infinite Obligation, and against an Infinite Person; but my brothers offense
against me, as it relates to me, is but of finite relation or obligation, and
against a finite Person; and therefore the measure of the thing forgiven by me
is too short and too narrow to fit and suit with that whereof I beg my Pardon.
Again, my Pardon to my Brother is with a great deal of corruption,
superciliousness, pride, grudging, aversness, expostulations, secret risings of
my Heart against him: O! But such a Pardon will not serve my turn; I beg a
Pardon at the hands of the God of Mercy and Perfection, a full, a perfect
Pardon. Measure not out, O Lord, thy Pardon to me according to my Pardon to my
Brother, the thing I pardon holds not proportion with the offense which I have
committed against thee: his is but a finite offense against me, a finite
Creature; mine is an infinite Offense against an infinite Obligation, and
against an Infinite God: the Pardon that I give, is mingled with ruggedness,
with revenge, with remembrance of the thing I forgive; but the Pardon I beg of
thee is an abundant Pardon, Isa. 55.7. A blotting out, and an everlasting
forgetting of my Sins, Isa. 43.25. Such a Pardon as leaves not behind it the
tincture of my former guilt; that though my Sins were as scarlet, they may be
as white as snow, Isa. 1.18. But,

5. Forgive us, for we forgive. By our Union with Christ, we partake of his
Privilege of being the Sons of God; so that as a Father has tenderness
toward his child, and is apt and ready upon his submission to Pardon him, so
there is the same, and a far greater readiness in him to forgive; I said, I
will confess my Transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the Iniquity
of my Sin. As soon as he had but a resolution to beg his Pardon, God prevents
his Petition by granting that Pardon which he intended to ask. And as by this
Union with Christ, we partake of his Privilege, so we partake of his Spirit;
and that Spirit is a Merciful Spirit, ready to Pardon an Enemy even before he
ask it. This was the command he gave us, and this was the Pattern he left us,
who when he was reviled, reviled not again, 1 Pet. 2.21, 23. but prayed for
those that sought his Life, Luke 23.34. Father, Forgive them, for they know not
what they do. And therefore this Conformity unto the Mind of Christ is an
Evidence unto a Man of his Participation of him, and that God hears him as a
Father hears his Child; and by this means Faith is strengthened; and the Soul
argues thus in this Petition; O Lord I am guilty in my self of many Sins, but
yet, if I am found in thy Son, thou will look upon me with the same tenderness
that a Father looks upon his child, and wilt be more ready to forgive me than I
can be to ask it: I find thy Son was Merciful, and ready to forgive, even his
Enemies; and I thank thy good Grace, I find in my self the same mind that my
Savior bore, a mind ready to forgive the injuries that were offered him; and
this disposition I have not from my self, nor my own spirit, for that spirit
lusts after envy; but surely it comes from that meek and gentle Spirit that
is in thy Son: and upon this I do believe I am in some measure united to him:
and as I do partake of his Spirit, so I doubt not but I partake of that
relation of his, even the relation of a Son unto thee, and in that relation, I
come before thee, and beg thee to pardon my Sins, assuredly trusting that thou,
that have created in me a mind of Mercy and Forgiveness unto others, wilt show
thy self a God of Mercy and Pardon unto me.

6. Forgive us, for we forgive: It is true, our Pardon of others deserves not
thy Mercy, nor can it make thee a debtor unto us; but, Bountiful Lord, thou
have been pleased in Christ, in whom all thy Promises are Yea and Amen, by
thine own free Promise, to engage thy self unto thy creature, Psalm. 18.25. That
with the merciful thou will show thy self merciful. Matt. 5.7. That the
merciful shall obtain Mercy. Mat. 6.14. That if we forgive men their
Trespasses, thou will forgive us: and these Promises of thine, freely and
undeservedly made by thee, I lay before thee, when I beg my Pardon in Jesus
Christ, thereby to strengthen my Soul in thy Goodness, in the free remission of
all my Sins.

To conclude, In this Petition the Soul breathes out such thoughts as these: O
Lord, I confess before thee, I am a sinful creature; I have a sinful and
polluted Nature, a Body of sin and death; and this sinful Nature sends forth
through all my Thoughts, Words and Actions, foul and filthy streams in every
moment of my Life; and if thou should pass by all the sins of my Nature and
Life unto this day, and should call me to an account for my errors since I
last begged my Pardon, there were guilt enough left to press me down to the
lowest Hell; And this guilt of the least of any of my sins, as it is more than
I am able to answer, so it is more than I am able to expiate; there is no
escaping but by thy free Pardon, and that Pardon I beg of thee in the Name and
Righteousness and Promise of thy Son, who knew all thy mind, and taught me to
seek my Pardon as often as to seek my daily bread. And in confidence only of
that free Mercy of thine, I beseech thee, pardon me; and as I beg the Pardon of
my sins in general, so in special I beg the Pardon of those Sins, which I
committed since thy last act of remission granted, and manifested, and ratified
unto me: this or that neglect of my Duty to thee, or my neighbor; this or that
sinful, proud, unclean, vain Thought, which has stained my Soul, and grieved
thy Spirit, and polluted or weakened my Conscience; this or that uncharitable,
or malicious, or unseemly or vain Word; this or that unjust, or unbecoming, or
unchristian, or ungodly Action; every one of these leaves a spot in my Soul,
which nothing but the Blood of Christ, and thy Free Grace can take away; It
leaves a Disease, a Weakness, a Wound in my Soul, which nothing but thy Free
Spirit can heal and recover. And though I know that my greatest mercy to
others, cannot merit mercy from thee, because that mercy is but my duty, and a
duty mingled in the performance of it, with many of my own imperfections, which
stand in need of thy mercy to pardon it, and that little good that is in it, is
not my own, but the work of thy Grace, as free as thy Pardon; yet it is an
evidence to me, that thou will be merciful unto me, in that thou have, contrary
to my own nature, wrought a merciful temper in my heart to others, the same
mind that was in thy Son; and therefore I am humbly confident that thou have
given me that Spirit of thy Son, and consequently the relation and privilege
of a Son; that, in as much as thou have given me a heart to pardon others, thou will make good thy Promise of Mercy and Pardon unto me. I make mention of my
remission of others, not as the merit of thy forgiving of me, but thereby to
strengthen my Faith, and to lay hold of thy Promise made in and by thy Son;
that if we forgive Men their offenses, thou will also forgive us. And this I
beg, not to make room for new offenses, by pardoning the old, nor to continue
in sin that Grace may abound; but with a resolution to forsake my sins, as well
as to confess them, and not turn again to folly; strengthen me so with thy
Grace, that as thou have now cleansed my Soul from my past sins and spots, so I
may keep my self from mine Iniquity; that I may live more to thy Honor; that I
may walk with more Vigilance; that I may every day find my account less, and
thy Spirit and Grace more and more effectual in me, to conform me to the Will
and Example of thy Son, in all Holiness and Blamelessness of mind and life: and
to that end,

Lead us not into Temptation, etc.
This Petition directs us to pray for (1) Preventing Mercy: Lead us not into
Temptation. (2) Delivering Mercy: but deliver us from Evil. Keep us from
falling into Evil; but if we fall into it, deliver us from it.

The Former part, wherein is considerable, 1. What is meant by Temptation. 2.
What to lead into Temptation.


Temptation may be understood (1) for an Active Solicitation unto Evil of Sin:
this is done either by the Devil: thus our Savior was led by the Spirit into
the Wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil, Matt. 4.1. And therefore he is
often called the Tempter; who being a Spirit, is, by the advantage of his
Nature, and by the permission of God, able to mingle himself so with our Souls
and faculties, that he can immediately solicit unto Evil. Thus he mingled
himself with the Spirits of the Prophets of Ahab, and became a lying Spirit in
their Mouths, 1 Kings 22.21. Thus he mingled himself with the Spirit of Judas,
tempting him to betray Christ, Luke 22.7. with the spirit of Ananias, Act. 5.3.
Why has Satan filled thy Heart? or it is done by Evil Men, either by their
Counsels, Persuasions, or Examples: or by our own corrupt hearts, James 1.14.
Every Man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own Lusts and enticed. Our
corrupt and sinful flesh breathes and evaporates into our Souls those ill and
filthy vapors, which, infect, and disorder, and seduce it from God; the Law of
our Members bringing us into captivity to the Law of sin, Romans 7.23.

2. For that Objective Temptation, or the Object from whence occasionally
Temptation arises. And thus almost every Object of our sense is a Temptation;
not that there is any proper active motion or action of the Object to persuade
to sin, but the corruption of our sensual Nature, meeting with such an Object,
acts amiss upon it, and so it becomes a Temptation to sin: and especially if
the Object be such as bears a disproportion to our enjoyment of it; The beauty
of the Apple was a Temptation to Eve; the wedge of Gold and the Babylonish
Garment to Achan; Naboths Vineyard to Ahab, Bathsheba to David: yet in these
the Objects were innocent, and had in themselves no active solicitation to
Evil, but because they were seemingly good, yet prohibited, corrupted Nature
laid hold upon that seeming good, and violated the Command. This taught the
Wise man to pray against extremes either of Plenty or Poverty; because his
corrupted Nature was ready to turn either into Temptation: Riches into
Arrogance and Presumption; Poverty into Blasphemy and Murmuring, Prove. 30.9.

3. For that Act which is not ordered unto Sin, but to some Experiment or Trial
of the temper or disposition that is in a Man; a Temptation of Trial. Thus God
tempted Abraham, when he commanded him to offer up his Son, to prove the
sincerity of his Love and Obedience to God; Genesis 22.12. By this I know that
thou fear God. To the like purpose were all those difficult dispensations to
the People of Israel at the Red Sea, and in the Wilderness, that he might
humble them, and prove them, and to know what was in their heart, Deuteronomy. 8.2.
And for this end God often sends several Afflictions upon those he truly
loves, that their Faith may be tried. And these Trials are called Temptations,
1 Pet. 1.6, 7. Ye are in Heaviness through manifold Temptations, that the Trial
of your Faith may be found to praise, etc. Jam. 1.2. Count it all Joy when ye
fall into diverse Temptations, knowing that the Trial of your Faith works
Patience.

2. What it is to lead into Temptation, and how God may be said to lead us into
them.

1. As to the latter of these sorts of Temptations, they may, and do come from
God; viz. Trials of Grace, by the permitting and inflicting of afflictions. It
is a work no way unbecoming his Purity and Justice; It is ordained to singular
Ends.

1. To his own Glory.

2. To the good of those that he thus tryes; thereby teaching them to despise
the World; to adhere unto him; to reach out after a better Life; to live by
Faith and not by Sense; patiently to submit to his hand, and to wait upon him
for deliverance. By this Refiners fire he consumes their dross, their carnal
confidence, building Tabernacles here, drives them to their true home, and
gives them a proportion of Eternal Comfort and Hope, far more valuable than
that Temporal comfort which they want.

2. As touching Temptation unto Sin,

1. That God tempts no Man. He that is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity,
will never solicit any Man to that which only he hates: It is the great work
of God to withdraw Men from sin, and surely he will never draw Men into it.
Jam. 1.13. God cannot be tempted with Evil, neither tempts he any Man.

2. As he does not actively tempt any Man, or move him to Evil; so neither does
he infuse into the Heart or Soul a Receptivity of Temptation, he does not
excite the Heart to close with any Temptation, or create or stir up any
corruption in the Heart to take fire from a Temptation.

And yet in some sort he is said to lead into Temptation:

1. By withdrawing that Grace of his, whereby we are prevented from, and
defended against Temptation. We walk in the midst of Enemies and snares: the
Prince of the air has his Instruments, that most Vigilantly takes all
opportunities to draw us into sin, evil Angels and evil Men; And were there not
a Devil or his Instruments without us, to tempt us to Evil, we have an old Man
within us, a fountain, a Sea of Corruption, a deceitful and wicked heart, a
Body of sin and death, that can with much advantage, and does with much ease,
draw us into Sin; and the merciful God that sees these snares, which the evil
one lays for us in our way, though we see them not, sends out his own Grace
and Spirit, and sometimes removes the snare out of our way, sometimes leads us
another way that we miss the snare: he overrules and restrains this raging Sea
of our own corruptions; and, as our Savior did to the Winds and Seas, commands
them, Peace and be still: he does by the same Spirit strengthen and enable our
hearts to resist, and oppose, and subdue those Temptations that rise from
within, and comes from without. And this Grace of his he owes not to us; It is
merely of his free Mercy, Genesis 20.6. For I withheld thee from sinning against
me; and yet such is his Goodness that he seldom withdraws this Grace from us,
unless we thrust it away and reject it; and then he withdraws that Grace of
his, and that being withdrawn, that cruel and subtle Enemy of our Souls falls
in upon us, and subdues us; and that Sea of corruption within us, that has now
no banks to keep it in, breaks in and over-whelms us. And thus was the heart of
Pharaoh hardened by himself, Exodus 8.15. And yet said to be hardened by God,
Exodus 10.1. By withdrawing from him that Grace that should soften it. And this
Subduction of the Grace of God principally respects Temptations from our selves.

2. By Permission. The Devil and his Instruments are under the restraint of the
Power of God, and without a commission or at least a permission, from him,
cannot actually execute that evil that is in their Natures and Wills: he
solicits Job, by himself and his instruments to let go his integrity, but this
he cannot do without a Permission: Job. 1.12. he seduceth Ahab to his
destruction; but this he cannot do without a Permission: 1 Kings 22.21. he
tempts David to presumption and carnal confidence, 1 Chro. 21.1. But this he
cannot do without a Permission: 2 Samuel 24.1. he watches the opportunity of
Gods displeasure against Israel, and gets leave thereupon to tempt David to
number the People: and here we may see the Infinire Wisdom of God in managing
that evil, that was in the Devil to tempt, and in David's heart to be overcome,
to a most just and excellent end; the punishment of the sin of Israel by David's
sin. Here was in the same action, Malice in the Devil, corruption in David, yet
nothing but Purity and Justice in God. He never gives the Devil a Permission to
tempt, that Man may thereby sin; but he turns that Temptation and that sin into
a work either of singular Mercy or Justice. The Devil could not have entered
into Judas without a Permission; nor Judas have betrayed our Lord without a
Permission; nor the Jews have delivered him up to Judgment without a
Permission; nor Pilate have judged him without a Permission, John 19.11. Here
was Malice in the Devil, and Treachery in Judas, and envy in the Jews, and
Injustice in Pilate, and Murder in the Soldiers; and yet in God the greatest
manifestations of his Truth, and Justice, and Wisdom, and Purity, and Mercy,
that ever the World did or shall see. While he permits the Instrument to sin,
he, nor his action, is in no sort defiled by it, but manageth that sin, which
is none of his, to bring forth that Righteousness that is only his.

3. He is said to lead into Temptation, by the External Dispensation of his
Providence, and that:

1. By withdrawing those External restraints from sin; such are the taking away
of good Men, good Governors, good Laws. So much Goodness as is in these is his
own; and he may justly call home what is his. As the restraining Grace that he
lends to a particular Man is not due to him, so these External Restraints, they
are not due to us; but they are the free Mercy and Favor of God; and yet as in
the former, so in this, the removal of them is seldom but upon some eminent
sin. When Jerusalem had offended against God he takes from them the Prudent,
and the Ancient, and the Honorable Man, and the Counselor, and gives them
Children to be their Princes. Isa. 3.2. when his Vineyard brings forth wild
grapes, he takes away the hedge thereof: Isa. 5.5. the good Order, and Rule,
and Laws among them. When God is angry with a Man, or a People, Governors of
exemplary goodness are taken away, not only from the Evil to come; but by their
being taken away, Evil succeeds, evil Manners, and then evil Events.

2. By proposing of Objects, which, though they have no evil in them, nor are
they propounded to the end to draw Men to Evil; yet the Evil heart of Man takes
opportunity by them to act unto Evil. The Egyptian Inchanters could have no
more made Blood by their Enchantments without a Permission, than they could
make Lice; Exo. 8.18.
yet by that act of theirs Pharaoh his heart was hardened, Exodus 7.22. Again
when, upon the importunity of Pharaoh, and the Prayer of Moses, the Plague of
Frogs was removed, it was an act of Mercy in God; yet when Pharaoh saw there
was respite, he hardened his heart, Exodus 8.15. And here appears that Sea of
Poison that is in our heart by Nature, that will corrupt an innocent object, as
was the wedg of gold; a Mercy, as was this to Pharaoh; nay the very Grace, and
Goodness, and Patience, and Bounty of God into a Temptation to Covetousness,
Presumption, Wantonness.

Now from this Petition we learn our Duty in reference unto these Temptations:

1. In reference to such Temptations, which God is pleased oftentimes to send
for Trial, such as are Afflictions and Persecutions.

1. That we are not to seek them. Our Savious teaches us to pray against all
Temptationr; they are not in themselves good, but are turned to good by the
Wise and Merciful hand of God.

2. That if we fall into them, to be quiet and contented, and to discern the
hand that has led us into them, and the end why he did, and to cooperate to
that end: to learn by them Patience under the hand of God; Confidence in his
Grace and Power to support us; still to hold our Integrity; not to be amazed
and disordered, as if some strange thing had befallen us, but rest upon that
Promise of his, who is faithful and will not suffer us to be tempted above what
we are able, but with the Temptation will make a way to escape. 1 Cor. 10.13.
Know that it is he, whose Will thou have before prayed may be done, that has
led thee into this Temptation. And by this means thy Temptarion shall be only a
Temptation of Trial, and for thy Advantage; not a Temptation of Seduction.

3. To pray unto God:

1. To prevent us from them: for as they are not to be sought, so all due means
is to be used to avoid them.

2. To be delivered out of them.

3. To be supported in them; 1. with Patience to bear them. 2. with Grace to
improve them to Gods End; and if God say unto thee, as once he did to Paul, My
Grace is sufficient for thee, it will become an act of Heavenly Chemistry to
turn thy Iron into Gold, thy Temptation into Advantage.

2. In reference to Temptations unto sin, we learn two special Duties,
Watchfulness and Prayer, both joined together by our Savior for this purpose,
Matt. 26.41. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into Temptation.

1. Watch; (1) That thou be not a Tempter: and therein,

1. Beware of Tempting God: (for such Tempters there have been:) (1) By
Presumption and presumptuous casting our selves upon unnecessary dangers, Matt.
4.6.7. (2) by Murmuring and discontent, Exodus 17.2. Why tempt ye the Lord?
Deuteronomy. 6.16. Psalm. 78.18. They tempted God in their Heart by asking meat for
their Lusts.

2. Beware of Tempting the Devil; for such is the Villainy of our Nature, that
we are ready even to solicit the Devil himself unto Temptation, by adventuring
upon secret and unwarrantable Arts, unreasonable practices, going to Witches,
using Charms, Invocations, or willingly being in such places where they are
used; adventuring into unwarrantable places or companies without any just or
reasonable calling thereunto.

3. Beware of tempting Others unto any sin, either by thy Persuasion, or by thy
Practice. The former is more gross, the latter well near as dangerous; 1. to
the person offending; Matt. 18.7. Woe be unto the World because of offenses. 2.
unto others, especially when the occasion is given by a person in eminence of
Place or Reputation. Peter's dissimulation proves a compulsion, Gal. 2.14. and
this extends not only to things simply evil, but also to the practice of things
in themselves indifferent: 1 Cor. 8.11. Romans 14.15. Destroy not him with thy
meat for whom Christ dyed. The thing that to thee is indifferent, and so
esteemed by thee, when it shall draw another into the like practice upon thy
Example, but against his Conscience becomes an occasion to lose his Soul.

4. Beware of tempting Thy self; and this may be done diverse ways:

1. By giving way to wandering and vain Thoughts. They mislead the heart,
indispose for Good, corrupt the mind, possess it with vanity; as for Example,
when a Man will raise an imagination to himself, that if he had such a degree
of Wealth, and then what Houses he would build, what Retinue he would have,
what Table he would keep, what Equipage he would have; or fancy to himself,
that if he had such a degree of Power, then how he would revenge such an Enemy,
how he would honor such a Friend, and the like. Such is the vanity of our
minds that it can, and often does, frame such similitudes to it self, and upon
them beget such follies and vain resolutions as these. The temptation and sin
that arises out of Wealth and Power really enjoyed, are those very workings of
the mind upon them: viz. Confidence, Ostentation, Pride, Revenge and the like.
Now in these Imaginations and vain Thoughts, the Soul tempts it self in a
double way: First, he tempts his understanding into a Lie and a falsehood, by
putting himself into that imaginary condition in which he is not. 2. He tempts
himself in his Will and Affections, drawing from those very imaginations that
he has thus framed those very same mischiefs, and that very same poison, if
not worse, which his corrupted Heart would have drawn from the real enjoyment
of that very Power or Wealth, which he has imagined himself to have; and
thereby improveth this very Imagination into a real Temptation, staining,
corrupting and poisoning his mind, and commits adultery with his own
Imagination. O Jerusalem, cleanse thy self: how long shall vain thoughts, lodge
within thee? Jer. 4.14.

2. Idleness. And from this Idleness and want of Employment the Soul runs out
either into these vain Imaginations, whereof before, or into unprofitable or
sinful resolutions; and to these the Devil joyneth himself, and if he finds a
Man not busied in what he should be, he will help him to busy himself in what
he should not be: David was walking carelessly upon his house, sees and lusts,
and sins: he therefore that allows himself to Idleness, thereby tempts himself
to be tempted by himself, or by the Devil.

3. Trusting a Man's self too much unnecessarily with, or in, Places, Companies,
or Objects, that carry in them Temptations to sin; such as are rude, impious,
or wanton company, or conversation; Stage Plays; filthy or wanton songs, books,
pictures; Places of Idolatrous worship; presence at Atheistical, irreligious
disputes or discourses; reading books or discourses against the Deity, the
Scriptures, etc. Joseph declined conversation with his adulterous Mistress:
Genesis 39.10. He hearkened not to her to lie by her, or to be with her. And when
the wise Man disswadeth from the practice of dissolute persons, he forbids to
walk in the way with them, Pro. 1.15. and not to come nigh the door of her
house. Pro. 5.8. not to look upon the Wine when it gives its color in the
Glass. And a Man, that thus trusts himself with objects or companies
unnecessarily, tempts himself: and it is a kind of presumption to expect, and
rare to find, that he comes off without some disadvantage. He that has taught
us to pray that we be not led into Temptation, has given no promise of Grace
to deliver us from that Temptation, which contrary to our Prayer and duty we
seek.

2. As we must watch over our selves that we tempt not our selves or others, so
we must watch that we be not tempted; or if tempted, that we be not overtaken:
and for that purpose,

1. Watch over thy ways, and see that the ways thou go in be warrantable
ways, ways that thou have a commission of God to walk in, the ways of thy
Christian duty, the ways that are commended or allowed by the Word of God, the
ways of thy lawful profession. If they be such, thou may be confident that
he, that has given his Angels charge over thee, to protect thee in all thy
ways, will remove out of this way of thine those Snares, that the Devil lays
for thee, or at least will lead thee besides them. It is true, the Enemy has
his Traps hid as well in our ways, as out of our ways; but when we are out of
our warrantable ways, the very way wherein we are is a snare, and is likewise
all strewed with snares and traps for us; and we have no promise of direction
or protection from God in such by-ways. Therefore consider diligently, Am I in
a lawful way? have I a calling or commission from God or his Word to walk in
this way, or to be about this business? if so, well then, I will trust on him
for protection, I am in the great Kings Highway: but if not, then I am in an
Enemies Country, I have not the protection or promise of God, I am like to meet
with Temptations, and to fall under them, I am out of my way, and I know not
whether this wandering fire will lead me. And this is the meaning of the wise
man, Pro. 4.26. Ponder the way of thy feet, and let all thy ways be
established: That is, consider what way thou art in, and be sure it be a right,
and sound, and warrantable way.

2. Labor to have thy conversation and walking to be with God, in his
Presence, and keep a constant communion with him: for such is his condescension
to his poor Creatures, that he is pleased to allow us to walk with him if we
will. Enoch walked with God, Genesis 5.24. Noah walked with God, Genesis 6.9. God
said to Abraham, Walk before me and be perfect, Genesis 17.1. I have set the Lord
always before me, Psalm. 16.8. That is, to endeavor to have the whole frame of
our conversation as before him, and to have continual communion with him in all
the way of our Life; and not only at the select and solemn times of Prayer, but
in the general Frame of our conversation. And if thou have such a Guide, he
will be to thy Soul, even in the darkest and most difficult and dangerous
times, what he was once to his own People, a Pillar of fire, that thou may
see thy way before thee, and he will show thee where the snare lies, and how to
avoid it; nay, if thou slip into it, he that leads thee by thy hand, will pull
thee out of it, and will not suffer thy foot to slide.

3. When any Action of any considerable or unusual nature is to be undertaken
by thee, that is somewhat beyond or beside the ordinary track of thy Life, let
this have a special and distinct examination, and be not content with that
general care of thy ordinary way, but bring it to a more particular scrutiny.

1. Consider how it becomes the Presence of God, and whether it will abide to
be brought before him without some regret and shame: how if this were the last
action of thy Life, and presently to be brought into his Judgment, whether it
would abide that Trial.

2. Consider whether it be allowed or condemned by the Word of God, or what
part or what circumstance thereof will not abide that Examination.

3. Bid thy Conscience plainly and truly tell thee what she thinks of it, and
of every part of it, and what she likes, and what she dislikes of it.

4. See if there be any thing in it that thou would be ashamed to own it
before Men, or any part of it.

And if upon these Examinations thou can clear the action to be agreeable to
the Presence and the Word of God, the Testimony of thy Conscience, and dare
to expose it to the Judgment of Men, do it: but if it fails in any (as when it
fails in any, be sure it fails in all, though happily in some particular,
according to the different constitution of a Man, and the nature of the thing,
the exorbitancy will be more apparent, it may be, in one than in another; for
all sin flies the Presence of God, crosses the Word of God, hurts the
Conscience and brings shame) reject it or so much of it, as upon this
Examination will not abide this test; there is a Temptation in it.

4. Upon such a discovery of sin in the action to be undertaken, hold not
dispute with thy own corrupt Heart long about it, but reject it without any
more reasonings; for if thou enter into debate with thy heart, she is a
Sophister and will deceive thee; she will distinguish, and put differences, and
enforce the necessity or convenience of the business, the possibility of a
greater good which may outweigh the evil, the inconsiderableness of that
crookedness that thou have discovered, and by degrees at last over-work thee
and bring thee about. And the Devil is not wanting to be assistant in this
dispute and to interpose. When Eve entered into discourse and dispute with the
Devil, and heard his reasons, and argued the Case, he over-matched her in her
Innocence, to offend against a most express and a most penal Law: and how much
easier will the conquest be over a corrupt and weak Soul, when the treacherous
flesh is won already without any persuasion?

5. If thy Temptation be importunate, lay against it in the other balance
these two considerations, and if thou will be reasoning with thy Temptation,
reason thus: I am now persuaded and solicited to this action, wherein upon
Examination I find apparently a sin against God and my own Life; and it is
true, I have propounded to me the Necessity, or the Profit, or the Pleasure of
it, but I know I am now in the Pesence of the Glorious and Eternal God, that
has power to bring me out of this Necessity without the help of this sinful
action, and is able to blast this action, that it shall not serve to
accommodate this Necessity; before that God who is Lord of all the wealth in
the world, and has promised that he will not leave me nor forsake me; I am
before that God that has promised Eternal Pleasures for evermore to those that
fear him, and can mingle or follow this pleasure that I expect from this
temptation with a most bitter curse, even unto all Eternity; And it is this God
that has forbidden me to commit this Sin, and does stand to see whether I will
abide by his Command, or side with his Enemy; I am before my Lord Jesus, that
laid down his life for me, became a curse to redeem me, as well from my
subjection to sin for the time to come, as from the guilt of sin for the time
past; and that Jesus stands and beholds whether I now value or despise that
Blood of the Covenant, and is accordingly ready with Vengeance or Glory to
reward me; I am before those glorious and pure Spirits, the elect Angels, whom
God has hitherto appointed as Ministers for my preservation, that see and
observe whether I hold a Conformity with the Purity of their Natures, or
whether I will foul my self in this filth, and partake with their Enemy the
Prince of this World. Could the Eyes of my sense behold the least of that Glory
that beholds me, it would make me ashamed of my purest actions; and though I
see it not, I am certain it sees me. With what face can I then commit this
Villainy in the Presence of that God, to whom I, and all the World owe our
being? before the face of that Savior, who has laid down his Life to rescue
and redeem mine? before those Angels who at the command of God are pleased to
be Ministering Spirits for my preservation? how shall I grieve that Spirit, whom
I hear at this very instant whisper unto me, Do not that abominable thing which
I hate? and what will the end of this be? will it not be a stain to my Soul,
and bitterness in the End? what can this temptation promise me that it can
perform? or if it can perform what it promises, and promise what it will, can
it promise that to me which can be equivalent to the loss of the favor and
presence of the Eternal God? the loss and ruin of my immortal Soul? can it
countervail the shame and damage that will ensue upon a contempt committed to
the Majesty and Mercy of the Eternal God, before whose immediate view I am now
basely and contemptuously, at the solicitation of his and mine Enemy, going
about to commit this evil? Again, 2. Let me but consider, that with the same
measure of shame that I shall submit to this Temptation, with the same measure
of Comfort and Glory shall I resist it. When I consider that in the View and
Presence of the Glorious God, of my Merciful and Tender Savior, of the Pure
and Blessed Spirits, those Glorious Courtiers of Heaven, I shall give a
Testimony of my Love to God, I shall resist and reject the Solicitation of the
Enemy of Heaven, and hold fast mine Integrity. Could Job have but heard that
approbation which God gave of it after the Devil had practiced his Experiments,
Job. 2.3. That he still holds fast his Integrity, though thou movest me
against him, it would have abundantly satisfied him for all his Losses, and
abundantly strengthened his Heart against all future Temptations. And what we
read of him, we may be sure is true concerning our selves; the same practices
by the Devil to seduce us, and the same attestation given by the Eternal God,
if we resist his Temptations. But which is more than this, the Eternal God, as
he stands by to see my behavior, so he stands by me to supply me with
strength, if I seek to him for it, and with an Immortal Crown to reward me in
that Victory over my temptation, which his own strength has given me. I will
therefore lay in the balance against the Pleasure or Profit of my Temptation,
the Shame and the Punishment from that God that beholds me; and against my loss
in the resisting it, the Glory and Advantage in the Presence of God, that I
shall obtain in overcoming it.

6. Carry with thee a jealous and Watchful Eye over thy self in all Conditions
and Actions. For there is a Snare and a Temptation in every thing thou do, or
that does befall thee.

1. Take heed to thy Senses and their Objects: thou have an Evil Eye, a
covetous Eye, a wanton and adulterous Eye, and envious Eye, and unsatiable Eye;
thou have an itching Ear, or an Ear open to vanity, dull of hearing, when that
thou hear is profitable; thou have a saucy and a luxurious Palate: that if
it find not a snare in thy Table, or a Serpent in thy Cup, will easily make it.

2. Take heed to thy Understanding, It is apt to ravel out it self in
impertinent and unprofitable, if not dangerous and presumptuous Speculations,
to mispend it self and thy precious Time in that which hurts thee, or at least,
does thee no good; and of what use will the most of them be within one moment
after thy death? Either they shall be known exactly without a minutes study, or
they will be unuseful, and utterly unserviceable to thee; whereas every minutes
time thou spendest here in improving thy Knowledge of God and his Word is
sowing of a Seed, that shall in thy Immortal Soul, yield a Harvest suitable to
her condition.

3. Take heed to thy Memory, it is apt to receive the Figures and Impressions
of vain or sinful Words or Actions; and the Devil is apt to turn that side of
the Glass to thy Soul, that contains those Characters, especially at such
times, when it may divert thee from, or disturb thee in better Thoughts, or
Employments.

4. Take heed to thy Heart, it is a deceitful Heart, a treacherous and a false
Heart, that will side with the Enemy of thy God, and of thy Soul, and of thy
Peace; an Hypocritical and a false heart, that will turn into a thousand
shapes, so that thou can not know what it is; It is the fountain of all those
bitter waters that stream through the faculties and actions; a box full of the
Spirits of poison which will infect all thou do, and overspread the World
with villainy and furies; a foul, impure, impostumated principle, that nothing
can cure or change, but the great Lord of the World, the God of the Spirits of
all flesh; and yet when God is pleased to set up his Rule and Scepter there,
there is never a minute but this heart of thine is practicing Rebellion or
Treachery or Apostasy against it; therefore Keep thy heart with all diligence,
for out of it are the issues of thy life, Prove. 4.23. the Objects upon which
thy Heart fixes, though they are innocent and harmless for the most part, yet
the ill constitution of thy heart turns them to the poison of thy Soul* Riches,
and Power, and Honor, and Creatures are in themselves good; but it is the
heart that turns them into Temptations, and into sins. In the Pursuit of them,
it begets Covetousness, Ambition, unlawful Means. In the Fruition of them, it
begets Pride and Insolence and carnal Confidence. In the Want of them it begets
Murmuring, and Discontent and Envy: In the Use of things lawful it begets
excess and immoderation and unseasonableness: In the Performance of things
commendable and commanded, it begets Arrogance, Self-attribution, Vainglory,
Overprizing of them and of it self for them, opinion of Merit, a supposition of
Privilege to offend in other things because of the due performance of these.
And thus we cannot want a Temptation, so long as we carry about us a heart so
full of corruption; Therefore carry a strict and diligent hand over thy heart;
for it has in it a fountain, a seed, a stock of Temptations.

5. Set a Watch over all the Actions of thy Life of what kind soever: 1. In
matters Indifferent, or that are so represented to thee: suspect thy Judgment
in them, and know that thou art apt to judge partially, and to put a face of
indifferency upon things that it may be are evil; and therefore rather be
content to deny thy self the use of things indifferent, than to hazard thy self
upon that which may prove a sin. If thy carnal heart judge a thing indifferent,
it is ten to one but that thing has somewhat of sin in it: if thy heart dare
only say it is indifferent and may be done, thou may certainly conclude, that
it may certainly be let alone: In matters presented to thee as indifferent to
be done or not to be done, be content to refuse that part which thy sinful
heart most inclines thee to. When thou denyest thy self in that which thou art
sure is sinful, It is the duty of thy Obedience: when thou denyest thy self in
that which seems Indifferent, it is the duty of thy Watchfulness. 2. In matters
that are certainly. Lawful; yet take heed of any mixture of any unlawful
circumstance: for that makes thy very lawful action a snare to thee to draw
thee into sin. Any one defect is enough to make the whole action sinful: as in
the use of the creatures, if it be accompanied with the circumstances of
Immoderation Unseasonableness or Unsuitableness: in the acquiring of
Conveniences for life, if it be accompanied with any unlawful means, Anxiety,
robbing God of the Heart, unseasonable robbing God of his Time: these make the
things, that are in themselves lawful, to become sins. And not only is it so in
case of things lawful, but in case of things Necessary and Commendable: to
glorify God is our most universal and indispensable duty, yet to talk
deceitfully for him: becomes a sin: Job. 13.7. to offer Sacrifice was a duty
enjoined under the old law, yet to commit Robbery for burnt offerings, or to
offer Sacrifice with hands full of blood, turns the Sacrifice into an
Abomination, Isa. 1.13. To Pray, to give Alms, to Fast, are duties enjoined by
God; but to do them for Pride, or Vainglory, turns them into a sin. Matt. 6.1.
The mixing of an ill Means, or an ill End, spoils the whole Service.

6. Especially have an Eye to that Temptation that is most suitable to thy Age,
Complexion, Constitution, or Condition: for that is thy most dangerous
Temptation, because it has the greatest Power over thee. The temptations of
Youth are commonly Lightness, Pride of Apparel, Rashness, Lust, Excess: the
temptations of Riper Age are commonly Vainglory, Ambition, Revenge, Violence:
the temptations of Old Age, Covetousness, Morosity, etc. So the temptations
incident to the several Constitutions or Complexions, Anger, Lust, Immoderate
eating, Sluggishness, Unquietness, Fearfulness, Vanity of Thoughts, etc. So the
Temptations incident to the several Conditions of a Man, those that border upon
his Trade or Profession, Lying, Cosening, etc. Upon his Estate in this World;
Poverty is apt to incline to Murmuring, Repining, Envy at others that seem of
less Merit yet more Wealth; use of unlawful means either to supply, or to cover
our wants: Power and Greatness are apt to tempt to Revenge of past injuries, or
present neglects, to scorn and despise others, to Pride and Arrogance, to love
to be Flattered, and to hunt for Applause, to Boasting, Threatening,
Superciliousness, Forgetting of Relations, using undue Means to support it,
etc. Wealth is apt to tempt to Confidence in it, to set up our rest here, to be
loath to think of death or change, to forget God, to undervalue, or not to think
upon our everlasting future condition, vexing and tormenting cares, an
imagination that we are out of the need or reach of the Divine Providence. 1 Timothy 6.9. Those that will be rich fall into many Temptations: Pleasures
expected or enjoyed, are apt to thrust out of the heart the thought of the
Presence of God, and the thought of Death and Judgment, that so they may be the
more freely and uncontrolably enjoyed; they are apt to estrange a man from
access to God or confidence in him, etc. These and the like temptations, every
man may find, by a small observation of himself; and others, are apt to follow
the several conditions of men, and prevail upon them: and therefore, especially
upon any great change of our condition foreseen, we are to fence our selves
strongest against those temptations, which are indeed nothing else but the
Issues and Productions of the heart upon such Conjunctions, and are as natural
to it in that state of corruption, wherein she is, (as) vermin are to be
produced from heat and putrefaction; and therefore expect such temptations upon
any great change of thy condition, and fortify thy self against them with
Resolution, with Watchfulness, with often thoughts of thy Mortality, with
Remembrance of the Presence, Power, and All Sufficiency of God; and lastly,
with Recourse to God by Prayer against them; for Except the Lord keep the City,
the Watchmen wake but in vain, Psalm. 127.1.

2. The second means is that which our Savior teaches us in this Petition,
Prayer unto God the Father, who is faithful, and will not suffer us to be
tempted above what we are able, 1 Cor. 10.13. Through our Lord Jesus Christ,
who has suffered himself being tempted, and therefore is able to succor those
that are tempted. Heb. 2.18. By the Eternal Spirit; who has promised to guide
us into all truth, John 16.13. That the Almighty and Eternal God, who so far
condescends unto us, as to offer us his Hand to lead us, and his Strength to
support us, that sees all our ways, and our wanderings, and the snares that are
spread for our feet, would be pleased to guide us by his Hand and by his Eye,
that we may keep the true and old way; and if any snares be laid there for us
by the Enemy of our Peace, that he would either remove or break the snare, or
lead us about by them, or lift us over them; That he would be pleased to
cleanse our Hearts from our corruptions, the nursery of our Temptations; that
he would prepare us, and instruct, and strengthen us by his Mighty Spirit to
discern, and to oppose, and to overcome the deceits and seductions of our own
Hearts.

To conclude therefore this part of this Petition: O Lord God Almighty, that
beholdest all my ways, I find that I walk in the midst of Snares and
Temptations; the great Enemy of my Salvation and his Retinue are continually
about me, and watch for my halting, secretly and undiscoverably soliciting my
Soul to sin against thee, almost in every occurrence of my life, and every
motion of my mind; and having in any thing prevailed against me, either he
quiets my Soul in my sin, or disorders my Soul for it, and by both prevents or
diverts me from coming to thee to seek my Pardon, as a thing not necessary to
be asked, or impossible to be gained: Again, the Men, among whom I live,
scatter their temptations for me, by Persuasions to sin, by evil Examples, by
success in sinful practices; And if there were no Devil or Man to tempt me, yet
I find in my self an everlasting seed of Temptations, a stock of corruptions,
that forms all I am, and all I have or do, even thy very Mercies, into
Temptations; when I consider thy Patience and Goodness to me, I am tempted to
Presumption, to Supineness, to an Opinion of my own worth; when I consider or
find thy Justice, I am tempted to Murmuring, to despair, to think the most
Sovereign Lord a hard Master. In my Understanding, I am tempted to secret
Argumentation, to Atheism, to Infidelity, to dispute thy Truth, to curiosity,
to impertinent or forbidden enquiries. If I have Learning, it makes me Proud,
apt to despise the purity and simplicity of thy Truth, to contend for Mastery,
not for Truth, to use my Wit to reason my self or others into Errors or Sins,
to spend my time in those discoveries, that do not countervail the expense, nor
are of any value or use to my Soul after death. In my Will I find much
averseness to what is good, a ready motion to every thing that is evil, or at
least an uncertain fluctuation between both: In all my Thoughts I find
abundance of Vanity; when employed to any thoughts of most concernment to my
Soul, full of inconsistency, unfixt, unsettled, easily interrupted, mingled with
gross apprehensions. When I look into my Conscience, I find her easily bribed,
and brought over to the wrong party, allayed with self-love, if not wholly
silent, unprofitable, and dead. In my Affections I find continued disorder,
easily misplaced, and more easily over-acted beyond the bounds of Moderation,
Reason, and Wisdom, much more of Christianity and thy Fear. In my sensual
Appetite I find a continual fog and vapor rising from it, disordering my Soul
in all I am about with unseasonable, importunate, and foul exhalations, that
darken and pollute it, that divert and disturb it in all that is good, that
continually solicit it to all sensual Evils, unto all immoderation and excess.
In my Senses I have an Eye full of Wantonness, full of Covetousness, full of
Haughtiness; an Ear full of Itching after novelties, impertinencies, vanities;
a Palate full of Intemperance, studious for curiosities; a Hand full of
violence, when it is in my power; a Tongue full of unnecessary vain words, apt
to slander, to whisper, full of vainglory and self-flattery. If thou give me
a healthy strong Body, I am ready to be proud of it, apt to think my self out
of the reach of sickness or death; It keeps me from thinking of my latter end,
or providing for it; I am ready to use that strength to the service of sin,
with better advantage, more excess, and less remorse. If thou visitest me with
sickness, I am surprised with Peevishness, Impatience, with solicitous care
touching my Estate and Posterity, and Recovery; and my thoughts concerning thee
less frequent, less profitable than before, though my necessity be greater. If
thou give me Plenty, I am apt to be Proud, Insolent, Confident in my Wealth,
reckoning upon it as my Treasure, think every thought lost that is not employed
upon it, or in order to increase it, loath to think of Death or Judgment. If
thou visitest me with Poverty, I am apt to murmur, to count the Rich happy, to
cast off thy service as unprofitable, to look upon my everlasting hopes as
things at a distance, Imaginary Comforts under Real wants. If thou give me
Reputation and Esteem in the World, I am apt to make use of it to bear me out
at a pinch in some unlawful action, to use it to mislead others, to use any
base shift to support it. If thou cast me into Reproach and Ignominy, my heart
is apt to swell against the means, to study Revenge, and to die with my
Reputation, though it may causelessly be lost, and to have the thoughts and
remembrance of it to interfere and grate upon my Soul, even in my immediate
service to thee: any Cross sowers at my blessings, and carries my heart so
violently, into discontent, for, it may be, all single affliction, which I
deservedly suffer, that I forget to be thankful for a multitude of other
Mercies, which I undeservedly enjoy. If I am about a good Duty, I find my heart
tempted to perform them Carelessly, Formally, Negligently, Hypocritically,
Vain-gloriously, for false or by-Ends; and when I have done them, my heart is
puffed up with Pride, opinion of Merit, looking upon my Maker as my Debtor for
the Duty I owe him, and yet but slightly and defectively performed to him; How
then can I expect Power from my self to resist a Temptation without, when I
find so much treachery within me? I therefore beseech thee, most Merciful and
Powerful Father, to send into my heart the Grace and strength of thy blessed
Spirit to resist and overcome all my Temptations, to cleanse and purge this
foul heart of mine of this brood and nest of lusts and corruptions that are
within it; to strengthen my self against the Temptations of Hell, the World,
and my self; to lead me in safe paths; to discover and admonish me hourly of
all the dangers that are in my way; and so by thy mighty and overruling
Providence to guide me, that I may avoid all occasions of falling; so to order,
and overruled, and moderate, and temper all the occurrences of my life, that
they may be suitable to that Grace thou give me, to bear them without
offending thee; and if thou at any time suffer me to take a fall, yet deliver
me from Presumptuous sins, give me a heart speedily to fly to thee for strength
to restore me, for mercy to pardon me. If thou suffer me to fall into
Temptation, yet I beseech thee deliver me from the evil.

But deliver us from Evil. Three Evils are here meant.
1. The Evil of Sin. We are before taught to pray for pardoning Mercy in the
first Petition; for preventing Mercy in the former part of this Petition; and
here we are taught to pray for delivering, restoring Mercy. When a sin is
committed, there is not only a guilt contracted, which stands in need of Mercy
to pardon it; but the Soul receives a Wound that weakens it, and stands in need
of a Divine strength to restore it; and without this it would never rise out of
that state of Impotency, yea of Rebellion into which it is fallen, but would
multiply sin upon sin to all Eternity. As before our conversion unto God we are
dead in trespasses and sins, and cannot convert our selves; so after we are
converted, any one sin puts us, as in our selves and in respect of our own
strength, into the same state of dead Men in which our conversion at first
found us; only here is the odds, God is pleased to put into us a Seed of Life,
that shall again quicken us though we fall. 1 John 3.9. Whosoever is born of
God does not commit sin (that is, continue in it) for his seed abides in him.
1 John 2.1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate, etc. That Seed of Life, that
Advocate of our Peace, will cause him to lay hold again upon the Strength, and
Mercy and Promise of God; will carry his Eye to look upon this brazen Serpent;
will enable him to reapply the Merits and Life of Christ to his Soul; and so
that wound that was in it self mortal is cured, and the Soul enabled to return
again to God, whom by sin it has forsaken; and yet though the benefit is ours,
the deliverance is Gods, and he will be sought unto, as well for strength to
recover from the state of sin, as for Mercy to recover from the Guilt of Sin
after every fall.

2. Deliver us from the evil of Punishment, or Affliction, 1. By giving us
Patience to bear it, as from the hand of God; 2. Wisdom and Understanding to
discern and perceive what the end of God is in sending it; for the Rod has his
Voice and his Message; It may be it is to bring into remembrance some sin past
unrepented of, which lies rankling in thy conscience, though thou have
forgotten it, and so it bids thee look backward: It may be it is to prevent
thee from some sin, which thou art otherwise like to fall into, and so bids
thee look forward: It may be thy Heart begins to settle upon her lees, to fix
her self upon the World, to grow secure and careless, to grow proud and wanton,
and so it bids thee look within thee: It may be God is pleased to use this
cross to stir thee up to Dependence upon him, to seek him by Prayer, to
discover his Power and Mercy in delivering thee in some eminent way, and so it
bids thee look above thee. Learn therefore the message of the Cross, and
improve it to that end for which he sent it, and by this means thou shall be
delivered from the Evil of the Evil. 3. Deliver us from Evil, that is, from the
very Incumbency of the Evil upon us. And this is a thing that we may lawfully
ask, so it be with submission to the Will of God, who best knows what is fit
for us: only of this we may be sure, that though the thing be not granted, yet
thy Petition is not lost: when Paul besought God thrice against an affliction,
2 Cor. 12.9. Though he had not deliverance from it, yet he had sufficient Grace
given him to bear it: when our blessed Lord besought that that Cup might pass
from him, though he must drink of the Cup, yet he was heard in the thing which
he feared, Heb. 5.7. And thy Prayer for deliverance shall be answered either
with a way to escape it, or with strength comfortably to bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13.

3. Deliver us from the Evil, that is, the Evil one, who goes about as a
roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour, the Prince of Darkness, the Prince of
this World, the Prince of the power of the Air; an invisible Prince, that could
he but get commission from the great Lord of Heaven and Earth, would sift us as
wheat, would shake our Faith, and bring us under his own rule; a Creature, but
yet of that Power, Wisdom, Subtilty, and Malice, that he would be easily able
to seduce, or at least to disorder and shatter the strongest Man; as once he
did Job: therefore we have cause to pray, that, as the Son of God came to
destroy the works of Satan, to judge this Prince of this World, to bruise his
Head; so he would continually assist us with his Grace to resist him, to
discover him, even when he transforms himself into an Angel of light; that if
he shall go about to seduce us from the Truth by Signs and Wonders, as once he
did Pharaoh; by Predictions, as sometimes he did in the Heathen Oracles; by
Misapplications even of the very Word of Truth, as he endeavored to do by our
Savior; by successes and events of things; that we may remember the caution
that Moses gave unto the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 13.3. The Lord your God proves you
whether ye love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your Soul;
that if he go about to seduce us into Sin, or denying of the Truth by Proposals
and Promises of Honors, Preferments, temporal Advantages, or to affright us
from the truth by Menaces, Persecutions, Disgraces, Death, yet we may not be
allured or affrighted into sin, but may keep close to the sure Truth of God
revealed in his Word, whatever the Event be.

For thine is the Kingdom, Power and Glory.
In the beginning of this Prayer, our Savior teaches us to sterngthen our
Faith in the Mercy of God, by teaching us to call hin Father; and in the Power
of God, by teaching us to call him our Heavenly Father; that under both these
considerations we may look upon Almighty God in the entrance into our Prayers:
And because our thoughts are easily taken off from these considerations; and
like Moses Arm, our Faith soon declines, and our light soon burns out; and
because there is an equal necessity of Intention of spirit, as well in our last
request as in our first, our Savior teaches us to remind those
considerations, that may support and fortify our Souls in the close of our
Prayers, as well as in the beginning; that so the consideration of Almighty
God, his Power and Goodness, who is the Beginning and the End, the First and
the Last, may be also the Beginning and the End, as of our Prayers, so of all
our Services.

Thine is the Kingdom.

Thou art the only, and absolute, and rightful Sovereign of all thy Creatures;
and to thee do all the Creatures in the World owe an Infinite subjection; for
by thy Power and Goodness they were created and are preserved: and yet if it
were possible that Infinitude could admit of degrees, the children of Men owe a
more Infinite subjection unto thee, than any of the rest of thy Creatures; for
thou yet sparest unto them that being, that by sin they have forfeited unto
thee: and yet more than this, those whom thou have redeemed by the Passion, of
thy Son and sanctified, owe thee yet a more Infinite debt of subjection, than
the rest of the Children of Men: and because thou art our King, whither should
we go to make our requests but unto our King, in whom all Authority is justly
placed? and if thou art our King, it is but reasonable for me to desire, That
thy Name may be glorified; that all the subjects of thy Kingdom, according to
their several conditions, may Magnify and Glorify the Name of their King;
That thy Kingdom may come with evidence and demonstration of it self; and that
all thy Creatures as they owe a just subjection to thee, so they may duly
perform it; that those that have rebelled against thee may return, and be
brought into subjection to thee; that though other Lords have had an usurped
dominion over us, yet that thy Kingdom may break in pieces all Usurpations, and
recover thy revolted subjects unto their just Allegiance. That thy Will, the
only rightful Law and Rule of Justice may be done in all places of thy
Dominion, in Earth and Heaven; and that all thy Creatures may submit freely to
this thy Will, which is the only rule and measure both of their perfection and
obedience: The Wills of Earthly Kings are subject to Error, Oppression, and
Injustice, and therefore thy Providence has regulated their administrations by
Laws and Rules; but thy Will is the only Rule, Exemplar, and Foundation of
Justice; therefore let thy Will be done. That thou would give us our daily
bread; when the seven years of plenty had filled Pharaoh's storehouses; and
were after entertained with seven years of Famine, the Egyptian's cried unto
their King for bread, Genesis 41.55. And whither should we go for Bread for our
Bodies, but to our King, who is Lord of all the store of the World, and gives
meat to all his Creatures in their season, and feeds the young Ravens when they
cry? And whither should we go for bread for our Souls, but to Thee our King,
who have entrusted this Bread of Life under the hands of our Joseph, our
Savior; that thou would Forgive us our sins? For our sins are as so many
Treasons against thy Majesty, and thou alone can remit, against whom alone we
can offend: the pardoning of Sins, as it is thy peculiar Prerogative, for who
can forgive sins save God only? so it is thy Property, a part of thy Name,
pardoning iniquity, transgression and sin, Exodus 34.7. That thou would
deliver us from Temptation, the cause of sin; and from Evil, the fruit of sin;
from the incursions of that Rebel against thy Majesty, the Prince of Darkness;
for whither should the Subjects fly for Protection, but to their King? and
though that Prince has a Kingdom too, yet it is regnum sub graviore regno: the
very Kingdom of Hell is subject to thy Authority; and therefore, as thou art
our King, we beseech Thee, Protect and Deliver us.

And the Power.

There may be a lawful and a just Authority, where yet there wants Power to act
it: but as thou have a just Sovereignty and Authority over all thy Creatures,
so thou have an Infinite Power to do whatsoever thou please: nothing is too
hard for thee: Evil Men and evil Angels, though they resist thy Authority,
cannot avoid thy Power. My requests, that I have here sent up unto thee, they
are great requests, but yet they are all within thy Power to grant: Sin has
drawn a cloud and darkness over our understandings, that we cannot see thee; It
has infused a malignity into our wills, that we cannot abide thee; and how
then shall we sanctify that Name which we know not; or if we know, yet we hate
it? But thou have Infinite Power to scatter this darkness, that we may see
thee, and to conquer this perverseness, that we may love and glorify thee. The
Prince of darkness has set up his usurped power, and is become the Prince of
the World, and sets up strong holds in our hearts, and man's them with
principalities, and powers, and spiritual wickedness; but thou have Infinite
Power, even by a poor despised Gospel, to pull down these strongholds, to
subdue those Principalities and Powers, to bind the strong man that keeps the
House, and to set up thy Throne and thy Kingdom, even where Satan's seat is.
The state of our nature is so changed, that we, that were once fitted for an
obedience to thy Will, are now become enemies to it, resisters of it, dead to
the obedience of it; but thou have infinite Power by thy very Word of Command
to quicken us, as well as to create us, to change our Natures, to conform our
Wills to the obedience of thine, that so thy Will may be done in Earth as it is
in Heaven. Sin has put a curse into the Creature, that it has lost much of
that effectual power to support and to preserve our Nature, that once it had;
and it has put a disorder into the whole Creation, so that it is a wonder to
see that such a World of men and Creatures, amongst whom sin has sown such a
disorder and enmity, should be one able to live by another; yet thou have power
to remove that curse, to provide for the several Exigencies of all thy
Creatures, according to their several conveniences, to feed us in times and
places of necessity; to make a Raven our purveyor, a Cruise of Oil or a Barrel
of Meal to be a supply for three years Famine. Our daily sins committed so
often against so great a duty, against so many Mercies, so much Patience, so
much Love, so much Bounty received from one that owes us nothing, are enough to
sin away any stock of Pardoning Mercy and Patience below Infinitude; But thou
have an unsearchable bottomless Fountain of Power, as well to pardon, as to
punish. Our Temptations unto sin meet us upon every occasion, from without us,
and from within us, and we have no wisdom in our selves to foresee them; no
strength, nor yet any will, to oppose them; but thou have infinite Power to
foresee, to prevent, to divert them, and to deliver from them. The least of
Evils, armed with the guilt of any one sin, will like a weight of Lead, press
us into an impossibility of recovery from it; the enemy of our Souls is
conversant within us, and about us, and ready upon every occasion to seduce us
into sin, and to torment and disorder us for it; and his power and strength and
subtilty is beyond our power to resist; and indeed he finds us willing
captives; but as thou have Authority, so thou have Power to restrain him, to
discover him, to fortify and strengthen us against him, and to deliver us from
him: And therefore I here lay hold of the strength of Omnipotency to grant
these my Petitions; but this is not all:

And the Glory.

Omnipotency, though it be one addition of strength to our Prayers, yet it is
not enough. The Leper in the Gospel said truly to our Savior, If thou will,
thou can make me clean; but yet he does not conclude, Thou can, therefore
thou will: but thy Glory is the great End of all thy Works; the End of thy
great Work of Creation; Prove. 16.4. the End of thy Son's coming into the World
to redeem Mankind; Luke 2.14. the End of thy Eternal Counsel in electing some
to Life, and leaving others; Romans 9.22. It is the only Tribute that all thy
Works can give thee for their Being and Preservation, and that which thou
accountest most dear and peculiar unto thy self. Isa. 42.8.48.11. I am the
Lord, that is my Name, and my Glory I will not give to another. And in all
these my requests I have sought nothing but what conduces to thy Glory. In
granting what I have here asked; the Benefit is ours, but the Glory is thine.
In it, Thou have the Glory of thy Mercy, the Glory of thy Power, the Glory of
thy Bounty and Goodness, the Glory of thy Truth and Faithfulness; thou have
said of old, that thy Glory shall be revealed, and that all flesh shall see it;
Isa. 40.5. that they shall sanctify thy Name; Isa. 29.23. that thou will set
up a Kingdom that shall never be destroyed, and shall break in pieces and
consume other Kingdoms, and shall stand for ever; Dan. 2.44. Dan. 7.27. That
thy counsel shall stand, and thou will do all thy pleasure; Isa. 46.10. That
thou will give us a new heart, and a new spirit, and wilt cause us to walk in
thy Statutes, and to keep thy Judgments and do them; Ezech. 36.26, 27. That
verily we shall be fed; Psalm. 37.3. That though the young Lions do lack and
suffer hunger, yet they that seek thee shall not want any good thing; Psalm.
34.10. That if we return unto thee, thou will have Mercy, and abundantly
Pardon; Isa. 55.7. That thou art a God Pardoning iniquity, transgression, and
sin; Exodus 34.7. That thou will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are
able, but wilt with the Temptation make a way to escape; 1 Cor. 10.13. That if
we call upon thee in the day of trouble, thou will deliver us, and we shall
glorify thee: Psalm. 50.15. And yet though thou, the great God of Power and
Truth, have spoken all this, and wilt do it, yet that thou may have the due
acknowledgment of our subjection and dependence upon thee, thou will be
enquired of for this to do it for us; Ezekiel. 36.36, 37. And although we are so
sinful, that we cannot so much as deserve thy pity in our greatest misery, yet
for thy Name's sake, and for thy Glory's sake hear us: Psalm. 106.8. For thy own
sake, Isa. 48.11. And though all the Praises and Acknowledgments of thy
Creatures add nothing to thy Glory; for thine is an essential, infinite,
absolute, independent Glory; yet since thou art pleased to accept of this our
poor and our only Tribute, and to take it in good part from thy Creature, we
will thankfully acknowledge thy great condescension to us in accepting of our
Prayers, and granting our Requests, giving us liberty through thy Son to be
intercessors for our selves, for others, nay for thine own Glory and Kingdom,
and the manifestation of it. What shall I render unto the Lord for all his
benefits toward me? I will take the cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name
of the Lord. Give me Grace in all my wants and necessities to fly to thee by
Prayer; and in all my supplies and deliverances to return unto thee with
Thanksgiving.

For Ever.

Thy Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and thy dominion endures throughout
all generations; Psalm. 145.13. A Kingdom which shall in time break and subdue
all the Kingdoms of this World, and the Kingdom of darkness, Sin, Death, and
Satan. And as is thy Kingdom, such is thy Power, infinite in extent, infinitely
more comprehensive than the vastest wants or desires of thy Creatures, infinite
in duration, unexhaustible by all the successions of Time and of Eternity it
self. And as is thy Kingdom and Power, such is thy Glory, an Eternal and
endless Glory; before the birth of Time, when nothing had a Being but thy self,
thou had Infinite Self-sufficiency, and an incomprehensible fullness of
Glory; Joh. 17.5. And when thou did in time create the World, it did not
contribute unto thy fullness of Glory, but thou did communicate and imprint
some of thy Glory upon it; and all the Glory that thy Creatures bring unto
thee, is nothing else but the reflection of thine own Glory, a recoyl of that
Beam that came from thy Sun: yet though the Glory of thy Essence, cannot
receive any increase by this reflection, yet thou art pleased everlastingly to
perpetuate this thy reflexive Glory, by the immortal Angels and Spirits of just
men made perfect, to whom thou will unto all Eternity communicate a fullness of
the Vision of thy Self, according to the measure of their perfected, but finite
Natures; and from that communication of thy Glory to them, they shall
everlastingly return Glory to thy Name, saying, Blessing, Honor, Glory and
Power, be unto him that sits on the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and
ever, Amen, Rev. 5.13.

THE Lord's Prayer. PARAPHRASED.
Our Father.

O Eternal and Glorious Lord God, for thou gave at first Being to the Common
Parents of all Mankind: Thou art our Father by Nature; we owe our own immediate
Being more to Thee, than we do to our immediate Parents; for thou art the
Father of our Spirits: Thou art our Father by our Preservation; we could not
support our selves in being one moment of time, without the uncessant influence
of thy Providence and Goodness: Thou art our Father by Adoption, receiving us
in a more special manner to be thy Children in and through Jesus Christ. In all
the course and passages of our lives, thou have manifested unto us the Love,
and Compassion, and Tenderness, and Goodness, and Affection, and Kindness of a
Father; Forgiving our offenses, Healing our backslidings, Pitying our
weaknesses, Supplying our wants, Delivering us from dangers, Accepting our weak
endeavors to please and serve thee, Providing things necessary for us, and an
Immortal inheritance of Glory and Happiness. Blessed be thy Name, that art
pleased even from Heaven to commissionate us to come unto thee, and to call
upon thee under that encourageing, comfortable, and near Relation and Title of
our Father; which carries in it the most full and ample assurance of Audience
and Acceptance: for with whom can we expect Acceptance or Access? from whom
can we expect the concession of what we need, if not from Our Father? to whom
should we resort for supplies but to our Father?

Which art in Heaven.

It is true, the Fathers of our Flesh did bear to us Tenderness and Affection:
but alas they were Mortal Fathers, Fathers on earth, Fathers that either are
dead, or must dye. And besides, though their affections might be large to us,
they were straightened in Power; they were Earthly Fathers; and possibly their
affections to us were larger than their ability. But thou art our Father, an
Abiding, Everlasting Father, a Father in Heaven. As thy Love is abundantly
extended to us as a Father, so thy Power and Ability to answer us is as large
as thy Goodness. Thou art an Heavenly Father, an All-sufficient Father, we are
not straightened in thy Love to us, because thou art our Father: neither are we
straightened in thy Power, Wisdom, Goodness; for thou art Infinite in all thy
Attributes. Isa. 66.1.
And yet though thou art in Heaven as thy Throne, yet Earth is thy Footstool:
though thou dwell in the Heavens by the glorious manifestation of thy
Majesty, yet the Heaven, 1 Kings 8.27.
nor the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee. Thou art in all places by thy
Power, Presence and Essence. Our Prayers have no long journey to thee; for thou
art near unto us, and acquainted with all our thoughts, and wants, and desires.
And thou art not only present to hear our Prayers, but to Relieve, supply,
support us; and art pleased by a special Promise to make the poor cottage of an
humble, sincere, praying Soul to be thy Temple, and to be present there, Psalm.
145.18.
and to be near to all them that in integrity call upon thee.

Hallowed be thy Name.

And since thy Glory and Honor is the great End of all thy works, we desire
that it may be the beginning and end of all our Prayers and Services. Let thy
great Name be Glorious, and Glorified and Sanctified through all the World:
Isa. 11.9.
Let the knowledge of thee fill all the Earth, as the waters cover the Sea: Let
that be done in the World that may most advance thy Glory: Let all thy works
Praise thee: Let thy Wisdom, Power, Justice, Goodness, Mercy and Truth be
evident unto all Mankind, that they may observe, acknowledge and admire it,
and Magnify the Name of thee, the Eternal God. In all the dispensations of thy
Providence enable us to see thee, and to sanctify thy Name in our hearts with
Thankfulness, in our lips with Thanksgiving, in our lives with Dutifulness and
Obedience: Enable us to live to the Honor of that great Name of thine by which
we are called; and that as we profess our selves to be thy Children, so we may
study and sincerely endeavor to be like thee in all Goodness and
Righteousness, that we may thereby bring Glory to thee Our Father, which art in
Heaven: that we and all Mankind may have high and Honorable thoughts touching
thee, in some measure suitable to thy Glory, Majesty, Goodness, Wisdom, Bounty
and Purity; and may in all our words and actions manifest these inward Thoughts
touching thee, with suitable and becoming Words and Actions.

Thy Kingdom come.

Let thy Kingdom of Grace come. Let all the World become the true subjects of
thee, the Glorious God. And let the Gospel of thy Kingdom; the everlasting
Gospel, run victoriously over the face of the whole World; Revel. 11.15.
that the Kingdoms of the Earth may become the Kingdom of God and of his
Christ. Let thy Grace, and thy Fear, and thy Love, and thy Law rule in all our
hearts, and in the hearts of all Mankind. And subdue and exterminate the
Kingdom of darkness, the Kingdom of Satan, the Kingdom of Antichrist, bring
all Men to the knowledge and Obedience of the Truth: and let the Scepter of thy
Kingdom be set up and upheld as long as the Sun endures. And let thy Kingdom
of Glory come. Also make us fit Vessels of it, and that having this hope, we
may perfect holiness in thy fear, 2 Cor. 7.1. 2 Pet. 3.12.
waiting for, and hastening unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
day wherein he shall deliver up the Kingdom unto the Father, 1 Cor. 15.24.28.
that God may be all in all.

Thy will be done.

And since thy Will is a most Holy, Righteous, Gracious, Just and Wise Will,
let it be evermore our choice, to make thy will to be ours, and to resign up
our wills unto thee, and to thy Will. Let the will of thy Counsel be done: and
although we know it is not in the power of Men or Devils to hinder it, yet so
we do testify our duty unto thee, in praying that nothing may impede or retard
the Will of thy Counsels; for thy Counsels are full of Goodness, and Benignity,
and Purity, and Righteousness. And we beg thee to give us hearts most entirely
to wait upon thee, in whatsoever thou shall appoint concerning us: that if thou
shall give us Prospeirity and success in this life, we may receive it with all
Thankfulness and Humility; and use it with Sobriety, Moderation and
Faithfulness: if thou shall send us Adversity, we may entertain it with all
Submissiveness, Patience, Contentedness; cheerfully submitting to the
Dispensation of our Heavenly Father; ever acknowledging thy Will to be the best
Will, and that whereunto it becomes us with all Humility to submit to; and in
the midst of all to rejoice that our Portion, and Patrimony; and Happiness is
reserved for us in a better life. And as we desire the Will of thy Counsels may
be done upon us, so we desire the Will of thy Commands may be done by us, and
by all Mankind; that we may conform our Hearts and Lives to the Rule of thy
Blessed Word, that we may live in all Piety to thee our God, in all
Righteousness toward men, in all Sobriety toward our selves; that we may
follow those Precepts and Patterns of Holiness, Righteousness, Justice;
Temperance, Patience, Goodness; Charity, and all other Moral and Christian
Virtues, that thou have in thy Word commanded or propounded for our Practice
and Imitation.

In Earth at it is in Heaven.

And that this Obedience unto Thee and thy Will, may be performed by us and all
Mankind in some measure answerable to what is done by thy Glorious Angels in
Heaven: that we (may) do it Cheerfully without Murmuring; Sincerely without
Dissimulation; Speedily without Delay or Procrastination; and Constantly and
Uncessantly without Deficiency or Fainting: And that we may not at all fail in
our duty herein, be pleased daily more and more to reveal thy Heavenly Will
unto us, that so our Wills on Earth may answer thy Will in Heaven: and keep us
always careful and circumspect, in sincerity and integrity of heart, to keep
close unto it; that neither the corruptions of our own hearts, the seducements
of Satan, the deceits of this present World, may at any time withdraw us from
the Obedience of thy most Perfect and Holy Will.

Give us this day our daily Bread.

And now, most Gracious Father, as we have Petitioned Thee for things that more
immediately concern thy Glory, Kingdom and Will, we beg Thee to give us leave
to Petition Thee for some things that more immediately concern our selves.
Blessed Lord, thou have given us our Being; and yet when thou have so given it
us, we cannot support our selves in that Being one day, nay onemoment, without
thy further Influence and Bounty. We therefore beg of Thee our Daily Bread, and
in that all the Blessings and convenient Necessaries for our support. We beg
bread for this Life: Thou that feedest the young Ravens when they cry, we, that
are thy Children, beg of Thee to feed us with food convenient for us: Thou that
cloathest the Lillies of the field, give us clothing for our covering and
defense; and all those necessaries and convenient supplies for our wants and
conditions. And because it is thy Blessing that gives our Food ability to
nourish us, our Clothes to keep us warm, and all other outward supplies, their
serviceableness and usefulness for our Conditions, we beg thy Blessing may come
along with thy Benefits. And because it is part, as well of our Duty, as of
that State and Condition wherein thou have placed us in this Life, that in the
sweat of our brows we should eat our bread, enable us, we beseech Thee, for the
Duties of our several Callings and Employments; and bless our Labors, that we
may serve Thee faithfully therein, and may be enabled thereby honestly to
provide for our selves and Families. And as we beg of Thee this meat that
perishes, the convenient supplies of our external conditions in this life; so,
we beseech Thee, give us that Bread that may feed us unto everlasting life; an
Interest in the Righteousness and Merits of thy Son Jesus Christ, thy Grace,
and the Direction, Guidance, and Sanctification of thy Holy Spirit; whereby we
may be directed, strengthened and comforted in a walking according to thy Will
here, and may everlastingly enjoy thy Presence and Glory hereafter.

And forgive us our Trespasses.

Thou art the great Creator, Lord and Governor of all the World; and art in a
more special relation the Sovereign, the Father, the great Benefactor of
Mankind; and therefore may most justly expect from the children of Men our
uttermost Love, and Fear, and Reverence and Obedience: and thou have by the
Light of Nature, and by that greater Light of thy Holy Word, revealed unto us a
most Holy and Righteous Law, to which we owe a most entire and sincere
Obedience: and yet notwithstanding all these obligations, we poor sinful
Creatures do daily and hourly violate that Holy Law of thine, both in Thought,
Word and Deed: we omit much of what thou requirest of us; and we commit often
what thou forbiddest us: we are deficient in the remembrance of thee, in our
Love to thee, in our Fear of thee. We often omit those Duties that thou
requirest, of Invocation, Thanksgiving, Dependence; and when we perform them,
they want that due measure of Love, Humility, Reverence, Intention of mind,
that thou most justly do require and deserve: we omit those duties of
Charity, Justice, Righteousness, that we owe to others; that Sobriety,
Temperance, Moderation, Vigilance, that relate to our selves; and we daily
commit offenses against thee, the Glorious God; against our neighbors; against
our selves; contrary to the injunctions of thy Holy Law revealed to us: and
these we often reiterate against Mercies, Chastisements, Promises of better
Obedience. And although many of our Neglects and Offenses immediately concern
our selves or others, yet they are all offenses against thy Holy and Righteous
Law; and against that Subjection, and Obedience, and Duty, and Thankfulness,
that we owe unto thee. And when we have done all this, we are not able to make
thee any satisfaction, for any of the least of our offenses or neglects, but
only to confess our Guilt, and to beg thy Mercy, Pardon and Forgiveness. We
therefore come unto thee, who art our Lord and Sovereign, whose Prerogative it
is to forgive Iniquity, Transgression and Sin; to thee, which art our Father,
who art full of Pity and Compassion to thy Children, though disobedient and
backsliding Children; to thee, who art a Father of Mercies as well as of Men;
and have delight in Forgiving thy disobedient and returning and repenting
Children: and we confess our Sins, our backslidings, our failings. And upon the
account of thy own Mercy and Goodness, upon the account of thy Son's Merits and
Sufferings, upon the account of thy own Promises contained in that Word,
whereupon thou have caused thy Servants to trust, Pardon the sins of our
Duties, and the sins of our Lives; the sins of our Natures, and the sins of our
Practice; the sins of our Thoughts, Words and Actions; the sins of Omission,
and the sins of Commission; the sins of Infirmity, Failing and daily Incursion,
and the sins of Wilfulness, Presumption and Rebellion, whereof we stand guilty
before thee. Our Request, we confess, is great. The Debt whereof we desire
Forgiveness, is a great and a vast debt: but we ask it of the great and
glorious Monarch of the World; we ask it of our gracious and merciful Father;
and from that glorious God, who rejoices more in multiplying Pardons upon
repenting sinners, than the Children of Men can delight in offending.

As we forgive them that Trespass against us.

And besides all this, we have been taught by him that knew thy Will to the
full, that if we from our hearts forgive those that trespass against us, thou
that art our Heavenly Father wilt forgive us our Trespasses against thee. Upon
this Promise of thine we lay hold. In obedience to thy Commands, we forgive our
brethren their offenses against us, and beg thee therefore to make good that
thy Promise, of Forgive us our offenses. It is true, our forgiving of others
cannot merit thy Pardon of us. When we forgive, we do but our duty, because
thou command it. And besides, the Trespass that we remit is but to our
Brother, and is but a small inconsiderable trespass, in comparison of those
Trespasses whereof we beg the forgiveness of Thee: his Trespass not an hundred
pence, ours more than ten thousand talents. Yet, blessed Lord, give us leave to
lay hold upon thy Promise, which thou haft freely made, and to strengthen our
hearts in this, that that God that has commanded us to forgive our repenting
Brother, will not deny a Pardon to his repenting Children; and that God that
has been pleased to promise forgiveness to us upon our forgiveness of others,
is a God of Truth and Faithfulness, as well as a Father of Mercies: and though
our forgiveness of our Brother cannot in any proportion deserve our God's
forgiveness of us, yet when the God of Truth has freely engaged himself by his
Word to forgive us, if we forgive, he will never break it: and he that has
raised in our hearts by his Grace this Merciful temper and disposition toward
others, has thereby given us a pledge of his Mercy and Goodness unto us in
Pardoning all our offenses.

And lead us not into Temptation.

And because we are weak and frail Creatures, subject to be overcome with every
Temptation to depart from our duty to thee; and we hourly converse with all
varieties of Temptations; Temptations from the World; Temptations from Satan,
the Prince of this World; and, which is the worst of all, Temptations from our
own sinful hearts, corrupt natures, unruly affections; and without thy
continual Grace Preventing or Assisting us, the least of all these our Enemies
and Temptations are able to over-match us: And because we are obnoxious to
Temptations in all our actions, in all our conditions, in all our wants, and in
all our enjoyments; in our lawful actions we are subject to the Temptation of
Immoderation and Excess; in our religious actions, to Formality and Vainglory;
in our Prosperity, to Pride and Forgetfulness of thee; in Adversity, to
Murmuring, and Discontent, and Accusing of thy Providence; under Injuries, to
Vindictiveness and immoderate Anger; under Comforts and Enjoyments, to Security
and Abatement of our Love to thee, and setting up our hopes and our rest upon
the present World; in our Knowledge, to vain and impertinent Curiosity, Pride
and Self-conceit; in cases of Wants, to unlawful Means for our supplies; in
case of Abundance, to Luxury, Intemperance and Contempt of others; in Sickness,
to Impatience; in Health, to Presumption and Forgetfulness of our latter ends;
in our Callings, either to Negligence, Unfaithfulness and Idleness on the one
hand, or to overmuch Solicitousness and vexation on the other hand: If we are
in Company, we are in danger to be misguided by evil Persuasions or Examples
from others; if we are alone, we are apt to be corrupted by the evil
suggestions of our own corrupt hearts, or of that evil one, that watches all
opportunities, either to seduce or mischief us. And since all our ways are
before thee, and thou know the snares that are in them, and how to prevent
them, or to prevent us from them, or to preserve us against them, we beseech
thee, by thy Providence preserve us from all those Temptations which thou
know to be too strong for us; and by thy Grace preserve us from being
overcome by those Temptations, that unavoidably occur in all our actions and
conditions. Grant us the Spirit of Watchfulness and Sobriety, the Spirit of
Moderation and Humility, the Spirit of Patience and Wisdom, the Spirit of Faith
and Dependence, and the Spirit of the Love and Fear of thy Majesty, that may
support us against all those Temptations unto any sin, that may occur in the
course and passages of our Lives; that though thy Providence should permit us
to fall into Temptation, we may not fall under it, but by thy Grace be
delivered from the evil of it.

But deliver us from Evil.

Deliver us therefore, we pray thee, from Evil of all kinds and natures: from
the Evil of Sin, and from the evil of Suffering; from such Evils as may befall
our Souls, either to disturb and discompose them, or to defile and corrupt
them; from the Evils that may befall our Bodies, by Casualties or Diseases; from
the Evils that may befall our Estates by Losses and Calamities; from the Evils
that may befall our good Names by Calumnies and Slanders; from the Evil that may
befall our Relations in any kind; from Public Evils to the Church or State,
wherein we live; from Private Evils to our selves or others.

For thine is the Kingdom.

And though in this short Prayer we have been bold to ask of thee many large
and ample Benefits and Mercies, which, if we look upon our selves only, seem
too great for us to ask, yet they are not too great for thee to give; for thou
art the great King and Sovereign Lord of all the World, in comparison of whom,
all the Kings of the Earth are but small inconsiderable things; and yet even
their Honor is much advanced by Beneficence and Bounty; all which nevertheless
is but a drop in comparison of that Ocean of Goodness and Bounty and
Beneficence, that resides in, and hourly flows from Thee, the great Monarch of
the whole World. Thy Subjects are all of thy own making; and all the good that
is in them, or enjoyed by them, is derived from thee to them. The Strength and
Glory and Beauty and Excellence of thy Kingdom is not derived from thy
Subjects, but from thy Self to them. And therefore, though my Petitions be
great, they are fit to be such, because directed to the Mighty Creator and King
and Monarch of the whole Universe, the Root and Fountain of all Being and
Goodness.

The Power.

And as thou art the Great Sovereign of all the World, and art invested with
the Supreme Authority, so thou art the great Creator of all things, and art
invested with Infinite Power and All Sufficiency. And as thou have the Supreme
Authority, so thou have Boundless Power to grant and effect what we have asked.
As thou art the Great and Glorious King of Heaven and Earth, and the Father of
all Mankind, we have reason to be confident in thy Goodness and Beneficence.
And as thou art the Almighty Creator, we have assurance of thy Power, to give
us whatsoever thy Wisdom and Goodness does move thee to bestow. And therefore
upon both accounts we have reason to be confident in the obtaining of what we
ask in this Prayer from the great Lord of all things, that is Abundant in
Goodness, and All-sufficient in Power.

And the Glory.

And although thy Infinite All Sufficiency and Glory can receive no increase
from thy Creatures, yet give us leave with Humility to press Thee ever with
this argument also: Thou have been pleased to declare unto us, That thy Glory
is thy great end of all thy Works, and art pleased to set the greatest value
that may be upon thy own Glory; and art pleased to command thy Creatures to
Glorify Thee; and do accept that small Tribute of Praise and Thanksgiving
and Glorifying of thy Name from thy Creatures in good part. Thou have the Glory
of our Dependence upon Thee, which we testify by invoking thy Great Name; thou will have the Glory of thy Goodness, thy Power, thy Bounty in granting these
our Petitions, and Requests; and the Glory of our Praises and Thanksgivings for
thy Bounty and Goodness in accepting and answering them; which though it cannot
benefit Thee, yet it is all thy poor Creatures can return unto Thee, and thou
have declared thy self well pleased with it. Psalm. 50.32.
He that offers Praise glorifieth Thee.

Amen.

Blessed Lord, therefore be it according to these our Petitions and Desires:
and so much the rather, because these our Requests, are not the product of our
own Imaginations and weak Judgments; but that Son of thine, who best knew thy
Will, and what thou would grant, has taught us thus to Ask, and commanded
us thus to thus to Pray. Luke 11.2.
When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc.

FINIS.

