A DISCOVERY OF Two unclean Spirits. OR,
Two Priests by their Fruits made manifest to be out of the way of Truth, and
out of the life of Godliness, in the broad way of Destruction, therein working
deceitfully the Works of Error.

A Warning unto all scattered people that call themselves Protestants and
Christians, yet are out of the Faith and Life of Christ, in vain Traditions,
and dead Forms, wherein the blind-guids are leading them in the Pit.

Also a Declaration of the Light of Christ now appearing in every man, even in
the Conscience, by which all men are left without excuse.

With a plain and true Direction into the good Way, which from everlasting has
been prepared, to lead all that abide therein, out of transgression through
death into eternal life.

A short Discovery of the Lords great Fury and heavy Indignation that will
suddenly break forth upon all the disobedient.

Written by one, who loves the seed of God, which is unknown to the World, A.
H. in the County of Gloucester.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black-spread-Eagle at the West End of
Paul's, 1657.

A DISCOVERY OF Two unclean Spirits. OR, Two Priests by their Fruits made
manifest to be out of the Way of Truth, etc.
HEnry Hean of Ollueston, William Wilton of Elburton, against you two Priests,
by the Spirit of the living God, I am moved to Declare;

Hearken O ye Priests, this Commandment is against you, for ye does shut the
Kingdom of Heaven against men, you your selves will not enter, and them that
would go in thereat, ye will not suffer, for ye have taken away the Key of
Knowledge, even the key of David, ye have denied Christ Jesus the light of the
world, the true light that lights every man that comes into the world, in
him was life, and the life was the light of men; but ye have denied the holy
one, and the first, and have desired a Murderer to be granted unto you, and ye
have crucified the Lord of life, the faithful and true witness, who has loved
us, and is washing us from all our sins in his own blood, whose blood is
precious, and unto us it speaks better things than that of Abel, but the
voice thereof cries against you unto the Lord, for verily ye are of the
generation of them that deny Christ the true light of the world, the gift and
grace of God which brings salvation unto all them that believe in the light,
(I say) of that generation will the Lord our God require all the righteous
blood shed (in the earth;) And you Priests who reject that light of Christ, you
do dispite unto the spirit of grace, and you trample on the blood of the
Covenant that is our life, which judges and condemns the world; and you who
hate the light, is condemned by that light, and from its judgment ye cannot
fly, and from the wrath of the lamb ye cannot escape, unless ye return and kiss
the Son, who is given unto us, the light of the knowledge of the glory of God,
in the face of Jesus Christ, who is the way, the strait way to the Father, the
way of holiness, which ye have denied, and now you stand in slippery places,
and your fall is near at hand, for in the broad way you are, in which all did
ever perish that continued therein, it leads to destruction, and you are
blind and do not see it, and you lead the blind into the pit, which devoureth
widows houses, and ye, for a pretense, make long Prayers standing in the chief
Seats in the Assemblies, and love to sit in the uppermost rooms at Feasts, and
to have greetings in the Markets, and to be called of men Master, and you
preach for Hire, and divine for Money, and seek for your gain from your
Quarters, you feed on the fat, and cloth your selves with the Fleece, but the
sheep you have not fed. But now the day of reckoning is come, you are weighed
and found too light, your ruff garments are Moth eaten, and your nakedness
does appear, for your cozening is not by the Spirit of the Lord, and woe unto
you who are found in the way of Cain, running greedily after the error of
Balaam, who loved the wages of unrighteousness, And know this, O Priest, who
has violated the Law, and profaned the holy things, that the Judge of the
whole earth will do right, and will not at all acquit the wicked, neither
respect persons in judgment, who spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast
them down to hell, and spared not the old world, and turned the Cities of Sodom
and Gomorah into ashes, making them an example unto those that after should
live ungodly.

Wherefore Henry Hean, who professes thy self to be a Minister of Jesus
Christ, yet are found in the steps of them that were deceivers and false
Prophets, and art in the ungodly life, the hand of the Lord is against thee,
and thy fellows who are one with thee, in the seed of evil doers, out of the
godly life, that goes in the way of Cain to envy, and Serpent-like to deceive
the Soul, and seduce the innocent who are in the godly life, which was before
the world was, before the deceiving Serpent was, and before Cain the Murderer
was, which life was in due time made manifest, to destroy him that had the
power of death, that is the Devil, which is the foundation, the ground, the
root, and original of the ungodly life; and all you that live ungod-like, there
is your original foundation, ground and root of bitterness, from which the evil
branch does spring up, which lives, and grows, and brings forth fruit, in the
ungodly life (in the world without God) is the life and breath of all the seed
of the old Serpent, which is the cursed root of the ungodly, which always
denied Christ Jesus, the light of the world, the Son of God, who is the lamb
slain from the foundation of the world, in the great City which is spiritually
called Sodom, and Egypt, wherein is the ungodly life.

Yea, which life is condemned, and all that is joined unto it, all the wicked
and ungod-like are joined unto it, all proud and lustful ones are joined unto
it, all covetous and idolatrous ones are joined unto it, all drunkards and
gluttenous ones are joined unto it, even all them that in their eating and
drinking does not show forth the Lords death, but does feed in their lusts
without fear, and are made strong in the ungodly life, from which arises the
reprobate mind, and vile affections, being filled with all unrighteousness,
fornication, wickedness, covetousness, and maliciousness, full of envy,
murder, debate, deceit, malignity, whispering, backbiting, hating of God,
despitefull, proud, boasting, inventing of evil things, these arise from the
ungodly life; and know all ye Priests, who are joined to, and are in the
ungodly life, against you is the wrath of God revealed from heaven, who bear
not the Image of him who is created after God, in righteousness and true
holiness, but the image of him you deny who came from the living Father, and
has life in himself, whose life is the light of men, and as many as believe in
the light are in their measures raised from the dead, and are joined to the
godly life (according to the measure of the grace of God, the truth and
doctrine of Christ, the word in the beginning, by whom the world was made,
wherein God is worshipped) let him that has an ear hear the truth, where the
Devil abode not, the Devil abode not in the truth, he is out of the truth, and
has it not, the liar and deceiver is out of the truth, and all the wicked who
are born of corruptible seed, and walk not in the doctrine of Christ, they has
not God, but are out of the truth.

And thou Henry Hean, who have persecuted and imprisoned the innocent which
has broken no law, but are in the doctrine of Christ, thou art out of the
truth, in the ungodly life, joined to him that abode not in the truth, who art
out of the protection of God, and have joined to Petition men to avenge thee
against the children of God, who seek the good of thy soul, and are in the
godly life, witness that of God in thy Conscience, which has made thy heart to
fail, and thy lips to quiver, its the worm that will never die, and the fire
that will never be quenched, even the breath of the Lord, which is the life of
the Sons of God, is as a river of brimstone kindling in the wicked, who
persecute the seed of God, and make Petitions against the innocent, breathing
out threatenings against the Church, which is in God, the pillar and ground of
truth, wherein is the godly life, whom you are found persecuting of, and when
any of the servants of the Lord has from the mouth of the Lord, in love to thy
soul, warned thee to turn from the evil of thy ways, persuading thee to
believe in the light of Christ, which convinces of sin, and calls to depart
out of the ungodly life, that thou may be turned from darkness to light,
from the power of Satan to God, and receive remission of sins, and an
inheritance amongst them that are sanctified, and these have thou shamefully
entreated, and they have been by thy command cast forth of thy Steeple-house,
and by some of them thou call Christians, plucked by the hair, halled forth
by the neck, and their mouths stopped with their hands, and thy own servant
abusing in the street, and has given out threatenings against them that live in
the truth; and thou thy self have had others before Magistrates who has
committed them to prison, against whom could not be proved the breach of any
Law, let that of God in thy Conscience judge, what image thou do now bear,
what mark is on thy hand, whether thou art not in the way that Persecution went
before, where the Dragon, that old Serpent, was head before, and on thy
forehead is the mark found by which the Beast is known that makes war with the
Saints, the seed of God, in whom the godly life is persecuted by the Beast,
which is out of the godly life: I judge the not, there is one nigh that sees
and judges, whose judgment is just, unto him return, that by him thou may
read the number of thy name, which is the number of a man, who is in the
ungodly life, unto whom thou art joined, while thou art an example of pride and
haughtiness of spirit, and of covetousness, who have filled thy holes with
prey, and thy dens with raven, thou art an example of strise and contention, of
malice and revenge, of winebinbing, and of pouring in of strong drink, and of
suing at the Law, of respecting persons, and of much idleness, and thou know
that thou do love the things of this world, which is joined to another seed,
which is in the ungodly life, which keeps not the commands of God, but eats
of the forbidden fruit, let that of God in thy Conscience judge, whether thou
art not feeding on these things Serpent-like, and seeks to entice, persuade,
and draw the simple to partake with thee in the transgression, that so they
might never come to know the innocent garment, nor never come to have the pure
eye opened, but keep the evil eye open, which cannot see God, that so the curse
and plague of God might come on them to the utmost, even hardness of heart, and
blindness of mind, and so be wholly turned away into the earth, where the
presence of God is not seen, nor his pure life enjoyed, nor the holy image of
God known, and there their nakedness does appear, and so the heart lusts
after, and coveteth evil, which is then become the husband, by whom is
conceived in the lust an image like to thy self, whose fruits are evil, and so
thy fruits feeds and strengthens the wicked that is born of the earth, and
so the bands of iniquity, and chains of darkness is by thee dubbled; but
assuredly the day is come, and coming, wherein the good and bad, the just and
the unjust shall arise to judgment, wherefore awake and come forth unto the
light from which thou can not hide, that thou may receive according to thy
deeds done in thy body; and know assuredly that the power of the Lord which is
now appearing, is greater and stronger than all the powers of the world, and
all the plots and policies in the earth cannot deliver thee out of the reach of
the hand of the Lord, who is mighty, against whom thou do rebel, but thou
shall not prosper, for his hand takes hold of judgment, the sword of his mouth
is sharp and keen, and in battle thou can not stand against him, from whom
thou have had sufficient warning, but still refuses counsel, therefore if thou
perish, destruction will be of thy self, and thy blood be on thy own head.

And a Warning unto thee, William Wilton, who professes thy self, to be a
Minister of the Gospel, sent of Jesus Christ unto the People at Elburton, unto
thou I say in the name and fear of the Lord, consider, what Message thou have
there delivered: Did Jesus Christ send thee thither to daub with untempered
Mortar, to sew pillows under the peoples arm-holes, to preach Peace to the
wicked to whom there is no peace, to strengthen the hands of evil doers, that
they may not turn from the evil of their ways, and so thou healest the hurt of
the inhabitants of Elburton slightly, saying, Peace, peace, and so cause them
to trust in lying words that cannot profit, like unto them that cried, The
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, and although they should steal,
murder, and commit adultrey, and swear falsely, and burn incense unto B^ll, and
walk after other gods, they might yet come, and assemble together, to whom thou
have spoken smooth things, as though they are delivered to commit all these
abominations? Who sent thee to say the foulest sinner is in the fairest way for
Grace, and such like licentious and unwholsom Doctrines as I have heard thee
speak, seeing Jesus Christ is the way of Grace, the high way of Holiness, the
strait, and the narrow way, wherein the unclean cannot walk; therefore thou who
art unclean have also said, that the Gift and Grace of God will not satisfy,
or, Gifts and Graces out of Christ will not satisfy, as I have heard thee
speak, seeing Christ is the Gift and Grace of God, and out of him, or beside
him, there is no Grace given, to him is the Promise made, in him dwells the
fullness of the Godhead bodily, and of his fullness have all (we) received Grace
for grace, which is sufficient, by which Salvation comes, and satisfaction, in
due time is made, for, and in, all that hunger and thirst after him; therefore
thou that said, The Gift and Grace of God will not satisfy, art out of the
truth, never sent by Jesus Christ, who have preached another Gospel than what
Christ himself has Preached, who said to his Disciples, Except their
Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, they
should in no wise be saved; but thou have said, Though we sin against the Lord,
and depart from him, yet he loves us, and accepts us in Christ; let the
mouth of the liar be stopped: Does not sin where it is not killed in the flesh,
and taken away by Jesus Christ, yet separate between God and man, in every
particular as much as ever it did, and is the cursed seed of the Serpent, which
is the evil doer, that is born after the flesh, in whom every man is, whose
image every man does bear and in whom every man is lost, and is without help,
or hope, till Christ the true light be received, and so thereby his Image, who
is the image of God, in the particular restored, through the death of the
mortal birth, or body of sin; (I say) is that seed and that nature, wherein sin
lives joined unto Christ, and so presented before God without fault, does God
love the liar, that must never enter, or the fearful, and unbelieving, and
abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolators,
which shall have their part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone
and has no inheritance in the kingdom of Christ, and of God, and know thou
not that the wicked shall be turned into hell, and all nations that forget God;
Christ has no communion with Belial, that man of sin, Christ w^ll destroy, and
not save, and they that know not the body of sin in the particular, by the
cross slain and putting of, they know not Christ put on in whom God is well
pleased, in him is his love placed, and out of him God is not at all pleased;
and let shame cover thy face, who art found a false witness, that has brought
another Gospel contrary to the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whose light
thou art seen, and denied, and thy spirit judged, who through hypocrisy and
deceit, art glorying, singing, and boasting of David's experiences, amongst a
people, before thou or they are come to live David's life, and superstitiously
art worshipping the unknown God, in the idols Temple, whereas the living and
true God, dwells not in Temples made with hands, neither is worshipped with
men's hands, but they that worship him, does worship him in spirit and in truth,
God is worshipped in the truth, where the Devil is not, the false Prophet, the
liar, and deceiver, is not; our God is worshipped in the spirit of life, in the
truth, out of the Idols temple, out of the Synagogues and Steeple houses which
were made with men's hands, even the bloody hands of the Papists, and are now
the idols of the heathen, who deny the light of Christ, and therefore know not
God, but does worship the Idols, and call them Churches unto this day, but they
are dead images, out of the spirit, and out of the truth, and they that build
them, and they that repairs them, and worship, in them, are like unto them,
having ears and hear not, eyes and see not, and hearts but does not understand:
Ah, foolish man, and unwise, thy inscription is to the unknown God, if thou
had an eye to see thou might read it, how thy worships stands in thy own
will, and thy own time, out of God and his will, and for thy own ends, do
greatly dishonor the living and true God, who is only known and enjoyed in
that truth, and not at all known, nor enjoyed in the ^doll, nor found amongst
Idolaters, though they cut themselves, and cry aloud, yet there is no answer,
let that of God in thy conscience witness, even the light of Christ, which
light does condemn thee for taking of tithes, and selling of tithes, seeing
that Christ has changed the Priesthood, and also changed the Law, and is come,
the Mediator of a better Covenant, even Christ, the second Priest, not made by
the Law of a carnal Commandment, but by the oath of God, after the power of, an
endless life, he is the resurrection and the life, in which the second
Priesthood stands which live of the Gospel, which is the power of God, the
power of an endless life, if thou have an care to hear thou may hear, (I say)
the power of God, which has abolished the first Priesthood, which could not
continue by reason of death, even Levi to whom tithes was paid, a figure
serving for the time then, of Christ the second Priest, which according to the
flesh came of the Tribe of Judah, which by the Law, never received tithes, of
the tribe of Judah, there is nothing spoken of Priesthood, neither of tithes;
-- Now thou and all you Priests, that by a carnal Commandment, does take
tithes, are not in the power of, an endless life, which is the power of the
Gospel, the second Priesthood, the wisdom of God, and power of God, a Cross to
the first Priesthood, to tithes, sacrifices, and offerings, and all things in
the changeable, in that, that cannot continue by reason of death, is, all that,
that is out of the power of an endless life, but now the first Priesthood that
takes tithes, and all that run for filthy lucre, and preach for hire, and
divine for money, are out of the power of an endless life, all false teachers,
liars, and deceivers, that run before they are sent, that use their tongues and
says the Lord says, when the Lord never spoke to them, are in the lusts of
covetousness, which is idolatry, and are out of the power of an endless life,
therefore own shame upon thy head, who takes tithes, glebe-lands, and such like
gain thou seek from thy quarters, for telling of dreams, false visions, and
lying divinations of thy own brain, not according to the Oracles of God,
therefore thou could not say, when in thy Steeple-house, before thy
Congregation, I asked thee, Whether thou did own Jesus Christ, to be thy only
teacher, guide, and leader, (I say) thou could not say he was, but after a
little space thou wentst away, but from the light of Christ thou can not fly,
for there is no darkness nor shadow of death where the workers of iniquity can
hide themselves, and by the light which thou despisest art thou seen in the
works of iniquity under death, and after the shadow thereof is thy heart and
thoughts wandering, and art not at all obedient to be taught, lead, and guided
by Jesus Christ, but art an envying as much as in thee lies to the pure love of
God, and Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, and so art out of the counsel of God,
which is known in the light to all them who are in the life, which life
condemns the world, and all that which is of the world is with thee, in the
shadow of death (there is the transgressor,) therefore own condemnation on the
disobedient, in whom the power of darkness rules and guides into error and
deceit, rebellion, and diso bedience against the light of Christ, and this by
the Spirit of the living God is thy spirit, words, and ways, seen and judged,
who are out of the light, and by the light is condemned, even in thy
Conscience, wherein this warning shall stand to be read of thee in secret.

A Warning to all scattered People that call themselves Protestants and
Christians, yet are out of the Faith and life of Christ, in vain Traditions,
and dead Forms wherein the blind Guids are leading them into the Pit.
HEar all ye scattered People, who are the inhabitants of Ollveston, Elburton,
and Alveston, and elsewhere, who call your selves Christians, because you think
you have been Baptized into the Church of Christ, by some that sprinkled your
faces with water, and cross you on the foreheads, and tell you it was in the
name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which thing they say is Baptism, and a
seal of the Covenant, and then after you must learn the English Creed, and such
like things, and so they tell you, That you are of the Protestant Religion, and
the Scripture they take to talk on, and one day in seven you must come into the
Steeple-house, which they call the House of God, or Church, wherein you must
hear and believe, without contradiction, that which they in the Week, have
gathered out of old Books, which they find written in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin,
which they call the Original, and what serves their turn out of English Books
and Scriptures they put to it to make up about an hours discourse, with their
own imaginations and inventions, which they call the Word of God, for which you
must pay a large some of Money or Tithes, or else much of their hours Discourse
will be in railing against you, though by them you have not been profited at
all; so they Lord over you, and you call them Master; and thus you spend your
time, and old age comes on, and death draws nigh, and you remain as void of
true Faith, and as ignorant of Christ and your own salvation, as you were when
you were first crossed on the foreheads, and here thousands die and perish in
their sins. Therefore now all you, who are yet alive, in your sins, walking in
the vanity of your minds, in the uncircumcision of the flesh, and talk of God,
and Christ in your vain imaginations, yet know no other Call, to appear before
the Lord, than the voice of a B^ll, which men has hanged up in the head of
your Idols house, which sound reaches but to the earthly image, that deny the
Call of Christ, and does not wait for revelation whereas none knows the Father,
but the Son, and him to whom the Son reveals him, but you all stand without the
revelation and knowledge of the true God, in the house of imagery, the outward
court, the first tabernacle, which is not measured nor purified, but you are
the Gentiles that stands thereon, not within, the pure measure, but are without
the holy place, worshipping every one his image, in the abomination that makes
desolate, and so you know not the way into the holy place, but are without the
pure life, allienated in your minds by reason of wicked works: Therefore be
warned, all you proud and wanton ones, you foolish jesters, and vain talkers,
all you covetous, and worldly minded ones, whose hearts are departed from the
Lord you are but as the stubble, you scoffing and scorning ones, read your
figure, in the dust, all you carnal minded, the best of you is but as a bryar,
and the most righteous is sharper than a thorney hedge, you grow on the cursed
ground, which brings forth briars and thorns, whose end is to be burned, the
Light of Israel is as a flame, and the Holy One as a fire, which shall devour
the briars and thorns in one * day; so verily, all you people, every one,
unless you receive Christ the true light, that lights every man that comes
into the world, you are no Christians, Christ is not your head, and you are not
his members, and you also, shall die and perish in your sins. [A Warning to
you.]

Also a Declaration of the Light of Christ now appearing, and working in every
man, even in the Conscience; by which all men are left without excuse.
THere is no other name given under heaven, whereby you may be saved, but by
Jesus Christ, who is the light of the world, a light shining in darkness, but
the darkness comprehends it not, and this is the condemnation of the world,
that light is come into the world and men love darkness rather than light,
rather than Christ, who is set for a light to the Gentiles, and for salvation to
the ends of the earth; for God so loved the world, that he sent his only
begotten Son into the world, that the world through him might be saved; he that
believes in him, is not condemned, but he that believes not, is condemned
already, and the wrath of God abides on him; tribulation and wrath on every
soul of man that does evil, he that does evil hates the light, the true light
that lights every man that comes into the world, is hated by the world, the
pearl of great price; which is hid in the field: the field is the World, the
World is set in man's heart, there is the World of Faith, nigh, even in the
heart, this is the sure word of Prophecy, unto which you would do well, to
take heed unto, as unto a light shining in a dark place, even in the heart of
man, which is in darkness, turned away from God, who is light, and therefore
cannot comprehend the light, the light not shining out of darkness, but in
darkness, under the earth, under the world, the day star not risen, because the
light is not loved, the fear of the Lord is not known, and none knows the Son
of tighteousness risen in the heart, but those that fear the Lord; and all you
that know not the fear of the Lord, you are not come to the beginning of
wisdom, and you who are out of the light, does not know the place of wisdom,
though death and destruction may have the same, yet it is hid from the eyes of
all living, all that live out of the fear of the Lord, yet notwithstanding unto
man God says, Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom, and to depart from
evil, that is understanding. Therefore every one, both small and great, to the
voice of Wisdom hearken, at the posts of her gates wait, even at the light of
Christ in the Conscience, which convinces you of sin, and discovers to you
what is evil, and out of the fear of the Lord, and makes manifest what is
good, and therein you will come to know, the fear of the Lord, which is the
beginning of wisdom, and this I declare freely unto you, is the grace of God,
which brings salvation that has appeared to all men, and it now teaches, to
deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts; and all that believe in it, and are
obedient to it, does receive the living power of God, by which they live
righteously, soberly, and godly, in this present world: For of a truth there is
no other way by which you can escape the wrath of God and eternal destruction
of your souls, but only by receiving and owning the measure of light, that
comes from Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of God, the Mediator between God and
man, and then in the light you will come to know the word of Reconcilliation
which none knows tell they receives Christ the light of the world, he alone is
the Word of God, even the word of Reconciliation, without which you are all
eternally lost, and are a far off from God, while you are out of Christ, and
none comes unto him but them whom the Father draws, therefore friends every
one, while it is called to day, harden not your hearts against the drawings of
God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of lights, who desires not
the death of a Sinner, but that you might return and live, if you return,
return unto the Lord, which none can come unto, but by Christ, who is the way,
the truth, and the light, and all that believe not in the light, are out of the
way, even the way of the just, that leads unto life, and they are in the
broad way that leads to destruction, wherein all are that deny the light, and
they go astray from God in every thought, word, and work; yet in this condition
all men are left without excuse, because that which may be known of God is
manifested in man, even the light of the Son of God, has she wed it unto man
what is good, and what the Lord requires, and gives sentence against the evil
work that is contrary to the pure Law of God; for the work of the Law being
written in the heart, the conscience bearing witness, and the thoughts
continually accuses and condemns for evil, here you are all left without
excuse, and the Lord will be just in your destruction, for ignorance none of
you can plead, and the eye of God is open, he winketh not, the light is the
eye, Christ is the light, that is now appearing, in which, if you believe not,
you shall perish eternally.

A Plain and true Direction into the Good Way, which from everlasting, has
been prepared, to lead all that abide therein, out of Transgression through
Death, into eternal Life.
NOw every one, to the measure of the gift of Christ turn in your minds, that
you may every one in particular, come to find the Talant that is hid in the
earth, much slighted and not esteemed by you, and wait that you may improve it
for advantage, least the Lord come and find you with the wicked and flothful
servant, and so turn you, who has despised the measure of light, into utter
darkness, then will you find weeping and gnashing of teeth, when the Lord has
taken his own from you, the time of his long suffering, and patient forbearance
will be over, and then time will be no more, in which you may be saved, but
with the cursed remain eternally, to be tormented with the Devil and his
Angels, then what will the whole world advantage you, when you shall feel the
wrath of God, even the eternal loss of your souls; therefore be diligent,
before it be too late, for the spirit will not always strive with man: Now
every one, consider, has not you had something within you, that when you have
told a L^e, or been Drunk, or Swear, or Steal, or secretly done wrong to your
Neighbor, or blasphemed the Name of Christ, or any evil that you have
committed, have accused and condemned you, even in the very conscience, and
then many times some of you have resolved never to do so again; but then
because sentence, against the evil work has not been speedily executed, the
heart grows hard, and is wholly set again to do wickedly, and so rebel again,
against the light, even the spirit of truth, that convinces the world of sin,
which has long strived with many of you, and is pressed under as a Cart is
pressed with sheaves, therefore now let not pride, and hardness of heart prevail,
but come down, through the Rocks and Mountains, of earth, For now you are
Children of the Night.
and dust, and sin, even in the heart, which separates you from the light, even
the measure of the manifestation of the spirit, which is given to every man, to
profit withal, that so you may come to see the Son, and to enjoy the light
thereof, that thereby your feet may be guided into the way of peace, which is
the old way, and the good way, wherein peace is found to the soul, even to as
many as are in the way, and here you will all come to know, what the peace of
God is to, and what can never enter into peace, as you own and receive the
light of Christ, you will see in the light, every thing that stands out of the
light, and that which stands out of the light, you will see condemned by the
light, as your minds is turned out of that which is condemned, into the light
which does condemn, you will see the cursed ground from which all evil does
arise, and keep you down in death, under the chains of death, and bands of
iniquity in the fall from God, so you will know the want of life, and your lost
condition you will then come to see, how you are without God, and without
strength, dead in sins and trespasses, (and until you see this, you are yet
lost) and as your minds is stayed in the light, you will see what you did when
you denied the light, and how you then pierced the Son of God, and daily
crucify him, and trample on his blood, and put him to open shame: And hear
friends, you must all come to know a better day, when once you come to look on
him whom you have pierced, when you find the want of life, and see him slain,
which is the Lord of life, you will then mourn over him, as one mourns for
his only Son, and be in bitterness as one for his firstborn, into the valley
you must all come, and there the Lord will plead with you, and sorrow and pangs
will you then come to seel, even as a woman in travel; and as you there wait in
the light, you will find the light arise, and the life moving within, even in
the light, by which you will come to see, what it was, that pierced Christ, He
that slew the just, must by the just be slain.
that took away the life of the just, and so the murderer and man of sin, you
will come to know, that is turned out from God, and then the flaming Sword you
will come to find, which turns every way to keep the way of the tree of Life,
and as you abide in the light, you will see the way of the tree of Life, to be
the strait, and the narrow way, in which the unclean cannot walk, although you
will many times find, the unclean will seek to enter unto the tree of Life, but
shall not be able, because of the flaming Sword; then the wicked and unclean
spirit will seek to arise above the meek principle, and will be full of wrath
and fury against the way of truth, and tree of life, and within you there will
be murmurings, and complainings, and disputings, and temptations on every side
will come, and from every thing you set your eyes upon, but then take heed, and
let not your thoughts go forth from the pure light of Christ, but in it keep
^ow, to the foundation, and stand still in the light, and receive nothing that
stands out of the light, above the light, so as you abide low, in the pure gift
of God, you will feel the power of God, keeping of you in the hour of
temptation, that you may not be overcome with evil, but overcome evil with
good, and as you abide in the fear of the Lord, you will find the flaming Sword
bruising in you, the Serpents head, and here you will come to know the cross of
Christ, which is the wisdom of God, and the power of God, that calls you
contrary to the evil motions in the mind, that arises in wra^h subtuly from
the wicked one, the corrupt seed, but the cross of Christ will appear above,
and a foolish thing, to the wisdom and prudence of the flesh, but the wisdom
of the flesh must be denied, and the cross of Christ must be taken up, and as
you abide in the light, in which the power of God is, even the cross of Christ,
the cross being taken up, it will remain above, above the wisdom and prudence
of the flesh, and will bring it down to naught, and all the mortal, earthly,
sensual part, which is of the world, will be under the cross, and by the power
of Christ, will be mortified, and crucified, as the evil does arise, judgment
will pass against it, and by the alone power of the Lord, it will be condemned,
and subjected, and brought to death, and so here you will come truly to read
the Law that was added because of transgression, until the seed should come;
and as you abide in the cross, the pure principle which was in bondage and
captivity, under the oppressing nature, will come to be raised, and redeemed
through judgment upon the transgressor, that now in you, keeps the seed in
bondage, then the Gospel of the peace, and glad tidings of salvation, will be
then preached to the Elect, the seed of God, which the world cannot comprehend,
but as you abide in the light, you will come to know the seed, wherein is
Faith, and through faith an entrance will be known into the eternal rest where
the new Covenant and Promises of God is received and known, where all the
Children of the Lord are taught of the Lord, and does know the Lord, from the
least to the greatest of them, and then Christ is known and not till then, and
then as you abide in the light, you will know a joining unto Christ, the head
of the body, which ought not to be covered, and so the image and glory of God
you will come to see; and worship in the spirit, and in the truth, with whom
you will have peace, and acceptance, in the presence of God, and in the light
of God, and in his pure presence, Christ you will come to know to be your only
leader and guide, true Prophet and teacher, by whom alone you will see the
dragon, the beast, and the false Prophet, that makes war with the Lamb, and as
you abide in the light, you will abide with the Lamb, and then you will be
hated, despised, reviled, scoffed at, and scorned, persecuted, and killed all
the day long, as we are now, even at thi^ day, who live godly in Christ Jesus,
to which, that of God in all consciences does bear witness, and friends, as you
then abide with the Lamb, you will know all them, that are against the Lamb,
even all that are out of the light, you will see against the Lamb all greedy
doers, all devouring wolves, false prophets, deceivers, thieves, robbers, and
hirelings, that comes nor in by Christ the door of the Sheepfold, and then the
true sold, you will come to know, as you abide in the light, you abide in the
sold, with the true sheep and lambs of Christ, you will partake of the living
food and bread of Life, and then you will know the communion of Saints, and the
table of the Lord, by which you will be strengthened, and grow up in Christ,
the true Vine, to partake of the life and power of holiness, that thereby you
may be, living branches, to bring forth fruits of Righteousness unto God in due
season, which only is accepted of the Lord; and friends, as you come through
these things, into Christ the living Vine, in the Vine abide, else you will
become withered branches, that will bring forth no fruit, and then you must be
again cut off, and cast into the fire, (and this shall be a warning to them,
who are in the Vine) and until these things be truly witnessed, and in measure
passed through, you are not at all accepted, though you hear, and read, and
sing, and pray, break bread, and are baptized with water, and give all your
goods to the poor, and your bodies to be burned, you are but as tinckling
Brass, and as sounding Cymbals, while you remain, uncircumcised in hearts and
ears, the Lord has no pleasure in you, neither does he accept a sacrifice at
your hands, it is even, as if you slew a man, unless you be born again, you can
never enter into the Kingdom of God.

A Discovery of the Lords great Fury and heavy Indignation that will suddenly
break forth upon all the Disobedient.
NOw therefore be ye not mockers, lest your hands be made strong; for I have
heard from the Lord God of Hosts, a consumption determined upon the whole
earth: This in obedience unto the Lord, and in much love to your Souls, I have
given you warning, before it be too late, that you may not be consumed with the
Adulterous and wicked Generation, against whom the wrath of the Lord God does
exceedingly burn, and he cannot long hold his hand, for his fury is even ready
to break forth as fire, and the flame thereof, will burn up all the wicked, and
therefore let it not seem to you as an idle tale, but remember the days of
Noah, [ the old World] and of Sodom, and Gomorrah, and Jerusalem which after
sufficient warning, was by the Lord overthrown: Thus I am free of your blood,
and my Conscience is clear of you, in the sight of God, whether you hear or
forbear.

Anthony Holder.

THE END.

