THE HOLLANDERS EMBASSAGE TO ENGLAND.

Concerning, The good will which they bear to the Protestants in Ireland:
Signified in a Letter which they sent to Sir John Penington, Vice Admiral of
his Majesty's Fleet.

ALSO, His LETTER, and their ANSWER.

AS ALSO. The Description of the Sea Fight, which was between the Hollanders,
and the Navy belonging to Dunkirk, which was provided to aid the Rebels in
Ireland: the Hollanders getting the Conquest, and they the Overthrow.

WITH, The humble Petition of the inhabitants of the County of Essex: To the
honorable Knights and Burgesses of the House of COMMONS in Parliament.

London printed, for John Smith. 1642.

THE HOLLANDERS Embassage to ENGLAND.
LET no Roman Catholic look or cast a view upon these lines, lest he find
himself more shook, than one troubled with a Tertian Ague: for he shall find
here no comfort, but many crosses, no Pope worshipped, but in the Highway to be
confounded. No treason broaching, but traitors set on tilt, all Popish dregs
being cast forth for the devil to feed upon. No Peace proclaimed to the
Babylonish Whore, but a bloody war; no Comedy but a Tragedy. Performed not
alone by the English, but also by true and noble spirited Hollanders, whose
love to England has, and is daily expressed, which the Spaniard is able to
witness; but not delight to hear of, in regard that their plate has so often
supplied the Hollanders coffers, in spite of Spains proudest Dons or Romes
malicious curses, who are able to do as much harm as their blessings good.

O what a heart-aching to them was that happy Marriage; of our Highborn
Princess the Lady Marie to that worthy Prince William of Nassau Prince of
Orange, sure it was as prejudicial unto them, as their overthrow in eighty,
eight: but it is ours and Hollands joy, whose loyalty late proffered for the
good both of our King and Country, I thus relate.

The news being arrived in Holland, of the Protestants in Irelands calamity,
they, the States of Holland, were very much grieved, as if that they had been
partakers of the others misery.

And truly, so it does behove each well-affected Christian, who is ambitious of
nothing, but to embrace true Piety, to assist and aid his friend being in
adversity.

The heathen Queen Dido having been once in trouble her self, did the rather
give ear to the Trojan Prince Aeneas his misfortunes, saying thus; -- Miseris
succurrere disco.

Having been in trouble my self, I learn now to succor those which are
troubled.

And yet there are a sort of people in the world, which are friends to none but
those which are in prosperity, which Ovid having had experience of, writ thus;
Donec saelix multos numerabis amicos,
Tempora si fuerint nubila, solus eris.


As long as a man is happy, that is, worldly rich, he shall be sure to want no
friends: but his prosperity being eclipsed with clouds of adversity, then his
former sycophanrs will answer him, with a truly I have forgot you.

But the Hollanders prove themselves to be of another Nature, making this
loving proffer.

That if they might have privilege to fight upon his Majesty's Seas, there
should neither pass by them, Spanish or French fleet, to do either the
Protestants of England or Ireland any harm.

Thus they proffered not when the Protestants of Ireland were in prosperity,
but now being in adversity, which is true friendship indeed, and now to make
their proffer good, they have proceeded to action.

Thirty of the Hollanders men of war scouted up and down the Seas toward
Dunkirk, because it was reported in Holland, that a Navy was dispatching from
Dunkirk to aid the Rebels in Ireland.

Whose Navy these Hollanders with their prospective glasses discovered, and
presently dispatched their packet-boat unto Sir John Pennington, Vice Admiral
of his Majesty's Seas, to know whether they should set upon them or not, who
having no Commission from the King or Parliament, gave them no Answer
presently, but first sent Letters to know whether their passage should be stopped
or no, whose Answer was, that it should.

Then to the same effect did Sir John Pennington answer the Hollanders
Messenger, of which they were as joyful as the birds of the Spring, sailing
bravely toward them, to the great amazement of the Dunkirk Navy.

Who stood upon their guard as well as they could, but the Hollanders made such
havocke amongst them, at length they had little courage to go to assist the
Rebels in Ireland, having so much to do at home, the fight lasted above forty
eight hours, many of the ships which belonged to Dunkirk were taken, and many
sunk, to the eternal honor of the Hollanders, but disgrace of themselves:
thus does God revenge their cause which put their trust in him.

THE HUMBLE Petition of the inhabitants of the Connty of Essex.
To the Honorable Knights and Burgesses of the House of COMMONS in Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Knights, Gentlemen, Ministers, and other
Inhabitants in the County of Essex.
SHOWS,
UNto your Honorable House, that we are truly sensible of your great care, and
extraordinary endeavors, to settle our Religion, and Peace, and daily give
thanks to God Almighty for it; And we do further in all humility present to
your Honorable consideraions, which we do apprehend a great stop in
Reformation of matters of Religion, and our selves together with you, and the
whole Kingdom, to be in great danger of the Papists, and other ill-affected
persons, who are every where very infolent, and are ready to act the parts of
those cruel blood-suckers in Ireland, if they be not speedily prevented: by
means whereof our Trading, especially of Clothing, and Farming, grew a great
pace, to so great a damp, as many thousands are like to come to sudden want.
Nor can we expect any redress thereof, unless the Bishops and Popish Lords be
removed out of the House of Peers.

Therefore we humbly pray, that you would earnestly mediate His Majesty and
the House of Peers, That our Brethren in Ireland may speedily be relieved, and
the Papists throughout the Kingdom be disarmed, and that such defects of Arms,
as in your discretions, shall appear to be meet, may be supplied, and this
County and Kingdom, put into such a Warlike posture, as may be best for its
defense, and safety, and that the Bishops, and Popish Lords who as we
conceive, have hindered the success of your Godly Endeavors, may be put out
of the House of Peers: Not doubting but then our Petition formerly presented
to your House, will receive a more full and speedy Answer.

And your Petitioners resolving in all just and honorable ways, according to
the late Protestation, to assist you, with our lives, and Estates, against the
Enemy of God, the King, and State, humbly pray to Almighty God, for your good
success.

FINIS.

