THE PETITION of the MEMBERS of the House of Commons, Who are accused by the
ARMY.

Presented to the House upon Tuesday the 29. of June. 1647.

Expressing their grounds for desiring leave to absent themselves from the
HOUSE, and their earnest desire for a speedy day to be given unto Sir Thomas
Fairfax and the ARMY To send in what particulars they pretend to have against
them; that so a way may be open for them to Vindicate their Honor and
Innocence.

London, Printed for Ralph Smith, and are to be sold at his shop, at the sign
of the Bible near the Royal Exchange, in Cornhill, 1647.

TO The Honorable the House of COMMONS. The humble Petition of the Members
charged by the Army, who have subscribed their names.
Shows,
THat they have with all fidelity to the best of their understandings
discharged the trust reposed in them by their Country in the service of this
House: Yet such has been their unhappiness, as their persons are become the
object of the power of the Army, and that in such a height as nothing would
satisfy but their present suspention from the House, which if not done by the
next day, the Army, or Sir Thomas Fairfax in the name of the Army, declared in
their Remonstrance of the 23 of June, That they should be enforced to take such
courses extraordinary as God should enable and direct them unto, And further
pressed it by a Letter to the Commissioners of Parliament, to the same effect,
dated the 24. which was the day prefixed for our suspention, and al upon
pretense of our interest and prevalency in the House to be such, as they could
otherwise expect but small fruit in their other proceeding, which how derogatory
to the Parliament and how groundless a suggestion to color the violence
intended, we humbly leave to Your wisdoms to judge, You were pleased hereupon
to Declare by Vote the 25. of June That it did not appear that any thing had
bin said or done by us within the House touching any matters contained in the
Papers sent from the Army, for which you could in Justice suspend us, And that
by the Laws of the land no Judgment could be given for our suspention upon
those Papers, before particulars produced and proofs made. Yet preparations
were made (as several informations brought it unto us) for part of the Army to
march toward Westminster, which was looked upon by Your Petitioners as a thing
of most sad Consequence to the Parliament, and their misfortune in it
considered, that it should happen upon their occasion, though themselves most
innocent of it, And this made them resolve rather to desire your leave to
absent themselves, which they knew had been formerly practiced by Members in
the like manner accused, and inconveniences thereby prevented, And you at this
time in your prudence thought fit to grant it; Which as it was done by them out
of their meet zeal to the safety and quiet of the House, so they hope it shall
not now be turned to their prejudice and dishonor. For notwithstanding many
days have past since the Army first sent in their general Charge, and with it
a Positive desire of our present suspention, which the House could not give way
unto (as is before expressed) and therefore writ to their Commissioners with
the Army, declaring their readiness to receive any particulars, and hear any
witnesses against us, and if any were to be produced, that they expected them
by Monday the 28. instant at farthest; in stead thereof we understand, that a
Letter is come from Sir Thomas Fairfax, signifying; That though the particulars
and proofs be ready, yet they desire the great businesses may not be interruped
by their coming in till a full settlement; By which means your Petitioners may
lie a long time under a general accusation, nothing instanced in, nothing
proved, they not heard, and so neither if innocent cleared, nor condemned if
faulty; which, they hope, will not be the pleasure of this Honorable House, as
disagreeing from all rules of proceeding in the Way of Justice, where delays
and denyals be alike forbidden.

They therefore humbly pray, the House will be pleased to appoint Sir THOMAS
FAIRFAX and the ARMY a short and peremptory day to send in those particulars
and proofs, that a speedy proceeding may be had hereupon, when they doubt not
to make their innocence appear: And in case they come not in at the time
appointed that you will be pleased to take such course as Your Wisdoms shall
think fit, that we may not still be obnoxious to the will and power of others,
but that we may have Passes to dispose of our selves, according to our humble
desires represented to the House, when we asked leave to absent our selves.

And we shall pray, etc. Denzel Holles. Phillip Stapilton. William Lewis.
William Waller. John Clotworthy. John Maynard. Edward Massye. Edward Harley.
Walter Long. Anthony Nichols.


FINIS.

