OF THE NATURE OF FAITH.

A SERMON, BY BARTEN HOLYDAY, Doctor of Divinity.

LONDON, Printed by S. G. for W. Lee, and are to be sold at his shop at the
sign of the Turks Head in Fleetstreet, over against Fetterlane end. 1654.

HEBR. 11.4. By Faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice then
Cain.

OF The Nature of FAITH.
THere is not any action in common life performed without a kind of belief: no
man of a rectified reason undertaking any business, but with a belief both of
the possibility of it, and of the benefit. Which as it is true even of civil
faith in outward life, so is it much more true of true faith in the inward
life. For without this no man can please God; no man can intend to please God.
He that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them
that diligently seek him. Faith then must be the beginning of our action; and
should have been the beginning of Cain's action, as it was of Abels; but as at
first it made an inward difference between their persons, so at last an outward
also between their sacrifices. But the more distinctly to understand the
actions of these brothers, we may distinctly view the sacrificers; the
sacrifices; the difference, and the cause of the difference, which was Faith;
by faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice then Cain. Behold the
persons, Cain and Abel. The first work that God performed for man, was to make
him perfect: and the first work that man performed after God's work, was to
make himself imperfect. Which when Adam had done, and afterward had children,
God, in his wisdom, did in his first child Cain show him his graceless state
into which he was fallen; as in his mercy he did in his second son Abel show
him, in some proportion, the good estate into which he was restored. In which
two brothers God was pleased to show that division which afterward succeeded
in mankind; Abel being the first of the most eminently righteous, and Cain the
first of the notoriously wicked. Which difference in their inward estate, some
think to have been shadowed out in their outward estate. Which strictly may not
be admitted for truth, both their professions being lawful; though in some
degree it may be granted, if we look upon the occasions and readiness of
trespass in the condition of the one, more then of the other. Behold, Gain
minding earthly things, to be sure of his portion, betakes himself to gainful
husbandry and covetous commerce, and with his son Enoch builds a City; invents
also, as the Learned Josepbus tells us, weights and measures; and takes
possession of the Eastern parts, making himself a Lord in the earth, which he
chose for his portion: though we must farther censure it as a woeful husbandry,
to water the earth with his brothers blood, and then to plow it. But behold,
Abel a Shepherd, the holy Patriarch of the Patriarchs, and the Princes of
Israel. Behold, a condition of life excellent for simplicity, being a stranger,
or rather an enemy to City-craft. Behold, a life, that does not so take up the
mind, as not to respite it to meditation, and the true use of life; to
meditation on the works of God, and so of our selves a chief work of God.
Behold, a life, that requires not the fixed glory of an habitation, but aptly
expressing by its moveable shelter the humble pilgrimage of our life. Behold, a
life helping us in this life with the ready charity and wisdom of clothing.
Behold, a life, which in that first age he helped them to the matter of their
sacrifice, and was truly the substance of it, whiles the emblem of the due
innocence of it. Behold, a life, not only innocent, but eminent, a life that
is the life, whiles the lively image of a Prince and of God; a good ruler being
the Shepherd of his people, careful to guide them, careful to preserve them;
not letting the sheers go deeper then the wool. Behold, a life, the image of
God, tender in his providence over the improvident sheep; more tender in his
providence over man; most tender in his providence over innocent men, his
Church; and therefore anciently the Shepherd was not so joyfully clothed with
the fleece, as Kings, and the King of Kings with the comfort and honorable
title of the Shepherds of the people. Now these two brothers did not only
differ thus in profession, but also succession. Cain had wealth and issue; a
father he was, though of a race, that was not so happy, as to degenerate. But
Abel had the excellencies of sanctity and martyrdom. Succession he had none,
but his example: and in respect of age, in that age of the world, he died young;
preventing the growing danger of corruption by grave and death. Yet after an
excellent manner God gave succession unto Abel, whiles in stead of Abel he gave
to Adam religious Seth: whose righteous posterity dealing in innocent arts, did
afterward dwell in the holy Land; the type of that inheritance, at which they
aimed- Nor were their posterities distinguished only in conditions, but also in
name; the female posterity of Cain (as some tell us) being called the daughters
of men; as the male posterity of Abel supplied in Seth, and which were taken
with those beauties, are for their worthy descent, though not for their
frailty, called the sons of God. These then being the conditions of the
persons, you may see, yea, foresee the conditions of their sacrifices; for
each of them did offer unto God a sacrifice. The end of the creature is the
honor of the Creator; and such honor is to be performed by some
acknowledgement; and such acknowledgment has been always made by sacrifice:
which, as it is due unto God by the right of Creation, so has it been always
performed unto God from the time of the Creation: And such duty being required
of man by God, God always instructed man with such knowledge, whereby he should
be able to perform such duty. In the beginning of the world, God taught Adam,
and in process of times, Adam taught Cain and Abel, both the kind and manner
of their sacrifice. Before and under the Law, the sacrifices were much of a
like nature, they being both external; and yet they differed by the many and
special rites and ceremonies used in sacrifice under the Law. The Mosaical
sacrifices were of three kinds: some of them being divided, part unto God,
part to the Priest, and part to the people: such was the peace offering, and
this offering was the meanest. Some of them were divided, part unto God, and
part to the Priest: such was the sinne-offering, and this was the second best.
But the last was the burnt-offering, which was offered only unto God, and this
was the most excellent. Now all the sacrifices before the Law were like unto
this, being offered all only unto God: as all the spiritual sacrifices now
under the Gospel, as Love, Prayer, Fasting, Obedience, Humility, Thankfulness,
and the like, into which those external sacrifices were changed by Christ, are
all offered only unto God. And indeed even in those first sacrifices, the end
being to unite man unto God, ut sancta societate illi adhaereamus, as S. Austin
speaks; there was not only the external part, but also the inward, that with
which it was offered, the affection; of which the outward was but a sign.
Without which mind, God told them by his Prophet Isaiah, He that kills an Ox,
is as if he slew a man: he that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a dog's
neck: he that offers an oblation, as if he offered swine's blood: he that burns
incense, as if he blessed an idol. Non sacrificia sunt quae sanctificant, sed
gratia offerentis, says Irenaeus; The holiness is not in the sacrifice, but in
the sacrificer. It is not said, that God had respect to Abel's sacrifice, but
to Abel and his sacrifice; to signify, as some think, that God looked first
upon his faith, and afterward on his sacrifice. Indeed the very Heathen
understand this Divinity. Plato tells us, that the Athenians having with
excessive sacrifices implored Jupiter Ammon in a war against the Lacedaemonians,
yet receiving the overthrow, sent Ambassadors to expostulate the business with
their God, who was shrewdly shent by them, and asked, how chance he failed them
in this their enterprise? to whom their God excused himself by a reply, that
indeed he acknowledged, their Altars were better dressed then the
Lacedaemonians; but that nothing was dressed but their Altars, or that their
Altars were better dressed then their minds. The mind then being required in
a true sacrifice, you may view the sacrifices of Cain and Abel: who, according
to the instructions they had from Adam, bring their sacrifices from their own
professions; at the end of days, ( Genesis 4.3.) that is, in process of time.
Which some think to have been at the yeer's end; then indeed men were wont
solemnly to sacrifice to God in thankfulness, having gathered in their fruits.
So did the Law of Moses afterward command, Exodus 23.16. which order was
observed from the beginning by the Fathers, and as the Philosopher in his
Morals tells us, it was observed even amongst the Gentiles. But with the
sacrifice of old, there was besides a Thankfulness to God, a yearly
remembrance also of their sins, Hebr. 10.3. and a hope of the forgiveness of
them by Christ to come; the Legal sacrifices being insufficient, Hebr. 10.1,
2. Now some more particularly think, these brothers offered these sacrifices,
by the hand of their Father Adam; who was High Priest, (as afterward
ordinarily the firstborn in families were Priests until Moses) and that he
offered their gifts upon an altar. Cain, being an Husbandman brought of the
fruit of the ground; and Abel, being a Shepherd, brought of the firstlings of
his flock, and of the fat thereof. These were their sacrifices, but Abel
offered the more excellent sacrifice; this was the difference of the sacrifice.

That it was better, it may partly appear from the sacrifice it self; for
whereas it is only said, ( Genesis 4.3.) Cain's was of the fruit of the ground;
the holy Ghost more accurately ( Gen 4.4.) describes Abels to have been of the
firstlings of his flock, and the fat thereof. Which was even according to the
mind of God, to whom the first born were the most acceptable offering, and
such as afterward he prescribed by Moses. And as for the offering of the fat,
that likewise was as acceptable; whether by that be signified the fattest of
his flock; or whether he brought the fat and burnt it to the Lord, as God did
afterward command by Moses, figuratively implying, that the hardness of the
heart is to be consumed by the fireof the Spirit, as some devoutly conceive;
though without doubt it properly signifies the excellency of the sacrifice; and
but in an after-sense want of sense, and unbelief. Again, that Abel's sacrifice
was the better, it may appear from Gods approbation of it, it being said, that
God had respect to Abel and to his offering, but unto Cain and his offering he
had not respect. God had respect to Abel's offering, (...) (and respexit) which
signifies to look upon a thing with intentiveness and approbation, and so with
delight: so that God delighted in Abels sacrifice; which pleasure of the Lord
is sometimes called seeing: so God is said to have respect, or to see Abels
offering: and sometimes it is called smelling; as it is said of Noah's first
sacrifice after the flood: The Lord smelled a sweet savor, Genesis 8.21. So in 1 Samuel 26.19. When it is said, Let the Lord accept an offering, the Margin from
the Original renders it, Let him smell an offering. Lastly, that it was better,
God testified, no doubt, by some outward sign; for otherwise how could Cain
have known, that God accepted not his offering, and so fall into into
discontent? And this sign as Saint Jerome (in his Hebraical Traditions tells
us, was no other then Fire sent down upon the sacrifice of Abel, which it
consumed, leaving Cain's untouched. According to which sense Theodosian renders
it, (...), God fired Abel and his sacrifice. And this is most probable, since
God did afterward in that manner declare his delight and acceptance of other
men's sacrifices. As of the sacrifice at Aarons consecration, Levit. 9.24. Of
Gideons likewise, Judge. 6. v. 21. Of David's, 1. Chron. 21.26. Of Solomon's, 2 Chronicles. 7.1. Of Eliahs also, 1 Kings 18.38. Nay, the Heathens false Deity (the
Devil) by divine permissio^, did thus deal by the sacrifices offered amongst
them; Solinus telling us, A litato numine fit incendium; They brought the
sacrifice, and the God brought the fire, which was according to a permitted
imitation of Gods work; who testified his favorable acceptance of a sacrifice,
by turning it to ashes: so prays the Church for David's offering, (according to
the Original) Psalm. 20.3. Thus we see, that Abel's was the more excellent
sacrifice: but now we must know, why it was the more excellent: we see the
difference, now we must see the cause of the difference: and the Apostle
tells us it was Faith, by Faith. If the Apostle had not here staid our enquiry,
we might have embraced the fine conjecture of Josephus: a conjecture seemly,
though not found. He will have the diversity to arise from the diversity of
their professions. Abel's sacrifice being taken out of his flock, a sacrifice
provided to his hand in the simplicity of nature: but Cain's being a sacrifice
from the fruit of the earth, which he did dress with much care and
covetousness, forcing it by art unto abundance; and so a sacrifice of guilt
and violence. But this cause does as much differ from the true cause, as Cain's
sacrifice differed from Abel's: it does as much differ, though not as odiously,
the fruits of the earth being a sacrifice afterward also, (as appears, Lev.
23.14.) but Cains was without faith, as Abel's, the more excellent being
offered by Faith. God, says Irenaeus, looked upon Abel's sacrifice, and not
upon Cain's, propter ingenium offerentium, Qualis est enim erga Deum voluntas
offerentis, talis est erga oblationem voluntas Dei; such as is the sacrificers
will toward God, such is God's will toward the sacrifice. That therefore we
may fully understand the nature of his offering, we must fully understand the
nature of his Faith; and then we may be able to understand and imitate Abel's
devotion in his sacrifice, which he offered by Faith. Know then we must, that
whatsoever creature is endued with reason, the same is thereby also made
capable of a faith: all faith presupposing reason, in which it is implanted, in
which it is employed. Thus is there a faith in the glorious Angels, who are
endued with analogical reason, and believe in God, that they shall be
preserved, with perseverance in which faith, they persevere in their
perfection. You shall see a faith too in the wicked Angels, who do not only
know Gods Word, but also give assent unto such knowledge: which yet proceeds
not from any special illumination, but from the remainder of their natural
angelical knowledge since their fall. You shall find a faith too in wicked
men: a faith, by which they shall not save, but continue and condemn
themselves. Yet by this faith, they shall not only know, and assent unto Gods
word, but also profess that knowledge and assent; as Saint Luke testifies of
Simon Magus, Acts 8.13. To which degree the Devils also in some sort arrive;
for they confessed, that Christ was the Son of the most High; and yet looked
for no salvation by him: nay, they disclaimed all salvation by him, crying out,
What have we to do with thee? You shall yet find a greater faith in wicked
men; whereby they shall not only know and assent, and profess; but also
rejoice, nay, and bring forth fruit. Surely this will make the just man fear;
this will make him begin to suspect himself; and not only rest content with a
direct faith, to believe; but seek also for a reflexive faith to believe, that
he does believe. Yet even the faith of the wicked shall be attended with joy,
it shall be attended with fruit. They shall bear fruit, but it shall be like
corn on the housetop; in the heat of Summer it shall wither. They shall bear
fruit, but it shall be like seed in the stony ground; it shall take no deep
root, ( Luke 8.13.) This faith shall pass away with time, it shall pass away
like time, the causes of it shall pass away; error, profit, glory, which
commonly are the true causes of false faith. Nay, ye shall find a greater
faith even in wicked men; a faith able to work miracles; which faith where it
has been found, is judged to have been commonly grounded on some revelation, or
on some promise of God: whereby a man believes God will bring such things to
pass by him, as by an instrument of such miracles. And this was the faith
which Simon Magus would have bought of the Apostles, ( Acts 8.19.) and though
he could not get it for his money, yet a worse hypocrite had it freely; even
Judas the worst of reprobates. Yea, and many more shall have part in this
faith, who notwithstanding shall have no part in Christ; nay, when at the last
day, they shall say to our Savior, Lord, in thy name we have cast out Devils,
they shall be returned with I know you not. They shall be cast out among those
Devils, whom once in his name they themselves cast out. And may not this shake
even the elect? May not this cast them into doubting of their salvation? Surely
it may, surely it does; but it is but at some times; it is but for some time;
it is but in some degree, shake them it does: but it is as the mighty wind
shakes a mighty Tree: it does but shake it, it overthrow's it not; nay, it is
so far from overthrowing of it, that by the shaking of it, it makes it take
the deeper root: whiles both the tender strings, and also the firmer and hidden
spurs by which it is fastened, do by the hollowing of the earth, pierce
farther into the earth. Thus does the righteous man, when he sees, that Faith
even in a wicked man may be attended with profession, joy, fruit, nay, with
miracles: it does not make him desperate, but diligent; diligent to try
himself by the rules delivered in Gods Word, to see whether or no he have
saving Faith: Which indeed may more properly, more effectually, be called the
Faith of miracles, it being the truest miracle, that any thing should be found
in man, which should be able to be an infallible instrument of the salvation of
man. Yet such is Faith, the Faith of the elect: who therefore carefully ask
counsel of Saint Paul, to know, what such Faith is; who has more carefully
taught us, what such Faith is. And he has taught us, that it is, The substance
of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen, ( Hebrews 11.1.) By which
we may learn both the nature of the things, which our Faith aims at, and also
the nature of our Faith it self. The things which Faith aims at, have a twofold
nature: they are things not as yet in our possession; they are things not as
yet in our sight: for in this life they are but hoped for, and in this life
they are invisible. Now Faith is of that nature, that it supplies both defects:
for by Faith we have even here a kind of possession; and by Faith we have
even here a kind of sight. It is the substance of things hoped for, the
foundation, the ground, the confidence, (...), the subsistence; it is that, by
which things that are but hoped for, are in admirable manner in our possession
already. It is the evidence of things not seen: (...), the argument, proof,
demonstration; S. Austin renders it the conviction of things not seen. For as
in natural knowledge, Reason does convince the understanding, so in
supernatural knowledge Faith does convince the understanding; not by the
manifestation of the thing it self, but by the authority of God, that says it.
By which authority, as the Apostle says, he brings into captivity every thought
to the obedience of Christ, (2 Cor. 10.5.) And it is of things not seen; Quae
enim apparent (says Saint Gregory) jam fidem non habent, sed agnitionem. It is
not so proper to say, we believe things, that are present, as to say, we
acknowledge them. By Faith then we have a kind of possession of all those
glories, which we now but hope for; and by Faith we may be said, even to see
those glories, which in this life cannot be seen. This is the nature of Faith,
which even the meanest may apprehend; and if the more subtle would farther view
it, they may from inquisitiver eason improved by Religion know, That it is an
habit of the understanding, whereby eternal life is begun in us, making the
understanding firmly assent to things, that do not appear: It is an Habit: for
whereas man after his fall had only a possibility to Belief, Faith does not
only reduce that possibility into an ability, but also into a facility. Though
Christ lay a yoke upon us, Faith makes it easy: though Christ lay a burden on
us, Faith makes it light; Draw me, we will run after thee, says the Spouse,
Cant. 1. 4. Nor does this Faith teach only to run, but also it shows us,
which way to run: it does not only give us will, but also knowledge, it
being an habit of the understanding. And this is manifest from the act of
Faith, which is, to believe: To believe, being an act of the understanding,
which does notwithstanding include an act of the will; the understanding in
this act being determined by the command of the will; The act of believing
being a cogitation with an assent, whereby eternal life is begun in us: This is
the end, and yet the beginning of Faith, according to that of the Apostle,
Faith is the substance of things hoped for; the certainty of happiness by
Faith being counted for possession. And it gives this possession, whiles it
makes the understanding firmly assent, it makes it assent; it is the victory of
the holy Ghost upon the understanding; which is happily led captive into
liberty, and by the power of Grace is delivered from the bondage of Nature. And
being delivered, it does firmly assent. There is a neutral act of the
understanding, inclining to neither part; and that is doubting. There is an act
of the understanding inclining only to one part, but it is only through some
light reason, and that is conjecture. There is an act of the understanding,
inclining likewise only to one part, but it is with fear, and that is,
Opinion: But this act of Faith is not only to one part, but also with a firm
assent. In which firmness of assent it agrees with knowledge: from which,
notwithstanding it also disagrees; knowledge being of things, that are manifest
to the understanding; but Faith being of things that do not appear. And thus is
the act of Faith distinct from all the other acts of the understanding. Will
you see the Power that produces Faith? Behold Grace, For since the object of
Faith is above nature, the act of Faith must likewise be above nature: and
therefore must proceed from such a cause, as is able to raise the soul to such
an assent. Now whereas faith comes by knowledge, and knowledge seems to depend
rather upon the industry of nature, then upon infusion: True it is, Faith does
depend upon nature, in respect of its outward cause, as external persuasion;
but the principal and proper cause of Faith is grace working inwardly in the
soul. Will ye see the excellency of Faith? You see it is a supernatural gift.
It is above corrupt nature: which, alas, is so corrupt, that of it self it is
not only not able to believe, but does ungraciously resist belief. But was it
also above Pure nature? had not our Parents, in the state of Innocence, Faith?
Faith they had in God; but had they Faith in Christ? Could Christ be the object
of man's Faith, before man's fall? If we consider the person of our Savior
consisting of God and Man; it were improper to say, he was then the object of
Faith: but if we consider the sufficiency, which was radicated in the Divine
Nature, and by which power the Divine Nature did assume the Humane Nature, we
may say, that man could then believe in Christ, because then he was able to
believe in God, in what manner soever it should please God to exhibit his
sufficiency; whether under the nature of Creation, Redemption, or
Sanctification; Faith being more properly grounded in the sufficiency of these
acts, then in the specification of them. Gold, Crystal, and a Star are the
object of the fight, not in respect of solidity and transparency, but in
respect of visibility; in which they all agree. But a foreknowledge of
Redemption, which implies man's fall, seems not congruous with the state of
Innocence; such knowledge being not a degree of perfection before man's fall,
but a relief of his imperfection after it. Yet Aquinas acutely, if not
warrantably, thinks, that Adam then foreknew the mystery of the Incarnation,
though not as a means of Redemption, yet of man's perfection in the future
vision of God. Will you see the manner of the Production of Faith? It is
wrought in the soul by a double work of grace; by an illumination of the
understanding, and by an excitation of the will. Grace inlightens the
understanding, whereby first it looks forward on the Law; and then it reflects
upon its own guilt, and so begets Fear. Next it beholds eternal life, and a
promise of that life in Christ. Grace likewise inflames the will, first to
desire remission of sins, and then an application of Christ's promises to ones
self, for the effecting of such remission. These then are the things, which
grace makes us look after: this is the Order of the things, which grace makes
us look after; the Law, the Gospel, Pardon, and the Application of Pardon.
Behold likewise the Passions, which grace makes us feel: Behold, the Order of
the Passions, which grace makes us feel: Fear, Hope, Desire, Joy. This is the
Method of the holy Ghost in the conversion of the Soul. And as some of these
degrees go before faith, so you may see also the degrees of faith. You shall
sometimes see a faith so weak, that it appears to be rather Desire, then Faith.
But yet it is a desire not only of salvation, (for Balaam also could desire to
die the death of the Righteous:) but it is also a desire of Righteousness. The
fool and the wise man both desire the end; but only the wise man desires also
the means. Now this desire of grace is never without grace, and has the promise
of blessedness. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness,
( Mat. 5.6.) And though this desire of Faith be not Faith, (Desire being a
Passion, and Faith an Habit) yet this desire of Faith is never without Faith,
it is an infallible effect of Faith. The desire of grace is a sanctified
affection; and where one affection is sanctified, all are sanctified: and where
all are sanctified, the whole man is sanctified. He likewise that is
sanctified, is justified; and he that is justified, believes. He then that
unfeignedly desires Faith, has Faith: Which desire proceeds not from a want of
Faith, but from a want of the knowledge of Faith; diverse having Faith, but not
the skill to know it. Sometimes you shall find the weakness of Faith in
respect of knowledge, the knowledge of the Gospel. Thus was the Apostles Faith
in the knowledge of our Saviors Death and Resurrection. For when our Savior
told them of his going down to Jerusalem, and his sufferings there, Peter
rebukes him, and says, Master have pity on thy self; this shall not be unto
thee. Sometimes you shall find the weakness of Faith in the apprehension or
application of Christ's benefits to our selves. Yet even such Faith, such
palsie-Faith, is able to receive a gift from Christ; it is able to take hold on
Christ; who has compassionately promised not to break the bruised reed; no, nor
to quench the smoking flax. But at last our observation shall find a strength
of Faith; you shall feel a strength of Faith. A young faith is but a tender
faith; but a grown faith is a strong faith; it grows, as the body does, from
Infancy to Age. Which strength of faith arises from a continual observation of
God's secret favors and motions in the soul, through the whole course of life
in the employments of the soul. And yet this strength of faith is imperfect in
this life, the wisdom of God having left some doubtings in man, that he may
remember he is but man, that he may the more earnestly depend upon the merits
of our Savior, God and Man. And thus by a gracious art, he makes us by fearing
the strength of our faith, to increase the strength of it; he shows his
strength in our weakness; nay, he makes his strength our strength. And (to see
the Effects of faith) as there is no ground so weak, but will by manuring, if
it has any heart in it, bear some grain; so Faith, though weak, being true
Faith, has some heart in it, and will infallibly bear some fruit: The
infallible fruit of Faith, as the Apostle teaches us, is a good conscience.
Faith is the cause, and a good conscience the effect; whose evidence depending
upon the cause, makes it inseparable. And since a good conscience is never
without charity, we may by the degrees of our charity measure the degrees of
our faith; and by a want of charity discern a want of faith. And since a good
conscience is a continual Feast; there is provision not only for him that
makes the Feast, There is provision enough not only wherewith to please
himself, but wherewith also to please God. As then faith provides a good
conscience; so a good conscience always provides a Sacrifice for God. Look upon
Abel's Sacrifice, which the Lord did look upon; and you shall see why the Lord
did look upon it. Both Abel and Cain offered that which was required, they
offered it to God, by whom it was required: but only Abel offered all that was
required. Ananias and Sapphira in a seeming holiness sold their possessions.
This was an action in it self indifferent; in pretense, good; in purpose, bad;
yea, vile: whilst they sold not only their possessions, but also themselves
to work wickedness. For when they brought the money to the Apostles, as a full
offering, the price of all, they kept back a part: so when Cain brought his
offering to the Lord, he kept back a part. Nam Cain cum Deo offerret sua, seip
sum sibi retinuerat, says Rupertus. He brought an offering to God, but he
left his heart behind him. He could not believe in God; but thought, that as
God had no need of our offerings, so he had no regard of our offerings. Indeed,
he had no regard of his offering; nay, therefore God had no regard of it,
because Cain would not believe that God would regard it. But Abel first brought
his heart, and then the firstlings of his flock. His sacrifice was not only an
offering from his flock, but also from his conscience. He did believe, that he
that commanded sacrifice, did therefore regard it, because he commanded it. He
did believe, God could not command that which was unjust; he could not command
that which was in vain: Therefore he had regard to offer sacrifice, because he
believed God did regard sacrifice.

You may see in Abel the whole course of Faith. He did both know Gods will, and
assent unto it, and professed both, by his sacrifice he brought: nay, he
rejoiced and brought forth fruit, whiles he brought for sacrifice the fruit of
his flock. He went yet higher; his faith was a faith of miracles; for his faith
fetched fire from Heaven, to consume the sacrifice of his faith. Nay, this
faith of miracles was also a saving faith: it was the substance of what he
hoped for; he hoped to enjoy God in the Heavens, and by Faith he prevents that
joy, and has him here on earth. His Faith was the Evidence of God, whom he
hoped to see; and by his Faith he saw God in the fire of his sacrifice. In
which fire that descended to consume a sacrifice, the Rabbines have a
tradition, that the face of a Lion did still appear, to represent the Lion of
the tribe of Judah, the Messiah, (which to us is our Savior Christ) by whose
only mediation sacrifices are made acceptable. Abel's Faith was also an habit,
by which his sacrifice was made as acceptable as it was willing and ready; and
he as freely yielded it to the Lord, as his flock yielded it to him. And this
offering of Faith proceeded both from his understanding and his will; the fire
expressed as much, which did not only accept his sacrifice made by Faith, but
also expressed the nature of the Faith: the light expressed his knowledge, and
the heat his love. The cause was Grace: Adam could instruct him to offer by
Faith; but Adam could not enable him to offer by Faith: the knowledge was from
Adam, but the power from God. And though his faith was before ours, yet the
manner of the production of it was like ours. He understood the high offense of
his Father, and how that nature had cast him likewise under the same guilt;
this taught him to fear: he had likewise heard of the prophecy, that the seed
of the Woman should break the Serpents head: this made him to hope; and both
these inflamed his desire to apply those mercies to himself. The next degree of
his faith, was the wisdom of his faith: which was to use those means, which
might attain the end. Cain no doubt, wished Heaven as much as Abel, but not as
well: Cain desired Heaven, but not Righteousness; but Abel desired
Righteousness, as heartily as he desired Heaven. This made his sacrifice as
acceptable unto God, as Heaven was acceptable unto Abel. Now the reason why
faith is of all virtues so acceptable unto God, is, because God is most
honored by faith: for by faith we trust God, we take God's Word; and so at
once acknowledge in him sufficiency and truth: sufficiency, that he is able to
perform unto us what he does promise; and truth, that he will infallibly
perform it. Thus did faithful Abraham honor God, when upon Gods promise he
left his Country, his plentiful Country, and his kindred, not regarding the
censures of the worldly-wise, even in that age of the world, who were ready to
interpret his travail a levity and indiscretion, to leave things certain for
that which seemed uncertain. Yet he did arm himself with Divine Wisdom against
Humane wisdom, against false discretion, not having his eye upon the danger,
but upon the command; which he did not examine, but speedily execute. This was
the faithful Abraham, whom God honored. But Abel was an example both for us and
for Abraham; if not for the degree of his faith, yet for the precedence of it:
which as God made for an example in the beginning of the world, so he intended
it for an example to the end of the world. Since then we have so excellent an
hope in God, and so excellent an example in Abel: since God so looked upon his
sacrifice, that we might look upon his Faith: since Abel's Faith was more
precious unto God, then his blood, Let us beg of God, that he will give us as
true a Faith, though not as glorious a Faith, as Abels: that he will give us
not only the knowledge of faith, but also the comfort of it, a good conscience:
that he will make our Heart the Sacrifice, and his Grace the Fire, both to
restifie his love unto us, and to inflame our love unto him; and that we may so
follow Abel in Faith, that we may follow him in Happiness. Which God grant for
the merits of the blood of Jesus, which speaks better things then the blood of
Abel; and work it for us by the power of his holy Spirit, the giver of all good
gifts, the giver of Faith. To which Three Persons and one God, be all faithful
Sacrifice of Thanks and Praise, now and for ever.

THE END.
Emendations.
Page 4. lin. 1. dele he. Page 5. lin. 11. and 12. read of corruption by the
grave and death. Page 8. lin. 10. for understand, r. understood. P. 12. l. 4.
for Theodosian, r. Theodotion. Page 14. lin. ult. for continue, read convince.
P. 26. l. 7. dele was, and for faith, r. failed. P. 27. l. 3, 4. for evidence,
r. existence.


