A Rejoinder To Master Samuel Eaton and Master Timothy Taylor's REPLY.

OR, AN ANSWER TO Their late Book called A Defense of sundry Positions and
Scriptures, etc.

With some occasional Animadversions on the Book called the Congregational way
justified.

For the satisfaction of all that seek the Truth in love, especially for his
dearly beloved and longed for, the Inhabitants in and near to Manchester in
Lancashire.

Made and Published by Richard Hollinworth. Mancuniens.

The Lord will show who are his and who are holy. LONDON, Printed by T. R. and
E. M. for Luke Fawn, and are to be sold at the sign of the Parrot in Paul's
Churchyard. 1647.

Some of the principal CONTENTS of this Book.
OF gathering Churches out of true churches, Cap. 1. Sect. 1. etc. Of
separation from a true church because of corruption, S. 6.
Presbyterial-Classical, National and Ecumenical church, c, 1, s, 2. p. 6. (the
citation in l. 12 being misprinted. for it read) c, 7, s, 1, etc. c, 8, s, 2,
3, c, 9, s, 1, c, 10, s, 2, c, 28, s, 3, c, 15, c, 18 Of Parishes, how jure
divino, and how not, c. 2. s. 1, etc. Of the heathen and christian Magistrate,
c. 3. s. 3. No toleration in New England, c. 3. s. 3, 4, 5. Whether seven or
eight can make a church, c. 4. s. 1, etc. Whether Adam's family, Noah's,
Christ's, and the 12 Disciples of Ephesus, and the 120 at Jerusalem, were each
of them particular churches, ibid. The church of Jerusalem did not ordinarily
meet in one place, c. 5. s. 2. Churches were planted in cities and great towns,
not in villages, c. 5. s, 5 Judaea was not so little but it might have many
classical churches in it, ibid. The Epistle to the Corinthians written to the
churches of Achaia, c. 6. s. 1.7. E (...), what it signifies, c. 5. s. 4.
Church taken as properly in a distributive sense as for one assembly. The word
[Churches] notes not Independencie, it is given to the Jewish church, c 10. c.
1. Combination of churches, c. 8. s. 2. c. 10. s. 2, 3. Whether and how the
church consists of visible Saints, c. 11. s. 1. Edification whether the only
end of church fellowship and not conversion, c. 11. s. 7. Who are to be
excommunicated, c. 11. s. 8, 9. The Jewish church a church of Saints, c. 11. s,
10 Of the Church covenant, c. 12. s. 1, 2, etc. Church Fellowship whether a
part of the covenant of Grace, c. 13. s. 5 The Authors just Apology for
pretended abusing of the Authors out of which the Positions seem to be taken,
c. 14. s. 1 Whether Christians without Officers be properly called a church, c.
15, 1. Of election of Officers, c. 16 Ordination by Bishops and popular
Ordination compared, c, 18, s, 4 Ordination and Election compared, c. 18. s. 8
Neither Tithes nor settled maintenance are unlawful, c. 20, 21 Of Lords days
contributions for maintenance of Ministers, and the design of it, c. 21, s, 1,
etc, 9 Deacons not to take care of Ministers maintenance, c, 21, s, 3
Distinction whether between Pastors and Teachers, c, 23 Each church Assembly is
not Zion, c, 24 Of the word [without] in 1 Cor. 5. c, 25 Of Anarchy worse then
tyranny, c, 26, s, 2 Marks of Malignancy, c, 26, s, 3 Presbyteriall Government
not Prelaticall, c, 26, s, 3 The difference between the Prelaticall and
Presbyterian way, c, 26, s, 3 What was the sin of Diotrophes, c, 26, s, 4
Independents likeness and unlikenesse to Corah, etc. c, 27, s, 1, etc.
Differences between the Christian church and the Jewish, c, 27. s, 1 c, 28, s,
2, 3, 4 Of the Key of Liberty, and of the necessity of the churches consent to
excommunication, c, 29, s, 1, The Keys how given to Peter, c, 29 Whether
Excommunication and delivering to Satan be all one, c, 30 The (supposed) sad
condition of the Presbyterian churches, c, 31, s, 3 A Definition of Discipline
and Essentials examined, c. 33, s, 6. The Independents Model promised, c, 33,
s, 7 Of Ministerial acting in another congregation, c, 34 Why men may preach
to Heathens, and before Ordination, and not administer the Sacraments, c, 34,
s, 2 Recommendation of Ministers and Members. c, 34, s, 11
Christian Reader,
I intended to have reprinted in this Book the Positions, my Answer to them,
and Mr. E. and Mr. T. Reply to it, and a large Rejoinder: but that course my
wife friends judged tedious and chargeable, not profitable: I have therefore
taken up the pith of their Reply, especially of that part of it which pretends
to Scripture or Reason; and of my Rejoinder, omitting prefaces, personal
matters, repetitions, impertinencies. My style is plain and modest; Not
victory, but Gods truth, the Churches peace, thy good, yea their good (who in
this are my adversaries) is really intended and endeavored, by

Thine in the service of Truth and Peace. R. H.

A Rejoinder to Master Samuel Eaton's, and Mr Timothy Taylor's Reply.
CHAP. I. Of Gathering Churches.
I Asserted in my answer, That the Apostles never taught or practiced to gather
or separate some Christians from others, one part of this true Church, and
another part of that, (especially persons which themselves converted not) to
make a purer Church, neither with, nor without the Magistrates Authority. To
this you Reply: The Apostles both taught and practiced the separating of some
Jews from other Jews, and gathering them into a Christian Church, while yet the
Jewish Church was not dissolved: for they ceased not to be a Church of God,
till the body of them pertinaciously and desperately rejected Christ: Therefore
they preached to the Jews first, and thought themselves bound so to do, because
they were the people of God Acts 11.19. and 13.46. And yet they had commanded
some to separate from the rest (as your self acknowledge) Acts 2.40. And their
communion they had with them in Jewish worships, shows that they counted them a
true Church. And some think that their Church state ceased not while their
Temple stood. And yet before that time many Jews were gathered into many
Christian Churches, as both the Acts of the Apostles, and their Epistles do
declare. And if they might gather out of one Church, they might as lawfully
have gathered out of twenty, or an hundred, had there been so many at that time.

Rejoinder 1. Suppose (at present) that the Jewish Church was then a true
Church and not yet dissolved, yet it was then in dissolving and ceasing to be a
true Church, your own words [Yet the Jewish Church was not dissolved] do
intimate so much, and the thing is undeniable, that Church was but to continue
for a time, and then to be dissolved by Gods appointment. As it was said of the
two covenants, that the first was taken away that the other might be
established, Heb. 1^. So it was with those two Churches, that legal, this
Evangelical; the first was taken away, that the other might be established: and
therefore separation from the then Jewish Church was more warrantable, then
from our Churches, unless you count them true Churches only in the sense you
speak of, viz. the body of them have not pertinaciously and desperately rejected
Christ come in the flesh, and that (as the Jewish Church then) they now are to
be dissolved, yea that they are in dissolving by Gods appointment, and ceasing
to be true Churches, notwithstanding the progress that is made in Reformation.

2. You do not reply directly and pertinently but obliquely and evadingly
(though in your last book called the Congregational way justified P. 17. You
are bold to say, that no reply can more front or diametrically oppose my Answer
then yours does) yea, I dare appeal to your selves whether a precept or
president of gathering or separating a Church out of the Churches of Galatia,
Corinth, Laodicea, because of their many and great corruptions would not have
more fronted, and bin more point blank opposite to that part of my (as your
wisdoms style it) confused answer then this instance of the Jewish Church. For
first, Did ever any man deny that there might then be separation from the
Jewish Church? Could you think I did deny it? Your selves cite me acknowledging
it, and you could not but know after I had published my Epistle and Quere's
(what ever you did before) that an instance of separation from true Christian
Churches, would most diametrically have opposed my answer which speaks not of
separation of Christians from Jews (as your instance does) but of some
Christians from others, and I dare witness thus much for you, that if you had
such a one, you would have preferred it before the other. Secondly, Whereas you
say in your last P. 18. That you do not consider that Church as Jewish, but
under the notion of truth, you acknowledge that you do not consider it as you
ought to have considered it, for the separation was from that Church as it was
Jewish, having officers and ordinances different from the Christian Church,
which has Ministers in stead of Priests, which has not bodily sacrifices of
beasts, nor such Sacraments and Ceremonial services, nor the presence of God in
one place especially, as the Jews had, and the lawfulness of separation from
that Church, (if it were then a true Church, and had not been Jewish) is still
uncleared. 3. The Reformed Churches and Ministers, are not to be compared to
the then Jewish Church and the Priests thereof, as you seem to compare them by
pleading, that the Reformed Churches, and Ministers may be separated from,
because the then Jewish Church and Priests were to be separated from; nor is
this concerning the Ministers impertinently shuffled in (as in your last P. 18.
You most untruly allege) for they which separate from a Church, do withdraw
from the officers of it; they that separated from the Jewish Church did
withdraw from the obedience of their Priests, and they that separate from the
Reformed Churches, do withdraw from the obedience of their Ministers, and
withdrawing (your selves tell us, Page 60.) is a negative Excommunication, and
therefore the Ministers have as much or more injury, then so many members have
in every unjust separation from them, as your selves would say, were it your
case; but this must serve in stead of a better reply. Surely you have either
too much charity to the then Jewish Church and Priests thereof, or too little to
our Churches and Ministers. 4. That Church was but one, and you should show
gathering out of several Churches, for whereas you allege they might have
gathered out of twenty, or an hundred, had there been so many at that time. I
answer, that it may be there were twenty, possibly an hundred Churches while
the Jewish Temple stood: your selves say there were many Christian Churches,
and yet I doubt not but you will acknowledge both, that no Churches were
gathered or separated out of those or any other true Christian Churches, and
also that it is more lawful and orderly to separate the precious of one
Christian Church from the vile therein, and the Godly party to cast out the
incurable sinful party 1 Cor. 5.12. Then to separate some persons of several
Churches into one distinct Church, the former being not a gathering of a Church
but a reforming and purging of it, which is warranted by Scripture.


3. Whereas you speak much both in your former and latter Book, of the truth of
the then Jewish Church, I pray you what trueness mean you? A natural trueness,
as a thief or a liar is a true man, (id est) truly a man, and Satan a true
spirit that is truly a spirit, or a moral trueness, viz. that it held and
taught the way of salvation, dare you say that the Jewish Church then did hold
and teach the way of salvation? Did they not pertinaciously and desperately
reject Christ? No not while their Temple stood, as you say, some think? The
Scripture calls them an untoward generation, from which it exhorts tho e that
were pricked in their hearts, (which were but few in respect of the body of the
Jews) to save themselves, and from amongst which the Lord converted and added to
the Christian Church, such as should be saved, Acts 2.40.47. And they did put
the word from them being filled withenty, contradicting and blaspheming, Acts
13.45.46. Again the Apostle. Romans 11.11, 12, 15, 19. Plainly implies, that the
Jewish Church ceased to be a true Church, did fall, was broken off, cast away,
before salvation came to the Gentiles. Nor do your Scriptures or reasons
solidly prove that the Jewish Church was then a true Church; for one of your
texts, Acts 11. which you produce for that purpose says, That they that were
scattered (whom in this place you call Apostles contrary to Scripture, Acts
8.1. and your own assertion elsewhere; Defense, P. 4.) Preached some to the
Jews only, and some when they were come to Antioch, to the Grecians also, Acts
11.20. Now the Grecians were not then a Church of God, nor gathered (yourselvs
say) into Church state til Barnabas was sent to them, Defense p. 4. The other
text mentions their Preaching to the Jews first, but that they thought
themselves bound to Preach to the Jews first, because they were the people of
God, is your gloss, which cannot be inferred from your texts jointly or
severally; you know Gods command might make it necessary, they should Preach to
the Jews first, whether they were at that very time the people of God or no,
and that was the true reason of it, as you may see by comparing Acts 13.46.47.
with, Math. 10.1.5.6. But neither their Preaching first to the Jews nor
afterward to the Gentiles, does evince that either of them were then the
people of God. As for the Communion the Apostles had with the Jews which is
your second argument, to prove the trueness of the then Jewish Church, I would
you had expressed what Communion what worships you mean, if that which you
count properly Church Communion, then the Apostles did not (as you say they
did) teach and practice separation from the then Jewish Church, at least not a
total one, they had yet Church Communion with her, if you mean not Church
Communion which is properly and peculiarly such, then it did not show that they
counted her a true Church: Though the Apostles being Jews and formerly members
of that Church might become Jews to the Jews, 1 Cor. 9.20. That they might ga^n
the Jews and give no offense, Acts 21. (which is unlawful to do to those that
are within or without the Church, 1 Cor. 10.32.) Might give great respect to
the Jewish Church and worships even after they were then dead, as in some
places by way of funeral pomp, the honor done to great personages by their
attendants while they lived is in measure continued to them after their death,
till they be buried, as uncovering the head, carrying maces and scepters before
them, etc.

Lastly, Unless you can solidly prove 1. That the Jewish Church was then a true
Church by a moral trueness. 2 That there is or ought to be such a change of
our Ministry, Sacraments, and service of God in the Churches gathered from
amongst us, as was then of the Jewish Priesthood, Sacraments, and service of
God, in those Churches which were gathered from amongst them. 3 That the
Reformed Churches and Ministers, may as lawfully be forsaken as the then Jewish
Church and the Priests thereof. 4 That you have authority to gather Churches
amongst us, as well as the Apostles had for gathering Churches from amongst the
Jews. 5 That men are bound to become Independents when they hear you preach, as
the Jews were to become Christians when they heard the voice of the great
Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18.18, 19. Unless also you can invalidate my other
forementioned exceptions against this instance I would advise you to lay it
aside and to pass to another argument.


Sect. 2. Reply, P. 2. Secondly, if the Apostles never taught nor practiced
such a thing, what warrant then have our brethren for their Presbyterian
Church, which is gathered out of many Churches? For they interpret, Mat. 18.17.
Tell the Church, of a Presbyterian Church, which consists of the Elders of many
Churches.

Rejoinder. What do you hence conclude that the Apostles taught and practiced
to gather some Christians from others, one part of this true Church, etc? This
is it which P. 18. of your last Book you profess to show at large in this and
the subsequent particulars, then belike you acknowledge that the gathering of
Presbyterian Churches is according to the doctrine and practice of the Apostles.
2 Between a Presbyterian Church and your gathered and separated Church there is
most difference. For, 1 A Presbyterian Church is not a particular congregation,
nor are al her members accounted to be members of a particular congregation,
much less covenanted members such as yours are. 2 She does not refuse the
communio of those congregations, out of which you say it is gathered, and
therefore cannot be called a separated Church. 3. She is gathered with the
consent of her societies. 4 She does not cast off the care of government of
those societies, but her gathering makes much for the better government of
them, and for settling of truth and peace in them, as the convening in
Parliament of the principal patriots, out of several Counties does make for
the good government of the State. Lastly, their gathering is warranted (as
hereafter Pos. 3. and 4. may appear) by the Doctrine and practice of the
Apostles which you cannot show of yours. Interim you may take notice that Mr.
Cotton himself as he does assert that Synods rightly ordered and classes and
conventions of Presbyters of particular Churches are all one, keys. P. 42. So
he does call a Synod a Congregation of Churches, or a Church of Churches, which
is as much as to say, there is a Presbyterian Classical Church, but of this and
of Mat. 17. I shall speak more hereafter.


Sect. 3. Reply, p. 2. Thirdly, why may not one Church be gathered of the
members of many Churches, as well as many Churches consist of the members of one
Church? For we read that the Church at Jerusalem was scattered upon Stevens
persecution, and we read not that they returned again, but fell into membership
with other Churches, (as is probable) which were planted in several parts of
the world.

Rejoinder. Yes they may; in these troublous times, one family has often bin
divided into more families; part of them at Manchester, another at home; and
one family has consisted of the members of many families, possibly the heads
of several Country families have taken one house and dyeted together, yea it
may be in times of persecution, wives may live apart from their husbands, and
their husbands live together apart from their wives, yet it were strange
boldness to say that the Apostles taught and practiced the separation of
several husbands, and gathering them into a distinct family from their wives,
and it is no less unreasonable from the necessitous condition of a scattered
persecuted Church, to infer that the Apostles taught and practiced to separate
some Christians etc. Your selves do intimate P. 14. That one Church may meet in
many places, in some time of hot persecution, may we thence conclude that the
Apostles taught and practiced the meeting of one Church in many places? 2. You
read as much of the return of the scattered disciples to Jerusalem, as you read
of their falling into membership with other Churches, if therefore it be
probable (as you say it is) that they fell into membership with other Churches,
I am sure it is as probable that they ere long did return to Jerusalem, seeing
there was the first Church, the chief Church in which the Apostles continued as
officers, whose doctrine and government all that were members of that Church
could not but much desire, and the persecution was but short though sharp. Acts
9.31.3. Your selves do in effect acknowledge that this argument does not
necessarily (if it do probably) conclude the undertaken conclusion. 4. They
that fell into membership with other Churches did not (nor do you think they
did) separate from the Church of Jerusalem, or refuse communion with her or
with the godly of her, aiming at a purer Church, and unless you had shown this,
you have not performed what you say you have performed. When the scattered
Disciples left the Church of Jerusalem it was their affliction, not their
choice, much less was it their duty, as you pretend your separation to be.

Sect. 4 Reply, p. 2. Fourthly, such a Church which consists of the members of
many other true Churches, has formerly bin without exception in the days of
the Prelates; how comes it now to be questioned? For at least fourteen years
since, such a Church was extant in Wirrall in Cheshire, (the vocal covenant
being only wanting) which consisted of the choicest Christians of many
parishes. And we think it cannot be denied, but Mr. John Angiers Church at
Denton in Lancashire, has of long time been such, and many other such there
have been besides. And it was accounted an high happiness to have liberty to
make such a Church; but was never accounted by the godly sinful before. If
assembling constantly together, and participating in all the Ordinances that
the rest do partake of, and contributing with the rest in the maintenance of
the Minister of such a place, and an adhering rather to such a Minister and
people, then to any other in affection and action, make members of a Church,
then these persons of other Parishes were members, and with the rest made such
Churches.

Rejoinder, 1. If all this were granted it is but an humane testimony not
divine, nor can you though you should produce a 1000 more instances (as you
might) 2 I am informed, and in part know that these were not gathered separated
Churches, for those members of other Churches did not refuse communion in
Parish-assemblies, they grieved when they were deprived of it for
nonconformity; they did not exclude all that were not visible Saints, much
less the known godly of other Churches from their Sacraments, they aimed not
principally (it at all) at a purer Church but a better Ministry, they possibly
having no Ministry at their parish Churches, or a bad one, and it may be
dwelling nearer to those, then to their own parochial assemblies, and you
confess they wanted the vocal Covenant, and I suppose also they wanted
subscription, and signals, of their mutual consent that they would be a Church
together; and they resorted sometimes to their parish meetings, and if they had
had such Ministers there, and liberty of conscience in point of gesture as in
other places, it may be thought they would not have sought else where. 3
Suppose there were such a Church in the days of the Prelates, and that it was
then lawful too; can you thence infer that it is still lawful, though
Innovations and scandalous Ministers and other offensive things be removed,
have you as great occasion still of withdrawing as they then had? 4 That such a
separation was never accounted sinful by the godly before is too large a
speech, if you mean, That the separation which then was used by them that used
it, and possibly by some others was approved, I contend not: but that no godly
man accounted it sinful, ordinarily to frequent another assembly (especially if
they had a Minister of ordinary parts and piety) I cannot think. As for your
separation many godly did account it sinful, yea the most eminent
non-conformists, yea they which did best affect congregational government; yea
you two have often told me and others of my godly brethren, That you are free
in your judgment to baptize my child, or the children of any godly Minister, or
member of our Church, or to receive us to the Sacrament amongst you: now if you
would act according to your own Principles, (which I should conceive my self
bound in conscience to do in this case) and would inform your Churches of their
duty herein, your separation would be less offensive; but how you can account
admission of us to your Sacraments lawful and yet the denial, of it not sinful,
I see not.


Sect. 5. Reply, P. 3. Fifthly, are not some parish Churches constituted
sometimes of members of other parish Churches, when many persons have left
their own places, and removed into other Parishes without any consent? Sixthly,
that a Church may consist of persons that have been members of other Churches,
if such persons have been orderly dismissed from such Churches, and have come
away with consent, will be granted of all.

Rejoinder, 1. What then? will you thence conclude, that the Apostles taught or
practiced to gather or separate some Christians from others etc? Did your
selves ever before call this gathering of Churches or separating Christians
into Churches; is this the common acceptance of the words [Gathering of
Churches] or separating Christians into Churches? Did your selves dream that
was my meaning, or the thing I put you to prove? Does remooval from one parish
to another, imply the forsaking of, or separating from the communion of the
former parish, and refusal to receive the Sacraments with the godly of the
former parish? If not, how does it, can it justify your kind of separation
from all our parish-assemblies? And yet you argue thus; remooval from one
parish to another has bin judged pious or at least honest, therefore your
separation is pious and honest, and you should conclude therefore the Apostles
taught and practiced your separation. For you know the question is not what is
judged pious and honest by men, but what is so judged by the spirit of God.
Truly I might as well argue, some separation from our parish-assemblies is
sinful (as that of the Papists, Brownists etc.) Therefore yours is so. And
indeed whether your separation be with consent or no it is not much material,
for it is sin to consent sent to such a separation, and sin to separate,
whatsoever consent you have: show that your gathering of Churches with consent,
or without consent is justified by the doctrine and practice of the Apostles,
and it shall serve your turn.

Sect. 6. Reply p. 3. Suppose some Ordinances, be corruptly dispensed, without
all hope of redress, and that men must partake therein without having any
power, so much as to witness against such corruptions, unless they will be
accounted factions, and disturbers of the Churches peace; or that by remaining
where such corruptions are, they be in danger to be leavened with the corrupt
lump of such a Church of which they be members; what must they now do? Does not
that Rule that bids a Church purge out one person that may endanger the
leavening of the whole lump, (when there are no other means to prevent such an
evil) give warrant to every member that is endangered to be leavened by the
lump, to withdraw from such a lump, (because power to purge out the lump they
have none) when there is no other means to prevent the evil? Church Membership
is for edification of the members, not for destruction.

Rejoinder, 1. These passages and your practice of gathering and seperating
Churches from amongst us do pass an harsh and heavy censure on our Churches,
viz. that there are amongst us not only smaller faults but greater corruptions,
and those obstinately persisted in without all hope of redress; and that there
is no other means left to prevent the evil but separation, a censure so void of
truth and charity, that it is worthy to be exibilated rather then confuted. 2.
When there is indeed such a case as you put, a particular member may and ought
humbly to admonish the Ministers and members, plead with the Church. Hose. 2.2.
Bear witness against her sins and errors, and act to his utmost in his place
for her reformation, both by exciting (quantum inse) the power of that
particular Congregation, and complaining to superior judicatories, but not
presently to separate. The Apostle Paul, notwithstanding the incestuous person
was in communion with the Church, and they were puffed up and gloried, 1 Cor.
5.1.2. Allows worthy receivers to Communicate in it, 1 Cor. 11. 28. and 10.16.
He blames their schisms in it, (which are less then separation from it) 1 Cor.
11.18. and 12.25. And prescribes the putting away of the old leaven as a means
of making a new lump, especially by casting out the grossest offender (as the
incestuous person) first. 3. Those members which in their place labored to
reform the gross profanation of the Sacrament, by the Incestuous man (as its
like some few did) and mourned for what they could not mend, were not leavened
or corrupted (no more then those of Thyatira were leavened with the false
doctrine of Iezabel, by being co-members with her which had not that dostrin
etc. Whom the spirit of God acquits. Revel. 2.24.) But they that were puffed up
and neglected to use the means which they had, be it less or more to the
putting of him away. If Joshua and his house serve the Lord and do what in them
lies to reform the rest, they are not guilty of all the sins and wickedness
of their tribe, much less of all the tribes or of all that were in communion
with the Jewish Church; some of your Churches have Brownists (whose errors the
Apologists call fatal shipwracks) Anabaptists, Antinomians and possibly some
other erroneous persons amongst them; can no member be free from being
corrupted and leavened by these unsound opinions (for false doctrine leaveneth
as much, and in some respects more dangerously then profaneness) except he
separate from you if he has not power to cast them out. 4. Separation from a
true Church and refusing to partake the Sacrament in it, or with the godly of
it, which is your practice (of which we speak all along) savours much of
faction, and more disturbs the Churches peace, then witnessing against the
corruptions of the Church while we are in her communion, and using means to
reform her: and is indeed sinful, being a remedy of your own devising; the
scripture does require that the bad should be cast out, not that the good
should cast out themselves: every person should inform the Church of a brother
that will not be gained by private admonition, and the Church should cast such a
one out, but that every person should cast off the Church if the Church does
not hear him, is a step beyond our saviors direction, and we should not be
wise above what is written. 5. Your selves when it is your case will not approve
it; suppose seven or eight should separate from your Congregation, and would
not admit either of you to the Sacrament, because you want the Ordinance of
prophesying, of singing himnes, of anointing with oil, holy kiss etc. Or
because some are admitted to your Sacraments which they judge not fit, or
because Pedobaptism is retained, or because you make not (as they think)
separation enough from our Churches, (which is the case of some Congregational
Churches) though they pretend to worship God in a purer way, would or could
your Church approve worship God in a purer way, would or could your Church
approve of their doings? Lastly, in 2 Cor. 13.10. Paul speaks of the power
which God had given him over the Church and over every member of it, not of
power given to the Church as distinct from officers, not of power given to any
member to withdraw from it, not of Church Membership, at least not in your
sense. But if he did speak of Church Membership, it will not serve your turn,
unless you could prove (as you can never do) that destruction only, and not
edification is found in our assemblies, and edification only and not
destruction in yours, nor can I think that you hold that every Corinthian (if
in his judgment the Apostle did use his power for destruction and not for
edification) was bound to withdraw from him, which they were too apt to do, and
for which he reprehends both them and the Galatians, Gal. 1.6.1 Cor.
4.10.11.13.14.15. 2 Cor. 10.2. Cor. 11.


Sect. 7. But you say that I stumble at this because they converted them not:
and to this you Reply, Persons whom the Apostles converted, were ordinarily
committed to others to be further edified, and the ordinary Pastors and Elders
of the primitive times, did almost perpetually build upon another foundation.
The persons that watered for the most part, were not the same that planted. In
Acts 11.20.21. We read of a great conversion wrought by the preaching of the
scattered Disciples, but we read not that they were gathered into Church State,
till Barnabas was sent unto them: and both Barnabas and Paul assembled with
that Church and taught it, which yet they converted not. And in Acts 19.1.9.
Paul found twelve Disciples (converted to his hand, though not fully
instructed) and gathered them into the Church which he planted at Ephesus. But
(Brother) how comes this to be a stone to stumble at? If you hold a succession
of pastors in the same Church, the successors may feed a flock which their
predecessors converted, and not themselves. And if you hold transplantation of
members from one Church to another, then they may feed the members which were
of other Churches, which themselves converted not.

Bejoynder, 1. I stumble not, but only discover your stumbling and falling, I
never denied or doubted that some might plant and others water; why do you
trifle away time to prove it? 2. I brought in by a parenthesis an aggravation
of the great wrong done, by separation, unto Pastors which are not only robbed
of their sheep, but of their children; in that they are gathered into such
societies, as will not eat, or have Church Communion in the Sacrament with
their spiritual fathers. 3. Did it not grieve Paul himself when those which God
had called by his Ministry were withdrawn from him, Gal. 1. 6.1. Cor. 4.15. 2
Cor. 11.2.4? And yet they I suppose never proceeded so far as to deny him
communion. If they had and should have prooved to him (as you do to us) that
some plant and some water (which he knew well enough) would this have given him
satisfaction or excused their withdrawing from him? If a father should complain
that some Jesuit, Monk, or Nunn, had seduced his children from his family
into their scieties, the said Jesuit, Monk, or Nunn might make as solid and
just Apology for themselves as this is, viz. That oftimes one begetts and
another brings up, and upon occasion of the death of parents, removal etc.
Children are to be disposed of and transplanted into other famlies, therefore
they did the father no wrong? surely their reasoning and yours too is very
weak.


Sect. 8. You suppose I may object, That this separation must be orderly done
and with consent an to this you answer, P. 4. No such order can be expected,
where no such order has been wont to be exercised. If any godly person has
removed from one Country to another, and planted himself in Manchester, have
the Ministers or people whom he left, sent after him, or challenged him as
theirs? Or have the Ministers or people whom he has come to, rejected him, as
none of theirs, because not orderly delivered into their hands? Suppose the end
of his removal was communion with a better people, or better Ministry, Does
this make it the worse, or more unwarrantable? Is it lawful to remove to a
fatter soil, to a purer air, And not to a purer Church? The purer any Church
is, does not Christ the more delight in it? And desire to be there most? And
why may not persons desire to plant themselves where Christ gives most of his
presence? And if one man may unite to such a Church, may not many agree
together to make such a Church? And this is all the gathering of Churches that
we know of, that is either taught or practiced.

Rejoinder, 1. You play with your own fancy, for it is not acknowledged that
your gathering of Churches is at any time orderly done, whether it be with
consent or no. 2. You assert what I think your selves approve not, that order
is not to be expected where it has not bin wont to be exercised: as though
custom were the guide of conscience. 3. You take it for granted, 1 That your
Churches are purer Churches (as if humane inventions sundry whereof I have
discovered in Quare's, (to which contrary to my caution given you in my
Epistle) you sent me censures in stead of answers, would make a Churth more
pure. 2. That Christ does delight in your Churches more then in ours, (as the
Anabaptists boast that they have more of Christ's presence in their Churches
then you in yours) 3. That your manner of gathering and separating Christians
into Churches, is as justifiable as the removal of one or many to dwell in a
fatter soil, clearer air and under a better Ministry that they may be a purer
Church, yea this (you say) is all the gathering of Churches you know of, I pray
you consider better of it. Lastly, your selves are not determined when a Church
is pure enough to live in. Hence many of you do fly from one Church to another,
under pretense of attaining more purity though they are usually mistaken, as
those Corinthians were, which slighted Paul, accounting him one of the foolish
things of the world, his bodily presence weak and his speech contemptible, and
those foolish Galatians which accounted him their enemy because he told them
the truth.



CHAP. II. Of Parishes, how they are jure Divino and how not.
Sect. 1. YOu say, the exception is, That there is a removal of persons to
other Churches without the removal of their habitations. This exception you
take off by saying, why should this be blamed? 1. If distinction of Parishes by
bounds and limits be not Iure Divino, where then is the fault.

Rejoinder, 1. The Parishes now are some too great, some to little, some
unfitly and incommodiously divided, and where they are most fitly divided these
or those limits are of politic and not of divine constitution, and are
alterable upon just occasion, and the law (if there be any such) whereby all
that dwell within such a line are accounted of the Church there, proceeds from a
supposition that a due profession of Christianity is made by all the
inhabitants, I say [if there be any such law] because many Jews, Pagans,
Papists have formerly, and yet may dwell within the percinct of some Parish, as
many Heathen did dwell amongst the Church Members of Jerusalem, Corinth etc.
(though no Christians of other Churches did) and so may many ignorant and
scandalous persons which by the laws of the land and orders of the Church are
to be kept from our Sacraments. 2. It is most agreeable to the law of nature
and scripture, that there should be Parishes, that is that Churches should be
confined within convenient local limits. For first, else the members of one
Congregation might live each of them, 10.20.50. an 100. miles asunder without
blame. 2. The Scripture usually denominates Churches from places, as the
Churches of Jerusalem, of Rome, Antioch, Corinth, and Cenchrea are denominated
respectivly from the Cities of Jerusalem, Rome etc. So that (for ought we know)
Churches were then so exactly distinguished by local bounds, that a man might
have stood in some place between Corinth and Cenchrea; and have said no member
of the Church of Corinth dwells on this side, and no member of the Church of
Cenchrea on that side. 3. In constant scripture phrase the Christian
inhabitants of such a town, city or place were the Church in that city or
place, The Christian Corinthians, Smyrnaeans, Laodicaeans were the Church of
Corinth Smyrna, Laodicea, 1 Cor. 1.1. 2 Cor. 6.11. Col. 2.1. and 4.16. Rev.
2.8. and 3.14. 4. Cities and Churches in scripture phrase do expound one
another (as you confess defense P. 16.) Which could not be if all the members
of the Church were not in the city, for certainly all the citizens (many being
Heathens) were not of the Church, Acts chap. 16. verse 4, 5. Acts chap. 14.
ver. 23. cum Tit. c. 1. v. 5. 5. The way of Christ all along in Scripture is,
That Christians dwelling together should together make one Congregation, and
the converting of many Christians in a place to be a Church was all the
gathering of Churches that then was. 6. They that did remove from place to
place did (it is very probable (as your selves acknowledge page 2. in the case
of the scattered disciples) fall into membership with those Churches where they
did reside, so Aquila and Priscilla might fall into membership sometime of the
Church of Rome, sometime of the Church of Corinth, etc. Acts 18.2, 24, 25, 26.
Romans 16.3. and so many persons removing their places may well be of other
Churches and yet transgress no scripture Rules, as your separation does. 7. If
Church Members should not cohabite, how can Pastors feed the flock that is
amongst them, and be resident with them if they be not resident amongst
themselves? 8 This is a pattern uncontrouled by preceps and other patterns,
which kind of pattern (your selves say, Defense, p. 15.) has doctrine in it,
for no instance can be given, either that any dwelt in a Town or City where
there was a Church, though very corrupt, as Corinth, Laodicea, Sardis, etc. and
was a member of a Church in another City or Town, as Cenchrea, etc. Or that any
dwelt nearer to one Church, and was a member of a remoter Church, Or that any
Christians dwelling remote one from another, were united into one particular
Church. This has also the consent of godly learned men, as Mr Carwright, Mr
Parker, and others non-conformists, which agree against the Brownists in the
lawfulness and expediencie of confining, for orders sake, particular Churches
within the bounds of distinct Parishes; and in New England it self (as I hear)
Congregations are divided and bounded by the divisions and boundings of Towns
and Parishes, as Cambridge, New Plymouth, Boston, etc.
3 Suppose distinction of Parishes by bounds and limits, were but of humane and
Politic or (as a nouresident Doctor in justification of his non-residency
said) of Popish institution, it will more disadvantage then advantage you; for
before the said division, many Congregations did but make one Church, and the
Presbytery did teach and rule in Common, and probably the several Assemblies
were not fixed, but fluid, consisting now of some persons, and then of others;
sometimes of more, and sometimes of fewer; and the reason of division of
Parishes was, Ne administratio in promiscuo esset, Poll. Verg. intimating
plainly, That no Presbyter did know his particular Congregation, whereof he had
more care than another Presbyter, or then himself had of another Assembly
within such and such limits, as of a City, etc. but after Division of Parishes
this particular Minister and assembly were better known, more related, and
fastened one to another; if this be of a Politic or Popish institution, what
do you gain by it? 4. I cannot but observe that you plainly intimate that he
that transgresses such bounds or limits as are not jure Divino is not in any
fault.


Sect. 2. Reply, P. 5.2. Was there not liberty within this very Kingdom
formerly, for persons to pay their tithes to what Minister they pleased? And
consequently, they were not tied to the Parish they lived in, but might choose
their own society and Pastor (and hence it is, that there are some pieces of
Parishes in some places six or eight miles distant from other parts of it, and
whole Parishes betwixt.) Why therefore now should there be an abridgment?

Rejoinder, Suppose Mr. Seldom say so, and that it be true that he says yet,
1. You know this does not evidence the doctrine and practice of the Apostles.
2. I cannot think that from their payment of tithes to such a Minister or
society, it can be concluded that they did choose to be of that society, for
they sometimes paid their tithes to Regulars, sometimes to Seculars, sometimes
they paid one year to one, and another year to another, and possibly a 3 year
to a third person. 3. That people paid their tithes to what Minister they
pleased, within such or such limits, within which Ministers did administer; and
several assemblies of people did partake in ordinances promiscuously, is not so
hard to believe as that after the division of Parishes, (as you intimate,
saying they were not tied to their own Parish) they did so. 4. Suppose the
people had then free choice of their society and Pastor, and afterward
according to their choice Parishes were divided, (which you to the discredit
thereof make the occasion of inconvenient division of Parishes) must it always
be free, notwithstanding any obligation by consent of Churches, custom,
command of authority for every private person to live where he lists, and to
choose his own society and Pastor? Is it an abridgment of the children of your
Church Members liberty to be accounted of your Church, or may they separate
themselves from your communion, and gather whenever they conceive there is
just occasion into any Church which they think is purer? Sure you must say that
they may; for seeing their parents voluntarily chose your Church, why should
there now be an abridgment?


Sect. 3. Reply, P. 5. 3d There are many inconveniences both to Minister and
people, arising hence: 1. The Pastors of parish Churches are only at certainty
what houses they have under their Ministry, not what persons: for they may go
which way they will leaving their houses, but their houses and lands are fixed,
and they shall always find them there. 2. The members of these Churches, though
they have been bred up under the wing of such Churches and Pastors thereof, and
have taken a love and liking to the same, yet if they remove from their
habitation but a stones cast sometimes, they must be broken off thereby from
such Churches in point of Membership. 3. A man's habitation may be nearer to
some Church that is out of that Parish, and so far off from his own Parish
Church that he cannot conveniently repair thereunto, must he yet be bound to
his own Parish Church by his habitation? 4. Suppose a man have many houses in
several Parishes, and would desire sometimes to live in one, and sometimes in
another, must he needs alter his Church membership as often as he changes his
habitation? Or can he be a member in all the Parishes where he has houses?


Rejoinder, Pastors may be at certainty what persons they at present have under
their Ministry but for time to come indeed they are not certain, nor can you
show us where the word of God requires that they should have such certainty,
your selves are not certain how long you shall have your members, for death may
take them away, or they may turn Anabaptists, seekers, or fall into such sins
as they may be cast out or they may voluntarily, notwithstanding any covenant
(which binds no further then it is lawful and warrantable) desert you: Nor are
we certain what houses we shall have in our Parishes, A fire may burn them, or
the sea in some places may overflow them, or the wind may blow them down, we
cannot say what shall be to morrow. 2. The removeal of men from one Parish to
another, is for the most part volunt^ry (possibly) for some secular ends and
volenti non fit injuria. 3. Distinction of Parishes are in some cases, is or
ought to be dispensed with where Parishes are in conveniently divided. 4. A
Christian removeing from one Parish to another; may be a member (at least a
transient one) in any Parish where he dwells, as a man that has houses in
several counties, cities and towns, may be a member of any of those several
counties, cities and towns where he dwells: they that were scattered from the
Church of Jerusalem, fell (you say) into membership with other Churches, was
this any inconvenience to the? Aquila and Priscilla dwelling sometimes in one
place sometimes in another, were members of several Churches. And if a
Christian citizen of Corinth did dwell at Cenchrea, he did (as is probable) fall
into the membership of the Church of Cenchrea. 5. If Parishes or neighbourhoods
of people to be in one Church-society be an ordinance of God, (as has bin
proved Sest. 5.) then allegation of these or many more such inconveniences
cannot equallize the inconveniences and unwarrantableness of your gathered or
separated Churches. 6. The cohabitation of Church members is full of
convenience, 1. For their more commodious meeting together in public with
ease, frequency, less expense of time and money. 2. Their more easy conversing
with, and watching over, comforting and releeving one another. 3. For the
preventing of confusion, contention, and offense. 4. For their more convenient
inspection over their families that their families as well as themselves do
sanctify the Sabbath.



CHAP. 3. Of gathering Churches and preaching without, yea against the laws of
the Magistrate.
Sect. 1. WHen you alledg for it, the doctrine of the Apostles Acts 4.17, 18,
21. and Acts 5.28. I answered that the Apostles were immediately called Gal. 1.
1. You reply, Page 6. That the ordinary Pastors and teachers of those times,
did so as well as the Apostles. and Page 7. That the warrantableness arises not
from the immediatness of the commission, but from the truth and reality of it.
I rejoyn, 1, You should produce those ordinary Pastors and teachers which did
so, and prove it by scripture, which proof the reader may expect as being only
able to satisfy conscience, your selves dis-allow many things reported in
Ecclesiastical history. 2. You cannot make out so true and real a Commission
for gathering Churches amongst us as the Apostles had amongst the Jews and
Gentiles, (as has bin largely showed Cap. 1.) If you could, yet surely had you
as immediate a commission now, as they then had you might more boldly imitate
them therein, which is the thing I asserted. 3. Mr. Weld a Congregational man,
calls this an opposition to Magistracy (yea (says he) what pen can express a
greater latitude of opposition?) as you acknowledge in your last, P. 22. And
promise to annex a more pertinent answer.


Sect. 2. When I assert that you hold not that ministers deposed by their
Churches ought to preach, or that Mr. Ward deposed by the Church at Roterodam,
was hound to officiate there before his restoration, you reply, P. 7. That
Ministers censured by a lawful power where ever it lies, whether in their own
Congregational Churches or in a Presbytery, whether the censure be inflicted
justly or unjustly, ought to submit and forbear the execution of their Ministry
in that place til they be restored etc. But what (say you) makes this against
the position?

Rejoinder, 1. Then you plainly intimate that either the Presbytery or the
Congregational Church, has lawful power to depose their Minister. 2. Your
grant here makes much against the Position, as it relates to the Apostles, For
1. The Apostles immediate Commission could no more be called in or curbed by
the Church then by the Magistrate. 2. Nor had the Churches power to silence
them (as they had ordinary Elders you confess) no more then the Magistrate. 3.
Those whom Peter and John refused to obey, if they were not merely an
Ecclesiastical Court, yet there was amongst them Ecclesiastical Persons, Acts
4.5, 6, 23. and Acts 5.17, 24, 27. 4. That they had lawful power is not denied
nor questioned by the Apostles but granted rather, Acts 4.8. And you assert it
was a true Church then, and if these things be so, and you do hold up to your
rule it will follow as well that Ministers deposed (specially if unjustly) by
lawful Ecclesiastical judges ought not to desist from their Ministry, but say
to them ( as well as to the Magistrate) as the Apostle said to the high Priest,
Acts 5.20. We ought to obey God rather then man: (Ecclesiastical judges being
but men no more then civil) which would tend to the undermining and subverting
of the Government, by pretense of unrighteousness in the managing of it, and
disturb the Churches peace, as you ingenuously acknowledge.



Sect. 3. When Iurge that the Apostles had infallible direction of the holy
Ghost, you reply nothing at all to it, though you know, 1. That he which is
infallible may more safely resist the laws of the Magistrate then he that is
not. 2. That opposition made by men so infallibly inspired is rather made by
the holy Ghost then by them. 3. The points which the Apostles were forbidden to
preach, were of themselves of more absolute necessity, and undoubted certainty,
(as your selves will acknowledge) then your tenets of discipline, and therefore
the Magistrate is not to be so peremptorily disobeyed in the one as in the
other. When I further answer, That the case of living under a Christian
Magistrate Intending, indevouring, (I might now add, and having in measure
effected Reformation) and of living under an Heathen Magistrate and a professed
public enemy of the Church is much different: you reply, That the case is not
different in my sense, for the Christianity of the Magistrate or his piety and
sedulity for Reformation cannot take any person or persons off their duty which
they would be bound unto, if a Heathen Magistrate bore sway, The Magistrate,
Minister and the people stand engaged each for himself to Jesus Christ, unto
the work of his own place. The impediments that come from any unto other cannot
be a discharge to any.


Rejoinder: but. 1. The question is whether it be private men's duty to set up
Churches or to make public Reformation; can a precept or president be showed
in Gods Book for such a practice? we must keep within the compass of our
callings, 1 Cor. 7.17. When things were amiss in Israel the people made no
Reformation nor did the Prophets call them to it, or blame them for not doing
it, when they were opposed by sovereign authority; the Jews omitted to build
the Temple and the City being forbidden by the Kings of Persia, yea Christ and
his Apostles shifted from place to place, and left the execution of their
Ministry in places where they were persecuted, at least to avoid offense or to
escape danger. 2. It is the right and dury of every Magistrate to be the
Churches nursing Father, and to reform it if there be need, as also it is the
duty of every family-governer to reform his family. Now a godly Christian
Magistrate and houshholder have both jus and aptitudinem, the right (as also
Heathens may have) and fitness so to do. A wife may be more bold to order the
family, if her husband be distracted then if he be solidwitted, for though he
be an husband still and it is his duty to do it, yet he wants fitness to do it:
It is not orderly for some companies of an army to engage while their faithful
and valiant General and Council of war are consulting and deliberating how they
may best do it, yea possibly have determined another course; shall no more
respect be showed nor obedience in matters of God, yielded by a wife, child,
servant to a conscionable Christian husband, Father, Master then if they were
professed Heathens; you would not take it well if you should catechize your
children, command them to come to family duties, and to keep the way of the
Lord. Genesis 18.19. And they should answer, an Heathen father is as truly a
father as you, and you are no more to be obeyed in matters of Religion then he.
3. The General Court civil in N. England has made a law that no Church should
be set up there without the consent of the Magistrate. T. W. to W. R. and were
you in N. E. I suppose you durst not preach or print that that law is against
Gods law, or that any ought to set up Churches there against the consent of the
Magistrates. And has not the civil Magistrate in old England (from whence
theirs is but derived) as much power (there being the same or greater occasion)
to make a law to the same effect?


Sect. 4. When I tell you, that New England men will not allow a Presbyteryan
Church, nor a new Independent-Church against the will of the Magistrates.

You Reply, P. 8. The Questian is not what they would allow, but what a company
of people planted there (which cannot without unfaithfulness to their own
light, be subject to any other government save the Presbyterian) ought to do.
Whether if their livelihood lie there, and that they cannot remove, they are
not bound to keep Faith and a good Conscience, what ever it be that they suffer
for it? Our belief of New England is this, that they would suffer the godly
and peaceable to live amongst them, though they differ in point of
Church Government from them: Because so far as we could ever learn, they never
banished any, but unpeacebleness together with desperate erroneousness, was the
cause of it.

Rejoinder; Yes the Question is what they would allow, for 1. It may be
presumed they do not transgress the charter they have from old England, nor the
due power of the Magistrate in the opinion of the Churches there. 2. That they
do to others as they would be don unto. 3. Your selves intimate that if
Presbyteryans have no livelihood there, then they should remove. 4. A course
has bin taken that they should have no livelihood there, for when some of them
being persecuted for nonconformity writ into N. E. desiring that they might be
a sister-Church and have the liberty of their Consciences, N. E. brethren
would not then tolerate them, though now the case is altered, and the
difference is pretended to be so small that one party ought to tolerate the
other. 5. They that now plead for liberty of Conscience and toleration will, and
(if they hold Presbyterian government to be Antichristian, as some do) must
endeavor to the utmost to root it out, if ever they have ability and
opportunity for such a design: these times show much, and aftertimes will show
more to the grief and shame of the lukewarm or (as they would be called)
moderate Presbyterians.


Sect. 5. To omit that it is plain (notwithstanding what you say in your reply)
that the chiefest Independents in London did think it unseasonable to gather
Churches at that time that you did gather yours, and that so far as any thing
is unseasonable so far it is unlawful: When I said that it may be Brownists,
Anabaptists, Antinomians, Familists, and other gross Heretics and
Schismatiques do also pretend the doctrine and practice of the Apostles. You
reply. They must be found to be liars, but those which not in pretense but in
truth have the doctrine and practice of the Apostles with them, may lawfully
practice according to it, though they want the commandment of man to warrant
it, The Church of Ephesus found the false Apostles liars and rejected them.

Rejoinder, 1. You here omit a fair opportunity of bearing witness against
those Heretical and Schismatical conventions, saying only (what themselves
would say) that they should be found liars. 2. They are found liars both when
in disputations and conferences they are solidly confuted (as they often are)
or when they are subdued or constrained to yedd (at least) feigned and
dissembled obedience. Deuteronomy. 33.29. Psalm. 18.44. As they ought to be. 3. Sure
you would not have them let alone by the Magistrates and ministers, til they
confess themselves to be liars: do not all Heretics, and Schismatiques say,
that they in truth and not in pretense have the doctrine and practice of the
Apostles with them? and it may be they think so too, being given up to believe
lies: and therefore by your argument they may, yea are bound to erect Churches
in their own way. Did the false Apostles of Ephesus, did those opinions of N.
E. whom neither preaching, nor conference, nor the assembly of the Churches
could cure, confess they were liars, though the Churches knew them to be so?
no, no, they went on in their former course not only to disturb the Churches
but miserably to interrupt the civil peace, and pour contempt upon Courts and
Churches, and therefore the Magistrates did convent and censure them, and if
the Magistrates had not so don, they had bin guilty of those Heresies, Schisms,
Seditions, and of the blood of so many souls as should perish thereby, (as he
that willingly suffers men to go about to poison all waters in a country, is
guilty of the death of those which are thereby poisoned) nor had they bin
nursing fathers to the Church, nor had discharged the trust reposed in them by
that Plantation, yea should they have tolerated Heretics, and Schismatics for
their own profit, or some Politic end, (as the Pope does Jews and Curtizans)
their sale of Religion truth and the souls of men for money or worldly
interest would have made them abominable to God and all good men.


CHAP. 4. What number makes a Church.
Sest. 1. WHen I alledg that the case of Adams family and Noah's was
extraordinary, there being then no more in the world. And that Adam and his
wife and first son were the Church, if then there was any, and that Cain
lawfully married his own Sister. you reply, P. 9.1. That I grant in that
extraordinary case that 7. 8 or 9. may make a Church. That the Church is
Christ's body, and every body consists of members; if all were one member, where
were the body, and therefore one Adam could not make a Church: That we have a
manifest Prohibition of a man's marrying with his sister, but what scripture
(say you) is there against this, that what number of believers have formerly
bin a Church, such a number may yet be a Church, and no greater number is
required to the simple being of a Church. And that God has not percisely
determined what number do make a Church.

Rejoinder, 1. I no more grant that seven or eight then that two or three did
then make a Church, much less that they may now make a Church; but that two or
three may now make a Church (though) it be the opinion of some congregational
men, as white Summer Islands. P. 23.) is rejected upon good grounds by Mr. T.
and Mr. M. against Mr. H. and by M. Cotton. P. 53. For if thy brother offend
thou must tell him his fault between him and thee, and if he hear thee not,
take one or two with thee, (now they are three or four) yet this was but the 2.
admonition which if he did not hear then they were to tell the Church; now as
the second admonition was to be given by more then the first, so the third
admonition was to be given by more then the second, and therefore the Church
must of necessity consist of more then two or three. 2. If one Adam could not
make a Church, it is nothing to my answer, for I only say that Adam was the
Church before Eve was made, and Adam and Eve before their first son was born,
if then there was any; and this (you know) is most true. 3. The Apostles saying
if all were one member where is the body; is not to be understood so much, that
the Church must be a Collective body, as that it must be an Organical
Heterogeneal body, if all were one member (id est) if all were one sort of
members, all eye, all ear, all feet as is plain by the Coherence, 1 Cor.
12.14.15. etc. 4. Your Reply leaves the reader very doubtful, in that you say,
God has not precisely determined what number does make a Church; for he may
question first, how you dare precisely determine either that 7.8. or 9. may
make a Church, that a Church may consist of so many as may with edification
meet in one place, and of no more; which does determine the number
materialiter, though not formaliter seeing God himself has not precisely
determined it as your selves confess. 2. You do not possitively must be found
to be liars, him what number did at any time make a Church, whether 7. or 8. or
10.20.40. or 100. but send him to seek it:
5. Mr. Cotton says though there might be a domestical Church in Adam and Eve
at the beginning, yet such a Church as Christ has instituted in the new
Testament consists of a greater number then two or three, way of the
Churches. P. 53. And if you do assert that Adam and Eve did then make a Church,
(which seems to be your opinion, for you argue only against one person being a
Church) then you have scripture produced by me, and cited by you, Defense. P.
73. And Reverend Mr. Cotton against such a number making a Church now. And
indeed in the beginning of the world, there was defectus physicus, but now if a
defect be, it is defectus moralis: If there were no woman in the world, an
incontinent person could not many, but now it is a sin for him not to marry. 6.
I believe your selves do not conceive that those 7. or 8. in Adams or in Noah's
family might be now an instituted Church, if they were alive (though the reader
may think you contend for it) can one man, one woman, four or 5 children (the
eldest whereof must needs be very young) make a Church? should the man sin, the
Woman reproves him (or e contra) and he will not be gained, where must she have
one or two more, or a Church to complain to? seeing little children (as reason
tells us and your selves grant) are neither meet for, nor capable of that
employment: Can four men and their Wives make a Church? Cham sins, Noah
rebukes him, he will not be gained, he according to rule takes with him one or
two more as Sem and Iaphet, then they have a goodly Church left, viz four
women, their four wives, which you know are disabled by their sex. 7. Suppose
in a Church of 7. or 8. a man and a woman should be suspected by their brother
of Committing adultery, (as David and Bathsheba did) or incest, and their
brother admonish them and they deny it; he takes one or two with him to charge
sin upon them and they yet deny it, and complain of wrong, and take one or two
with them to charge sin upon him or them that admonished them, then all these
are parties; who is left to judge this business, if the Church consist but of 7.
8. or 9? 8. You say a particular Church is called a City, an Army, a Kingdom,
which titles do imply multitudes, now it were strange to say that two or three,
or 7. 8. 9. may make a City, an Army, a Kingdom. 9. It is inconvenient and of
dangerous consequence, that 7. or 8. should be able to cast out of Communion
any person, not only with themselves but the whole Catholic visible Church,
and deliver him to Satan; especially if they be illiterate and unexperienced
in the ways of God, and apt to be byased as so few men (though visible Saints)
may easily be.


Sect. 2. When I say that Twelve are more then seven or eight, and an hundred
and twenty a competent number, yet it appears not that they were called or
counted a Church til they were more increased. If there were no more believers
in Ephesus then twelve (as there was, viz. Aquila. and Priscilla, which knew
more then John's Bapti^m, Acts 18.26. with 24.25. If not others) Yet there were
more in Jerusalem then an hundred and twenty. 1 Cor. 15.6. You reply, P. 10.
That twelve is not more in the truth of the constitution of a Church then 7. or
8.

Rejoinder. 1. My meaning was, that you cannot prove that 7. or 8. may make a
Church though twelve might, for 12. is almost double to ^. 2. Twelve men (your
selves will acknowledge) are rather capable of being a Church then 7. or 8. in
Adams family or in Noah's. where were so many women and children; for here if a
man sin, and his br^ther admonish him, and he will not be gained: and he take
two or three with him, yet there is some remaining to take cognizance of the
thing, which in the precedent instances there was not: you see I dispute upon
your own principles, though I grant them not. 3. You say, P. 13. Small Churches
are inconsistent with Christ's and, which is edification by Pastors: from whence
it follows that the more small the more inconsistent, and the less small the less
inconsistent, and in this sense I might say that twelve is more then 7 or
eight, and so declare some what else then that I can number twelve.


Sect. 3. You Reply, P. 10. That the scripture determines not what number is
competent and what not competent to the being of a Church, that I am the more
presumptuous in aring that an 120 are a competent number to make a Church, that
if I will, I may see them a Church before they were so increased; for they
performed one great act of a Church in electing an officer to be over the
Church. Acts. 1. 23. And when three thousand were added to them they came into
their state, and if their state were not Church State, then neither were they
made a Church by this addition: for let 3000. be added to no Church and they
are still no Church which to affirm were flat against the Scripture.

Rejoinder, 1. Pardon me (I pray you) I thought I had bin no more presumptuous
to say an 120. is a competent number then you are in saying, 7. or 8. is a
competent number to the being of a Church, seeing God has as well determined
that an 120. as that 12. or 7. or 8. is a competent number, and 120. is more
capable of all officers, and of a flock then 7. or 8. The truth is, as you said
that an 120. was small enough in comparison, (you mean) of what it was
afterward, so I said, that it was a competent number comparatively to 12. which
yet is more then 7. or 8. the number which you should prove competent to the
being of the Church or else forgo the position. 2. Election of an Apostle is
not properly a Church act, for then other Churches might have done it as well as
that, for other Churches may do all Church acts, but it was an occasional
extraordinary act, and the power of doing it, did not result from the
combination of them into a particular Church, but from an immediate
extraordinary commission from God for that time only, and therefore notes not
any Church-ship in them, nor that any other Church might do it, any more then
Ananias his laying of hands on Saul proves that every single disciple or
Minister may ordinarily do it. It is the honor of Apostles and Apostolic
men, not to be of men, or by men, but of God. God himself elected the first
twelve, and after there were Christian Churches, God without the intervention
of all or any of them chose Paul to be an Apostle. And in this place he
confined them to some sort of men that had conversed with our Savior, (amongst
whom (I suppose) an unfit man could not be found, and if he had bin unfit, the
gifts of the holy Ghost which they were then immediately to receive would have
made him fit) he gave them no power to nominate the particular man, but himself
determined it by Lot, and he might have chosen a third man not nominated by
them, yea one that had not accompanied the Apostles (as Paul) if he had so
pleased. 3. That election (so far as it was the act of man) might as well be the
Apostles as the peoples act, for though Peter stood up in the midst of the
Disciples, and told them that in the room of Judas one must be ordained, yet he
does not bid them nominate or elect one or two or more, nor does the text
convincingly decide who did appoint those two: Bucerus says, The Apostles
named two, and it is likely it was they, the same parties that prayed and cast
lots, And though all persons present did not join in the election, Peter's
speech unto them might be of use, lest they should conceive (as they might well
enough) that none should have succeeded an Apostle an extraordinary Officer, no
more then any succeeded John Baptist before, or James afterward: and that they
might submit to such an one, and join with more understanding and faith in
prayer with them, and in approbation of their act. 4. If you can see them a
Church (you mean) a particular Church, because they elected an officer, then I
may say, you (if you will) may see them an universal Church, because they
performed one great act of the universal Church in electing an universal
officer. 5. It is strange that men of your strength should make so weak work,
for 1. The words [to them] upon which you build, are not in the original text,
but only in the translation; and therefore it may be read, they were add^d to
the Lord, as Acts 5.14. 2. The words [to them.] (if they were in the text as
they are not) may be meant of Peter and the rest of the Apostles spoken of v.
37.42. as Acts 9.26.27 which were not set members of any particular
congregation. 3. If one Apostle only had bin there, and 3000. had added
themselves to him, receiving his word, being baptized, and continuing in the
Apostles doctrine and fellowship, they might have bin a Church of themselves;
though that one Apostle (to whom they were added) was not nor could be a
Church. 4. Those that were daily converted to the faith, and baptized are said
to be added daily to the Church, meaning the general visible Church, into which
the Eunuch was baptized, and Paul also before he did so much as assay (...) to
join to any particular Church.



Sect. 4. You Reply, P. 11. Though Aquila and Priscilla were at Ephesus, yet
they were but sojourners there, as they were also in many other places:
sometimes at Rome, sometimes at Corinth, as appears from Acts 18.2. Romans 16.3.
But to what place they did belong it is not certain.

Rejoinder, 1. If it be uncertain to what place they did belong, how dare you
say peremptorily they were but sojourners there, why might they not be
inhabitants of Ephesus, and members of the Church there? 2. They had an house
in Rome, and in that house a Church, Romans 16.5. Therefore they remained there
for one season. Pareus thinks they dwelt at Ephesus another while, and removed
from one place to another as occasion was offered. 3. The dissenting brethren
in their reasons, P. 18. do affirm that many of the members of the Church of
Jerusalem were but sojourners there, and if so, why might not Aquila, and
Priscilla be members of the Church of Ephesus, though (suppose) they were but
sojourners there. 4. If their being but sojourners in a place did hinder them
from being members of the Church in that place, then how can they which are not
so much as sojourners in a place, but mere strangers and inhabiting 5.8.10.20.
miles from it, be members of the Church in that place? 5. Those twelve which
you call the foundationals of the Church of Ephesus, When the holy Ghost came
on them, they not only spoke With tongues but prophesyed, Acts 19. Now though
tongues were a sign to them that did not believe, yet Prophesying served not
for infidells but believers, 1 Cor. 14.4.22. Yea Beza signifies that they were
called unto the Ministry, and then these may well be those Elders mentioned,
Acts 20.28. Which the holy G^ost (in a special manner) made Bishops, now that
12. men should prophecy, yea to be made Ministers at Ephesus; and there be no
other believers to hear that prophecy, or to submit to their Ministry, your
selves will judge very improbable.


Sect. 5. Reply, p. 11. Your five hundred brethren at Jerusalem is as slightly
collected from 1 Cor. 15.6. For first does the Apostle say that he was seen of
those 500. in Jerusalem? He showed himself in Galilee, and some other places as
well as in Jerusalem. 2. Though the place of manifesting himself might be
Jerusalem, must the persons therefore be of Jerusalem why not appertaining to
Judea? Or suppose of Jerusalem; why might they not be dispersed before Christ's
ascension? for presently afterward when they chose an Apostle, they were not
there, which yet was a Church action, and without doubt the major part of the
Church would have bin present at it.

Rejoinder, 1. Those 500 might well be of Jerusalem, seeing that I^rusalem
(which could be no less then a considerable part, if not the major part of that
City) were baptized by John; See more. Cap. 5. Sect. 2. 2. You render no reason
why it might not be at Jerusalem as well as any other place. 3. Imagine the
place to be Galilee or Iudaea (and indeed you do but imagine it, not prove it)
and those 500 to appertain to Galilee or Iudaea, might they not be of the
Church of Jerusalem? was there yet any other Church to which they did belong?
would they not desire the society of the Apostles? were there not men of
Galilee amongst the 120. Acts 1.11.15. and 2.7. which your selves acknowledge
were of the Church of Jerusalem? Suppose therefore these 500. were Galilaeans
or dispersed into Iudaea and Galilee, this does not hinder but they might be of
the Church of Jerusalem. 4. If Christ did appear in Galilee they had notice of
it in Jerusalem, Math. 28.7. And questionless they would go out of Jerusalem to
see him. 5. The choosing of an Apostle (concerning which see before in Sect.
3.) was of general concernment, and why then should not the 500 brethren though
in Galilee or Judea have bin there at the choosing of an Apostle, who was to be
an officer to them, as well as to those in Jerusalem?


Sect. 6. When I alledg that Adam and Noah with their families, if they were
Churches were but domestical Churches not congregational, some houshoulds are
called Churches in the new testament, many whereof may be within a
congregational Church and specially within a national. To this you Reply, page
11.12.

That Domestical Churches enjoying Congregational ordinances, and
Congregational Churches, differ not in their nature and kind, but in quantity,
as a small country Chapel differs from a numerous Town-Church. That many
domestical Churches may be in one Congregational, in my sense, not in yours,
that you deny, that two or three concerted in a family, enjoying no
Church-ordinances are called a Church: that you acknowledge not any such
distinction of Congregational Church and Domestical. But say the foundation of
a congregationall Church may be laid in one family, and spread into many. It
may be laid in 7 or 8. and grow up to as many as can meet together constantly
unto edification in one place, as the Church in Abraham's family, which
afterward grow up into a nation, and though the Go pel-Church is not now
national, yet a Congregation of many families, may spring out of a Church in
one family, more easily then a nation did.

Rejoinder. 1. you do not express, whether you mean that one, or two, or all,
or none of the three families mentioned in the position did enjoy
Congregational ordinances. Nor. 2. What you mean by Congregational ordinances;
but the Reader may conceive, that you mean election of officers, partaking
Sacraments and censures: 3. You tax me to hard to require me, to prove that two
or three converted in a family enjoying no Church-ordinances are called a
Church, for neither you nor I know the number of persons in the families called
Churches, whether it was 2. or 3, 7, or 8, 11, or 12, 19, or 20. more or less,
nor is it (as to this) any whit material. 4. Mr Weld a congregational man does
acknowledge a domestical Church to be spoken of in scripture, as distinguished
from a particular visible Church, and cites Phil^m 2. and so do Zanchy and very
many good interpreters, and Mr Cottons words cited, Sect. 1. import the same.
And indeed these families might be called Churches, because they were more
eminently Religious or more numerous, or for some other reason, besides the
enjoyment of Congregational ordinances. 5. You say, p. 16. That city and Church
do expound one another, and p. 113. You say we do not read of more
Congregations of Saints constantly meeting for the Worship of God in any City
then one. But if these were Congregational Churches, then you must acknowledge
that there was more Congregations then one in a City; for you read of the
Church of Rome, Romans 1.7. And of the Church in the house of Aquila, and
Priscilla, Romans 16.3. of whose being in Rome you spoke even now.


Sect. 7. When I cite New England men to say, that Christ did not make a new
Church, but lived and dyed a member of the Jewish Church; and therefore he and
his family were not a Church distinct from the Jewish Church. you reply, p. 12.
Whether Christ dyed a member of the Jewish Church or no, is questionable, but
that he gathered certain persons to him, and instituted baptism and the Lords
supper amongst them is most certain, which were ordinances of the Gospel
Church: and he either thereby prepared them for, or laid the foundation of a
Gospel Church before his death: for immediately after his ascension they were a
Gospel Church as appears from. Acts. 1.14.15.

Rejoinder, 1. The Elders of new England confidently assert it, Answer, to, 32.
q.p. 14. Though you question it. 2. If it be questionable whether Christ dyed a
member of the Jewish Church or no, then it is questionable whether he and his
disciples made a Cospel Church or no, and then what becomes of that instance in
the Position? 3. To prepare for, and to lay the foundation of the Gospel Church
are much different, yet you tell us not whether of these two Christ did; as
though either would serve your turn, but you know he might prepare them for a
Gospel Church, and himself dye a member of the Jewish Church. David did prepare
for building the Temple, but did not build it, nor lay the foundation of it. 4.
What you mean by gathering certain persons to himself, or who were those
certain persons you do not tell us: if you mean the 12. how prove you that he
instituted baptism amongst the 12? if others, how do you prove that he
instituted the Lords supper amongst them? were all baptized persons only
prepared for the Church, or was the foundation of the Church laid in them, or
only in those to whom he administered, the supper: or if in both, was the
foundation of the Church laid in them equally or unequally? If the foundation
of the Church was laid in all them that were baptized, then it was a very large
foundation, if only in the twelve, then it was but a little one, and so it
makes for the position, the other makes against it? I pray explian your opinion
that the reader may understand it, and the reasons of it. 5. Was the reality of
an Instituted Congregational Church in the family of Christ or no? (you speak
like Apollos oracles very doubtfully) if it was not, then this instance is
impertinent to prove the position, if it was (for they did partake in the
Sacrament to which you will admit, none but such as are in Church State) then it
is to be proved that Christ and his Apostles did covenant or agree to be a
Christian Church, that they did choose Jesus for their officer (which seems to
contradict, John 15.16.) or at least that they had power to choose their own
officers, to ordain them, and if need had bin to censure them, and that they
had power to receive Saints by calling into that society and fellowship, and
why then was not the blessed Virgin received into that Church? 6. It appears
not to me (nor I think) to any man from Acts 1.14.16. That they were a
Gospel Church, an instituted Congregational Church, nor can you by any
consequence infer it from those two verses, though you say it appears from
them.


Sect. 8. When I argue, If seven or eight may make a Church, then 200. persons
in a City may well make twenty distinct Churches and Independent judicatures,
you reply, p. 12. That this is to bring an odiu upon Congregational Churches.
That 7. or 8. may but make a Church in the first foundation, and whilst they
are no more persons fitted for membership, and that the Church is to be
increased, as more in that place shall be converted, as you perceive by the
patern's, Acts 1.14.15. with Acts 2.41, and 19, 7, 8, 9. with 18, 19, 20. Acts
20.17, 28. That you are against the unnecessary multiplication of Churches, as
conceiving that small Churches are inconsistent with Christ's ends which is
edification by Pastors, teachers, Ruling Elders, Deacons: and that a Church of
7. or 8. requires not, nor is able to maintain so many officers. That if one
Congregation will conveniently hold the believers of a City, you would not have
them to be of so many Churches without, ome eminent reason.

Rejoinder, 1. The collection is necessarily inferred from the Position; nor do
you, or can you deny the consequence: 2. It is well you grant it is as
disorderly or inconvenient, that 200 persons in a City should be 20 Churches as
that 300 in an house should make 60. distinct families, or 60 domestic
Churches, or as that 200000 in a field may make so many distinct armies under
so many Independent Generals. 3. Christ's family which you seem to affirm to be
a congregational Church but of 12 or 13, was not so little for want of more
persons converted in that place and fitted for membership, for there were many
such persons in Jerusalem, yet not one of any other family was added to them
while Christ lived. 4. You acknowledge, that the Church is to be increased of
such persons as are converted in that place where the Church is (though your
own Church is increased of some that dwell remote from it) that small Churches
are incon^^stent with Christ's ends, that Churches are not unnecessarily to be
multiplied; but your brethren in London do practice the contrary, for some
three, or four, or more of their Churches might be conveniently one
Congregation; nor is there any ^minent reason (except that they cannot all
agree to affect any one Minister, but some are for Paul, some for Apollos, be
an eminent reason) though possibly they will tell you, that officers seeking to
increase their Churches seek more their own profit or credit, then the
discharge of their duties for they may better attend to afew people then to
many. 5. Of the texts cited by you I have spoken of before in this Chapter. 6.
Whereas you say you do not assert Churches consisting of a few members without
officers to be Independent judicatures, then you do not assert all Churches to
be Independent, but some only; if some be already acknowledge not to be
Independent judicatures, the rest may possibly, in time, be so acknowledged
also.


CHAP. V. Whether a Church may consist of more then may ordinarily meet in one
place.
Sest. 1. When I grant that 1 Cor. 11.20. and 14.23. do prove, that there were
Congregations, meeting for prayer, hearing the Word, Sacraments in one place;
and that believers in some Cities and Countries (when they might) did meet in
one place, you reply, That they meet also for execution of censures, I Cor.
5.4. And you say, That there is no sacred worship or institution prescribed in
the Gospel, which may not be observe^ to have bin exercised in, or appertaining
to the Congregations, and that those Congregations are called Churches.

Rejoinder, 1. The texts cited by you speak only of meeting in one place for
Sacraments and prophesying, (to which certainly prayer was annexed) of the 1
Cor. 5. (which you now produce) we shall speak herea^ter. 2. That every
Gospel Worship and institution has bin either exercised in, or, in some sense,
appertaining to the Congregations, may be true, and yet no prejudice come to
the cause I maintain, but I dare appeal to you: are not Synods ordinances of
God, yea General coun^^ls? yet they cannot be enjoined in any less Church then
the universal visible Church. Is not ora^^ation by Presbyters a
Go^pel-institution, and yet it cannot be enjoined in every congregation;
especially not at first in an Independent congregation which consists only of
private members, for which also she cannot as yet regularly partake in
Sacraments and censures.


Sect. 2. The strength of your Reply is, p. 14. where you say, That there can
no instance be given in all the new testament, that Christians ordinarily
meeting together in diverse places are called one Church, except where Church is
taken improperly, and in a distributive sense; and you challenge me again and
again to produce such an instance from, 1 Cor. 11.20. and 14.23.

Rejoinder, Instances may be given o^ Christians meeting ordinarily in diverse
places, which are properly called one Church: 1. The Church of Jerusalem, the
prime and patern-Church, was properly called one Church, and under one
Presbytery (who has read or heard of the Presbyteries of Jerusalem?) and yet
the Christians there did meet ordinarily in diverse places, as appears first,
there were so many Christians that they could not meet for all ordinances in
one place for edification; therefore they did meet ordinarily in several
places: the consequence is evident, for the Apostles certainly did avoid
confusion, and seek the order and edification of the people: The Antecedent is
thus proved. 1. Jerusalem and all Judea and all the region round about Jordan
were baptized by John, Math. 3.6.7. And the Disciples of Christ baptized more
Disciples then John, John 4.1. The Pharisees said the world is gone after him,
John 12.19. For many of the people believed in him, John 2.23. and 7, 31, and
8, 30. And after Christ's ascension there were added 3000. Acts. 2.5000. heard
the word and believed, Acts 4.4. Multitudes of men and women: and afterward the
Disciples were multiplied greatly, and a great company of the Priests were
obedient to the faith. Acts 5.14. Acts 6.1, 7. Now those which deserved to be
called a City, a world of people, thousands, and multitudes (for the holy Ghost
at last leaves numbering of the converts after Christ's ascension) could not
meet together with order and edification in one place for hearing the word; for
first no one room could well hold them. 2. No one Ministers voice could reach so
many at once. 3. Much less could so many myriades orderly at once in a private
house receive the Sacrament together, nor could be accommodated with bedds to
sit, lie or lean, upon (which was Christ's gesture) atable to receive at, and
cups to drink in. 3. We read expressly of more then one assembly of Saints
constantly meeting together for the worship of God in that city, Acts 2.46.
breaking bread from house to house, Acts 5.42. And in every house they ceased
not to teach etc. That these assemblies were Church-meetings, appears. 1. By
that which they are said to meet for, to wit breaking of bread, which phrase
though it do not only signify the Lords Supper, yet it does signify it together
with their ordinary tables or love feasts, and is so generally interpreted,
Acts. 2.42. Acts 20.7. And for teaching and preaching, Acts 5.42.
contradistinct to preaching in the temple and in public, it being (as is by
it self evident) the Apostles custom to preach both in the temple, Synagogues,
markets, court-houses and the like public places, to all promiscuously,
believers and others, that would hear, and in houses to the believers only in
their Church Assemblies, so that publicly or in the temple (which terms
expound one another) and from house to house, and in every house, note two
kinds of Assemblies, sc. promiscuous meetings and Church-meetings: 2. That
these were distinct several Congregations, and not the same kept successively
at several houses, may be gathered. 1. by the words, (...) duly rendered, which
signify house by house distributively, or in every house, as it is translated,
Acts 5.42. That is, not in every house in the city, nor in every believers
house in the city; (for there were thousands probably of these) but in every
house designed for a Church-meeting, 2. By the opposition the text in Acts
2.46. Makes between their meeting in the temple, and their breaking of bread
house by house, the former its said was (...) with one accord, implying they
all met together in the temple, but distributively in their private houses or
Church-meetings for the celebration of the Lords Supper, (the Jews probably not
permitting this new ordinance in the temple) and other Church ordinances. 3.
Learned Mr. Beza on that of Acts. 2.46. Says that procul dubie the number of
Christians at Jerusalem did require that more commodious houses should be
chosen for their living together in common, as we see the Church in every
populous city distributed into several Parishes, as the preposition (...)
shows: so he. And of these several meeting houses, we may very fitly
understand that of Saul his entering into every house, Acts 8.3. (...) house by
house, that is, he watched and assaulted them at their meeting times and
places, and thence halling men and women, committing them to prison, for into
every private house of Christians, it cannot be conceived that he entered for
them; how could the Apostles themselves remain at Jerusalem and escape him as
they did? v. i. But he entered the ordinary meeting houses which were best
known, and most noted, and where he was likely to meet with them for his
purpose by great numbers, and both interrupt their exercises and find most
occasion against them to punish them, he therefore possibly with reference to
this, confesses that he persecuted this way, Acts 22.4. And is said to make
havoc of the Church, c. 8, 3. And to get authority to bind all that call on
the name of the Lord Jesus. c. 9, 14. 4. Mr. Burton an eminent man of your way,
confesses that the Christians of that Church were constrained to sever
themselves into diverse companies, to communicate (which probably they did every
Lords day) and consequently they did every Lords day, enjoy other ordinances
accompanying the Sacrament, as preaching, prayer, singing, and (yet says Mr
Burton) these several companies (which we call congregations) were but so many
branches of one and the same particular Church, no properly several Churches
but one Church. 2. Where there were so many preachers, that they could not all,
nor the most of them be employed in preaching every Lords day to one particular
congregation, there was more then one congregation; this consequence is good
and firm both by reason, for God did not ordain preachers to be idle or
negligent, or to preach seldom, but to be instant in season and out of season,
he appointed not many shepherds over a little flock: any by scripture, which
affirms that the increase of the disciples was the occasion of the increase of
those officers; and that there were so many officers in that Church is also
evident, 12. Apostles, Math. 9.35. with 10.1 and 70. disciples Luc. 10. 2.
besides Elders mentioned, Acts 11.30. as being extant we know not how long
before that time, and others having immediate commission to preach, Luc. 9.60.
(If those Elders were not the same with the 70. disciples, seeing we read not
of the institution of any other, and if so, then there was twelve Apostles
answerable to the twelve Princes of the tribs, Number. 1.16. and 70 Elders in the
Christian Church answerable to the 70 Elders amongst the Jews, Number. 11. 16.)
which could not be employed in preaching every Lords day in one congregation.
3. The Church that prayed for Peter, Acts 12. 5. Met many of them in the house
of Mary, v. 12. and others of them viz. James and his brethren else where, v.
17. And yet the text calls them the Church of Jerusalem though met in several
places. 4. Again it is said that Paul abode in Jerusalem with Peter 15 days,
Gal. 1.18. And doubtless Peter and he frequented the public meetings, yet he
saw no other of the Apostles save James the Lords brother; (he says not, that
they were not in Jerusalem but he saw them not) which had bin very improbable
if not impossible (seeing the Apostles were diligent in preaching) if there had
bin but one Church-meeting in Jerusalem: another instance may be given in
Samaria, where the generallity of the city, which had before given heed to
Simon Magus, embraced the Gospel in outward profession, Acts 8.6, 9, 10, 11,
12, 14. Now all these m^st needs be more then could orderly in one place
receive the Sacrament, (and they were not baptized into several Churches, (for
then Church and city could not expound one another as the scripture witnesses,
and you acknowledge) therefore they met ordinarily in several places. So now to
omit other Instances til a fitter occasion, I have given you two Instances in
the new Testament, of Christians ordinarily meeting in diverse places which yet
were but one Church properly so called.

Sect. 3. in Reply p. 14. You say, Can you show that the believers of any
Christian Church met only at first in one place, and afterward (being
increased) they met not in one place, but many places, except at sometime of
hot persecution?

Rejoinder: 1. Reason teaches that when a land is Heathenish, the conversion
of it from Heathenish to Christianity must begin somewhere, first it may be one
or two, or more are converted and baptized, and then as leaven (to which the
Gospel is compared, Mat. 13.) It spreads further and further: some say the
first Christian Church in England was planted at Glastenbury by Joseph of
Arimathea; and if so, then at first believers in England meet in one place. 2
Of the Jewish Church the thing is evident, that they at first were altogether,
both in the family of Abraham, and in the wilderness, though they never all met
together again after their setlling in the land of Canan. 3. I have manifested
that the Church of Jerusalem did ordinarily meet in several places, and yet you
doubt not but that at first they met together in one place. 4. The primitive
times were times of hot persecution, when Peter and John as they were preaching
were apprehended, threatened again and again, halled to the common jaol and
beaten, Acts 4.1, 2, 3, 17, 21. Acts 5. 18, 40. Saul also persecuted for a
time, Acts 8.1. and Herod, Acts 12.1. Your selves tell us, page 6. that the
ordinary Pastors and teachers, of those times were martyred for preaching
against the peremptory commands of Magistrates: yet I suppose you intend not
that the Primitive paterns of Churches meeting in several places, produced or
to be produced, should hereby be evaded, because those were times of
persecution, seeing it is not possible that in the Churches greatest
prosperity, such a vast number cannot orderly and edifyingly conveene.


Sect. 4. When I put you to make good your inference, viz. Scripture says such
and such a Church did meet in one place, therefore the Church must consist of
no more then can meet in one place: You say, Reply p. 15. You must take the
argument in the scope of it, such and such churches did meet constantly in one
place and there is no mention of any Church which did not meet together in one
place? therefore no church in the new testament does consist of more then can
meet in one place; the consequent is now good, for we think that patterns that
are uncontrouled by percepts, and other patterns have Doctrine in them, and do
teach how things ought to carried. It is one thing more warrantable to derive
an inference from patterns when they all run one way, and be patterns of one
kind, and another thing (and less safe) to draw an inference from patterns when
there is diversity of kinds of them about the same thing.

Rejoinder: 1. Your selves dare not say that all the patterns in the new
testament do run one way, in point of gathering of Churches out of Churches, of
having 7 or 8 to be a Church, of ordination by non-officers, of the Church
censuring her officers, of maintenance by contributions, or out of the
Church-stock etc. And therefore your reasoning is less safe and warrantable by
your own confession in these points, in which you have much ado to find one
pattern for each of them, so far are you from proving that they all run one
way. 2. It is repugnant to plain Scripture, or to near and necessary
consequence from it to assert, that no Church in the new testament does consist
of no more then may meet in one place, as is instanced and proved in the Church
of Jerusalem and of Samaria, Sect. 2. and in the Church of Corinth, chapter 6. 3.
Christians dwelling in a vicinity or neighborhood together do always in
scripture make a Church together, and this is a pattern uncontrouled by
precepts or other patterns therefore (by your own rule) it has doctrine in it,
but your practiles are not conformable to this doctrine: 4. Suppose that in the
new testament, only one family in a city had received the faith, could it
thence have bin concluded that no Church should consist of more, then of the
members of one family, I believe you will not own such a conclusion?


Sect. 5. When I urge that all the believers in such or such a city were of the
Church in that city, whether they were more or fewer, (hence every city and
every Church expound one another, Acts 14.21, 2, cum. Tit. 1.5. Acts 16.4, 5.)
And that it cannot be she^ed that any Church how numerous ^oe^er it grew, was
divided into two or more Churches, or that there Were more Churches then one in
any city or town; therefore the believers in any one city or town may be but
one Church, whether they can meet in one place or no. You Reply, p. 16. Not so,
because as appears to us thene is light of scripture gainsaying it, for though
in all cities all the believers of them were of the Church of each of them, yet
such an inference would be ^aught, because it was so for a special reason, and
in regions and countries where that reason took not place it was ^therwise. All
the believers of Jerusalem were of one Church there, because they were not so
many, but that they might come constantly together into one place, and did so.
But all the believers in Indea were not of one Church there, but of many
Churches, because they could not meet constantly in one place. And if believers
in cities meeting in diverse places are but one Church for this reason, because
they were of (...) city (as you would form to infer) than show but a probable
reason, why believers meeting in diverse places in countries, may not be one
Church because they are of one country, especially the believers of Indea being
but a small country and under the same civil Government. The reason why city and
Church expound one another was this, because there was not more converted in a
city then could meet together in a congregation or Church. And when you can
show us out of the new testament, that believers were so multiplied in any
city, is that they could not all meet in one place, then Will we show you that
such Churches were divided into more Churches.

Rejoinder: 1 Here are patterns of the new Testament uncontrouled by precepts,
and other patterns rejected by you upon pretense of special reason, and that
special reason is your begging of the question, viz. there were no more
converted in any city, then might constantly meet together in one place. 2. I
have showed out of the new testament, and light of reason, that believers in
Jerusalem were so multiplied that they could not meet together constantly for
edification to receive the Sacrament of the Lords supper. Sect. 2. 3. we read
of Churches planted by the Apostles in cities, and in great towns, Cenchrea
the least was oppidum valde frequens and populosum, navium statione
celeberrimum; Gualter in Rom: a wel-frequented, popul^^ town, most famous for
the station of the ships, and that they usually preached in cities, Math.
10.23, and 11, 1, and 23, 34. Jerusalem Rome Corinth, Coloss, were all cities;
so were Philippi and Thessalonica, Antioch, Laodicea, etc. Hence cities (not
countries or villages) and Churches do in scripture phrase expound one another,
and Paganus which signifies a Countryman, signifies in our common acceptance
an Heathen, and yet you tell us of Churches in the countries, as distinct from
Churches in cities, and never offer to prove that there were such Churches.
That the Apostles in their journeyes did preach sometime in villages I grant;
but that they planted any Church in a village, I put you to prove by scripture,
and if you cannot prove it, then your distinction of country Churches and city
Churches, and the observation there upon which you make so much use of, falls
to the ground. 4. I did not hold them bound to be out Church, only because they
were in one city, but because their Elders or commissioners might come
together, being all of one city, easily and conveniently, as your selves say of
Herod and Pilate, p. 19. And I hold that several congregations in the
countries, (if they may conveniently meet and govern in common) not only may,
but ought so to do as well as several congregations in a city. 5. You cannot
show so express a pattern of Christians in a city making two Churches, as I
have showed of Christians of one Church meeting ordinarily in several places,
and therefore this pattern is more uncontrouled then the other, and
consequently by your own doctrine more to be followed. 6. You presume that there
were Churches in some other parts of Judea besides Jerusalem, though the
particular assemblies of the Church of Jerusalem, might well enough be called
the Churches of Judea; and you cannot show where one Church was in Judea, save
at Jerusalem; and it is improbable to suppose any Churches in Judea, but what
were in Jerusalem; seeing at Jerusalem the Apostles resided, held their
constant assemblies and occasional counsels, and there they of Galilee (which
was beyond Judea) that believed in Christ, continued Luke 23.49. Acts 1.15. and
2.1, 7. and 13.31. And the converts of the Apostles closely adhered to them in
fellowship at Jerusalem, and sold their possessions, goods, lands, houses, and
had all things common in the Church, Acts 2.42, 44, 46, 47. and 4.34. Some of
which were of remoter places far then any part of Judes, cap. 4.36. 7. If you
should prove there were Churches elsewhere in Judea besides Jerusalem, yet it
could not thence be gathered, that they were all congregational, and only such;
for as little and final as Judea was, 1. It had cities in it and great ones too
besides Jerusalem, as Lidda, Azotus etc. And you acknowledge that city and
Church do explain one another. 2. Judea (through the blessing of God
multiplying the inhabitants as the sand of the sea, according to his promise to
Abraham) contained an innumerable multitude of people (for ought I know) more
then in England, In Ata's tune out of Juda and Benjamin alone, there was an
army of almost 600000 men, besides women, and children, valiant men besides
impotent aged persons; now you know, the multitude or paucity of the people,
not the largness or littleness of the of the place or country is in this case
most considerable: London may fitter be a providence, then the same circuit of
ground in some parts of the kingdom, a parish: 3. There was a vast multitude
of Christians in Judea converted by the Ministry of John Baptist, Jesus Christ
the 12 Apostles, the 70 disciples, all rai^ed up to gather Gods chosen ones out
of Iudaea, and which were very successful in their Ministry, so that the
littleness of Judea is no let but that there might be ten or 20. several
Churches and each of them dividid into 5 or 6 several assemblies, as also the
county of Midlesex one of the least counties in the kingdom, and far less then
the Province of Judea, and having no city in it save one, might also contain so
many and such Churches. Concerning the term Churches see more afterward.



CHAP. VI. Whether the Epistles to the Corinthians were writ only to those that
met ordinarily in one place.
Sect. 1. WHen I alledg that Paul writs to them that in every place ( not
throughout the world as appears, 2 Cor. 1.1. Written to the same persons, 1 Cor.
5.1.2. with 2 Cor. 2.1, 2. Nor is this a Catholic Epistle) but in all Achaja,
call upon the name of the Lord. You Reply, p. 16. That Paul writes, sends, and
applies this to the Corinthians alone, for all along proper and peculiar things
belonging to the Corinthians, and not to the Achaians, nor Saints in all the
world, are spoken of in commendation and discommendation, and proper reproofs,
directions etc. Yet he intended it for use and benefit of all Achaia, and of
the whole world also: And it may as properly be called a Catholic Epistle, as
an Achaian Epistle, for the use redound; to all the world, as well as to Achaia,
else how can it be Canonical scripture and the foundation of our sermons that
we preach out of it?

Rejoinder: 1 Certainly you know that the Epistle may be canonical, and yet the
use of it not redound to all the world as well as to Achaia, if by as well you
mean equally in all the particular contents of this Epistle, The Epistle to
Philemon is canonical, and the 2. to Timothy, though the use of it in point of
Onesimus, and Paul's cloak do not as well or equally concern all the world as
Philemon and Timothy. 2. The use of these Epistles, I dare say, redounds not to
Corinth only; nor to all the world as well as Achaia, for there are diverse
passages in both these Epistles which cannot be limited to Corinth, nor
enlarged to the whole world, as 2 Cor. 11.1, 2. Forwardness of Ministering to
the Saints, was not only in the Corinthians, but in the Achaians; Paul boasts
of them to whom he writes in these words, I boasted of you that Achaia was
ready a year ago: now it is improper for any man that writes to London, and not
to England more then all the world, to say I boasted of you, that England was
ready a year ago. The house of Stephanas he commends to them under the notion
of being the first fruits of Achaia. The contribution for the Saints at
Jerusalem, was the contribution of Achaia, Romans 15.26. And part of his drift
and scope is to get a liberal contribution, not from Corinth only, but from all
Achaja; and he does not desire the Church of Corinth to communicate this letter
to the other Saints of Achaia, because he writs to them all in the second
person. 3. The Apostle does not write to the Saints in Ephesus and in all Asia,
Ephesians. 1.1. Or the Saints at Philippi, or the Church of Thessalonica, and to
all Macedonia, nor any where else does he write to the Saints or to the Church
in such a city with all the Saints in such a province or country, or in every
place, though every Epistle be of common use and profit, both to the borderers,
and to strangers, yea to all the world, yet he writes to the Church of Corinth,
with the Saints in every place, or in all Achaia. Which words are not vainly
and impertinently put here and not in any other Epistle; and what can they else
import but that this Epistle is more an Achaian, (pardon your own improper
term) then a Catholic Epistle. 4. I put you to prove that the reproofs,
directions, exhortations, commendations were proper to them, that schisms,
fornications, were only amongst them, that the exhortation to a liberal
contribution on the first day of the week was proper to Corinth, yea that the
Incestuous person was a member of the Church of Corinth, though we presume and
commonly speak so, yet it is not necessary, for he might be a member of the
Church of Cenchrea, or some other Church in Achaia for ought we know. Why do
you so strongly assert things, and yet leave them naked without the least show
of proof?


Sect. 2. You Reply, p. 17. I Ask what commentator ever said, that all in every
place and Saints in all Achaia expound one another: does, 1 Cor. 1.1. compared
with 2 Cor. 2.1. Enforce such an exposition? you would suggest that he writes
to the same Corinthians in the 2. Epistle, that he writes to in the first; more
your scriptures import not, and we grant it. But the inference you draw is
this, ergo all in every place, and all the Saints in all Achaja are all one: a
strange consequence. If the 2. Epistle be written to the same persons as the
first, why do ye not expound the subject persons of the second by the subject
persons of the first, and say though the Saints in all Achaja be mentioned
only, yet under them the Saints every where in the world are meant?

Rejoinder, 1. I observe you say not, no commentator has said so, or that you
know not any commentator has said so; possibly you knew that Reverend and
Iudicions Beza, Annot in 1 Cor. 1.1. Expounds (...) id est in quavis Achaiae
Ecclesia, asserting also, that though this inscription is made properly and
specially to the Corinthians, yet next, it is written to the rest of the
Churches in all Achaja, as appears by the beginning of the 2 Epistle, as the
Epistle to the Galatians was to all the Churches of that nation, for that it is
not absolutely Cathol^que, directed to the Churches in all the world, appears
(says he) by the Inscription and matter of the Epistle, Thus he. 2. I would
suggest not only that the 2. Epistle is written to the same Corinthians, that
the first (as you strangely interpret me, but that it is written to the same
persons (as I plainly expressed my self) Corinthians or others. 3. I have not
read any one that makes so loose an interpretation of the Saints in all Achaja,
2 Cor. 1.1. As to say that under them, the Saints every where in the world are
meant, for so they might have bin under the name of the Corinthians alone, as
well as under the name of the Romans alone, Romans 1.7. Ephesians alone, Gal. 1.1.
And that the use of them redounds to all the world, as well as to all Achaia,
against which I have formerly given some reasons, to which I add that the
Apostle might have said as well to the Church of Corinth and to all the Saints
in Indea, if this Epistle had concerned them being a part of the world, or any
other province as well as Achaia.


Sect. 3. Reply, p. 17. The Corinthians not the Achaians had written to Paul,
c. 7, 1. And Paul had received sundry reports concerning them, not concerning
all the Saints in Achaja, for the Cenchreaus had not writ to him, nor he heard
any thing of them that we read of, Chap. 1.11. and 5.1. And hereupon he writes
unto them: but because this letter might be of common use and profit and
especially to the Saints which bordered next upon them, therefore he would have
the Achajans their neighbors to peruse it, yea the Saints every where to read
it; in both his Epistles he mentions the Corinthians, as the proper subject
thereof, the Achajans he mentions in one, and the Saints every where in
another, And he brings them in Collaterally rather then directly; it is to the
Church of Corinth, but with all the Saints in all Achaja, and with all that in
every place, as it were on the by, And this is Pareus his exposition upon, 1
Cor. 1.2.

Rejoinder, 1. You first presume that the Epistles are written to the
Corinthians only (which is the thing denied) and then tell us that the
Corinthians had written to Paul, and he had heard some reports of the
Corinthians, but it is evident that those he writes to, did write to him, and
that he had received some reports concerning them, but that these were only
Corinthians, and no other Saints in Achaia to whom he writes, and which did
write to him, and concerning whom he had received some reports, you cannot
evidence. 2. I grant there might be some special aim at the Church of Corinth,
in some things at least, rather then any other Church of Achaia, and possibly
in other things other Saints were more aimed at then the Corinthians; and
doubtless the Churches then could better tell when this Church or that was more
specially aimed at by the Apostles, then we which are more ignorant of the then
state of those Churches can; yet your collection is very sleighty and infirm,
concerning the bringing the Saints in every place, and in all Achaia in
collaterally rather then directly. Do your selves think that he that in his
prayer mentions Christ, and says, To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost
be glory, does give glory to God the father, and the holy Ghost collaterally,
rather then directly? if you do think so, I hope you will hold him accursed that
uses it: the phrase is the same, the Reader can apply it.


Sect. 4. When I answer that (...) 1 Cor. 11.20. and 14.23. may fitly be
translated in idipsum for the same and in one, you reply p. 18. That the words
(...) are conjoined with with the verb (...) 1 Cor. 11.20. and 14.23. and then
(you say) it will not be denied but that place is principally meant.

Rejoinder, 1. If the Apostle does write to more Churches then one as is
alleged and proved from 1 Cor. 14.34. Then I hope your selves will not
interpret this of the identity of place, for you hold not (as I told you though
you blotted it out of my answer) that two, three, or more Churches in the new
Testament must consist of no more then may meet in one place. 2. You beg the
question and would persuade the Reader there is something in the Greek (which
possibly he understands not) to force my assent to your opinion: but the words
import no more then convenire in unum, as the Lords and Commons may be said to
do, which are but one Parliament though met in two houses, and if there be no
incongruity of applying the phrase to those which we know do meet in several
places, then the Apostle might apply the phrase to the Corinthians though he kn
ew that they did meet in several Assemblies: on a day of a public fast or of
thanksgiving all the Churches in Holland, yea all in New England may be said
(...) 3. It is at least very probable that the Church of Corinth it self
(suppose he write to no more) was more then one particular congregation: for,
1. Not only Crispus the chief Ruler but many of the Corinthians hearing the
Word believed and were baptized, Act. 18.8. And God told Paul that he had much
people in that City, v. 10. And Paul tarried there a long time which he would
not have done if his ministry had not prospered; yea so many were the
Christians that the Jews which made insurrection against Paul were driven away,
and Sosthenes beaten by the Geeks, Gall^o the Proconsull was Paul's friend. 2.
There was a great multitude of teachers (as is intimated, 1 Cor. 4.15.) Though
you have 10000 Instructers implies they had many, and they had contentions
amongst them, one being for one teacher, and another for another, 1 Cor. 4.6. 1
Cor. 11.12. There was also many that had the gift of tongues and of Prophecy,
1 Cor. 14.31. And Paul tarried with them a year and six months together, now
it is incongruous there should be so many Pastors, Teachers, Speakers with
tongues, Prophets, un-imployed (at least in part) and employed, they all could
not be to any purpose in one Congregration.


Reply, p. 18. Except the words (...) do hold forth a coming together into one
place, their meeting at all, any of them together though in an hundred places
will be overthrown, If the words do carry any respect to place, then seeing it
is said (...) the whole Church they will be in force to prove that the whole
Church came together into one place.

Rejoinder, Camero, that learned Critic, says, the words have respect to the
unity of the persons not the identity of the place. Yet, 2. Their meeting at
all any of them needs not be overthrown, for though this phrase could not
uphold it, yet other texts of Scripture may. 3. Your selves know that James
2.2. and Heb. 10.25. the Texts cited in my Answer do carry respect to place,
and do import that some met together in one place, and some in another place or
places, and yet do not import the meeting of them all in one place: so we say
the Parliament comes together, The Lords amongst themselves and the Commons
amongst themselves, not all both Lords and Commons in one house: 4. This Phrase
(or one equivalent) may respect place and yet be taken distributively, so Joab
and Abners men, 2 Samuel 2.13. are said (...) yet the holy Ghost intends not to
express thereby a meeting in one place, but exp^^sly overthrows that sense, by
telling us that they sat one on the one side, and the other on the other side
of the pool of Gibeon. The same word is used of Edom, Ishmaelites, Moab, etc.
Psalm. 83.4, 5, 6. so Kingdoms are said to come together to serve the Lord.
Psalm. 102.22.


Reply, p. 18. When these words are found without (...) is not the sense
darkened if not overthrown by such an interpretation? shall Acts 2.44. be
rendered, And all that believed were in one thing or mind? So they might be,
though every one were in his own house, and none of them together in the same
place; But how does it Cohere with the next words, and had all things common,
if they met not together in the same place?

Rejoinder: 1. I cannot see any shadow of absurdity to say, Believers were in
one, or in one mind, (though it sounds not well to say Believers were in one
thing, nor know I any but your selves so rendering the text, and had all things
common, it is the language of the holy Ghost, Acts 4.32. (a place which seems
parallel) and the multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and one
soul, neither said any of them, that ought he possessed was his own, but had
all things common. Surely, you dare not quarrel with the language of the holy
Ghost: 2. Suppose that this interpretation of (...) in Acts 2.44. Would darken
the sense, it will not follow that the same interpretation in the texts cited,
1 Cor. 11.20. and 14.23. will darken the sense also; the same words may bear
one sense in one scripture, and yet not necessarily bear the same sense in all
other scriptures.


Reply. p. 19. Will those words in Acts 3.1. Now Peter and John went up together
into the temple, be well translated? They went up to the temple for the same
thing, not together in company, but for one end, then they might go one after
another; several passages in the story do flatly contradict it, and do show
that they ascended together in company one of another into the temple.

Rejoynd^r: 1. If some passages of the story show that they went together in
company, do any of them show that (...) proves their going together in company?
2. It is untrue that the passages of the story do flatly contradict their
meeting in one-ness of business. That they went together for the same thing,
and with one mind, your selves will not deny. 3. No one ever said that one-ness
of mi^d and business, does exclude one-ness of place, (which is the thing you
confute) only we say, it does not necessarily include it, they might meet (...)
in one mind and to one end, and meet more place too; and the rather because (if
(...) cany any respect to place) Peter and John being but two, were not capable
of meeting distributively in several places, as the phrase (if it do respect
place) must of necessity be understood in other texts as has bin showed.


Reply. But Acts 4.26. compared with Psalm. 2.2 Is alleged to confirm the
exposition of (...) To which we answer, we see nothing but that the
conspirators against Christ met in one place, for Psalm. 2. Says they took
counsel together, and how can that be better done then by meting in one place?
Acts 4.27.5. Says (...) which without (...) signifies they came together in
one place, and they might do it easily, because all the persons mentioned were
in one city, and the story makes it plain, that the rulers and the people of
Israel, and Pontius Pilate and the Gentiles gathered together, and there is
nothing repugnant, but that Herod might meet with them, especially seeing that
we read that Pilate and he were made friends.

Rejoinder. That (...) may signify consent of minds in one thing, and that
Herod, Pilate, and the Gentiles did agree in one d^sign is as clear as the Sun,
but that (...) signifies their meeting in one place (as you assert) is
improbable. 1, Because (though I deny not but they might come together) yet it
cannot be made to appear by the story, that ever they did come together all at
once in one place. 2. Suppose they did (sometimes) meet together, do you in
good earnest think that the prophecy, Psalm. 2. or the history, Acts 4. Of
their being gathered together (...) was verified of them only in that punctilio
of time, when all the foresaid persons (without exception) met together in one
place, and not any other time. The Lords and commons are together sometimes in
one house, cannot they be said to meet (...) at any other time but then?


Sect. 5. Reply. p. 19. We do not stand in need of (...) to prove that the
Churches of the Gospel met in one Congregation frequently: for there are other
words that carry it clearly, as may appear from, Acts 2.46, and 5.12, and
14.27. and 15.22, 30, and 1 Cor. 5.4. and 1 Cor. 11.17.

Rejoinder: None of those texts do carry the thing clearly, nor does it appear
that the Churches of the Gospel met frequently (much less and constantly and
ordinarily, which you should prove) but the contrary rather; for 1 Though Acts
2. and Acts 5. May prove a meeting in the temple to hear Gods word, which was
a worship common to Jews with Christians, and frequented in the temple jointly
by both, yet they prove not that in the temple they administered the sacraments,
(the Jews probably would not permit this new ordinance there) which are the
distinguishing ordinances of the Christian Church, Interpreters collect that
they did break bread (which was Sacramental breaking as that phrase is
generally understood by all, Acts 20.7.) not in the temple but (...) in every
house, or from house to house; now it has bin showed by good reasons, and by
the acknowledgment of a prime man amongst you, that it is no way probable that
in those several houses of the poor, which did then receive the Gospel, there
should be rooms so capacious, and other accommodations, as that so many
thousands might orderly and edifyingly communicate therein at once; not can I
think that you being ingenuous dare assert that the whole Church of Jerusalem
did constantly meet together in one place to receive the Sacrament, for your
brethren of the assembly having formerly disputed for it do now wave it. Acts
14.27. Says that Paul gathered the Church together, but you should have
showed. 1. That the Church they gathered was any other then the Church that
sent them out by imposition of hands, Acts 13.1, 2. viz. The Prophets and
teachers of Antioch, or at least. 2. That women and children were gathered
together by the Apostles that they might give them account of their labor and
success, For. 1. We might grant that the men of a Church might sometimes be no
more then might meet in one place, and yet in respect of the women and
children, (which for most part are treble or more to the men) they could not
meet ordinarily in one assembly: at a Leet-court a (...) city may be gathered
together, if you mean all the men of it, whereas if women and children were
there too, there would not be room for half for a quarter of them. 2. This
meeting was not an ordinary s^^ted meeting on a Lords day, but an occasional
meeting; for the text says not, that Paul and Barnabas came when they were
gathered together, but they gathered the Church together: and therefore it is
likely no women or children were there, nor (it may be) any besides the Elders.
3. It is said that when they went to Jerusalem. Acts 15.3. They were brought on
their way by the Church, which must needs be Synecdochic^^y understood, either
of the Elders or at least some part o^ the Church, and not the whole Church,
and so is this place also to be understood: compare Acts 14.27, with 15, 3. It
seems evident that the Church of Antioch was more then one Congregation, for
first a great number believed, Acts 11.21. And then upon Barnabas preaching
much people were added to the Lord, v. 24. And Paul a whole year assembled with
the Church, and t^^ght much people, and questionless he saw the fruits of his
labors; and the Disciples were first ca^ed Christians in Antioch, v. 26. And
besides Barnabas and Saul they had Prophets and teachers, Acts 13.1. And some
others which came from Judea, Acts 15.1. All which could not have competent
employment in one Congregation. Acts 15.22, 30. Speaks not of one single
Church, but of a Synod or assembly of the Churches, as Mr. Tompson, Mather,
Cotton expound it, and your selves must needs acknowledge, that there were
others besides the Church of Jerusalem there; will you hence infer, That a
Church under the new testament, must not consist of so many, but that others
may assemble with them in one place? and if others, how many? if two, why not
ten, 20.100.1000. where and upon what grounds will you determine the number? As
for, 1 Cor. 5.4. (...) etc. 1 Cor. 11.17. I answer. 1. That the Church of
Corinth appears not to be only one particular Congregation. 2. The Apostle
writes not only to that Church, but to other Churches. 3. The same Greek words
or other equivalent to them have bin proved insufficient, when joined with
(...) to evince one-ness of place, and therefore you cannot persuade any wise
reader that they alone will evince it: I suppose you think not that (...) does
weaken them.


Sect. 6. When I urge that James call's the twelve tribes scattered abroad, one
assembly, Synagogue or Church, Jam. 1.1. cum 2.2. and 5.13. Or Paul's
mentioning the Hebrews gathering themselves together, Heb. 10.25. Does not
prove that they were only one Congregation which might and did constantly meet
in one place. You Reply, That there is a palpable difference betwixt the places.

R. But I suppose if it had bin said to the Corinthians, If there come into
your assembly, or a charge given them not to forsake the assembling themselves
together, you would not have discerned such difference, but would have urged
that the word Synagoga in the N. T. is usually taken for a place, and when it
is taken for the people it is understood of one only, and not of several
assemblies. You 2. Reply, That the scripture makes such a meeting of the
scattered Hebrews impossible.

R. But does not the vast numbers of the Church of Jerusalem (for whose meeting
ordinarily in one place the most is pretended) make it also impossible that
they all should orderly ordinarily convene to receive the Sacrament? and the
Inscription of the first Epistle To the Church of Coriath with all that in
every place etc Being expounded, by the Saints in all Achaia, 2 Cor. 1.1. Does
contradict the meeting in one place of all those to whom Paul writ: You say p.
20. The literal sense of the words may pass, there is no need of a figure in
texts you alledg; for 1. The persons were neither so many nor so remote but
they might come together; And if the holy Ghost say they did, we must believe
it, and not seek a figure when we are not enforced to it. 2. The text in 1 Cor.
14.23, Says (...) when the whole Church comes together, have any of your texts
any such fullness of words in them, to sway to a meeting in one place as that
text has? Some of your own side have been convinced with the evidence of this
text, that the Church of Corinth was but one Congregation, and came together in
one place.


Rejoinder, 1. My exposition of the words in sensu distributive is no more
figurative then yours; If it be, I pray you, what figure is it? will you make a
new Rhetoric too? 2. What the holy Ghost says, we must believe; but you
should not beg the question, and say the holy Ghost says what he does not
mean, all the Hebrews did assemble themselves together (in the sense he means)
viz. in several companies and so may this be understood and believed: 3. You
for your advantage translate (...) when the whole Church comes together but you
should translate if the whole Church come together, and I told you in my answer
that suppositions put nothing in being, and you know they do not, Gal. 1.8.
Though you take no notice of it, yet you are willing to lay aside the
conditional expression which is both in the original, and sundry translations
and take up a more absolute one; this dealing is not candid: should the Apostle
have said (which (you know) may without any impropriety be said now in London)
if two or three whole Churches shall meet together in one place, would you have
collected thence, that two or three whole Churches may orderly convene, and
that there ought to be no more in two or three Churches then may so convene?
when we say if the whole County of Lancaster or York respectively come together
into the Castleyard of Lancaster or York, does this prove that the whole County
does ordinarily meet in one place, though upon some special occasion (as
choosing of a Knight etc.) They may meet together, or at least a great part of
them in the name and power of the rest? And so when he faith if the whole
Church come together in one place, it cannot be thence rationally concluded,
that every member of the Church was at any time much le^s ordinarily in one
place, some were infants, some no doubt were sick and weak, 1 Cor. 11.30. Some
abroad about necessary negotiation, some women in travel, some in childbed: so
we read Joshua 22.12, And Ezra 2.64. That the whole Church or all the Church
was gathered together, and yet you know there were many thousands of men in the
Church of the Jews, besides women and children and sick persons, which were not
in that assembly: so far are such texts as these from proving that the Church
must consist of no more then may meet in one place. 4. That same thing which
now you alledg to me was alleged by a Protestant revolted to Popery concerning
hoc est corpus meum, viz. The holy Ghost says it, and Protestants have bin
convinced with the evidence of that text to grant a corporal presence in the
Sacrament.


Sect. 7. When I urge, that the Apostles writes to the Saints in all Achala,
and that there were other Churches in that Region, at least two Corinth, and
Cenchrea which was oppidu^ Corinthioru^ etc. You Reply p. 20. That he does not
write to them as making one Church with the Corinthians, for he mentions them
with a note of distinction from the Corinthians (...)

Rejoinder. 1 You fight with your own shadow, I said not that he writes to
them all as one Church, but plainly asserted with Beza Piscator and others,
that he writes to the Churches in that region, 2. Your criticism is worth
nothing if one should say, Paul writes not to the Bishops and Deacons as Saints
at Philippi, for he mentions them with a note of distinction, to the Saints at
Philippi with the Bishops and Deacons, yourselves would laugh at it: 3. He
might have a scope that the other Churches in Achaia from the Epistle he sent
to Corinth which they were to peruse (as the Laodicean Church was to read the
Epistle written to the Colossians) should be stirred up to the same duty of
contribution etc. Thus you, But the Apostle had not a scope to stir up all
other Churches, at least not all alike to that duty of contribution to the poor
Saints at Jerusalem, and therefore you now in effect acknowledge (what before
you did deny) viz. That the Apostle writes more properly to the Achaians then
to the whole world. Besides, you know your parallel is not suitable, for 2 Cor.
inscribed to the Achaians, and so is not that Epistle to Colo^s inscribed to
the Church of Laodicea. 4. You demand, why then does not the Apostle say to the
Churches of Judea, Macedonia, Asia? Why is the Church of Corinth mentioned and
the Church at Cenchrea wholly silenced in the first Epistle and not mentioned
directly and by name in the second? You are as good at asking questions as any?
I pray you answer me one question and then if need be I will answer yours. Why
does not Paul call the Romans Ephesians, Philippians by the name of Saints, and
the Corinthians and Thessalonians by the name Church? Why does not Paul, James
and Jude inscribe their Epistles to the Churches of Judea or the Hebrew
Churches, though all of them write to Churches and famous ones too, far more
famous then Cenchrea (probably) was? yet they make no mention of them directly
or by name. The answer is, 1. We must not teach the Apostle in what phrase to
speak. Nor 2. can we render a reason why he inscribes his Epistle to the.
Saints at Ephesus, whom elsewhere he calls the Church of Ephesus, no more
then we show a reason why the Church of Cenchrea may be included under the name
of Saints in Achaia. 3. The Church of Corinth may be mentioned and not any
other Church by name, because the Church of Corinth was the most famous,
best-gifted Church: Or (to use the words of Mr Banes Diac. trial p. 16.)
because it was the most illustrious and conspicuous Church.
5. Where Iurge that the women he writes too did resort to Churches, else how
could they keep silence in the Churches, 1 Cor. 14.34. You reply, p. 21. That
these Epistles were written for universal direction of the women of all
Churches. 2. That women were wort to go from ove Church to another (as Phebe)
and were to keep silence in all Churches. 3. That though he says [your wome]
he says not [your Churches.]



Rejoyn. It was indeed for universal direction of the women of all Churches in
a secundary and mediate way, but primarily and immediately it was for direction
of those he writes to, and hence he says not, set women or all women, but your
women. 2. Phaebe's going from Cenchrea to Rome does not prove, that women had
such a wont to go from one Church to another, and that they were so forward
speakers that the Apostle had need to silence them, not only in their own
Church but in strange Churches. 3. If it had been said your Churches (which
phrase being not found in any place of Scripture is not here to be expected) it
had been somewhat more plain; but as it is, it is plain enough, viz. that the
women he writes to did resort to Churches; and therefore I conclude they were
not all of one particular Congregation; you presume the contrary, viz. they
were all of one Congregation, and that the Apostle speaks of Churches because
they did sometimes occasionally resort to other Churches; any text may be thus
answered, let the Reader judge.


CHAP. VII. Of a National Church.
Sect. 1. IF there ought to be such a national Church, then in Reply, p. 22.
this Church there must be some national combination, national place for
convention, national pastor upon which it must depend and national ordinances,
for seeing there was no such Church extant when the Gospel was written, nor
rules left how things must be carried in such a national Church, what reason
can be showed, if such a Church must be, why there should be a departure from
the pattern of the national Church among the Jews?

Rejoyn. 1. I expressly distinguished in my Answer between a ^^^^d Church or
such a national as the Jewish Church was; and therefore your confutation of
such a Church might well enough have been spared, for the Jewish Church had an
high Priest (which was a type of Christ, and his office is now ceased) to be a
national Pastor, and a national place of Convention as the Temple or Tabernacle
being of divine institution and promise (which was also ceremonial) and
national ceremonial ordinances, but that the Church cannot be national except
it be such a national, except there be a national pastor, a set place for
convention, and national ordinances is unreasonable to assert; for then
Scotland it self were not a national Church, for it has no national pastor, no
national place, not a certain fixed place for convention, no national
ordinances, but does justly and necessarily vary from the Jewish Church in
t^ose things that are ceremonial; but subora nation of Ecclesiastical
Judicatories and the benefit of appeals is not merely ceremonial but grounded
on natural reason and equity, not does the abrogation of it appear in the New
Testament. 2. You grant, both that the Saints in a nation as destinguished from
the Saints of another nation, may be call ^^a national Church, and al^o that
^ll the Churches in a nation may, and in some cases ought, to combine together
and convene in a Synod or Church of Churches to consuit the good of the whole,
and to preserve truth and pear in the Churches; such was the assembly of the
Churches in New England, and this their convention is an ordinance of Christ,
though in the Apostles times there was no pattern of such national Synod no
more then there was a national Church, when there was no Christian Magistrate,
nor were Christians so many as to bear the name of a Land or Nation (as if but
one family had been Christian the Church could not have been more then
Domestical) the Protestant Church could not be national in the days of Henry
the 8. and Queen Mary as in the days of King Edward and Queen Elizabeth; nor
had they liberty safely and freely to meet in such national assemblies, nor is
there rules left how things must be carried in such a national assembly or
Synod, considering it as National: Yea Mr Cotton groundeth this Synodical
combination on Act. 15. and alleges the Jewish Church in Ezekiel. 48.30. to be
but one Congregation, twelve furlongs, and the Church in Rev. 21.16. to be
12000. furlongs, many Churches combining together in a Synod, Keys p. 57. the
difference then is only about combination in government, or whether a lawful
national Synod or Assembly may or ought to exercise jurisdiction over
particular Churches in that nation, I hold assirmatively and in this sense
maintain there may lawfully be a National Church, and this is not of my framing
(as you assert) but was framed many hundred years before you or I were born,
and is consonant to the rules of Gods Word, you hold the negative. 3. You say
there is no necessity of Congregational officers to the being of Congregational
Churches, and then what necessity is there of National officers to: National
Church? Yea it is clear that one Congregation may have more Pastors then one,
and then what necessity there is that a National Church should only have one
officer.


Sect. 2. Reply p. 22. Then these persons must stand in relation to all and
every of the assemblies of the natian under their jurisdiction, and so they are
national officers every one of them, and the whole is the flock of each amongst
them; as in the representative civil body, every Knight and Burgess has the
care of the kingdom upon him, and each has equal authority of inspection, and
decision of matters concerning cities and countries, which he knows not, as of
those from whence he came.

Rejoinder: 1. Your selves grant, not only that Synods are the ordinances of
God, but also that all the Elders thereof are to be looked upon as the officers
of Jesus Christ, when they do such synodied acts as they may do in relation to
many Congregations, you cannot deny that they do those acts of Elders as
Elders, when a Minister does administer the Sacrament to another Congregation,
or to the people of another Congregation, he does it as an Elder, and as having
special relation to that people at that time and in that work, he being called
unto it. 2. The Knights and Burgesses in Parliament, are not each of them
severally and singly kingdom-officers; though in that body they may do many
things in relation to the whole kingdom: So Colonells associated in a council
of war, So particular heads of Colleges joined in a consistory, So aldermen of
several Wards in the Court of Aldermen, So in the Jewish commonwealth the
heads of the several tribes, which were as a Parliament to all Israel might in
that associated body do many things, which could not be required of particular
Elders and heads of the tribes, yet it is an unproper and untrue speech to say,
every head of this or that tribe is an officer of all the tribes; every Colonel
is a general officer of the whole army, and so it is an unjust and incongruous
speech to say, every member of an authoritative national assembly is a national
Church Officer, though he with the rest in a body or whole assembly whereof he
is a member, may in some acts of government relate to the whole,


Sect. 3. Reply p. 23. Now if it be so, the question is, whether each be not a
Pastor to every purpose as well as to one? and to feed by Doctrine as well as
Discipline, all such assemblies which are under his charge (which thing is yet
impossible to be done) why they must jointly rule all the assemblies, but
severally teach each man the Congregation to which he is designed without care
of the rest.

Rejoinder: 1. What mean you to call each member in a national assembly, a
Pastor? Is each man in a Congregational Presbytery a Pastor? 2. We hold not
that Pastors may or ought to teach each man his own Congregation without care
of the rest, because from the one-ness of the Catholic Church, there arises
to every particular Church and person, such a relation to and dependence on the
Church Catholic as parts have to the whole, and neither of them are to work
as several divided bodies by themselves (which is the ground of all Schisms)
but as parts conjoined to the whole and members of the Commonwealth for the
edification of it, having care of, and exercising their power to other, as
their call, occasion and necessity does require, Ephesians. 4.11. Epaphras Pastor of
Coloss had a zeal, and therefore a care also for them in Laodicea and
Hierapolis. Col. 4.13. 3. Your argument is a mere non sequitur, it runns thus.
If Colonels in a Council of war may exercise some acts of power over the whole
army, then one Colonel should teach, train, and lead up the soldiers of other
Regiments, as well as he with the rest may rule them. Now this inference is
evidently weak and so is yours, for as the Colonel does not singly and
severally by himself govern the whole army but jointly with others, and
therefore cannot be expected to train every Regiment, so a Pastor which is a
member of a national assembly, does not separatim govern all the Congregations
but jointly with others, and therefore it cannot be concluded that he should
separatim feed them. 4. All that can be concluded will be but this that he must
feed them by Doctrine as well as by the rod of Discipline, and so he does; he
with the rest do lawfully (as you confess) upon occasion, put forth Doctrinal
power to bring light to the Churches. 5. Seeing Mr. Burroughes not only as his
own opinion, but as the judgment of other Congregational men does hold that
Elders in a Synod are to be looked upon, as the officers of Jesus Christ; your
argument may be thus retorted upon your selves. The question is whether each be
not an Elder or officer of Jesus Christ to every purpose as to one, they as
officers may feed by do^trine (as you acknowledge) and why not by discipline?
They may (you say) by authority from Jesus Christ admonish men or Churches, and
this admonition is a censure, why then may they not proceed to other acts of
censure? 6. Elders receive their power for the whole Church of Christ, and may
(having a call) preach, administer the Sacraments, or rule in any Congregation,
or do one of these and not the other where their call and necessity of the
Church requires one and not the other. Your selves as Elders do administer the
Sacrament to some of other Churches which you have no power to censure, and so
you become a Pastor to them for one purpose and not for another. 7. Acts the
15. does hold out the authoritative power of a Synod (as you may see in the
next section) and then your arguments against it are nothing worth.


CHAP. VIII. Of Councels especially of that, Acts 15.
Sest. 1. THere is a pattern of a Synod of Churches, Acts 15. of two evidently,
and (probably) of many more, as of the Churches of Syria and Cilicia which were
alike troubled, and their souls subverted, and the letters of the council
directed to them, rather then to other Churches, as more peculiarly binding
them, which intimates they had commissioners there; but if there were but 2
Synod of two Churches, Jerusalem and Antioch, (for those that were sent from
Antioch were certainly members of that meeting, Acts 15.12.22.) a Synod of two
Churches warranteth a Synod of three, four, or five Churches, (for where must
it stay?) even of as many as sh^l combine and associate Synodicatry, else it
could not be proved hence that Synods are an ordinance of Christ, and that the
assembly of the Elders of the Churches in N. E. was a lawful assembly. 2. This
meeting is not to be looked upon as Apostolical, but as Synodical, for though
the Apostles were present and acted in it, yet they acted not as Apostles: Paul
as an Apostle needed not to have gone up to Jerusalem to the Apostles and
Elders, Gal. 1.16, 17. Peter, James and John added nothing to him, Gal. 2.6.
much less ordinary Elders; I Paul say unto you had bin enough, Gal. 5.2. And
all preachers of another Gospel, should have bin accursed, Gal. 1.7, 8. Nor had
the Church of Antioch any power to send out Paul as he was an Apostle, but only
as an Elder and member of their Presbytery there, Acts 13.1 and 15.1, 2. Had
they acted as Apostles, they needed not to have stated the question, and
debated it from scripture in an ordinary way, having deliberative discourses
before the decisive suffrage. v. 7. Nor should the ordinary Elders have gone
hand in hand with them as they did, for the Elders were sent unto as well as the
Apostles. v. 2. They came together to consider of the matter, v. 6. The Decrees
were ordained by the Elders, Acts 16.4. The Elders did write and conclude, Acts
21.25. where the word Eld^rs may and ought to include the Apostles, but cannot
include any un-officied men, though it be supposed, that some such were present
and did join in the inscription of the Synodical Epistle, as Sylvanus and
Timotheus did in the Inscriptions of some of Paul's Epistles. 1 These. 1.1. 2
These. 1. 1. The Apostles may be pretended to act as Apostles in other cases as
well as this, and then nothing done by them is to be drawn by us into imitation.
3. This Synod was an authoritative Synod, not only consultative; they put forth
doctrinal power confuting the heresy, vindicated the truth, v. 1, 7, 8, 9. And
this power was above the power of a single Pastor, or the Presbytery of a
single Church. 2. They made a practical canon for avoiding the Scandal and the
occasion of it, v. 20.29. and they ordained Decrees, Acts 16.4. not doctrines,
but decrees or laws, for so the word dogma is taken in the new testament, Luke
2.1. Acts 17.7. Ephe. 2.15. Col. 2.14. Of these decrees they say, It seems
good to the holy Ghost and to us, (as any Synod upon assurance of scripture
warrant may say) to impose upon you no other burdens, now it is an act of the
binding power of the keys to impose burdens, and this binding power arises
not only materially from the weight of the matter imposed, (though that ought
to be warranted by the word of God) but also formally from the authority of the
Synod, which being an ordinance of God, binds more for the Synods sake. 3.
They put forth an act of Critic power, v. 24. Branding them with the black
mark of liars, subverters of souls, troublers of the Church. They needed not
to summon the false teachers for they were present, at least some of them, to
whom else does Peter say, v. 10. Why tempt ye God? Neither was it necessary
they should make mention of excommunication, it being a clear case of it self,
that those Heretics and Schismatics which could not by admonition and other
due means be reclaimed, were to be excommunicated, Tit. 3.1^.11. Rev.
2.2.14.20. It being also clear that if they were not then duly proceeded
against, they could not be justly and orderly excommunicated. 4. If it be said
that this meeting, if it was a formal Synod it was only occasional, and not a
set stated monthly, or yearly meeting. I answer. 1 This is but a circumstance
of time, which follows necessarily the substance of the thing; if Synods sit,
they must sit in some time; but what time or times they should sit, does depend
upon circumstances and as the Churches business requires: the scripture does
not mention any st^t^d Ecclesiastical meetings for government, Synodical or
Congr^gational, that they should meet weekly, monthly, nor mentions it any
set Church-meetings (except the Lords day) for preaching, hearing, fasting,
prayer, conference; yet the Church may upon occasion order weekly or monthly
Congregational meetings for those purposes according to the general rules of
Gods word: your selves grant that the officers of several Churches may meet
together as often as occasion shall require to advise and consult about the
ordering of the affairs of the Churches in all difficult cases. And that at
every meeting the time of the next meeting be determined on, and the occasion
thereof so far as appears intimated. Yea you tell us, p. 128. That emimently-
gifted men may preach for diverse months together while the occasion lasts. And
so (I say) Synods may meet, but if it appear there be no just occasion of a
Synod, I desire not that there should be any in a stated way.

Sect. 2. Reply, p. 23. What is there to warrant combination of assemblies in a
Nation more then of all Christian assemblies in the world represented in an
ecumenical Council? For if a Congregational Church must depend upon a National
Church, then a National Church must depend upon the universal, as the lesser
upon the greater. What a Nation is to a Congregation, that the Universal is to
a Nation.

Rejoyn. I will also ask you one question, what is there more to warrant the
Elders of New England to convene in a Synod or Assembly of the Churches, then
the Elders of all the world to convene in a general Council? Surely no more
warrant save that they had a better call and more power and encouragement by
the Civil Magistrates and their mutual consent, and might with more
convenience, ease, exped^tion, and safety meet together in Cambridge in N. E.
then all the Elders in the world could, and yet you account that Assembly an
Ordinance of God. 2. There is not the same necessity of combination of all
Churches in the world as there is of all Churches in a Nation for peace and
government. Is there as good reason that all kingdoms should be subject to one
general meeting o the Kings and supreme Magistrates, as that in every Kingdom
there should be subordination of Judicatories and appeals from the less to the
greater? 3. How much greater distance there is between particular Churches, so
much the less needs the visible communion of those Churches to be, because
danger of scandal and infection and the opportunity of mutual edification is
less or more according as the distance of place is greater or less; therefore
there is or ought to be a more strict ordinary visible Ecclesiastical communion
within a Classis then within a Province, within a Nation then in all the world.
4. Your selves must either acknowledge that a particular Church has power to
elect an officer for other Churches (for you often alledg Acts 1. for the
Churches power of Election) as well as their own, or else grant that that was a
general Church or Council which did choose an Apostle a general officer. 5. As
for your conceit that the members of a general Council must be universal
Pastors, it has been before confuted; in a democracy or popular government the
power is in all the people jointly, but to say that every one of the people is
an universal officer is ridiculous.


Sect. 3. When I say, show me a Nation of Magistrates and people converted, and
I will show you a National Church. You reply p. 24. that I might have said, Show
me a Nation converted, and I will show a National Church framed like the Jewish
Church with one National Bishop over it, one National Cathedral in it.

Rejoyn. 1. The Jewish was rather the Universal then a National Church, if God
should have called any or all other Nations they must have been proselyted into
it. 2. If there were no better arguments against the Pope and Prelatical men
then you bring against a National Church, and if the Nationalness of the Church
was as truly Ceremonial and abrogated as the high Priest and Temple were (which
you odly call a National Bishop and Cathedral) are, then that form of speech,
should I use it, were irreprehensible. 3. I retort, show me an Assembly of the
Churches in a Nation like that of New England, and I will show you a National
Church. You further say, Reply p. 24. Though there was no Nation converted, yet
Christ's mind in that matter might easily have been dictated in the Scriptures
had he intended any such Church afterward, as Moses tells the Jews, Deuteronomy. 12.8,
9, 10. And though there were not Nations converted yet there were so many in a
Nation converted as made many Assemblies. In little Judea there were
Congregation, and why, together with the Church at Jerusalem, might t^ere not
have been a Diocesan or Classical Church? The foot-stets of a Diocesan or
Classical Church shall serve the turn, then we will yield there might in time be
a National.


Rejoyn. You hold a National Synod to be a lawful and useful Ordinance of God;
if one should deny it and say show me a lesser Synod of all the Churches within
such or such a circuit and I will grant there may be a National Synod; consider
well what ye would answer. 2. It is either weakness or worse to intimate to the
world that Presbyterians do plead for a Diocesan Church; you know (I suppose)
that Mr Rhuterfurd and others do professedly reject and refute it. 3. I have
showed that the Church of Ierusalem^ did consist of many Congregations, and
that the Elders of that Church did convene for acts of government you cannot
deny; and this you know is a Presbyterial Church which we call a Classis. 4. I
have showed a pattern of an authoritative Synod exercising jurisdiction over
particular Churches and cleared it from your greatest and strongest exceptions
against it. 5. In Chap. 9. I have showed from holy Scripture that there is an
Universal visible Church which is greater then a National, and does include and
justify it, and to which it is subordinate in a regular way. These (you know)
are more then footsteps of a Presbyterial or Classical Church. 6. The
Scriptures do prophecy of the call of a Nation, I. a. 55.5. and also of a
Nations answer to that call: and that Israel should be one of the three, which
may import three National Churches: One Nation, as Egypt, should be one people
of God, which in Defense p. 40. you say is all one with one Church; another
nation another people of God; and Israel shall be so far from being alone a
National Church that she shall not be the chiefest, but other Nations shall be
before her, Isa. 19.25. So Abraham became the father of many nations, Romans
4.17. the Jewish Nation and the Nations of the Gentiles, one (its evident was a
National Church, and why might not a Gentilish Nation converted to Christianity
be a sister National Church: Paul faith Romans 3.29. God is not the God of the
Jews only, but of the Gentiles, the word in the Original is, of the Nations
also, his meaning is, God is in covenant with believing Nations of the Gentiles
as well as with the Jewish nation. Now if God call a nation, and a nation obey
that call, and become the daughter of father Abraham and a sister of the Jewish
nation, and God be in covenant with a nation, or the God of a nation, Is not
that nation a national Church? Did not thus much (if there had been no more)
make the Jews a national Church? And will it not make a believing nation among
the Gentiles so also? Have you any so good an argument against a National
Church as this for it? 7. Moses in Deuteronomy. 12. did not tell the Jews that God did
intend they should be a national Church, for that they were before, even as
soon as they grew into a nation, Acts 7. but only of a peculiar place of some
sol^mn public worship, which was but ceremoni^l, and because it was so and God
has not intended any such set place for solemn public worship in the New
Testament as more holy then other places, therefore he has prescribed to us no
such thing, but l^ft us at liberty, Ioh. 4.8. Of little Judea much is spoken
before and after.


CHAP. IX. Of the universal visible Church and general Councels.
Sect. 1. Reply. ANd if an universal visible instituted Church be acknowledged,
why are there not then universal representative conventions? What a defect is
this in Christendom that all Christians do not endeavor it? But we conceive
that they are so far from the endeavoring of it, that if there were any such
thought they might make use of them for advice, yet they would be loath to
subject themselves to the binding decrees of them.

Rejoyn. 1. You being no Scriptures at all against the universal visible Church
or the subordination of lesser Judicatories to greater. 2. You acknowledge (at
least implicitly) that if there be an universal visible Chuch, then there may
be a national subordinate to it, and a congregational subordinate to it, in
which you deal fairly and ingenuously, for the whole is not subject to a part,
but the part to the whole, and the nearer any part comes to the whole Church,
the more authority it has; and hence a general Council is of more authority
then a National, and a National then a Provincial. 3. I assert that the
Scriptures do hold out an universal visible Church. For 1. the Apostles which
were general officers (to which a general Church is the adaequate correlative)
and had the care of all the Churches, are said to be put or placed in the
Church, as speaking but of one: 1 Cor. 12.28. 2. This is that one body into
which all both Jews and Gentiles, bond or free are baptized, v. 13. whereof
Christ is the head, v. 12. yea the visible head, though he be now removed to
heaven, (as King James was visibly the head of Scotland though removed into and
residing in England) and Paul the Minister Col. 1.25. in which God has set
[(...)] the members 1 Cor. 12.18. viz. he has set [(...)] Apostles, Prophets,
Teachers, helps, governments, v. 28. 3. The same is proved, Ephesians. 4. to the
end of the 16. verse, for there we find that the whole Catholic Church is but
one. v. 4. one body, one spirit, one hope of our calling, one Lord, one faith,
one baptism, one God and father of all. All which are adaequate and
commensurate to the Catholic Church, unto which he after says, the Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and teachers were given. v. 11. 4. This Church
consists of all believing Jews and Gentiles, Ephesians. 2.16. and 3.6. And is
contra-distinguisht from, and opposite to all other Jews and Gentiles in the
world yet uncalled; and is called one fould, John 10.16. one woman traveling,
Rev. 12. one city of God. Rev. 11. one field, one draw net, one barn-floor etc.
5. This Church was a child, and in nonage under the law, and at full age under
the Gospel, Gal. 4.1.2. One assembly of 24. Elders, and four beasts in
allusion to the 24. orders of Priests, and the four camps of Israel bearing in
their standards the same beasts. Rev. 4. and as all the twelve tribes did but
make one Church, so the 144000. of all Christian Churches (as it were of the
twelve tribes) are but one Church.

I omit many more such expressions which signify to us, that as the Church was
but one amongst the Jews, so it is but one amongst the Gentiles, one army under
Michael, one vineyard etc. you may object, that we read of Churches in the new
testament, therefore there is not only one Church: I answer. These are
particular Churches of the same name and nature with the whole, as the dry land
is but one; yet being possessed by several nations under several climates,
divided by hills, rivers and other boundaries is called lands; as Labans flocks
having all one owner and probably all one mark, are called one flock; and so
Jacobs also. Genesis 30.31, 32, 36, 38. and 33.13. as the freemen of Rome where
ever born or bred, make but one corporation; hence the Church of Ephesus
(though a complete particular Church) is not called the whole city or household,
but fellow citizens with the Saints, viz. of other Churches, and of the
househould, Ephesians. 2.19, 20. As the Jewish Church was certainly but one, yet it
is called Churches as you shall hear anon: as the Antichristian Churches of
Italy, France, Spain, Germany, are but one whore; one Church under one head the
Pope, so the Christian Churches of England, Scotland, Holland etc. which have
their fathers name written in their foreheads, having one faith etc. are but
one woman, one Church. The one is the army under the Dragon, the other under
Michael; particular Churches and Antichristian conventions are as the several
Brigades, Regiments or companies of those armies. Hence the Church of God is
called Army, and Armies, Cant. 6.10.13. vineyard, and vineyards, Cant. 7.12.
and 8.11.12. Garden, and Gardens. Cant. 6.2. Note (Reader) that these are not
spoken of the invisible Catholic Church, but of the visible Church, for
officers are not set in the invisible Church; Judas was an Apostle, but was not
a member of the invisible Church, nor is baptism a badg of it. 2. Whereas some
object that my first argument for an universal visible Church [The Apostles
were universal officers, to which an universal visible Church is the adaequate
correlative] were good, if the Apostles had bin universal ordinary officers,
but they were universal extraordinary officers; therefore the Adaequate
correlative is an extraordinary universal visible Church. I answer. 1. I have
not heard til now of an extraordinary visible Church, which continued til the
death of John, and then breathed its last. 2. If there were then an universal
visible Church, (whether ordinary or extraordinary (as to this) it matters not)
it follows necessarily, that all those presidents which are brought for Judah
po^^^^^^ Churches in Galatia, Asia, Judea, do not so much as prove de facto,
that the Churches then were Independent, much less do they prove de jure, that
then and ever after all Churches ought to be such. 3. God has set Pastors,
teachers, helps, governments, which are ordinary officers and offices in the
very same Church, in which ^e set Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets,
extraordinary officers, and therefore the same Church does continue to the end
of the world. 4. Ordinary Pastors baptized the Corinthians into this universal
visible Church, for Paul baptized none of them but Crispus, and Gajus. and the
household of Stephanus, 1 Cor. 1.14, 16. with 1 Cor. 12.13. And ordinary Pastors
now do baptiz into the same body that ordinary Pastors then did viz. into the
universal visible Church, as has bin showed before, therefore the universal
visible Church continues to the end of the world. 5. The arguments and
illustrations I have brought to hold out the universal visible Church, do suite
(all or most of them) not only with the Church in the Apostlique times but in
after ages. 6. Every Apostle was as it were an Eldership of the Churches
extraordinarily combined in one man, and so one Apostle being an Elder of all
Churches, had universal authority in all Churches, but that so much authority
in all the Churches as was to be perpetual, should be in the Elders of all the
Churches, was not temporary or extraordinary, but is ever useful and necessary.


Sect. 2. As for the defect of general Councels etc. I answer. 1. You seem to
assert that that doctrine which supposes a great defect in Christendom is not
to be entertained, or is not likely to be the way of God, which if true, I am
sure the Independent way is not likely to be the way of God, for that supposes
a far greater defect in Christendom; the Churches of Christ far more generally
opposing it then the other way. 2. There have bin some general representative
conventions, as the Council of Nice, Ephesus etc. The Protestant Churches a
great part of this body, met at the Synod of D^rt. 3. There is nothing
intrinsecal to the Church, but that they may meet so still; the lets are but
extrinsecal, viz. division amongst Kings and Countries etc. The deadly enmity
or great re^^teness of the several nations, in which Christians do respectively
dwell. Had you but one Independent Congegation in England, another in Spai^,
another in Turkey; you could not gather an assembly or Synod of these Churches,
though it were never so needful, and though you did much desire it, as being an
ordi^^^ of God: yea in that (...) (suppose you were Presbyterians) you could
not have so much as a Class, and yet such a defect you would esteem your
affliction not your sin. 4. The fault is not so great as you make it: For 1.
every Prince and State does come as near a general assembly as they can,
encouraging the Churches within their territories to combine and be, as it
were, one body or Church of Churches. 2. That is supreme authority to us which
is the highest authority we can get pro hic and nunc; we hold that supreme
Ecclesiastical power may be in a National or in a Provincial Church (if God
shut the door of higher appeals, and he by his providence, and not we through
our default, do break the line of subordination) yea in a particular Church,
which same thing we hold also of supreme civil power that in some necessary
cases it may be exercised in one Assembly, yea in one Family, the same thing
might in some cases be said of a Jewish Synagogue when they could not have the
benefit of any superior Judicatory. 3. A general Council has in this last age
been desired and endeavored by sundry famous Christians, though in vain.
5. If there were such a lawful general Council we should be as willing to
submit to their godly decrees as to follow their advise, though the question is
not what we would do, but what we should do.


CHAP. X. Of the word (Churches) whether it evince Independency of
Congregations.
I Omit some things less pertinent and profitable; as 1. That the English word
Church did anciently signify the place; for the Saxons, Germans, Dutch
Nations, from whence this word is derived, do usually call their temples or
meeting places by the name of Cyrick, Kirich, Kerck; and they call the people
the Gemeine and the Gemeint; as is acknowledged by one of your friends. Guide
to Sion, p. 4. Hence our Translators turn the word (...) into Church, Acts
19.37. and our meeting places are properly and truly called Churches. 2. That
Ecclesia commonly translated Church is not necessarily so translated, but
convocation or a people called o^^; though it may be at least meto^^^mically
und^^^ood of the place of ordinary public worship, as Mr Mede, Mr Fuller, and
of late Mr Bifield do interpret 1 Cor. 11. which ought not to be despised, a
negative civil reverence being due unto it, as to a Courthouse, Senate House,
Parliament House, etc. 3. That the words Ka^^l and Gnedah do sometimes signify
a dispersed multitude or company that possibly never did nor could meet
together: Hence we read of a Church of Nations, Genesis 35.11. Church of evil
doers, Psa. 26.5. Church of the dead, Prove. 21.16. Church of the righteous, Ps.
1.5. And the people of Israel, though divided into several Domistied Assemblies
to keep the Passover, are called one Church, Exodus 12.46, 47. when I urge and
prove, that usually an Assemby or Co^cio is all one with Kahal or Ecclesia; and
that in this sense there were many Churches amongst the Jews; the Scripture
calls them. Church or Congregation often, and sometimes in respect of their
several Synagogues, Tribes, and Families, Congregations, Psa. 74.4.8. No wonder
therefore if the Christians of one Country, meeting in several. Synagogues and
houses, do receive the dommination of Churches, which in Scripture Phrase is
all one with assemblies, many whereof we confess were in Galatia, Macedonia,
etc. You reply, p. 26, 27. Psa. 74.4.8. is impertinently aledged, for
Congregations there is metonymically used, and is all on with Synagogues, and
signifies the place and not the people at all; the Congregation was but one,
having one high Priest for their chief Pastor, though meeting in its parts in
many places; the Church of the Jews is not called Congregations there, as
Mollerus shows But suppose there be truth in all that is said, what are all
these ^ceptions of the words Kahal and Ecclesia to the purpose? Can you find
that ever any one Church is called two or more Churches. For except there can
be found such an instance, the air is but beat^^ all this while, and our
assertion stands immovable. You cannot show, as we suppose, that ever any one
Church was called Churches in the plural number either in the Old or New
Testament in reference to plurality of places they met in.


Rejoyn. 1. Doubtle^s our Translators did understand v. 4. of (...) people (and
v. 8. of the place) else why should they translated (...) Congregations and not
Synagogues: and that is the primary sign^^cation of the word; and so it is most
usually taken in the Old Testament, That there were in David's or in Asaph's
time any Synagogues or set stated appointed places to use your own wor^^ (...)
it is hard to prove, the temple it self being not yet built. 2. I have showed
that an Assembly or Concio and a Church are often in Scripture phrase all one,
and therefore seeing it cannot be denied that there were assemblies in several
places, it must needs be granted, that there were many Congregations in
scriptural and ordinary phrase of speech, though these were indeed but parts of
the Jewish Church: and therefore it might be said to be but one congregation,
having one high Priest, etc. yet it may be called many congregations because
they did meet in several assemblies. 3. If it can be showed that one Church is
called Churches in the Old and New Testament, then you grant something is done
to purpose for the weakening of the position. Now (besides that the Universal
Church is but one and yet called Churches, as has been showed) I alledg that
the Jewish Church, which you confess was but one, is called Churches, Ps.
26.12. where David promises to bless God in the Churches, the Original being
the properest word to signify Churches, and such as you cannot say is meant of
Synagogues or places. Also Psalm. 68.26. which was a Psalm sung at the removal
of the Ark, Bless ye the Lord in the Churches: viz. In the Church-meetings, in
the several assemblies for the worship of God: Mr Ainsworth himself translateth
it Churches, and paralels it with 1 Cor. 14.34. Now to say that David promised
and the Israelites were commanded at the removeal of the Ark to bless God in
the Churches of the New Testament, or that those texts are only prophetical, or
to ^^ll of Enallage numeri, when the strength of the Argument is in the
difference of the number, are strained and far fetched evasions, and such
whereby I might quickly answer you, saying, The Churches of Galatia are spoken
figuratively for the Church of Galatia^^. Thus I have, through the good hand of
God helping me, done the task you set me, and by bargain your position should
fail. 4. If your consciences did not tell you the contrary of what you instance
concerning my scope and drift (when you say, Is your scope to confound and lose
your Reader in the various acceptions of the word Assembly or Church, that when
they read the word [Church] or [Churches] they shall not know what to under of
it); yet my rejoying (...) this, the testimony of my consc^^^ (...) ^^d rather
extricate my Reader out of di^^^^ties that (...), and the true reason of all my
ted^^^ and exp^^^ (...) satisfaction and strengthing of God^ peo^^^ (...) GOD,
(...) speak (as becomes Saints in the sight of God) are these things nothing
to the purpose, you to prove that there were several Independent judging
Churches in Galatia, and in Macedonia alledg the words Churches of Galatia; I
grant there were several assemblies in Galatia and also in Macedonia and in
Judea: The question is whether the texts cited do prove more then I grant; I
showed that the words Kahal and Ecclesia in Scripture (as well as profane
Authors) signifies Concio or an Assembly, whether orderly or disorderly, less
or greater, with government in it or no: Whether is be an instituted Church or
no, a whole governing Church or but a part of it. Hence though the Jewish
Church was but one yet Churches are said to be in it, because there were diverse
Assemblies in it: Hence (as I proved in my Answer) those that met at such and
such a time and place are called the Church, the whole Church, yet they were
not (it may be) the half or a third part or the tenth part of the Jewish
Church: and hence it follows what I would infer, that the calling of them
Churches of Galatia does not prove that each of them was an instituted visible
Church uncombined is any other in point of government, seeing the Assemblies
amongst the Jews were certainly combined in point of government, and yet are
called Churches as well as the Churches of Galatia. It is therefore clear to me,
and I hope to you too, that the word Churches proves no such thing as that they
were instituted Independent Churches, though (it may be) other texts do show
that some of them were complete particular Churches. 5. You should not only say
but prove that there is no other combination to enjoy all Gospel ordinances but
congregational, a position which in the latitude of your words your own authors
Mr Cotton, Mr Mather, Mr Tompson, and others will not own; nor I think your
selves, when you have considered wisely of the matter, for Synods are some
ordinances, yea Gospel Ordinances too, and a Congregational combination ( if
there be no other) cannot enable us to partake of those ordinances, as you very
well know.


Sect. 2. You do but think (though you in page 28, intimate that you know) that
those Churches were only Congregational, 1 Cor. 1.1.2. Cor. 8.1.19. Rev. 1.4.
and that they are properly called Churches, and that the word Church in 1 Cor.
12.28. is read in a figurative sense; when I say, that though the believers in
Galatia were called Churches, yet (for ought you alledg to the contrary) they
might be combined one to another, as the Churches of England, Scotland, Holland
are respectively combined; for the Apostle speaks of them as one lump, 1 Cor.
5.6. with Gal. 5.9. and wishes the anathematizing or excommunicating of him
that troubled them. Gal. 1.8, 9. and 5.10, 11. and the restoring with the
spirit of meekness (both which I take to be acts of discipline, and Cottons
Keys p. 8, 9. does so take them) of a fallen brother, Gal. 6.1. You thus reply:
As for such combination as is in Scotland, Holland without proof we cannot
grant them in Galatia; and if Paul had intended, by saying A little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump, that we should gather thence that they were but one
Church, he would never have called them Churches in the Preface of his Epistle;
if one speak in a literal sense and say a little leaven leaveneth the whole
lump, does he thereby make all the dough in a Country one lump? No, but of
every lump how many soever they be, it is to be understood a little leaven
leaveneth each of them, so of Churches a little leaven leaveneth the whole
lump, that is the whole Church, every Church in which it is, this makes not
all the Churches in a Country to be one.

Rejoyn. 1. Suppose it were granted that there were no combination for
jurisdiction in those Churches, does it thence follow that such combination
never ought to be? If a national assembly of the Churches of Galatia cannot be
showed, will you thence conclude that therefore there ought to be no national
assemblies, and that the present assembly in England and the late assembly in
New England is unlawful, possibly there might have been a special reason why
the Churches of Galatia could not be combined, either because they lived too
remote or under several civil Magistracies, which would not or could not have
intercourse one with another, or the Magistrates being enemies would not suffer
such meetings or combinations or the like peculiar reasons which now bind not.
2. I omit your needless cavils you uncandid intimations, and to this which is
the solidest part of your Reply I say, Suppose Paul had been alive before the
coming of Christ in the flesh, and should have writ to the Churches (a speech
used by the Psalmist, as has been showed) and the phrase Churches of Indea
which were in Christ, 1 These. 2.14. Gal. 1.22. seem to imply that even after
the time of Christ there were some Churches it Indea which were not in Christ
(as I urged in my Answer, though you put it out by and Index expurgatorius,) or
suppose he were now alive and should write to the Churches of Holland or of
France (as well he might without deserting the ordinary style) and one should
gather thence, that there were before Christ Independent Churches uncombined in
government, or that now every Congregation in France or Holland were
Independent and uncombined, your selves would deny the warrantableness of that
inference and yet could justify the propriety of Paul's speech well enough: If
we may call those which we know are combined, by the name of Churches, why
might not Paul call them by the name of Churches though they were combined? So
that if you will maintain that the Churches of Galatia were each of them an
Independent judging Church, you must seek out a better argument, for there is
nothing in the proof made in the position that infers so much; and this Answer
does serve for the C^urches of Indea and Macedonia as well as of Galatia. 3.
There was one special man amongst the false teachers which the Apostle aims at,
Gal. 5.10. (Now this m^n could not be of every Church of Galatia but of one of
the Churches) yet he writes not only, no not so much as principally to that
Church of which he was, but to all the Churches of Galatia, and declares what
censure he wishes might be dispensed (to use Mr Cottons own words Keys p.
59.) against him and other corr^^^ teachers. Now the strength of my Argument is
this: Those which are wished to dispense censures against a false teacher or to
do any acts of discipline must needs be combined; but the Churches of Galatia
are wished to dispense censures against a false teacher and to do acts of
discipline, therefore they were combined. 4. Let me ask you, as sometimes you
ask me, 1. What Commentator before you did explicate the word lump as you do,
denying the combination of those Churches? 2. Why it should not be taken
distributively in 1 Cor. 5. as well as here? 3. Do you indeed hold what your
exposition imports, that false doctrine does only leaven and corrupt the lump
in which it is, and one particular Congregation and not other Congregations in
any case? I should have ended this business, (...) you would tell me of leaving
Indea (as you did p. 29. though (...) was but deferred to its proper place, and
no text of Scripture (...) produced in the position for it) I alleging
therefore that (...) Churches of Indea were so combined, that they did come
together, Acts 20.20, 21, 22. to be satisfied of Paul concerning an accusaetion
they had received against him, and are called a Church, Gal. 1.13. Acts 12.1.
and an house, Heb. 3.6. which title you say is not given to loose stones and
timber, but imports joynting and knitting one to another. You Reply 1. These
were not the Jews of Judea alone that did gather together, but of all other
parts Act. 21.27.



Rejoyn. 1. You deal too cunningly, for though the Jews of other parts might be
there gathered, yet they are apparently distinguished from the other believing
Jews which had received the information, of which I spoke v. 20, 21. The Jews
amongst the Gentiles were they whom Paul was said to teach, and it may be some
of those Jews did inform, but the persons informed (you know) were different
from them both, and could be no other then the believing Jews or Churches of
Judea, and yet that they came together to be satisfied of Paul is plain, and
that James and all the Elders persuaded Paul to give them satisfaction. You
further Reply p. 31. That the Church Which Paul persecuted and Herod vexed is
meant either of that of Jerusalem or of the Saints in general, and not of the
Churches of Indea.

Rejoyn. Why not the Churches of Indea, seeing Jerusalem was one of them which
you acknowledge he persecuted, and not it only, for they that were scattered
abroad durst not stay in Judea no more then in Jerusalem, Acts 11.19, 20. which
implies that his persecution reached all Judea over, and the Churches of Judea
were within Herod's reach, and the ground of his killing James and proceeding to
take Peter also was because it pleased the Jews: Now it would please the Jews
that he should vex any Christian Church amongst them in Judea as well as the
Church of Jerusalem; and Paul also being a Jew his main envy was at the
Christians of Judea? 2. How dare you say Paul persecuted not the Churches of
Judea? Why might not they be persecuted to Damascus which was in Samaria, as
well as the Saints of Jerusalem? Compare Gal. 1.13. with v. 22, 23. Paul says,
I persecuted the Church of God, and the Churches of Judea heard that he that
persecuted us (viz. the said Churches of Indea) now preaches the faith; which
makes it clear that the Church of God in one place and Churches of Judea in the
other are the same thing, as I asserted. Finally advertising the Reader, that
the Printers error, not mine, putting Heb. 3.4. for 3.6. has given you some
advantage; I conclude, that the title of Churches of Galatia, etc. does not
prove that they were each of them distinct, governing, Independent, uncombined
Churches.

CHAP. XI. Whether and how the visible Church must consist of visible Saints.
Sect. 1. THe state of the question is this. First it is to be meant of Jews,
Heathens, and other strangers to the Church, not of children born within the
Church whose parents are Churchmembers, which are reputed within the Church and
baptized as such, though no visible Saint-ship does or can (they being infants)
appear in them, and consequently this is not of much (if of any) concernment to
the Reformed Churches of England, Scotland, France. For until it can be proved,
that a perfect reformation of the Churches cannot be made without a new
constitution, and that Churches may lawfully be gathered out of Churches, the
said new constitution is to be judged unnecessary. 2. It cannot be denied that
all men are morally bound to be visible Saints, yea real Saints; yea God
requires that armies should be holy, Deuteronomy. 13.14. and 23. 9. And the Instance
of Achan for relative guilt, is more suitable to the Isralites as a camp, (the
passages of it being military not Ecclesiastical) then as a Congregation.
Cities should be holy, Isa. 1.21, 26. Isa. 64.10. families should be holy,
Psalm. 101.2, 7. That is, they ought to be so, it is their duty so to be, and
the words in the position nakedly considered import no more: and he that erects
a family is bound (so far as he may) to erect it of such as fear God.
Church Members should much more be visible and real Saints, for a Churchmember
( qua such) makes more profession, enjoys more means, is in a nearer relation
to God, then a soldier or a Citizen qua such. 3. I grant that some visibility
of Saint-ship is requisite to admission, viz. profession of faith and
repentance, (especially if men be not sufficiently known, and approved by
experience of them, acquaintance with them, or by sufficient testimony of
others that are known; or if they have bin known to be Heathenish, heretical or
wicked) and desire of admission. 4. I deny not but all means prescribed by the
rule, that the Church may consist of visible Saints are to be used: but I
question. 1. whether it were better no Church were erected then not of visible
Saints, as you assert. p. 31. That is not wholly of visible Saints, for thus I
understand you, seeing those Churches from which you gather members, consist of
some if not of many visible Saints. 2. I question also whether God does not
require Heathens and irreligious wicked persons to join to the Church, as well
as to raise armies, or wage war, erect families, and that their joining to the
Church by profession of faith and repentance; craving the Sacraments is not a
sin, no more then raising armies, families etc. Yea it is a greater sin to
neglect the one then the other, though indeed their remaining Heathen is a
great abomination, and more odious in Gods sight after their entrance into the
Church then after the erection of Cities. But the main question as it is stated
by you, p. 33. is, whether a Church should examine persons which come to be
admitted, whether the work of grace be wrought in them, or not.
I hold the negative, and my reasons are. 1. There is no precept for it in the
word of God. 2. Nor was every member at his admission into the Church, in the
Apostles times called to give account of the work of grace in his heart. Nor.
3. Can any Congregation be named, which was appointed to judge or did actually
judge, whether the work of grace was wrought in such an heart or no, and
consequently whether he were to be admitted into the Church or no. 4. Nor does
the Scripture prescribe that men should meet together for prayer and mutual
conference, to be satisfied of the good estate one of another, and to approve
themselves to one another consciences in the sight of God, before they can
constitute a Church. Nor. 5. Were those three thousands and the Apostles also
satisfied in their consciences of the regeneration of all those they joined
with, as Ananias and Sapphira; ^or can we think that they could in one day or
had any days before, used the foresaid means of trial one o^ another by
prayer, conference. Nor. 6. That all that were circumcised and admitted into
the Jewish Church, would (upon such examination) have bin found visible Saints.
Nor. 7. That Jesus Christ as man, did know those thousands and myriads of
Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan, (what one man
knows the people of London, of all Midlesex and of all the Country about Thames
or Trent) with whom he was baptized, much less can it be proved that Jesus,
John Baptist which baptized them, or the disciples of Christ, (which were born
and lived amongst them, and knew the great wickedness, and frequent fained
confessions and humiliations o^ that people) did esteem each of them a true
Saint of God, or that they did examine, and try whether their confession of
sin, or profession of faith and repentance was real or but merely verbal, or
that they required them to Walk in Christian fellowship with them some space
for trial and approbation, or that they stayed or deferred to baptize any of
them, til they saw their fruits meet for repentance, especially seeing Luke
says, Luc. 3.21. that all the people (which v. 7. he calls Generations of
vipers) were baptized: if you cannot prove to the contrary of these things, I
pray you acknowledge it if you can do it, hitherto you have not done it. 8. This
makes the Churches charity the rule of admission, which is but a leaden rule no
certain one, some men's charity being larger, some lesser, yea the same men's
charity being larger at sometimes then at others, and more to some men, as
those that are of their opinions, kindred, benefactors etc. Then to others,
whence it follows that men of larger charity, may lawfully admit such, as
they that have less charity cannot. 9. This Tenet makes Communion with all the
Apostolic Churches, and particularly with the Church of Corinth, unlawful,
whereas the Apostle allows the worthy receivers to communicate in it, 1 Cor.
11. he would have no schism in it, nor separation from it, 1 Cor. 12.25. and
11.18. 10. A man that believes he should not communicate with any of whom his
Conscience is not satisfied that they are visible Saints, dares not
communicate in any Congregational Church, especially not in a great one; for if
covetous persons, raylers, (two of the very sins mentioned by the Apostle 1.
Cor. 5.) or Brownists (whose errors the Apologists call fatal shipwracks, or
Schismatics, (which professedly the Apostle speaks of, 1 Cor. 11.18, 19, 20.)
or Hypocrites and false teachers, (which the Scripture says are of a leavening
nature) idle persons, disorderly Walkers. 2. These. 3.6, 8, 12. or spiritually
proud, censorious, uncharitable persons be unworthy receivers, it is an hard
thing to be satisfied, that in those Churches, especially in the greater of
them, there is none at all of any of these sorts amongst them, no not one. 11.
The Scripture compares a Church lawfully constituted to a draw-net, to a wheat
field, in which are tares discerned, a cornfloor; and to a City; but as for the
comparing of a visible Church, to a garrison town. 1. Is a similitude invented
by your selves for your own purpose. 2. You cannot show so good warrant for
your examination, as soldiers have for theirs. 3. It is neither necessary, nor
ordinary, that each man that is admitted into a garrison should give
satisfaction to all the soldiers therein, that he is a real friend.
12. Mr. Noyes a N. E. man, says, p. 6. p. 10. Our facility of admitting
members must give testimony to the Lords dispensation of grace in the embracing
of invisible members. The gates of Jerusalem do stand open, Rev. 21.25. The
Elders of the City of Refuge did not expostulate with such as fled before the
avenger of blood in way of any explicit covenant or exquisite examination,
Josh. 20. Excess of complements, insolemnities, formalities, punctualities are
unsuitable to the simplicity and spirituality of the Gospel, and also fully
forbidden in the 2. Commandment.



Sect. 2. Reply, p. 34. If the Church be not a common receptacle but must
consist of selected, then there are certain rules of reception, and rejection,
and trial must be made by some, whether persons be so qualifyed according to
those rules: and this the light of nature, and rule of reason leads to, though
there should be nothing in Scripture expressly mentioning it.

Rejoyn. 1. When the rule of reason, and light of nature is alleged by some
for episcopacy, by others more clearly, necessarily for subordination of
Ecclesiastical judicatories, and the remedy of appeals, then you decline trial
by those judges, but now you do appeal to them. 2. Your argument is a mere
non-sequitur; The Church is not a common receptacle, there are rules of
reception and rejection, a trial must be by some; therefore the Church must
examine all those that come to be admitted, whether the work of grace be
wrought in their hearts or no.
For 1. The Jewish Church, the Christian Church in the days of the Apostles
were not common receptacles; yet they did receive and admit into them
(respectively) many, whom they did not examine whether the truth of grace was
wrought in their hearts or no. 2. The rules of reception and rejection, are set
down in Scripture, but amongst them this rule is not to be found, that the
Church must examine etc. If it be, why do you not show it? 3. If some may try
persons that come to be admitted, it follows not that the Church must do it. 4.
If there may be examination of something, it follows not, that it must be of
the truth of grace wrought in the heart, and that all are to be rejected which
cannot give satisfactory arguments thereof.


Sect. 3. Reply, p. 34. It was lawful and commendable in the Ephosians to try
false Apostles which professed in words to be true Apostles, Rev. 2.2.

Rejoyn. 1. You do here much qualify your tener, signifying you would accept of
verbal profession of faith and repentance, if there be any thing which may
(though but probably) give witness to the reality thereof. 2. That those
Apostles did desire member-ship with the Church of Ephesus, and were tried upon
that occasion is not expressed or employed in the text, but rather they that
said they were Apostles did in effect say, that they ought not to be set
members of any Church but had the care of all the Churches. 3. This trial was
not of their sanctity or syncerity, but of their doctrine and authority; not
whether they had true grace or no, but whether they had the office and doctrine
of Apostles or not, which two things differ much. Indas was a true Apostle, and
yet the work of grace was not wrought in his heart, and the work of grace is
wrought in many that are not Apostles. 4. They had commission to examine them,
1 John 4.1. 1 These. 5.21. And for this the Bereans were commended, Acts 17.11.
And the Elders or the Angel of Ephesus were in effect put upon that duty by
Paul, Acts 20.29, 30. But you have no such commission for the Church to examine
the work of grace, and therefore your practice is not so lawful as theirs.


Sect. 4. The Church of Jerusalem sought satisfaction concerning Saul; you will
say there was cause of suspicion and jealousy concerning him; and we may say,
there is now also cause of jealousy, for profession of faith and repentance is
common, and the fruits worthy of it, Math. 3.8. are rare.

Rejoyn. Your practice is not so reasonable as the practice of that Church in
that case: for. 1. There was just ground of personal exception against Saul,
and so there is not against every man of whom you doubt, the Apostles might
suspect him still to be a Jew, a persecutor, a spy, and that he but assayed to
join himself to them to betray them: Protestants in Q. Maryes days, and
Non-conformists in the Prelates days, (though they held not that they ought to
examine each man of the truth of his grace before they admitted them into their
society) would have bin afraid to have admitted known persecuting persons into
their private meetings, though they had pretended to be converted, til they had
known they had left off their trade of persecution, which the Aposties knew
not, that Paul had done til they heard Barnabas his testimony concerning him,
which they received without any examination. 2. Fruits meet for repentance were
ever rare, yet John Baptist did not defer baptism til the people brought them
forth, nor was he or the disciples of Christ afraid (notwithstanding they well
knew the rarity of such fruits) to admit thousands at once to baptism, against
whom they had no just ground of personal exception, as they had against Saul,
and therefore were afraid of him.


Sect. 5. In Answer I alledg, If the Gospel and Christian Religion was brought
into England in the Apostles times then it was like it was constituted of
Saints, as well as the Church of Corinth. If we look upon the latter
constitution in Q. Elizabeth's time, many Congregations (Manchester for
example) had visible, yea doubtless real Saints which were sufferers all Queen
Mary's time to be the foundationnalls thereof. You Reply. p. 35. It is
uncertain what Congregation was so constituted, and what not: we neither
justify nor condemn the constitution of any, but judge according to their
present state; and if we see any visible Saints, (as doubtless there are many
in some Congregations, and united also amongst themselves) for the sake of
those few so united, we acknowledge them a Church, and in all things so far as
they carry the ordinances uncorruptly, desire to have fellowship with them.

Rejoyn. 1. It is as certain as any thing built upon humane faith, that God had
a faithful people, not only in London, but in Manchester, and near to it in
Queen Mary's days, witness not only tradition, but the letters of Mr. John
Bradford and Mr. George Marsh, 2. There are also visible Saints still in it, and
those as much united (save that a few Anabaptists, Brownists, and Independents
break the union) as the Scripture requires a true Church to be. 3. You two show
no willingness of joining with us so far as the ordinances are carried
uncorruptly; for you hold that without such corruption the godly amongst us may
be admitted to your Sacraments, and yet you deny to do it, we bless God we need
not to it. 4. It is a fond thing that you should urge your humane inventions,
as a means to carry Gods ordinances uncorruptly.


Sect. 6. You say, Reply. p. 35. 1 Cor. 1.1.2. Shows either what the members of
the Church of Corinth were at first or ought to have bin, or what some of them
were at that time, and ought to have bin, viz. sanctified in Christ etc. As
Hemingius, Gualter, Pareus do note, and say that a definition of the Church may
thence be fetched.

Rejoyn. 1. Though this text does indeed show what some of them were, and all
ought in duty to have bin; yet your selves dare not assert, either that it
proves that the Church of Corinth was constituted wholly of v^sible Saints. or.
2. That then when Paul writ, it consisted wholly (if mostly) of visible Saints:
were all the carnal Schismatics. 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. The Incestuous person, and
they that were puffed up and gloryed. 1 Cor. 5.1, 2. The Contentious persons,
Fornicators, Idolaters, Drunken Communicants, denyers of the Resurrection,
spoken of 1 Cor. and 6.10, 11, 15. chapters. the false teachers, despisers of
Paul, impenitent persons mentioned Epist. 2. Chap. 10, 11, 12. visible Saints?
you know they were not. or. 3. That the Church of Corinth did, or ought to have
examined all she admitted, whether true grace was wrought in their heart or no:
or. 4. That the Church of Corinth had better bin no Church then not constituted
of Saints. or. 5. That it is necessary that a Church should be constituted of
visible Saints, or else sin is committed. I conceive none of those Divines can
hence conclude any of the foresaid things by me denied, nor can they rightly
gather the definition of a visible Church from these words, taking Saints in
the same sense that you do: for then if a Church should not consist of visible
Saints, then it wants the definition and consequently the being of a Church.
Surely none of them did judge the way of Independency to be the Scriptural way,
as you would pretend to the Reader they did, at least in this point.


Sect. 7. Reply. p. 35.1. The end of Church Fellowship is not conversion but
edification, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Acts 9.31. For if it were, all unconverted ones,
whether they make profession of faith and repentance or no, may enter in.

Rejoyn. 1. Conversion is as much the end of Church Fellowship in the time of
the Gospel, as in the time of the law, when all the lews and their seed (though
not all visible Saints) were within the Church, conversion to the Jewish
Religion was not the end of Church Membership then, not conversion to
Christianity now, but conversion to true sanctity might then and now be one end
of Church Membership: 2. Your texts say that God has given Apostles,
Evangelists, Pastors and teachers for the edifying of the body of Christ; and
then were the Churches edified, and walking in the fear of God were multiplied.
Hence you conclude, not only that edification is the end (which indeed the Text
imports) but also that conversion is not the end of Church Fellowship: The
weakness of which inference does thus appear: 1. The Apostle says not that
edification is the only end, or that conversion is not one end of
Church Membership. 2. The Apostles, of whom Paul speaks as well as of Pastors,
are acknowledged by your selves to be sent not for edification but for
conversion, though that Text (by your exposition) would as well prove that their
mission, as the mission of Pastors, was not for conversion contrary to Math.
28. 19, 20. Acts 26.18. 3. The word which we translate edifying is building,
and in common phrase signifies as well the rearing of a new house, as the
repairing, strengthening, and amending of an old house. And yet 4. there can be
no repairing of an old house without some addition of new materials, not can it
be conceived how the Church, a collective dying body, can be built or preserved
without conversion of souls. 5. To be builded, in Scripture Phrase is to have
children, Genesis 16.2. and 30.3. So Sarah and Rachel are said to be builded: See
Ainsworth in Genesis 16. And God made the midwives houses, Exodus 1.21. that is,
gave them children; and so Pastors are given to build the Church, viz. to beget
children; hence they are said to plant also, Jer. 1.10. Persons converted are
the joy and crown of their Pastors, and an argument of their mission from God.
6. Acts 9.31. says, the Churches were multiplied (...) which comes of the
word (...) of (...): Now how, I pray you, could they be multiplied without
conversion of some new souls? 7. One of your texts shows the end of giving
Apostles, Pastors, Teachers; of which we have spoken before. The other shows
the fruit of the Churches, rest and peace, but neither of them does (at least
not directly and plainly) tell the end of Church Fellowship.
3. As for the entrance of unconverted ones and persons not professing says
and repentance into the Church; I answer, 1. Infants do enter into the Church
though they neither profess faith nor repentance; and these must either be
converted in the Church or not at all. 2. Though conversion be one end of
Church Membership, yet it follows not that Jews, Turks, Pagans may enter,
because a profession of Christianity is required by Gods law before admission,
and so much care as God prescribes, ought to be taken. 3. Though one end of
conversion be hearing, yet if God have secluded excommunicate persons from
hearing (as I conceive he has (Excommunication being vltimum remedium) then he
must not be admitted to the Word: So though one end of Church Fellowship be
conversion to true sanctity, yet none but they that are converted to the
profession of Christianity can partake in it, and so Turks and Jews are
excluded.



Sect. 8. Reply p. 36, Excommunication is to recover persons desperately sick
and ready to dye, it is in the use of it as Physic, 1 Cor. 5.5. and therefore
supposes the persons to whom applied to be alive, therefore all Church Members
are to be reputed in the judgment of charity living stones, 1 Pet. 2.5.

Rejoynd. 1. Excommunication and Physic are not alike in point of the life of
the object, for no man gives physic to one whom he knows to be dead; but
though one spiritually alive being scandalous or erroneous may be
excommunicated, yet the more certainly (yea suppose infallibly) a man is known
to be spiritually dead, the more liable and fit he is to be excommunicated; for
Excommunication looks upon a man as sinful and erroneous, yea as incurably
such, and therefore to be cut off, -- Immedicabile vulnus ense recidendum, ne
pars syncera. trabatur, Math. 18.15, 16. Tit. 3.10. that the other members be
not leavened or corrupted by it. And yet 2. one end of Excommunication may be
the saving of the soul of the excommunicate, and yet not suppose him to be
already in the state of grace; for as a known unconverted man may be admonished
(if not apparently and obstinately wicked) and when God sets in with the
admonition we gain our brother and he is converted, and his spirit may be saved
in the day of the Lord Jesus; so if God set in with the Excommunication he may
be gained by it, though before he was not gained. 3. The Apostle supposes not
the incestuous person to be alive, but to be a wicked person and spiritually
dead, 1 Cor. 5.12. and yet would have him cast out. 4. In the Churches of Asia
and Galatia were some that were bewitched, Gal. 3.1. and turned to another
Gospel, Gal. 1.6. and counted Paul their enemy for telling them the truth, Gal.
4.16. And some that were of the Synagogue of Satan, Nicolaitans, Balaamites,
Jezebelians, many that had defiled their gariments, viz. were visibly wicked,
that were lukewarm, neither hot nor cold, Rev. c 2. and c. 3. Therefore Peter
writing to the strangers scattered through Pautus, Asia, Galatia, etc. could
not repute them all in the judgment of charity living stones or visible Saints,
but this denomination is given a meliori part, as if a man should call a
Parliament godly, wise, faithful Senators, he is to be understood that the
better part of them are such, but not that all of them are such, no not in the
judgment of charity.


Sect. 9. Reply p. 36. If Excommunication be an ordinance to throw forth
visible sinners, both all scandalous sinners 1 Cor. 5. and all other which will
not be healed of their lesser faults being duly proceeded against, Math. 18.15,
16.

Rejoyn. 1. I doubt whether every one that is not healed of lesser sins after
due admonitions be to be excommunicated. Suppose of passionate speaking, of
vain merriment, etc. if he be not otherwise blameable. The censure of
excommunication in Scripture is read to pass for grosser crimes, but no example
of passing it for lesser faults, we complained of this very thing in the
Prelates. Beza affirms Math. 18. to be meant of private scandals which differ
only from public scandals, that the one is less known then the other; we must
not (says Doctor Sibbs) kill a fly on a man's forehead with a beetle: If every
one that is not healed of every sin must be proceeded against so far as to
excommunicate him; the purest Churches would have nothing to do but
excommunicate one another. 2. Suppose they were to be cast out; can you show as
good warrant to keep such out, before due course of admonition, as to cast them
out when you perceive that admonitions and other due proceedings will not work
upon them? 3. Suppose you had good warrant to cast out all such, you cannot
hence infer, that all that are not visible Saints are to be kept out nor cast
out; for there are thousands that are not scandalous, and it may be (if they
were admonished) of their lesser faults would strive to amend them; ( Herod did
many things after John Baptist) which yet you would not put in the Calender of
Saints, especially if you should examine them of the work of grace in their
heart: Sometimes the thing is in medio, and we are neither satisfied that this
man is a Saint, nor dare we censure him to be a sinner: Can you show that the
Church ought to examine her members (yea those of which she has no just ground
of personal suspicion) whether they have committed any sin that deserves
casting out? Then we will grant she may examine such before she take them in: Or
could you show that Non-regeneration or the Churches not being satisfied of
their visible Saint-ship (she possibly seeing more into them then she did at
her admission of them) is a just cause of excommunication, though they be
neither gross offenders, nor in foro Ecclesiastico obstinate in their lesser
faults, then you speak somewhat to the purpose: But if this could be showed,
then the Apostle needed not to give us a catalogue of diverse sorts of sinners
with whom we must not eat, 1 Cor. 5. for he might have given us a shorter and
readier rule, saying, you shall nos eat with any, of whose regeneration you are
not satisfied, or that are not in your judgments, Saints.


Sect. 10. When I say he writes to the Church called to be Saints or called
Saints, not to Saints called to be a Church or, to the Church constituted of
Saints, which expression rather of the two proves there was a Church before
they were Saints (See v. 1. Paul called to be an Apostle) then that they were
Saints before they were a Church, though I maintain not the validity of either
inference. You Reply p. 36. Can there be a Church before there were Saints?
What a Church was that which had no visible Saints in it when it was first
constituted?

Rejoyn. Why do you oppose an inference which I professed I would not maintain?
the Reader certainly would have discerned the impertinency of this your Reply,
if you had not in your book left out that Passage of mine. 2. That which I
said, is undeniable, that the words [Church called to be Saints] does in the
grammatical construction (rather of the two) conclude that they were a church
before they were called to be Saints, then that they were Saints before they
were called to be a Church: as if I should write to Mr E. called to be a
Pastor, it were more rational to conclude that Mr E. was a man before he was a
Pastor, then that he was a Pastor before he was a man. 3. Any company or
assembly called together by command to hear some laws and speeches whether they
obey them or no, are called Ecclesia or Concio, but be it as absurd as you can
make it to say; there was a Church which had no visible Saints in it, much more
absurd is the other Position that they were Saints before they were a Church,
considering it as an inference from this Text, whatsoever it is in it self. 4.
(...) may be read called to be holy, which is in Scripture a word of greater
latitude then Saintship in English; so little children are said to be holy 1
Cor. 7.14. by a faederal holiness which cannot be called Saints or Sainted. The
Papists invented this substantive Saints which the Scripture uses always as an
adjective (though possibly sometimes the substantive is not expressed, of which
also instance may be given in other adjectives) and from them we borrow the
word. 5. There is no more here ascribed to the Corinthian Church then is often
ascribed to the Jewish Church by the Holy Ghost, as holiness, Deuteronomy. 7.6. Deuteronomy.
33.2, 3. Psa. 79.2. and their Church is said to be a Church of Saints, Psa.
89.5.7. Psa. 149.1. and their seed holy, Ezra 9.2. so that in this there is not
the least difference between Christians and Jews, save that the Jewish Church
was called holy and a Church of Saints in the first place, and Christian
Churches in the second, Exodus 19.5, 6. with 1 Pet. 2.9. Psa. 89.5, 7. So that
it may as well be concluded that every member of the Jewish Church was or ought
to be a visible Saint, or else sin was committed in it, and better not to have
been a Church at all then not to have consisted of visible Saints, and that the
Saints should have been separated into a distinct Church from the rest, that
the Church of the Jews did or ought to have examined persons coming to be
admitted, whether the work of grace was wrought in their hearts or no, and did
or ought to have rejected all those of whose sincerity and sanctity she was not
satified, as these things can be said of the Christian Church.


Sect. 11. When I say, How appears it that all the honorable titles and
epithites given by Paul are given with relation to Churchmember ship? The
Corinthians were curiched by God in all utterance and all knowledge, and did
come behind in no gift, etc. So when other Saints are called beloved of God,
elect, blessed, etc. their Life is hid with Christ in God; if these things be
spoken of them as Church Members, then they are true of all Church Members,
which you know they are not. Reply. There are some names, which show the
intrinsecal nature of the things to which they are given, and they do agree to
all of that kind: so [souldier] shows the intrinsecal nature of an army, and
[Saint] of the Church of God, but there are names extrinsecal to, and separable
from the nature of the things, and may be in some not in other, such are the
Epithites enriched with wisdom, utterance etc. As if one should write to the
army of such an one enriched with gold and silver.

Rejoyn. 1. You have a pretty distinction and similitude here, yet they are
faulty, for. 1. You beg the question and presume that to be true, which you
should prove so to be; for the very question is, whether Saint-ship,
satisfactory to the Church is of the Intrinsecal nature of a Churchmember, and
agrees to all Church Members, and is inseparable from them; so that whosoever
has not given satisfaction to the Church of his Saint-ship, or is not a Saint
in the Churches judgment, cannot be a Churchmember. 2. You know that if a man
be inlisted in an army, he is a member of it, though he was not examined of his
soldier ship before his inlisting; yea though he was known not to be a
soldier before, and is yet but in trayning, exercising, and learning
soldiery. If you mean that Church Members are called to be Saints only in such
a sense, as such a man is called to be soldier, you come short of the
question. 3. The Jewish and Christian Churches are compared to an army in the
books of Canticles, and Revelation, but neither the Jewish nor the then
Christian Church did pretend to consist all of Saints, nor was this doctrine
known, at least not practiced til separated. Churches were erected by Brown,
Barrow etc. 4. As concerning the names Elect, blessed, beloved of God etc. The
sum of what you answered, p. 42. I take to be this. That some of those to whom
the Apostle writes, might by him be infallibly known to be elect, beloved of
God etc. But all of them were judged such by Paul in the judgment of charity,
which latter you prove by Phil. 1.7. But the thing is evidently false, even in
that very instance you bring to prove it true, for the Apostle did not account
all the Philippians to be Saints, for he expressly says, Phil. 3.18, 19. that
some were enemies to the Cross of Christ, and your selves tell us, p. 76. That
there might be dogs in the Apostolic Churches, and alledg Phil. 3.2. which is
as much as to say, there were dogs in the Church of Philippi, and Paul knew it
when he writ this Epistle, how then could he in the judgment of charity account
them all to be Saints? So that of necessity you must acknowledge, that these
titles, Saints, sanctified, elect, beloved of God, faithful, were only in truth
applicable to a party in the Apostles judgment; I demonstrate it thus, If in
those very Epistles which he writes to Churches by the name of Saints, faithful
etc. He brand some of those he writes to, to be wicked, Impenitent dogs etc.
Then he does not, cannot, without contradicting himself, count all in those
Churches to be Saints; but the first is true; therefore he did not, could not
account them all visible Saints. And if this text do not prove that in the
judgment of Paul the Corinthians were Saints when he writ this Epistle, then
much less does it prove that they were visible Saints at the first constitution
of the Church, or that it was necessary they should be such, or that they were
better no Church then not so constituted, or that the Church then did or ought
to examine whether men intending or desiting member-ship, had the work of grace
wrought in their hearts or no, which is the practice you did undertake to
justify.


CHAP. XII. Of a Church Covenant.
Sect. 1 YOu say. Reply. p. 37. That the combination of Saints into one body by
some kind of covenant, either express or implicit, or by some kind of special
bond, does make a true Church. The Shechemites Genesis 34.15, 16. could not become
one with the seed of Jacob, but by coming into the same Covenant.

Rejoyn. 1. Surely you understand this of adulti, persons of age, not of
infants; for that infants born in the Church (suppose an Independent Church)
give any consent to their being or baptizing in that Church, it cannot be said.
2. You hold (I suppose) that those infants, whose parents did voluntarily
combine into a Church and are fit matter for a Church, and have continued from
their childhood in the fellowship of that Church, need not any new agreement
or covenant to make them of that Church. 3. You deny not (it seems) that there
is an implicit covenant, (they are your own words) though some have no less
fondly then confidently carped at the expression, as implying a contradiction,
but now the case is altered, your selves do use it: 4. This implicit covenant
or consent employed in actions is in our Congregations, for amongst us
(Christians that dwell in a vicinity or neighborhood, as has bin showed Chap.
2. that they ought) are one Congregation, they choose or submit unto, and
maintain the same individual officers, as John, Thomas; frequent the same
numerical meeting places, Sacraments, and other ordinances, and so are
distinguished from other Congregations of Christians dwelling in other
vicinityes, submitting to and maintaining other officers, as Andrew, Thomas
etc. Paul and Barnabas, assembling a whole year with the Church at Antioch,
(though they did not covenant themselves into it) are said to be within that
Church, Acts 11.26. cum. cap. 13.1. And therefore if implicit covenant,
agreement, or combination does make a true Church, we are not deficient
therein. 5. As for that of the Sichemites being one people, (that is to say)
one Church, or one people to God, as elsewhere you phrase it. I conceive that
Simeon and Levi did not pretend them to be one Church, neither would this have
bin an acceptable motion to an Heathenish Idolatrous people, nor would
Circumcision alone have effected it, ( Edomites and others were Circumcised,
and yet were not of the Jewish Church) except they had renounced their idols,
and become Proselytes. 2. I conceive the poor Sichemites had no thoughts of
altering their Religion for a wife, nor would the men of the City (in all
probability) have so unanimously consented to it, they might look upon
Circumcision as a national rite, and by being one people they do interpret
themselves to mean of a civil union, viz. dwelling, trading, marrying one with
another, enjoying the cattle and substance one of another, Genesis 34.21. Of any
overture or pretense of Simeon and Levi, or any desire or hope that the Sichem
tes had, that they should be one Church, one people to God, partakers of the
same Sacrifices and ceremonies, there is no mention; I conceive therefore it is
but your gloss; what covenant is involued in Circumcision, we shall show
hereafter.


Sect. 2. Reply. p. 38. Relation and combination to domestic ends and purposes
is the form of a family; unto politic and civil ends is the form of a
Commonwealth etc. And so relation, and combination of so many Saints as may
well meet in one place, unto the enjoyment of Church-ordinances does make a
Church.

Rejoyn. 1. Do you not mean that this agreement, or covenant is only of them
that are sui juris? must every member of the Commonwealth, as mean men,
servants, women, children, per se, at least implicitly, consent to their
relation or combination in the Commonwealth, and every particular member of a
City and family also, or he else is not to be judged one in that Commonwealth,
City or family; and do you hold the same of Church-relation? 2. Do you mean
that this covenant is not only between inferiors, and superiors, but between
equals, viz. that all the subjects of the Commonwealth must agree together to
be one, all the children and servants in a family should agree to be one, all
the wives of David and all the wives of Solomon did agree to be one; and not
only that there is an agrrement between Magistrates and subjects, Masters and
servants, (as we acknowledge also between Ministers and people) but that there
must be agreement, or covenant of the wives amongst themselves, the servants
amongst themselves, the subjects amongst themselves, and that this is the form
of a family, or of a Commonwealth; and so consequently Christians agreement to
be a Church is (you say) the form of a Church. 3. Do you mean that any former
agreement or covenant, made by our parents unto Domestique, Politic, or
Ecclesiastique ends and purposes does not bind us, their children and
successors; but notwithstanding the same we (without a particular and personal
consent) are not of the same family, City, Commonwealth, or Church that they
were of. I pray you express your selves plainly.


Sect. 3. Reply. p. 38. A solemn express, and verbal covenant or agreement, we
assert necessary to the purity and strength of a Church, how should Saints and
they alone living promiscuously in the world have communion together without
express verbal consent, which yet we judge ought to be, if the rule be well
attended, Rev. 22.27. and 22.14. And how else such looseness as in our Parssh
Churches (from which we may remove into another Parish without rendering a
reason, the members in a natural body, the stones in an house are not so loosly
set, to which a particular Church is compared Ephesians. 2.22. 1 Cor. 12.27.) may be
prevented, therefore we conceive a covenant necessary for such purposes.

Rejoyn. 1. You assert here more then I can yield unto, For. 1. The Scripture
gives us no precept or president of such a solemn express and verbal covenant,
which you assert necessary to the strength and wel-being of the Church: For. 1.
Church Covenant has reference to Church State, and Church-duties as such; as
marriage has to conjugal duties as such, Apol. for Church Cov. p. 3. and 25.
This does distinguish it from the covenant of grace, and other covenants which
have no more reference to those duties, (if so much) as to other duties. 2.
Your Church Covenant binds men to walk in all the ordinances of God, which in
the known sense of your Church, expressed by your confession of faith, and by
your practice, is no other then to walk in the congregational or Independent
way, now no Scripture does require that men should covenant to walk in that
way. 3. Your Church Covenant is not only with God, but with a particular
Congregation, which does difference it from all those covenants that are made
with God only, and not with any Church. 4. Your covenant is public, vocal,
express, and this does distinguish it from all those agreements that are only
employed in actions; as one that dwells in Manchester joins in choosing and
submitting to the Constables and other officers, pays lays and taxes, assists
officers, and bears office if required, does tacitly agree that he is a
Manchester man, and yet we do not say he has entered into covenant, or that
none can be a Manchester man but by covenant. 5. Your solemn covenant is before
the choosing of officers, which distinguishes it from al such covenants as are
made by a Church having officers. 6. It binds men not to depart without
leave-asking, which though it be no ordinance of God, but a politic
invention; yet it does infringe much the liberties of the Church. members, with
else in some cases might lawfully depart without leave. asking. 7. If a man
cannot in Conscience consent to your covenant, he shall be secluded from the
Sacrament though he be never so fit and holy. 8. Your covenant does translate
men and remove men out of our Churches into yours, and makes them members of a
distinct Church, whereas Scripture-covenants at the most did but confirm (if so
much) men in their Church State; If you can show such a Church Covenant as this
in Scripture, or that has all the essentials of your Church Covenant, then I
shall incline to believe it, (not only lawful but) necessary to the Churches
welbeing, but I cannot believe any thing to be necessary to the strength and
purity of the Church, if it cannot be found in Scripture: some have said, If
set forms of prayer had bin lawful, Christ would have prescribed them: I may
much rather say, if this Church Covenant were so necessary, Christ would have
prescribed it.
2. Any separation or division that is of God may be brought about without our
own inventions. The Christians did separate themthemselves from amongst the
Jews and Heathens, and the Protestants in Queen Mary's days from the Papists,
and yet without any such vocal express covenant that we read of. 3. If such
loo^ness in our Parish-Churches be so great an evil, then take you heed you be
not guilty of that great evil by making that looseness greater then it is, or by
Gods law ought to be; Is it a greater evil for men that remove their
habitation, then for those that do not remove it all, to depart from their
Parish Church without rendering a reason? Is it not a greater evil to add to
the commandments of God our own carnal and politic devices, and to lay a yoke
or covenant on our people which God has not laid on them for preventing of
some inconveniences which Gods law does not enable us to prevent? 2. If there
be any local bounds (as by Scripture rules has been showed there ought to be)
that inconvenience must necessarily happen, but to this I have spoken before
Chap. 2. 3. The place in Ephesians. 2.22. is apparently not meant of a particular
Congregation but of the universal Church which is called the City, the
Household, the Temple, and all the Christians of the particular Church of
Ephesus were not the whole City but (...) fellow-citizens with the Saints, not
the whole household but of the household, not all the temple or building but
(...) are built together with other Saints and Churches, which also are part of
the City, Temple, Household, building as well as they. 4. in Cor. 12.27. when he
had said ye are the body of Christ, he corrects himself (...) as if he should
say, ye are not the whole body, but members in part of that body, and others
are part of that body as well as you, for into it both Jews and Gentiles are
baptized, v. 13. viz. into the universal Church, and in this sense these
Scriptures do not serve your purpose; and therefore you say (but not rightly)
that a particular Church is there compared to a body and an house. 5. Your
selves, I know, hold not that Church Membership is as in dissolvable, as the
members of a natural body are one from another, which are not separated without
ruin of the part separating if not of the whole body, nor can that member be
willingly separated from its body or joined (with any good effect) to another
body.



CHAP. XIII. Whether Deuteronomy. 29. or Genesis 17. be presidents of a Church Covenant.
Sect. 1. THe Covenant in Deuteronomy. 29.1.10, 11, 12. respects Reply p. 39.
principally Church-duties more then other duties of the moral law, v. 16, 17,
18. for he warns them of Heathenish worships, and would engage them by an holy
Covenant to all Gods holy worships of the Passover, and all the offerings of
Gods prescription, which were to be brought to the door of the Tabernacle of
the Congregation, -- though a Covenant binding to some duties of the moral law
may be made by two or three persons of several Churches, and yet not make them
members of a distinct Church; yet if they Covenant to walk together in the
constant enjoyment of all Church-ordinances, this would change their state and
make them a Church.

Rejoyn. 1. Those verses contain in them Moses admonition and exhortation to
the people, v. 10. Ye stand this day all of you before the Lord your God -- v.
12. that thou should enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God and into his
oath which he makes with thee this day, etc. that they should not serve the
gods of Egypt or of other Nations, least there should be amongst them man, or
woman, or family, or tribe, whose heart turns away from God; but there is not
the least mention of Passover or other Church-duties which you say that
Covenant did engage them to; and therefore it does not appear by those verses
that the Covenant more principally respects Church-duties more then other
duties of the moral law; some part of the moral law is mentioned and
interpreted, viz. the first Commandment, but nothing spoken of
Church Membership; Every particular servant of God ought to take heed of
Heathenish worships which is there required, and not a Church only. I appeal to
you, may not, ought not, every man, woman, family, or tribe (to use the words
of v. 18.) make a Covenant with God that he, she or they will not turn away from
the Lord to go and serve the gods of the nations, as Jacob covenanted for
himself, Genesis 28.21. and Ruth cap. 1.16. and Joshuah for himself and his house,
Josh. 24.15? May not any two or three amongst us covenant that they will keep
the first Commandment, which in this text is paraphrased on, Thou shall have no
other Gods before me, viz. not the abominations of Egypt nor their idols, v.
17. of some duties sealing their union and communion with the body of the
Jewish Church and celebrated when the whole body was assembled, I find mention
in your book, but not in the book of God in the place cited. 3. Suppose it true
that persons covenanting to walk together in all Church-ordinances which God
requires of a Church would make them a Church and change their state, yet it is
not to the point, for the question is, whether two or three of several
Christian Churches, covenanting in the very words of v. 16, 17, 18. on which
you build, That their hearts should not turn away from the Lord their God to go
to serve other gods, or that they would not serve or worship images; would this
make them one Church together? And if it do not, how can you say this was a
Church Covenant? 4. This was not an express vocal Covenant on the peoples part,
which you are to prove necessary to the wel-being of the Church; for it was
made with them that were absent as well as with them that were present; now they
that were absent, however they were included, did not, could not (if they that
were present did) make a solemn express verbal Covenant: Mr Cottons opinion you
shall hear hereafter.

Sect. 2. When I answer that a Covenant in general does not make a Church (nor
a marriage) and that Scripture-Covenants are not with appropriation and
application to this Pastor or people, viz. that they would serve with this
people or Pastor rather then with that, therefore they are not
Church-Covenants. You reply page. 40. Who ever read or heard of a Covenant in
general of duties to be done without application to persons mutually engaged to
perform such duties? The Covenants in Scripture were no such Covenants, they
were applied to Israel and to the Gentiles that should join to Israel, and so
they were a separated people from other nations by Covenant, Exodus 12.47, 48.
The Jews by the Covenant of God were to serve God rather with this people then
with that.

Rejoyn. 1. You ask who has read or heard. I answer Mr E. and Mr T. have I
suppose read the N. E. Elders apology for Church Covenant, out of which that
phrase, and most part of the sentence is taken. why do you quarrel with me, or
rather with the Elders of N. E. beating them on my back. 2. Your selves will
say, A covenant to serve God, to endeavor after the enjoyment of all Gods
ordinances, A covenant to perform Church-duties, is not a Church Covenant
except they covenant to enjoy Gods ordinances, and perform Church-duties
together: a man promises to marry, a woman promises to marry, this does not
make them many and wife, except they promise to marry one another, and do so;
Surely you do not think these expressions ridiculous. 3. I speak (as you might
discern by my phrase) of the Churches and people of the new testament not of
the old, and so did the Elders of N. E. for they speak of distinguishing one
Church from another, a speech proper to the new testament. 4. Suppose there had
bin before Christ some other Church which had worshipped God as purely, and
enjoyed God as fully as the Jewish Church did; would such a covenant as this
you speak of Deuteronomy. 29. have bound all that took it to be of the Jewish Church,
and not of the other? I think you will not say it, I dare say you cannot prove
it: 5. However we yet want a solemn verbal express covenant by which the Jews
and Gentiles converted bound themselves to be all of one Church, though they
were one Church, and did not want any thing necessary to the strength and
purity of the Church: for Mr. Cotton himself says that God propounds and
gives a covenant to a people, and they accept it, though not in express words,
yet in silent consent, and he cites, Genesis 17.7. Deuteronomy. 29, 10. ad fin^m. Cap.
30. Way of the Churches. p. 3.


Sect. 3. Reply. p. 40. There is a covenant between Pastor and people, but it
grows out of the covenant amongst the people, who must first be one before
they can agree in one to choose a Pastor; There was a covenant with Abraham and
his house, by virtue of which Israel was the Lords people in Egypt, before
there were Pastors over them; and it was so in the wilderness before Aron and
his sons were chosen.

Rejoyn. My speech was dis-junctive, if a Church Covenant imply appropriation,
either to this or that people, or to this or that Pastor, or both, the speech
is true. 2. That the covenant between Pastor and people is emergent from a
covenant amongst the people is gratis dictum, and so stands, til you show a
people covenanting to be a Church together before they had officers. 3. That
Israel was the Lords people before they had any Pastors over them, is a gross
untruth. The first born (until Aaron and the sons of Levi were separated for
that work, were unquestionably Priests and Pastors) yea Adam was a Priest to
himself and family, and therefore it is said that Cain brought of the fruits of
the ground, viz. he brought to his father that he might offer it to the Lord,
so both ancient and modern Interpreters do expound it, and they had Priests
before the giving of the law, which questionless came with them out of Egypt,
Ainsworth in Exodus, 19.22. and those young men, Genesis 24.5. are interpreted to be
the first born of the several families, and these continued til the Levites
were substituted in their places.


Sect. 4. Reply. p. 40. To be one people to God in a professed solemn way by
entering covenant with God, and to be a Church is all one; and this is
asserted, Deuteronomy, 29.12.13.

Rejoyn. Neither the text, Deuteronomy. 29.11.12. nor my answer had the words [ one
people] in them, but [ a people] you force in the word [one] that you may have
some pretense for a covenant. The Scripture shows us not that a people, or a
people of God is equivalent to one people. 2. England, Scotland, and Ireland,
are or may be the Lords people in a professed solemn way by entering into
covenant with God; will you hence conclude that they thereby are all made one
Church? God foretells that many nations shall be joined to the Lord, and be his
people, Zach. 2.11. The Christian Gentiles are called Gods people, and that by
covenant. Hose. 2.23. The Jews scattered in Pout us, Asia, Cappadocia, and
Bithinia are called a poculiar people. 1 Peter 2.9. And therefore by your
logic they are all one Church.

Sect. 5. Reply. p. 41. To prove there was a covenant at the founding of the
Jewish Church, and so of Christian Churches, you urge, That all the Proselyted
Gentiles entered into the Church by the seal of the covenant which was
Circumcision, and converted Heathens, and the infants of Church Members are
brought into the Church by baptism, which is the seal of the covenant of grace,
and especially of that part of it which concerns Church society.

Rejoyn. 1. You know my meaning was not that there was no covenant at all, but
that there was Church Covenant, no solemn express verbal covenant which you
assert to be necessary to the strength and purity of the Church. The Jewish
Church (qua Church if not qua Jewish) was founded first in Adams family, then
again in Noah's; (hence your selves argue from their families that 7 or 8 may
make a Church, so it continued in Shems family, (who (as some most probably
think) was M^l^his^d^ck, who being a Priest must needs be within the Church,
and yet all this while you have no color for a Church Covenant. 2. If the
bringing in of converted Heathens, and the infants of Church members into the
Christian Church by baptism, (of Circumcision we shall speak afterward) be a
sufficient evidence that the Church is founded by covenant, then the Reformed
Churches are founded in covenant as well as yours, yea as well as the Primitive
Apostolic Churches, for the same argument you bring why they were founded in
covenant suits fits all the Churches (for ought I know) Gentiles converted and
infants of Church Members being brought into them all by baptism, and
consequently, they that forsake the Reformed Churches, are (coeteris paribus)
covenant-breakers, as well as they which forsake your Churches. 3. That
Congregational society is a part and a principal part of the covenant of grace,
I understand not. For if it were so, then. 1. It would follow that Adam and Eve
While alone til they were so many as would make a Church, were not wholly
partakers of the covenant of grace. 2. That a true believer excommunicated
(though for the name of Christ) is deprived in part of the covenant of grace.
Yea that every one that is not a Churchmember wants a part of the covenant of
grace, and a principal part too.
4. Nor do I believe Paptism to be a seal of Congregational communion
principally: Because 1. The Apostles (as you say p. 56.) might baptize in all
the world, and not only in the Church. 2. Paul himself was baptized before he
did assay (...) to join himself to the Disciples. 3. You cannot show of what
Congregation all those that were baptized by John Baptist, by the Disciples of
Christ were, or that they were of any, and if they were of none, then the seal
of Baptism in reference to a principal part of the Covenant of grace was set to
a blank. 4. Baptism does admit us into that one body consisting of Jews and
Gentiles, 1 Cor. 12.13. else if Baptism do admit only into one Congregation,
then a person so baptized is an alien to other Congregations, as he that is a
member only of one Corporation is a stranger to all the rest. 5. Whereas you
ask, how those that are many become one amongst themselves, and distinct from
others of the same kind, as Corinth was one in it self and distinct from
Cenchrea (for parish bounds were not then on foot) so that the members and
officers of one were not the members and officers of another, what can it be
but some agreement or covenant explicit or implicit? I answer the same way of
uniting and distinguishing Congregations and Churches which the Scripture holds
out to be practiced in the primitive times cannot be denied to be sufficient
now a days, partly by local bounds and limits, and partly by an implicit
Covenant (which here you confess to be sufficient) or an agreement employed in
actions, submitting to the same officers, frequenting the same Sacraments, etc.
of which we have spoken more Chap. 2. 6. Whereas you demand p. 41. Did not the
joining of the believing Gentiles to the family of Abraham by circumcision make
them more truly members of the Church then they were before? Were they not
afterward accounted of the Jewish commonwealth and invested into all their
spiritual privileages which they had no right unto before, though they were
converted persons and Gods servants.



Rejoyn. 1. That Passage of mine [their Covenants did not make a Church more
truly a Church, or more truly members] had apparent reference to the Covenant
in Deuteronomy. 29. pretended to be a Church Covenant, the believing Gentiles were not
a Church or members at all before their believing, and therefore not capable
(in propriety of speech) of being made more truly such. 2. You show not that
the joining of the Gentiles to the Jewish Church was by solemn express verbal
Covenant, that they would be a Church together. 3. That believing Gentiles
after Circumcision were always accounted of the Jews commonwealth, viz. under
their civil government, had a portion of their land, I deny and put you to
prove, and if they all were of that Church, it was but per accidents, because
there was then no other Church to which they might join: had God pleased to
have erected several Independent Churches amongst the Jews, their circumcision
had sealed them no more into one of these Churches then into the other.


Sect. 6. Reply p. 41. We conceive that Abraham and his family were not in
Church State, and professedly and openly separated from the world till the
Covenant in Genesis 17. at which time by a mark in his flesh he was distinguished
from all the Nations and became Gods household; if this be so then Church State
is founded in Covenant: if otherwise, let it appear that he was in Church State
before that time, and we shall look for a Covenant before that time: We read
nothing of Abraham's family that they were a professed people to God before that
time.

Rejoyn. 1. You speak but doubtingly; you know that if it be not certain that
the Church was now constituted, it is impossible to demonstrate hence (what the
Position asserts) that the Church of the Jews was constituted in Abraham's
family by Covenant, no more then it can be certain that A. B. sold his land for
ready money, if it be uncertain that A. B. did sell his land. 2. But for ought
you say they were in Church State before, though not professedly and openly
separated, yea they might be one of them and yet your words be true, if they
were not both. 3. I conceive they were in Church State before, for God called
Abraham and blessed him with a promise of Christ, Genesis 12.1, 2, 3. and Abraham
believed the Lord, etc. built altars, called on the name of the Lord, God
appeared to him and made him promises, was blessed by and paid tithes to
Melchisedeck the Priest. 4. Was not Lot a professed servant of the Lord, and
Sarah and Hagar, one of the worst in Abraham's family, Genesis 16.9, 10, 11?
Abraham was the Priest of his family, and when he offered sacrifices upon the
altars he builded, did he not offer sacrifice for his family as well as himself?
Doubtless Abraham before circumcision as well as after, did command his chidren
and household to keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18.19. his family willingly,
for ought appears, even 300 and more left their own Country and Idolatrous
kindred at Gods call, Genesis 17.4, 5. Josh. 24.23. Isa. 41.2. and came into the
land of Canaan, and this they did visibly and professedly bringing no Idols
with them that we read of; were none of these arguments of Church State and of
real profession and separation from the world? 5. You tell us, p. 28. that
usually when any heads of families were converted, some of the household were
converted with them, and was Abraham's family to be excepted? 6. You reply p.
42. We read not of any symbol of Church State by which they were separated
from the rest of the world before circumcision.


Rejoyn. But would you have any symbol of Church Estate which God has not
instituted? You assert, that Adam's and Noah's family was a Church. You say p.
43. there might be a Church in Sem's family: You cannot deny that there was a
Church before Abraham's time: Had that Church any symbol of Church Estate
which Abraham's family wanted? What was that? I believe you cannot show any;
and if he had all the symboles of Church State which God had then instituted,
or any Church before him had, it was enough; take heed lest by your reasonings
against the Family of Abraham being a Church you utterly overthrow the Church
of God before his time every where else also. 7. You say, This distinguishes
him and his family not from the world alone, but from the believers of his
time: Melchisedeck and Lot though holy men were not in his state, nor had his
privileges.

Rejoyn. Melchisedeck and Lot might be circumcised though we do not read they
were, and if he was Sem, then by virtue of a natural precedence in age (as Mr
Noyes supposes) he was a Priest of Abraham's family as well as his own, and
they were sons of the same Church, and if Melchisedeck and Lot were of one
Church with Abraham before, Abraham; receiving of circumcision could not thrust
them out of that Church which they were of before, though they did not
(suppose) lie under the same command of circumcision that Abraham and his
family did; if God required them to be circumcised, they (its like) heard of
it, and doubtless being holy men would not slight Gods holy Ordinance. 2. What
is all this to prove that a solemn express verbal covenant is necessary to the
purity of the Church; if Melchisedec was of another Church was not his Church
(for he being a Priest had one) whether constituted in Covenant or no, as pure
as Abraham's that was constituted by Covenant.

Sect. 7. I said, The Covenant in Genesis 17. is taken only for Gods part of it
or his promise to Abraham, Gal. 3.16, 17. not for man's part to God whereof we
now speak. you reply, The Apostle seems to make use of the promise of God made
to Abraham and his seed in the Covenant, Genesis 12.3. and 22.16.18. The Apostle
there had no occasion to speak of the restipulation on Abraham's part, and in
Genesis 17.1.9. it is manifest that the Covenant was reciprocal. Junius and Paraeus.

Rejoyn: He seems, (you say) multa videntur et non sunt, many things seem what
they are not: dare you say that the Apostle makes use of the promise, Genesis 12.
and Genesis 22. and excludes, Genesis 17? Was not this as solemn glorious a promise
as any made to Abraham, might the covenants, Genesis 12. and 22. be taken for Gods
part of the covenant, or his promise (as you confess) and may not covenant in
this place be so taken? Paul speaks of promises and may include them all, this,
as well as those. 2. Paul might if he had pleased have taken occasion from the
subject in hand to have spoken of Abraham's part of the covenant. 3. Put case
the covenant was reciprocal (as you say it is expounded; I am not so furnished
with books as formerly I have bin) it follows not that it was explicitly
reciprocal on Abraham's part, nor that it was a Church Covenant, nor that an
express solemn verbal Church Covenant is necessary to the welbeing of a Church.
You Reply. Cong. way Iustif. p. 31. The Position says nothing of an express
vocal covenant, and you by bringing in these words do alter the question, we
hold not an express vocal covenant necessary to the being of a Church. And when
we say it is necessary to the purity and strength of a Church; our meaning is
not that it is a standing ordinance of God, that the Church should be united by
a vocal expression of their mutual consent, (which we call the covenant) so as
that subscription, signals, or silence it self as a sign may not be a lawful
testification of their consent, but it is fit and convenient that it should be
expressed in words, and so words are necessary as one, and usually the fittest
expression of our minds.

Rejoyn: 1. If you understand only an implicit covenant or agreement employed
in actions, we never denied it, the Scripture approves it. 2. If a man may judge
of the Position by the definition given by N. E. men of a Church Covenant.
Apol. p. 3. That it is a solemn public promise before the Lord, or by your
practice which commonly have an express verbal covenant; or by your own
assertion of the necessity of it to the purity of the Church. I did no wrong to
bring in a vocal express covenant, and to show that Abraham's was not such a
one. 3. If vocal expression of mutual consent which you call the covenant, be
not a standing ordinance of God, as you confess it is not, then how comes a
solemn express verbal covenant, or agreement to be necessary to the purity and
strength of a Church, if it be no standing ordinance of God? 4. Subscription,
signals, and silence it self as a sign do suppose a verbal, and express
covenant written, repeated or read to them or by them; and if the said verbal
express written covenant, be not the ordinance of God, then subscriptions,
signals, silence it self as a sign, do not much more qualify the matter, then
if vocal expression were required, prove that subscription to a
Church Covenant, signals, or silence as a sign are the ordinances of God, and
it shall serve the turn: Suppose Abraham's family did not vocally covenant to be
a Church together, did they subscribe, give signals, or keep silence as a sign
of it? 5. If words be necessary as one, and usually the fittest expression of
our minds? how comes it to pass, that in neither of the tex^ cited (as Mr.
Cotton acknowledges) they did accept the covenant by express words? Cotton.
way. p. 5.


Sect. 8. Reply. p. 42. But you check your self as if over-hold; and therefore
say, Indeed receiving of circumcision does import a covenant on Abraham's part,
or consent to the covenant as Baptism also does; but it is held they were in
Church State before they had right to Circumcision; therefore you should show
they made a covenant before: Circumcision. Reply. Circumcision does argue
necessarily that there was a covenant before, of which it was the sign and
seal, was not Isack in covenant before he was Circumcisied, and did not his
Circumcision seal so much? This order is always supposed 1. Gods promise. 2.
Man's faith. 3. The sign and seal of both -- ^^in baptism.


Rejoyn. 1. You are much mistaken, I see no cause to check my self, but you
rather for omitting part of the Answer. viz. Gods covenanting with Abraham did
not impose, or suppose an express vocal covenant on Abraham's part, (although
when God appeared visibly and spoke vocally, there was more color for an
express covenant then now he does not) nor always an implicit Covenant. The
children not yet born could not give so much as an implicit assent etc. Which
strongly proves (though Genesis 9.9.10. which speaks not properly be left out)
that they with whom God did Covenant, Genesis 17. did not (for ought appears by
the text) make a solemn verbal express Covenant. 2. That Circumcision was a
seal of the Covenant between God and Abraham, that Isack was in Covenant I
grant, but you know very well, That to be in covenant and to make a covenant are
two distinct things; you should have showed that they made a Covenant, and you
ask whether Isack was not in Covenant, you children and mine not yet born, or
but of a year old, may be in Covenant, but they cannot be said to make
Covenants: we blame you not for being in Covenant, but for making
Church-Covenants express verbal etc. 3. The order you speak of. 1. Gods
promise. 2. Man's faith. 3. The sign and seal is a right order in adult is, and
most true of Abraham.
1. The promise was made, then he believed, then was Circumcised, but what is
this to an express verbal solemn Covenant, or subscription, signals before his
Circumcision? I presume you speak not of Infants; for Isack (you know well) did
not, could not believe nor make profession of faith before he was Circumcisied.
4. If Circumcision in the old testament, and now baptism in the new, be such a
certain sign of Church Covenant; you need not to ask whether a baptized person
be in Church Covenant or no? for his baptism does prove him to be in
Church Covenant, as well as Circumcision did, all that were baptized by John
Baptist, or the Disciples and Apostles of Christ, and Paul himself before he
did assay to join to the Disciples was in Church Covenant, because he was
baptized by Ananius, and all those that were baptized in our Churches, were in
your judgment in Church Covenant with us; and if you persuade them to leave us;
how do you clear your self of being accessory to their breach of
Church Covenant? I add How prove you That Melchisedeck a Priest, and Lot which
were not of his seed, nor of his family were out of Church State? That a
believer is not a son of Abraham, nor an heir of the promise and Covenant
made to Abraham, if he be not in Church State by Covenant, all which you seem
to imply when you say the Jewish Church was constituted in Abraham's family by
Church Covenant. The family of Shem was the Church of God long before this.
Genesis 9.25, 26, 27. You Reply. p. 43. We assert not that they were out of
Church State, but if they were not Circumcised, they were not of Abraham's
Church, nor could they have partaked of the passover, had it bin on foot, any
more then other believers, not joined to Abraham's family as Cornelius.


Rejoyn. 1. You have not yet proved that Abraham was not in Church State before
Genesis 17. This demand you answer with a deleatur. 2 If Melchisedeck and Lot were
of another Church then Abraham's, can you prove that that Church also was made
by Covenant, if it was not, then every Church is not (as you assert) founded in
a Church Covenant. 3. If Melchisedeck was not a Jew (as I believe he was) Lot
certainly was one, Cornelius was certainly a Gentile, Melchisedeck (if he was
Shem) was Abraham's progenitor, and Lot was his kinsman, and so nearer to the
family of Abraham then Cornelius was, but of Melchisedeck and Lot see before.
You Reply further. It is one thing to be a son of Abraham, as a believer and
heir of promise: another thing to be the son of Abraham, as a professed
Covenanter with God, and bearing the symbol in his flesh; in the former sense
Abraham was the father of all believers, though uncircumcised, in the later of
the Circumcised, which were also of his faith, as the Apostle shows. Romans 4.11,
12.


Rejoyn. Romans 4.11, 12. Shows that Abraham was the father of all that believe,
whether Circumcised or uncircumcised (that is in Scripture language you know)
Jews or Gentiles, the Jews had the symbol in their flesh, the Gentiles had not:
but what is this to the purpose, you assert the Covenant, Genesis 17. to be a
Church Covenant, then I conceive it follows from your opinion, that believers
which are not now in Church State by Covenant are not heirs of that promise,
and put you to prove it, or (if you had pleased) to renounce it; your text does
rather prove that he was the father of all believing Gentiles, whether joined
to an instituted Church or no; and that such believers are heirs of that
promise and Covenant. 2. You say every believer is the son of Abraham as a
believer and heir of promise. But what promise mean you if not that Genesis 17.
my demand was, and is, whether a believer out of Church Covenant be not an
heir of that promise and Covenant, Genesis 17! If you grant he is, then it will
follow that it was not a Church Covenant, if you say he is not, I pray you
speak plainly, I sometimes find it more difficulty to discern the strength of
your Reply, then to confute it. 3. A single person, two or three persons may
undoubtedly be professed covenanters with God, and so may be children of
Abraham in that, but to be the children of Abraham as bearing the symbol of
that covenant in his flesh; no believing Gentiles, whether in Church Covenant
or no, baptized or unbaptized can: for the Scripture, yea common sense tells us
that neither baptism nor Church Membership do leave any symbol in the flesh,
you are able enough to express your selves; if you would make your meanings
more plain, our discourses would be more profitable to the Reader. Lastly you
reply. p. 43. Though it be probable there was a Church in the family of Shem,
yet that place proves it not, and that Church might be of another constitution
then this in Abraham's family; this hinders not but that the Church in Abraham's
family was constituted by covenant.

Rejoyn. 1. If there were a Church in Shems family, it is less matter whether
that text proves it, and yet if the thing had bin denied I could have proved
it. 2. You take too much delight in multiplying Churches, and diversifying
their constitutions; one Church whereof Melchisedeck was, (for you will not
assert that he was out of Church State) another Church where Lot was, (for I
imagine you will not assert that Melchisedeck and Lot were both of one Church) 3.
A third might be in the family of Shem (if you hold him not to be
Melchisedeck.) and a 4. in Abraham's family, what three or four Churches at
once? and that before Christ too, and those or some of those of different
constitutions, and yet all agreeable to the will of God? I suppose if necessity
had not driven you to seek Churches to take Sanctuary in, you would not upon so
little ground of Scripture have deserted the received and most rational
opinion; That there was but one Church at once before Christ's time. But surely
the more Churches you find out, the more work you have to do to prove they were
(as you say, all Churches are) founded in Covenant, especially if you should
prove that a solemn express verbal covenant was necessary to the strength and
purity of each of those Churches, or (if you wave that) that subscription,
signals, silence it self as a sign were used.


CHAP. XIIII. Of members promising at their admission to give themselves to the
Church. 2 Cor. 8.5.
Sect. 1. TO show that 2 Cor. 8.5. does not uphold that practice, I urged, that
the givers are not the members of the Church of Macedonia (as you for your
advantage phrase it) but the Churches of Macedonia, and therefore if this do
prove union or Covenant, it is of the members of several Churches, and not of
one only.

Reply. The allegation in answer. to 9, Pos. page 73. runs thus. So to the
Church (according to God) to be guided by them these words [according to God]
are left out, whether wilfully or by oversight I conclude not.

Rejoyn. I never professed nor intended that the Positions and Scriptures
alleged, should agree punctually and verbatim to the places set in the margin,
nor could I effect it without some (in mine opinion) unfitting alterations of
them as they were alleged to me, and for evidence that I tied not my self to
the Printed books (as at the first coming out of my examinations, I advertised
one of your brethren) I sometimes alleged no book at all, even where you know
I might, as Pos. 4. Other times that by comparing arguments which otherwise
came to hand with the Printed books, I might probably intimate (and if my
conjecture should fail, it were no great matter) from whence they were taken,
and also evidence the truth of what I said in my preface. That Independency for
the most part produces the same texts in Print, which she did in preaching,
writing, conference. I alleged Printed books, the bystanders mentioned in the
preface, with these or the like clauses. See almost the same argument verbatim,
the like you have, this though not so fully. This seems to be taken out of --
These Scriptures are alleged though not with such tartness etc. And sometimes
I alleged for one position (the 2. for example) two or 3. Printed books,
differing possibly more then in Phrase one from another, which are so evident
signs, that I tied not my self to the Printed books, that I cannot but wonder
if you did not observe it, which had you done, you needed not to have fought so
much with your own shadow; for if it be acknowledged that the Scriptures
alleged prove no such thing, as they are produced for (whether they be in
Printed books or no) I (as I told you in my preface) have my full end. Besides
the very first Position is not the very same with the place cited in the
margin, In Answ. to 32. q. p. 35. You have not gathering of Churches named,
though the Position name it, and many other things added which the Position
includes not, and you do not there quarred with the difference of the Position
and citation, possibly one of you may remember, that at a lecture set up by you
in Chesshire, for the promoting of the Congregationgational way, (which
abundantly justified the setting up a Counter-lecture in Manchester afterward
at the motion of a very godly Minister there was a conference, and at that
conference, Acts 4.19. and 5.29. were urged for gathering of Churches in the
very words, or as near as could be) of the Position: Lastly some persons not
the meanest in the Parish can witness how sundry allegations of Scripture have
come to my hands. Surely if you have but a little charity and ingenuity, this
may satisfy you. 2. In this Position, the leaving out the words [according to
God] does not hinder but that Answ. to 9. Pos. p. 73. which has those words in
(though I observed it not til you told me of it) may be alike allegation,
(which is all I said in my margin) though not the very same with the Position.
And I dare appeal to you, must not that man which gives himself first to the
Lord to be guided by him, be necessarily understood that he gives himself to
the Church to be guided by them, according to God and no otherwise. But if you
will blot paper with suchweak unjust exceptions I will not deign to answer. 3. I
wonder that you should tax me with leaving out two or three words (which I was
not bound to put in) and yet in the same place leave out the Principal part of
my answer, though you mention part of it in your defense, yet you mention it
not as my answer, but as your free confession. viz. That it is not said, that
they gave themselves to the Church or Churches, but to us that is to Paul and
Timothy, which were not so much as set members of any particular Church etc. 4.
You do not answer the whole strength of the exception. For. 1. The Position
speaks of a promise and Covanent; the text says not, that the Churches of
Macedonia did promise to give themselves etc. And your selves in this point
wave the Position saying, there was no intent to prove union or covenant of a
Church, but subjection of each member; what is not a promise to give our selves
to the Church a covenant? The text speaks of their giving themselves to the
Lord, to Paul and Timothy by the will of God, but not of their promising so to
do, to do a thing, and to promise to do it, are two distinct things; especially
when the promise, and not the performance is the thing controverted whether it
be appointed of God or no. 2. The Position says that every member does so
promise at his admission: the text says not that the members of the Church of
Macedonia did so promise, or give themselves at their admission into the
Church: but that the Churches gave themselves to the Lord and to his Ministers,
specially in this duty of charity to be guided by them, and to contribute
liberally according to their exhortations. 3. If the practice of the Church of
Macedonia be made use of by way of allusion, and the argument be good a
comparatis, as you plead, then it is a far more parallel and proportionable
case, that Churches should give themselves to the Lord, and then to their
officers according to God to be guided by them, then that members (you mean
officers and all) should give themselves to the Church, for Paul and Timothy to
whom the Churches gave themselves were officers, they were not a Church to
which members gave themselves; If this which is more agreeable to the text
suite your liking, there will be no more controversy about this, we may pass to
the next.


CHAP. XV. Wheher Acts 2.47. does prove that a Congregation may be a Church
before it have officers.
Sect. 1. Reply. WE take Churches for such Churches as the Apostles planted in
all plapes, when they had converted a considerable number of persons, into
which Saints are wont to be gathered, that they might be built up and edifyed
by the ordinance, Acts 9.31. And unto which Pastors were given to reside with
them and oversee them. Acts 20.28. Or we take Church as Amesius takes it.
Coetus fidelium speciali vinculo inter se conjunctorum ad comunionem sanctorum
inter se constanter exercendam. Such a company is the Church before it has
officers, for it is their privilege to choose their officers.

Rejoyn. It is granted that in a general sense a few private men without
officers, yea few women without men, yea 20 members of several Churches may be
called a Church, that an assembly in Scripturephrase is all one with a Church,
the word Church may be taken for a mystical Church. 2. It cannot be denied by
you or me that Synecdochi^^s the Church may be taken either for the officers
apart from the people, or without consideration of them, or for the people
apart from the officers or without consideration of them. But the question is
what is a Church properly so called; the Elders of N. England say, A Church
properly so called is the body Politic consisting of people and Minister,
Answ. to 33. q. p. 46. They cite also Mr. Banes saying of Math. 16. The word
Church (says he) we understand not figuratively, taken metonymically for the
place. Synecdochically for Ministers, but properly for a body Politic,
standing of a people to be taught, and teachers, and governors: I profess my
self to hold as they here express themselves, for these reasons. 1. The Church
is not one member but many, viz. not one sort of members but composed of
variety, as has bin said. Chap, 4. Hence the Church is described as an
organical body of diverse members, Romans 12.4, 5. And if all were one member
(that is believers only) then where were the body? A corporation, an army
properly so called does consist of governers, as well as governed. 2. Word,
Sacraments, censures, yea all sacred worships (you say) may be observed to
belong to the Church, but none but professed Anabaptists, and Morellians hold
that Christians united without officers have power to preach, and to administer
Sacraments or censures. 3. The Churches we read of in Scripture were organical
Churches, yea those by you spoken of. Acts 9.31. might be such, for ought
appears, they were edified, how but by officers, which (elsewhere you say) were
given for their edification, Ephesians. 4.11. or by ordinances, by the word and
Sacraments, which they could not regularly enjoy without out officers; if you
mean by prayer, reading, hearing, conference, this you will acknowledge they
might have had without enchurching. 4. That the Apostles taught Christians to
unite themselves together without officers, and to call themselves a Church, or
do any any act of Church Power or that they planted Churches any other ways
then to convert many Christians in a City and to ordain Elders over them it
cannot be showed. 5. As for Amesius his definition of a Church if it be to your
mind; I am sure it is not in your usual language, for he speaks of communion of
Saints which you use to distinguish from Church Communion; if Church Communion
be not included then you in effect tell us p. 39. that such a bond will not make
them a Church, and if Church Communion be included, how Church Communion in
Sacraments and censures can be lawfully had without officers, and what that is
I cannot see. 6. A man may have a privilege to choose a wife and yet not be an
husband, nor she a wife till they be married; a free State may have a privilege
to choose a King, yet they cannot be a Kingdom till they have chosen him; so it
may be the priv^l^dg of the people to choose their officers and yet not be a
Church properly so called till they have them: for it is their privilege to be
a Church together, yet they are not a Church before they are one. Lastly, it is
a contradiction to say the Apostles planted Churches and yet those Churches
were without officers, for the Apostles that planted them were officers of them
if they had no other.


Sect. 2. Reply p. 46. You grant that the Church Act. 2. had no ordinary
officers, for none were then appointed: Act. 14.23. shows they were Churches
before the Apostle ordained Elders in them.

Rejoyn. 1. You take full as much as I granted, and possibly I granted more
then I needed, but I in a Parenthesis (which you leave out) spoke of the 70
which might be ordinary officers or extraordinary, and their commission might
be in force or no for ought I determined, but it is as like they were Elders of
that Church as no; seeing Act. 11.30. we read of Elders in that Church as
extant we know not how long before that time, and we read not of the
institution of any officers amongst them save the 12 Apostles, 70 Disciple, and
7 Deacons. 2. In the first plantation of Churches the Elders that planted them
must needs be before the plantation, and the spiritual fathers before their
children. 3. Acts 14.23. proves not your assertion, for Apostoles and
Apostolic men did ordain Elders in some Churches where Elders were before, yea
they joined with Elders in the ordaining of other Elders, as 1 Timothy 4.14. cum 2 Timothy 1.5. and 1 Timothy 15.22. cum Acts 20.28. Acts 19. Yet grant they were
without Elders, that only proves that they were called by the name of Church,
and so are officers sometimes so called as distinguished from the members, but
neither of them are properly called by the name of Church.


Sect. 3. Reply p. 46. And though there were general Elders -- yet neither
these nor any other Elders do ingredi essentiam Ecclesiarum, nor is it any
formal reason why a company of believers are a Church because they have Elders
-- then their privilege to choose their officers would be when they have them,
and they cannot choose them when they want them, for then they are not a
Church, and so can have no such power, and this is uncomfort able, for the
death of an officer might be the unchurching of a people; members mentioned
apart from the officers are called the Church. Act. 20.28. Phil. 1.1.

Rejoyn. 1. Though they were general officers yet (as I told you) they were
Elders particularly of the Church of Jerusalem and acted therein as Elders, for
that Church then was the universal Church, the Apostles (or 70) had no present
exercise of their pastoral authority any where but there, they did preach,
administer Sacraments, ordain there and only there. Can a regiment complain of
want of a Colonel? May it not rather say it has a good one, if a faithful and
wise General, which has no other soldiers but that regiment, become a Colonel
to it? 2. I suppose your selves dare not assert that the Church of Jerusalem
was then an incomplete Church, and yet you account every Church wanting
officers to be an incomplete Church. 3. If officers be not essential to a
visible Church properly so called, then neither authoritative preaching the
Word, dispensation of Sacraments and discipline are not essential to such a
Church, or they are in the hand of Church Members. 4. Concerning the
unchurching of a people by the death of an officer: 1. You say Pos. 2. that 7
or 8 may make a Church; What if 4 or 5 of these dye and leave but two or three?
What if the men dye and leave the women? These that are best make not a Church.
2. The Pastor may dye, and yet the Church not dissolved at his death, they may
have other officers if they have none at present, but the shepherd being
smitton, the sheep are scattered, yet they may have ere long: In an elective
Kingdom. if the King dye, the Kingdom is actually dissolved till another King
be set up. 3. If all the officers of a Church do dye, this does not so un
church it, as to deprive them of Gods love, nor divorce them from God, or from
the ordinances in other Congregations, but only so that for the present they
are incapable of the Sacraments and other Church-ordinances amongst themselves
till others be set over them, and this you must needs acknowledge.
5. Acts 20.28. Phil. 1.1. will give no certain satisfaction, for 1. It is
granted that the name Church may be given to officers or to people as
distinguished from one another, as also you acknowledge, that the word Covenant
is sometimes taken for Gods part to man, sometimes for man's part to God, but
when it is properly taken it includes both. 2. The word Church. in Acts 20. is
but distinguished only from Elders, not from all the officers, and from
feeding. not ruling Elders; for that the ruling Elders are said to be made
Bishops by the holy Ghost is not probable. 3. Phil. 1.1. will prove that there
were Saints in Philippi distinct from Bishops and Deacons but not that they
were a Church without them, much less that they were a Church properly so
called. Lastly, If you can show by Scripture that any company of people without
officers did or ought to exercise Church Power, or that they might receive in,
or cast out members our of the Church, it shall suffice, we will not contend
about names, nor will the name of the Church avail, if this power cannot be
proved by Scripture.



CHAP. XVI. Of Election of Ministers and other officers.
Sect. 1. Reply p. 47. THe Position says not that a particular Congregation
has full and free power without seeking the help of advise and direction of a
Synod, Classis or Presbytery, but without the authoritative help thereof.

Rejoyn. 1. Then you allow both that there should be Synods, Classes and
Presbyteries, and that they should be advised with about election; prove you
that any Congregation did ask or seek the direction or advice of any Synod,
Classis or Presbytery in election of officers (which you press as a duty and
holy ordinance) and I will show you that they used authoritative help of a
Synod, Classis, etc. 2. I approve your approbation of Mr Cottons modesty in not
taking on him hastily to censure the many notable presidents of ancient and
latter Synods which have put forth the acts of power in ordination etc. Which
Author though he speak not expressly of election, yet if acts of power may be
put forth in another Congregation in one thing, they may be put out in another.
3. When I say, we hold it a privilege of the people (especially if they proceed
wisely and piously) to elect their officers. 1. You vainly ask, Reply, p. 47.
What people? Is it a people-priviledg or a Church-previledg to choose
Ecclesiastical officers? R. You are too willing to contend, Scripture warrants
me to call un-officed men, Church Members or others, by the name of people Heb.
7.5. and your selves p. 59. yea in the last line of this very page use the same
word in the same sense which you quarrel at: that a Church, viz. a company of
people knit together by express public covenant or agreement has the only
power of choosing officers, I put you to prove. 4. You ask, What if they do not
proceed wisely and piously, is their privilege lost? Would it then be no injury
to intrude any officer on them? Is the privilege of a Church Officer or Master
of a family lost, if he use it not wisely and piously? Must they not be
directed and exhorted to use it rightly, and the privilege remain still with
him, we have Junius of our mand.


Rejoyn. Then I conceive the Presbyters ought to keep the charge of the Lord,
and not to ordain hastily, though the people should elect suddenly, 1 Timothy
5.22. Least they should be partakers of other men's sins, viz. of that unwise
and ungodly Election. 2. A master of a family may rule his house so unwisely
and impiously that his privilege of Governing it, yea his liberty and his life
may by the Magistrate be taken away from him; A Church officer (your selves
assert) may be censured, yea deposed for unwise and ungodly managing his trust.
3. Your selves hold not (I suppose) that it is the privilege of the people to
have an unwise and ungodly election confirmed, but rather an injury to them. 4.
The Church of Boston in New England did choose (or would have chosen) a
notorious familist to have been co-teacher with Mr C. would you have the Elders
to have ordained him, or the Synod to have approved him? 5. If you grant that
whenever a people do choose unwisely and ungodlity, the Presbytery or Synod
should oppose, and refuse to ordain them, and that without such ordination they
may not lawfully officiate, it is enough as to my present purpose, and this at
least if not more, you seem to grant, by equalling the case of a Church
mis-electing to the case of a Mr of a family, or a Church Officer mis-governing
both which may loose their privilege and power by a. busing it, especially for
a time til they be more wise.
Sect 2. I ingenuously confess I have always and still do in my opinion and
practice propend that people should elect their Minister they being thereby
engaged the more to love and obey him and his call to them made more
unquestionable, yet the Scriptures you bring (though (as I conceive) as
perument as any other, and your defense of them upon the matter as strong as
the cause will suffer) are unsatisfactory to me. To your first text I answered,
that it is likely that Assembly was not a body politic but occasional only (no
part of Church Government being as yet on foot) here were not all but some of
the sounder members of the Jewish Church and they had no commission to separate
from the Jews before Act. 2.44. The company was not without Elders. The
Apostles (if not the 70) were present, all the Churches and Elders that were at
that time in the world were present, in respect whereof it may be called an
acumenical council, (The Apostles being Elders of all Churches) rather then a
particular Congregation. If there had been any more Elders and Churches they
must have convened upon that occasion to choose an Apostle who is a Pastor of
all Churches. The choice was limied by the Apostle Peter, 1. To the persons
present. 2. To those that had accompanied the Apostles all the time that the
Lord Jesus went and out amongst them, and by God the director of the lot (to
whom properly the election of an Apostle does belong) to Matthias.
You reply p. 48.1. There is a contradiction, if they were but the sounder
parts of the Jewsh Church then they were not a Christian Church, and if no
Christian Church, how were the Apostles Elders of it, how was it an ^cumenical
Council the Churches and Elders in all the world being present.

Rejoyn. I do not at all contradict my self, for 1. To he Christian and to be
the sounder members of the Jewish Church was then all one. 2. The Apostles
being members of the then Jewish Church hinders not but that they might be
Elders of all the Churches in the world (as Christ was a member of the Jewish
Church, and yet head of the whole Church Christian or Jewish) in several
respects. 3. If you will have it to be a Christian Church (as you affirm) it was
liker to a general Council then a particular Congregation.
You further reply, 1. Is there not some mistake in point of truth? There were
added to them 3000 souls (to them) to whom? To those who were yet members of
the Jewish Church, then these separated ones who were added were members of the
Jewish Church, for they came into their state to whom they added, and so they
were separated and not separated which agrees not toy. 47. where they are all
called a Church. R. Here is indeed a mist ache yea a great one too in you, for
the words (to them) or which you build are not in the original but in the
translation only, but of the whole matter see cap. 4. sect 3. 2. Though they
were unseparated in Act. 1. it follows not that they were unseparated Act. 2.
but if the Christians had still been members of the Jewish Church yet the 3000
Christians could not be said to be added to the Jewish Church (whereof they
were members before their conversion to Christianity) but to the professors of
Christianity. You further reply p. 49. That the company was not straituod in
their liberty, but acquainted with their privileds in this matter by these
Elders, that their limiting was nothing lut necessary direction, that it was
but in one thing, for ought that appears ^^l that accompained them were present
and who could be so fit to be as Apostle as one of those, 1 John 1.1.


Rejoinder. To that which has been largely said to this before, I add, 1.
That a hundred and twenty were not all the believers of Jerusalem, not the
major part of them, though taking in only men of note, and Disciples of the
longest standing in Christ's school, even those that had accompanied with the
Apostles all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out amongst them,
begenning from the Baptism of John unto the day of our Saviors ascension (of
whom v. 21, 22.) which were the twelve, the seventy, and some others which
Christ sent to preach, as Luke 9.60. it is very probable the number of these
did not exceed an hundred and twenty: And this was a different meeting from
that spoken of v. 14. as is evident by the transcision. And in those days, for
no impartial man which reads and considers the wonderful operations of the
Sermons of John Baptist, Jesus Christ, the Apostles, and the Seventy, as in
other places, so in Jerusalem, can conceive that an hundred was the total
number of the believers there, or the major part of them. 2. You tell us, p.
15. That it is less safe and warrantable to draw inferences from paterns, where
there are diversity of kinds of them about the same thing: Now in this point of
election there are diversities of kinds; The 12 Apostles, and the Seventy, were
chosen by Christ himself, Luke 6.13. and 10.1. others appointed to preach by
Christ himself, Luke 9.60. The people chose seven, whom the Apostles appointed
over the business. Acts 6. Paul was chosen by God immediately, Acts 9. The
Presbytery separated Paul and Barnabas by Imposition of hands, Acts 13.1, 2.
and Timothy, 1 Timothy 1.14. and 1.18. The Elders of Ephesus made by the Holy
Ghost, Acts 19.6. with 20.28. Lastly, in this Text they were not only limited
and restrained in election, but they were limited and restrained from election
of any, they were only allowed to present two (which also had they not had an
extraordinary particular warrant at that time for, it had been high presumption
for them to have done) and to offer them to the choice of the Lord; and the
very way and means of tendering them to Gods choice, was limited and restrained
to lots; a course not now pactised.


Sect. 3. Reply, p. 49. They proceeded as far as they could therein, and agreed
in the denomination of two; and when the lot determined whether of the two
should be the man, the Text says, v. 26. by the common suffrage of them all
Matthias was numbered, etc.

Rejoynd. 1. If they were all (or (but almost all) Officers (as has been in
part proved before) the Apostles, the Seventy, and others, what will this
advantage you, that by the common voice of the Officers Matthias was so
numbered? 2. You know, that they did not ordain or elect Matthias rather then
Justus; and they had no more to do, when God had chosen Matthias, then to
accept him, by an orderly subjection to Christ's will, as people do, or ought to
do, to a Governor made by supreme Authority, and yet their acceptance of him
is not an act of power, but of obedience.


You Reply farther, p. 39. We read but of one Church and the Elders thereof
present at the ordaining of Paul, Acts 13.1, 2, 3, 23. Whereupon Paul calls
himself (...).

Rejond. (...) Romans 11. I doubt whether Paul calls himself and Apostle
separated with reference to Acts 13. possibly it was rather with respect to the
Pharisees (one of which he was) which were said to be (...). I doubt also,
whether Paul was then ordained an Apostle, for he was chosen by God, and
Ananias laid hands on him that he might receive the holy Ghost, Acts 9.15.17.
some years before, Gal. 1.15. and he preached, Acts 9.15, 17, 20, 28, 29. yea,
he had fulfilled his ministry, Acts 11.26, and 12.25. even at Antioch, where
hands were imposed on him: Therefore, I conceive, the holy Ghost minding to
have Paul and Barnabas preach in other Churches, as well as they had done in
Antioch, wills the Prophets and Teachers there to let him go (for so the word
(...) may signify) and the words following import so much, that they laying
their hands on them (...) sent them away; and Paul and Barnabas (...) being
sent forth by the holy Ghost, went to Seleucia, Cyprus, etc. and therefore Paul
is not considered as an Apostle, but as an Elder of Antioch, one of that
Presbytery, which may be the reason why they are immediately before said to be
in that Church, v. 1. and amongst the Presbyters thereof: And this rite of
Imposition of hands, was a solems commending them to the grace of God, Act.
14.26. and as Elders they returned and gave account to the Church, which an
Apostle was not bound to do. Your selves say, p. 123. Paul and Barnabas did not
now go forth by virtue of their Apostolic Commission, for so they needed not
to have been separated by fasting and prayer, and imposition of the hands of
the Eldership, for they had Apostolic commission long befort. How will you
reconcile your selves with your selves? but if you can, and do maintain, That
Paul was then ordained an Apostle, then it will infallibly follow, That the
Eldership of Antioch did administer Ordination (which you grant is an
authoritative act) with reference to other Congregations: As also if the One
hundred and twenty did choose an Apostle (whether they were a particular Church,
or the Eldership thereof) they did an act of Church Power, with reference to
other Churches, if you do not consider them under the notion of being then the
universal Church, or all the Officers of it.

CAP. XVII. Of the choice of Deacons, Acts 6. And of the Elders, Acts 14.23.
Sect. 1. TO Acts 6. I answered, For the Deacons or Overseers of the poor,
though people may better discern of men's fitness and ability for that office
then the ministry, and their liberty of choosing was a good means at that time
to abate their discontentments, because of former neglect; yet at their
election there were all the Churches and Elders in the world, and more there
could not have been in any case; such necessity has no Law. Your selves
acknowledge Synods an Ordinance of Christ, useful in sundry cases (as in case a
Church being leavened with Popery, Arminianism, Antinomianism, Libertinis^s,
Anabaptism, etc. should choose a Minister like themselves: If such a case had
happened, they could have had no more of a Synod at that time then they had; the
company, Acts I. did nominate (...), but they that prayed, which is likely was
the Apostles, did appoint them, v. 23, 24. The people chose seven, such as they
were directed to choose, set them before the Apostles which did appoint them
over the business, prayed and imposed hands. You Reply, p. 49. Why are Deacons
and overseers for the poor made Synonima's? have We had Deacons all this while?
Who ordained or imposed hands upon them according to the pattern?

R. I added, Overseers for the poor to explain and limit the word Deacons,
which in Scripture phrase is a general word, usually signifying and translated
Ministers. 2. That I might show that the work of the Deacon was to oversee the
poor according to their institution, Acts 6. 3. That I might (with a learned
holy man before me) discover in our Churches low at ground, those Officers
which are specified in Scripture, though with some defects: Interest of Engl.
part 2. p. 33. who also instanceth in Overseers for the poor refined by the
late Statutes, 43 Eliz 2.3 Car. 4. to be the Deacons. You further Reply p. 50.
They had direction to i^^ble them to discern aright in choosing Deacons, and by
direction they (...) be able to discern aright in choosing other Officers: A
godly people or Church rightly const^^uted for the manner, wi^^ be able to
discern of w^oles^m and powerful Doctrine, of humane learning, they may wite
^^^^le ado be informed; upon this ground the people should choose Deacons, not
other Officers, and so limit your first grant.


Rejoynd. 1. They had Apostolic direction, and all the people were f^^u of
the holy Ghost, Acts 4.31. but we have not such infallible direction nor
extraordinary gifts. 2. Even a godly people or Church, which (you say) is
rightly constituted, and has good direction, cannot sometimes judge of a man's
fitness for the Ministry: The Church of Boston in New England would have
chosen Mr. Wheelright a Familist to have been co Teacher wish Mr. Cotton: The
Brownists, Anabaptists, Familists, would be esteemed a godly people and rightly
constituted (especially those which being first Independents do afterward turn
such) yet they usually choose a Pastor or Teacher of their own Way, and the
manifold Blasphemous, Hrretical, Schismatical Doctrines of these Times,
especially amongst those which are for Indepency does flow from this fountain,
and their Ministers, if they will not lead, or at least follow them into those
giddy Opinions, are despised, so unable are some Congregations, which in your
sense are rightly constituted and Well directed to discern Shepherds from
Wolves. So the Churches of Galatia counted Paul an enemy, and the Church of
Co^inth was like lier sometimes to entertain a false then a true Teacher. 3.
However you talk of direction, or of information, you hold, That the Election
of a particular Congregation, whether she have direction, or no, will take it,
or no, is valid, and cannot be frustrated but by her self, 4. You deal not
fairly; For
1. you untwine those passages which I twisted together, placing the strength
in all of them joynely, and not in any one singly, quae non prosent singula
juncta juvant, that you may break them better when you have sundred them. 2.
You are too forward in making inferences for me from every of them, which I
would but make from all of them, jointly considered. 3. I desire you to
express, whether your conscience do not tell you, That what I have said is
(...) most certain truth, Tha^ people may better discern men's fitness and
ability for oversight of the poor, then for the Ministry, and whether your
selves judge the cases alike: Do you count it necessary to have the advice of
other Churches in the one, as in the other; or that the help of God should be
so solemnly craved in the one, as in the other.


Sect. 2. Reply, p. 50. Then by your speech the liberty of choosing Deacons was
granted to them of courtesy; Does any thing appear to make this a Reason that
this liberty was? would not they have been as well pleased if the Apostles had
done it? all magnified the Apostles: would the Apostles nourish a sinful (...)
of discontent in the people, by giving them that prividedge which belonged not
to them? these are dangerous glosses.

Rejoynd. 1. That which you conceive so absurd in me, your selves say in
effect, p. 96. It was suitable to the holy and self denying frame of the
Apostles Spirit, jure suo cedere, to remit something of his own right -- And
the Apostles concurrence with the Church (you mean the Churches concurrence
with the Apostle) seems to make more for the Churches peace, who are now more
likely to subscribe to the equity of those proceedings of which themselves have
the cognizance, then if it were carried by a transcondent and superior motion
of Apostolic power: That you speak of Excommunication, and may not I speak
the same of Election of Deacons, which if the Apostles ( with whose managing of
the contributions the Grecians were displeased) should have nominaeted, the
Grecians might still have suspected some fraud or partiality; and therefore
they might allow the people to nominate some whom they might appoint over the
business, as they were ever careful to avoid suspicion of wronging any this
way, which made them for satisfaction of such as contributed to the poor Saints
at Jerusalem, to desire them to approve some man to carry it, 1 Cor. 16.3.2
Cor. 8. 19.20. That the Apostles did somewhat condescend to the multititude --
and that there was a peculiar reason for it, especically in that tenderness of
the Church, and to put off from themselves all sinister suspicion, is asserted
also by Bucerus, diss. de gub. Ecclesiae apud Apoll. p. 104. 2. You much wrong
your selves and your Reader, in calling that assertion of mine (which you
cannot deny to be true and pertitent) a dangerons gloss.


You add, p. 50. Your meaning (in saying there were all the Churches and
Elders in the world) is, there was but one Church and the Elders thereof, at
the time, in the world: It Is true, the Apostles and Members were there, for
these elected, and the Apostles directed; But did they interpose their
authority in election! Did they take it out of the brethrens bands? Did they
not put it into their b^^ds, in commanding them to look out seven men?

Rejoynd. If you had faithfully transcribed all my foresaid answer, it might
have prevented these exceptions; for, 1. That if they had been the stricte^^
Presbyterians in the world, they could have had Elders of no more Churches
present then there was. 2. The people did not set them before the Apostles,
that the Apostles might give direction, but that the Apostles might ordain
them, which your selves yield to be an authoritative act. 3. Though the people
did nominate and propound some persons which they had looked out according to
the direction, yet those so nominated were not Officers by their election,
before the Apostles approved them, prayed and imposed hands on them; for the
Text expressly says, That the Apostles (it says not, that the people) did
appoint them over the business; therefore it was but clectio oblata and
preparatoria, not perfecta, these seven had not been Officers, had they not
been appointed by the Apostles, nor were the Apostles any way bound to approve
whomsoever they should have chosen. 4. Your selves do not, dare not assert,
That the people did do any authoritative act; for you elsewhere expressly yield;
That the (...) of Authority does not hang at their girdle; and if that be true,
then all the authority which was interposed in that Election, was by the
Officers, and not my by the people. 5. Did not the Apostles interpose their
authority when they prescribed the number of seven, and neither more nor less,
Acts 6.3. had it not been a sin against authority, if they would not have
chosen so many, or twice, thrice as many? 6. The authority of Synods by way of
Inrisdiction, b^^h been proved Cap. 8.


Sect. 3. To Acts 14.23. I answered, Paul and Barnabas ordained Elders by
suffrages given by lifting up or stretching out of hands (for so the Greak word
usually signifies, though not always, Acts 10.41.) but that the people did
ordain Eiders by Election without the Aposiles, it says not; bu^^^ther the
contrary (viz.) that they stayed from Election and Ordination of Elders till
the Apostles came to advise and assist therein: The word (...) ^^gnifieth
rather to give, then to gather suffrages: As (...) does imply the Election of
more Churches then one, and year imports (...). Election of ^o more Churches
then those there spoken of S. the p^ra^e Paul and barnabas (...) d^^h not imply
that any Church or other persons, besides Paul and Barnahas, did elect there
^resbyt^rs. To this you Reply, p. 51. We do not affirm, That the coopie did it
without the Apostles, the Aposiles guided them.

Rejoynd. But do you not affirm, That they might have done it with the
Apostles? The Position speaks of a Congregation without Officers that she has
full and free power to elect them, yea, though she has no Officer to guide or
assist.

You add p 51. Concerning their staying from Election and Ordination, we read
not of it, their advising we grant; what other assitance the Apostles afforded,
we understand not, unless they led the people by their own suffrage, and so
they night give their suffrage, as you say the word signifies, and yet gather
the peoples also; But that they should give their own suffrage by lifting up
their own hands with out the peoples, seems unreasonable: When has it been
known that two persons alone in the presence of many others, have gone to
voting by lifting up of hands? the one must say to the other, If thou be for
such a man to be an Elder in this Church, left up thy hand: a most ridiculous
course, one man to gather, and another to give; they two might better have gone
apart and agreed. for two persons can and nothing by vote, if they be contrary
one to another.

Rejoynd. 1. You do read of Churches which were (as your selves hold) without
Officers till the Apostles came; and you read not that any Church without
Officer did elect or ordain their first Officer; what call you this, if it be
not a staying from Election and Ordination till the Apostles came? 2. As (...)
does not always signify suffrages (as would have appeared to the Reader of
your Book, had you fully transcribed my Parenthesis) so there was no necessity
I should grant that it does so signify there; for as God who is but One in the
forenamed place, is said (...), so Paul and Barnabas being Two, may in this
place be said (...) without absurdity: Stephanus in bis Treasure of the Greek
tongue, upon the word (...), says, That when it governs an Accusative case (as
in this place) it signifies not to give suffrage, but to ordain, create,
elect. The Text does manifestly restrain it to Paul and Barnabas (as well as
the other Text does restrain the choosing of the brother to the Churches there
spoken of) for the substantive of this participle is Paul and Barnabas, not the
people. But if you can show that the word is taken in any good Writer for
gathering suffrages, or taking the consent of others (which I believe you
cannot) then I will grant that they did lead the people by their suffrage: but
if it signifies only choosing, or ordaining, or giving their own voices, they
might do that as well by stretching out their hands (which with Ecclesiastical
Writers imports as much as (...) to lay on hands) as by lifting up of hands;
for I read it disjunctively, though you by altering my word [Or] into the word
[And] do read it copulatively; and then, what is here to note, That the people
did concur with Paul and Barnabas in that action; yea, That that action was
whelly the peoples, and that Paul and Barnabas. did but direct them in it, or
at most lead them by their suffrage. 3. Those passages, If thou be for such a
man to be an Elder, hold up thy hand (which, you say, was a ridiculous course
for Paul and Barnabas) were not (I easily believe) used by them, nor by any
Primitive Church, either when Officers or Members were admitted; for who has
read or does believe, That the One hundred and twenty did lift up their hands,
when each of the Three thousand were added; or that when Matchias as seven
Deacons were chosen, they lift up their hands (though I have read of such a
practice amongst the Heathens?) if you think they did, show when, and where
they did it. The word (...) not only in Scripture, Acts 10.41. but in
Ecclesiastical Writers, is used where the suffrage of the people is not
intended, nor included, but (it may be) professedly excluded. Lastly, bethink
your selves, if these Elders were made by the holding up of the hands of the
people, and this be the sense of the word (...), then the sense of it cannot
be, that they were made by the Imposition of hands of Paul and Barnabas; for
that one and the same word should at once both signify the lifting up of the
peoples hands, or the voting of the people, and the stretching out of Paul of
Barnabas hands, or their imposing hands in Ordination, is no whit probable.


CHAP. XVIII. Of Ordinination of Elders by non-Elders.
Sect. 1. TO your proof from Number, 8.9, 10. That a Congregation wanting Officers
may ordain, I answered, That Congregation had Officers, Aaron the High Priest,
and many other Priests, Number. 3.4. You Reply, p 52. Those Officers could not lay
their hands upon them, for a special Reason, viz. The Levites were given to
God, and they were given to Aaron and his sons, to God's service, and therefore
they must be preson^e^, not by Aaron and his sons; but before them, Number. 8.13.
Laying on of hands was the more of those that offered and gave them, not of
those that must receive them, Number 3.6^. and 8.13. with 18.2.

Rejoynd. Your Argument is this, They for whose service Officers are gives,
must re^eive them, but not ordain them; which if you would prove (as you (...)
not) it would make as much or more against O^dination by the Jewish Church, as
by Aaron and his sons, for the Levites were given for the service of the
Congregation, Number. 16.8. ye^, and Aaron too. You say, p. 54. That Officers us
given for the service of the Church, and that the service of the Minist^ry is
(...) service of the Church; will you hence conclude the Church must receive
then, therefore she must not ordain them? 2. The seven in Acts 6. were
presented, not by, but before the Apostles; will you hence infer, That there
was a special reason why the Apostles should not have ordained them, but the
people. 3. It this were a special reason, and a good one too, why Aaron and his
sons might not ordain them, yet they had other Ecclesiastical Officers, Exodus
19.22. See Aynsworth is locum, even the firstborn (as Son the firstborn of
Noah by privilege, if not by birth, is judged to be Melchizedek the Priest) in
whose place the Levites came; and was there a special reason also why they
might not put their work upon the Levits by ordaining them, as Moses did on
Joshuah his successor, Deu. 34.9. and the Apostles on the Deacons which
succeeded them in part of their charge, Acts 6? I pray you show, if you can,
some special good reason for it. You farther say, Will it not hold a majore
from the greater, if in the Old Testament the people did ordain in the presence
of Officers, then they may in the New much non in the want of Officers?


Rejoynd. I believe you dare not say that it will hold. 2. If it would bold, ye
you cannot show that the people did ordain. 3. Every particular Congregation
runs not parallel with the whole Jewish Church. The Apostle, Gal. 4.1, 2. (...)
serts, That the Jewish Church was but one child in nonage, and the universal
Church (since that partition wall was trodden down) was but the same child^
grown to full age, and is not multiplied and made many children (as you fancy)
but only one still, though by clearer manifestations, and larger accessions,
ripe^ and bigger then before: Now that in the Universal visible Church there
should be no Officers, is a strange supposition, not true in the time of
Antichrist g^^atest rage and reign, Rev. 12.6, 14. As for a particular
Congregation, it is but a part of the Church, as has been showed. 4. You know
it will hold as well, yea better, if the people might in the Old Testament
ordain in the presence of Officers, then they may in the New Testament ordain
in the presence of Officers; and to this purpose Mr. Noyes a N. Engl. man
argues, ^.15.


Sect. 2. when I say that all the children of Israel could not lay hands on the
Levites, but some in stead of the rest, which were most likely to be the
Elders; you reply, what Elders? Eclesiasticall Elders there were none but Aaron
and his sons, they were therefore Civil Elders (not as Civil but) as they
were the chief and Principal men, and we hold that the gravest, wisest, and
prime of the congregation (in want of Eclesiasticall Officers) ought to do it
in behalf of the rest.

Rejoyn. 1 There were other Ecclesiastical Officers beside Aaron and his
sons, viz. the firstborn till the Levites came in their places as page. 54.
you confess they did: See Ainsworth in Exodus 24.5. And they did ordeine in the
name of the rest; Aaron and his sons were not in stead of the firstborn,
nor did put them out of Office, as the Levites did, and your selves dare not
deny that if there were other Elders besides Aaron and his Sons, they were
more likely to ordein then any civil Elders, or other men. When I further
answer, That all the congregation and all the Elders of the congregation are
all one Exodus 12.3. with verse 21.

You Reply, 1. that it does not appear that they were all one, for when God
says, speak ye to all the congregation of Israel, he meant really that
congregation should be spoken to, not the Elders only, for the ordinance was
as well appertaining to the congregation as to the Elders. Moses was to speak
to all the congregation but not immediately, but by the Elders, this does not
confound the congregation and the Elders, for then the Elders killing the
passover, though the people had not done it, had fulfilled Gods command. 2.
Though the Congregation and the Elders should be all one yet is the
congregation and Ecclesiastical Elders all one. 3. if they should be all one
in some place, yet in Number. 8.9, 10. They are not all one, for Aaron and his
Sons were the only Ecclesiastical Elders, and they are mentioned distinctly
from the congregation.


Rejoynd. 1. if that God meant all the Congregation of Israel shoald be
spoken to; and that the Passover did concern them all, Yet the question is
whether God bad Moses speak immediately to all the Congregation as a collective
body, or meant, he that Moses should immediately speak to all the Elders only,
and they should speak unto the people, If the former, then Moses sinned in that
he himself spoke not immediately to all the People (which yet was impossible he
should at once do) if the latter, then God calls the Elders to whom Moses
immediately spoke, by the name of all the Congregation, and so we else where
find, and your selves cannot deny but that Elders in the Old Testament as
distinguished from the people are sometimes called by the name of Church? 2.
Why may not the Ecclesiastical Elders be called the Congregation or Church as
well as the civil? Moses here receives a command for an Ecclesiastical not a
civil Ordinance, viz. the Passover in which Ecclesiastical Elders had most to
do, and therefore Moses would be sure to speak to them; but you do not express
your opinion [though an unwary Reader may conceive you doe] but only ask a
question and make a supposition. 3. I pray you resolve me who were the
Ecclesiastical Elders in Exodus 12. before Aaron and his Sons were made Priests,
or dare you assert it to be your opinion [how soever you wrigle] that the
Congregation had no Ecclesiastical Elders at that time when the Passover was
instituted, or that those Elders [I mean the first-borne] were put out of
Office before the Levites were put in, I would think you dare not assert so
groundless a thing.


Sect. 3. I Answered that the Levites were separated to their work, and taken
from amongst the Children of Israel, cleansed and offered before the Lord by
Moses and Aaron respectively according to Gods express appointment v.
6.7.8.11.13.14. therefore this laying on of hands was either only obediential
for approbation of Gods Election, or for Oblation of the Levites to God in
stead of their first borne, v. 16.17.18. as they laid hands on sacrifices
which was a special reason and peculiar to those times: if the people did
ordain the Levites, they did not choose them. If this be a binding pattern,
you will lose Election, while you contend for a popular Ordination.

You Reply p. 54. It was obedientiall, but principally for another reason, the
service of the Levites was the service of the Children of Israel, which
formerly the first borne performed, therefore Israel must lay hands on them,
that is put that work upon them which was theirs, for as the laying on of hands
on the sacrifice did put the sins on the sacrifice: so the laying on of hands,
did put the service upon the Levites, Number. 3.7. Number. 8.18.19. and herein is a
parity, for the service of the ministry is the service of the Church, and the
Officers perform it for the Church. Yet this reason would not have been, nor
is good in the presence of Officers, had there not been a special reason,
because the Officers are to transact her affairs for her. As for Election, we
have examples enough in the New Testament, for such a privilege we need not
fly to the old.

Rejoyn. That the service performed by the Levites was formerly performed by
the first borne, That the first borne did sacrifice for Israel, I grant; The
Priests did sacrifice first for their own sins, then for the sins of the
people, Heb. 7.27. but that Israel did sacrifice by their Priests, or that the
power or authority of sacrificing was in the Congregation, or that the Priests
did sacrifice by any power they had from the Congregation is an unjustifiable
opinion, The Priests were neither chosen, nor ordained, nor authorized by the
people, God always did single out whom he pleased to the Priesthood. The Elders,
not all the People did lay hands on the Sacrifice even when the whole
Congregation had sinned, Levit. 4.14.15. It was never the service of the whole
Congregation to offer sacrifice to God but of the first borne of Aaron and his
Sons, no more then Saul might Sacrifice: That the service of the Ministry is
performed for the Church, I grant finaliter for the good of the Church, and all
good Ministers do make themselves (as Christ himself did) in this sense
servants of the Church, and are willing to spend and be spent for them,
acknowledging that they are for the Church and not the Church for them equally,
but if you mean that the service of the Ministry is vice Ecclesiae, and by
authority received from the people, or that they do the peoples work when they
baptize or administer the Sacrament, or when the Priest did offer Incense, or
that your people may be said to baptize, administer Sacraments, preach to
themselves by you their Pastor and Teacher, or Rule over themselves by their
Elders, that is a phrase of speech and a tenet not warranted by the word:
Ministers are in the New Testamen called the Ministers of God, of Jesus Christ,
of the Gospel, of the Word, of the New Testament, but not servants of the
Church, of this or that Congregation.

2. I Demand why this should be a Pat^ern in Ordination and not in Election,
and you almost tell us you have no Examples for Ordination by people in the New
Testament and therefore you fly to the Old when you say of Election you have
Example enough in the New Testament to settle it on the people, you need not
fly to the Old. your principal examples, have been already weighed.

Sect 4. IF you can but produce one Instance from the New Reply p. 54.
Testament that ever Elders of one Church ordained Officers in another, or any
good reason for it grounded thence, the con^roversy about ordination shall be
ended, and the pattern of Numb. 8 waved. Rejoynd. 1. By the Words In Another
Congregation. I suppose you mean not in the presence of another Congregation,
but for the use and benefit of another Congregation to officiate there; your
selves say the 120 Act 1. were to be considered only as a Particular
Congregation, and yet they did choose an Apostle which was Pastor of all
Churches: why might they not have ordained him? 2. Your selves say, that the
Presbytery of Antioch did Ordeine Paul an Apostle; which if so, then they did
ordain an Officer for other Churches, yea even for Rome, to which he Writing
calls himself (with reference (you say) to that ordination) an Apostle
separated Romans 1, 1. and the truth is, they did not by this imposition of hands
enable Paul and Barnabas to officiate in the Church of Antioch, for that Paul
had done a Twelvemonth before, nor were they to stay there but to be sent
thence. 3. The Presbytery that Ordained Timothy was not the Presbytery of the
Church of Ephesus, that Church was not founded [your selves say] till Act 19.
yet Timothy^ exercised his function before, and Paul wishes him not to neglect
the gift (viz. to use it in the Church of Ephesus) which was given by the
laying an of hands of the Presbytery (some say at Lystra.) 4. If sundry
Congregations in Jerusalem were under one Presbytery, which is clearly proved
Cap. 5. If there be an Universe all Visible Governing Church, If a Synod have
authoritative power of which see cap. 8.9. then it is a clear case that Elders
may have power of Ordination in several Congregations. 5. Division of the
Church into Congregations, and fixing particular Elders to them is no further
of Divine Institution then order and edification did first occasion, and do
still require it should be so, as the whole Tribe of Levy fed all the Jews in
common (for ought we know) while they were together; and afterward when the
tribes of Israel came to be fixed in their several divisions, the Levitess
alo were scattered and fixed amongst them, so the Apostles notwithstanding
theri general commission did feed the church in common while there was but one
particular Church, and afterward when Churches were multiplied, did for
edifictaion and orders sake, agree upon a division of themselves, and had their
several places Ordinarily to Officiate in Gal. 2.9.2 Cor 10.13.14.15.16. as
soldiers and watchmen of any regiment (to which Ministers 1. Tim 2.3. Isa.
62.6. are compa'rd) have their several wards, limits, and gates, which they
look to, and take care of; yet so as they all are the Soldiers and Watchmen
of the whole city, and ministers may teach and Govern several congregations
in common, by consent of all parties Interessed, if it shall be found most for
their edification, as it is in some reformed churches at this day; for all
Ministers and officers of the Church are given to the whole church for the
gathering and building of it. 1. cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11.12. and they are to
teach and rule and perform all ministrations with reference to it, and the
best advantage of it. And yet (that I may prevent an usual objection) there is
difference enough between Apostles and Ordinary Elders; for the Apostles were
to teach and rule not only Churches and Flocks, but Pastors, and Ministers
also, being men of an higher Order 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11, they were
immediately called of God, Gal 1.1. Infallible in their Doctrine, Gal. 1.7.8,
and 5.2 endowed with extraordinary gifts Act 2.1, 2, and 8.18. were enjoined
ordinarily to travel abroad to plant Churches Math 28.19 they might act
authoritatively any where without a call or consent, and might shake of the
dust of their feet, against such Ministers, or others as did not receive them,
Math. 10.14. their Commission was irrepealable, their limits were large. Gal.
2.9. one Apostle had authority over all the Churches whether he were present or
absent. But a Minister is not of an higher order, nor has power over his
Fellow-Ministers, nor has an immediate unrepealable call, is not infallible,
nor in these times extraordinarily gifted, he cannot act authoritatively,
either in an ordinary or occasional way, either inpreaching, administering the
sacraments or the like, without the call or consent of persons Interested. 6.
You cannot show any one Elder that was ordained by those that were only of that
particular congregation where he was to officiate byvertue of the said
ordination.


Sect. 5. Lastly, if it be unlawful for unofficed men to ordain, then [at
least in case a congregation have no Elders] the Elders of other congregations
must ordain Elders there, or else they can have no ordination without sinful
surpation of Presbyterian Power: now for the unlawfullness of unofficed men's
ordination of Elders; consider first what ordination is. It is the solemn
setting apart of a Person to a public church-office. so it was voted in the
Assembly nemine contradicente, or it is in Scripture phrase, an appointment of
men over some church-business: Act: 6.3. Imposition of hands the usual and
most approved ceremony of ordination, notes 1. a visible designation of persons
to be in office. 2. a separation of them to God in that office or work, Act.
13.1.3. Romans 1.1.3. a putting of that work and service upon them, as laying
hands on the sacrifices, did put sin upon them. 4. A benediction of them that
their labor may be to the glory of God and good of the Church. 5. a
signification to them in Gods name that his hand is with them in all that they
do in his name and by his Authority, to guide, strengthen, and protect them. 2.
Let us consider who has the power and Authority to ordain: viz. Officres
only, for first, The Apostles [ which did where ever they came leave the Elders
and people to the exercise of that right which belonged to them] did not leave
to non-Elders the power of ordaining though it had been much easier to have
writ to the churches that they should ordain their own Elders then to have
come themselves [as Act. 14.23] or to have sent Timothy or Titus for that
purpose, 1. Tim. 5.22. Tit. 1.5.

2dly. There can no Instance, no not one be given in all the New Testament of
any Officer upon whom an unofficed man did impose hands in ordaining him. 3.
They that do ordain do put some of their work upon the person ordained; but
Preaching Baptizing, etc. Is it not the work of any non-officed men. 4. He
that ordaines blesses him that is ordained, and without all contradiction the
less is blessed of the greater, Heb. 7.7.5. Ordination [vou confess] is an Act
of authority, but non-officed men have no rule or authority. Cotton Keys p.
5.6. The two Brethren in their answer to Mr. Herle page 48. do allow that a
Church wanting Elders, may request the Elders of other Churches to ordain
Elders for her, and they that are so requested have a calling to come. 7. Your
selves say p. 110. It is essential that ordination be done by the right
Subjectum capax of that ordinance, and allege, 1 Timothy 4.14. laying on of hands
of the Presbytery, Tit. 1.5. Act. 14.23. to which I add Act. 6.2.6. and
13.1.2.1 Tim. 5.22. 2. Tim. 2.2. which texts do not only prove that Ordination
is to be done by the right Subjectum capax, but also; that Elders are that
Subjectum capax. 8. their being deputed by a Congregation or not deputed varies
not the case, till it be made to appear that though no other non-Officer may
ordain, yet the Church may lawfully depute a man, and a man so deputed may
lawfully ordain. Where has the Congregation any charter for this? Sect. 6.
When I allege that you tell us that it is a maine Pillar of Popery to
proportion the church now to the outward policy in Israel, and that Christ's
faithfullness above Moses consists in as full determination of Gods worship in
the New Testament, as in the old that we are as strictly tied to the Gospel
Pattern, as the Jews were to the old Testament, you reply p. 55. The
foundation of the Antichristian Hierarchy is laid in the proportion betwixt the
Jewish policy, and the policy of the christian church, yet use may be made of
the Old Testament where the new is silent, do not you conclude Infants must be
baptized, not because the new expressly says so, but because you find in the
old Testament that Infants were circumcised.

Rejoyn. 1. Then the foundation of the Antichristian hierarchy and of Popular
ordination is one and the same, viz. the proportion between the Jewish church
and the christian. 2. Your selves confess that the New Testament is not silent
in this matter, for it shows [say you p. 110] that ordination must be done by
the right subjectum capax of it, of which I spoke in the next precedent
Section. 3. The covenant of grace to which the controversy of Paedobaptisme
has reference is the same in the old and new Testament, but ordination is an
Act of Government and policy, and you tell us p. 86. That Christ has not
appointed the Jewish Church in matters of Government to be a Pattern to Gospel
Churches, but that they should be conformed to spiritual Patterns and Precepts
left by Christ and his Apostles, amongst which this is not to be found, that
the people may ordain. 4. Baptism of Infants has better ground in the new
Testament then your popular ordination 5. you say it is an Essential in
government that ordination be done by the right subjectum capax, therefore that
by your own confession must be directly determined. And (...) deny not your
selves to have certain knowledge of Essential, in government, and the people
think, you are assured, that it is lawful for non-officied men, in case a
church want Officers, to ordeine. Sect. 7. When I ask why should we in
ordination of Officers be guided by the Old Testament and not by the New? and
why should we follow the Ordination of Levites rather then of Priests for a
pattern of Ordination o^ Elders? You Reply I. no hands at all were laid upon
the Priests, they were anointed and consecrated 8 c. but you would not have
ordination of Elders turned into consecration after the manner of Priests.


Rejoynd. No I would not indeed, and therefore I would not have the Ordination
either of Priests or Levites a pattern for ordination of Elders, as you may see
by the last question above, why should we in etc. whereunto you give no direct
answer, but Popish-Priests will be anointed using such a like argument from
the anointing of the Priests as you do for popular ordination from the
ordination of the Levites.

2dly: you Reply. p. 55. what was done to the Priests was not done by any
Ecclesiastical person but by Moses the chief Magistrate.

Rejoyn. 1. Surely you know that Moses though he was the chief Magistrate, was
also an Ecclesiastical person. Psalm. 99.6. Moses and Aaron amongst his
Priests; and that he did offer sacrifice (which had he been only a civil
Magistrate (as Saul) he could not have done) at the time of the consecration,
Exodus 29.11.12.13. 12. at it were to show that he consecrated Aaron as a
Priest, not as a Magistrate. 2ly. This puts me in mind, that I told you that
the Levites were by Moses separated to the work from amongst the Children of
Israel and cleansed and brought before the tabernacl of the congregation, and
set before Aaron and his Sons, and Offered as an offering to the Lord; Number.
8.6, 7, 13, 14. which was more (to say nothing what Aaron did) then was done by
the children of Israel toward the consecration of the Levites, and your
evasion that he was a civil Magistrate will not serve your turn. 3dly your
reply, the Elders of the new Testament are rather the successors of the Levites
then of the Priests because there was no Hiearrchy amongst them and therefore
the pattern of their ordination is rather to be followed.

Rejoynd 1. The Levites are often called Diaconi, Deacons and the Deacons seem
in the Prophesies to be pointed out by Levites, and Elders by Priests Isa.
66.21. I will take of them for Priests and Levites, which (as your selves say,
p. 71.) is spoken of the New Testament. 2. There was an Hierarchy amongst the
Levites hence we read of the Princes and overseers or Bishops of the Levites,
1 Chro. 15.16, 22. 1 Chro. 9. 33, 34, 2 Chronicles. 35.9. Nehe. 11.22. and 12.42.
when you have consulted better with Scriptures (as you bid me do, and
God-willing I will do in these dangerous times wherein men father their bastard
opinions on God) and with Bertram de politia Iudaica. p. 101. You will find an
Hierarchy amongst the Levites as well as amongst the Priests, and also that
there is no footing for ordination by non-officers no more then for the
Antichristian hierarchy.


Sect. 8. I alleged in my Answer that there was no mention in Mar. 16.15. Mat.
28.19, 20. of the celebration of the Eucharist you Reply, p. 56. The Apostle
having Commission for Baptism could not want it for the Eucharist, which
seals the same Covenant which baptism seals.

Rejoynd. Very true, therefore Ordination being an Act of Presbyteriall power,
as well as Baptism, the Apostles did not want it though it be not mentioned. I
further said that preaching and baptizing were first to be done to the nations,
therefore they are there mentioned: you Reply. That was not the sele reason,
but because they were principal works and in reference to the subject persons
about which they were to be exercised more Apostolical, for they might preach
and Baptize in all the world, whereas ordinary Officers in an Ordinary way, may
not do such works in all the world but only in the Church. Rejoynd. 1. You
allow my reason to be good, though it be not the sole reason. 2. The reason you
add is not good for the Administering of the Supper is as principal a work as
Apostolical as Baptism, it seals the same Covenant (as you confess) requires
as much if not more Authority might have been Administered in all the world by
the Apostles as well as Baptism and so might ordination also. 3. If the
Apostles might Baptize any that were not in the Church, then how could their
Baptism be a seal principally of Church Communion as you have asserted. I
further urged. That the Apostles did practice Ordination and we suppose that
they went not beyond their Commission Act. 6. etc. 13. and 14. And a Commission
to Elders we read as well as practice, 1 Timothy 4. You reply, That the Position
says not that Ordination is within their Commission, but that there is no
mention thereof when they first received their Commission and the page out of
which the Position is exerted, makes mention of some works within their
Commission not mentioned, viz. prayer, and Act. 6.4. is quoted for it. But
indeed you are injurious to the Authors of the Answ. to 32. q. p. 71.

Rejoynd. 1. You are injurious to me to accuse me of injury to the Authors of
the Answ. to 32. q. 2 What ever their meaning be if your selves will plainly
acknowledge (what you seem to do covertly) that those words in that position
will not justify Ordination by non officers I have attained my end. 3 That
passage of yours That Ordination is nothing else but the accomplishment of
Election, I must take notice of it here, it may be I shall not meet with it
els-where, and in direct opposition of it, I say, That Ordination is more then
the accomplishment of Election, yea it is of more moment then election; for, 1.
laying on of hands (not lifting up of hands (as you speak) is reckoned amongst
the Principles, Heb. ^.3.2 The charge is more express that Ordination rather
then election should not be hastily and suddenly done. ^ The description of
persons fit for Office is much more large in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus,
which were to ordein, then in any or all the Epistles written to the Churches
to whom Election is conceived to belong. 4. The Apostles by Ordination rather
then the people by Election are said Act. 6. to uppoint the 7 over the
business. 5. Fasting and Prayer was specially with reference to the ordination
of the seven, rather then to the Election Act. 6.


Sect. 9. Ordination by the Prelates (notwithstanding what is said of
Hierarchical, and Prelatical men) is more lawful and valid then ordination by
non-officers; for the Prelates were Preshyters, and so more enabled by the word
to ordain then any non-Presbyters. Prelacy though an humane Institution did no
more annihilate their being Presbyters then Pharrisaism did the Jewish
Priesthood, and they did ordain as Presbyters, for Bishops and Presbyters are
but made one order by the very Papists, which also judge, that if a Deacon
should be made Bishop par saltum, he has no power to ordain Presbyters; and
although the Prelates partly through their own usurpation, partly through the
sloth or Pusillanimity of the Presbyters, partly by law and cannon were
invested with too much power; yet they did not ordain Presbyters without the
assistance of other Elders, and their ordination comes nearer to the
Scripture-way of ordination by the Presbytery, then ordination by non-Elders
(especially by one) can do; and is by the Scripture-rules, by the present
Parliament, as formerly also by the reformed Churches and godly
non-conformists, (notwithstanding their opposition to Prelacy) judged valid,
and not to be changed for any popular ordination. When the Church was in the
wilderness, when Antichrist most reigned and raged; God did preserve some
foundamental Doctrines, and the essence of Baptism and Ministry; and they (that
is her Pastors) did feed her there, Rev. 12.6, 14. before there was any Popular
ordination. If you deny these things show the contrary of them.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Churches power to Censure her officers from, Col. 4.17.
Sect. 1. When I alledg that the Church of Coloss had other Elders besides
Archippus, You reply p. 58. 1. What officers there were therein, and with that
Church appears not. 2. Though they had officers, yet the command is directed to
the Church without express consideration of any officers amongst them, and the
brethren are not excluded from joining with the officers in that which is
commanded, Col. 4.17.


Rejoyn. 1. You dare not say there was no ruling nor preaching Elders, besides
Archippus though you seem to argue that there was not, It may be Philemon, to
whom Paul writes as to a fellow labourer, was there, seeing Onesimus his
servant is said to be one of the Colossians, Col. 4.9. Epaphras was also an
officer, though absent, v. 12. If they had no officers with them but Archippus
(which is not credible) yet Tychicus a Minister, and Onesimus might from Paul
join with the Church in that admonition. 2. I might as well say, it does not
appear that Archippus was of the Church of Coloss, for the Apostle seems to
have done with the Colossians, only wills them to salute them in Laodicea and
Nymphas, who (its like) was a Laodecean, and then to cause this Epistle to be
read in the Church of Laodicea, and read the Epistle from Laodicea, and say to
Archippus, who as one writes was Bishop or Pastor of Laodicea, and not
unlikely, that a cold Church might have a cold Minister, nor unagreeable to the
context. But it is as probable that Philemon and he were joint Pastors or
Coloss, Phil. 1.1. Bullinger says that Philemon was Bishop or Pastor of
Coloss, and then it is probable Archippus was his partner: But if it be denied
that Philemon was of Coloss, it will hardly be proved that Archippus was. 3. If
there be not express consideration of officers, yet an implicit consideration
may serve the turn. 4. That brethren in their, sphere may join with the
officers is not questioned, but that the brethren of a Church distinct from
Elders, have power to censure their Elders.
I deny 1. Elders have authority, but such brethren have none, as you
acknowledge, now that they which have no authority, should have power to censure
such as have authority, is a strange and new tenet. 2. The Apostle which does
all things fitly, directs Timothy about receiving accusations against Elders,
but he does not direct any brethren in that matter. Now every Apostle as also
Timothy and Titus, were as it were an Eldership of the Churches extraordinarily
combined in one man. 3. When the Prophets speak by two or three the other
Prophets, not the body of the people were appointed to judg^^^, and in that
sense as well as in any other. The Spirit of the Prophets are subject to the
Prophets. 4. The power of ordaining and making Elders is not in hands of
Non-Elders; therefore jurisdiction over Elders to to censure, depose,
excomunicate them is not in their hands.


Sect. 2. I answer Paul bids Timothy fulfill his Ministry, 2. Tim. 4.5. This
does not suppose Timothy to be faulty or to be under censure, and it may be
Archippus Paul's fellowlaborer was not faulty, and then this admonition was no
censure and therefore it is alleged to no purpose. You Reply, p. 58. 1
Expositors do judge him faulty, as Zanchy. 2 There is a difference between,
Make full proof of thy Ministry, which respects persons himself and others:
And fulfill thy ministry which respects the work it self in the duties of it.
3. It is one thing when the Apostle a superior writing to a person and
inferior, gives him good Council, and amongst other things injoyns him to make
full proof of his ministry, and another thing when he writes to a people
without any occasion, and without mingling it with other exhortations of like
nature, and excites them in an abrupt manner to say to Archippus, see to the
ministry of the former there are many patterns which imply not faultiness, 1
Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. Tit. 2. ult. for the latter where is there a parallel place?
therefore there is a strong presumption that Archippus whom the people
ordinarily must hear in silence and are now put upon it to admonish him, was
not faulty. Congregationall way justified, p. 7. You argue thus; Paul bids
Timothy fulfill his ministry, 2 Timothy 4.5. yet this does not suppose Timothy to
be faulty, and then this admonition was no censure, and thence you infer,
therefore its alleged to no purpose; it had bin more tolerable if you had said
therefore it may be it is alleged to no purpose.

Rejoynd. 1. My meaning is plainly this, It may be Archippus was not faulty,
and then, (viz. if he was not faulty) this was no censure, and (if this was no
censure) it is alleged to no purpose, These are hypotheticall propositions,
and are not grounded upon a possibility but upon supposall of Archippus his
faultlesness, and that being supposed, they are not only tolerable but
justifiable without it may be. 2. The authority of Zanchy you do not much
regard, nor any other humane authority, which is not to your mind: you know
well if matters between us, should be put to the arbitrament of Commentators,
they would not cast them on your side. 3. Notwithstanding your critical
difference of the Greek words, our translators conceived that fulfill or make
full proof are either of them consistent with the Original, therefore they put
one in the text the other in the margent. 4. Was it not a duty for Timothy to
make full proof of his Ministry as well as for Archippus to fulfill it, and if
so, does not the requiring the one of Timothy suppose a defect in duty as well
as requiring the other of Archippus? 5. As for the abruptness of the speech,
nothing is more usual in the end of Paul's Epistles then abrupt speeches. 6
grant they do amount to as much (as your selves reckon them to) viz. a strong
presumption that Archippus was faulty, that is but as if you should say, There
is strong presumption, that the Church is commanded to censure him, that is
there is but weak proof. 7. Strong presumption cannot carry away the cause, for
there are strong presumptions on the other hand, 1. That Paul inscribes an
Epistle to Philemon and him, at or about the same time, Isaacson Chron. and
does not tax Archippus at all. 2. That in that Epistle he calls him his
fellow-souldier, a very honorable Epithet. 3. If these words were then
understood to imply faultiness then this Epistle being read in the Churches of
Coloss and Laodicea would shame Archippus publikly before he had (for ought we
know) any private admonition, these considerations with many others may weigh
down your strong presumption, of the contrary.



Sect. 3 I answered that admonition does not always suppose authority, for this
may be an act of charity a well as of authority? Paul might admonish Peter, and
one brother another of the same Church, though Paul had no authority over
Peter, nor fellow members one over another. Gal. 2.11. Math. 18.15, 16. You
Reply p. 59. Church-admonition is some degree of censure, for it is a leading
step to an higher censure, til it come at last to excommunication; call it what
you will consure it is, and that is all the Position does assert.

R. 1. The Position does assert that the Church does not only admonish by way
of charity, but that she has power to censure does admonition imply power? can
you say properly that Paul had power to censure Peter, because he did admonish
him, or that a woman has power to censure a Churchmember, yea a
Church Officer; because upon occasion she may tell him his fault between him and
her, and yet this may be a leading step til at last in come to excommunication?
2. I would you had expressed whether in your opinion, this admonition did
suppose authority in the people or no? if you say that the people have no
authority to admonish their Pastors, you as I conceive wave the position: 3.
When one of your Churches does admonish another, this is Church-admonition; and
is (you say) a leading step to an higher censure, viz. Non-communion, yet I
suppose you will not say, one Church has power to censure another.
I further answered. That Private members cannot censure judicially or
un-Church the Congregation though they be bidden plead with their mother plead.
Hos. 2.2. You Reply. If they may plead, then they may withdraw from the
Congregation off from their officers, when they will not be reclaimed, Which
though it be not a judicial and positive censure, yet must be granted to be
negative,

Rejoyn. 1. The consequence is naught, a wife may plead with her husband in
many cases (and a child with his parent) in which, she may not withdraw from
them. 2. The question is, whether we may conclude, that they that are bidden
plead, have power to censure the Church judicially you intimate, that we may
not so conclude. 3. They might plead with the Church before Christ (I grant the
text bears it) but that then they might withdraw not only from her corruptions,
but from her Communion; and that into a distinct Church (as the manner of some
now is) you cannot prove: 4. If pleading do by consequence prove withdrawing,
yet sure it does not prove that they should withdraw from the Church before
they plead with her, but that they should first plead with her, and if she will
not be healed withdraw from her. 5. You might have done well to have explained
and proved by Scripture or sound reason, that there is an unjudicial censure as
well as a judicial, a negative censure as well as a positive, and that they
which may only censure negatively and judicially may be said (as it is in the
Position) to have power to censure, otherwise the Reader happily may think
these distinctions were but invented to help in a strait. 6. You hold that
women may withraw (and indeed they having learned of their great grandmother
are too apt to do it and to persuade their husbands also) and have women poof
the keys? Or is this any key at all? Or do you mean that the Churches
admonition of Archippus does prove only a negative unjudicial censure, such as
private men may have one toward other, yea toward the Church, or a positive and
judicial censure, if you hold the former then we differ less, if the latter,
more.


Sect. 4. I answered the Colloss: were as well to cause that Epistle to be read
in the Church of Laodicea, as to say to Archippus, yea the word [cause] seems
more authoritative then say ye, yet our brethren hold not that one Church has
not power over another Church; if it had been said of Archippus Cause Archipyus
and say to Laodicea you could have made notable use of it. You reply p. 59.
[Cause] in the original is (...) not command ye, but work ye, effect ye,
endeavor ye, that it be read and so interpreted, it is not so authoritative as
say ye, for say ye take heed seem more imparative: The Greek word translated
Cause imports no more then endeavor ye.

R. 1. You tol us p. 99. there is a the fold causing by way of authority or by
way of moral swasion, this later, say you, the Apostle speaks of here, but if
it had been said cause Archippus, some would have told us that causing by way
of authority is here meant, and that (...) signifies to make or cause a thing
to be done, and that there is no classick Greek writer in which a man is said
(...) any thing which he does only endeavor and not accomplish. 2. You say,
say ye etc. seems more imperative then make ye or cause eye who ever said so?
thought so (if your selves do) you do not show us that these is a twofold
saying, one authoritative and the other swasive as you say there is a twofold
causing, nor do you show us any place of Scripture where saying is taken for
authoritative saying, and yet if you did it were not good reason a genre ad
sp^ci^m affirmative, no more then if a man should say, causing is sometimes by
way of authorits therefore it is so here. 3. The word say ye may be translated
tell ye to Archippus as well as Math. 18.17. (which is the very same word) tell
the Church, or that place in Matthew may be translated say ye to the Church as
well as this say ye to Archippus, as you being acquainted with the Greek tongue
know well enough; now if both of these places had been translated say or tell
they would not have sounded so much for your purposes: I conclude therefore
there is as much or more force in these words to prove the Collossians power to
cause an Epistle to be read in another Church, as to say Archippus; but I
maintain not that they had of themselves power in either.


Sect. 5. I concluded the Church cannot excommunicate their whole Presbytery no
more then the Presbytery excommunicate the whole Church; the Church has not
received from Christ an office of rule without her officers, Cotton Keys. You
reply p. 60. This withdrawing is a negative excommunication which is some kind
of censure though not so authoritative as the positive.

Rejoyn. 1. I observe that this negative censure, is now swelled up to a
negative excommunication. 2. That it is grown up to be authoritative, though
not so authoritative as the Positive. 3. You deny not but that in case of
Apostasy, scandal, obstinacy of the Church? the Elders as Mr. Cotton says, may
denounce the judgments of God against the Church, and withdraw from it; and
therefore we may invert the Position and say. The officers have power to
censure the whole Church if they see just occasion and prove it, because they
may withdraw. 4. A man by the law of nature, may withdraw from his crud father,
or Master, (or a wife from her husband that seeks to kill her) for the safety of
their lives, and men (and women also) ought to forsake a Church in the
Communion of which they cannot be saved, but this is not an authoritative but a
natural act, yet sure women have no power over their husbands, over their
Churches and Ministers. 5. Is not negative excommunication of the officers by
the Church tantamount with Positive excommunication (saving the pronouncing of
the sentence) which is not much material if the thing if self be effectually
done without it.


CHAP. XX. Of Tithes, and settled Maintenance.
Sect. 1. Repl. p. 61. YOu discover your apprehensions thus. 1. That Tithes are
Jewish maintenance.

Rejoynd. 1. What you or I apprehend is not material, but what we prove. 2.
What mean your by Jewish? That they were ceremonial, and abrogated by Christ.
I believe you mean so; but then you should show wherein the Ceremony did
consist? where, what is the analogical resemblance of things prefigured?
wherein consists the signification of them? All ceremonies properly Levitical
were either of mystical signification, or typical of something belonging to
Christ and his kingdom. 3. If by Jewish you mean, used among the Jews, I grant
it, (and that they were used amongst the Heathens also; Amsworth on Genesis
14.20.) but this does not make them unlawful, your selves being judges; for,
page 67. you labor to prove by Chemnitius, and by comparing Joh. 8.20. with
Mar. 12.61. That the Doctors in Christ's time were maintained by contribution,
and that the treasury of the Temple (which sure was no Gospel-ordinance) was
both to maintain the Doctors and the poor, and thence you will gather the
lawfulness of maintaining Ministers out of the Churches stock.
Are Contributions lawful, because they are Jewish; and Tithes unlawful,
because they are Jewish? If the manner of maintenance in Christ's time be so
much looked at, then I dare say, yea I did say in my Answer though you left it
out, and now justify that you might better allege Mat. 23.23. for manner of
maintenance; for there Christ expressly says of Tithes, yea of the smallest
tithes of mint, annyse and cummin, These things ye ought to have done, etc.
Which if it had been spoken concerning Sabbath Day contributions, or
maintenance out of the Treasure of the Temple, or Church-flock, that it ought
to be done, or not to be left undone; you would not have fetched such a
compass for proving the Divine institution of such maintenance; nor have urged
Chemnitius his testimony, if you had so plain a one of Christ.

Sect. 2. Reply, p. 61. Because Tithes were settled on the Levites upon
consideration of having no inheritance amongst their brethren.

Rejoynd. 1. It is evident that Tithes were not settled on the Levites as
Levites, nor proper to the Leviticall officers. Paul to the Hebrews, c. 7. v.
5, 6, 8. expressly affirms that Melchizedek (after whose order Christ the
greatest Priest was, Heb. 5.6. (and not of the order of Aaron) and who
represented Christ) did receive Tithes, and by his receiving of tithes proves
him to be a more excellent and eternal Priest; for in the Law men that die
receive tithes, but Melehisedeck received tithes, of whom it is witn^ssed that
he lives. Paul says not, the Priests and Levites receive tithes, but
Melchisedeck (of whose order Christ was) receives none: This would have been
an argument for your purpose; but he in effect says plainly, that the payment
of tithes was not proper to the Levitical Priesthood, but paid also to
Melchisedeck the type of Christ: for the Apostles purpose was not only, nor
chiefly to advance 0208 0108 V 3 Melchizedeck's, but Christ's Priestheod above
Aaron's, yea 0208 0108 V above Melchizedeck's, which in token of his greatness
received tithes, Heb. 7.4. and was not made after the law of a carnal
commandment, but after the power of an endless life, and of whom it is
witnessed that he lives, v. 8. as Christ also, Rev. 1.18. Secondly, you do
dictate, not prove, that Tithes were settled upon the Levites upon consideration
of having no inheritance amongst their brethren; for the contrary is evident,
viz. They had no inheritance amongst their brethren, upon consideration that
they had Tithes, etc. because God had given them Tithes, First Fruits, etc. and
the Lord was their inheritance, therefore he said unto them that among the
children of Israel they should have no inheritance, Number. 18.24. Deuteronomy. 18.1, 2.
and yet you think men should believe it without any pretense of proof. Thirdly,
in the margent you say, see John Seldom of Tithes, but neither cite book,
chapter, nor page, nor do you by any letter direct us for what part of this
Section you cite him, whether for this or some other particular in it, nor have
I his book; I did once see it, but was neither then, nor am now any further
versed in this controversy then your book does occasion me to be: And yet I
suppose Mr. Seldom, being a learned man, does not hold Tithes unlawful; why
then do you so abuse him to set him so in the margent of such a section, in
which (as you tell us in your last) you prove Tithes unlawful by the Word of
God, as though his book did bear witness to such an untruth? but as I
remember, he counts it a sin against Gods law, Prove. 20.25. to alien Tithes.
Consult you again with him. I will credit your report of his opinion, if you do
distinctly and deliberately relate it. Fourthly, It must not be understood that
the Levites had no inheritance at all, for the contrary appears, they had forty
eight cities and suburbs, which were 2000 cubits from the wall on every side,
Numb. 35.2. Lev. 25.32, 33, 34. though Judaea (as often times upon other
occasions you assert) was but a small country. Jeremy a Priests son buys a
field of his uncle as next a ki^ Jer. 32.7, 9. Barnabas a Levite having land,
sold it, Act. 4.36. Yea for ought you know (except you have studied more
against tithes, then I for them) the cities of the Levites (though a small
tribe) might equal, yea excel the portion of any tribe in Israel, besides
their tithes and other their great revenues: therefore you cannot say that they
had no inheritance at all, though they had none such as other tribes had, so
separate from the rest, so bounded, so entire together, but they had their
inheritance by parts and pieces, as Jacob had prophesied, and God in wisdom
disposed, both that the land should be but divided into twelve parts, and the
children of Joseph should be two Tribes, Josh. 14.4. and that the Levites
should for the better instruction of the people be scattered amongst the
tribes, and have their maintenance also where they lived.

Sect. 3. Reply, p. 61. Tithes were appointed together with Offerings, Mat. 3.8.

Rejoynd. 1. That text says that they were taken away together, God was robbed
of them both at once: but that they were appointed together, it says not. 2.
The text mentions them together; yet this (if you have no better argument)
proves not that they were of the same nature. Fornication, eating of blood and
things strangled, prayer ever the sick and a^^^inting them with ^yle, are not
of the same nature, nor alike commanded or forbidden, and yet the first two are
mentioned together, Act. 15.29. and the other two, Jam. 5.14. 3. The text
implies they were at the same time due, and required of God, but not that they
both were appointed at the same time and upon the same grounds. 4. How do you
make it appear that all the Offerings there mentioned were ceremonial, and now
unlawful? Is it ceremonial to offer to the Church-stock or treasury, because
the Jews did so? Your selves, for the credit of such offerings, say they were
used amongst the Jews; and I dare say, you hold that it is lawful upon good
occasion to keep a Day in the month or year, a Fast or a Feast, though we
know the Jews did keep fasts or feasts on the same day.


Sect. 4. Reply, p. 61. Tithes had a particular respect to the Priesthood; for
the tithe of the Levites was to be tythed and given to the Priests, Nehem.
10.38.

Rejoynd. Here is another mistake. The text says not that tithes were paid to
the Priests, but to the Priest the son of Aaron, the successor of Aaron in
the Highpriests office; as the very citation in the margent led me to Number.
18.27, 28. which faith, that the tenth of the Levites (amongst whom the
Priests, as to that, were comprehended) was to be given as the Lords
heave offering to Aaron the Priest. But tithes were paid by Abraham, Genesis 14.
vowed by Jacob, Genesis 38.22. Asserted by Paul, not to be proper to the
Leviticall Priesthood, Heb. 7, are not (that we know) of any typical or
mystical signification, as the High Priest (we know) was; therefore they are
not of the same nature. If tithes to the High Priest be now unlawful, the
reason is because there is no High Priest now; Christ has made that office
void, it was typical and plainly ceremonial, and not because Tithes are
unlawful. And these, or some of these, are the answers we give to them that
tell us we might as well keep the Sabbath of the 7. year, as of the 7. day.

Sect. 5. You reply, p. 61. That you see no ground for settled stinted
maintenance, to last from year to year, if it must arise from the Church, and
not come from the State, as in some countries it does: because, if the Church
must maintain the Ministry among them, as God blessed them, ( and a more
equal rule then that, there can none be found;) then except they could settle
Gods blessing, and make it to abide with men in an equal manner without
increase or decrease, the maintenance may not be settled. And this also is an
argument against Tithes.

Rejoynd. But what if Tithes were ceremonial and Jewish? is set maintenance
ceremonial also? Of what mystical or typical signification is that? or is it
grounded on equity and moral reason? Does not the Scripture, Ezekiel. 45.1.5.
allude to a certain and settled maintenance that should be given to the
Ministry? and in comparing it with servants hire and wages, 1 Timothy 5.18. and
to a Soldiers pay, 1 Cor. 9.7. both which are certain. 2. Had God more care of
the maintenance of the Ministers of the Old Testament, then of the New? As the
father allotting his son some portion of lands and revenues, or allowing him
to be capable of certain maintenance which none can deprive him of, does
express more care of him then if he should make him incapable of such
maintenance, and assign him to his friends at large to be maintained as they
thought fit. 3. When the Minister has setmaintenance, he knows better how to
proportion his living, his alms, his expenses for the public, his provision
for his children, and how to keep hospitality (as the Scripture requires he
should) 4 Tithes are not in one sense settled or stinted maintenance; for they
are more or less, according as the husbandman sows and God prospers, as
Corn is little or much, good or bad, well or ill gotten, dear or cheap; they
that receive Tithes do rise and fall with them from whom they receive them. 5.
Where do you see ground in Scripture for settled and stinted maintenance to last
from year to year, if it come from the State? how prove you that the State may
lawfully settle such maintenance, and the Church may not? Can the State settle
Gods blessing to make it abide with them in an equal manner without increase
or decrease, any more then the Church can? 6. Do you see ground for set stinted
maintenance for a time, as a quarter of a year, or half a year, or a year, (as
you intimate you do) only (you say) you see not ground it should last from year
to year: Can the blessing of God be settled and made to abide with men in an
equal manner without increase or decrease, a year, or half a year, or a
quarter? 7. When maintenance is given from the State, must it not come out of
the Subjects purses? (You would not have the Parliament men out of their proper
purses to maintain all the Ministers in the kingdom) And out of whose purses
can it so fitly come, as from those which are bound by Gods law to maintain
their Ministers? 8. Do not Tithes come from the State, or from the King (which
as to this is all one) Did they not voluntarily at first give them? and when
some by Law did fall again into their hands at the dissolution of Abbeys, they
might either give them to the Ministry, or dispose them to private persons, or
possess them to the public use; the present inhabitants or countrymen having
no more legal right unto them where they were assigned to the Ministry, then
where they were assigned to other persons and uses; for when they bought or
took their Lands, they did not think of buying or taking the Tithes, or did the
sellers or setters think of setting or selling them; if they had, they would
have required more money for the sale or lease.


Sect. 6. Reply, p. 61. There is great inequality in Tithes, and in all settled
maintenance, if not unrighteousness; Persons whose estates arise from Trading,
and consist in goods, (not having any lands) in some places pay nothing to the
Ministry out of duty, and so the Country maintains the Ministry of the Town,
though many Chapels perhaps be robbed thereby, and persons who are much poorer
in Estate then others, but have larger Lands then they, yet pay more because of
their lands then they? and if houses be rated, or men's present estate valued,
and maintenance settled in the just proportion; yet because men's estates are
like the Moon, some in the increase, others in the decrease, it will soon grow
unto an inequality again; besides, men's estates lie many times where their
persons inhabit not, neither can inhabit; and then their estates go to
maintain a Ministry to which they do not belong, and they are so much the more
disabled i^ supporting the Ministry to which they do belong.

Rejoynd. 1. Is there not as great an inequality, when Tithes are paid to a
Gentleman (possibly a Papist) as where they are paid to the Ministers? Or do
you intend, that as well the Parliamentmen and others should be wronged of the
Tithes legally due to them, as the Ministers? 2. Is it any inequality or
unrighteousness that men should pay their debts which they are legally bound
to by their own consent, because it falls out that a poorer man may pay more
then a richer? When a fifth part of the land became Pharaohs, Genesis 47.26. was
it unequal or unrighteous that they which possessed much lands, should pay for
the fifth part of them more to Pharaoh, then richer men that had less lands
did? Is it unequal or unrighteous, that he that has a greater quantity of
ground, should pay a greater Rent or a greater chief, then a richer man that
has less? 3. You count it lawful for the State to allow settled maintenance;
how can they do it any way, but there will be some pretense of inequality or
unrighteousness? If the State do allow an Independent Minister 40. l. 50. l.
or 100. l. per annum out of the sequestered Tithes of a neighboring Parish, may
not the people complain of inequality and injustice, as well (...) if they were
of a Ministers own parish, and paid their tithes to him? 4. If any inequality
or unrighteousness be now or hereafter, the Parliament may from time to time
rectify it. 5. If Tithes be so burdensome (as you say they are) to the poor,
what if it be possible to find some poor Church Members to pay much more to the
Contributions then their tithes come to? Nor is their act merely voluntary, it
is expected they should give something every Lords day; and two pence every
Lords day, Fast and Feasting day, cannot be less then 10. s. per annum; it may
be his Tithes comes not to two shillings, and he is not worth 10. or 20. l.
Surely your rich ones do not keep their proportion with your poor ones, and for
every ten or twenty pounds they are worth, pay two pence per diem. 6.
Conscience tells us, that every one should have his own; but conscience in
sundry cases does not determine that this or that is mine, nor must I be mine
own Judge in it; even good men are partial in their own cases (as Judah and
David) though just in other men's: therefore the Laws we live under must
determine it.


Sect. 7. You say in [ Congregat. way justified, p. 8.]. If Christ our Lord
has appointed no such thing as stinted maintenance, then it is unfit for the
Church to settle stinted maintenance.

Rejoynd. 1. Your conclusion should be, Therefore it is unlawful. A thing may
be unfit, at least in opinion, and not unlawful. 2. Has Christ appointed that
the State may settle maintenance, and forbidden it to the Church? or may the
State plead exemption from Christ's appointment any more then the Church? See
above, Sect. 5.


Reply, p. 61. And this settled visible maintenance can be the maintenance but
of peaceable times, when the Magistrate is a Christian and countenanceth
Religion: for in the Apostles days, and afterward for three hundred years
together, while the ten Persecutions lasted, there neither was nor could be on
foot any such maintenance. But the Church-treasury duly kept up by
contributions, according as God blesses every man, will afford maintenance
while the Church has any thing, at all times, whether peaceable or
troublesome, whether the Magistrate be a Christian or a Heathen.

Rejoynd. 1. What then? is it therefore unlawful? Maintenance from the State
is not had but in peaceable times; therefore it is unlawful too? Public
meeting-places for worship cannot be had but in peaceable times; are not they
unlawful too? And sometimes the Church-treasury may be robbed and spoiled; the
free and public peaceable exercise of Religion cannot be had but in peaceable
times; you will not therefore conclude that they are unlawful? 2. For lasting;
the trade of the Begging-Friars outbids your Church-stock; for the Ministers
may beg, whether times be peaceable or troublesome, whether the Magistrate be a
Christian or an Heathen, whether there be maintenance out of the Church stock
or no. 3. The tithes amongst the Jews were paid to the Jewish Priests in the
time of Christ and his Apostles; if the Apostles had been never so desirous of
them, they could not have had them: The Christians were very poor, in respect
whereof, for fear of offense, the Apostles did preach freely in some places,
having neither maintenance from Church nor from State, but working with their
own hands. And yet you say that set maintenance from the State is not
unlawful, though such maintenance neither was nor could be on foot for the
first 300 years.


CHAP. XXI. Of Ministers maintenance out of the Church-stock and Lord's Day
Contributions.
Sect. 1. YOu say, p. 62. This maintenance out of the stock of the Church, we
think we see most warrant for from the New Testament, and as most probable we
once disputed; but neither then, nor now, are we peremptory in it. And in your
last you say, That the Ministers are to be maintained by such a stock as is
raised by weekly contribution; because it is not absolutely clear in the Text,
at least to us, we thought fit to dispute it only as probable.

Rejoynd. 1. Then it seems the Scripture annexed to the Position, is not
sufficient, pertinent, and full of power to prove it. And in this I praise your
modesty. 2. Your applying of the commendation of Jugurtha to your selves in
your last, That he did pl^rimum facere, and minimum de se loqui, is no act of
your modesty.
The Independent Answerer of Mr. Prynnes Quaere's, says, Independents are the
meekest men upon earth; and you, by your own report, are men that do much, and
say little. Surely few think so but your selves.

You say, p. 62.1. We considered how Christ and the Apostles were maintained in
the work of the Ministry, and we find that they had a Stock of moneys, which
came (partly at least) by Contribution, Luke 8.2, 3. and out of this stock was
taken for the Poor also, as from Joh. 13.29. appears. See Junius Ecclesiast. p.
1954.

Rejoynd. The one Text says, The women ministered to Christ of their substance;
The other faith, that Judas had the bag. But that the women's contribution was
given every Lords day, or that it was put into the public treasury; Or that
Judas bag out of which Christ gave somewhat to the poor, had not Christ's proper
goods in it, but the Churches stock; that Judas was a kind of Deacon or
Church Officer, it says not. 2. That Christ's maintenance was wholly out of a
stock that was raised by contribution, your selves do not assert; nor were the
Apostles maintained in the work of the Ministry out of that bag, save only
when they were at home as being of Christ's own family.

Sect. 2. Reply, p. 62. We consider what was done in the Apostles times, Act.
2.45. and 4.35. there was a Stock then, but raised after an extraordinary way,
and yet by free contribution; they brought their whole estates and put them
into a common stock; which was but a temporary business, and not astrictive
unto all times. Now out of this common stock, the Apostles and all others that
had need were maintained; and the Apostles had at first the oversight of this
stock.

Rejoynd. 1. They could not have any other way of Church-maintenance at that
time. 2. Your selves acknowledge, First, that a settled maintenance may come
from the State; And must it come from the State and the Church-stock too?
Secondly, that that was but a temporary business, and not astrictive to all
times, else it would hold that there must be a community of all things in the
Church. 3. What is this to Lord's Day contributions for the Ministers
maintenance, of which the Position speaks?


Sect. 3. Reply, p. 62. You say, There were Deacons chosen, which had the
oversight of the treasure of this Church; for the Apostles gave themselves to
the ministry of the Word and to Prayer, Act. 6.4. and neither meddled with
receiving, nor with disposing of what was contributed: The Deacons took that
burden from off them, so that now they received all, and disposed of all: if
any brought their estate, they laid it down at the Deacons feet; and if any
distribution was made, the Deacons made it; the Apostles meddled with nothing.
So then the work was the same which the Deacons managed, with that which the
Apostles had before managed, only it was in other hands, the Deacons came into
the Apostles place: hence it follows, that if the distribution was made as
every one had need, when the Apostles had the oversight, and if themselves had
a share as their need required, and other Laborers with them; then it was so
afterward when the Deacons were entrusted in it; so then the Deacons office
was to dispose as the Laborers had need, and their office was not to oversee
the Poor alone.

Rejoynd. 1. That the Deacons came so into the Ap^stles place, that the
Apostles meddled with nothing, but received their maintenance from the Deacons,
or that men laid their money at the Deacons feet, it appears not in Scripture.
2. The contrary rather appears; for not only Paul took great care of the poor
diverse times and in diverse places; and James, Cephas, and John, (not the
Deacons) did desire him to remember the poor, Gal. 2.10. but the Antiochians,
Act. 11.30. sent the relief for the poor brethren which dwelt in Judaea, to the
Elders, not to the Deacons. Now Agabus and other Prophets came lately thither
from Jerusalem, v. 27, 28. and Barnabas and Paul that went with it, knew to
whom to deliver it, yet they lay it down at the feet of the Elders (not of the
Deacons) which imports that Agabus, the Prophets, Barnabas and Saul, did know
that the Apostles and Elders had somewhat to do with it, at least to take for
their own necessity as they did before, and not to be at the disposal of the
Deacons; and if Barnabas and Saul had conceived it to be Gods ordinance that
the Apostles and Elders should not meddle with reception, they would have
brought it to the Deacons whose office they knew well enough, nor would the
Elders have received it at their ^hands, but have sent them to the Deacons. 3.
That the charge of the poor belongs to Pastors, is the judgment of Pareus and
others, which do hold that the greater and higher office does include in it the
less and lower. 4. By this doctrine, Pastors, if they have means of their
own, ought not to receive maintenance out of the Churches stock, except they
have need in the judgment of the Deacons or of the Church, as other poor
Saints have.


Sect. 4. P. 63. You tell us, That the office of the Deacons is not temporary,
but perpetual. But what is this to prove Ministers maintenance by Lord's Day
contributions, or out of the Church-stock? Yes, say you, In the Commandment
which respects the necessity of the Ministers, Gal. 6.6. the word is the same
in the Greek which is in the commandment to distribute to the necessity of the
Saints Romans 12.13. Heb. 13.16. and signifies to communicate. But what then? 1.
The word communicating is a general word, and compriseth all duties whereby
men do mutually help one another, Calv. on Heb. 13.16. Can there be no
communicating, except the Deacons do receive it and pay it over to the
Minister? except there be Lord's Day contributions and a Church-stock? You know
the contrary. 2. That place in Gal. 6. (which only speaks expressly of Ministers
maintenance) is understood of private, as well, yea rather then of public
contribution. (...), of all his goods, by which is meant not only money which
may be fitly brought to the Congregation, but other good things according as
there is opportunity, ability, and necessity, some of which cannot be fitly
brought into the Congregation. 3. Your own Texts do declare, that the Scripture
distinguishes communicating to the necessity of the Saints, and communicating
to their Ministers, and that these two are not both one; f^r then Paul might
have said, Give unto the Church-treasury for public uses, for the maintenance
of the Ministry and of the poor; to both which if there were a Church-stock,
they might contribute in one act, but he speaks of several acts, yea kinds of
contribution.


You say further, That the word there used signifies often, Church Communion;
and that the Apostles meaning may well be, that it should be upon days when
the Church meets in communion. Hence it is that Deacons are called (...), 1.
Cor. 12.28. which being interpreted, may import a person that receives
something for another, and it may bear receiving of a just reward for another,
and so not for the poor Saints alone, but for the Laborers also. But what
then? Is it your meaning, that every day the Church meets in communion, they
are bound by the law of God to contribute to their Ministers, whether they be
Lords-dayes or no? 2. Is Church Communion any whit violated, if the Minister
himself do receive his own maintenance from others besides the Deacon, and some
other day besides the Lords day? Your selves confess, you would not be
understood to exclude private distributing or communicating to the Ministers or
Members. 3. As for the word (...) 1. If it may import such a person, that does
not prove it does so in this place. 2. The most proper signification of the
Word is help or holding up a man or thing that is weak and ready to fall, and
so it is taken for relief of weak poor and miserable persons, Luke 1.54. He
bath helped his servant Israel. And the properest acceptance of a word is
first to be cleaved to, unless there be (as here there is not) some convincing
reason to the contrary: Now the Deacons were to help the poor and needy. 3.
Beza conceives the Ministry of the widows is also meant, I Cor. 12.28. as
well as of the Deacons. Did the widow also receive a just reward for another?
And whereas you allege, that this communicating or distribution is called a
Sacrifice, Heb. 13.16. and that sacrisice was wont to be brought to the door of
the tabernacle, and that it comes most freely when it is brought, etc. I
answer, 1. If contribution and communication be called a sacrifice, Heb. 13.16.
(as it may well be, for first, it should be freely offered; secondly, it is in
stead of the sacrifices required of the Jews, which were very chargeable;
thirdly, it is as pleasing to God as sacrifice) Yet that proves not that the
intent of the Holy Ghost is, in calling it a sacrifice, (as you would make your
Reader believe) that it should be brought to the public assemblies every Lords
day. If a man from that appellation should infer, that only Ministers should
communicate or distribute, because they only might offer sacrifice; That
distribution is not to be made to men, because sacrifice; were only to God;
That a man must contribute morning and evening, as they did offer sacrifice;
That contributions are propitiatory, as s;ome sacrifices were, your selves
would cry out, Non sequitur, Nonsequitur, and so do I; for you know that
private distributing or communicating to Saints or Ministers is a sacrifice as
well as public; so also is Prayer, Psalm. 140. I. Praise, Psalm. 50.23.
Righteousness, Psalm. 4.5. 2. The Church may have a stock by contributions
gathered on the weekday from house to house, or otherwise, or by monthly,
quartetly, yearly contributions, and many other ways besides weekly
contributions. 3. The Church may have a stock by weekly contributions, and yet
that stock not be for the Ministers maintenance. Surely I cannot think that
your selves do think you have solidly proved this manner of maintenance out of
Gods word.


Sect. 5. Reply, p. 64. You confess that the occasion of this Institution, I
Cor. 16.'. was collection for the poor Saints at Jerusalem; that there are no
other Churches mentioned upon whom this institution was enjoined, but Corinth
and the Churches of Galatia. Notwithstanding, if we consider several
particulars of the Injunction, we may probably conjecture that be had a further
scope in the commandment, then the occasion does import. He brings a great
many of Churches, not to the doing of the duty alone, but to the same way of
doing it; the Churches of Galatia were many; and that at Corinth; and there
cannot be a reason rendered why all other Churches that were called to the duty,
Romans 15.26, 27. should not be bound to the same manner of doing also; and so
the Churches of Macedonia, and that at Rome will be brought under this
injunction.

Rejoynd. 1. That there is an institution here of a Church-stock for the
maintenance of Ministers, occasioned by the collection for the Saints at
Jerusalem, is fancied by you, but not confirmed. 2. You can show no Church
which was not required to contribute in the said extraordinary case that was
appointed to have such collections; nor can you show that all those which did
contribute, (as the Churches of Macedonia, 2 Cor. 8.1. or Antioch, Act. 11.29.)
did do it every Lords day: And you may observe the Apostle faith not, So I have
ordained in the Churches of Macedonia, nor So I have ordained in all Churches;
but only, As I have ordained in the Churches of Galatia. 3. You merely presume
(but prove not) that there were many Churches, a great many of Churches in
Galatia; Though it were as big as England, can you show any more Churches in
Galatia then two, Antioch and Laodicea? 4. The reason why we believe not that
other Churches were bound to the same manner of doing, is because we read it n
t. Show where we may read it, that we may believe it.


Sect. 6. Reply, p. 65. The Apostle binds this contribution to the Lords day,
in all these Churches; if he had no scope to make this an Ordinance in all the
Churches, be might have pitched upon some other day. He says, every first day
of the week ( that is every Lords day) so it is translated in the Geneva-
Bible, and so the Preposition ^gr^ is often rendered, as Scapula observes and
gives instances abundantly, etc. Why must this contribution be every Lords day,
inreference to the Church of Jerusalem alone? for they might have given what
they could have spared at once; or if it were a great deal, they might have had
the longer time allotted them, and yet have given it at once; or the richer and
abler might have given it at once, and the rest at. wice, or thrice, or four
times; but they must give it Lord's Day by Lord's Day, without missing one
Lord's Day: this seems to hold forth, that Paul meant it for a standing
Ordinance, and that his scope was by weekly contributions to raise a stock in
the Churches, out of which might be taken, without gathering.

Rejoynd. 1. Amongst us, Collections for the Palatinate, for Ireland, etc. have
been appointed on the Lords day, as being the fittest day, most people meeting,
the Minister might exhort and excite them to this duty; and yet you know we
account it not an Ordinance in all Churches, and so it might be with that
collection which might be appointed on the Lords day, without any such scope as
you pretend. 2. The preposition (...) is often rendered distributively, I grant,
but not always, nor necessarily. In the first chap. in all the New Testament,
(...) is translated in a dream, speaking of one, not many dreams. 3. When it is
taken distributively, it is not always so to be understood of every, but of
sundry, as (...) Act. 2.46. They brake bread, not in every house, but in
several houses. 4. However you understand it, this is certain, that Paul would
have no gatherings when be came, and then he intended to come shortly, 1 Cor.
4.19. even when be had passed through Macedonia, which journey he then was
entering upon, 1. Cor. 16.3, 5, 6, 7. and probably there were but few
Lords-dayes, may be two or three, before the intended time of his being with
them.
And we our selves, whose people are richer, and the time more prosperous, have
had for the Palatinate or some other extraordinary occasions, collections more
Lords days then one in some places, to make the sum more considerable.

Sect. 7. Reply p. 65. They are bound under this injunction, Without any time
set them of ceasing the same; for though our Brother say, those gatherings were
to cease when Paul should come, and allege verse. 2. for it; yet we find no
such thing there; the true meaning is, that it may be in readiness when I
come, and that there may not be need to gather for it when I come: the Greek
words are against his exposition, but agree well with ours, (...) which words
are truly thus translated, that not when I come, then gatherings be made: He is
diverse (I think) from Paul, in exposition of Paul's words; he would have
gatherings then to cease, Paul would not have them then to begin, lest there
should be nothing in readiness when use should be made thereof.

Rejoynd. Paul says, that there be no gatherings when I come, or (if we must
pedantically translate the Greek) That not when I come, then gatherings be
made; he says not, That there be no gatherings for the Saints of Jerusalem
when I come, but in the general, that there be no gatherings when I come. 2.
He says not, That not only when I come, gatherings be made; nor says he,
That not when I come gatherings begin to be made. And therefore you that at
first confidently and jointly said, The Greek words are against his exposition,
and that I am more guilty of corupting the Text then you; do afterward abate
of your confidence, saying that I am diverse (as one of you thinks) from Paul
in my exposition. The Lord knows your thoughts, and not I.

Sect. 8. Reply, p. 66. You say, Consider the manner of performing this act;
every one must not keep it with him, but treasure it up, as the Greek carries
it; or put it into the Treasury: What treasury? his own private treasury? no;
for then it needed not to have been upon the Lords day, and then there would
have been gathering together what every man had put into his own private
treasury, when Paul came; and this would have been unreadinesse, which Paul
labors to prevent; it was then the common treasury which the Church had when
they met, into which every one did put what he provided for such a business;
thus a stock was raised in all the Churches by an every Sabbaths contribution.

Rejoynd. 1. The words are, Let every one lay by him in store, which seem to
import rather a laying up in private then in public. 2. If it was the common
treasury of Church-stock, it was only for the relief of the poor Saints of
Jerusalem, not of the Officers of the Church of Corinth. 3. Finally, if the
Churches own poor do rather require weekly contribution for their relief, then
the poor of other Churches; if the Belgic churches have Lords. days
contributions for their poor, if these contributions be according to Scripture,
yea grounded on this Text, wherein does this stock or treasury of the Church
respect Ministers?


Sect. 9. To prove that it does respect Ministers, you say, page 66. The stock
raised by selling of estates, and laying them down at the Apostles feet,
respects the very Apostles; why then s;hold not the stock raised by an every
Sabbaths contribution respect Ministers? If we will take Chemnitius his opinion
(whose Harmony upon the Gospel is not a little set by) He tells us, The Doctors
in Christ time that preached, were maintained by contribution; he says, The
treasury into which Christ beheld many rich ones casting in much, and the poor
widow all her substance, was to maintain the Doctors: He also joins the Poor
with the Doctors, and says, that the Treasury was for both uses. See Jonn
8.20. and compare it with Mark 12.41.

Rejoynd. 1. Now at last you are welcome home, for you have been Wandering from
the question all this while, and I have (though somewhat unwillingly) followed
you with intent to fetch you home. 2. If it be conceived that the stock raised
by selling estates did respect Ministers, there is more warrant for that
opinion, (though it may be though that the Apostles, qua Ministers, did then
take no maintenance but qua needy, Act. 4.35.) from the Text, then there is for
Ministers maintenance by Lord's Day contributions from this Text. 3. Though I
rendered you reasons in my Answer, and have taken notice of your Replies in this
Rejoinder;
yet because you still crave more Reasons, I will give you some. 1. The Apostle
says not any thing of gathering any Church-stock or treasury, but that which
should be sent to Jerusalem, v. 3. Whom you shall approve I will send to bring
your gift to Jerusalem, not making the least mention of the maintenance of the
Ministry, or other necessities of the Church of Corinth. 2. He sent this
Collection to them of Jerusalem under the notion of poor Saints and Brethren,
and not under the notion of Officers. qua such, though they (if poor) were also
relieved by it. 3. If the Apostle had any further scope of gathering a
Church-stock for maintaining the Officers, as well as the poor of the Church of
Corinth, he might plainly have expressed it, and doubtless he would, saying in
this or the like manner, I have ordained in the Churches of Galatia, that not
only the poor of Jerusalem, but their own Officers should be maintained by
contribution; seeing the mentioning of the several uses of the Church-stock,
viz. 1. for their officers, 2. for their own poor, 3. for the poor of other
churches and other necessities would have provoked them to a more liberal
contribution, which was the main design of the Apostle.
4. N. E. men do not generally preach or practice the maintenance of Ministers
by Lord's Day contributions, but (as Mr Weld says, p. 59. Their weekly
contribution is properly intended for the Poor, according to 1 Cor. 16.1. yet
so, as if much be given in, some (burches do (though others do not) appoint the
overplus toward the Ministers maintenance. In which words, 1. he expresses
their opinion, that the contribution (1 Cor. 16.1.) Was properly intended for
the poor. 2. That some Churches appoint not any part of it toward their
Ministers maintenance. 3. That those that do it, do it but conditionally (if
much be given in, if there be an overplus) and in a secundary way, which is not
the manner of your Churches, which (or at least some of them) make it an
ordinance of God.
5. The setting up of this way of Ministers maintenance is the grand design of
Heretics and Schismatics (though some godly men in the simplicity of their
hearts may approve it or actin it) for some or all of these ends. 1. That they
may strengthen the hands of Cormorants, who under pretense of Reformation, and
abhorring Idols, do now (as in the days of Henry the 8.) commit sacrilege,
viz. That do take away to private use things deputed to holy uses, or
maintenance and furtherance of Gods worship, (for what is the sin of
sacrilege, if this be not?) by the received custom and consent of the
Churches, by donation of Princes, legacy of Testators, several Acts of
Parliament and Magna Charta, and do alien them from their general end; whose
sin consisting in devouring that which is holy, or devoted to the service of
God and his Church, Prove. 20.5. Lev. 27.28, 30. and in abrogating the
Testaments of men, Gal. 3.15. makes them worse then Ananias and Sappirah, which
did only withold part of that which they had pretended to give to the Church,
though before they gave it it was in their own power; but these do take away
that which neither they, nor (it may be) their ancestors did give, but others,
strangers to them, and long since dead. 2. That they may make way for their own
maintenance in their several separated Congregations, as of Divine
institution, whether they be tolerated or no. 3. That they might put an
imputation of covetousness and burdensomnesse upon the Ministers of the Gospel
(as the false teachers did upon Paul) who therefore took no maintenance at all
(though he might) but wrought with his hands, that he might take off that
imputation. 4. That they might catch men to their party, because this way is
for the peoples profit. 5. That they might discourage Learning. 6. That they
might set the People aloft over their Ministers. 7. To bring the Ministers
which cannot in conscience comply with their unsteddy unsound people, to
baseness and beggary, and that they might neither have learning, nor leisure,
books nor spirits, to oppose their ungodly ways.
6. As for Chem^itius, I have spoken before, and now add, You do not produce
him to say, that de jure it ought to be so now, but only de facto, it was so
then: he says, contributions was the maintenance amongst the Jews, not that it
ought to be so amongst Christians.


CHAP. XXII. Of the burning Mountain cast into the Sea, REVEL. 8.8, 9.
Sect. 1. TO show that that is not rightly applied to settled endowments brought
in to the Church, I urge, that Kings and States are called mountains, Zach 4.7.
Casting of mountains into the sea implies great commotions and troubles, Psalm.
46.2. Their burning with fire signifies their opposition and fierceness,
whereby they become destroying mountains, or (as the Septuagint, whom the
Penmen of the New Testament much follow) (...), a mountain on fire, Jer.
51.25. But I find not that settled and stinted Maintenance is in any Prophecy
understood by a mountain burning with fire cast into the sea.

You reply, p. 68. that Constantine did bring in great riches and settled
endowments to the Clergy of the Church, and that this may be clearly evidenced
from credible Authors.] But why do you not show this in your first or second
book, and that those Authors meant not of Constantines donation, which is
justly accounted a fiction? What other settled endowments did he give to the
Clergy, and to whom? and who are those credible Authors that assert it? You
further reply, If Kings and States be called mountains, so is prosperity in
riches and honors. Psalm. 30. Thou have made my mountain to stand strong, that
is, my condition so prosperous: And sea in Scripture is the Church sometimes,
or the Religion of the Church, Rev. 13.1. and 15.2. Therefore casting of a
mountain into the sea, may be, bringing prosperity and casting riches and
honors upon the Church; and though mountains should be in your sense for
Kings, when almost Regal riches and honors were cast upon the Prelates, and
the ambition of Prelates did set the world on fire, it might be called a
burning mountain.

Rejoynd. You know Kings and States are called mountains. The most learned and
godly Interpreters of Prophesies, Brightman, Mede, etc. tell us so; you need
not to If it. 2. The place Psalm. 30.7. may be understood of David's Kingdom in
which God had settled him; it was a Psalm at the dedication of his house, v. 1.
3. Do you hold indeed, that Kings may not cast any riches and honor upon the
Church? how are Kings nursing fathers and mothers, if the Church be as poor and
beggarly as when they were enemies? how can the Kings of the earth bring their
glory and honor into it, Rev. 21.24. Why might not Constantine bring in settled
endowments, as well as the State allow settled maintenance? are they not both
one? yet the one you hold lawful, and not the other. 4. I had nothing to do
with ampla praedia, the Position was of settled endowments. Even N. E. men bring
it against them, and I understand it of set maintenance, which may be either
less or more, which you deny to be lawful from the Church: therefore the
leaving out of ampla praedia (minding you always of what is said in answ. to
Pos. 8.) was no fault in the producers of the Position. 5. You should show that
settled endowments given to the Church, are in any prophecy called a burning
mountain cast into the Sea: but because you cannot do it, therefore you
acknowledge ( Congr. way justified, p. 9, 10.) that the interpretation is but
probable and doubtful, and that you dare not speak definitively of it. And so
I leave it; minding you only, that many which seemed most Anti-Prelatical, do
justify the Bishops setting the world on fire.


Sect. 2. You tell me of my misinterpreting and misreporting of T.W. to W.R. p.
59. I shall relate the case, and leave the determination of it to any ingenuous
indifferent person. It is thus: New England men being asked, Whether they do
allow, or think it lawful to allow and settle any certain and stinted
maintenance upon their Ministers? do answer, But for settled and stinted
maintenance, there is nothing done that way amongst us, except from year to
year, because the conditions of Ministers may vary, etc. Mr. Weld says, For a
way of settled maintenance, there is nothing done that way, except (mark the
exception) from year to year. And a little before he says, The Church usually
meets twice in the year, or oft^er, to consult and determine of the sum to be
allowed for that year to their Ministers, and to raise it. Whether it may not
be hence inferred, that there is a way of settled and stinted maintenance in
New England for a year at least, let the Reader judge, I will not contend about
it: That the people in New England, when the work is done, do consult and
consider the Minister for the year past, or that the Minister does not know
till the year be up what he must have, (in which respect the condition of the
meanest servant is usually better then his) is scarce agreeable, I think, to
the letter of Mr. Welds words, or to the practice of New England, where (as
Theodore de la Guard, p. 39. says) They generally find and practice as the
best way, That the Ministers have seasonable and honorable maintenance, and
that certainly stated. But our work is to find out the mind of God, not of man.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the distinction of Pastors and Teachers, on EPHESIANS. 4.11.
WHen I say, that Ephesians. 4.11. proves not that Teachers must be distinct from
Pastors, as Apostles are distinct from Evangelists; you reply, p. 70. You
cross the opinion of many Orthodox modern Writers, -- whether you translate
some Apostles, or these Apostles, the matter is not weighty, nor are you
advantaged by it. The greater question is, who these Teachers be, and what
their work is? whether School-Doctors, to train up Youth in the knowledge of
Arts and Sciences, especially of Divinity, or Teachers of the whole Church, and
their work to doctrinate the Church by words of knowledge, which seems more
consonant to the Scripture. And Zanchy, Pareus, Bucer, and many others are of
this judgment, whose Reasons your selves (in the Congregational way justified,
p. 9.) thus abridge. God gives distinct gifts to Pastors from those he gives to
Teachers; for to one is given a special faculty of Exhortation, to the other a
clearer understanding of doctrine, and consequently they are distinct officers.
And you conclude your Reply, p. 70. with these words: So that if we do put any
false gloss upon the Scriptures by misinterpreting of Ephesians. 4.11. yet more
modest language had becommed you, seeing such Reverend and learned men, whom
your self so much honor, have gone before us in this exposition.

Rejoynd. 1. The force of my argument (to which you answer not at all) was not
(as you would in both your books make the Reader to believe) that the article
(...) was translated [some] or [these] but that the said article is not
inserted between Pastor and Teacher, as it is between every of the rest; to
show that there is not the same distinction between them as between each two of
the rest, as appears plainly by my answer, though you take no notice of it,
having fit occasion, and being minded of it by me: I would not so deal with
you. 2. That you have the authority of Zanchy, and of some reverend men besides
on your part in this Position, I do not deny, nor do I want such on my part;
but I would see with mine own eyes, not other men's. 3. To the reasons alleged
(as you say) by Pareus and Bucer, for the distinction of Pastors and Teachers
from difference of gifts, which is grounded on Romans 12. I answer, 1. It takes
not away the exception made against the proof of this, by Ephesians. 4.11. 2. I
suppose the Apostle did not intend, no not in Romans 12. (though he might intend
it there, and yet Ephesians. 4.11. be impertinently alleged for proof of it) that
each of those several gifts should constitute a several officer; for then
there should be seven officers in the Church, viz. Prophets, v. 6. Ministers
and Teachers; v. 7. Exhorters, Givers, Rulers, Shewers of mercy, v. 8. For all
these are equally by the disjunctive particle [Or] severed one from another;
for it is not sufficiently cleared to me, that Prophecy and Ministry, or
Ministry and Teaching, or Teaching and Exhortation, are in the Apostles sense
all one, or one the genus, and the other the species. And yet Mr. Gillespy has
done most learnedly and accurately in that point. 3. Difference of gifts,
without an institution from God, cannot make a different office. James and John
(it may be) had a special gift of terrifying sinners, and are called sons of
thunder, Mark. 3 17. and Joses a special gift of comforting weak Saints, and
called the son of consolation, Act. 4.36. Yet no man will upon this ground
conclude them to be different officers; one Pastor may be excellent in one
gift, another in another, possibly some men may be excellent in both gifts:
Paraeus himself, a little after the place by you cited, says, The Apostles did
excel in both gifts, and they are indeed common parts of the Episcopal or
Pastoral office, and therefore are conjoined, 1 Cor. 14.4. And it is evident,
1. That every Pastor should be apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3.3. which word is of the
same original with this in Ephesians. 4.11. 2. That Pastors are called Teachers,
(the very word that is here) 1 Cor. 12.28. (which runs parallel with this Text,
and may be well fetchr into explicate it) and also in Isa. 30.20. Act. 13.1. 3.
The Scripture does ascribe the work of feeding with knowledge and understanding
(which upon supposall of the distinction of these officers is the work of the
Teacher) unto the Pastor, Jer. 3.15. And lastly, words joined together by a
conjunction copulative, are often exegetical and explicative one of another, as
in the example produced by me, 1 Pet. 2.25.
And the Apostle purposely omits the distinguishing and dividing particle
[some] inserting it between Apostles and Evangelists, but not between Pastors
or Shepherds (for the word is the same with 1 Pet. 2.25.) and Teachers, where
[Teachers] tells us what he means by Shepherds, as Bishop does expound Shepherd
in the other place; And there is no parallel in all the Scripture does prove
that [And] does stand for [Some.] From all which jointly considered, I
conclude, That Ephesians. 4.11. is not sufficient, pertinent, and full of power to
prove that Pastors and Teachers are by Gods institution distinct officers. And
your selves also seem so to think, when you conclude your Reply, p. 70. with
these words, So that if we do put a false gloss upon the Scripture by
misinterpreting Ephesians. 4.11. etc.



CHAP. XXIV. Whether every particular Assembly be Sion, the place of Gods
special presence.
Sect. 1. WHen I say, that every particular Congregation is not Sion, but one
of the Assemblies of Sion, Isa. 4.5. That the Hebrews which were divided into
many Congregations, are not said to be come to many mount Sions, but to mount
Sion, Heb. 12. And that the Scripture warrants not the expression of an hundred
or a thousand Sions. You reply, p. 71. That Sion was a mountain contiguous to
Moriah upon which the Temple was built, in which God vouchsafed a special
presence, and unto which the Tribes went up; and by a metonymy is frequently
put for the temple, and the people that repaired thither and assembled there,
and so for the Church of the Jews, which consisted of many assemblies, and yet
was but one Church, and the Temple was but one which was called Sion, and so
Sion was but one. But in the times of the Gospel there were to be no visible
temples where God would dwell, but the visible Church, 2 Cor. 6.16. and the
visible Church is Congregationall, not National, much less Universal, as
has been proved: therefore the Congregationall Church is Sion the special
place of Gods presence.

Rejoynd. 1. A question of names and words is of no great moment; yet in
opposition to that which is most common with Congregational men, (yea with
confessed Heretics and Schismatiques) to call each of their Congregations by
the name of Sion, which in their sense imports that it is an entire visible
church, Independent of any Ecclesiastical judicature, and that the greatest
presence of God is there to be found, and that combination of many Sions is
unnecessary, yea sinful; I truly observed, that there was but one Sion in the
Old and New Testament, and that the Scripture warrants not the expression of an
hundred or a thousand Sions. 2. The Temple is one expression, and Sion another:
the Scripture may, yea does acknowledge many temples of God, not many Sions;
every Christian is a temple, not a Sion; yet if you do betake your selves into
the temple, I will follow you thither rnd fetch you thence. 3. The visible
Church in 2 Cor. 6.16. is not called a temple; but every Christian in whom the
spirit of God dwells, 1 Cor. 3.16. yea his body is the temple of the Holy Ghost,
1 Cor. 6.20. even that body which may be joined to an harlot, which is
especially sinned against and abused by fornication, viz. his natural body (as
Christ called his natural body a temple, Joh. 2.19.) and that body which might
be unequally yoked with unbelievers, 2 Cor 6.6. one way whereof was by unequal
marriages, and of it the Apostle chiefly speaks, and not of any visible Church
or Society as such. 4. It has been showed that the visible Church may not only
be Congregationall, but National, yea that there is an universal visible
Church. And in Ephesians. 2.20, 21, 22. (which your selves interpret of the visible
Church) the Church of Ephesus is not said to be the whole city, house, or
temple, but to be built together with other Churches and Christians, and all
the building grows unto an holy temple in the Lord. Of this temple all the
Churches to which Peter writes, 1 Pet. 1.1. are living stones, not so many
living temples, 1 Pet. 2. Thus many Nations shall in the day of the Gospel be
joined to the Lord, and shall be Gods people, and he will dwell amongst them,
Zach. 2.11. so Antichrist is said to sit in the temple of God, viz. in the
Church universal, 2 Thessalonians. 2.2.4 See also Rev. 11.1. and Mr. Cotton ( Keys,
p. 56.) says, The new Jerusalem is many particular churches combined, all
which are yet but one city, one tabernacle, Rev. 21.


Sect. 2. Reply, p. 71. Yet this hinders not but that the language of the Old
Testament, when it speaks of things of the New Testament, may be used in the
Old Testament, yea in the New also, as in Zach. 14. 19. Isa. 66.20, 21. So in
Isa. 4, 5. we may as well read of the assemblies of Sion, though there be no
such thing, but each assembly is Sion; as of the feast of tabernacles, when in
the days of the Gospel there is no such thing, but it is spoken by way of
allusion; because Sion was then but one, it is spoken of as one still, and yet
it is more then one.

Rejoynd. 1. That the language of the Old Testament may be used in the Old
Testament or in the New, is not denied: yet it is considerable, if the word
Sion be read perhaps two or three hundred times in the Scriptures, and never
taken for one particular Independent congregation, as you frequently use it; if
you could find Sions in the plural number, you would judge it to be a
justification of your appropriating the word to a particular assembly, and full
as good an argument for the Congregational way, as the term [Churches] which
you say (though untruly) is not found in the Jewish church. 2. If you can prove
it to be as ceremonial, that Sion should consist of many assemblies, as that
the feast of tabernacles should be kept, and the one be as evidently abrogated
as the other, then you say something, or otherwise it is nothing. If a man
should endeavor to prove from Isa. 4.5. that the Church should be at least one
assembly, you would not sure stop his mouth with the feast of tabernacles. Now
if I allege that there shall be assemblies of Sion in the New Testament, I
suppose you can find no ceremony in the plurality of the number. 3. That there
is but one Sion, is the language, yea the constant unchanged language of the
New as well as of the Old Testament, yea when it is applied to the Christian
church; and no example there is to the contrary; but the feast of tabernacles
is not constantly, not frequently, not once (that I remember) applied to
Christian worship in the New Testament; and therefore the case is not alike,
though you make itso.


Sect. 3. Reply, p. 72. Now that there are many mount Sions, your self do
really confess. We know you hold, 1. That the Church of the Jews was called
Sion. 2. That the visible Church in the days of the Gospel is Sion; is it not
manifest therefore that you hold, that look how many visible Churches there are
in the times of the Gospel, so many Sions there are? You say the Hebrews which
were divided into many Congregations, are said to be come to one mount Sion? If
so, then the Congregation of Christian Gentiles may be called another mount
Sion.

Rejoynd. 1. All this does not so much as prove (though it confidently affirms
much more) that there is two Sions, one in the Old Testament, and another in
the New. The Jewish church and the Christian notwithstanding may be but one
Church, one Sion, though under a different state and condition. 2. I hold not
there are as many Sions as particular visible Churches; but you grossly
misunderstand my words. A believing Jew and a believing Gentile may be (you
will acknowledge) of one particular Congregation, and so of one Sion; much more
may I say, that they both may come to one mount Sion, yea many people, all
nations may flow unto it, Isa. 2.^, 3. I never said nor thought that the
Hebrews did come to one mount Sion, and Christian Gentiles to another, but all
to one. You see you are far enough from proving what you would have us believe,
that every particular assembly of Sion, Isa. 4.5. is a distinct Sion. 3.
Whereas you ask what greater absurdity it is to say there are an hundred Sions,
then to say there are an hundred or a thousand Churches? I affirm it is a far
greater absurdity; for [Churches] is a term used in the Old, as well as in the
New Testament, for particular assemblies meeting for the worship of God, as
has been showed; but [Sions] is a term not read in the Old or New Testament,
as your selves do silently confess; for though you be put upon that work, yet
you do not show it.


Sect. 4. When I ask whether you have not found God present in our assemblies?
have not you by faith closed with the promises of God in the use of ordinances
amongst us? You grant that God is present with us in our assemblies, nor dare
you deny (though you do not expressly grant it) that he has promised his
presence to us, or that you (sometimes) did by faith close with the promises in
ordinances amongst us. 2. But you assert that God is most present, vouchsafes
a special presence with his people gathered into a body, compacted together in
an instituted Congregational Church, which you call the order of the Gospel,
the way of Christ; concerning which I demand, 1. Have both of you, and your
Members, since your entrance into the Church Way, felt such a special presence
of Christ in ordinances, as none of you did before? 2. If your way be not the
way of Christ, and the order of the Gospel, is not then the conceit of a
greater and more special presence of Christ in your way, a strong delusion? As
when men fall off from your Congregations to Antinomianisme, Libertinisme,
Familisme, or but rigid Separation, they persuade themselves (you know) that
they have a greater and more special presence of Christ after they have left
you, then when they were with you. If I have solidly answered your Book (which
I leave almighty God, and ingenious impartial Saints to judge of) then your
way is not the order of the Gospel, nor the way of Christ. 3. That God might
give his presence, though there be some error, you grant, alleging Rev. 2.1.
with Rev. 2.14.20. and afterward (you say) He vouchsafes a special presence
amongst such Churches, Rev. 2.1.
So then God not only might, but he does give his presence, yea his especial
presence to such Churches as have not only some error, but gross error; for
all the seven Churches of Asia were golden candlesticks, and God walked in the
midst, viz. equally near to each of them, notwithstanding Balaamites,
Nicolaitans, Jezebelians, many that had a name to live and were dead, many that
had defiled their garments, viz. were visibly wicked, many lukewarm, etc. were
amongst them; only Philadelphia had nothing reprehensible (by which Mr.
Brightman who so long since prophesied of these times, conceives the Church of
Scotland to be typified) by the Spirit of God: will you say that all the 7
Churches were alike in the way of Christ, in the order of the Gospel? or will
you revoke your own speech, that Christ was specially present with them? Surely
if God should not vouchsafe his special presence where there are some errors,
and gross ones too, your Churches should not have it.

Sect. 5. Whereas Mat. 18.20. is alleged to prove that Christ has promised
his special presence to a Congregationall church above all other societies and
persons; I answered, 1. That Christ in that place promised his presence to
those which are not a Church, even to two or three, which will not make a
Church. 2. That faithful people, though women, whether Church Members or no,
are not to be excluded from this promise, though they make not a
Congregationall church. And 3. That Christ's presence is promised to the
Apostles, and their successors the Elders, Mat. 28.20. and to the assemblies of
Sion, or Churches jointly as well as severally, Isa. 4.5. Rev. 2.1. and 21.22,
23. and 22.3, 4, 5. To which you reply, p. 73. --


There is a figure in the number, a certain number put for an uncertain, two or
three are put for a few, the Paucity that may be in a Church shall be no
obstacle of his presence. Pareus upon these words. It is an argument that the
judgment of the Church shall be ratified, because Christ himself will be
present as supreme Judge to ratify it; it is also a general promise of the
presence of the grace of Christ in his Church, be it great or small. Now surely
(say you) we shall less doubt of our exposition, having so learned and
well-approved a Commentator to stand by us in it.

Rejoynd. 1. What is that figure, and where is it found? v. 17. or v. 20. or
both? If not both, how does it appear that the one is literal, and the other
figurative? Mr. Cotton says ( Way, p. 53.) that those two or three are not
considered as a Church-body, but as a sufficient number of witnesses to join
with the brother offended. Mr. Voyes another N. E. man says, those two or
three do refer to the Preshyterie; and so you may well doubt of your
exposition, having such godly learned Divines of your own way against you in
it. 3. I durst appeal to you, whether you would interpret two or three in v. 7.
and two or three, v. 20. after a different manner, if it were not (as you
conceive) for the advantage of your cause. 4. It is too familiar a thing with
you to allege one or two Commentators interpreting a Text thus or so, whereas
your selves know that if the controversy between you and me should be
determined by the major part of the godliest and learnedest Commentators, your
part would be nothing; nor are you ignorant that even godly men writing against
the Papists, and being then not in fear of contrary errors, did write less
cautelously then otherwise they would have done.


CHAP. XXV. Who are [without] in the Apostles sense, 1 COR. 5.
Sect. 1. I Said, that those without, of whom the Apostle speaks, were
unbelievers, Pagans and Heathens without Christ, without visible profession of
Christianity (for so I meant) and out of the universal visible Church, as well
as out of a particular Church. To which you reply, that those without, whom the
Apostle had not to do with, stand in opposition to those within the Church of
Corinth.

Rejoynd. It is harsh to say that the members of the church of Jerusalem, Rome,
etc. should be without to them that were of Corinth; or that a visible
Christian not joined to some particular Church, should be excluded out of the
universal Church. Paul, Act. 9. and the Eunuch, Act. 8. were of the visible
Church before they were joined to any particular Congregation. It Paul had
converted those women, Act. 16. which could not have been brought into an
organicall congregation, they might have been baptized and so counted within
the Church. A man may be detained by violence from joining, driven away by
persecution, incommunicated it may be unjustly, in which case he is not a
member of a particular church; it were hard therefore to say he is without the
visible church. They that are without, are opposed to any man that is called a
Brother; but all Christians in Scripturephrase are called brethren, whether
they be of the same or of several congregations, yea though one should be
unjoyned to any congregation, as Paul whom Ananias calls brother Saul, Act. 9
17. And the Apostle writing to several churches, wills them to love as
brethren, to love the brotherhood, 1 Pet. 2.17. and 3.8. Lastly, they are here
said to be without, which Paul had not to do with by judging them; but of this
more afterward.

Sect. 2. But you reply, If this exposition of yours be true, then the
judgment of the Church of Corinth did extend to the lands-end of Christianity,
to the confines of Paganism, and consequently any one Church has power to
judge any Believer in the world; for he says, Do not ye judge them that are
within, V. 12.

Rejoynd. Nothing so; for [Ye] there is to be understood of the Corinthians, as
members in part of the universal visible church, 1 Cor. 12.27, 28. Your selves
tell us, p. 65. that the Epistles do respect persons according to their
capacities; so this judging those that are within, respects only the church of
Corinth, (suppose he writes only to one church; for we would not mingle
questions, lest we should darken the light) according to her capacity, viz. You
judge all within your limits, all of the city of Corinth, the Cenchrean church
all within that town, and other Churches pari ratione and authoritate within
theirs: So ye are Gods husbandry and Gods building, 1 Cor. 3.9. that is, ye are
part of Gods husbandry, of Gods building. So, 1 Cor. 12.27. Ye are the body of
Christ, ( viz. as he immediately by way of correction does interpret himself)
Members in part. And in 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. he says, all things are yours, Paul,
Apollos, Cephas. Now Paul and Cephas were officers of all churches; his meaning
therefore is, that they are yours, viz. yours amongst others; and All things
are yours, viz. all things belong to the Universal church (of which the
Apostles were properly officers) and to you as members. And so it is no more
but this. Ye are, amongst those, that judge them that are within. So Calvin and
Beza might have written to one or two English Bishops, and said, You silence
all Nonconformists, and yet might well enough have been understood, that they
had but silenced all within their Diocesses, and other Bishops had done the
like in theirs.

Sect. 3. Reply, p. 74. Suppose the Apostle had known a member of the Church of
Corinth (whatever he appeared outwardly in the frame of his conversation) to be
indeed without God, and in a state of enmity with God; if this man had
committed a gross sin, might not the Apostle have judged such a one to be
excommunicated? and why should a Church-unbeliever be subject to the Apostles
judgment, and an Heathenish unbeliever exempt from it, if Church Membership
did not make the one obnoxious to that judgment, more then the other?

Rejoynd. 1. By your argument ( p. 36.) he ought not to be excommunicated; for
you say, Excommunication supposes men to be alive in the judgment of charity,
but such a one as is known to be without Christ, is not supposed to be alive.
2. We assert, that if he have committed some gross sin, and appear to the
Church obstinate therein, he may be excommunicated, though he be supposed to be
truly ingrafted into Christ. 3. I dare not say, that one known by the Apostle
to be without Christ, which has committed some gross sin (as heresy,
adultery, or some other work of the flesh, Gal. 5.) if he being admonished, do
hear the Church and submit himself, ought to be excommunicated, Tit. 3.10.
Mat. 18.17. A member of the visible Church, though indeed without Christ, and
so discerned by an Apostle, cannot be judged to be without Christ in foro
ecclesiastico, he appearing (as you put the case) outwardly otherwise in the
frame of his conversation. 4. I never said nor thought but a man must be within
the Church, before the Apostle could excommunicate him; yet it hence follows
not that he must be within this or that particular church, or within the Church
in your sense. Of I'resbyterian calculation I shall speak in the last Section.


Sect. 4. When I urge that the Apostle opposes fornicators of the world, and
fornicators that are brethren: You reply, that Persecution in the Primitive
times was levied against those which did join themselves to the Churches, or
otherwise visibly (as Paul at his first conversion by preaching) declared
themselves to be Christ's disciples. That the brother opposed to the fornicators
of the world, is not be that by the internal and invisible grace of faith is a
brother, and dare not ^^enly profess Christ, but a named and professed
brother. Fervicators of this world are to be understood of it as it stands in
opposition to the visible Church.

Rejoynd. The Apostle forbad them to eat not only with scandalous
Church Members, but with all Brethren (not those which are brethren only in
foro Dei and conscientiae suae, by the internal and invisible grace of faith,
whereof it is impossible the Church should take notice, De non existentibus and
non apparentibus eadem est ratio) But those that were brethren in foro
ecclesiae, did make profession of Christianity, were called brethren, and yet
were scandalous. I am not so senseless as to think that the Church was bound to
take notice of the internal, invisible, and unprofessed grace of faith in a
man's heart; why do you so largely disprove it? 2. A man may be a brother, that
is, a Christian, and disciple of Christ, (as Paul was (it is your own instance)
at his first conversion) before any such enchurching; yea every visible
Christian is so; for by priority of nature every Christian is first of the
universal visible Church, and so in that respect called a brother, and
secondarily of a particular congregation. An Heathen is not first converted
into this, or that, or the other Congregation, but first into the Church
catholic, then into this or that Congregation. Now the Apostle says not, if
any man that is called a brother, and is a member of a particular Congregation,
with such a one eat not; but you (contrary to the rule ( Non restringendum ubi
lex non restringit) say, if a man be called a brother, and be not of a
particular congregation, he is without as well as an Heathen, and the Church
has no power to censure him, nor does the Apostle forbid us to eat with such
an one. And so you make scandalous Church Membership, not scandalous
professorship of Christianity, to be the formal objective cause of our
separation and withdrawing from them.

Sect. 5. When I say, Without are dogs, sorcerers, Rev. 12.15. such as Paul had
not to do with, What have I to do, etc.? v. 12. (And yet he had to do with all
Christians by his illimited Apostolic power, whether they belong to that, or
any other Congregation, on no) such as God judges, or are loft to the
immediate judgment of God. You reply, p. 76. There might be dogs in the
Apostolic churches, as well as without, Phil. 3.2. and with such dogs Paul
had to do. A strange speech to proceed from you, who elsewhere maintain that
the Apostolic Churches did consist of visible Saints and that Paul in the
judgment of charity did think all the Philippians to be Saints, Phil. 1.7.
and if I grant that there might be dogs as well within the Churches as
without, what gain you by it? you further reply that Paul had to do with the
dogs of the Gentiles; he received a Key of knowledge to open the Kingdom of
Heaven to believers, and to bind them that would not repent and believe under
the guilt of impenitency, but Paul had nothing to do to judge (with the
judgment mentioned in this place viz. by the Ministry of the Church of
Corinth) those that were without the combination of that Church; the Apostles
had received no such Power, to judge those persons to excommunication by the
Ministry of a Church that were never in fellowship with the Church.

Rejoynd. 1. Master Cotton tells us that the key of knowledge, saving knowledge,
or (which is all one) the key of faith is common to all believers, and he
distinguishes it from the key of Power. Cot. keys p. 6.7. but it may be this
is not the key of knowledge you mean, but you have made another. 2. Paul
opening the Kingdom of Heaven to the Gentiles in case they would believe and
repent, and binding them under the guilt of impenitency and obstinacy, if they
would not repent (though you prove not that her did so bind any Gentiles) was
done by Doctrine, not by Discipline, by preaching, not by censures (of which
this 1 Cor. 5. evidently speaks.) Had Paul any thing to do to judge or censure
the Heathens to be excommunicated, which were never within the universal or
particular Church? 3, Paul had not to do indeed to excommunicate out of the
Church, them that were never in the Church; for that is impossible how can he
be excommunicated that is not within the universal visible Church, for
excommunication is a casting out of the Church, not out of the invisible Church
(for that cannot be) nor out of a particular visible Church only, but out of
the universal visible Church; as Baptism does admit into it, so
excommunication does cast out of it; and as they may be received to Baptism,
and not admitted into a particular Church, as Saul and the Eunuch; so they may
be excommunicated though they were not set Members of a particular
Congregation, but if they were never within the universal Church they cannot
be cast out of it; for that imployes a contradiction. 4. The judgment
mentioned in this place, is not the judgment of Paul by the Ministry of the
Church of Corinth (as you assert) for he does expressly distinguish them,
what have I to do? -- Do not ye judge? Paul says not what have you to do to
judge, nor what have we to do to judge, (for so it may seem that he included
the judgment of Corinth with his own) but what have I to do, etc.
Now though the Church of Corinth, could only judge those that were within her
limits (as other Churches could also within theirs) and therefore might judge
the Incestuous Person, suppose he was one of them, and lived amongst them: yet
the Apostle did deliver to Satan, Hymeneus and Philetus, without the Ministry
of any Church (that we read of) and certainly the Apostle had Power to judge
all Christians, all of the universal visible Church, whether within a
particular Congregation or no; for which I alleged the Authority of the
Elders of New- England in the marginal citation which you leave out.

Sect. 6. Reply p. 77. Such Persons (though for their Crimes they may be
subject to the judgment of the Civil Magistrate,) yet in respect of
Ecclesiastical judgment they are left to the immediate judgment of God; else
by whom shall believers not joined to any particular Congregation be judged?
why shall this Congregational, Classical, Provincial, National Church, judge
them rather then that? may they be judged by all, or any one? they stand no
more related to one then to another which are members of none at all: where
shall the fault be charged if judgment be not passed? if a Church may judge
one out of the combination, why not 1000.10000. Yet we are far from judging
those beneevers in England and Scotland, which are not joined in our way to a
particular Congregation, therefore to be altogether out of Church combination,
and not crpable of the Ecclesiastical judgment of their Churches.

Rejoynd. Every Christian is to be accountable to the Church, or Churches where
he does reside, and that Congregation, or classis of Congregations is to
receive him to such Ordinances as he is meet for, and to censure him if he do
offend (As in the time of the Law, if a man was found slain, the next city
must expiate the Murder, if the Murderer was not known, Deuteronomy. 21.1, 2, 3. or
punish him if known) for first, It is the duty of every Christian to join to
that particular Church of God, where he does reside on near unto him; and
those with whom he does reside, are to admonish him so to do. but if he shall
obstinately refuse, they may order that the brethren of those Churches should
not eat nor have familiar society with such an offender.

2. Members of that Congregation or classis of Congregations, within which an
Heretic or Scandalous man does reside, are in most danger to be infected with
Heresy or Scandal You will say, he has not consented to be of that
Congregation, and therefore is not subject to her judgment. I Answer. 1. If it
be his sin, he has not joined, then one sin cannot free another from being
censured, If a Malefactor at an Assize shall refuse to be tried by God and the
Bench, or by God and the Country, shall he therefore be left to the
immediate judgments of God? 2. It may be he has consented to it; 1. In
Parliament he and we all are included, which has set bounds and limits. 2.
He possibly was borne and baptized in it, and 3. It may be he received the
Sacrament in it, frequents prayer and preaching there; or at least, 4. he
voluntary sits down in that Parish or Vicinity, the inhabitants whereof by Law
or custom in general consent of Ministers and Members do belong to that
Congregation, and so may be interpreted to have consented in his deeds, though
in words he deny it: A Cambridge man that dwells within the City of London, does
by deeds profess he is a Londoner, though in words he may deny it; no
Christian dwelling in Corinth could escape the censure of the Church of Corinth
by pretending to be of the Church or Cenchrea, 2. If there should yet be a
question, what Congregation should judge such an offender, yet he might be
judged by a Provincial (for this is one benefit of combination of Churches) or
National Assembly; or if there were a universal council, all Christians
should be subject to its Ecelesiasticall power, whether Members of a particular
Congregation or no, and may be excommunicated upon just occasion, not only out
of particular Congregations if they be Members of them, but out of the Church
universal; for though it might be doubted to what Church this or that man does
belong; yet it can scarce be doubted in what province, in what Nation an
offender does reside, and to which he by right does belong: The Church of
Ephesus is commended for trying the false Apostles, which did not acknowledge
themselves Members of that Church (for this had been inconsistent with the aim
of Apostleship) else grievous Wolves, false Teachers might have crept in
amongst them, and drawn Disciples after them, to Blasphemy, Idolatry, etc.
without blame.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Authority of Elders.
WHen I say though Elders be not Lords over Gods heritage yet they are Leaders
and Guides, yea Shepeards, Rulers, Overseers, Bishops, Governors, and not
only Presidents of the Congregation, Moderators of her actions, or as the
fore-men of the Jury, you think your felves wronged, and express your selves
to grant, that Elders dos rule as Stewards, as Captains, as Guides, or
Leaders; and his grant is large enough; for Stewards and Captains may take or
put out Servants and Soldiers, without the others of the family or company,
intermedling by way of Power therein, yet I could have wished, you had showed
what more Power then of a Moderator or President of a Synod, or foreman of a
Jury, or Speaker of a Parliament House, practically you give the Elders in
election of Officers, receiving in of Members, or casting them out, or other
acts which are properly act of Discipline and Government; for a Moderator may
put matters to Vote, open the doors of speech or silence, advise or council
the Assembly, pronounce the sentence, keep order, etc. But why do I put you
upon this? you say they rule as Stewards and Captains, yea as Guides and
Leaders, which Titles in Scripture Phrase (in which I presume you speak) do
signify the Power of civil Magistrates Act. 23.24. Mat. 27.2. and indeed
Presbyterian Government in this sense in opposition to Praelaticall and Popular
Government you cannot deny, seeing the Scripture says, they have the Rule,
they feed and govern the flock. Heb. 13.7, 17.1 Tim. 5.17.1 Pet. 5.2. Acts
20.17, 28. The Keys (which in the Notion of them do carry Power and
Authority properly so called) are committed to them Matthew. 16.19. and Power to
remit and retain sins Joh. 20.28. and they are over the People in the Lord, 1
These. 5.12. and the Titles which are given to civil Magistrates (at least to
subordinate ones) are given to the Elders of the Church, and they (as you say
afterward) are Governors to the Church in the descending line of Power,
though thy be but Ministerial Governors in an ascending line that leads to
Christ, the only Monarch or supreme Governor of the Church.

Sect. 2. when I urge that Matthew. 20.25, 26. forbids Kingly or Lordly power in
the Ministers of the Gospel, for the two Apostles still dreaming of a Temporal
Kingdom, and being Kinsmen to Christ, did expect some temporal honor and
advancement, Christ says not there was inequality among the Priests of the
Jews, or amongst the Priests of the Gentiles, or between the Priests and the
People, but it shall not be so amongst you, but very aptly and pertinently to
their petition answers, the Princes of the Gentiles, etc. propounding himself
verse 28, whose Kingdom is not of this world for an example to them; yet had
he no intent to equal them to himself in Church Power, or other Ministers to
the Apostles, or the People to the Presbyters. You say in your Reply p. 79.
Admit that the Apostles were such babes as to imagine that Christ would lay
down his spiritual Kingdom, and take up a temporal, and that any or all of
them desired an eminency one above an other therein, yet it will not follow
that Christ speaks nothing by way of reproof of ambitious aspirings in the
Spiritual, but only in the temporal Kingdom of Christ; he expresses the
disparity betwixt civil policies, where one or more rule with Lordly Power,
and the rest are in subjection, and Spiritual policies, where Christ only
rules with Lordly Power, and one Apostle or Minister has no Authority at all
one over another, but are fellow servants.

Rejoind. 1. You must needs admit you cannot deny that they did still dream of
a temporal Kingdom Matthew. 20.21 Acts 1.6. 2. The Apostles were not such babes
as to imagine that Christ would would lay down his spiritual Kingdom over the
souls and consciences of his People; but they are babes that imagine (as you
intimate) that he could not take up a temporal Kingdom, except he did lay
down his spiritual Kingdom; for spiritual and civil Government which were
confihenti in the person of Moses, Eli, Samuel, were much more consistent in
the person of Christ, God and Man. 3. I said not, that it will follow that
Christ spoke nothing by way of reproof of ambitious aspirings in the
spiritual Kingdom of Christ; they may also be included, though ambition in
civil matters be the thing here directly and principally and intended, and I
hope the Reader by reading the whole answer in my book, which is curtel'd in
yours, will understand me aright. 4. Nor denied I that inequality of men of the
same office may be here forbidden, (save only that reason and order, if not
Scripture, do require presidencie, moderatorship) one Apostle is not to be
above another Apostle, one Elder (as such) above another Elder, etc. Yet you
cannot deny, that had Christ's main scope been to forbid inequality of the
Ministers of the Word, an instance of the inequality of the Jewish and
Gentilish Priests had been more pat then of the Gentile Princes. 5. As our
Saviors meaning was not to exclude the Apostles from being in Ecclesiastical
power above Elders, Elders above Deacons, and himself above all; so neither was
it his meaning to equalize believers in Church Power with their Presbyters, or
one Elder or the lesser part, to many Elders or the major part; and
consequently he speaks nothing against Presbyterian government, or the
government of the Church by Presbyters. 6. It may be said of Civil policies,
that one supreme Magistrate is not above another, but they are all
fellow servants. Lastly, whereas you say, page 80. That corruption of
Church Governors in an usurpation of Ecclesiastical domination, is of more
dangerous influence to the Church, then if they should usurp some branches of
Civil power. I answer, 1. What you can show to be a corruption of
Church Government, an usurpation of exorbitant Ecclesiastical domination, God
forbid that we should not abominate it: and I expect that you shall be as
willing to abhominate Anarchy, which is far worse then tyranny. These four or
five years has brought forth more blasphemies, heresies, errors, schisms,
phrensies, strong delusions proceeding from the spirit of lying and giddiness,
then four or five Ages before. And also that you should abhominate popular
usurpation of Church Government, which God did abhominate in Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram, and their congregation, and did severely punish, as also he did the men
of Bethshemesh, 1 King. 6. for but looking into the Ark. 2. To say that
Presbyteriall government implies usurpation of exorbitant ecclesiastical
domination, is a bearing false witness against the Reformed churches of
Scotland, France, Holland, etc. and tends to exasperate the Civil Magistrate
against them as usurpers of undue power. And the same may much more truly be
said of Independnt churches.



Sect. 3. When I answer, that Diotrophes being but one, was liker to a Prelate
then a Presbytery; yet S. John does not blame him simply for accepting or
having pre-eminence, or for taking upon him to answer in behalf of the Church
to which S. John writ, or for taking to him the power of commanding,
forbidding, excommunicating, but for loving pre-eminence, as Mat. 23.6, 7. for
not receiving the Apostles and brethren, and prohibiting what he should have
required and encouraged, and excommunicating such as were the best members of
the Church. You reply, 1. p. 82. Brother, a horse in the abstracted notion of
unity, being but one, is liker a Prelate then a Presbytery, which are many; but
Prelacie does not consist in unity, but in usurpation of undue unscripturall
power over their brethren. A Classical Presbytery may be as like to
Diotrophes, as a Prelate; it is alike, if not equally Prelaticall, when fourteen
or fifteen exercise a Jurisdictional power over their brethren, as when one man
does exercise it in two or three several Counties.

Rejoynd. What mean you? Brother, a horse; Its well you said not an Ass. Let
us be grave and serious. Though Prelacie do not consist in unity, yet in a
Prelate unity and usurpation meet together, so they do not in an horse. 2.
Prelacie in the most usual sense, and in the sense of our National Covenant,
is nearer to Monarchical then to Aristocratical government; so also in the
sense of the Reformed Churches, and the old godly Nonconformists, which did not
esteem Presbyterian government to be Prelatical. 3. You jump notably with the
Malignants, which say that a Parliament may be as tyrannical as a King; and
when answer is made that it cannot be thought that a Community will destroy it
self, they reply, Yes, a Representative kingdom may endeavor to destroy the
Collective, and then the power is in the body of the people, and you (mutato
nomine) say little less. And no wonder if you should (as some do) speak as
expressly against representative Civil, as Ecclesiastical judicatories seeing
many Independents have the undoubted marks of real malignancie upon them, viz.
they have as truly labored to divide the Kingdoms, to divide the King and his
people, to make divisions in Parliament, City and Kingdom, to nourish and
foment those divisions, to hinder help from Ireland, to retard the work of
Reformation, as Canterbury and Strafford did, to pick and pack Parliament Men
for their purpose, and to awe his Majesty's liege people by an Army, to the
destruction both of privilege of Parliament, and liberty of the Subject. 4.
You told us, p, 47. That you did approve of Mr. Cottons modesty, who would not
hastily censure ancient and latter Synods for putting forth acts of power in
Ordination and Excommunication. Surely now you may say (what I, when I search
and try my own ways find cause to say) Video meliora proboque, deteriora
sequor. Is the preserving the government and discipline of Scotland, preserving
of Prelacie? Is setting Presbyterian government, the reviving of Prelacie? Are
all the Reformed churches, all the old Nonconformists (save you, and the
Brownists, Anabaptists, Familists) Prelatical? Are they covenanted against, and
ought each in his place endeavor their utter extirpation? Doctor Ames says,
The Reformed Churches of France have their association and combination without
any Hierarchy: [Fresh suit against Cerem. p. 91] Which is as much as to say,
without any Prelacie. 5. May a Classical Presbytery exercise undue,
unscripturall power over their brethren, and in that capacity be as like to
Diotrophes as a Prelate; and may not a Congregation in that respect be as like
to Diotrephes as a Classical Presbytery? for she may also exercise undue
unscripturall power, as the Church of Roterodam did in deposing her Minister,
and every Congregation does, that does depute a Non-Elder to Ordain; for the
Scripture gives not a Church of believers that power; and when a Non-Elder does
ordain a Pastor, he is Prelatical in the highest degree, For first, one man
ought not to ordain a Minister, but a company, 1 Timothy 4.14. Act. 13.1, 2.2.
They that ordain Elders, should themselves be first ordained Elders, which he
is not.
Also when a Congregation without officers do exercise the power of the Keys,
she is Prelatical, yea super-Prelatical; for the Prelate by office as a
Presbyter, has some power of the Keys, which Non-Elders have not; and the
Prelate had Presbyters to assist in ordination of Ministers, and to join in
Imposition of hands, which sometimes in Congregational churches is not observed.
5. I need not tell you of some of N.E. which call their godly Ministers Baals
Priests, Popish factors, Scribes, Pharisees, Legal preachers, persecutors, and
the Church of Boston there, the whore and strumpet of Boston, as well as you
call us Prelaticall. Nor need I to tell you, that extraordinary courses may be
taken in extraordinary cases, and that some things are necessary to be done
when Reformation is in fieri, that are not fit when it is in facto esse. But I
must needs mind you, that I showed in my Epistle before the Quares, which you
pretend to answer, the differences between Prelatical and Presbyterian
government, which though you did not take so much notice of it as to transcribe
it, nor can the Reader of your books perceive that there was any such thing in
it, yet because it is safe for the Reader, it shall not be tedious to me to
repeat it, for the further clearing of that Government from the aspersion of
Prelacie. In the Prelatical government, the Prelate only called and counted
himself a Bishop, (a name common to Elders, Act. 20.17.28. Tit. 1.5.7.) he
challenged Ecclesiastical jurisdiction above his fellow-Ministers to belong to
him as a man of a higher rank, challenged to one what does belong to a
College, did not associate Congregations, but subjugate them to him, and
himself would be subject to no Presbytery; he made the Cathedral and
Mother Church superior in power to the rest: but the Presbyterian way is a
social way as between friends, confederates, brethren, where all judge, and all
are judged, all things done communi Presbyterorum consilio, where no
Congregation is above another Congregation, no Minister above another Minister,
though the major part of them (as of Congregational members, though equal one
to another) be above the minor part, where every Elder is left to enjoy the
office of an Elder, and each Congregation left to the freedom of the
Congregation in what belongs to them, and they able to perform. The Prelates
power was altogether extrinsecal to those Congregations that were under it,
they did not consent unto it, nor sent Commissioners to assist or concur in it;
but Classes and Synods are aggregates made up out of their mutual associations
into one, and do in matters of common concernment strengthen and help
particular Congregations walking according to rule, and reduce such as walk not
in truth and peace, but are leavened with error and variance. The Prelates
urged Subscription, Ceremonies, had civil power to imprison, fine; were Barons,
and so had votes in Parliament; they had their Chancellors, Commissaries,
Surrogates, Deans, Chapters, Archdeacons, Rural Deans, Proctors, Apparitors,
Singing-men, Choristers, Summoners. Their Courts were remote from many of the
people, they were expensive, oppressive by exaction of Fees; they (or some of
them) promoted Tyranny, Popery, Arbitrary government, suffered ignorant,
profane, Popish, Arminian, Socinian Ministers, which the Presbyterian
Government where it is in full strength, as in Scotland, does not.

Sect. 4. Reply p. 8. You might more properly have said that John did not blame
him simply for usurping or exercising pre-eminence; for accepting presupposes
an offer made of the thing accepted; now it is more then probable that the
Church never offered him that pre-eminence, nor if she would, had she any
such power; exorbitant pre-eminence usurped over the whole, both the Elders his
equals and the fraternity (which yet have a share and interest in the passing
of Excommunication) is here spoken of, not any lawful pre-eminence; for then a
moderate and well-tempered love of it were lawful; By the same reason that
Diotrophes is excused in regard of the materiality of his action, may the
corrupt Princes, of whom it is said, Isai. 1.23. Every one loves gifts, be
excused from their bribery and corruption. 3. You say It is probable that John
writ somewhat concerning Discipline, as the receiving of certain brethren; a
business in which the fraternity had some interest as well as Diotrophes and
the rest of the Elders, and therefore he wrote not to Diotrophes, or to the
Elders alone, but to the whole Church. But Diotrophes rises up, he alone
commands, forbids, excommunicates; and yet say you, (or else you say nothing to
purpose) be is not blamed for it. If Diotrophes were not to blame being a
particular Elder, to take upon him the power of the whole Eldership, yea and
the whole Church; why may not a brother do that which belongs to the
fraternity, an Elder do that which belongs to the Presbytery, or to the Classis
or Province, and yet blameless?

Rejoynd. 1. You grant Diotrophes was an Elder of the Church of Corinth, and is
it not probable he had a primacy of order, or some pre-eminence amongst the
Presbyters by reason of parts, or age, etc? whereunto he was chosen by his
brethren, and whereupon he made answer when John writ to the Church, as
Presidents, Moderators use to do when Colleges, Synods, Societies are writ
unto; and if so, the word accepting is not an unmeet expression. 2. That the
text speaks of an exorbitant pre-eminence usurped over the whole, you assert,
but prove not, the express words of the text are loving pre-eminence or
primacy, not having pre-eminence (the word I used) not usurping it (the word
you use.) The pre-eminence might be lawful, and yet the love of it be blamed
in Scripture, as money, pleasure, uppermost rooms, long clothing, salutations,
may be lawful, Prove. 21.17. Mat. 23.6. Mark 12.38. as your selves confess:
yea, the Prophet does not reprove Princes for receiving of gifts or rewards,
(notwithstanding your instance to the contrary) but for corrupt inordinate
loving or receiving of them. Saul did lawfully receive gifts, and they were men
of Belial that brought him none, 1 Samuel 10.27. though to love gifts or rewards,
or to receive them so as to delay or pervert judgment, be a great sin, Isa.
1.23. 3. By what logic do you conclude Diotrophes is not here blamed, ergo he
is excused from the guilt of solitary excommunication, in regard of the
materiality of the action, or he is not here blamed, therefore he is not to
blame, etc. Are all men in Scripture blamed, yea and simply blamed, (for that
was my word) for every thing in which they were to blame? 4. I indeed had no
thought of excusing him from guilt in solitary excommunication, or exercise of
any Ecclesiastical authority, (which I have publicly witnessed against, both
lately and long since) nor well know I whether he was solitary, or only
principal in that work, nor how far the Church was guilty of it: That he alone
did rise up, and command, and forbid, and excommunicate, the Scripture says
not, neither did I say it or think it, much less did I say he is not to blame
if he did so. They (for ought I know) might join with him, and yet he only be
blamed by name, as being the head of the faction, and they doing it by his
inducement and instigation, (as the rebellion of many, yea in a sort of all the
congregation of Israel, is from the principal actor called the gainsaying of
Corah, Jud. v. 12.) for how one man in the very Apostles times could
excommunicate members out of a Church so great, well gifted, and fully
furnished with officers as Corinth was, if the Elders and people had been
against him, or have hindered John from coming to them, I cannot see. Might
they not have received John, and have, some one, or all of them, writ to him to
that purpose, whether Diotrophes would or no? seeing the Elders certainly had,
and you say the fraternity also had, a share in those weighty businesses.

But possibly this was one of those false teachers which brought the
Corinthians into great dislike of the Apostle Paul their spiritual father, 1
Cor. 4.13, 14. 2 Cor. 10.1. and was of an ambitious spirit, v. 12.18. (your
selves take it for granted he was of that Church) and if so, then he might very
easily bring them into dislike of John. 5. Suppose any Church Power (which you
esteem most lawful) should have loved pre-eminence, should not have received
John nor the brethren, and have forbidden them that would, and have cast them
out of the Church, might not John have writ on this manner, and sharply have
rebuked them, without any intent on his part of reflecting upon the lawfulness
of their power, but only upon their ambitious and corrupt use of it?

CHAP. XXVII. Of Independents likeness, and unlikenesse to Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram.
Sect. 1. WHen I desire you calmly to consider whether investing Non-Elders
with Ministerial power, placing Church Power in the body of the Congregation,
complaining of the Elders that rule over them in the Lord, for taking too much
upon them; be not the gainsaying of Corah? You in the Cong-way justified, p.
38. say, Your reasons to prove our way is the gainsaying of Corah are weak; For
first, this schismatical company would utterly have taken away the Power of
Moses, and Priesthood of Aaron, and so when they had officers, would have
destroyed their officers, We only in the extraordinary case of an utter want of
an Eldership hold it fit to ordain by persons deputed by Preachers (such as
have been Ministers) as deputed, or by Elders elected.

Rejoynd. I could wish for your sakes the reasons were weaker then they are. 2.
That Schismatical company did not oppose Moses as a Magistrate, but as a
Minister, and therefore they said, All the people of God are holy; Not, all the
people of God are wise, valiant; true-hearted, which are the virtues of the
Magistrate, ( Sympsons Sermon before Parl. July 26. 1643.) And they did not
claim to rule the State, but to offer incense, Number. 16.3.5.10. Hence Aarons rod
budded, not Moses his rod. 3. That they would have destroyed their officers, is
more then I know, or you prove, only they did usurp upon the office of the
Priests: yet here you grant, that if you should endeavor to take away the
power of the Magistrate, or to destroy their officers, then you were like to
Corah indeed. 4. Your extraordinary case is now too ordinary, viz. at the
erection of each of the Churches of Independents, Brownists, Anabaptists,
Familists. 5. The case of Vzzah in staying the Arc, 2 Samuel 6.6.8. and of Saul's
sacrificing, 1 Samuel 13.9, 10, 11. might seem to be extraordinary, yet the Lord
was very angry. 6. If any Preachers do ordain that have been Ministers, they do
renounce their Ministry before they do ordain. And as for the elect Elders,
they are (when they do ordain) but persons elected to be Elders; for election
of the people does not make the officer, as has been showed. 7. That the
Church has any commission to depute a man to ordain, I read not, and Non
credimus quia. non begimus. If Corah, Dathan, and Abiram had had a deputation
from the Church of Israel to have offered incense (as it may be they might have
had) this would have made the sin of the Church greater, not theirs the
less. 8. But if you may here be excused a tanto, or a toto, yet the
Anabaptists (with whom you close too much) which ordinarily do place the power
of administering the Sacraments in disciples that are no officers, cannot be
excused.


Sect 2. Cong. way just. If placing Church Power in the body of the
Congregation, were the gainsaying of Corah; then because election of Officers
Act. 6. is a branch of Church Power, and was placed in and acted by the body of
the Church, then that Church was guilty of the gainsaying of Corah.

Rejoynd. 1. You do not answer my argument, but make a counter argument. 2.
Placing of Church- power in the Body, is undoubtedly the gainsaying of Corah,
Number. 16.3. All the Church is holy, viz. has power to do the Priests office --
Wherefore lift ye up your selves above the Church of the Lord? 3. That
election, Act. 6. was but a nomination of some officers, and a setting them
before the Apostles, who appointed them over the business, and made them
officers, and that this was an act of Church Power placed in the body of the
people, the text says not. But of this more in its proper place.


Sect. 3. Cong. way justified. It is not true that our cause allows or enjoins
complaining of the regular exercise of the power of the Elders that rule over
us; we honor and obey the Elders of our several Churches, and also the Elders
and Members deputed of several Churches meeting occasionally to rectify
disorders, etc. But for stated Classical Elderships, and your several
graduall Judicatories swallowing the Votes of the Elders of particular
congregations, Ordaining, Depriving etc. these are not Powers ordained of God.

Rejoynd. Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, did not, nor (I believe) would confess
that they did oppose any Ordinance of God, but only the pride and usurpation of
the Priests. 2. If Classical Elderships and graduall Judicatories be powers
ordained of God, as has been showed they are, then you are guilty (as you
implicitly confess) of the sin of Corah, and do resist lawful authority as
they did. 3. That which makes me to suspect your Way of this sin, is, 1. This
is a sin of the New Testament as well as of the Old, Jude, v. 11. 2. It was
not so much a sedition against Moses the Magistrate, as a schism against Moses
the Minister and Aaron the Priest. 3. They did gather a Gnedah out of a Gnedah,
a Congregation out of a Congregation, Number. 16.1. the Chaldee understands it of
taking, that is, of withdrawing of himself, saying, And Corah separated
himself; and Solomon Jarchi also expounds it, He took himself aside to be apart
from the congregation, and Dathan and Abiram also took men and separated
themselves, or Corah took them all into a distinct Gnedah or congregation, v.
5.16. Psalm. 106.17. Now who they are that plead for withdrawing, separating,
gathering themselves from a true Church into a distinct Congregation, you very
well know. 4. As also to whose opinion the gainsaying of Corah is most suitable
in the very expressions of it, All the church or congregation is holy, you
Elders take too much upon you; wherefore lift ye up your selves above the
church of the Lord? The church has the power of the Keys, the church may
depose and excommunicate (if she see just occasion) all her Elders. 5. The
authors of that Schism were no blasphemers, heretics, or fundamentally
erroneous, no adulterers nor grossly vicious any way (that we know of) but in
likelihood they were men of good report and repute; the Text says they were
famous in the church, and though they be called wicked men, v. 26. that was but
in relation to their Schism, which is a work of the flesh, Gal. 5.20. and
shows men to be carnal, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3. and the original word signifies
restless turbulent men; the Greek has it hard men. 6. That schism pretending
power and liberty (and questionless profit too; for if the Priests work might
be taken of them, why not their tithes and wages?) took mightily: for, 1. 250
Senators called to the Assembly, the Greek translates it Council, of the
Governors, Statesmen, famous and renowned, joined themselves to these
Schismatiques. 2. The Congregation, yea many doubtless religiously affected,
in the simplicity of their hearts favored them, v. 19.22.
And though God appeared in an unheard of way against them, yet all the
congregation judged that Moses and Aaron did oppose the people of the Lord,
appropriating that title to Corah and his company, as though Moses and Aaron
were not Gods people, but enemies, for which murmuring God sent a plague, v.
41. 45, 46, 47.

The Lord preserve the Parliament and people of the land from this abominable
sin, and grant that the dream may be to our common enemies, and the
interptetation to them that hate us.

CHAP. XXVIII. Whether the Church appear to be a particular Congregation. MAT.
18.
Sect. 1. IN Cong. way justified, you profess your selves to hold that the
exercise of Church Power by the Congregational church is founded upon this
text, as the observation of the Christian sabbath is upon the 4. Commandment.
I join issue with you, and observe that you grant, 1. As the 4. Commandment
did at the first promulgation of it, and afterward command the keeping of the
seventh-day Sabbath, so this Text did first send the offended party of the
Jewish church to the Jewish church, while that Church remained in power as you
acknowledge. 2. As the 4. Commandment does equally command any day in the week
(which God by other Texts does require to be kept) after the expiration of the
Jewish sabbath, so this Text sends the people of God to any Church which after
the dissolution of the Jewish church should be in strength by virtue of a
charter from heaven. 3. That he that shall affirm that the first day of the
week is to be kept holy, rather then the 7. or 6. is enjoined by the fourth
Commandment (other Texts set aside) does abuse and wrest the 4. Commandment;
so he that asserts that this Text does so prove that the Church must be only
Congregationall, not National and Oecumenicall, does wrong this Text. 4. Hence
also may be inferred, That if a day or time of the same extent was there
commanded to the Jews, and after the expiration of the Jewish sabbath to
Christians, then a Church of the same extent as was amongst the Jews, (which
was a Church consisting of subordinate Judicatories, and was National (as soon
as it was capable of being such) and in a sense Occumenicall) is here
prescribed to the Christians after the expiration of the Jewish church.
And this is as much (or more) then I intended for it; my professed work was
only to vindicate the Text from the Congregationall way, not to urge it for the
Presbyterian, as you would make the Reader to believe. If I at this time do
solidly vindicate the said text, I do as much as I desired; the chief of your
other texts on which your opinions are pretended to be built, have been and
shall be examined; Though I might spare my labor in this point; your selves
confessing that Mat. 18. does not prove that the Church must be
congregationall, which I would have persons concerned to take notice of: yet I
will give the Reader a taste of your Reply.

Sect. 2. Reply, p. 86. The sinew and strength of your reason is this. It is
necessary that the judging Church in the times of the Gospel should answer in
the manner of its judicature to the judging church in the time of the Law;
therefore the Gospel Church ought to have gradual judicatories and appeals as
the Jewish church had. The main hypothesis whereof is unsound; for it is
necessary that the Judging church in the time of the Gospel should be conformed
to spiritual precepts and patterns left us by Christ and his Apostles, and
Christ has not appointed the Jewish church to be a pattern to Gospel churches;
so then Churches of Presbyterian complexion are not here understood, for there
is a vast difference between them and the Jewish church.

Rejoynd. 1. The sinew and strength of my reasoning is not that which you
pretend; it is plain in the words to be this. If Kahal (and Ecclesia with the
70) signify the company of Elders, as well as the body of the People, and a
Church with graduate Judicatories and Appeals; then this Text does not prove
(whatsoever others do, or do not) that the Church must be a particular
Congregation as opposed to Classical, Provincial. National, etc. But the first
is true, therefore the second. And this argument is good and strong your selves
being judges. 2. It is enough for me to show that it does not conclude for the
Congregationall way, though I should not show that it makes against it, or for
the Presbyterians. The argument you propound is your own, not mine, nor would I
put the matter of it into fuch form, did I use the argument. 2. You show a
vast difference between our Churches and the Jewish; but does this prove that
the subordination of Ecclesiastical judicatories amongst the Jews was
ceremonial, or that we may not reason for it from the analogy of the Jewish
church? Anabaptists may and do render many differences between Judaisme and
Christianity, Baptism and Circumcision: and yet notwithstanding from them all
we may conclude from analogy the lawfulness of Paedobaptisme, and Christian
Magistracy. There is a vast difference between the Priests of the Law and
Ministers of the Gospel; yet the Apostle by analogy reasons from the one to
the other in point of maintenance. In things most like it is easy to find some
difference, none of your differences do clear that subordination of
Ecclesiastical judicatories was ceremonial amongst the Jews, or unlawful
amongst Christians, and therefore they are not pertinent. But what are those
differences?


Sect. 3. Reply, p. 87. 1. The Sanhedrim did not consist of chosen men sent out
by the Synagogues, but of Priests and Levites. R. If it did not consist of
chosen men, (which you say, but do not prove) yet God has appointed us to
choose men for the Synod, Act. 15.2. The Church (...) determined or ordered to
send Paul and Barnabas and certain others with them. This is as truly an
ordinance of God, as that was then. 2. That the Sanhedrim did consist of none
but Priests and Levites, you too barely and boldly affirm. It is said that
Jehosaphat did set of the Levites and Priests, and of the chief of the fathers
of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 19.8 for the judgment of the Lord, and for controversies.
You reply further, p. 87. that there was one chief by office, 2 Chronicles. 19.11.
but in the Classical way all are equal in point of office. R. The
High Priesthood was ceremonial, and therefore it must be abrogated: but that
the Sanhedrim qua a superior Judicatory, was ceremonial, is the thing you
should prove. 2. If in the Classical way all be equal in point of office, how
comes it to pass that you charge that way to be Prelatical? 3. So far as the
high Priest, Amariah, or any other was but a President of the Sanhedrim, so far
reason and light of nature, if not of Scripture, shows us that we may follow
the pattern.


Reply, p. 87. Thirdly, you reply, The Sanhedrim dealt with civil matters,
Deuteronomy. 21.5. Synods with ecclesiastical.

Rejoynd. 1. Their civil laws were divine, not drawn up by Princes or
Parliaments, but by God himself, and so as being Gods laws, the Priests were
the Lawyers and did interpret them, and tell de jure what of right ought to be
done, yet de facto the Ecclesiastical Sanhedrim did put no man to death, nor
inflict any civil punishment. 2. The rest of the things, as time, place,
statednesse, are but circumstantial, or ceremonial things (in which no one
ever said that Church Government in time of the Gospel shonld bear conformity
with the Jewish church government) or are elsewhere spoken of, and some of them
are impossible now to be had. 3. I remember when you find but one Expositor
interpreting a Text according to your mind (as p. 74.) you say, Surely we
shall less doubt of our exposition, having so learned a Commentator so well
approved of, to stand by us in the same.
Now you know we have a cloud of faithful witnesses which argue for Classes
and Synods from this text, year Mr. Cotton himself ( Keys p. 24.) Churches,
faith he, have a brotherly communion amongst themselves; look then as one
brother offended by another, and not able to heal him by the mouth of two or
three brethren privately, is to carry the matter to the whole Church; so by
proportion if one Church see matter of offense in another, and be not able to
heal it in a more private way, it will behove them to procure the assembly of
many Churches, that the offense may be orderly heard, judged, and removed. Mr.
Parker also in his Politacclesiast. l. 3. c. 24. and multitude of other
Non-conformists and foreign Divines cited by Mr. Paget in his defense of
Church Government in the Presbyterial, Classical, and Synodal assemblies, p.
44, 45, 46.

Sect. 4. Reply, p. 87. The Synagogues might be under a superior Judicatory,
for they were but parts of a Church, a Positique National church: but
particular Congregations are entire and complete Churches, and may transact all
Gods ordinances, walking in truth and peace amongst themselves.

Rejoynd. 1. What if the Synagogues were as complete and entire Churches in all
matters of perpetual and moral concernment, as particular Christian
congregations are. For, 1. there were Assemblies there. 2. Those assemblies are
called Churches, Psalm. 26.12. 3. In them was reading, Act. 15.21.
Preaching, Act. 18.20. Ruling, yea rulers, at whose request Paul preached,
Act. 13.15. Censures, as excommunication, or casting out of the Synagogue, Joh.
12.42. and 9.34. and 16.1, 2. What moral ordinance waa wanting in the
Synagogue, which was to continue in time of the Gospel? 2. That Congregations
are entire and complete Churches, you can never prove in your sense, nor that
they can transact all Church-ordinances, the contrary has been proved. 3.
Power of Church Government is not left to every or to any Nation as it is a
Nation, but to the Church, not because it is National simply, for a Provincial
or Presbyterial Church, yea a Congregational, may have power of government;
only the nearer any Church is to the Universal church, the more authority it
has, and the further off, the less.


Sect. 5. I cannot but mind you, that p. 88. you deal unjustly, 1. In that you
would make the Reader to believe, that from that single proposition, The Gospel
was writ principally for the Jews, some say in Hebrew, I conclude, that
Congregationall men do not apply it rightly, yea that the Christians that are
Gentiles may not make a right use of them. You know my purpose was only to show
the great probability of taking the word Church in Mat. 18. in the same sense
that it is taken amongst the Jews, and in the Hebrew tongue. 2. In that you
divide the argument, and then encounter with the several peeees of it, and say
of the several pieces of it, We cannot but despair of ever seeing the premises
delivered of the conclusion; and, How shall we do to get the conclusion
willingly to follow these premises?

Rejoynd. 1. Seeing you want help to make a Syllogism, and cry out, What shall
we do? it is an act of charity to direct you. Do but joint the Premises
together, put them in form, do not wrong them, strangle not the child in the
place of bringing forth, and they will very easily deliver themselves of the
genuine and natural conclusion, viz. that this Text does not prove that the
Church in the time of the Gospel must be only Congregationall, not National,
Provincial, etc. and that they which thus allege this Text do abuse it: and
this was my scope. 2. Notwithstanding this was my scope, yet by the providence
of God some arguments are couched in my answer, which imply that by the word
Church the Presbytery is meant, because he speaks to the Disciples v. 1. or
Apostles, which elsewhere are said to have the power of binding and loosing,
Mat. 16.19. Ioh. 20.23. and were not ordinary believers, but Elders, 1 Pet. 5.
See my answer. 2. That he rather meant a Church with subordination, then a
single Independent assembly, it is thus covertly argued. The notion of a
particular Congregation is not agreeable to the Jewish church, which you say is
here spoken of in the first place; but the notion of a Church with distinct
judicatories is agreeable to it: and these two arguments might incline you to
judge that he speaks of the Presbytery, and of a Church with distinct
judicatories, but in your Reply you take no notice of them.

Sect. 6. Reply, p. 89. Though this place be not understood of the people only,
no nor chiefly as they stand in opposition to their guides; yet this place may
lawfully be understood of the Congregationall church as it is contradistinct to
Classical. Provincial, National, etc, churches; because we have presidents in
the Word of God for the one, as in the Churches of Jerusalem, Corinth,
Cenchrea, etc. and rules prescribed to such a Church, Act. 6.3. 1 Cor. 5.4. c.
11, 12, 14, 16. but of any stated, Classical, Provincial, National, and
Occumenical churches, there is deep silence in the Scriptures of the
New Testament, no precept for erecting of such, and no laws nor officers
provided for churches. Christ sends the people to such a Church as has a
charter from heaven.

Rejoind. 1. You implicitly acknowledge that the word Church is not understood
only nor chiefly of the people as they stand in opposition to their guides;
then if a Church have but one guide, and he sin, can the Church proceed
against him or no? 2. You also in saying, this place may lawfully be understood
of the Congregationall church, do imply that there is no necessity it should be
so understood. 3. All these chapters are cited only to prove two presidents,
viz. that the Church of Jerusalem and the Church of Corinth were only two
particular Congregations, and we have fully cleared that the Church of
Jerusalem consisted of many assemblies. 4. Act. 6.3. will not prove the
contrary; for, 1. That meeting was for the choosing of Officers, wherein I
suppose you require not the presence of women and children, though (possibly)
others of your way do. 2. They had several tables (possibly 7. for every
Deacon one) and not one table only, v. 3. The word [table] is the plural
number: now several tables to receive the collection of one Congregation, are
neither usual nor needful. 3. How 8000. or suppose but 5000. new Converts,
and the many thousands converted by John Baptist, Christ, and the 12 Apostles,
and 70 Disciples before Christ's death could at that meeting upon the Apostles
motion all of them know the seven men, and so unanimously agree upon this new
business, without considering and consulting apart (especially seeing they
were of diverse languages) is a thing incredible: most probable it is, that the
Grecians that murmured against the Hebrews, did apart choose one or more of of
the Deacons, as suppose Nicolas the Proselyte of Antioch. 4. Whereas you name
Cenchrea, though you bring nothing to prove it was only one particular
assembly, and your men pretend that it was but a little town, I read that it
was a very well frequented populous town, most famous for the station of the
ships, and so might be large enough to contain in it many Church Assemblies, as
well as many Haven-towns in England do. 5. There are no officers appointed by
God for National churches, but the same that are for lesser churches; surely
there may be National churches without National officers, as in Scotland. The
office of a President, Register, etc. nature may teach it National Synods
(which your selves hold lawful) as well as Congregationall Judicatories. 6.
For Laws, there are some laws for Synods, whether National, Provincial, or
Ecumenical, and there are some acts of Church Government which by the laws of
Christ every particular Congregation is unable to perform, as I have formerly
showed. 7. Seeing there is deep silence in the Scripture of this Position, that
every Church must be only Congregational and Independent in opposition to
Classical, Provincial, etc. and seeing also there is a charter from heaven for
combination of Churches into Classes and Synods, and for the authoritative
power thereof; therefore they which say that Mat. 18. must needs be meant only
of the former, and cannot be rightly applied to the latter, do abuse and wrest
that Scripture. Lastly, Mr. Cotton himself says ( Keys, 47.) that the promise
of binding and loosing is not given to a particular Congregation when it is
leavened with error and variance. Ecclesia litigans non ligat, Clavis errans
non ligat.

But then a Synod of Churches or of their messengers may judicially convince
and condemn error, search out truth, determine, declare, and impose the way of
truth and peace upon the Church.

You say, a Synod must not assume authority of censuring Delinquents. Wherein
you oppose Mr. Cotton; for how can a Synod of Churches impose ways of truth
and peace upon a litigating erring Church, if she have no authority to censure
the said delinquent Church, nor any member of it, except she her self will do
it. I leave you three to consider of the matter.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the power of the Keys, in MAT. 16.19.
Sect. 1. Reply, p. 89. The power of the Keys we seat not in the people, as
contradistinguisht to their Elders, but in the whole Church by a most wise and
divine dispersion of power into the dissimilar parts of the Church; Elders have
an authoritative power, the people have a power of liberty in point of
Censures, so that reclamante ecclesia there can be no excommunication.

Rejoynd. 1. Who made these Keys, especially this key of Liberty? cannot they
that make Keys, make Locks too? If God have made these Keys, I pray show me
when and where? If the Scripture do not witness that they are true Keys, I
shall think them to be picklocks, and fit with the Popes keys to be thrown
into Tyber. 2. A Key in all men's judgments was wont to imply office and
authority; they that have no office, have no keys that I know of at their
girdle. In a family, or in a corporation or city, servants and citizens have
some liberties, privileges and interests, which yet have no stroke in ordering
the Keys in city or family. 3. Do not your selves give the people without
officers (or as distinct from them) a Key of authority? Tell me, I pray you, is
not Ordination an authoritative act, an act of government? And yet you say (
Pos. 10.) the brethren may ordain. Is not Church-admonition as a step to an
higher censure, an authoritative act, an act of government? and yet you say the
brethren may admonish their officers, yea and excommunicate them, at least
negatively, which you say is not so authoritative as the positive, but yet you
imply it is authoritative. Do you hold that Elders do receive their authority
from the Church of Believers, or no? If you do, then the Church of believers
has authority, else she could not give authority. If you do not, you forsake
your own principles. If ye hold that the peoples denial of consent (when a case
is voted) does bind the Elders, and the Elders denial of consent does not bind
the people; then the people have more authority then the Elders. If you say,
the Elders and body of Members have each a negative voice, then you make the
Church to consist of two coordinate societies, which you cannot prove by
Scripture. 4. Your speech, Reclamante ecclesia, etc. must be rightly
understood, or else it is not true: the sentence of Excommunication may be
valid in foro, though not in facto, in respect of right, though it cannot take
due effect; as an Outlawry may be good in law, though the people will not
withdraw from the person outlawed: if the people had a negative voice which
might illegitimate and disanull the act of the Presbytery, then they had
greater authority then the Presbytery. A necessity of the Members consent does
constitute Church government in a Democratical frame; in Rome, Athens, etc.
they had Magistrates, yet the government was democratical. But certainly it
belongs to the Elders, which are stewards of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor.
4.1.2. Tit. 1.7. (and not to the whole family) next under the Lord, and by his
direction, to take in and turn away servants; and Elders have full power to
baptize, upon making of a disciple, without any intervening act of the Church,
Mat. 28.19. and this power was exercised by John Baptist, Mat. 3.6. Luke 3.7.
and the Disciples of Christ, Joh. 4.1, 2. and the Apostles, Act. 2.37, 38, 41.
Act. 4. and 5. and 8. etc. no mention being made of a Church or Congregation
voting for their admission into the Church by baptism.


Sect. 2. When I answer that Peter and the rest to whom Christ directs his
speech were Apostles in office and commission though not yet sent out into all
the world; you tell us that the term Apostle is equivocall, as noting, 1. One
authorized to dispense Doctrine and Discipline amongst all Nations, Mat. 28.19.
and in this sense Peter was no Apostle. 2. As one sent out by a temporary
commission to preach and work miracles amongst the Jews only.


Rejoynd.. 1. That they were not called Apostles by Anticipation only is very
clear as any historical thing is, for the Text says, he chose, made, and
named the Apostles, Luc. 6.13. Mark 3.13. Mat. 10.1. and that he sent them,
Mark 6.7. Mat. 10.5. Luke 9.1. 2. The term of Apostle is not equivocall, for
(if your selves do not equivocate in the word equivocall but take it in a
logical sense) it importes nomen commune and diversas rations or essentiales
definitiones, so canis a dog, is an equivocal term being taken for the
dog-starre, or a living dog, or a painted dog, now sure (you know) that Peter
had more of an Apostle than the dog-starre, or pai^ted dog has of a living
dog: nor do you think I believe whatsoever you pretend that Peter was an
Apostle of one kind one while, and another while of another, that Judas was of
one kind of Apostles and Matthias of another. The Apostles without equivocation
had the same office at first, they had at last, only their limits were
enlarged? you father your distinction upon me but I own it not, Peter was
authorized to dispense doctrine and discipline any where, the Apostleship
included a general commission in it, but Christ immediately after he made
them Apostles prohibited them from going to the Gentiles or Samaritans Mat.
10.2. and so I meant, they were not yet sent out into all the world, as neither
they were long after they undoubtedly had commission to teach all Nations, nor
was James all the time of his life (that we read of) sent out into all the
world but abode in Jerusalem to his death and yet was as truly and fully an
Apostle as any of the rest. 3. The 70. which were not Apostles were sent forth
by a temporary commission to preach and work miracles amongst the Jews only,
by your definition they should be Apostles all the life time of Christ as well
as the twelve. And whereas you say, Reply p. 91, that the promise of the keys
was not made to Peter as authorized to dispense doctrine and work miracles
among the Jews, nor was be an Elder invested with authoritative power of
government, he could not Excommunicate by himself or all the rest of the
twelve with him, but must shake off the dust of his feet against them, Mat. 10.


I answer, the Apostles were then sent forth to baptize, and did actually
baptize which you acknowledge to be the work of an Elder and allowed to receive
maintenance. 2. The Apostles had authoritative power of government immediately
after they were Apostles (as also Jesus himself more fully had) though it is
not mentioned that they did much exercise it, either because the power of the
high Priest and of the tribe of Levi was not to cease till the death of Christ,
or because Christ the great shepherd was then upon earth authoritatively to
govern all his disciples, as he thought good [but indeed he himself did
neither vote in Synagogues nor in Sanhedrin that I know of) or for some other
special reason, yet when one was casting out Devils in Christ's name the
Apostles forbade him (the word imports either a forcible or authoritative
Prohibition) as the Church of Rome forbids meats, and marriages, 1 Timothy 4.2.)
Luc. 9.49. Mar: 9.38. and Christ does not blame them for taking on them to
forbid, but for forbiding what they should not. Lastly, the shaking the dust
off their feet, was a renouncing of their communion, a real pronouncing of
them to be unclean, unworthy that the Apostles should tread upon any dust of
their land, a delivery up to Gods judgment, and was only prescribed to men in
office.

Sect. 2. Reply. p. 92. The thing promised may be considered two ways: 1. As a
reward in general of grace and mercy, and so it was promised to Peter as
making such a glorious confession which he did not make as a general officer
but as a believer. I say unto thee. 2. As importing a power of opening and
shutting, and so it is promised to Peter as a believer, and in him to all those
that make the same holy confession, yet not to be executed by any under the
notion of a believer only, but imports an office or state under the capacity
whereof it was to be executed; and Christ does herein promise that capacity,
viz. that Peter should be as a member, as an Elder, as an Apostle, no believer
at this day merely as a believer though externally confessing Christ with the
mouth may have any share in executing the power of keys unless he be a
brother joined to some Church or an Elder.


Rejoynd. 1. This distinction was made (I think) for this present purpose, and
you can make more of them, if there be cause, but the Position in the
Grammatical sense of the words does not express nor imply such a thing. 2. If
the power of the keys considered as a reward of grace and mercy was promised
or given to Peter as making such a glorious confession, then it was not
profession of faith nor in churching that moved God to give him the keys, but
sincerity and sanctity whence it follows. 1. That Peter did not speak in the
name of the rest of the Apostles (for his personal sanctity and sincerity of
profession could not procure a reward of grace and mercy to them all) but by
the context it appears that he spoke in the name of them all, for v. 15.
Christ says to them not to Peter only, and v. 20. he charged the disciples
(not Peter only) that they should tell no man that he was Jesus the Christ
implying that they did know it, and Christ knew they knew it, which (as man)
he could not do without their confession of him, and this we hold against the
Papists, nor can you deny it. 2. If the keys were promised as a reward of
grace and mercy then Judas could not partake of the keys in that respect, for
to him being an hypocrite there belonged no reward of grace and mercy, 3. Nor
can any Minister or member that is not a vessel of grace and mercy, receive any
part of the power of the keys under that notion.
3. The Position imports that Christ's speech to Peter, I will give thee the
keys, etc. conceives Peter in some present capacity, and not only in a
promised capacity, for it argues that the Apostles were not considered as
general officers, because that commission was not yet given them. And Peter
and the rest did actually baptize, which does imply they were already officers,
and therefore your speech that Eldership and Apostleship were then but promised
them cannot be true. 4. The Text is so far from asserting that Peter's
church-member-ship made him capable of the execution of the power of the keys
(which you say it did) that ^ it does expressly distinguish the Church from
Peter for having named the Church, v. 18. say not And I will give to it the
keys, but I will give to thee the keys. 2. The Church here spoken of is not
any particular congregation against which the gates of hell may prevail, as
they have prevailed against Rome, Jerusalem, etc. but either the universal
visible church, or the visible church, neither of which the gates of hell can
utterly overthrow. 5. Keys in Scripture phrase do import office and authority
either Magisteriall, Rev. 1.18. and 3.7. Or Ministerial, Isay 22.22. But all
church members are not officers, and you sometimes say that unofficed men have
no authority.


Sect. 3. When I say, If the keys be given to Peter a^ a believer, then they
are given to all believers making Peter's confession whether in chuch-convenant
or no, whether church members or no, whether males or females, for a quatenus
ad omne valet consequentia: you having first granted that the power of the
keys is promised to every believer making Peter's confession though it cannot
be executed by them except they be in such a capacity of state or office. You
reply p. 93. That axiom will not hold when we speak of a sovereign Lord
acting in a transcendent way of liberty, nor of a ra^ional creature moving
according to choice and election. If one looking upon a servant as faithful,
should promise him all the keys of the house that he should open and shut to
all the rest, it will not follow that every other faithful servant may execute
that power or that he may execute it as a faithful servant.

Rojoynd. I knew well before you told me that it is one thing to promise to
give the keys to a servant because he is faithful, and another thing for
that servant to execute the power of the keys qua a faithful servant,
everlasting Priesthood was promised (as you truly allege) to Phineas because
he was zealous for God, his zeal (and especially Gods own free love) moved
God to give it him, but did not enable him to exercise the Priestly functions,
only his calling to the Priesthood did thereunto enable him. 2. That the words
in the Position [as disciples and beleevers] are to be interpreted by, because
they were disciples and believers, therefore as a reward of grace and mercy, a
further office was promised to them you strangely presume; yet your selves hold
not that God did look upon Judas (of whom the Position must needs be
understood, as well as of the rest of the Apostles) as faithful, and did
therefore promise him the keys as a reward of grace and mercy. 3. What the
opinion is of the Elders of New England out of whose book the Position seemed
to me to be taken (though I meddle not with it as such, but take it in
terminis) the Reader may see Answ. to 32. q. p. 44. and p. 49. etc. Where they
expressly affirm that church power, church government the keys are committed
to the whole Church, and that some exercise of it is in the whole Church as
distinct from the officers, yea, over the officers themselves if they offend;
and therefore I wonder that you should say in your last clause, that the Elders
of New England do not give authoritative power to the Ruled, but to the Elders,
seeing in the 22. position set down by your selves, the thrones and Crowns,
Answ. to 32. q. p. 45. are by them aleadged (as I upon supposal the position
might originally be theirs noted in the margin) to be ensigns of authority
and governing power in church members, and in your last, you assert this to be
the allegation of the Elders of New England, and that it may be they are able
to maintain it, though you by reason of your weakness dare not undertake it,
you have need to come with another distinction to reconcile your selves, and to
show how that Position can be asserted by them and yet give authoritative power
to the Elders and not to the members.

CHAP. XXX. Of Excommunication, Delivering to Satan, In 1 COR. 5.
WHen I urge, that Paul's blaming of the Believers as well as the Elders, does
not prove that they had power to put away the incestuous man; for he blames the
women that did not mourn, but were puffed up as well as the men, and yet the
women by your confession had no such power: You reply, When an Epistle is writ
to a whole Church, it does respect particular persons according to their
several capacities. Now women are not in a capacity of dispensing
Church Censures, therefore the reproof extends not to them. If things
indefinitely spoken to a whole Church, because they cannot be verified of one
who is not in a capacity to receive them, may not therefore be affirmed of
another; then, because a liberty in cutting off offenders, by virtue of Gal.
5.9.12, 13. does not belong to women, neither does it belong to Elders or
brethren.

Rejoynd. 1. Your rule is good and sound, but gains you nothing; for hence it
follows, that whosoever by Scripture rules is in capacity to administer
Church Censures, is only blamed for not dispensing them, whether Elders,
brethren and sisters, or Elders and brethren, or Elders alone; and they that
are not in that capacity are not blamed for not dispensing censures, though
they may be blamed for being puffed up, and not rather mourning. That Elders
are in such capacity, we both agree; that brethren are in it, I deny: if
therefore Scriptures do not affirm that Brethren are in such capacity, then
this place (which respects particular persons according to their several
capacities, and puts none into a new capacity) does not blame the Brethren for
not dispensing Church Censures, no more then it does blame women. You beg the
question, and take that for granted which I deny, and you should prove, and
interim you prove that which was never denied. 2. If you call cutting off of
offenders an act of liberty, I pray you what is an act of authority?

Sect. 2. When I cite Mr Cotton speaking of Paul's excommunicating alone, 1 Timothy
1.20. you leave out the citation, and would make the Reader believe it was only
my speech, and yet you do not profess to deny it, nor to argue strongly
against it, only you say, If we should deny it, we could argue probably for the
negative. R. I will not justify Mr. Cotton, at least not in that expression,
Paul did excommunicate. For, 1. as in my Answer I left it in medio, whether
Excommunication and delivering up to Satan were the very same thing or no,
propending rather to the opinion which differenceth them. So now I know not any
necessity why they should be the very same; for though every Excommunication,
Clave non errante, be a kind of delivering up to Satan, yet every Delivering
up to Satan, especially in those times, was not Excommunication. Job was
delivered up to Satan, Job 2.6. so were those that were possessed with Devils,
and yet were not excommunicated When the Apostle says, he has in readiness
to revenge all disobedience, 2 Cor. 10.6. That he has a rod, 1 Cor. 4.21. That
when he comes, he will not spare, 2 Cor. 13.2. he does not (I conceive) mean it
of sharp rebukes, or of excommunication, which were not so proper and peculiar
to the Apostle, but the Church might have done that before Paul came. 2. I will
not meddle with the question whether the Apostle might or no, did or no act in
excommunication with the concurrence of the Church; though I could answer your
arguments for the one, and bring as good or better arguments for the other. Mr.
Cotton (whom it most concerns) is able to defend himself, I leave him and you
to end this matter as you shall see cause. Of the subject excommunicating we
shall speak afterward.

Sect. 3. When I urge that the Apostle says, (...), I have judged or decreed
already as if I were present, to deliver such a one to Satan, which imports
rather that Paul himself would deliver him to Satan, then that he exhorted
them to do it. Indeed he commands them to put him away, as he writes to them to
restore him again, to see whether they would be obedient in all things, 2 Cor.
2.9. and he would have it done when they were gathered together, that the
people might behold, approve, and execute what was decreed. You reply, p. 97.
That the words may be said to import the one rather then the other, and yet in
their proper sense import neither. The Publican was justified rather then the
Pharisee, and yet the words do not positively import that either of them was
justified: And yet you have a good mind to make the Reader to believe that
Paul himself delivers him to Satan, and not the Corinthian Church.

Rejoynd. 1. You can cavil at any expression, and turn my words any way. When
in answ. to Pos. 5. I say, that the words [Church called to be Saints] do
rather of the two import, that there was a Church before there were Saints,
then that they were Saints before they were a Church; though I added by way of
interpretation of my self, that I did not maintain the validity of either
inference, you there argue against me (notwithstanding my said
selfe-interpretation) as though I had positively asserted that there was a
Church before there were Saints, and now you say of the very same phrase of
speech that it does positively import neither the one nor the other. This is
not fair. 2. Concerning the Publican, I answer. 1. You have no ground to the
contrary, but that he was justified. 2. You cannot show any place in Scripture
where the word (...) employed or expressed is so indifferent a term. 3. Most
(if not all) Interpreters conceive from that place that he was justified. 4.
Our Saviors speech following does seem to back that exposition, he that
humbles himself shall be exalted which is to be understood of true humility
and true exaltation. 5. I dare appeal to you whether the words, Matthew. 10.28.
rather fear him that is able, etc. do not positively import that we must fear
God, and whether the words John 3.19. they loved darkness more than light, do
not imply that they loved one of them, and so may that of the publican, and my
speech also.
3. The Grammatical Syntaxe of the words will best bear that Paul himself
had decreed alrealy to deliver him, and for this I dare appeal to any that has
competent knowledge of the Greek tongue, Camero, a learned Critic understands
this of some special Apostolic power, saying, the Apostles words are
diligently to be weighed for he would not or could not so speak if he spoke of
any ordinary power. 2, Unto this delivery, the Apostles presence was requisite
at least that he should be present in spirit, and that is the reason of the
phrase [as though I were present] and of that [and my spirit] v. 3, and 4. Now
the Apostles presence was not necessary to excommunication.


Sect, 4. But you urge that doubtless an accusative case importing the subject
delevering must be understood either (...) or (...) not the first, for then
probably he would have said I have delivered him to Satan and commanded the
Church to take notice of it, and abstain from him. 2. The Apostles judgment
was passed at the writing of this Epistle, and therefore his judgment was not
an actual casting of him out, but only a judgment that the Church of Corinth
should pass the judgment of Excommunication against him.

Rejoynd. 1. The words naturally and genuinely run, I have determined
already, or I have decreed already to deliver etc. and the want of an
accusative case is an argument that he spoke of himself as if I should say, I
determine to oppose error and you should say we determine to defend
Independency, or as Paul 1 Cor. 2.2. says, I have judged or determined (for
the original word is the same both there and here) to know nothing save Jesus
Christ. 2. The Apostle could not say, I have delivered him, etc. for he had
not then done it, his determination only was then certified in this Epistle,
and not the performance of it. 3. You strongly run away with a conceit that
it is granted, that delivering up to Satan and excommunication are terms
equipolent which I grant not because the propriety of the Greek phrase is best
preserved by saying Paul was determined to do the one, and the church enjoined
to do the other, for he says not I am determined to purge out the old leaven,
or to put away the incestuous person nor (says he) deliver ye such a one to
Satan, or I appoint you to deliver such a one to Satan, as he says, Purge ye,
out ye away, etc. and therefore your arguments, precedent and consequent which
are built upon this supposition are to me of no weight.


Sect. 5. Reply. p. 98. (...) notes such a transaction of an ordinance as Paul
could not do being absent, for he did nothing by proxy. Now must the whole
come together and look one upon another and imagine him to be excommunicate
because Paul had so judged him, and after this dumb show to depart, therefore
we conceive (...) must be understood as going before the word (...) and relate
to (...) according to that rule of Gramarians, etc. Si infinitivus and
Participium praecedens pertinent ad ^^ndem personam non additur accusativus
personae sed subintelligitur.

Rejoynd. 1. That the Apostles might deliver to Satan without such a public
solemn transaction, public binding and observable exemplary ejection as you
speak of, you have heard before. 2. That the Apostle did nothing being absent,
is not true, for handker-kiefs and aprons going from him did cure many that
were sick, and doubtless he might have cast out Satan as well as deliver to
Satan absent, as well as present, though he did not so usually and commonly
practice it. 3 you cannot extract out of your grammar rule that a Genitive
absolute depending on the nominative to the verb standing as it were in a
parenthesis (which being left out the sentence would be perfect) should take
away the necessary dependence which the infinitive has on the verb, and
interest the action of the infinitive in another person having no other ground,
but only Rhetorical placing by which it stands nearer to the Infinitive then
the verb does. 4. There might be good reason to require the assembling of
themselves together, though he only did deliver to Satan. 1. That the Church
might behold it and be afraid, might repent of their glorying and being puffed
up, and take heed of the same sin least they should meet with the same
punishment. 2. That there might be more shame and confusion upon the Incestuous
man's spirit, as when a Malefactor is openly punished. 3. That they which were in
capacity to dispense church censures might more solemnly excommunicate hi^. 4.
That the rest (if they also must be gathered) might give a popular consent and
approbation to the sentence, and execute it in withdrawing from him; some of
these reasons were given by me in my answer by way of prevention, but you left
them out that your objection might be more plausible. 5. If the Church of
Corinth by an extraordinary commission had been enabled in Pavl's absence of
body and presence of his spirit to deliver the Incestuous person to Satan that
cannot be drawn into ordinary imitation. 6. As for your other passages I find
you mis-aprehension of my opinion to be the ground of all or the greatest part
of your discourse, you conceive I grant that delivering up to Satan and
excommunication of the incestuous person is all one, possibly I did not so
clearly in my answer express my conceptions as I might and ought to have done,
out of a fear of multiplying questions.
Whereas you say in p. 96. The Church in 1 Cor. 5.7.4.5. is made by the holy
Ghost the subject excommunicating, I grant you that the Church in v. 7, 8. 13.
was the subject purging out or putting away (if you will) the subject
excommunicating with this proviso that as imposition of the hands of the
Presbytery is by your selves p. 96. called the concurrence of the Church in
Ordination, so the acting only of the Presbytery in excommunication may be
called the concurrence of the Church. As the whole Church, which Act. 15.22. is
said to send messengers and decrees to Antioch was in the judicial passing of
those decrees only the Apostles and Elders Acts 15.2. and 16.4. and 21.5. 3. I
assert not that Paul did command the Church to deliver the Incestuous person to
Satan, nor that excommunication was an act belonging to the Apostolic
function I know it may and ought in cases requiring it, be transacted by the
Church. I assert not that there were no other grounds of Paul's writing to them
to put away the wicked person but to try their obedience, I only say if Paul
did write to them to deliver him to (Satan as you strongly affirm) some other
way then by church-censure then the Church of Corinth was in obedience to Paul
and by his spirit to deliver him up, and every Church has not the same power,
and this was the reason of those passages Paul by Apostolic authority bids
the Colossians cause an Epistle to be read in Laodicea, etc. I grant that
whatsoever power the fraternity and the Presbytery of the Church of Corinth had
the fraternity and Presbytery of all such Churches as Corinth was has to the
end of the world, but deny that the fraternity of that or any other Church has
power to dispense church censures, and that it is that you should prove.


Sect. 4. When I say that bidding them purge out the old leaeven and put away
from them that wicked person etc, must not be understood as if Elders and
people were equally authorized thereunto, etc. You reply, p. 100. Is not this
to insinuate that the Elders of New England and Mr. Cotton affirm that the
Elders and people are equally authorized to cast out the incestuous person,
there is nothing in the place by you alleged that does import thus much, the
King for a mis-carriage in a cause may reprove the Jury as well as the Judge
and not imply that Judge and Jury are equally authorized etc.

Rejoynd. 1. The Position in the letter says, that he did reprove the brethren
of the Church of Corinth as well as the Elders that they did no sooner put him
away, implying that the brethren were to put him away as well as the Elders. 2.
The Position in the scope of it seems not to me, if I understand it, to make
any difference between the power of Elders and of Brethren: Mr. Cottons words
are, There is no word in the Text that attributes any power to the Presbytery
apart, or singularly above the rest, but as the reproof is directed to them
all, so is the commandment directed to them all, Cottons way, p. 99. You bring
in Mr. Cotton expressly giving all authority, properly so called, to the
Eldership, allotting only popular power of interest and liberty to the people.
I would suppose he does not contradict himself; and yet me thinks in his late
book called the Keys, he comes nearer to the truth then in the former called
the Way. I know not how to reconcile him, I leave it to you to do, which are
better acquainted with his manner of speaking. 3. If N. E. men may interpret
the Position, (which I conceive might be, and you assert was taken out of them)
they do hold that the Members of the Church have authority and governing power.
I will not gloss on their words or meaning, or on your distinction of
authority properly so called, and not properly so called: let the Reader judge
as he pleases, I count these unnecessary unprofitable debates. 4. Your
comparison of Elders and people, to Judge and Jury is not proper; for the Jury
is not all the County or Corporation, but only some select dozen of men out of
many, and so the Ruling Elders are liker to the Jury then all the Congregation.
2. The judgment of the Jury is a judgment (I think) of authority properly so
called; for they condemn or acquit the party in some degree, though not
completely.


Sect. 5. Reply, p. 100. And lastly, A man would think you did acknowledge that
the People in suo gradu were authorized to purge out the old leven, and put
away the wicked person, which questionless is some act of governing power; and
yet in the Catastrophe of your Discourse you wipe the Fraternity clearly of all
such acts. This is is a ridle.

Rejoynd. 1. I do acknowledge that the people, yea the women, are authorized in
suo gradu to put away the wicked persons, viz. by withdrawing from them being
excommunicated: yet sure, Women's withdrawing is no act of governing power, but
of obedience to it; for you say Women are prohibited by positive law from
having any Church Power, (though (it is said) women do exercise power in some
of the new Churches in London.) When the Steward of a family has discharged a
naughty servant, all the servants are authorized to withdraw from him, yea if
need be, to turn him out of doors. The withdrawing of people from an outlawed
person, is no part of the Judicature, or of power, but of obedience. Briefly,
he that executes an authoritative command, may be said to be authorized to that
act (as to execute a malefactor) though himself be not a governor. And so I
have read your ridle, and Oedipus may save his labor, unless he come to
observe, (but any ingenious Reader that minds the scope and drift of the
Position and of your discourse, may do it) that while you have been catching at
this or that shadow, you have not given us one solid argument to prove (what
you should prove) from 1 Cor. 5. viz. that the Brethren must concur with the
Presbytery by way of authority, or by way of power: Or unless he will judge
whether that which you put out of my answer as guilty of a grand misprision, be
guilty or no, viz. Numb. 5.2. The children of Israel are commanded to put out
of the Camp every Leper; yet the Elders did judicially make clean or unclean,
Lev. 13.3. Deuteronomy. 17.13. yea sometimes they alone did put the Leper (as Vzziah,
2 Chronicles. 26.20.) from amongst them. The allusion to the Leaven is not to be too
far strained; for every woman or child in their private house without the
consent of the Church might cast out leaven, but yet they cannot excommunicate:
The Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.31. bids them all prophecy one by one, yet our brethren
do not hold that all sanctified persons which in any place call upon the name
of the Lord Jesus, Cor. 1.1, 2. were by this precept bound to prophecy. Also
in 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. he beseeches the Thessalonians to know them that are over
them, etc. which he speaks to Believers; and not to the Elders. So when he
speaks of the acts of governing power, it is to be understood of Elders, not of
Believers.

Rejoynd. I now add, that the Priest wanted not authority to pronounce
judgment of excluding the Leper, until he had consent of the people. The
Priests alone did make him polluted or clean, viz. did authoritatively declare
him so, The Priest alone might shut him up seven days, Lev. 13.3, 4, 5, 6. and
yet all the children of Israel are commanded to put away the Leper from amongst
them, as well as the Church of Corinth is commanded to purge out the old leven,
and to put away every wicked person; though this punishment was inflicted by
many, (...), not (...), by the Elders which were many, and not by all the whole
Church in your sense.

CHAP. XXXI. Whether REV. 2.11. and 4.14. prove that Church Members have power
and authority.
Sect. 1. WHen you say, the Lord Jesus reproving the Angel of Pergamus, sends
his Epistle not to the Angel, but to the Church: I add, not to the Church, but
to Churches. And, As you gather that the suffering of corrupt persons and
practices was the sin of the Church, and not of the Angel only; so I may gather
that it was not the sin of one Church only, but the neighboring churches
(...). But this you deny. You reply, p. 101. If you should unto this inference
of the Elders add an hundred more of your own, yet this will not prove that
the Inference is injurious to the Text; for still it may be doubted whether
theirs or yours, any of them, all of them, or none of them, be true inferences
from the text. It is harsh to say John wrote to all the seven churches, ergo
not to Pergamus: if the suffering of Balaamites in the church of Pergamus was
the sin of the neighboring churches, then it may be securely affirmed it was
the sin of that church.

Rejoind. 1. Revel. 2.11. being brought to prove that the church may concur
by way of power with the Elders to cast out Balaamites according to your
opinion, because the Spirit speaks not to the Angel to whom the Epistle is
inscribed, but to the whole church; I demanded whether they held that Churches
might join by way of power to cast out the Balaamites? They denied that. Then I
said, the Text does as well prove the joining together of Churches by way of
power, as the joining of one Church with her Elders, your selves shall be
judges in this case between me and the alledgers of the Position, speak
conscionably (I pray you) may not I as well infer from, Rev. 2.11. that the
suffering of corrupt persons and practices is the sin of Churches, and that
Churches may authoritatively or by way of power concur for the casting out of
Balaamites out of the Church of Pergamus, as you or any other can infer it was
the sin of one Church, and that one Church only must concur authoritatively,
or by way of power with the Angel; have you warrant for the help of the
Independent way to vary from the text, and to turn Churches into Church, the
plural number into the singular number, and have I no warrant to keep close to
the words in opposition of it. 2. I told you in my answer that Congregational
men do deny that Churches should exercise such power, as the scope of the
Position would infer from these words that our Church should exercise with
her Elders; I plainly showed that they cannot infer the one and deny the
other as they do; now you very strangely leave out those words [But this you
deny] whereby my answer builded upon that denial does not appear to your
Reader so pertinent and strong as it is indeed. For you count it absurd, and
too like the Presbyterian way that Churches should concur by was of power to
cast out offenders out of any Church, and thither therefore I brought the
alleadgers of the Position, and there I left them. 3. Your selves do not
vindicate the inference made in the scope of the Position, but say it may be
still doubted whether theirs, or mine, or any, or all, or none be true
inferences. 4. I neither affirmed that the suffering of the Balaamites was not
the sin of the Church of Pergamus, nor that it was the sin of neigboring
Churches, but I said (and you cannot deny it to be true) that I may gather
from the text as well, that it was the sin of Churches, as of one Church, yea,
better then that it was the sin of one Church only.


Sect, 2. Reply p. 102. When you say Christ reproving the Angel sends the
Epistle to the churches, we suppose you mean the other six churches; the seven
Epistles were of immediate concernment in a distributive sense to seven
several churches; it is undeniably manifest that the Church of Pergamus was
guilty of suffering Balaamites and other wicked persons; but to have so much
faith to believe that all the rest of the six churches were guilty of
suffering Balaamites and Nicholaitans yea, even Ephesus and Philadelphia; to
prove that the seven Churches were governed by a joint and common Presbytery,
hic labor hoc opus est. But suppose such a common Presbytery and that the
Presbyters of all the other six Churches did endeavor the casting out of these
Balaamites, etc. why were they then not cast out? Could the Elders of Pergamus
over-vote the Elders of the neighouring churches in a Synod? and if all, or the
major part of the Elders of the 7 Churches did neglect, why are the Elders of
Pergamus only reproved?

Rejoynd. I pray you tell us whether the words [The spirit says to the
Churches] does prove that only one Church and not Churches are spoken to by the
spirit. 2. Whereas you suppose I mean the other six churches of Asia, and tell
of a common combined Presbytery amongst them all, Episcopal men make each of
those Churches an Episcopal Sea having other Churches under it is jurisdiction,
and you fancy to bring them all under one combined Presbytery, both which are
extremes; had I meant either of them I could have so expressed my self. I
meant only churches in the same sense that the text means, and determined not
what that meaning may be, but say once again, if it could be proved from Rev.
2.8. that the Epistle directed to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus was of
immediate concernment to one Church, then it may be thence proved that it is
of immediate concernment to churches, and sic de caeteris, v. 11.17. and one is
as clear as the other; and your selves I hope mean not to contradict the sacred
Text, whatsoever be the meaning of it. 3. Mr. Brightman a godly learned man
does conceive that each of those seven churches did typifie one or more
National Churches; for instance, Laodicea does typifie England, Philadelphia
(in which the spirit of God finds nothing reprehensible) Scotland, Geneva, etc.
each of which have several Congregationall Churches within their combination.
4. My thoughts I shall deliver in these propositions. 1. The Church of Ephesus
did consist of more congregations then one, I evince it first by the mu^titude
of believers there, Paul continuing Preaching there for the space of three
years, Act. 20.31. and God gave special success to his Ministry so that many
believed, and there were many also which used curious Arts who brought their
books and burned them before all men, the price of which was 50000. pieces of
silver, so mightily grew the Word of God, and prevailed, Act. 19.18, 19, 20.
and a great and effectual door was opened to him, 1 Cor. 16.8, 9. 2. By the
number of Elders, Act. 20.17. the term All being again and again given them v.
36, 37. Paul settled there about twelve disciples which Prophesied, Act.
19.1.6.7. and doubtless in any single Congregation many Elders and Prophets,
especially in those times of extraordinary gifts, could not find employment.
The second Proposition is, that the Church of Ephesus had but one Presbytery,
Rev. 2.1. Act. 20.17, 28. The third Proposition is, that congregations and
assemblies are in Scripture phrase called Churches; so the Jewish Church which
unquestionably was but one, is called Churches, as has been showed, and the
several assemblies were ruled by one Presbytery; and so the meaning of this
place is, that the spirit speaks not only to the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus, but to the several assemblies of the Church. As Church and city, do
expound one another, so there was but one Church comprising all the Christians
within Ephesus if they were 40000. as Church and Assembly do explain one
another, so they were many churches, 10.20.30. it may be, and your selves will
acknowledge that if this be true of Ephesus, it may be true of Smyrna,
Pergamus, etc. that they also consisted of more Congregations then one, though
perhaps it be not so evident.
5. Your large discourse to prove that the seven Churches were not under a
common combined Presbytery, is not only impertinent (for no one holds that
opinion that I know) but also in part insufficient; if it were to any purpose I
could discover the weakness of it; but I shall take notice only of your last
thing.


Sect. 3. Reply. p. 104. The sad condition of Presbyterian churches is such
that if wicked men be suffered in any congregation in the world, all the
churches in the world are guilty of it; for the same obligation that lies upon
a classical church to reform the congregation, lies upon a Provincial church
to reform the classis, upon the National to reform the Provincial Synod, upon
the Oecumenicall to reform the National; though inferior churches should
fail, the Oecumenicall should see it reformed, and if the Oecumenicall fail,
all the churches of the world are guilty.

Rejoynd. 1. That there is, or ought to be the same obligation in all respects
between all the Churches in the world, as there is between the Churches of a
Nation, Province or Classis, I never asserted (but the contrary) why then do
you let such a proposition as this go naked without any proof? What, are all
the Churches in the world guilty, if wicked men be suffered in any particular
Congregation? and does Presbyterianisme bring such guilt? Oh if you wrong it,
and the glorious Churches of God, what can you answer when they rise up against
you at that Day? 2. If the Angel of the Church of Thyatyra suffer that woman
Jezabel, God will indeed cast them that commit adultery with her into great
tribulation; but the rest in Thyatyra, as many as have not this doctrine, and
which have not known the depths of Satan, be will lay upon them no other
burden but to hold fast what they have already, Rev. 2.22.24. but you (it
seems) will lay upon them the burden of all those fornications, idolatries,
seductions, impenitencies which any of those with whom they were in communion
were guilty of, though they mourned for it, and labored to amend it, but could
not. 3. The faithful in Pergamus are said to hold fast Gods name, and not deny
his faith; and yet they had amongst them such as held the doctrine of Balaam,
and of the Nicolaitans which did not hold fast Gods name and faith, Rev.
2.13.14. Dare you say that the godly and orthodox were guilty of these
abominations, because they were comembers with them of the same church. 4. If
one of your Church be a Brownist (whose errors the five Apologists call fatal
shipwracks) or an Anabaptist (which goes beyond the Brownists) or hold some
other error, or is fit to be cast out for some sin, do you hold your selves
guilty of that error or sin, though you should do your best to reform them,
or to cast them out, and could not do it? And if a member of a particular
Church may be guiltless of the sins of his fellow members, yea of the
Churches suffering wicked men, if he do the duty of his place against them,
then why (I pray you) may not a particular Church be guiltless of the sins of
other Churches? 5. The external impediments why an Ecumenical church cannot
meet, you have heard before. If an Englishman should be taken prisoner in
Turkey, and cannot return shall he be guilty of all the misgovernment of his
family. in his absence, which he prays against, mourns for, and endeavors
what he can at such a distance to amend? Surely God will be to him a more
equal and merciful Judge. Lastly, your selves do hold communion of Churches
too for counsel, though not for jurisdiction; yea, you hold that Churches ought
to have a (...) one of another; are you thereupon guilty of all those heresies
and blasphemies that are broached by men which at first were Independents, if
you do admonish them of their error, and renounce communion with them, and use
what means you can to reclaim them?


Sect. 4. I read in Rev. 4. that four and twenty Elders distinguished from
believers, c. 7.8.11.13.14. not four and twenty Saints or members were clothed
and crowned, by which I understand the officers of the Church, alluding to the
four and twenty orders of the Priests, and the four beasts represent the
Christian churches through the four quarters of the world, alluding to the
four camps of Israel bearing in their standards the same beasts. By your
exposition, the Elders which (you say) are signified by the four beasts, are
excluded from governing power, for they sit not on thrones, nor have crowns on
their heads; Their crowns and thrones are no more ensigns of power and
authority, then their white raiment of Priesthood, (Cot, keys, p. 16.) But
they are not Priests by office; they cannot do Pastoral acts, as baptize, etc.
neither have they authority to govern: Every Christian man or woman,
Churchmember or other, has a crown, and sits on a throne, viz. is
spiritually a King and Priest to God, Rev. 5.10. Finally, governing power
properly so called you acknowledge none but in the Elders alone, 1 Cor. 12.28.
Romans 12.8. Heb. 13.17. The peoples power (you say) is more fitly called liberty
and privilege, too mean a thing to be represented by crowns and thrones.

This my answer to Rev. 4. you blot out by an Index expurgatorius; and being
justly taxed for it in my Epistle before my Quaere's, you say, That in the
copying out of your Reply for the Press, it was omitted, but whether casu or
consilio, casually or purposely, we cannot say. I pray you whom should I ask,
if you know not? You tell us how godly and able men having proved a thing by
plain texts of Scripture, do add probable ones, though more obscure.] But I
pray you where are those plain texts which do solidly prove that Church Members
are to sit on thrones, or that they have authority and governing power? You
express your selves unwilling to defend the Position by virtue of the Text, at
least in that expression, viz. of authoritative and governing power.] Why then
do you not ingenuously confess that the Text does not prove the Position? You
say, that it may be N. E. men are able to maintain it by virtue of the Text.]
Then it may be authority and governing power may be duly settled on
Church Members as distinct from officers, by Gods word. You say that the
exposition that I give in my answer seemed probable to one of you, yet upon
further inspection you have some exceptions against it, though you do not
absolutely reject it.] But if my exposition seem probable, and you do not
reject it, why do you except against it? 1. You say, the four Beasts are full
of eyes, Revel. 4.8. but you read not of any eyes that the Elders had.] I
answer, it was convenient to mention the beasts with eyes, that it may not be
thought the Churches were bruitishly ignorant; but to mention Elders with eyes
was superfluous, seeing they are men, and of the gravest and wisest of men, and
you may presume they had eyes, for the Text tells us not that they were blind.
2. You say, the four beasts do lead the 24 Elders in the worship and service of
God, Rev. 4, 9, 10. etc. 5.8, 11. Now Churches do not lead their Officers, but
Officers the Churches.] I answer, 1. The Elders are sometimes set before the
four beasts, Rev. 7.11. 2. If I should say, When the Society of Duckenfield
does communicate, the Elders do break the bread, therefore the Church of
Duckenfield does lead her Officers, you would laugh at that consequence. The
cafe is the same. When those beasts give glory and honor, (you may read, shall
give glory and honor) the 24 Elders fell down, therefore say you the Church
does lead her Officers.
3. You say, As for your allegation, Rev. 7.9, 11, 13, 14. that Elders are
distinguished from believers -- we discern not that they are any more
distinguished then the four beasts are.] I answer, You may discern more
distinction; for one of the Elders (not any of the four beasts) speaks of them
as of another sort then themselves in some respects, v. 13. (...), These are
they, not We are they, etc. 4. You say, Mr. Conon asserts some privileges of
Church Members, which are privileges of Kings wearing crowns, viz. to transact
nothing by themselves, but by their officers? 2. Their consent is requisite to
the judgments that pass in the Church.) I answer, 1. I thought that a Church,
viz. the non-officed members, had nor transacted things by their Officers to
express their royalty, but for want of authority per se to administer
Sacraments. 2. That their consent had not been a royal consent, as to Acts of
Parliament, but a popular consent. 3. No exposition can be given of the words,
but some exceptions may be made against it. 4. All your exceptions together are
not of such weight, no not with your selves, as that you da^e because of them
reject the exposition I gave. Lastly, if you do maintain the position that
Church Members have authority and governing power, you contradict your selves.



CHAP. XXXII. Of taking Christ for their only spiritual Prophet, Priest, and
King.
Deuteronomy. 18.15. Act. 7.37. Psalm. 110.4. Heb. 5.4. Isa. 9.6, 7. Rev. 15.3.

YOu profess that you do not appropriate this to the Congregational churches,
as if in these offices Christ were so only hers, that no five or six, or one
particular Saint out of Church Fellowship, no Classical, Presbyterial, or
National Church may take him for their only Prophet, Priest and King. You
condemn any that have thus expressed themselves, you call it a cup of
abomination, and say in whose sack soever it be found, let him suffer according
to his d^^^rits. Yea that all the churches of God, yea all the people of God
may deservedly condemn such, that it favors of most detestable pride and
censoriousnesse that it is a thing of greatest abhorrency to our thoughts, if
it fall on this side blasphemy against the holy Ghost.

Rejoynd. 1. The texts cited prove that Christ is a King, a Priest and Prophet,
but not that Congregational churches do only so take him. 2. You insinuate that
it may be found in the writings of some on your right hand, you may mean the
rigid Seperatists which if it be, I am sure it is found in the writings of
those that in point of government are Congregational men and Independents, and
neither Presbyterians nor Prelatists, but some of them members of your
Churches. 3. I read in one that is merely a Congregational man, viz. Mr. B.
that our Ministers and those that are converted by them do deny Christ's Kingly
Government, and that a main thing is wanting, viz. Christ's Kingly Office, and
that they refuse Christ for their only King, and other words to that effect. 4.
That this is a doctrine devised by my self, and Scriptures fixed to it to make
you odious (as you say in your last) is a most uncharitable ungrounded surmise,
and yet you are as peremptory in i^ as if you infallibly knew that never any
one of the Congregational way had ever in speech or writing vented such a
thing, I will not bring against you a railing accusation, only I say you know
not of what spirit you are, it is well if your selves be not guilty of such
practices. 5. You own the Position in terminis, and do I doubt not apply it to
your society, but as it is by me controverted (you say) you own it not: what
do ye not hold that a Congregational Church rather than a Presbyteriall does
acknowledge Christ to be the only King, etc. You say little less, when you
say, that our way (as you conceive) is not suitable to the will of God
delivered by Christ as a Prophet, nor to the Laws of Christ as King and yours
is conformed to that will and laws, but I asked you what Scripture does so
witness, and you return no answer. I dare say you cannot make your speech
good. 6. Your selves in your last, p. 36. do complain of me for such divulging
to the world the doubts of brethren wanting light. and addressing themselves to
me for satisfaction, and say it will make them tender how they seek
satisfaction from me for the future, and yet you often call upon me to name
my authors, but as the brethren were not displeased but some of them desirous
of the publishing of the first book, so I will notwithstanding all your
provocations be tender of their names as of mine own, and be willing to spend
and be spent for them, humbly hoping that (as heretofore I have been) hereafter
I more fully may be Gods Instrument for their settlement and satisfaction in
the way of God.


CHAP. XXXIII. Whether 1 TIMOTHY 6.13, 14. proves the unchangeablenesse of the
Discipline of Christ.
Sect. 1. WHen I say, it seems by the words Thou O man of God, I give thee
charge that thou keep this commandment (viz. which immediately precedes)
concerning faith and holiness in the Ministry of the Word to be directed to
Timothy himself, or if to his successors, then it must be to the ordinary
Elders (for Evangilists which succeeded him we know none) not to the churches,
for example not to the Church of Ephesus to whom Paul writes nothing of
government, though in his Epistles to Tymothy he writes almost of nothing
else, and charge the Elders to take heed to the flock and look to the wolves,
Act. 20.28. You Reply, p. 107. Do these words, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. nothing
concern Church Government?

Rejoind. Yes, in general terms, but they are not spoken to the Church as the
proper subject or party to act in, or manage government, which was the sense I
spoke in, nor do they tend to invest any but Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors, Teachers with Church Power, only they make the Church the object about
which, and for the good whereof that power is to be used, whom the Apostle
would stir up to a good esteem and profitable enjoyment of the ministerial
power, but not to assume or challenge it to, or execute it by Non-elders.

Reply. p. 107. If you will acknowledge that the things written to Timothy
concern Elders, Deacons, believers out of office according to their several
capacities, then we will grant that all the things contained in the whole
Epistle are directed to Timothy himself, but not for his own personal use,
but for the use of the Church.

Rejoynd. I expressly excluded that large and laxe sense (which you here
mention) in saying not to the Churches, not to the Church of Ephesus in
opposition to that hint (which I had good reason to suspect was in the
position) that churches in your sense, and not the Elders only are the
subjects, actors, executors in the rules given (and so you should mean speaking
to purpose) nor can I admit it, for some things in this Epistle are merely and
solely for his personal use, I mean, in opposition to the Church, and all
ordinary persons in it, as these, cap. 1.2, 3, 4.18. cap. 4.14. and cap. 5 23.
and some things are for the use of some; and not of others in the Church, cap.
2.9, 10. and cap. 3.2, 3. and 8.9. and cap. 5.2, 3, 4, 5. and cap. 6.1, 2. and
17. 2. If you mean that the things in the whole Epistle are not for Timothies
personal use, but for the use of the whole Church objective or finaliter, for
the good and benifit of the whole Church in their several capacities in and
about which they are exercised, you say the truth; but what is this to prove
that all the commandments concerning Timothy are directed to the whole Church
to be executed by her, and not by Timothy, or the officers only.

Sect. 2. Reply. p. 107. If by these words, to be directed to Timothy himself,
you mean that the commandment immediately preceding concerns none by way of
obligation but only Timothy, you beat upon a harsh string; for must none flee
these things, fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life, (by
virtue of this Text) but only Timothy? or if to his successors, then it must be
the ordinary Elders, not the Church, you mend non the matter, must Elders only,
and not believers follow after godliness, righteousness, faith, etc?

Rejoynd. 1. I might without any harshnesse or absurdity argue that the
commandment preceding concerns none by way of obligation but only Timothy
himself, or if any else, his successors the ordinary Elders, and that none are
to perform the duties of v. 11, 12. in the sense here used by virtue of this
Text but he or they; for what harshnesse and absurdity cannot it be to say
that Bishops only are to be blameless, to have but one wife, to be vigilant,
sober, etc. by virtue of cap. 3. v. 2, 3, 4. or that Deacons only must be
grave, not double-tongued, not given to much wine, etc. by virtue of v. 8, 9.
and that their wives should be grave, v. 13. though other men besides Bishops
are to be blameless, the husband of one wife, etc. for that which is spoken in
Scripture to, or of one particular person is sometimes appliable to others. 1.
When the subject matter is of common concernment, and a general duty, as Mark
13.37. or secondly, when there is a parity of persons, as what is commanded to
one as a father, Magistrate, Minister, etc. is obliging to other Fathers,
Magistrates, etc. in this sense Pastors and Elders so far as they are called
to the same public charge that Timothy was, are by virtue of this text to
follow righteousness, etc. but other Christians are obliged to the same things
no further then they are of common concernment and required of them by other
texts of Scripture. 2. That it may appear that the Apostle is here dealing
with Timothy as an Evangelist or Elder of the Church it is easily observable.
1. That some things are in this Epistle directed by Paul to Timothy for him to
convey over, communicate, and procure to be observed by others under his
charge, such are those in cap. 2.1, 8, 9. etc. cap. 3.2, 3. etc. v. 8. etc.
cap. 5.4, 5, 8. etc. cap. 6.1, 2, 17. in his laying down these things, the
parties whom the duties concern are particularly nominated to Timothy, and he
is willed to put them in remembrance of these things to command, teach, and
give them-in charge, cap. 4.6, 11. and cap. 5.7. and 6 2, 17. 2. That other
things are directed to him for himself to execute and observe in his own
person, he bearing a particular office different from, and superior to all
others in that Church of Ephesus, and that which had for its object all the
officers and members in that Church with the duties of them all, and this
appears to be the principal part, and his Instruction in this the principal
end, of this Epistle, cap. 3.14, 15. cap. 1.2, 3 4. Of these things, some are
so personal that they cannot be applied to any in that Church but himself, as
cap. 1.2, 18. and cap. 4.14. and cap. 5.23. Others are for his instruction and
excitation to the discharge of his office, as cap. 1.19.4.6, 7, 11, 12, ad
finem, cap. 5.1, 2, 3, 7, 19, 20, 21, 22. cap. 6.2, 5, 11, 12, 13, 14, 7, 20.
and although many of these for the matter of them and in part are the duty of
others and particularly of Elders, yet in a sort they are personal, and in
their formal and full consideration can be only obliging to Timothy: which may
be 'yet more evident. 1. By the singular compellations and personal addresses
to him in them, as Thou, thou my son, son Timothy, thou O man of God, O
Timothy. 2. The limiting circumstances of time and place, c. 1.3. c. 4.13. 3.
The nature of the office he was here set to execute, viz. that of an
Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4.5. 1 Cor. 16.10. by virtue of which he had a peculiar way
of performing the said duties, not competible to others, and of which none of
the rest were capable of, and therefore they could not be obliged to the acts
and rules of it as he was for whose direction this Epistle was written, c.
3.13, 14. 4. The deep and reiterated charges given him by name about these
things, without any partners adjoined to him, c. 1.18. and 5.21. and 6.13, 14,
20. which to those which then were not in being, could not formally be
delivered, nor could they with any congruity be taken hold of by, or pressed
upon others then in the Church of Ephesus. 5. Had these things as well as
others concerned all, or any besides, he would in all likelihood have ordered
him to have published the whole to all, as he does in such a case, Col. 4.16. 1 Thessalonians. 5.27. and not have directed him to impart some things in particular as
he does, c. 1.3. and 4.6.11. and 5.7. and 6.2.17.18.19. What I have said of all
that in this Epistle is spoken to Timothy by name as his duty, and of peculiar
obligation to him, may be applied to the Text in hand, and there are yet in it
some things more which may be noted as characters of appropriation to him as an
Evangelist or Minister, viz. 1. The way of expressing the command, Fight the
good fight of faith, v. 12. which agrees with what he had said, c, 1.18.19.
This charge I commit unto thee son Timothy etc. It is evident that the charge
there is the office of an Evangelist or Minister, as appears by the designment
of him to it by Prophesies, which is further witnessed by that in c. 4.14. the
executing of this office is there termed warring a good warfare, and holding
faith and a good conscience, which expression the Apostle (when he speaks of
the Ministry of the Gospel) takes up often, and seems to affect, as 2 Timothy
2.3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 9.26. 2 Timothy 4.7. and as Beza notes, Moses uses the same
metaphor, Number. 4.3. Now mind the agreement of these two places, viz. c.
1.18.19, and this of c. 6.12. and you may discern they both deliver the same
thing, and the one is a repetition of the other; As there Timothy is spoken to
by name, son Timothy, so here, Thou O man of God. There a charge is given, so
here, v. 13. There mention is made of his designment to his office by
Prophesies, so here of his calling to the same, Whereunto thou art also called.
As there the matter commanded is to war a good warfare for the custody of the
faith, so here, Fight the good fight of faith. So that as face answers to
face in water, so do these places, each to other, both looking upon the work of
the Ministry committed to him. 2. The reasons he urges him withal to this in
the same verse, Whereunto thou art also called, s^. by Ministerial vocation;
for to understand it of his calling to Christianity, common to all other
Christians, would make it of no such special force: And the words, Have
professed a good profession before many witnesses, do point at the public
discharge of his Ministry, or else may reslect upon his solemn vow made at his
ordination, wholly to dedicate himself unto, and employ his uttermost
endeavors in the service of God, as is noted in the late learned Annotations.
3. The occasion upon which, he brings in this commandment, and the charge
added, viz. the heterodoxe teaching of others, v. 3. in opposition to whose
corrupt doctrine he requires him to decline in his Ministry their errors, and
to propagate and propugne the truth. 4. The title or notion under which he is
now speaking to Timothy, Thou o man of God, v. 11. a style proper to Ministers,
2 Timothy 3.17. vid. Beza in locum, as to the Prophets in the Old Testament, 1 Samuel 2.27. 1 King. 13.1. and 17.19.
By all which it does appear (I hope) that that the Apostle is here dealing
with Timothy as an Evangelist or Elder of the Church. But say you,

Sect. 3. Reply, p. 108. It is not necessary that the words, Fight the good
fight of faith, lay hold, etc. should be understood of faith and holiness in
the Ministry of the Word, which is but one part of the good fight of faith,
the other part is fought in the universal conflict of an Evangelists
conversation against the world, flesh and devil.

Rejoynd. The words taken out or abstracted from the place where they are set,
may be stretched to more; but the restriction which I have given, if well
weighed, leave us but this. 2. If a share of this fight stands (as you say) in
an Evangelists conversation, yet still the commandment may be peculiar, an
eminency and exemplarinesse being required of an Evangelist or Minister in his
conversation as such, c. 4.12. The enemies in this fight bending themselves
more against such, then against ordinary persons, as gaining more advantage by
it if they prevail. 3. If the word faith be here understood of sides qua
ereditur, or doctrine of Christianity (as you take it in your next page) it is
more properly and directly said to be fought for by a Minister in his public
ministry, then in his life, Gal. 1.23. The Apostle delivering a Bishops part,
says, he must be one that holds fast the faithful word in teaching, (so the
margent, Tit. 1.9.) 4. If this Commandment reach to the conversation, will it
ever the more yield a bottom for a perpetual form of Church Government? You go
on, Reply. p. 408. How can these words, Fight the good, etc. drink up the whole
meeting of the words? And it may seem too gross to tear in peece-meal the
continued exhortation, v. 11, 12. and to apply the words [this commandement]
only to that in v. 12. R. But my words carry not in them a dividing between v.
11.12. nor a referring of the charge following to the 12. verse; for the words
I used, s^. faith and holiness, may comprise the whole of those two Verses:
what is there in them of commandment, which may not be reduced to these two
heads? Your bold censure of the thoughts of my heart I pass over.


Sect. 4. When I urge that [this commandment] extends not is the whole Epistle,
nor to every precept and example of Discipline in gods book, or to the whole
way of Discipline. Against this you oppose and assert, p. 109. that the words
relate to the Rules concerning Church Government in the former part of the
Epistle.

Rejoynd. Say they do, yet in so doing they relate not to the whole way of
Discipline for all Churches, not to the essentials of it (which is that you
have to make good) there being diverse parts of that Discipline, yea (as you
will upon second thoughts grant, I suppose) essentials not found laid down by
precept or pattern is this epistle. What is there in it about Excommunication,
and other censures by the people or ordinary Elders? What of election or
ordination of Elders by the people? What of Church Covenant Qualifications of
persons capable of membership, etc? You should therefore enlarge your
assertion, (which seems large enough already) and say that the Apostle relates
in these words to all fore written books of Scripture, which have any thing of
Church, government in them, or else you do not make good the Position by the
Text, nor do you prove what I required you in my answer to prove that the words
[this commandement] do extend to every preccept and example of discipline in
Gods book, which clause you answer not but with a deleatur, wherein you deal
wisely in your generation to shape my answer so as that you might better reply
to it. 2. For proof of your assertion you say, Consider the cohaerence: The
Apostle having in the former part of this Epistle insisted on the several
duties of the officers of the Church, he commands them in the later end of the
second verse of this chapter to teach and exhort these things.

Rejoynd. If we do consider the coherence, we shall find that the Apostle
had insisted most on Timothy's own duty, in which indeed other officers may
read theirs, so far as they are analogated with him in the Ministry, and
somewhat of the qualifications of the persons eligible to the offices of
Bishops, Deacons, widows, cap. 3. and cap. 5. that so Timothy might know how
to regulate in such cases. 2. You greatly and plainly mistake the text, for it
is not them that in the second verse of this chapter he commands to teach and
exhort, but him viz. Timothy; you could have wished (perhaps) it had been them,
to have brought in the several officers to a nearer interest in the charge we
are about; but the cohaerence here will not stretch to it. Thirdly, as this
[them] for all the officers is an altering of the text, so it is against sense,
and commonly admitted principles that it should be so; for who on your or our
part will grant, that all officers, even Deacons, Widows (then, as it is
held, officers) shall exhort and teach these things and that authoritatively by
this commission, not only (as you distinguish) by virtue of a gift. Fourthly,
you strangely mis-interpret the words these things teach and exhort in making
these things there; to be the several duties of the officers of the Church
delivered in the former part of the Epistle, for who so reads over the two
beginning verses of this chapter unto which this clause is the close and
epiphonema, will in one instant perceive what he means by these things, scil.
the dutys of Christian servants to their masters, which this Apostle with Peter
saw cause more then once to press, (the contrary practice reflecting much upon
the name of God and his Gospel) and therefore wills Timothy to teach and exhort
these things, yet you pass over this clear Inference of the words, and seek a
longer stretch for them, which I suppose none will follow you in, that would
not be lost in a dark labyrinth. You proceed in your coherence and say, Next
he arms him (now you come again to the right person) with instructions how he
should carry himself toward those that should teach and exhort the contrary,
v. 3, 4, 5. R. The contrary to what? To the duties of servants immediately
preceding, v. 1, 2. and not to the duty of Church Officers formerly (as you
say) laid down as you would insinuate; and if you will not yet agree to my
sense, observe the characters given of the contrary teachers in in v. 3, 4, 5.
and judge whether they have not more direct contrariety to the doctrine of
Servants duties, v. 1, 2. than to Church Officers duties, any where before in
this Epistle laid down? former argument to bear the sense I have cleared it to
have) and so may your following paraphrase on v. 11, 12. and your transition to
this text as a charge laid on Timothy as an Evangelist or Pastor. But what is
in all this tending to pitch the charge upon the matter of Church Government
situate so remotely from this passage, though treated on in this Epistle? Your
selves have found out now at length a nearer dependence for it upon a subject
of a different nature, sc. v. 11, 12. on which I shall suffer it to rest, and
take the coherence or relation of it to the rules concerning Church Government
in the former parts of this Epistle, yea in every other book of Scripture,
(which the Position supposes, and you should make to appear) to be a
mathematical, invisible, and imaginary line.

Sect. 5. Reply, p. 109. Now lest these things should be conceived of a
temporary nature, he says v. 13, 14. I give thee charge, etc. that thou keep
this commandment without spot to the coming of Christ, i.e. keep them thy
self, and deliver them in charge to the Church, and principally to the Elders,
to be kept till Christ his second coming. And so Dr. Whitaker against Duraeus
urges it.

Rejoind. 1. This clause, till the appearing of Jesus Christ, extends in some
places, as annexed to duty no further then the parties term of life, 1 Cor.
11.26. and so far as this command either points at the office of an
Evangelist, or otherwise obliges Timothy, it can extend no further; for
Timothy cannot keep that commandment, either by doing it himself, or by
charging others, any longer then his own natural life. 2. What if this charge
be taken in your extension of this clause, so far as by it any perpetual
office in the church, or duty is commanded, (and further you contend not to
lengthen it) yet if the commandment take not in the body of the Epistle, as I
have (I hope) sufficiently, and shall yet more evidently evince, it nothing
serves your turn. 3. The expounding of this clause so extensively, will make
against you, and help to prove that by this commandment, v. 14. cannot be
understood all the rules of discipline in Gods word, no not all the rules in
this Epistle; For. 1. in this Epistle many things concern Timothy's person and
office as he was an Evangelist, (which office you will grant is not now in the
Church.) Now if this commandment is to be kept in the Church in all ages, then
those many things must remain out of the verge of this commandment, and by
consequence it extends not to all particulars of discipline in the Epistle. 2.
There are some things in the Epistle about Discipline of a temporary nature
besides, as the office of widows, and their washing fee^, c. 5.9, 10. I
conceive you dare not assert that either of these are perpetually necessary
unto the second coming of Christ, and of such unchangeable obligation as you
make the words to import. 3. Some things in this Epistle are either
incompetible or unsuitable to Timothy himself, to whom this commandment and
all contained in it is given) as the Women's duty, c. 2.9, 10. the Wives duty,
c. 3.11. the Widows duty, c. 5.4.9. the Servants lesson, c. 6.1, 2. though
these things he might give in charge to them they concern, yet he could not
keep them in person, as you even now paraphrased on keeping, nor can it be
conceived that such things should be imposed on Timothy with such a deep
obtestation, either as the only, or as a principal, or as a representative
subject of them. 4. The word [this commandement] might me thinks be enough to
have kept you in from such a wide acception: Can so many things as are packed
up in this Epistle, so miscellaneous in nature, so manifold in form of speech,
commands, prohibitions, declarations, assertions, admonitions, exhortations,
instructions, consolations, all be reduced to this one word of the singular
number, (...) especially if the observation of several authors, David Heinsius
exercit. sa. in Ephesians. 6.1. Critica sacra Graeca in vocab. and apud illum alii,
do hold, viz. that (...) signifies only an affirmative precept, not a negative,
of which sort (besides those things which are not precepts at all) there are
diverse in the Epistle.



Sect. 6. Reply, p. 110. You define or describe Discipline to be the whole
System of, and comprehension of Divine rules, precepts or presidents for the
external order of the Church, which are not of a temporary, but of perpetual
use and equity till the appearing of Christ; and by essentials we mean such
particulars included in this System, as if any thing be wanting, something is
detracted from the perfect and complete order of the Gospel. But your
definitions of Discipline, and of Essentials, are throughout one and the same;
and although you make the genus of Essentials some particulars included in the
systeme of Discipline, importing there are other particulars non-Essentials,
yet in the special form and differences ye make Discipline and Essentials
equipollent; for if Essentials be such particulars of the System of divine
rules for the order of the Church, as if any of them be wanting, something is
detracted from the perfect and complete order of the Gospel; and if Discipline
be the whole system of divine rules for the external order of the Church,
which are of a perpetual use and equity, Are not these two of equal limits?
That which will admit of no detraction from the perfect order, is as
comprehensive as the whole system of such orders. 2. In these your definitions,
you implicitly contradict the Position which you pretend to defend; for it
says, The essentials of Discipline are unchangeable; importing both that some
things in Discipline are not Essentials, and that Non-essentials are
changeable; but your definitions do make all things in Discipline essential,
and of perpetual use and equity. You further say, That only persons rightly
qualified should be admitted to society in the Church, is an essential, Isa.
56.6, 7. 1 Cor. 1.1. Phil. 1.1. This in the general is not in controversy;
yet whether this or that be a right qualification is in controversy, and so an
error in an essential is contended for, and made by the erring party either by
taking in visibly false, or excluding visibly true matter.

Rejoynd. 1. You say, whether this or that; but you should have named the right
qualification, and showed it to be such, (else we are as far to seek as before)
For if it be not a right qualification, (which you do not affirm) but a
suppositious one, an Essential is not in controversy; the attributing
essentiality to that which it belongs not to, makes not that which is truly
essential to be indifferent; so that we are never the nearer for this
instance. 2. You cite three Scriptures in your margent, to prove that only
persons rightly qualified to be admitted to Church-society, is an Essential.
To which I answer, 1. to Isa. 56. It is questionable whether it speak of
Church Communion; for, 1. The Eunuchs doubtless were already in
Church Communion. 2. The sons of the stranger are said to be joined to the
Lord already, and joining to the Lord you usually interpret of being in
Church Communion by covenant, Act. 5.14. and 11.24. Jer. 50.5, 6. Zach. 2.11.
3. The Proselytes which were already in the Church, are called Levim, copulati,
adhaesores to the Lord, the very term here given to the sons of the stranger.
2. If Church Communion were unquestionably one of the things, yet your selves
dare not say that it is the principal thing here promised, for which those
qualifications are required; the chief things are, To be made joyful in Gods
house, to have our sacrifices and burnt offerings accepted, to have a name
better then of sons, etc. For the attainment of which all agree those
qualifications are required; but to conclude thence that the Church must
require all those qualifications to Church Communion, is as much as to say
whatever qualification God requires to make us capable of three or four
privileges, the Church must require them all to one, though that one be the
least and lowest, and an outward privilege which a reprobate may be capable
of, and the other inward, special, spiritual privileges proper to the elect.
3. That is a promise, and Gods promises are not the rule for such as have the
exhibition of the things promised to be guided by; meat, drink, lodging,
safety from the plague, admission to the Word, Prayer, Fasting; each good thing
is by God somewhere or other promised to persons so and so qualified, (see for
instance Isa. 33.15.16. Psalm. 91.1.2.14. Psalm. 25.8.)
Must therefore men see that persons must be so and so qualified, before they
give them meat, drink, clothes, or preserve them from the plague, or admit
them to pray, hear the word, or to fast with them? But of the qualification of
Church Members, as also of your other two Texts, I have spoken before. You
further reply, p. 110. That the members of the Church be united by a right
medium, is essential to Discipline; but whether this right medium be I know
not what implicit Covenant, or whether it be an express Covenant, or the
legal bounds of the Parish, is no small question. R. That is not an Essential
of discipline that is before it, and can be without it; but such is this union
by a right medium: union or coalition of a society must needs in time as well
as in nature precede the ordering and regulating of the said society; if it may
be called essential to discipline, yet then it is not within the Position, for
that speaks of the essentials of discipline: It is essential to discipline that
the Members should be reasonable creatures: but you will not say that this is
an essential of discipline within the verge of the Position. 2 If you know not
an implicit covenant, Mr. E. and Mr. T. will teach you, and bring in Dr. Ames
to teach you also, p. 37, 38. and see this Rejoynd. 3. Whereas you stand for
the explicit covenant to be the right medium, etc. and so essential to
discipline, let me mind you to keep to your definition of essentials, which as
ye say are such particulars in the system of divine rules, either precepts or
presidents, as if any of them be wanting somewhat is detracted from he complete
order of the Gospel: Now you having yet given neither precept nor president out
of the Script. how can you put it among the essentials? 4. None that I know do
hold that the legal bounds of the Parish are the right medium of uniting a
Church, nor that they are the necessary limits of a Congregational church,
(though the cohabitation of comembers has been showed to have ground on the
Scripture and reason, c. 2.) But say they do, I do not, cannot make those
bounds to be a medium uniting the Church; common reason says, that Puncta
terminantia non sunt continuantia. 5. Whereas you cite three Scriptures in your
margent (I suppose) for an explicit covenant: I answer, Act. 2.41. and 5.13.
speak of adding to and joining of those that had before been Jews by
profession, to the Apostles and the rest; but of joining by covenant, and that
an explicit one too, into a Congregationall church (to which the Apostles
themselves were never so joined they speak not one word. What 1 Cor. 12. should
do in your margent, you that set it there can best rell, I know not. You add,
that Ordination, Excommunication, etc. be done by the right subjectum capax of
these Ordinances, 1 Timothy 4.14. Tit. 1.5. Act. 14.23. is an essential part of
discipline. But whether Churches in some cases may ordain by deputies no
Church-Elders, or whether in an ordinary way the power must be in the Eldership
of particular Congregations, or in a compound Chassique Eldership, is a great
controversy.

Rejoynd. It had been contended by you, that the text 1 Timothy 6.13, 14. relates
to the rules of Church Government in this Epistle, and therein bottoms the
assertion of a discipline in essentials unchangeable, and to be kept till the
appearing of Christ. Now one of those rules you have about Ordination, 1 Timothy
4.14. delivered by president (a rule in your definition of discipline) and
others also cited by your in margent, Tit. 1.5. Act. 14.23. and no other way of
Ordination can you find out in the Gospel; therefore by your own confession,
Ordination to be only by a Presbytery, is an unchangeable perpetual law. 2.
That Ordination is not in an ordinary way in the Presbytery of a particular
Congregation, but in a compound Classick Presbytery, is no such great
controversy: but whether it may be, or in some cases must be, that not only
neighboring Elders should be present and advise, (which your selves require)
but also that they should anthoritatively act in Ordination, this thing is
spoken of before. 3. You may possibly hold Holy kiss, Oil, etc. lawful and
covenient, though you hold them not essential; if you do not, others are of
opinion they are ordinances of God, and do act accordingly.


Sect. 7. Reply, p. 110. The remainder of your examination drawn out into seven
particulars, though we cannot assent to every thing in them, yet we shall pass
them over, because though they were all granted, yet it may be clearly deduced
from 1 Timothy 6.13. that Christ has left but one way of Discipline for all
Churches, for these are no parts of the discipline left by Christ to the
Church, which in the essentials of it is unchangeable. Rej. You do not only
not transcribe nor answer the seven particulars, nor leave them quietly out,
but pass a scornful censure upon them: let the Reader read them, and what you
except against them in this and your last, and judge between us 2. But I pray
you, is not the office of an Apostle and Evangelist (to omit sundry other
things in those 7 particulars) a part, and an essential part of the discipline
left by Christ to the Church, 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11. and mentioned too in the
Epistles to Timothy, 1 Timothy 1.1. 2 Timothy 4.5. and yet they were but temporary,
not perpetual, though the Seekers expect such officers now also; but indeed if
Discipline were by you rightly defined a System of Divine rules which are not a
temporary nature, but of perpetual use and equity then it were impossible and
would imply a coutradiction that it should be changeable. Lastly, when I ask a
narrative of your way, especially of what you count essentialls, you answer, we
thought to have satisfied you herein, but that work is done to our hands by
Reverend Mr. Cotton; and we be are a work of the same nature by the
Congregational men of the Assembly is upon the anvile; we are not obliged to
give forth a narrative of our way more then the Presbyterians are of theirs.

Rejoynd. 1. I would you had bestowed that pains not so much for my
satisfaction (though I do desire it) as for the satisfaction of many hundreds,
and the rather because Mr. Cottons way and keys cannot both be a true
narrative; for the keys lie cross the Way, and whether of them you fully own
(if either of them) I know not; in this your Reply you question, or deny that
which is asserted in them both, and the Publishers of both of them were not of
the same judgment with the book they published. 2. As for the work of the
Congregationall men of the Assembly which you say was then on the anvile, I
wonder when it will come off ever or never, the Assembly has long long
expected it, your party has promised it, they were once made a Committee for
that end, and some made that business a pretense to excuse their not so
frequent coming to the Assembly, that hitherto (as Mr. Duraeus and Mr.
Apollonius complain of their unwillingnesse to declare their opinions) they
have refused to give up a narrative, either because any one of them is not at a
point in his own judgment, nor resolved where to fix, they having professed
to keep as a reserve, liberty to alter and retract, which if their model were
given in, they could not so fairly and honorably do; or possibly they are not
all fixed in one and the same point; possibly they cannot agree amongst
themselves (for it is easier to agree in dissenting then in affirming) or
possibly if they seven agree, some other brethren may not like it, or others
that at present are a strength to them and expect shelter from them, and they
would not discontent any party, Brownists, Anabaptists, etc. or for some other
reason which we know not but sure there is none yet. 3. For the Presbyterian
government, you have sundry books of the Scottish Discipline, of the French and
Dutch Churches, yea the Assembly has given up to the Parliament an entire
platform of Church Government which (we hope) they will at least when they are
petitioned by the Kingdom so to do, command to be printed; for my part I
shall not stick (God thereunto enabling me) to do any thing for our way,
which I desire you to do in behalf of yours, I prae, sequar.


CHAP. XXXIV. Whether a Minister may act Ministerially in another Congregation.
Sect. 1. WHen I say 1 Pet. 4.15. speaks not of the Church or of the Elders,
more then of any other men, nor meddling with the affairs of other Churches, but
with other men's matters, and such meddling for which they suffered from the
heathens in those days, Let no man suffer, etc. and is of no more strength
against the power of a Presbytery over particular Congregations then against
the power of Parliaments above other Courts: You Reply p. 112. You say true,
the place meddleth neither with the one nor with the other, nor was produced to
any such purpose.

Rejoynd. I said in my margent, the like words are found Answ. to 32. q. and
you dare not say, they are not found there. 2. As for the Position, whether it
be the same with the saying of the Elders, it makes no matter unto me, I have
at once answered all these imputations. 3. Yet surely upon second thoughts you
will clear me of doing any gross wrong to the Elders (yet though the Position
should be acknowledged to be taken out of them.) in adding to the word (...), 1
Pet. 4. because, 1. That is the only place of Scripture where that word is
used. 2. Your selves confess the Elders do allude to that place, and you
justify their so doing. 3. Either the Elders do bring this as a proof of the
Position, or they affirm it gratis without proof. 4. That they bring it as a
proof, the particular [for] does witness. 5. You may believe that this Text
was produced against the Presbytery by others, if not by N. E. men in the place
cited, and seeing you acknowledge that it can witness no such thing, I have my
full end.



Sect. 2. When I assert your Inference from Acts 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2.
supposes that the flocks mhere mentioned were two particular Congregations,
which is impossible to be proved. You reply, it supposes no such thing; only
implies that there is something in those Texts against Ministers performing
ministerial acts to other Congregations.

Rejoynd. The position speaks of a particular Congregation, and your tenet
confines Ministerial power within a particular Congregation, and pleads the
Elders restraint to the flocks in the Acts, and Peter respectively, for a
Ministers restraint to his particular Congregation; if then it be not granted
that those flocks are particular Congregations, as I said that is impossible to
be proved, so now I say, it is impossible to prove the position from them; you
know it would be a silly argument to say the Elders in Ephesus, Pontus,
Galatia, etc. are tied within their flocks of Ephesus, Pontus, Galatia
respectively, which were or might be many congregations apiece, therefore a
Minister may not act ministerially beyond his particular Congregation, and
therefore (as I suppose) when you come in your next page to argue severally
from these Texts, you put this for a Postulatum, that the flock at Ephesus was
but one Congregation. 2. If this be not taken for granted, that the flock of
Ephesus, and the other, may each of them contain several Congregations, there
is much more for a combined Presbytery to govern jointly many Congregations,
and for a Minister to act beyond the verge of a particular Congregation, then
is against either of them therein; for 1. Those at Ephesus are called one
flock, one church, as also they in Peter are called one flock; now if this one
flock was many congregations, they must needs have a medium, a way of union, or
something wherein they are one, as the same fould, pasture, guides, viz,
Church-ordinances, Pastors. 2. The Elders in both the places have a joint,
adequate, general and promiscuous charge without any parcelling or limitation,
that can import a distribution of the flock spoken of (the words [ over which]
in the one, and [amongst you] in the other place, being terms distinctive of
the flock spoken of, from other flocks not distributive of the flock into
several flocks) and in Acts 20. it is (...) take heed to all the flock, which
flock if it contained many Congregations (as you say the Inference supposetth
not the contrary) then they have a call and warant to act ministerially out of
the bounds of one Congregation.

Sect. 3. Reply. p. 112. The Texts in Acts 20.28. gives this charge. Take heed
to your selves and to all the flock, etc, their charge extends to none of them
beyond the flock over which the holy Ghost made them overseers in the work of
feeding.

Rejoynd. 1. If you mean by their charge the commission and trust which was
given them at their Ordination or admission to the Ministry, you speak besides
the book; for here it is not described, these Elders were officed and ordained
before, only here they have an occasional visit and charge upon Paul's passing
by Ephesus, and taking leave of them, which delivers to them as much as Paul
thought fit and necessary to impart to them on that occasion, as John the
Evangelist upon occasion delivered a young man (say the Ecclesiastical
stories) to a Bishop or Pastor. 2. If by their charge you mean the charge in
the Text, if that do extend no further then the flock of Ephesus, will it
follow that they may not do any ministerial act beyond the limits of the
flock?
I cannot judge so. 1 Because the Apostle is here delivering them their fixed
constant set task and duty, and therefore speaks to them under the title of
overseers or daily watchmen, not simply their whole duty, or the utmost bounds
of what they have to do, either in ordinary or occasionally, and he is urging
them to their duty with relation to their particular charge, but sets not down
their whole duty as Ministers of the Gospel. It is an error to take the
function or calling of the Ministry and a pastoral charge identically; the
function of a Minister was attributed to the Apostles and Evangelists, Ephesians.
3.7.2 Tim. 4.5. yea to Tychicus, who is for such, commended and sent both to
the Colossians, c. 4.7. and to the Ephesians, cap. 6.21. and yet neither the
Apostles or Evangelists nor (possibly) Tychicus had the pastoral charge of any
one particular Church only. 2. This is an unjustifiable way of argumentation
and denied by that known logic rule, Testimonium non valet negative.
The Elders must feed this particular flock of Ephesus, therefore they must
feed none else upon any occasion, or this text mentions not that they may feed
any other flock then that, therefore they may not in any case feed any other.
Timothy must charge some at Ephesus that they teach no other doctrine, etc. 1 Timothy 1.3. ergo he must charge none else, nor anywhere else: he must command and
teach these things, 1 Timothy 4.13. observe these things, cap. 5.21. exhort and
teach these things, cap. 6.2. keep this commandment, v. 14. he must charge the
rich that they be not high-minded, etc. v. 17, 18, 19. therefore he must
command, and teach, observe, exhort, keep, charge no other things then those
respectively: yet this is the strain of your argument here, and in your
following discourse all along.

Sect. 4. Whether there were more congregations in Ephesus, or but one, no
Elder could then, or can now feed by Word and Sacraments in a constant way any
more then one Congregation, and consequently if they feed ministerially other
congregations, they are (...).

Rejoynd. 1. If your argument be ab impossibili, and that there is a
contradiction implied in an Elders feeding more then one congregation, I must
deny it; for some Elders there were that did it, viz. the Apostles,
Evangelists, and Prophets; and I read of the Elders of some of the German and
Belgic churches, which do execute their offices promiscuously over many
congregations; ab acta ad potentiam valet consequentia. 2. If you mean your
proposition de (...), potestate of authority and warrant, that no Elder can
warran^ably feed more then one Congregation, you beg the question: the Elders
in the Apostles times taught and ruled in common, within a certain circuit
containing many congregations, as it is very probably conceived by some; and
Division of the church into congregations, and fixing particular Elders to
them, is no further off Divine institution, then Order and Edification did
first occasion, and do still require it should be so as has been said. 3. If
it be granted (what you say we grant) that Elders cannot in a constant way feed
any more then one congregation, yet if we distinguish (as your own words hint
to us) of a constant fixed quotidian feeding in all the acts of a Pastor and
Overseer, and of a feeding successive, interchangeable, occasional, and
partial, and yield your Proposition as understood of the former (which can
only be applied to the Text) and deny it if taken of the latter, what will you
gain hence? seeing you cannot conclude by this argument against a Ministers
exercising some ministerial acts sometimes in another Congregation, or his
being a Minister to several Congregations successively. 4. Your often
reiterated brand of (...), you should take from off us to your selves, and that
out of your own words and practice compared, if the work of feeding by the word
and doctrine be one principal work of the Elders; then, not those Elders which
feed by the Word whomsoever, and as often as they can, are (...); but those
which are no Elders, and take on them to feed by Word, and those who are
Elders, and hold they may not act ministerially out of their own congregations,
yet do feed by the Word (yea some in a constant way) other congregations, are
by your own rule (...).


Sect. 5. Reply, p. 113. It is more then probable that the flock at Ephesus was
but one congregation; 1. Ephesus was a city, and we do not read of more
congregations of Saints constantly meeting in any city then one. 2. The Church
of Jerusalem, Corinth and Antioch, were we think as numerous as Ephesus, yet
none of them more than one congregation: the Holy Ghost witnesses that they
ordinarily met in one place, as before was showed.


Rejoynd. 1. If it be more then probable, then it is no less then necessary:
but me thinks your selves seem to suspect your proofs will not reach to so
much, seeing you modifie them thus -- We do not read -- We cannot think. These
are but feeble props for a demonstrable conclusion, yet it behoved you to
assert this, or (as I told you now) you could challenge no leave to argue from
this Text, though you would make countenance as if this needed not, and now you
lay hold on this for a basis, but it will not stand by you: For first, your
argument a testimony negative is an inartificiall argument, and will not hold,
as was before said; if it would, we may as well say e contrary, we read not
that the Saints in any city were only one congregation. 2. You read of more
Saints residing in a city, then could constantly meet for the worship of God in
one congregation, and consequentially you road of more congregations (unless
you will say, though they could not meet in one, yet they met not in diverse,
but were uncongregated, which were to impute a great sin to them.) This has
been formerly evidenced. That the Holy Ghost witnesses that each of those
Churches met in one place, and that ordinarily, I leave you to consider.


Sect 6. Reply, p. 113. They are called one flock, one church. We have declared
that one instituted Church, and a Congregation, is all one, when Church is
properly taken; and in this place there is no necessity of a figure, therefore
the charge runs to the Elders to feed the church, viz. the congregation at
Ephesus, and to that they are so limited.

Rejoynd. 1. Those to whom Peter writes are called one flock; yet sure you will
not say that they were but one congregation; the Inscription of that Epistle,
and your own Interpretation next following, will forbid you. 2. What you have
declared before, is I hope sufficiently answered. 3. Many churches
congregationall associated or combined in one Presbytery, may as properly be
called a church as many Christians may which belong to one congregation.
I would fain see you evince the contrary, and know your meaning distinctly in
that distinction of properly and improperly, with and without a figure: you are
oftentimes pressed with multiplicity of Scripture instances for the word church
taken for more then one congregation; your distinguishing thus at random and
in general can satisfy none about these instances: Let me give you one
instance, it is in Act. 15, 22, and let me hear what impropriety there is in
[church] there, it is a Church assembled, and acting in the ordinances of Jesus
Christ, and it is not a particular congregation; your Authors as well as ours
acknowledge it to be a Synod of churches, and it is as has been said a Church
imposing burdens, making decrees for many churches, which you will not grant
single congregations may do: A church made of many particular assemblies, was a
proper term when the Jewish church stood, and in the Old Testament; how comes
the propriety in this point to be so much altered? I had thought there had been
fewer figures since, and not more: but because you will needs put a figure on
the word, when it is used otherwise then for one congregation. I pray you erect
your figure, and state what it must be; you can find none such figures, but
what will fall upon that acception which you will have to be the only proper
one; there is as much necessity of a figure in your exposition as in ours, but
it seems figures are necessary (yea and new-coyned ones too, for the old ones
will not serve) to help out your improbabilities. 4. What will the conclusion
so long looked for, be from all these premises? certainly but possible, (which
is far from probable, and further from more then probable, which it was
promised to be) for that which follows upon no necessity of the contrary, and
no improbability of the thing, will amount to no more. Your conclusion should
be, that the flock at Ephesus was but one congregation: but this has so little
strength in the premises, that you have thought good to set it aside, and only
to join the Church at Ephesus and the Congregation at Ephesus together with a
Viz. presuming that they are both one in the Text, but not proving it. After
all this feeble or fallacious dealing, you in the close of all bring in, [ And
to that they are so limited] whereas if the former assertion of Ephesus being
one Congregation had followed soundly on your pre^^s^^, yet this had still been
in controversy: so that here you doubly commit that grand solaecisme in
argumentation, of putting more in the conclusion then was in the premises.

Sect. 7. Reply, p. 113. Flock in 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. is to be taken figuratively
and distributively of necessity, and the charge of feeding the flock is to be
limited by the words [amongst you] and thus it must be understood -- You Elders
in Pontus, feed the flock amongst you, and you Elders of Galatia amongst you,
and each in every place feed the flock where you be. And yet more
distributively -- Ye Elders in this city, feed the flock among you, and ye
Elders in that city, feed the flock amongst you. Now the Saints in Galatia were
not with the Elders of Asia, nor the Saints of one city with the Elders of
another city; therefore the Elders were by commission to look to the Saints in
every city and place where themselves were, and not to others where they were
not; if they should take authoritative inspection over other Saints, they
should be (...), because all Elders are bounded to the Saints amongst
themselves.

Rejoynd. 1. This is an ill compacted argument (if you did intend it for one)
and may thus be taken off. 1. This touches nothing the binding of a Minister
to one congregation, but only insists on a tie to one city or region inclusive
of many congregations; Galatia had churches in it, Gal. 1.1. and so had Asia,
Rev. 1.11. 2. This offers not to confine him in all acts to that place, but
only in authoritative inspection, (it is your own word) which can mean no more
then administration of discipline. 3. This reaches no further then to a
limitation of him in those acts to that place while he is there present (which
is natural and necessary ex part adjecti) ^o that if he should thence remove,
or but travel for a few days to another city or country, he might (as this
argument runs) ye^ he ought to feed the flock in each place where he is. 2.
Whereas you say the word [flo^k] is to be taken distributively, and to be
limited by the words [amongst you] let me ask, if it be distributive, how can
it be limited? The words [amongst you] are more properly distinctive then
distributive, and point out what flock he charge them to feed. 3. You cannot
prove that this charge is the commission of the Elders (as you call it) nor a
full recit^^ thereof, but a charge insisting on some part of the Ministers
duty, viz. of feeding or overseeing. 4. When you say the Elders must (...) look
to the Saints in other cities or places where themselves were not, you condemn
your own practice of Allotriepiscopacy, in that you gather and constitute your
Churches of Members dwelling in several towns and countries many miles distant
one from another, and from your Elders. Thus this term you so often bandy,
rebounds to your selves still. 5. Whereas you say that all Elders are bounded,
etc. I demand, was not the Apostle himself an Elder? as v. 1. and might there
not be within the circuit of those countries mentioned c. 1.1. other Apostles
and Evangelists amongst them either in Pontus or Asia etc? and will you say
these also were so bounded by this Scripture?

Sect. 8. You go on to overthrow my exceptions against the Positions, arguing a
testimonio negative laid in by two instances. A Communicant must examine
himself; will you thence infer that none else must examine him? (You change
this word [him] into [himselfe] which change alters the sense, and fits it to
be more liable to your answer.) The Theslalonians are to know them that were
over them, and labored amongst them, and esteem them very highly in love for
their works sake, therefore they must not hear or at least not esteem highly
for their works sake the Pastors of other congregations, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12.13. and,
Reply, p. 114. Your reasoning is not good nor candid in comparing things
disparate; you argue from works of common Christian duty, unto works of office
very improperly.

Rejoynd. Disparate things may be compared in their common or genericall
nature, wherein they agree. 2. I do not argue so improperly as you charge me to
do; I bring in those instances as examples of the like way of arguing to yours,
to demonstrate the invalidity of the form of your argument, and therein I do
not transire a genere ad genus, but instance in relative duties of Pastor and
People, such as your argument proceeds upon; they are thus, if drawn out a
little large. A Pastor is to examine his Communicants: this by your arguing
will not hold; for a Communicant must examine himself, therefore none else may
examine him. Again, The Pastors of other Congregations are to be esteemed very
highly, etc. But this according to you will not hold; for the Thessalonians
were to know them that were over them, etc. and to esteem them very highly,
therefore they must not esteem other Pastors. These are bad inferences, it is
true, but they are of the nature of yours, and I brought them to evince yours
to be bad. 3. Suppose I had instanced in duties of a genericall nature, yet a
negative argument fetched a testimonio will stand no more in them, then in
relative duties. You further reply. --


The Parliament writes to the Colonels of Lancashire, to govern well the
soldiers and people amongst them, therefore they are not to govern the people
and soldiers of Cheshire; this inference is good. But the Colonels of
Lancashire must agree amongst themselves, must they not therefore agree with
the Colonels of Cheshire? The soldiers and people of Lancashire must honor
their own Commanders, therefore they must not honor other Commanders; this is
weak argumentation.

Rejoynd. Surely all these arguments are alike to him that knows what an
argument is, they are all irregular, and serve rather to overthrow one another,
then to prove any thing, in as much as they run from a positive rule
negatively; all the difference amongst them is, the first has veritatem
consequentis, happens to have the consequent Proposition true, which the other
has not, there is in none of them verit as consequentiae, if they be truths
they are not rightly inferred; For, because the Colonels in Lancashire are to
rule in Lancashire, it does not thence follow that they are not to rule in
Cheshire, unless it had been said in the Antecedent they are to rule only in
Lancashire. Apply now to the case, and see what you get by your newdevised
examples. To make an end once with this obvious fallacy; whether you pitch
upon precepts of a common nature or of office, a positive rule applied to a
definite object will not limit the duty as solely appertaining to that object,
unless the object expressed be adequate to the act or office. (Now whether it be
so in the Text now in agitation, whether the flock intended be the adequate
object of the office of feeding, is the thing in controversy.) The Lord says.
Judge the fatherless, plead for the widow, Isa. 1.17. must they therefore
judge, plead for no rank of people else? Defend the poor and fatherless, do
justice to the afflicted and needy, says God to Judges, Psalm. 82.3. must they
defend, do justice therefore to none else? Timothy must give attendance to
reading, exhortation, and doctrine, 1 Timothy 4.13. must therefore he attend to
nothing else? Parents must bring up their children in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord, 1 Timothy 6.2. must therefore they bring up none else but
their children? Christians must distribute to the necessity of the Saints, Romans
12.13. must they therefore do good, distribute to none else? No argument can be
weaker to ordinary understandings; yet such is both that which you take to
defend, and that wherewith you defend it.

Sect. 9. When I urge that, taking heed to the flock, and feeding it does
include administration of the Word and Prayer, which you confess may be done
in another congregation, you reply p. 115. Your self does not place a parity in
all these. You will preach to the Heathens as heathens, and not give the
Sacrament to them; you may preach before Ordination, for approbation; you may
preach to a congregation in Scotland, and yet not act authoritatively in their
Synods.

Rejoynd. There may be a disparity in all these, and yet not grounded on the
reason you render, but it comes to pass (as I understand) thus. 1.
Ministerial acts and ordinances of the Gospel, some have a larger scope and
extend to more, others are confined more ex part objecti: hence Heathens may
be admitted to hear, but not (as such) to Baptism or the Lords supper; and of
Christians, some may be baptized, which may not be received to the Lords table;
and of Communicants, some may be called and ordained to office in the Church,
and not others; and these latitudes on part of the object or persons whereabout
the acts are conversant, are circumscribed by Scripture rules. Though therefore
one may preach to Heathens, and not give them the Sacraments, the reason is not
because to dispense the Sacraments is more an act of feeding, or more strictly
ministerial and authoritative then Preaching, as to baptize is not less
ministerial then to administer the Lords supper, yet it has a wider object;
but because the one ordinance is more limited on the part of the object to whom
it is to be dispensed, then the other; but this is not the matter in question
it is a limitation ex part subjecti or agentis which is enquired for, to wit
the Ministers confinement in his acts where persons are on their part capable,
so that he may dispense them to men of his own congregation, but for want of
power and authority cannot dispense them to any, though never so fit, out of
his own congregation. 2. The subject or agent of Ministerial acts may be
supposed limitable ex part actaum, so that he may perform some acts, when he
may not others; or ex part objectorum, so that he may perform the acts to some
persons, and not to others capable of them. The former kind is your second
instance; One may preach before Ordination, for approbation and in order to it,
but not administer the Sacraments before it, not because they are not both
purely and equally ministerial, but, 1. because he that so preaches is a
Minister in fieri, and but in fieri, and so (as in natural and moral
beginnings of things, some acts flow out of the principles of constitution
before others) may do somewhat that is ministerial, not others. 2. and
chiefly, because there is a special warrant for his Preaching for approbation,
and a special necessity of it, in as much as he is to be proved in his gifts
before he be ordained, 1 Timothy 3.10. and 5.22. and his gifts for preaching
cannot be otherwise tried then by his preaching: but there is no special
warrant for, or necessity of his dispensing Sacraments for trials sake, there
being no gift necessary to his dispensing the Sacraments, but what may be
discovered by his preaching and praying, or if there be any it may be otherwise
descried then by acting in those ordinances, (as a lawyers abilities are better
discerned by drawing books, then by aff^^^ing the label and seal) But neither
is this the thing in question betwixt us. The limitation of the agent in
relation to the object; which is the latter restriction of him before
mentioned, is that wherein the knot lies; to the unlosing of which you may
observe 3. We must distinguish of ministerial acts thus: 1. They are either
absolute, and such as flow from the principles of the ministerial office, or
relative, such as spring from a Pastoral relation or state. 2. Again, they are
either properly, peculiarly, specifically ministerial, it common, general or
genericall, agreeing both to a Minister and other ruling Officers or Elders of
the Church. 3. And again they are either solitary, such as are performed by one
alone, or social, joint acts, such as cannot be performed but by a plurality;
of the former sort in first, second, and third distinctions, are
administrations of the Word and Sacraments;

Of the latter sort in all the three distinctions, are acts of
Church Government and discipline. In the former, to wit absolute or
irrespective specially ministerial and solitary acts, a Minister is more free
to execute, and positis omnibus requisitis ad agendum, he may dispense them as
occasion is ministered to all persons capable of them. In the latter, the
relative, common and sociall acts, he is more restrained as to the execution of
them; the reason hereof is, to the former there is required on his part an
office and calling, but to the latter there is required not only an office, but
also Pastoral or Presbyterial relation to those over whom, and a consociate
state with whom they are to be exercised: and hence it is that one may preach
to a congregation in Scotland, but not act authoritatively in their Synods (at
least not without a good call thereunto, with which he may vote in their Synods
as well as the Scottish Divines do in ours) And the reason is not because this
is more ministerial then that, but because Preaching is a more absolutely,
independently, properly, and solitarily ministerial act; acting in Synods is a
Ministers work relatively, generally and socially; it is a complexe act, to
which is required residence, relation, or pastorship, and consociation. Thus
you have my reasons of the disparity you observed.

Sect. 10. Reply, p. 115. And now what the reason of this should be we cannot
imagine, unless you grant with us a difference betwixt some acts of feeding,
and others; some acts are so annexed to office, and are so authoritative, that
they cannot, be performed but where office and authority is; others though they
be authoritative to that people over whom persons performing them are officers,
yet they may be performed by a gift without office to another people, and are
not authoritative to them.

Rejoynd. If this distinction should go for good, yet how can you clear your
selves from failing, yea crossing the Position, and your own argument fetched
out of that of Peter, and from yielding in stead of answering it. The alledgers
of the Position, and you, contend that when the Apostle charge the Elders, 1
Pet. 5.2. he confines them in their acts of feeding each to one congregation,
yet here you burst asunder this limitation and bound so much pleaded for, in
your distinguishing acts of feeding, and giving some of them to an Elder to
exercise them out of his congregation to another people, yea you give away some
of them to others out of office. If the Elders in the Texts be here restrained
by Peter to their congregationall flock in the acts of feeding (as you have
largely argued) they are so limited either in some of those acts or in all. 1.
Not in some only; for first the Apostle charge them with feeding and
overseeing, without making difference of acts. 2. You said before, Taking heed,
and Feeding, does include the administration of the Word, and Prayer, and
Sacraments, and Discipline; and what other acts are there of feeding, and of
this charge you have before affirmed to be limited by [amongst you]? 2. Not in
all; for your selves say in this distinction there are some acts of feeding may
be performed to another people then that over whom the persons performing them
are officers. 3. If this charge be necessarily a limitation of the Elder to the
object Flock, it is as necessarily (at least) a restriction of the work of
feeding to the persons spoken of, the Elders, (show any reason why the
limitation in the Text should not tie the one way as well as the other) and if
so, the acts of feeding cannot belong to any out of office. 3. However you may
distinguish of acts of feeding, yet ministerial acts (which is the term in the
Position, and of which the question is) cannot be thus distinguished of,
unless you will say some ministerial acts are annexed to office, others not;
or some are authoritative, others not; or some ministerial acts are merely
ministerial, others may be done out of the Ministry, and then how are they
ministerial? Truth is, take this term to be your subject in distinguishing,
and I cannot see how you will make your membra dividentia agree with, or
participate of your division. 4. According to this distinction, First, the same
individual act may be authoritative, and not authoritative, in reference to
two sorts of persons, viz. the persons to whom the agent is an officer, and
others to whom (as you hold) he is not an officer, and so contradictoria will
be simul vera. Secondly a man may have office, and that authoritative, and do
an act of that, office which is authoritative, and yet not act authoritatively,
Hie dignus vindice nodus. 5. All your former arguments for the Ministers
confinement to his Congregation, both from this and other Texts, is now at last
resolved into this, as to some of his acts, that he is not confined in re, but
only in notione, which consisting only in conceptus, will make no difference
in the act but according to this distinction, it may come to be thought fit for
the Minister to take up some ministerial habit, (as the manner was lately that
it might be discemed when he acts as a Minister and when not. Lastly, (for the
unfoundnesse of this distinction, as it is applied by you, I shall have fuller
occasion to discuss hereafter) whereas you call in the Elders Answ. to 9. Pos.
p. 78 to stand by you in it, let me bring in the remainder of their words
which you leave out, If that question were propounded to any Minister, so
exercising in another Church which was once to our Savior by the high Priests
and Elders, by what authority do thou do these things, and who gave thee
this authority? let that Minister whosoever he be study to make an answer: and
retort them thus on you, you say here, there are some acts of feeding which
though they be authoritative to that people over whom the persons performing
them are officers, yet they may be performed without an office, etc. let him
that holds or exercises any such acts in such manner (suppose preaching which
was the subject of that question of the high Priests Matthew. 21.23.) study to
make answer to it. If he say by no authority, but by a gift, then. 1. He
answers not the Elders question which demands by what authority, etc nor can
he positively answer it. 2. Either this giftednesse is a sufficient warrant,
and then he has authority and so does it authoritatively, or else its
insufficient; and then he is convinced as a transgressor and presumptuous, and
he and you must quit this, and find out another distinction to salve your
disparityes which can hardly be so strange and incongruous as this.


Sect. 11. When I urge, If the relation of Ministers and people be mutual, If
the people may receive the Sacrament from one that is not their Minister, then
the Minister may administer it to them that are not of his flock, you reply p.
115. In one sense all that you say is true; they may so do by recommendation,
but then this recommendation is as it were a dismission, differing not really,
but only in time; Recommendation commends them for a time into the fellowship
with that Church, and dismission for continuance: when persons of another
Church do orderly intermingle themselves with this or that Church, then they
are as Members, and Pastor is as their Pastor, and so he might dispense the
Sacraments to them.

Rejoynd. In New England, members well known and approved do mutually without
exception communicate each of them at other Churches, even so often as Gods
providence leads them thereto, and they desire it, and this is done by virtue
of communion of Churches, and sometimes without letters of recommendation. See
Answ. to Pol. 9. p. 78. Cottons keys p. 17. way p. 103. F.W. to W.R.p. 10. 2.
We still ask why may not a Minister officiate inanother church, recommended or
as it were dismissed by his own as well as a member of another communicate in his
by recommendation? 3. Belike you are pinched with the argument, that you are
glad to use such amphibolous terms, as it were a dismission as his member, as
his Pastor, but observe. 1. Your Author Master Cotton gives a reason of this,
both more genuine and cross to this of yours, for we (says he) receive the
Lords Supper, not only as a seal of our communion with the Lord and with his
members in our Church, but also in all the Churches of the Saints; if so, then
what need you, or how can you say truly, that a member of another Church
coming to receive at yours, is as it were dismised or dismembered from the
other Church, and is become as a member of yours, and you are as his Pastor? 2.
I ask is he not still really a member of the Church he comes from? is he not
under another Pastor of another Church? if you deny these things it would
overthrow that communion of Churches which Master Cotton reduces this mutual
receiving one of another to, and would make membership and Pastorship like a
cloak to cast off and put on alternation upon every slight occasion of going
from home, and eturne; and if you yield or affirm the said things, then you
must recall those words w^erein you say Recommendation differs not really from
dismission; for if it do not, then is he really dismissed from the Church he
comes from, and is not as one of them he comes from, but as one of them to whom
he is resigned and recommended. Cottons way p. 104. In what Church then to
place him or whether he be in either, according to you, I cannot resolve: and I
am sure to say he is a member of both, would be incongruous to your Principles
and to reason. 3. In saying Recommendation differs not from dismission really,
but in time, is a contradiction; for things that differ in time must needs
differ really, ut res and res, quorum incipiente vel desinente uno non incipit
vel desinit alterum. else you must needs say, eadem res est and non est, but
you are not happy in your distinctions, the less wonder it is that in some
things you err; for qui been distinguit been docet. 4. The Argument for all
this that you have said must still press you; if this man a member of another
Church may come to your Church, why may not the Pastor of his Church come? and
if he as a member may receive, why may not his Pastor as a Minister preach and
administer the Lords Supper? is not the one as strictly tied in by his
Church Covenant in his relation as the other in his? is not recommendation of a
Minister as truly a d^smission of him as recommendation of a Member?



Sect. 12. Reply p. 110. But it will not follow that therefore he may act
ministerially out of his own Church and people, in and among another Church
and people; Magistrates and Subjects are Relatives, and if any Subjects of one
County come to another County and be wronged, there he may require justice from
the Magistrate of the County where the wrong is done him, and receive it, but
the Magistrate may not therefore go from among his people to another County,
and dispense justice amongst them. So of Ministers.

Rejoynd. 1. The similitude is not truly laid down; for a Magistrate of this
County, and a Subject of the Kingdom, are not relata as such; a
County-Magistrates correlative is a Subject and Inhabitant of the said County:
And if you had so put your comparison, what could you have inferred from it? 2.
The similitude is unfit even in that for which you bring it; For first, a
County-Magistrate is tied within local bounds in administrations, whether to
his countrymen or to strangers, but the case of a Pastor is not so, especially
with you which admit of no Parochial or local bounds, (which we think
requisite in some cases, not possible in all) to the circumscribing of a
Church, or the Pastorship of it, but enlarge the Pastors leave to officiate any
where in the world, if his Church remove thither, and the Church may remove
whithersoever. Secondly, a Magistrate as he may do a stranger justice in his
own County, so he may as well execute justice on him within the same: but you
will not allow another Churches member to be censured in this Church, though he
may communicate there. Thirdly, I should easily grant that a Pastor may not go
from his own congregation to act with the Key of power (wherein only he
resembles a Magistrate) or to exercise jurisdiction in any other: That he is at
all times and cases fixed to such a circuit, but as a Colonel, Captain, etc
(which possibly sometimes may be the governor of such and such a castle,
defender of such a country, etc.) or any Martial commander may do acts of
government wherever his Camp removes: so may he do his office, by your own
confession, wheresoever his Congregation is present: but a Magistrate may not
do justice, no not to his own citizens no more then to strangers, out of his
liberties. 2. Acts of justice and judgment by Majors or other Magistrates our
of their territories, are not only unlawful, but null in Law; but sure you
hold not that if a Minister preach in another congregation, by virtue of
office, baptize, administer the Sacraments, Ordain, or the like, that those
acts are altogether null and void, as if they had not been baptized or
ordained, and that they ought to be rebaptized or reordained. Lastly, the
County-Magistrates power is bounded by express laws or orders of the King or
State; but you can show no Divine Law, for the bounding of a Minister to a
particular assembly, yea whether there be any such laws or no, is the question,
which you must not beg.



Reply, p. 116. We grant, that not one only of another Church, but two, three,
six, eight, (which it may be are the whole Church) may be received to the holy
Communion: but we demand who shall recommend them? and without recommendation
they cannot orderly be received; or suppose they commend themselves, they are
now swallowed up in the fellowship of the other Church, and counted pro tempore
members of it, and have not the consideration of a distinct church. And though
it be lawful for a Minister to dispense the Sacrament to them with his own
people, yet not lawful to go forth from his own people, and give it to them
alone. If a whole Town should come and live in another Town, they might have
the justice of that Town from the Magistrate, which cannot dispense justice to
them abiding in their own place.

Rejoynd. 1. If you grant that a Pastor may administer the Sacrament to another
Church coming into his assembly, as you say you do, then first, May not a
Pastor and his Church upon some occasion go to the meeting place of another
Church, and there perform the same ministerial acts by consent of all parties
interessed, as he may do if that other Church come to his Churches
meeting place? Does the place make any difference in your opinion? Secondly,
May a Pastor (if his flock be present) administer the Sacrament to another
Church (which possibly may be an hundred times bigger then his own) and may he
not, if his flock be absent? does the presence of his church add so much to his
power over another church? Sure these things are gratis dicta, without
Scripture, without reason. 2. As for recommendation, I answer first, M. Cotton
and the Elders of N.E. (as I showed before) yield another way of communicating
betwixt Churches besides Recommendation, so that this bar is needless and
untrue, if they must be Judges. Secondly, if Recommendation be so needful for
a whole Churches communicating with another Church, it may be had from its
officers and from other neighbour-churches, or from members of that church to
which they come and join, which are able to testify of them. Thirdly, whereas
you suppose they may commend themselves, this is of all other reliefs the
weakest as good as nothing, a mere formality; sure Recommendation with you is
very needful that must be thus patched up, rather then wanted; when it is thus
helped out, it stands you in great stead. 3. As for coming of one Church to
another, I rejoyn, first, If they communicate with this other church by virtue
of communion of churches, they must needs be considered as a distinct church;
Communion is (at least) between two, and imports plurality and distinction
betwixt the parties; Identity destroys communion, which consists in the
conveniencie or agreement of persons or things in aliquo tertio, and not in a
coalescencie of them in one. Secondly, whatsoever they are counted, howsoever
considered by you, this temporary fellowship makes them not indeed one church
with that they communicate with. Your way of constituting churches, and your
everlasting covenant; [Cottons Way, p. 104.] wild noc brook such an easy and
interchangeable putting together into one, and parting again of churches: your
considering them as one, then, when they are not such, is the error of your
Conceptus, and salves not the matter in hand; in this case deny it if you can:
A Minister acts ministerially to another church, and now you have brought two
churches together in communion, let me enquire, May not their Elders act in
common to both? are the Eldert of either suspended in this conjunction? and if
so, of which are they that are to be suspended? and why not a third, and a
fourth church come to them after the same manner, and the Elders of all join
interests in ruling, what will lack to make up here a Classis or Presbytery of
many churches? Thus you are unawares coming into our tents. Thirdly by this
you plainly teach, a Minister acts not ministerially but in the presence of his
Congregation; and the authoritativenesse of his acting, and lawfulness of his
authoritative acts depends on their being assembled with him. But, first, it is
the presence of Christ which gives authority and efficacy to his Ministry, Mat.
18.20. which is promised to him always, and with no such limitation, Mat. 28.20.
Secondly, some Ministerial acts are required of him in private, Jam. 5.14. 2 Timothy 2.15. 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15, 16. He is to charge privately the people, that
they live not inordinately; Cottons keys, p. 21, 22. and he may act
authoritatively in a Synod of churches, where his Church is not collectively
(which is your sense) present. Of the difference (as to this) between a
Magistrate and a Minister, see Sect. 12.


Reply, p. 117. The Scripture allows the recommendation of the members of one
Church to another, Romans 16.1. 2 Cor. 3.1. But can you produce any place where
the Minister of one church has acted ministerially in another church?

Rejoynd. 1. Neither of the places you cite for recommendation of members,
mentions any thing of mere members, but both speak of officers. Phaebe in Romans
16.1. is termed a servant of the Church, Mr. Cotton calls her a Deaconesse of
that church, [ Way, p. 103. Keys p. 17.] And that in 2 Cor. 3.1. speaks of Paul
himself as not needing recommendation to, or from them, as do other teachers,
for of such he had immediately before discoursed, c. 2. ult. and much in this
Epistle the Apostle uses this collation, as c. 10. and 11. 2. Your demand
annexed should in equity and correspondency to your own attestation, be, Can
you produce one place where the Ministers of one church are recommended to
another? And this I can (though your places for Members recommendation be not
found) and may as strongly therefore infer their acting ministerially in
other churches upon their recommendation to them, as you (with Mr. Cotton)
conclude for the communicating of members in other churches from such supposed
recommendation of them thereunto.
See for the recommendation of Ministers, 2 Cor. 8.16, 18, 19, 22, 23. Act.
15.22, 25, 26, 27, 32. Col. 4.7, 8, 10, 11. Ephesians. 6.21, 22. Phil. 2.19, 20,
21. and your own place, 2 Cor 3.1.

Sect. 4. When I produce Mr. M. and Mr. T. granting that Elders have a power to
ordain Elders in other churches by request of that church where the Elders are
to be ordained You reply, p. 117.

Not by their own proper right, not as Elders or Officers, but as of better
gifts and greater abilities; and their power is derived to them from those
congregations which entreat them; if they acted as officers, then they might
act without entreaty, for entreaty makes them not officers; and if they were
officers before, entreaty is not needful to enable them.] Rejoynd. This reason
is not good. 1. A man may be entreated to do that which he has office and
authority to do, Act. 16.9. 2 Cor. 8.4. with 19. Mar. 9.23. 2. When there is an
office and calling to do a work, there is requisite on the part of them to or
for whom it is to be done, a consent, and whether it be signified in the form
of an entreaty or otherwise, is nothing material. In censures you give some
proper power to the Elders, and yet require the peoples consent in passing
them: In this matter of Ordination you hold the Churches consent necessary,
though their own Elders did transact it, and their acting therein (you will
grant) to be authoritative. 3. You say the same of Elders acting in their own
congregations: therefore the Elders deriving power from the Church, is no
hindrance but that they may have it from Christ to another congregation upon
their request, as to their own. 4. Let me ask you, 1. How can the Church
(according to you) delegate its power to persons out of it self? 2. Whether is
this act of deriving power to the Elders of another church, an act of authority
or no? If it be, then the Church acts authoritatively to persons of another
church; and if the Church may, why may not also the Ministers? If it be not;
then the Ordination performed by them is either done by no authority, or by an
authority underived from the church to which they are entreated.
5. If the Church may derive power to Elders of another church in point of
Ordination, why may she not translate it to the Elders of two, three, or four
churches? why not to a classis of Elders? and why not her interest in other
acts of power as well as this? You have thus a power to become Presbyterians
with us, if you will.


You further reply, p. 117. And if they act as officers in another
congregation, then they may in all congregations.] R. So they may act in any,
positis omnibus requisitis ad agendum, but they act not formally as officers of
another congregation, but as officers of the same classical, provincial, or
national church, and as joined in government with that church.

(Part of this, and the whole 35. Chapter [of the Preaching of gifted men]
Waits a farther occasion.)

FINIS.

