The last great and terrible SEA FIGHT BETWEEN The English and the Dutch, on
Tuesday and Wednesday last, upon the Western Sound near Cornwall, continuing for
the space of two and twenty hours: The particulars of this bloody Conflict;
the manner of Engagement; and how Sir G. Ayscue charged quite through the
enemies fleet with the Rainbow, with the loss of 12 men, and 60 shot in the
Hull; the number of ships sunk, taken, and burnt on both sides; the great loss
that befell the English in the Bonaventure, Elizabeth, and George; the ships
rent and battered; and Capt. Pack, and diverse others, torn limb from limb with
Canon-shot. Brought by the last Post, Sunday August 22. And published according
to Order.

depiction of a sea-battle with two ships or galleons and two smaller vessels

London, Printed for G. Horton; and sold at the Royal Exchange in Cornhil.

A Terrible and Bloody Sea Fight between the English and the Dutch, upon the
Coast of Cornwall: with the particulars thereof; and the number of ships sunk,
burnt and taken on both sides; the like dispute has not been heard of these
many years.
Right Honorable,
ON the fourteenth instant, the Dutch Armado (consisting of fourscore and ten
sail, and twelve Fireships) mounted on their Warlike Throne, set forth
Precepts to our sons of Thunder, and chased Captain Bane into this Harbor, who
brings advertisements to the Major and Governor, that the whole Fleet are
standing up toward the Isle of Wight; from whence we hear, that they bare up
on the backside, and sailed directly to Sir George Ayscue, who were riding
thirty miles off from Plymouth: And on the sixteenth instant, De-Witte their
Admiral, with the rest of his Men of War, even like a Grove of Cedars, bore up
with hoisted and booming sails toward the South-East Sound, resolving to act
the Theater of War upon that part of Neptune's Region; in order thereunto, the
Vice Admiral of Zealand, with twenty stout ships, and eleven Frigates, drew
forth, and prepared themselves for an Assault; which Sir George Ayscue
perceiving, gave immediate Orders and Instructions to all his Captains, to ply
windward, and to receive their salutation, which was acted with such a
revengeful rage, that both parties being inflamed, resolved to fight until the
one was tamed; insomuch, that Sir George with the Rainbow, charged them quite
through, but not being able to go to the windward of all, received 40 broad
sides, and with great difficulty got off, only with the loss of three men, and
his Bolt-split. In the midst of this dispute, the rest of our ships were not
silent; but each man acted with an irresistible courage and resolution; And
from four of the clock, till 8 at night, the fight was extreme hot; Then Nights
sable Curtains being drawn the dispute ceased, and both fleets lay in a
defensive posture against each other, with all their lights hanging forth. This
Conflict was maintained with great gallantry and resolution on both sides; and
great was the execution; for we have received great loss, the George and
Bonaventure, being much shattered and torn, and for the present unfit for
service; diverse were rent limb from limb by the Canon-shot; some had their arms
shot off; others, their legs; amongst the rest, valiant Captain Pack, (an
excellent stout Seaman) has his leg shot off; Captain Lisle is wounded in the
shoulder, and since dead; Capt. Clerk is said to be slain, and diverse others.
Sir George lost 12 men, besides some wounded; and received 60 shot in her Hull;
the Sampson, Elizabeth, and diverse others, received great loss, and many a
stout Seaman has made the Sea his grave; and too too many (for the present)
lies languishing of their wounds.

Yet notwithstanding, the Hollander has little cause to brag, for his loss is
exceeding great, many of their ships are rent and torn; the Rear Admiral is
sunk, the Captain of Flushing, the Arms of Holland (beware the Body next) and
three other gallant ships.

However, the Dutchmen resolved not to decline engagement; but lay in a
defensive posture till Tuesday morning; at which time, they hung forth their
bloody flag of defiance, on the Topmast head; and gave sundry Vollies from
aboard, retaining them as Trophies of Victory; the which, did so exasperate the
spirits of the English, that a Council of War was called, to consult what to
do, in further proceedings against the enemy, and it was unanimously resolved
by the said Council to engage them again: Hereupon preparation was made, and
after prayers, and seeking of God, for a blessing upon their enterprise, the
Admiral, with 33 Men of War, hoisted sail, and stood up toward them; and about
one of the clock in the Afternoon, both Navies engaged, and for the space of
seven hours furiously was the fight maintained, and great execution again done
on both sides, especially to the Hollanders; but the night drawing on, the
dispute ended: And this morning the enemy had given us the slip about six
leagues; some of our ships are in pursuit; others are, come into this Harbor,
with wounded men.

The five hundred men sent from this Town to Sir George, deported themselves
with singular dexterity and courage, and were in the thickest of the Conflict;
many of them are slain, and about 60 wounded.

This has been the bloudiest Conflict that ever happened between the two
Republiques; and consequently, it is but a beginning of the Chaos of confusion;
for it is now too late to dispute the Groundwork, the Arguments of blood being
drawn at large in undeniable Maxims: Yet I doubt not, but the Lord will
perfect that Work which he has thus triumphantly carried on, even for those
who desire to praise and magnify his glorious Name. As for the particulars of
the fight, I cannot represent no otherwise, at present, but that we have taken
seventeen, sunk five, fired two, and dispersed the rest; but not without great
loss, as is before specified; which is all at present, from

Your devoted servant, J. HOLDING.
Plymouth 18 August, 1652.
FINIS.

