CERTAIN QUERES Modestly (though plainly) Propounded to such as affect the
Congregational-way, And specially To Master Samuel Eaton and Mr. Timothy Tailor.

WITH AN EPISTLE Also directed to them Concerning their late Book Entitled A
Defense of sundry Positions, etc.

BY Richard Hollinworth, Mancuniensis.

You shall not turn aside to the right hand, or to the left.

Deuteronomy. 5. If they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no
light in them,

Isai. 8.20. If the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that
darkness?

Matthew. 6. London, Printed by Ruth Raworth for Luke Fawn, and are to be sold at
the sign of the Parrot in Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

THE EPISTLE.
Reverend and beloved Brethren,
I Have perused your defense lately Printed (which how able or unable to
justify Independency, or to vindicate the Positions and Scriptures, time may
discover.) At present I have these few things to advertise you of.

First, you charge me with provoking you to be my Antagonists in Print In the
Epistle.
; from which, I was so far, that when others (rather then my self) thought fit
the Examination of sundry Scriptures, etc. (which for the most part was an
Answer to some Allegations, as they were privately made to me for satisfaction)
should be Printed, I gave special charge that neither my own name, nor the name
of Manchester, much less the name of other persons and places should be
inserted at length, in, or before the Book (though some few Copies came out
otherwise) lest I should seem either to provoke persons, or reveal secrets.

The deep and heavy charge (as you call it b) in the first part of my Preface
against misinterpretation of Scripture, as a belying of God, counterfeiting the
King of Kings hand, etc. (Though I now see how I have sped) I repent not of,
nor see I cause why you should repine at it, or complain of it, if you have
clearly manifested (as in your Title page you say you have) the Positions and
Scriptures alleged for your Churchway, and by me examined, to be sufficient,
pertinent, and full of power.

And yet I find my self deeply and heavily charged by you, To deprave places,
to blot and blur sweet humble spirited, holy pertinent expressions, to wrong
the Elders of N. E. to wrest allegations, etc. Yea, though I said, I will not
tell you who said All the Church is holy, ye take too much upon you: Yet you
think it not unworthy my serious consideration, Whether it might not be said to
me, as sometimes Christ said to one of the twelve, when he asked, Master Is it
I, and he answered Thou have said Psa. 85.15.
, (a bitter personal invective) What is your beloved brother, your good
brother, as a Judas or Corah, Dathan, etc? I hope in this (to say no more) we
neither are, nor shall be Brethren, and desire an humble modest Christian
Contestation with you, which are (in your own phrase) my Antagonists in Print
in this grave controversy; and withal calmly to consider (what I spoke in
relation to your cause, not to any person) whether investing non-Elders with
Ministerial power, placing Church power in the body of the Congregation, and
complaining of the Elders that rule over them in the Lord, for taking too much
upon them, be not the gainsaying of Corah, a sin of the new as well as of the
old Testament? Whereof if I be guilty, I justly bear this reproach; if not, you
have much wronged me; but God has sent you to do it, from whom I deserve much
worse, though not from you any evil.

The usual occasion of your censures of depraving places, etc. is a wide (I
hope) not a willing mistake in you, and not any iniquity in my hands or heart.
You expect the Positions and Scriptures alleged, to agree fully and exactly
with the places cited in the Margent, which I neither professed, nor intended,
nor could effect without some (in mine opinion unfitting) alterations of them
as they were alleged to me. But on the contrary for evidence, that I followed
another rule then the Printed Books (as at the first coming out of my Book, I
advertised one of your Brethren) I sometimes alleged no Book at all, even
where you know I might as Pos. 4. Other times, that by comparing Arguments that
otherwise came to hand with the Printed Books, I might probably intimate from
whence they were taken, and also evidence the truth of what I said in my
Preface, That Independency for the most part produces the same Texts in Print,
which she did in Preaching, Writing and Conference. I alleged Printed Books
the Bystanders mentioned in the Preface with these or the like clauses, See
your own Defense, p. 1, 13, 14, 46, 78, 90.
See almost the same Argument verbatim. The like you have. This though not so
fully. This seems to be taken out of. These Scriptures are alleged though not
with such tartness, etc. And sometimes I alleged for one Position (the second
for example) two or three Printed Books, differing possibly more then in phrase
one from another, which are so evident signs, that I tied not my self to the
Printed Books, that I cannot but wonder that you did not observe it, which had
you done, you needed not to have fought so earnestly and frequently with your
own fiction; for if it be acknowledged that the Scriptures alleged witness no
such thing as they are produced for, (whether they be in Printed Books or no) I
(as I told you in my Preface) have my full end.

You have also either to bring an odium upon me, or the cause I plead,
sprinkled here and there, both unlovingly and unnecessarily some secret
intimations of affecting Prelacy, whereas I in the worst times was not so much,
or no more Prelatical then the greatest and godliest Independents in the
Kingdom, if not at least one of you have been (though what ever I was or am,
that is no Answer to my Arguments) nor do I plead the cause of Prelacy which we
have Covenanted to endeavor to the utmost to extirpate: But of the Government
of the Reformed Churches which we have Covenanted to defend against the common
enemy, maintained by godly, learned men, our betters, known opposers of
Prelacy, which have obtained a good report in Manchester, and the parts about
it, viz. Master Burn of Manchester, Master Gosnol of Boulton, Master Fleetwood
of Wigan, both Master Midsley's of Rachdal, Master Storer of Stockport, Master
Hildersham of Ashby, Master Herring of Shrowesbury, Master Ball of Whitmore,
Master John Paget (to omit his Brother Master Thomas Paget, and multitudes of
others now alive) Master Hunt of Oldham, Master Rathband of Cockey, Master Gee
of Newton, Master ^ilecoat of Stretford, etc.

Nor is the Presbyterian-way, a Prelatical-way, but a Social-way, as between
Friends, Colleagues, Confederates, Brethren; where all judge, and all are
judged, all things done communi consilio; where no Congregation is above
another Congregation, no Minister above another Minister; though the major part
of them (as of the spirits of the Prophets to the prophets, and of
Congregational Members, though equal one to another) be about the minor part;
where every Elder is left to enjoy the Office of an Elder, and each
Congregation left to the freedom of the Congregation, in what belongs to them,
and they able to perform; where Presbyteries Classes, Synods of the same
Congregations, or their Commissioners in matters of common concernment, do
strengthen and help particular Congregations, walking according to the rule,
and reduce such as walk not in truth and peace, but are leavened with error
and variance; and Elders upon a call, do teach, and rule, and perform all
Ministrations with reference to, and the best advantage of the whole Church of
Christ, though more specially of those parts of it, to which they are most
related.

Also, I cannot but observe, that there is a difference between your
Title Page, in which you say indefinitely, That the Positions and Scriptures
alleged (not some or many of them) by me examined, are sufficient, pertinent,
and full of power, and are manifested, yea, clearly manifested so to be; and
some other passages in your Book, in which you disclaim the places applied to
Pos. 23. as it is by me controverted, and are confident they are not found in
the Works of any Congregational man. P. 105.
And Pos. 15. after the Allegation of some Authorities, in stead of answering a
Text (upon which, the distinction of Pastors and Teachers is grounded) you the
one, a Teacher, and the other Pastor, conclude, If we do put a false gloss
upon the Scripture, by mis-interpreting of Ephesians. 4.11. yet more modest
language (let any man find immodestly in that examination, if he can) had
become you brother, seeing such Reverend and Learned men, whom your self so
much honor, have gone before us in this Exposition Page 7. ult.
. So Pos. 19. do you clearly manifest, or so much as assert, that the Text
Matthew. 18. (what ever other Texts do) does prove, That the Church must be
Congregational. Pos. 20. have you clearly manifested that Matthew. 16. proves
that the Keys were given to Peter to be used by him (for you could not but know
that to be the meaning) as a Disciple or Believer, not as an Officer Pa. 93. 1.
. Pos. 12. have you clearly manifested that Col. 4.17. proves the Churches
power to censure her Officers, when the best Arguments you bring to prove
Archippus his faultiness (without which it was no censure) amounts but to a
strong presumption Pa. 59. l. 14.
, and that you know is a weak proof, So Pos. 2. have you clearly manifested
from Adams family, that seven, eight or nine, make a Church, when for any thing
you Answer, Adams family was no more a Church when they were seven or eight,
then when they were but two or three, and do acknowledge (notwithstanding your
clear manifestation) that God has not precisely determined what number does
make a Church P. 10. lin. 14, 33, 34.
. Also methinks you have not manifestly cleared, that Revel 8.8, 9. is
sufficient and full of power against settled endowments in the Church; of which
Text you say Our brethren present their Exposition, as probable; they force the
Interpretation upon no man. And Pos. 7. you do not manifestly clear that 2 Cor.
8.5. does pertinently and powerfully prove, that every Member at his admission,
does promise to give himself P. 68. l. 12.
to the Church to be guided by them, when you say The practice of the Churches
of Macedonia by way of allusion is made use of; and the Argument is a
comparatis: P 44. l. 18.
For you know Allusions and Comparisons are not Argumentative. And Pos. 13.
instead of clear manifestation of Ministers maintenance out of the Stock of the
Church, you say, We think we see most warrant for it from the New Testament;
and as most probable once disputed it; but neither then nor now are we
peremptory in it P. 61. l. 5, 6, 7.
. Finally, to omit more instances, when you say, We think, We conceive it is
probable, etc. or do never so confidently assert any of the several Positions,
and do not prove the same by the several Texts respectively alleged, nor clear
the said Texts from all the Objections made against your Exposition (one
material Objection unanswered, being enough to invalidate the same) you afford
so many Arguments to any wise Reader, that you have not clearly manifested the
Positions and Scriptures (where such speeches are found) to be sufficient, etc.

As for your pretending to prove some Positions and Practices by other
Scriptures and Arguments (which makes your Book swell so big:) Suppose you
should really so prove them, yet that (as to mine intent expressed in the
Preface) is but a by-matter; For Positions and Practices may be true and
lawful, and yet not truly nor lawfully grounded on the Texts alleged; and if
I answer them, and you produce other new ones, we shall contend in infinitum,
and not come to any issue. I could wish we might keep close to the Scriptures
and Positions alleged, till they be one way or other cleared, and then we may
more safely and orderly proceed to other Scriptures and Arguments.

If the Positions and Scriptures be so clearly sufficient, why do you not
directly Answer the Examination, but obliquely and evadingly, in sundry places?
For instance, in the very first words of your first Reply, when I allege one
thing, viz. That the Apostles never taught or practisied, to gather or separate
one part of this true Church, and another part of that (especially persons
which themselves converted not) to make a purer Church: You answer of another
thing, which was never denied. viz. The Apostles both taught and practiced the
separating of some Jews from other Jews, and gathered them into a Christian
Church, while yet the Jewish Church (you say) was not dissolved, but was a
Church of God.

But suppose you did solidly prove that the Church of the Jews was then a true
Church: Yet first it was not a Christian Church, nor are the Reformed Churches
and Ministers to be compared to the then Jewish Church and the Priests thereof,
and you should prove Separation from a Christian Church.

Secondly, It was but one Church, and you should show gathering out of several
Churches.

Thirdly, It was only of those Jews which they converted to Christianity from
unconverted Jews; and you should show the gathering of Christians converted by
others from other Christians converted, as well as they, and (possibly) from
those persons by whom they were converted.

Fourthly, That Church was then by Gods Commandment to be dissolved, and many
Churches to be built upon its ruins; and therefore does no more warrant the
building of one Christian Church upon the ruin of other true Christian
Churches, then the Parliaments Commission (if there were such a one) to the
Inhabitants of Derby Hundred to take down Latham house to build them houses of,
does warrant any one of the said Inhabitants to take as many good stones as he
can come by out of this, that, and the other Neighbors houses, concerning
which they gave no such commandment: Your not bringing a more punctual and
pertinent proof, argues either an implicit confession of the Truth of my
Answer, or inability to oppugn it. A little after you discover too much
willingness to quarrel at my Expressions, Page 6. l. 20, 25.
wherein you say I would suggest that you make Opposition to Magistracy. But
does not Master Weld a Congregational man, when Master Rathband charge
Independents to hold that Christians may and ought to set up new Churches, and
practice in them all Gods Ordinances, without the consent of a Christian state,
yea, against their peremptory commands and established Laws, and in the midst,
and against the mind of such Churches as they freely acknowledge the true
Churches of God, say of this Article, No Pen can express a greater latitude of
Opposition against Magistracy, and Laws, and Churches too, then he affirms to
be in us. Do not I use his own words? Print them in a different Character, cite
him in the Margent? (which citation you (for what ends you know best) leave out
as you do many others) should you not blame Master Weld, or your selves, rather
then me? This is but one example of many.

And whereas according to rule and reason, he that affirms that such a
Scripture holds forth such a Position, must prove it: You have a faculty, and
make much use of it, when I show you where the proof of the Position from the
Text alleged is defective, and require you to supply that defect, to turn it
over to me to prove the contrary: As 1 Cor. 16.1. when I say the Churches of
Galatia might for ought you allege to the contrary, be combined one to
another. The substance of your Answer to this passage is, Without proof we
cannot grant them ( id est, Combinations of Churches) in Galatia: And (that you
may more plausibly put the business off your selves) you leave out the words,
For ought you allege to the contrary.

Finally, because charges of you for your indirect dealings without instances
to make them good, are but weak; and Instances of the several kinds would too
much enlarge this Epistle, I will now omit them.

And yet one thing being a great wrong to me, and to the Truth of God, I cannot
pass by, viz. That you oftimes curtal and clip my Answers and Arguments, not
only the Supplement (which yet in a large Answer to a little Book in a
Twelvemoneths time, is scarce allowable) being in my close style very little;
but also part of the substance and strength of them, sometimes folding them up
in obscure, etc. where (you know) they cannot be read, sometimes omitting them
with a censure (as the seven particulars in Pos. 24.) lest the Reader (had you
transcribed them) should have expected an Answer, sometimes not giving any hint
or intimation of any thing omitted: For example, to omit the other places (for
if they were all transcribed, they would augment this Epistle in sundry pages,
though my whole Examination (your Positions deducted) scarcely amounts to
thirteen Leaves.) Out of my Examination of Pos. 6. a main passage, viz. Gods
Covenanting with Abraham, did not impose nor suppose an express vocal Covenant
on Abraham's part, etc. And out of my Examination of Pos. 7. the principal part
of my Answer, It is not said that they gave themselves to the Church or
Churches, but to us, viz. Paul and Timothy, etc. And out of my Examination,
Pos. 22. my whole Answer to Revel. 4.14. are by an Index Expurgatorius quite
blotted out.

Brethren, let me with love and meekness reason with you; Do not you when you
find the shadow of such dealing in me, much complain of it? Is it not one
error under the Sun (and a great one too) in men, and perhaps in some good
men, that they will strive for victory rather then truth? Do not you omit that
which you know to be pertinent, while you transcribe, and largely Answer some
thing less pertinent? You know many will read your Reply, that possibly will
never see my Answer; and would you make them to believe that to those
Scriptures alleged in the Position, and published by my self, I should Answer
either nothing at all, or no more, or otherwise then you set them down, that
they may account me not only weak (as I am) but ridiculous? Is this the fault
of the Printer (who has committed few other Errata's, and left out I suppose
none of your Reply) or is it your fault, who say in your Epistle, You think I
will confess your candor? Surely, Either the Printer or the Publisher, have
not dealt kindly, nor heartily, but deceitfully with me, and the Reader. Cannot
your cause or some particular of it, be maintained without such dealing? Is
this the way to clear manifestly the Positions and Scriptures to be sufficient,
pertinent, and full of power, by leaving out the Examination of them in whole
or in part?

Thus I have signified unto you some of those plain things, which at the first
reading of your Book appreared, to me; and have also sent you some Queres
prepared, and showed to some of your Brethren, and (possibly) to one, or both
of you, before the coming out of your Reply, and little altered since,
beseeching you to hold out your way (as (you say) you are able) by giving not
subtle only, but solid Scriptural or Rational Answers to them all, as they
respectively do require, and not to take and leave where you list, nor (seeing
you know Quaestie quaestionem non selvit) to return Antiqueries (much less
censures) in stead of Answers, which notwithstanding if you shall do, I shall,
if God thereunto assist, and his cause and the necessity of the Church do
require, endeavor to Answer (when you have first answered these Queres) as
also rejoyn to your Reply (and that within the time Geometrically
proportionable to the time you took in Replying) with more mildness,
clearness, and candor, then you (as by this short Epistle every wise Reader
will easily see) have used in your Book.

The God of Truth, and Peace, R. H.
November 29. 1645.
Some Quere's mildely and modestly propounded to such as affect the
Congregational-way.
WHether to be wise, and holy, above or without the Rule, be not folly,
profaneness, and presumption?

Are not unscriptural ways of procuring and preserving Church-purity, as bad
as voluntary humility and will worship?

Are not humane inventions in Gods worship. imposed by a Congregation upon her
Members, or freely observed by them, as opposite to the second Commandment (at
leastwise in respect of the things themselves) as if the Parliament or
Assembly, had imposed or should impose or observe them?

Are not such humane inventions as are unjustly pretended to be Gods
Ordinances, so much the more detestable to God and godly wise men, and more
unlawful to be submitted to, then if they were plainly professed and practiced
as Institutions of the Church? Was not Episcopacy the worse when Jus Divinum
was stamped on it?

Whether profession and practice of humane inventions, as a part of Gods
Worship, or as essential to a Church, a Minister, or Churchmember, was not
formerly esteemed, and asserted to be; and is it not still Antichristian
impiety, and much liker to procure Gods judgments on the Kingdom, then the
discovery, confutation, and opposition of them?

Whether they which in opposition to Presbyterial Government, the Government of
the most, and best Reformed Churches, make Disturbance, Divisions, Separations,
pretending their way is the Scriptural-way, the only way, must not have as
clear, yea, more clear Scriptures for their way, then the other, or else be
justly accounted enemies to Truth and Peace?

Does the Scripture require the new Constitution of any true Churches, (such as
the Reformed Churches are confessed to be) and which already by your
confession, have the essence of Constitution, and where does it require it?

May not the said Churches be fully reformed according to Gods Word without a
new Constitution?

Does the Scripture use the phrase gathering the Church, in the sense that you
use it, for the first Constitution or Coalition of a Church?

By what name or names, is the said Church Constitution so much urged upon
tender consciences, called in Scripture?

Did the Apostles or Ministers in those days teach or practice, to gather or
separate one part of this true Church (of the Jewish Church I speak not, which
was then by Gods Commandment to be dissolved) and another part of that, yea,
persons which themselves converted not to make out of them all a purer Church?

Did they sever the godly into bodies distinct from others of the same place,
professing the same Religion?

Is it not the Scriptural-way of purging a corrupt Church, to cast out the
grossest offenders first (as the Church of Corinth in which were many
Schismatikes, Heretics, Fornicators, Drunken Communicants, was advised to cast
out the incestuous person) that others may hear and fear, etc. And so in case
of Heresy and Error, Gal. 5. and 6. First, the Seducers were to be cut off;
and they that were overtaken with a fault, to be restored with the spirit of
meekness?

Does not the setting up of a Church in a Church, and extracting the one out of
the other, or out of Churches, imply the incorrigiblenesse, incurablenesse,
dissolving and disanulling of that Church or Churches, out of which it is
extracted?

Does mere Separation of Members from a confessed true Church, and Ministry
endeavoring to reform according to her Light, without their admonition,
assistance in the Work of Reformation, or so much as intimation to the
Ministers or Members, free their consciences from the guilt of those
corruptions which they judge to be in that Church? Is it not a neglect of
Christ's rule, viz. Admonition, Tell him his fault, etc. And the substitution of
another in the place, viz. Separation, which is as it were an Excommunication
of the Church. and beyond the Rule?

Whether if seven, eight, nine, ten, twenty, separating voluntatily, yea,
sinfully (as if they turn Brownists, Anabaptists, Familists, Antinomians.
Arminians) from a Congregation of an hundred, two hundred, or a thousand, do by
a particular Covenant combine themselves together, are presently thereupon
exempt from the Jurisdiction of that Church, and have as much or more Church
power, then they had while they were (as they ought still to have been) Members
of the said Church, yea, do become a distinct Independent sister Church?

Whether Women (at least Widows and Maids, that are sui juris) be not engaged
to-seek the participation of all Gods Ordinances; as well as men, and bound to
join in Church Covenant, whether any considerable number of men, or any men at
all do join with them or no?

Had Paul converted those Women to whom he preached; Acts 16.13. which could
not be brought into an Organical Congregation: can it be conceived that they
(though Baptized) were still without? were not their children (...) holy,
having right to Baptism?

If it be essential, that the Church should be at first made up of visible
Saints; can a man in Faith join to any Church, or being joined, bear Office,
submit to Censures, or give any Church respect unto her, at the Constitution
whereof he was not present, nor knows the first Members, or possibly
suspecteth them to be unsound, seeing he may well doubt, whether the said
Church has all the Essentials of a Church, or no?

Is not that which was once Essential to a true Church ever Essential? and is
not the matter of a Church, visible Saints, as necessary in the continuation,
as in the first constitution of it?

Was every Member at his admission into the Church in the Apostles times,
called to give account of the Work of Grace in his heart? and how is that
proved?

Was the Congregation to judge, and what Congregation in Scripture did so judge
whether that work was wrought in his heart or no: and consequently, whether he
were to be admitted, or no?

Did John Baptist: which Baptized Jerusalem, and all Judel, yea, those which he
calls Generations of Vipers, Luke 3.7. with 21. and the Disciples of Christ
which Baptized more Disciples then John, so much mistake (though they were born
and lived amongst them) as to think every of them a true Saint of God? Was this
gross mistake the ground of their Baptizing so many of them? Did they profane
or prostitute the Holy Virgin Ordinance of Baptism in baptizing so many
thousands, yea, myriads (for they could be no less) amongst whom were so few
(very few comparatively,) either real or visible Saints? Should they not have
prepared the people better then thus, and letten them have walked sometime in
fellowship with them for approbation of their Conversation? for so the very
Cells of Satan (say some) Monasteries and Nunneries, do before they admit any
into their Society?

Was not the first (if not the only) Church, founded by Christ himself,
domestical in Christ's own Family (as the first Jewish Church was in Abraham's
Family,) in which, Christ himself, the Master of the house, who chose the
Apostles and not they him, was the Priest, Prophet, and Pastor, (as also Adam,
Noah, Abraham, in their Families) and in which, the Sacrament was administered
and received (which we read not in other Families, called Churches;) and to
which, Christ might have added many formerly converted by himself and others,
and yet did not; and should or may a family of twelve or thirteen be, and
continue so long an entire Church, without adding one Member of any other
family (though never so fit to be received) as Christ's Family till it was
dissolved by his death did?

Whether the Church being first Domestical and after Congregational, both the
one, and the other, were not accidental to it (the Jewish Church having the
essence of a Church when it was National, as well as while it was
Congregational) and to the Office of an Apostle, then the only Church Officer
(seeing (themselves say) an Officer and a Church, an Universal Officer and
Universal Church, are Relatives) as it is accidental to a General to have but
one Company or one Regiment?

Whether Subordination of Ecclesiastical Judicatories, and the benefit of
Appeals in the Old Testament, was merely Ceremonial (though the High Priest,
Temple, and some other things were) or was it grounded on natural Reason and
Equity? and so far as it is so grounded, is it abrogated in the New Testament?
and how does the abrogation of it appear?

Does not 1 Cor. 12.28. warrant an Universal visible Church, name, and thing,
seeing it is improper to say That the Apostles which by Office had the care of
all Churches, were set, put, or placed in any one? If they were Members of any
particular Church, was it not rather of Jerusalem then of Corinth (to which,
Paul did but come as to other Churches; and no other Apostle that we read of
was there; and which at his Baptism was a mere non-ens; much less were the
Jews and Gentiles Baptized into the Corinthian Church)? Is not Paul's speech,
Ye are the Body of Christ, corrective of it self: (...), as if he should say,
Ye are not the whole Body, but members in part of that Body, in which, the
Jewish and Gentilish Churches are said to be Heb. 13.3. Ephesians 3.6. Whereof Paul
was a Minister, Colos. 1.15. viz. The Catholic visible Church?

Is not this Body or Church Catholic totum integrale, and the particular
Churches similares part? Does not the Scripture usually set it down as one
Spouse, one Woman traveling, one Assembly of twenty four Elders, and four
Beasts, one City of God, one Household, one Temple, (whereof the Church of
Ephesus (being not the whole City, Household, or Temple,) were fellow Citizens,
of the Household, and built together, viz. With other Churches and Children of
God) one new Jerusalem, etc. The Scripture not warranting the expression of an
hundred or a thousand Cities of God, New Jerusalem, etc?

Does not the Scripture expressly, and almost in the fame words teach, That
the Sacraments, Officers, and Censures, belong primarily to the Catholic
visible Church, when it says, We are all Baptized into it, and in it God has
set not only extraordinary persons, callings, gifts, as Apostles, Prophets,
etc. but ordinary as Teachers (there is the same reason of Pastors, Helps,
Governments, in which the Censures are included?

If the Scripture allow the name and thing of an Universal visible Church: If
also the Jewish Christian Churches be called in Scripture, one Bride, one new
Jerusalem, and all the Gentiles Churches one Sister, and all the Jews and
Gentiles converted one sheep fold under one Shepherd; may not all the Churches
in a Nation, living under one Civil Government, agreeing in one Confession of
Faith, and Directory for Worship, joined in one Covenant, and represented
sometimes in one Assembly of themselves, or their Messengers, be by warrant of
Scripture called one Church?

Whether though National Churches were as lawful as either Domestical or
Congregational, There was in the Apostolic times any possibility of having a
National Church when there was no Christian Magistrate, (which we now esteem a
special blessing,) nor were Christians so many as to bear the name of a Land or
Nation (as if but one Family had been Christian, the Church could not have been
more then Domestical) nor had they liberty, safely and freely to meet in
National Synods or Assemblies (which yet we now hold lawful and useful
Ordinances of God.) Could the Protestant Church be National in the days of
Henry the eighth, and Queen Mary, as it was in the days of King Edward, and
Queen Elizabeth?

Whether can a wise impartial man, which reads and considers the wonderful
operations of the Sermons of John Baptist, Jesus Christ, the twelve Apostles,
and the seventy Disciples, conceive that the one hundred and twenty, Acts 1.
were the total number of the Christians in Jerusalem (among whom, were the
eleven and the seventy) or the major part of them?

Whether it be possible or probable, that all those of Jerusalem which were
converted and Baptized before the death of Christ, Matthew. 3.1, 5, 6. John 4.12.
and 12.19. Luke 10.17, 18. together with those several thousands converted to
Christianity by Peter, Acts 2, etc. might notwithstanding their numbers, join
in Public Prayer, and Preaching, so that all might hear, and all might be
edified?

Whether does any Scripture show, that the many thousands confessed to be of
the Church of Jerusalem, did meet ordinarily together to receive the Lords
Supper (the chief Church Ordinance?) Can it be imagined, that so many at once
could be accommodated with room, Beds to sit, lie, or lean upon, (as Christ did
according to the custom of those times) a Table to receive at, and Cups to
drink in, especially seeing that though they continued with one accord in the
Temple, yet they brake Bread from house to house, (the Jews probably not
permitting this new Ordinance in the Temple,) viz. In the several houses of
those poor that then received the Gospel?

Can it be showed that any Church in a City, or Town, how numerous soever it
grew, was for the numerosity of it, divided into two or more Churches (I speak
of Ecclesiastical Judicatories, not of Congregations) or that there were for
that reason more Churches then one, in any one City or Town, and by what
Scripture?

Do not places in Scripture denominate Churches? Were not all the believing
Corinthians of the Church of Corinth; the Brethren that were in Laodiced of the
Church of Laodicea; the Saints in Ephesus; the Church of Ephesus, etc? And each
of them under the Jurisdiction respectively of Corinth, Laodicea, and Ephesus,
etc.? Is not this a pattern uncontrolled by precepts and other paterns? Is there
any example or warrant in Scripture, That a Christian living in a Town or City
where there was a Church, was not, nor ought to be a member of that Church, but
of a remoter Church?

Did not Pastors in Scripture feed the flock of God that was amongst them? or
can they watch over their flocks, or Church members one over another, as by
Covenant they are bound, if they live five, ten, fifteen, twenty miles a sunder?

Can it be showed that God in the Old or New Testament, did erect one Church
without Officers? Seeing Adam was a Priest to his Wife and Family, and the
first born afterward were Priests at the founding of the Jewish Church, and
Christ was an Officer to the Church in his house, and the Apostles were
Officers in commission at the founding of the Christian Churches?

Has a Church without an Elder, or with one only, and consequently no
Presbytery, power to censure, yea, excommunicate? Can an Instance be given of
any such incomplete Church that did exercise any Church Government? Or can it
be proved by Scripture, that they might and ought to have exercised it?

Does not Election of, and Submission to the same Officers and Ministry,
ordinarily frequenting the same Ordinances and Worship, joint maintenance of
Officers and Ordinances (not to speak how considerable ^ohabitation and private
Christian Communion is) include a sufficient, though an implicit covenant or
consent, which may be justified by holy Writ?

Whether there be any Precept, direct or indirect, or President at the founding
of the first Churches, for a solemn express verbal Covenant or Agreement, more
explicit then this? and if not, are not they guilty (to say no more) of
strange boldness, which make it not only lawful, but useful, and far better
then the said implicit Covenant, yea, a binding Ordinance of God, necessary,
if not to the being, yet to the welbeing, strength and purity of the Church?

Whether there be a Church Covenant in Scripture ( viz. which not only in
general promises Service and Obedience. but has also special relation to
Church State, and Church Members duties as such, as marriage Covenant has to
conjugal duties as such?

May not the Scripture Covenants, viz. God shall be our God, etc. be taken by
two or three, though too few to make a Church; or by one Family, or by persons
of several Churches, and yet leave them in the state they were in, and not make
them Members of a distinct Church, as Independents Covenants are said to do?

Whether Subscription to your Confession of Faith, be as essentially necessary
to Church Constitution, as entering into Covenant? Is your Confession the very
same with the Confessions of other Independent Churches, or a Different? Is the
Confession of your later Churches, the very same with the Confession of your
former Churches? Do your selves esteem all things therein unquestionable
Fundamental Articles of Faith, seeing you require Subscription to them all
alike, as a Confession of Faith, and that upon pain of Non-Admission?

Whether there be any Precept or President in Scripture for requiring a
Promise, before we admit Members, that they will not depart without the
Churches leave? Is this a standing Ordinance, or but a Politic invention,
requisite for the good of Societies so molded? Are not Church Members
Liberties much infringed, when they can neither dispose of themselves, or their
children in Service, Marriage, and Factorship, remote from that Church, without
discovering the causes them thereunto moving, (which is not always fit and safe
to be done,) and having Approbation and Dismission from her, which sometimes is
hard to be got, especially for rich and useful Members?

Whether any Apostle or other in the Primitive times, did refuse to admit any
known beloever to the Sacrament, because he was not (to use the new phrase of
these times) in Church State, or that they enquired of him whether he was
convenanted into some particular Congregation, and that such a one as they
might lawfully hold Communion with?

Was the Baptism of John, and of the Disciples, and Apostles of Christ, a Seal
of Congregation Communion? Was Paul the Apostle, and the Ennuch, Baptized into
a particular Congregation? did not the ordinary Pastors of Corinth Administer
that one Baptism, ahd Baptize in the same Body that John Baptist did, and that
Paul Baptized Crispus and Gains, and the household of Stephanas into? Is
Baptism one time a Seal principally of Congregational Communion, and other
times not? and what Scripture is there to warrant such a distinction?

Whether every Congregation which joins in Covenant, does, or must consist of
all, or some Christians able to try the sufficiency of an Elder, yea, fit to
discharge that Office? Or, whether visible Sanctiry without such ability, be
not sufficient? And may this Congregation lawfully, (without assistance of
others, unless themselves please,) notwithstanding their apparent inability,
choose their own Minister, and that one of themselves also which must needs be
an Insufficient one?

May this Congregation also (suppose they had a godly learned Pastor) proceed
against him in case of Error and Heresy, even to Deposition and
Excommunication. if their weakness shall judge it fit? And is the said
Deposition valid (whether just and unjust) unless the said Church be pleased
to recall it, to deprive the said Pastor of his Ministerial Authority and
Office; and is there no remedy in such a case?

Is it not improper to call them that rule only, by the name of Elders; and
them that both rule and labor in the Word and Doctrine, by a meaner name,
Ministers? Does the Scripture apply the name of Elders, rather to Ruling then
to Preaching Elders; and if it does not, why should we?

Are the Ministers in the New Testament called (...) or (...) or (...): The
Ministers or Deacons of the Church, or of the people? Are they not usually
called Ministers of the Lord, of God, of Christ, of the New Testament, of the
Gospel, of the Word, etc? and with reference to their people, Elders, Rulers.
Pastors, Teachers, Overseers, Ministers for them, etc? Does that Expression in
the second Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. 4. Verse. 5. Our selves your
servants (wherewith Paul call-himself as well as others; (...) imply, that he
received his Authority and Office from the Church, did Officiate in their
names, was censurable by them, as a servant by his Master; or that he made
himself a servant to them, as Christ did to his Disciples, and as all good
Ministers do to their Flocks for their good?

Are the spirits of the Prophets subject to the people, or to the Prophets? Is
not this subjection of the Spirits of the Prophets, to the Prophets, viz. Of
the fewer to the greater number, as well in Synods and Assemblies of Churches,
or of their Messengers, as in particular Congregations?

Whether these two Propositions [Synods or Assemblies of Churches, or of their
Messengers (to say nothing now of their Jurisdiction) are Gods Ordinances,] and
[ Every particular Congregation may, yea, must enjoy all Gods Ordinances within
it self] be not cross and contrary one to another, or how are they reconciled
according to Scripture grounds?

Is it any privilege for Congrogations to subsist every one by her self? May
they not stand and flourish surer and better in an holy and Brotherly
combination, and coordinate subjection, then in a divided singularity?

Does not Communion of particular Churches require, and the light of nature,
and the equity of Scripture rules, and examples teach, that they may, and ought
to enter into mutual Consociation or Confederation amongst themselves, in
Classes and Synods, that they may so far as conveniently can be, make use of
common consent and mutual assistance, especially in those things that are of
greater moment?

If the Keys be given to Believers to be exercised by them as Believers, then
are they not given to all believers: whether in Church Covenant or no, Church
Members or no? If they be given to Church Members as such, does it not then
follow, that Pastors as Pasors, or Elders as Elders, have no more power of the
Keys then othher Church Members? And may not women as Church Members challenge
power and right in them, do they not challenge the same in some of the new
Congregations?

Is not investing Non-Elders with Ministerial power, placing the power of the
Keys in the Body of the Congregation, and complaining of the Elders that rule
well, for taking too much upon them, the sin of Corah? Is it not a sin of the
New, as well as of the Old Testament? Does Jude Historically or Prophetically
speak of it? If Prophetically? When, and in whom is it, or shall be fulfilled?

Does Election without Ordination make the Officer? Were the seven chosen by
the people, Acts 6. Officers by virtue of their Election, before the Apostles
prayed and imposed hands? If so, then did not the people rather then the
Apostles appoint them over the business?

If Ordination be less then Election, then why is laying on of hands, rather
then lifting up of hands in suffrages, reckoned amongst the Principles, Heb 6.
Why is the charge more express that Ordination (rather then Election) should
not be suddenly and hastily made? Why is the description of persons to be
ordained much more large in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus which were to
ordain, then of persons to be elected in any or all the Epistles written to the
Churches to whom such election is conceived to belong?

Is Ordination of Ministers an act of Presbyterian power, or of Churchliberty?

Did the Apostles (which you confess Reasons of the dissenting Brethren
did wherever they came, leave the Elders and people to the exercise of that
right which be longed to them) invest non-Elders with the power of Ordaining?

Did not Churches wait, and not ordain their own Elders? (though they had as
much Authority, and knew it as well as Churches now do) Did not the Apostles go
themselves to ordain Elders in every Church, or send some Elders or other to
that purpose?

Does the Scripture require that every particular Congregation may, yea must
(though she has neighbour-Congregations to assist which is our case) alone
ordain her own Elders?

What one Elder in Scripture was ordained by those that were only of that
particular Congregation where he was to officiate?

What may be the reason that the Apostle (which did all things fitly) writing
to so many Churches (in each of which was a particular Eldership) did not so
largely (if at all) set down Rules for Ordination as in the Epistles to Timothy
and Titus?

Did the Presbytery that ordained Timothy, consist only of one particular
Congregation? and of what Congregation? and how is it proved?

Was not every Apostle (as also Timothy and Titus) as it were an Eldership of
the Churches extraordinarily combined in one man?

When the Apostles joined with other ^lders in Ordination, under what notion
did they join? as Elders of sundry Churches, or only as Co-elders of that
particular Congregation? If under the later notion, what did they add unto
them; the Elders of a Church, being but Three or Four, having as much power as
if by addition of Two or Three they were made Five or Six?

May we not grant in some cases that Supreme Civil power (suppose in executing
one that had murderer his father and attempted to murder his mother) as well as
Ecclesiastical may be exercised in one Congregation, yea, in one family (if it
be in a wilderness, when it can have no assistance in Government) without
having the least thought that in ordinary eases every Congregation or Family
ought to be Independent in Ecclesiastical or Civil matters?

Ordinary Elders imposing hands on Apostles or Apostolic men, as you say the
Teachers of Anttoch ordained Paul an Apostle, Act. 13.1, 2, did they set him
apart to officiate only in one, their own Congregation, and not in other
Churches? For example, not in Rome, to which Paul writing, calls himself, with
reference to that Ordination. (...) an Apostle separated, etc.

Is there not as many precepts or presidents for admitting to the Sacrament
known Christians of no set Congregation (which you so much boggle at) as of
admitting the members of other Churches and their children, which you commonly
practice?

Do not Elders receive their power and commission for the whole Church of
Christ, and may they not (having a Call) preach in any Congregation, administer
the Sacrament to any Christian, yea, vote in any Synod, as the Scottish Divines
by consent do vote in our Assembly?

Does not communion of Churches bring communion of Offices and Officers? Else
how can a Minister administer the Sacrament as an Officer (for as a gifted man,
he cannot dispense it) to men of another Church, by virtue of the said
communion of Churches? And if so, why may not an Elder of other Churches in
Jurisdiction?

If recommendation be as it were a dismission (by your own Principles)
differing not really, but only in time; may not a Minister recommended, that
is, dismissed for a time, act Ministerially in another Congregation? may not
the Mayor of one Corporation, by consent of all parties interested, act
authoritatively out of the said Corporation? (as the Mayor of London is Bailiff
of Southwark) And may not the Colonels of Lancashire (your own similitudes) by
like consent govern and rule the Soldiery of Cheshire?

Is not the whole Church of God one Corporation, one City (ut supra)? -- And
may not then the Aldermen and Officers, notwithstanding their several Wards,
Limits, Companies, join together in a Court of Common counsel for the
Government of the City?

May a Pastor, as a Pastor, pray for the Universal Church, or no?

Is it a divine or but an humane Institution, that Ministers should be
maintained by Lord's Day collections? If humane; can any man which holds all
Humane Institutions unlawful, with good conscience offer at those Collections?
If you say it is divine; where is the warrant for it? Dare you determine it as
certain, or do you but dispute it as probable?

Do not those Independent Ministers which enjoy Church lands, and receive
Tithes or compositions for them, or yearly, half yearly, quarterly stipends,
hold these ways of maintenance as lawful as Lords-day-collection?

By what Scripture prove ye that it is the duty of any Christians that are not
of your Church (nor ever were) but are by you excluded out of it (possibly
because they will not take your Covenant, or subscribe your Confession, or the
like) to contribute to your maintenance; seeing you take no charge of them, nor
so much as preach to them as Pastors? Have you from Christ any power to receive
maintenance from such?

May a Church, to save charges, make it a rule or constant practice to choose no
Ruling-elders, though never so fit and able, but such as are able to maintain
themselves? Does not that Text, 1 Timothy 5.17, hold forth the maintenance
(notwithstanding the poverty of those times) as well as the lawfulness of
Ruling elders?

Whether Moderators and Presidents of Synods and Church Assemblies, Assessors,
Scribes, and Registers of Church-proceedings (to say nothing of ringing Bells
to public Worship) be lawful and useful or no? Are these Offices grounded on
Scripture, or on Reason, or the light of Nature?

Has God any where forbidden that he that exercises those Offices of
Presidency or Moderatorship, etc. in one Synod, should exercise them in the
next, and in the third, fourth, etc. while he is willing able, faithful in
discharge of his duty, and is thereunto elected and approved?

Is not the preaching of the Word the highest and hardest part of the
Ministerial Function, in respect of which. Paul says Who is sufficient for
these things! And if so; by what warrant do private men unfit for the meanest
Office in the Ministry, so ordinarily and presumptuously usurp it, and yet are
justified by some of you?

How dare non-Elders, which have no commission from Christ to Preach and
Baptize, nor power to receive maintenance, usually and publicly preach the
Word in the Congregations, and receive maintenance for the same? Do not they
themselves sin, and all they which usually hear and maintain them in their way;
especially such as may hear true Ministers as able and as faithful men as they?

Has not any in the Congregation (by their own grounds) as much authority to
preach and receive maintenance, if the Congregation judge him gifted, and
desire it?

Does the absence or dissent of some or of the minor part of the Congregation
disannul the election of an Officer, admission, excommunication, etc, of a
member, or other Church-proceedings? or is the minor part bound to rest in the
vote of the major part, though contrary to their own judgments? or must they
separate from the Church, in case they conceive the major part does sin in such
election, admission, etc. lest they be leavened?

Are not all bound in conscience ordinarily to hear their own Ministers, which
themselves, or their husbands, or parents, or the major part of the religious
in their Congregation did either elect or afterward consent and freely submit
to? (which after consent, in the case of Leah, was enough to make a Marriage)
Or is every Christian notwithstanding this, at liberty to hear whomsoever and
whenever they please, even upon Sabbath days, when they conceive he is bound
to preach?

Were not husbands, wives and children always of one and the same Church? Does
the vote of the husband, or his joining to this or that true Church, include
the vote and joining of his wife and children under his Government? Is it not
then a disorderly unscriptural practice that husbands should be of one true
Church, and wives (and that often without their husbands privity) of another,
and children possibly of a third? Can an example of the like be showed?

Can Masters of Families (in such a case) take that care that those that are
under their Government do sanctify the Sabbath, which by the moral Law of God
they are obliged to take, when one go's one way, another a second, another a
third?

Whether there be any precept or president in Scripture for suspension of any
member of a particular Church or Congregation from the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, who is not at the same time cast out of the Church? and where is it?

Whether any greater degree of knowledge and sanctity ought to be required from
any before we admit them to the Sacrament, then Christ required of all those
which he admitted to it; if so great a degree may be required, considering what
men they were, and what means they enjoyed?

Does the Scripture contain in it any precept, president or warrant that a man
should refuse to communicate where either the Presbytery or Congregation are
remiss in Discipline, and admit such to the Sacrament as in his judgment are
not fit?

Was every particular Corinthian by communicating guilty of that gross
profanation of the Sacrament by the Incestuous person, though in his place he
(as it is like some few did) labored to reform it, and mourned for what he
could not mend?

Is not the instance of Achan for Relative guilt, more suitable to the
Israclites as a Camp then as a Congregation, and as valid against fighting in
an Army as against communicating in an Assembly where wicked men are admitted?

May a man under pretense that he abhors Idols, commit sacrilege; that is,
in Scripture phrase, rob Churches or Temples of that which belongs to them, and
convert to private use things he never bought or bargained for (nor is the
propriety of them legally in him, but in others) because he falsely conceiteth
(or suppose truly) that they were at first idolatrously and superstitiously
dedicated to God? Is gain godliness? Does this Reformation savor of
Conscionablenesse or Covetousness? Is there now adays any such sin as
Sacrilege? and what is it?

Whether the practice of every humane Invention (suppose those mentioned in
these Queres prove such) or the practice of every humane Institution used by
the Papists (suppose celebrating and receiving the Lords Supper before dinner,
in unleavened bread, bare headed, etc. be such) though accompanied with sincere
hatred and solemn renunciation of the Papacy and Popery, be the mark of the
Beast?

Can they that receive the mark of the Beast, be saved without explicit
knowledge of it and particular repentance for it?

Is that the mark of the Beast in one Age, that is not in another?

Was there not both Pastors and People during all the rage and reign of
Antichrist which did not receive the mark of the Beast, but their Fathers name,
and were Virgins; and yet did live and die in the practice of some Traditions
used by the Papists?

Can it be said either with truth or charity that the reformed Churches or
Waldenses, Albigenses, etc. which were more corrupt then they, did or do
receive the mark of the Beast? and who is he that can or will justify this
accusation?

Whether, notwithstanding the apparent differences between the Apostolic
Churches and ours; the Jewish Ceremonies being then scarce dead, or at least
not buried, their Civil customs differing from ours, the Church being then but
in gathering from amongst Heathens and Jews, under Heathenish and Jewish
persecuting Magistrates, and endued with extraordinary gifts and offices,
(which is not our case) the Rites and ^eremonies, Practices and Usages of the
Apostolic times be unalterably binding to all after-ages?

Does Christ's faithfulness above Moses consist in a more particular and
punctual determination of all externals of Gods Worship in the New Testament
then was given by Moses in the Old? Are the times and days of Baptism and the
Eucharist as plain as the days and times of Circumcision and the Passover, the
place of meeting, with the utensils etc.

Is the particular way how maintenance should be given to the Ministry as
punctually prescribed in the New Testament as in the Old, or the place of, etc.?

Where in Scripture is that glorious title of The Kingdom of Christ, applied to
the external policy of the Church; and of all other ways of Church Government,
to the Congregational-way only and chiefly; so that no Christians (though
never so sincere and holy) have Christ for their King, except they be
Church Members, and also within the Congregational Covenant; or at least none
so much as they? And if it be not so applied in Scripture, do not they wrong
Christ his Kingdom and people, that presume so to apply it?

Did not New England-men well and warrantably, when their hopes began to
languish of reducing the erroneous by private means, or by preaching and
conference, to hold an Assembly of the Churches for discovery and confutation
of them?

Had the General Court Civil in New England a lawful power, when Opinions grew
on, and experience discovered the danger, to make a Law that Churches should
not be set up in N. E. without the consent of the Magistrates and Churches
there? And has not the Civil power in Old England, from whence theirs is
derived, seeing the Word of God does not alter with Climates, the same power,
when there is the same or greater occasion? And ought not obedience by yielded
here as well as there?

Would not they that now plead for Liberty of Conscience and Toleration in the
Kingdom, were they able to root out Presbyterians and their Way, and could
Civil Authority enclinable to put forth coercive power against it, tell the
Magistrate that he might (if not, he ought) repress it with a strong hand, at
least under the notion of being prejudicial to the Civil peace, if it could not
otherwise be suppressed?

Did not the Magistrates of N. E. when they saw that neither preaching,
conference, nor Assembly of the Churches did work the cure of their
Distractions, but the erroneous went on in their former course, not only to
disturb the Churches, but miserably also to interrupt the Civil Peace, to
convent them, and to disfranchise some, fine others, and banish others? Is it
true or no, that sundry speak, and some write, that our N.E. Brethren would not
tolerate a few Presbyterians (notwithstanding the now-pretended smalnesse of
the difference) which were persecuted for Nonconformity, in any corner of their
Country; no not so much as in that which was next to the Barbarians?

Whether they which hold Episcopal Government to be Antichristian, Babylonish,
to be destroyed by fire and sword; and also Presbyterian Government to be
Antichristian, as bad or worse then Episcopal, be not bound by their principles
to root out Presbyterial Government and the resolute abbettors of it, with fire
and sword, if they can get ability and opportunity for such a design?

Whether they which have solemnly sworn to endeavor the Reformation of
Religion in Doctrine, Discipline, Worship and Government, according to the Word
of God and the example of the best Reformed Churches, and to endeavor the
Uniformity of the Churches in the three Kingdoms, and the extirpation of
Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schisin, etc. as all Parliament men,
the Assembly, and the best affected in the Kingdom have done, can with good
conscience allow or tolerate Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Herefie Schism? and
why may they not (for any obligation lying upon them by this Covenant) tolerate
Popery, Prelacy and Superstition as well as Heresy and Schism?

Whether the Parliament can perform those promises they have made in the first
Remonstrance, and since (wherein the Kingdom has much confided) If they loose
the golden reins of Discipline, and leave private men or particular
Congregations to take up what form of Divine Service they please, without
requiring conformity to that Order which the Laws enjoin according to Gods Word?

Have our Brethren expressed all their present opinions and desires, or kept
some for a reserve? and what may be the reason of such a reserve? Are they
fully persuaded in their own minds of the truth of all that which they
express themselves to hold, or only take them up for the present, waiting for
further light? May not the Presbyterian-Way, for ought they certainly know
(howbeit they at present think not so) be the Way of God, and most agreeable to
his Word? And have not expressions to this purpose proceeded from their Tongues
or Pens?

FINIS.

