A CAUTION to the sons of SION: Being an ANSWER to Jeremiah Ives his Book,
Entitled, The great Case of Conscience opened.

I. Proving that every calling God to witness is not Swearing.

II. Proving that Promissary Oaths were never commanded by God, only practiced
as Liberty under former Dispensations.

III. Proving that Promissary Oaths were never commanded nor practiced by
Christ nor his Disciples in all the New Testament.

IV. Showing what an Oath is.

V. Proving the lawfulness of all Promissary Oaths in the time of the Gospel.

For the Land is full of adulterers, for because of Swearing the Land mourns,
the pealant places of the wilderness are dried up, and their course is evil,
and their force is not right,

Jerem. 23.10. By Samuel Hodgkin.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, in the year, 1660.

An Answer to Jeremiah Ives his Book Entitled The great Case of Conscience
Opened.
FOrasmuch as many of the Lords People through this Nation are imprisoned at
this day for the Testimony of a good Conscience, who rather choose joyfully to
suffer than to Swear, I therefore who am a prisoner upon the same account,
being constrained, by those mani-fold persuasions that I have met with from the
Lord upon my spirit, to persuade me hereunto, I therefore have thought it my
duty to set pen to paper in vindication of that Righteous Law of Christ, for
which we suffer at this day, that so the Justice of our Cause may appear the
more plainly to all those who are willing to look on it with an unbyassed eye,
and I am the more provoked hereunto, through consideration of those many Stars
that have fallen in this evil day, who have not been contented only to Swear
themselves, (although some of them have manifested by their suffering for it
first, that their Conscience was convinced to the contrary) yet when they saw
no way to escape suffering, they were willing rather to Swear than to suffer;
and also some have not been contented only to Swear, but have endeavored not
only by pleading for, but also writing to vindicate the same; and least it
should prove to the wounding of some poor souls, I judge therefore my self
bound in Conscience, for the vindication of the truth, and therefore I shall
proceed,

First, To answer as briefly as may be, what has been asserted by Mr Ives, for
the proof of Promissary Swearing in the time of the Gospel, and that I may so
do, I shall examine what has been said by him in his book, called The great
Case of Conscience Opened, and to the end we way escape the dangen of those
manifold extremes, that too too many are carried away by in this our day; Let
us therefore take heed, least through the pretense of fear of splitting our
selves on the rock of ignorance, we cry up that for verity, which is in it self
heresy: I shall therefore take notice of the method which he takes, that so by
tracing him in the channel wherein he goes, I may the better take notice
wherein it agrees, or not agrees with the Scriptures of Truth; and if through
the Lords assistance I shall come to discover any thing therein contained not
to be agreeable to Truth, I have what I aim at, and let God have the glory, and
that I may so do, I shall first take notice what he undertaketh to prove, which
is, That Assertory and Promissary Oaths are both lawful and useful in the time
of the Gospel and the way by which he proceeds for the proof thereof is, First,
To show what Sacred Oaths are. Secondly To what end they were taken. Thirdly,
Whether those two Texts, Matthew 5.34. James 5.12. do forbid all Oaths in the
time of the Gospel.

As to the first, namely what a Sacred Oath is: says he, it is a band by which
a man binds his soul to the speaking of that which is in it self true, or the
doing of that which is in it self lawful, unto which the living and true God is
called to witness, Numb. 30.2.

To this I answer, that every Sacred Oath by which God is called to witness to
the truth of a thing, or to the performance of a lawful thing, is a band
whereby the soul is bound, but every calling God to witness in lawful things
is not an Oath.

As appears thus, if a bare calling God to witness be swearing by God, then
calling the Heaven and Earth to witness is swearing by Heaven and Earth, for
then Moses had sworn by creatures, Deuteronomy. 4.26. I call Heaven and Earth to
witness against you this day; And so likewise God himself in Deuteronomy. 30.19. I
call Heaven and Earth to record against you, chap. 31.28. but it was ever
unlawful to swear by creatures, therefore I conclude, That a bare calling to
witness is not swearing.

Now wheneas Mr Ives says there were two sorts of Sacred Oaths under the Law,
(viz.) commanded and voluntary.

I grant that there were, but there were no other Sacred Oaths commanded under
the Law but Assertory, and therefore you may take notice that those Texts he
has here cited, to wit, Exodus 22.11 Deuteronomy. 5.3. chap. 10.20. do not in the least
mention any Promissory Swearing: Now therefore whereas he says some Oaths were
voluntary, I shall not deny it, but do say that all Promissory Oaths were
voluntary, because I find not one Text of Scripture where ever God commanded
them. Now whereas M. Ives says, That there were three ways by which a man
bound himself with an Oath.

I do grant there were: namely, first when he pronounced the Oath with his own
lips, Levit. 5.4.

Secondly as a man is sworn when he pronounced the oath with his own lips, so I
grant that he may as well be sworn when he is charged or abjured to swear by
the liveing God, provided that he say amen to the oath, or I take this oath
upon me; I say then if after he has taken the Oath upon him, he do not speak
the truth, he is as well guilty of false swearing, as he that pronounces the
oath with his own lips; but it does not therefore follow, that if a man be
charged or abjured to swear and to speak the truth upon his Oath, and he give
no consent to the Oath, neither by saying amen, nor so be it, nor I take this
upon me; I say then that it does not follow that he has sworn because he
speaks the truth, for then when a man is charged or abjured to swear by the
living God, and to speak the Truth, it would follow, that either he must hold
his peace, or else if he speak the truth, he must be sworn whether he will or
no; I say therefore it does not follow that because the High Priest charged
Christ to swear by the Living God, and to speak the truth, namely, whether he
were the Son of God or no; I say then it does not follow that because he
consented unto the truth, in saying thou say it, that therefore he was
sworn; for according to what Mr Ives cites of Mr. Answorths writings, if he
had been sworn, he must have said amen to the Oath, or so be it, or I take this
Oath upon me; then after he had taken the Oath so upon him, if he had answered
any thing, it had been upon his Oath.

Again, whereas Mr. Ives cites, Levit. 5.1. to prove that a man was sworn if
he untered a matter, being abjured thereunto by the Living God; the text says
no such matter, for the text at most if we take it in his own terms, does but
say, if a man sin and hear the voice of swearing (or abjuration) and is a
witness, whether he has seen or known of it, if he do not utter it, then he
shall bear his iniquity; as much as if the Lord should have said that he that
could witness the truth of a matter, and would not when he was charged to it,
should be guilty of sin, because he did not discover it; and as Solomon says,
Prove. 19.24. He that is partner with a thief hates his own Soul, he hears
cursing and bewrays it not, as much as if he should say by keeping silence
when he ought to witness, he became guilty of another man's sin; now the Text
does not say that if he does not utter it, he shall be guilty of false
swearing, but the text only says he shall bear his iniquity.

Again, whereas Mr. Ives says from the 1 King. 22. 16,17. that the Prophet
Micah was as firmly sworn when the King abjured him in the Name of the Living
God, as if he had pronounced the Oath with his own lips; I much wonder that he
should so much wrong the Prophet, for if every time the King abjured him, he
were sworn, then he was sometimes forsworn; for it is plain from the words, How
many times? That the King had sometimes abjured him before, and yet we do not
find that he gave the King any direct answer before; and therefore I conclude
as before that, except the Prophet had first owned the Oath, and then answered,
he was not sworn; I confess I cannot but much wonder that he should so
earnestly desire others to consider of this, and yet so little consider of it
himself; for he first tells us that a man is sworn if he does but speak the
truth when he is abjured by the Living God, and yet he tells us afterward,
that an Oath like this we have in our Common Law; now I would appeal to any man
that knows but any thing of the Law, whether or no when the witness is
charged by the help of God to speak the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, between party and party; now if the witness should speak the truth,
without laying his hand upon the Book and kissing it, or giving his consent to,
or owning of the Oath, I would fain know whether any rational man would say
that this man was sworn; therefore I would desire you for to consider that it
is one thing for a man to relate a matter when he is charged or abjured to
swear to it, and another thing for a man first to own or take the Oath upon
him, and then to relate it upon his Oath.

Now the third way by which a man bound his Soul by an Oath, I do grant was no
less Sacred, though somewhat different from the former, and that is called an
Oath of cursing, Number. 5.21. But this Oath was no otherwise taken then the
former, for either the party taking it must utter the curse with his own mouth,
2 Samuel 3.35. Or else when the Oath was pronounced by another, the party must
say amen, or a word of like import, to signify that they owned the Oath, or
else they were not bound, as appears, Number. 5.22. Nehe. 5 12, 13. And all the
Congregation said Amen.

And therefore I shall now come unto the second qustion, (viz.) what was the
end of sacred Oaths, and here I cannot but take notice of his distinction
between Oaths commanded and voluntary, because he says that Oaths that were
commanded were ordinarily such as were made by God to men; and Oaths that were
voluntary were made to God; I confess if this distinction were true, it would
somewhat clear the matter, and therefore let us take good notice of the way he
takes to prove it, for faith he, this distinction appears plainly, if we
consider the example of Abraham swearing his Servant to him by the Loid, Gone.
23.4. And Abraham swear by the Lord Abimeleoh, Gen 21.23. and the spies Swear
by the Lord to Rahab, Jos. 2 12.

I confess if these texts prove that God Commanded men to swear one to
another, they would make something to his purpose, but if every practice or
example of the Servants of God of old do prove the thing practiced to be a
Command of God, then have I lost my understanding; But I humbly conceive that
Mr. Ives will not say that every thing that was practiced by the Servants of
God of old was Commanded by God, for all men that know any thing, do know that
they practiced many things, as Liberty, and not as Command; Now therefore
except I could find one text of Scripture, either in Old or new Testament, to
prove that promissary Swearing was Commanded,

I conclude that it was never Commanded; Now says he the end of such oaths as
men swore by God to one another was, as the Author to the Hebrews tells us,
Heb. 6.1^. To end all strife, and to confirm the truth of a matter in question;
an example we have of this, Exodus 22.11 If a man deliver to his neighbourian
Ox, or an Ass, or a Sheep, or any Beast to keep, and it dye or be hurt, or
driven away, no man seeing it, Then shall an Oath of the Lord be between them
both, that he has not put his hand unto his neighbors goods, and the owner
thereof shall accept it, and he shall not make it good; Now I grant that one
end of men's swearing one to another, was, as the Author to the Hebrews says,
to end all strife, and as appears by the forementioned text, Exodus 22.11. I do
also grant that another end of one man's swearing to another, was to make good
all Lawful promises, according as Mr. Ives says; but you may be pleased to
take notice that here he begs the question, and says, having spoken of the end
of such oaths that were Commanded, when he has not given one text of Scripture
to prove promissary oaths Commanded.

I shall therefore conclude that not only all Sacred oaths to God were
voluntary, but also all promissary oaths to men were voluntary, because I know
no text of Scripture Commanded them; I shall now proceed and take notice of
what he says to the end of voluntary oaths; Now says he, the end of those
Sacred oaths that were voluntary, were to afflict the Soul by falling or
otherwise. To this I answer that some voluntary oaths were to afflict the Soul,
Number. 30.3. But it does not therefore follow that all voluntary oaths were to
afflict the Soul; For some Sacred oaths were between men and men, which were
voluntarily, as I have already showed from Genesis 23.4. chap. 21.22. Again says
he, those Oaths that were made to God were called Oaths to God; I confess I do
not know how they should be called otherwise, because there was none else
concerned in them; but it does not therefore follow that God requires the
performance of no other Oaths to him, but such as were immediately made to him;
for we find in Scripture, that God owns Oaths that were made between men and
men to be his Oaths, and requires the performance thereof as well as it they
had been immediately made to him, as we may see in Ezekiel. 17.19. Therefore thus
says the Lord God, as I live, surely my Oath that he has despised, and my
Covenant that he has broken, even it will I recompense upon his own head. So
likewise the 2d. of Samuel 21.7. and 1 Kings 2.43. Now therefore, though as he
says, the end of Oaths made immediately to God, were to bind them to the
performance of those voluntary Services which they were not bound to by the
Law, yet it cannot be understood that Christ has reference in Mat. 5.33. to
such Oaths only as were made immediately to God, because as I have already
showed, that God requires the performance, and owns such Oaths to be his, as
were made between men and men.

I now come to his last question, (viz.) whether those two Texts Mat. 5. and
Jam. 5. do forbid all manner of swearing in Gospel times, and here I shall
grant with him, that Christ does not forbid the use of such swearing as was in
the Law commanded, only let me revive the forementioned distinction, namely
between Oaths commanded, and Oaths that were voluntary, and that because Oaths
that were commanded were only assertory, as I have already showed; now
therefore I shall pass over those reasons that he has given to prove, that
Christ did not take away the use of all such swearing as was commanded under
the Law, only by the way, give me leave to except against some particulars
that he has instanced in for proof in this case, and first I take notice of
his first Reason, (viz.) that Christ used some such swearing himself, in Mat.
26.63. when he was adjured by the High Priest.

To which I answer, if I should grant that Christ in this swore, yet it makes
nothing to our question, because in this Text there was nothing promissary, but
however I cannot but wonder, that be should so much contradict himself, as to
say that Christ swore, and yet made no answer to the Oath, when he himself
says in the third page of his Book, speaking of Mr. Ainsworth's writings, in
showing, that when a man is adjured or charged to swear, he is not sworn except
he take the Oath upon him, by expressing some words to signify the same, which
Christ did not.

I now come to his second Reason, (viz.) that Christ in Mat. 5. could not take
away the use of all such swearing as was commanded under the Law, because those
Commandments contained in Ordinances, were not taken away till the death of
the Testator, Ephesians. 2.15. and those Ordinances that were contrary to us, were
not taken away till Christ nailed them to his Cross, Col. 2.14. therefore
those Commandments of the Law which accommodated humane affairs, and respected
morals, of which, this of swearing to end strife was none of the least, could
not be taken away before Christ died, and that therefore all such Oaths as were
commanded under the Law, was not forbid by that Text, Mat. 5.34.

I confess this is the soundest Argument I have met with in all his Book, and
had he first proved that promissary swearing had been commanded under the Law,
this had been something to his purpose; but forasmuch as promissary swearing
was never commanded in any part of the Law; this Argument can at most but prove
assertory Oaths to be excepted in Mat. 5. and so we are but still where we were
before; for I do grant, that in Mat. 5. Christ took away nothing that was
commanded, and that therefore in his prohibition ver. 34. can have reference to
no other Oath but promissary, and because no other Oath binds the persons
taking it to performance.

I come to his third Reason, (viz.) that those Texts Mat. 5. and Jam. 5. cannot
forbid the use of all such swearing as was commanded under the Law, because the
Prophet prophesied that some such swearing should be used in the times of the
New Testament, Isa. 65.16, 17. I must confess Mr. Ives puts me into amaze, to
think that he is already got into the new heavens, and the new earth, certainly
he has not been long there, for it was not long ago since he was in prison
because he could not swear, but it should seem that he is not only got thence,
but he has forgotten all the former troubles; I confess it will be well for
him, if he according to the Text, never have occasion to remember them any
more; but I humbly conceive, that few men in England will say that the time is
yet come that the Prophet speaks of; and although Mr. Ives cites the Apostle
Peter's words, 2 Pet. 3. to prove that the Prophet does respect the New
Testament time, yet I suppose that after the heavens and the earth is burnt up,
then Mr. Ives will have done writing of Books, but to come unto the Text, if it
did respect our times (as doubtless it does not) yet it does not reach our
case, because it mentions nothing promissary. Again whereas he cites Psalms
15.4. to prove promissary swearing under the New Testament: To this I answer,
that if this Text must of necessity be understood to have respect to the time
of the Gospel, then it is either because some Text of Scripture tells us so, or
else because that swearing is in all ages a duty so incumbent upon Saints, that
none can dwell in Gods holy Hil^, that have not been found acting therein: But
there is no Text of Scripture that tells us, that this Prophet in this Text
has respect to Gospel times, and I am persuaded that none will be so
ridiculous as to say, that swearing is in all ages a duty so incumbent upon
Saints, that none can dwell in Gods holy Hill, that have not been found acting
therein; and whereas he cites Isa. 45.23. I must say it does not respect our
time, because then every tongue shall confess God, but at this present they do
not, but however it does not respect our case, and therefore I shall leave it.

I come now to his fourth Reason, which is, that those two Texts Mat. 5. and
Jam. 5. could not forbid all such swearing as was commanded under the Law,
because such swearing Jesus Christ was not only found in the practice of, but
the Apostle Paul does both practice and enjoin the same; Now to prove that the
Apostle practiced promissary swearing, he cites 2 Cor. 11.10. and tells us that
the Apostle swore, because he said, as the Truth of Christ is in me, no man
shall stop me of this boasting in the Regions of Achaia; I confess I cannot
but wonder to think that he should call this swearing, if it was swearing, what
did he swear by? In your stead I answer, that if I should take it for granted,
as you say, then he swore by that Truth or Belief of Christ which was in him;
Again, if he swore, what did he swear to? I answer, that he would boast the
matter, touching which he would boast of is evident; so to gather this up we
thus reason, that if the Apostle swore, that then he swore by something that
was not God, that no man should stop him of his boasting; Now to swear by any
thing that is not God will be easily granted on all hands to be sin, which this
arguing accuses the Apostle with, and certainly it need be no wonder that men
have gotten a custom in England to swear by their Faith, or Truth, if Paul
swore by the same, for if swearing by the Truth of Christ that is in us be not
to swear by our Faith, then I must confess I am to seek; but certainly none
that well considers what they say, will affirm that the Apostle did swear by
his Faith, neither that he made so slight an account of an Oath as to swear he
would boast; yet notwithstanding to prove the Apostle did swear in these words,
he refers us to the 1 Kings 1.29. and tells us that Daniel swore as the Lord
lives, yet if this were true, it does not follow that the word as does make it
to be an Oath at all times; but if you look into the Text you will find that it
says that the King swear and said as the Lord lives, from whence we may
observe, that his Oath was one thing, and what he said in the following words
was another thing, and if we mind the 30. verse, he tells us what the Oath was,
even as I swear unto thee by the Lord; so that in plainness we may understand
that the King swore by the Lord, and said, As the Lord lives that bath
redeemed my soul out of all distress; again he tells us, that under the Old
Testament they swore, in calling God to witness, or record to the Truth of
what they said, Judge 11.10. Jerem. 42.5. but these Texts does not call it
swearing, though Mr. Ives does; and though he tells us, if calling God to
witness be not swearing, he is ignorant what swearing is; yet let me tell you,
he has given us never a Text of Scripture to prove that it is, but I humbly
conceive, that what I have already said from Deuteronomy. 4.26. and 30.19. and 31.28.
does sufficiently prove, that every calling to witness in a solemn manner is
not swearing; for then not only Moses, but God himself has sworn by
Creatures, a thing which Mr. Ives himself grants was never lawful; but if it
should be granted, that calling God to witness were swearing, yet it would
make nothing to his purpose, because the Apostle uses it only in cases
assertory, and not promissary; Again he tells us, that the Apostle swore in
Romans ^.1. because he says he speaks the Truth in Christ; I confess, if
speaking the Truth in Christ be swearing, then this is swearing, but if not, I
know not how he can make an Oath of these words; but in regard the Apostle also
in this Text is asserting the Truth, I shall leave this, and come to what he
says concerning promissary swearing.

Now to prove that promissary swearing is lawful, he cites 2 Timothy ^.1. where
Paul charged Timothy before God and the Lord Jesus Christ; but what of this?
does this prove that he charged him to swear? the Text says only, that Paul
charged Timothy to preach the Gospel, but it is only Mr. Ives that tells us he
charged him to swear; but now to make good his assertion, he brings us to 1 Thessalonians. 5.27. where the Text speaks not a word of swearing; but to wind up his
discourse, having no Text of Scripture to prove his matter, he does as the
Priests of England use to do, and tells us that it is otherwise in Beza's
Translation; but what then? if it be otherwise in Beza's Translation, will it
therefore follow that Beza's Translation is true, and all others false? I would
appeal to all rational men, whether it be a sufficient ground for men to swear
promissary Oaths, because Beza in one Text of Scripture contradicts other
Translators? But again consider, what reason can there be imagined, that Paul
should write to the Thessalonians to charge them to swear to read his Epistle
to all the Brethren? Were it not more reasonable to think, that if the
Thessalonians did value Paul's charge, they would as soon have read his Epistle
without swearing, as to be sworn, or to swear to read it? for doubtless, if
they had not valued his charging them to read it, they would not have valued
his charging them to swear to read it; so that this considered, it does not
appear that Paul swore them.

To proceed, I come to the fifth Reason, where he tells us that Mat. 5. and
Jam. 5. could not forbid all such swearing as was used under the Law, because
there is as much reason for the use of some Oaths now, as ever there was to
this; I answer, that as to Oaths assertory, I shall leave it, because it is not
our case, but as to Oaths promissary, I answer, and say that the Law of Christ
must be above reason; for when Christ commands, we must not enquire whether his
Commands be reasonable or no; if we do, it is possible our carnal reason may
come short of the mind of Christ; as for instance, what reason was there that
Abraham should slay Isaac, only the command of God? Again, what reason was
there that all the Males should be circumcised, only the command of God?
Again, what reason is there that a man or woman should go in a cold frosty
morning to be baptized, only that the Servant of the Lord says to persons
when converted, arise, why tarriest thou, and be baptized; and why may we not
as well say swear not at all promissary Oaths, though there were no more reason
why we should refrain, then there is for the former cases cited, seeing we have
for this as for the former, the command of Christ? and therefore let us take
heed how we consult with reason in such cases; but I might prove sufficiently
from Scripture, that there is not so much reason in our day for promissary
swearing, as was in the time of the Law; but supposing that what I have said
already may be sufficient, I shall only refer the Reader to Mat. 24.6, 7, 8,
9. verses, and Ezekiel. 24.17. desiring them to consider of them, (not that I
would here be mistaken) as if I did believe from these Texts, that it is the
Saints work to overturn Government; but only this I could wish, that Saints
would have a care of swearing, to uphold and maintain any power, least that
power should act wickedly, and God should have a controversy with them, even
to the overturning of them, which may fully by Scripture be proved to be the
manner of Gods dealing with powers that he himself has set up, and so may be
found fighters against God.

I shall now briefly take notice of what Mr. Ives further says as to Mat. the
5.34. where Christ says, but I say swear not at all, which words says he does
admit of a restriction; To which I answer, that I do believe that Christ did
not intend in that text to take away such swearing as was enjoined by a Law,
(viz) assertory swearing; Therefore I shall pass what he has said as to this
particular; and whereas he tells us that Christ forbids all swearing in our
Common Communication, and also swearing by Creatures, now these kind of
swearings being always unlawful, I shall love what he has said to this, only
I cannot but take notice of what he says in the Conclusion of his book, where
he tells us that the Apostle James had reference to those passionate oaths that
the twelve Tribes did usually make in affliction, for says he, it was usual
for them to make passionate Oaths in affliction, and to prove this, he cites
Psalm. 13.2.12. Lord (says the Psalons) Remember David in all his affliction,
how he swear unto the Lord, and vowed unto the Mighty God of Jacob, Saying, I
will not enter into the Tabernacle of my House, her climb up to my Bed, nor
suffer my eyes to sleep, nor my eyelids to slumber, till I have found out a
place for the Lord, an Habitation for the Mighty God of Jacob. Now because that
God has said that David should never build him an House, Mr. Ives is pleased
to say that this Oath was passionate, but I humbly conceive that his opinion in
this case was not grounded upon Scripture, for the Scripture tells us that it
was such an Oath as the Lord will accept of, 2 King. 6.8. But the Lord said to
David my Father, for as much as it was in thy heart to build an House for my
Name, thou did well in that it was in thine heart.

And although the Lord would not suffer David to build him an House, yet he
suffered them to fulfill his Oath in every title; for he did not only find out
a Place for the House to be built, but also he gave the Pattern, 1 Cro. 28
10.11. chap. Thus having answered what Mr. Ives has written to prove
promissary oaths lawful, I shall conclude what I have said with the same
causion which he gives; but let every man take heed how he swears.

And now I shall come first to show what an oath is, and secondly to prove that
Christ forbids all Promissary oachs in Mat. 5. and that I may so do, you may be
pleased, first to take notice of what I have already said from Dent. 4.26.
chap. 30.19. chap. 31.28. namely, that calling God to witness, is not swearing,
but when we read of the Servants of the Lord swearing in Scripture, we find,
that it was not only a bare calling God to witness, but they swear by God that
they did speak the truth, or that they would do such a thing, as you see in
Genesis 23.4. Abraham swore his Servant by the Lord, 1 Samuel 21, 22. David swear to
Saul by the Lord, 21 Genesis 23. and Abraham swear by the Lord, 2. Josh. 12 the
Spies swear by the Lord, and as it was the true manner of swearing, to swear by
the Lord, when they prenounced the Oath themselves, so it was also when they
were charged or abjured by another; and therefore we find that it was the
manner of the Jews, that when they charged or abjured one to swear, they did
not tell them that they should take God to witness to what they said, but we
find that when the High Priest abjured Christ, 36 Mat. 63. he adjured him by
God; So likewise when the the Prophet Isaiah Prophesied of the New Heavens, and
the New Earth, Isa. 65.16. He says that he who swear in the Earth shall swear
by the God of Truth; Now to swear by the Lord is to say that they do speak the
truth, or will do such a thing by the Lord, as much as if they should say, that
the Lord do help them in what they do, or that they do it by his assistance;
and hence it comes to pass that it was unlawful for a man to swear by any
Creature, because no Creature can help him to speak the truth, or perform what
he promised; and hence it is that God took it ill when they did not speak
truth, because they did as much as say that God did help them to speak a lie,
and so they blasphemed the Name of God in the highest nature; and doubtless
those that made the oath that we have in our Common Law, did understand no
less, and therefore they charge the witness by the help of God to speak the
truth; Thus having shown what an oath is; I come now to prove from Mat. the 5.
that Christ forbids all promissary oaths, and that I may so do, I shall first
give you these distinctions, as finding them in Scripture; first swearing in
their common Communication. Secondly, swearing, yet by Creatures. Thirdly,
assertory Oaths, swearing by God to affirm a truth by them spoken, in a solemn
manner before a Judge, or otherwise. Fourthly, promissary oaths, promising and
binding it with an oath. As to the first, all men that I know of will grant
that it was ever sinful. The second, I know no man that will say that it was
ever Lawful. The third was once Gods Law, Exodus 22.11. and therefore not taken
away by Christ, Mat. 5. because those Commandments contained in Ordinances,
were not taken away till the death of the Testator, Ephesians. 2.15. The fourth, an
old practice, yet never Commanded, but used as Liberty until Christ forbid it
in Mat. the 5.33.34. and never in the least used in all the New Testament,
since the time it was prohibited, neither by Christ nor Christians. Now that
Christ did prohibit it in Mat. 5.34. appears thus, first, that it was
promissary is manifested from verse. the 33. in the word thou shall perform,
because there can be no performance where there is no thing promised. Secondly
that it was such promissary Oaths as was sometimes Lawful that is there
forbidden, appears also from verse. 33. Again ye have heard that it has been
said by them of old time, thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform
unto the Lord thine Oaths; Now it was Lawful both before the Law and under the
Law to swear and perform; Therefore Christ forbids that which was sometimes
Lawful. But if it should be objected that because the text says, it has been
said by them of old time, that therefore Christ for bids only such promissary
Oaths as the Jews allowed of by their Tradition, namely, swearing by Creatures;
To this I answer, first, that in the older Translations it is read thus, It was
said of them of old time; and therefore it cannot be understood to be the Jews
traditions, because it was the Law of God that said to them of old time they
should not forswear but perform. Secondly, it cannot be reasonably concluded
that Christ has respect in this text only to the Jews tradition, because he
uses the same m^nner of expression in this text that he uses in ver. 21. and
27. Now it will be granted by all that it was the Law of God that said they
should not kill, and that they should not commit adultery, and why may we not
as well conclude that he intends the Law of God in ver. the 33. Now if it be
objected that he does but give the true sense and meaning of the Law in ver.
21.27. and therefor he does not take away any thing that was ever Lawful, in
ver. 33, 34. To this I answer, that it was once Lawful in the Law to put away a
wife, although it was not for fornication, yet Christ prohibits it, ver, 32.
Again, it was lawful in the time of the Law to have an eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth; but Christ prohibits it, in ver. 39. therefore we may
plainly see that although Christ do not take away any of the Preceptory part of
the Law, yet he does take away some of the Privileged part of the Law.
Thirdly, the third and last reason why Christ cannot be understood only to
forbid swearing by Creatures, is taken from ver. the 34 But I say unto you
swear not at all, neither by Heaven, from whence we may take notice from the
word, neither, that he does first forbid such swearing as was sometimes Lawful,
namely, to swear by God; and least they should think that although they might
not presume to swear by God, yet they might swear by those inferior things;
Now to prevent this, he says neither by Heaven nor Earth, nor Jerusalem,
neither by the head, for we must understand that the word neither, has
reference to something going before; But if it should be objected further, that
Christ means only swearing, in their ordinary or Common Communication,
because he says in verse 37. But let your Communication be yea yea, nay nay;
for what soever is more then these comes of evil.

I answer that if the word Common or Ordinary were in the text, there might
besome ground for this Objection; but forasmuch as the text only says
Communication, not Ordinary or Common Communication, I humbly conceive that
this Objection will easily be answered; for we find in Scripture that the most
Heavenly or most solid discourse between men and men is called Communication,
as you may see, 2 Samuel 3.17, 18. Abner had a Communication with the Elders of
Israel about setting up David to be King, according to the appointment of God,
2 King. 9.11. now if we compare this text with the precedent verses, we shall
find that the Prophet declaring the Message of God concerning the setting up of
Jehu King over Israel, is called Communication; but I conceive these will be
out of qustion, and therefore I shall leave it, and commit what I have said to
the ingenious Reader, desiring to leave it to the blessing of the Almighty,
hoping that these who are willing to look on it with an equal eye, may thereby
be enabled the better to escape the evil of our day.

FINIS.

