THE ^ISTORY OF THE ^IFE and DEATH (...) that Ancient Father of the Church, Dr
Joh. Thauler, (...) lived at Colen in Germany in the year of ^r Lord, 1346.
where he was in a ^iraculous manner turned from his vain ^onversation to an
extraordinary degree ^f holiness of life. ^ther, with many of his Precepts,
Positions, and ^ermons; but especially the Means and Man^r how he came to be so
highly Illuminated, ^d to the understanding of the secret Mysteries (...) ^he
Gospel, etc.

^aithfully Translated out of Latin.

^rinted for Lodowick Lloyd, and are to be (...) ^is Shop at the Castle in
Cornhil, 1663.

THE HISTORY Of the Life of the sublime and illuminated Divine, Dr. John
Thauler, who at Colin (where he lived) was in an Extraordinary and Miraculous
manner turned from his vain Conversation to an Extraordinary degree of
Sanctity, and Holiness of Life.
IN the year of our Lord, One thousand three hundred forty six, there lived a
Doctor of Divinity in Colin in Germany, a frequent Preacher exceedingly
followed, and famous for his Doctrine far and near. A certain Layman
abundantly endowed and anointed with Divine Grace, hearing his fame, and being
thrice warned in a Dream to go to the City where the Doctor lived, (which was
at the least thirty mile distance from the place, where then the Layman was)
resolved with himself to Travel thither, and try what it would please Divine
grace to bring to pass; then he takes his journey, arrives at the City where
the Doctor lived; attentively heard him five times Preach; In which while he
understood in the Spirit, that the Doctor was by nature an ingenuous Man, of a
mild, sweet, and courteous behavior, and excellently well skilled in the
Letter of the Scripture; but obscurely and glimeringly understanding it, being
without the Light of Divine grace. The Layman exceedingly hereupon pitying his
condition, went to him, and thus entered into discourse with him. Reverend Sir,
I am come above thirty miles to sit at your feet, and hear your Doctrine, drawn
by the fame of your excellent abilities, and already have I heard five of your
Sermons; Therefore I beseech you for Gods sake vouchsafe while I stay here, to
be my Confessor. The courteous Dr. refusing not the motion; The Layman often came
to confession, which he performed with much simplicity and humility: and when
ever he thought fit to receive the most sacred Body of our Lord, he received it
at the Doctors hands. Twelve weeks in this manner being spent, the Layman came
to the Doctor with a request, which he thus uttered: Reverend Master, I beseech
you for Gods sake teach us in a Sermon the most compendious way of attaining
the highest degree of perfection, that this Life is capable of. What do thou
mean Son (quoth the Doctor) to what purpose would it be to Preach such sublime
matters to you, who (I suppose) would hardly be able to understand one word?
Though possibly (answered the Layman) I may not (Reverend Sir) be able to
understand you, yet at least I shall breath and pant after, and with hearty and
frequent Prayers desire those things you shall deliver. Beside, a great
multitude of people come together to hear you; now if but one of these shall
rightly understand what you shall say, your labor will not be lost. I but
(said the Doctor) if I should be put upon that you desire (good Son) it would
cost me first much pains and study, and a great deal of labor, to gather what
would be requisite to the business, and to digest it into fit method. But
whatever excuses the Doctor made, the Layman would not give over his entreaty
till the Doctor passed his word, that he would Preach such a Sermon as he
desired. It fell out shortly after that the Dr. Preached in a certain Monastry;
And Sermon being ended; he told the Congregation, that those whom other
business hindered not, might resort thither upon the third day following; for I
am desired (quoth he) to Preach a Sermon, in which I must show, by what means
one may most compendiously come to the highest degree of perfection attainable
in this Life. The third day being come, very many flocked to the place; among
the rest, betimes in the morning thither hastens the Layman, that he might get
a convenient place where he might the better hear, and understand the Doctor.
The Doctor comes as he had appointed, and begins this following Discourse.

In this following most excellent Discourse, there are laid down four and
twenty points, by which may be known who are truly illuminated men, and true
contemplators.
SO great and many things (dearly beloved) are to be handled at this time
touching the Argument, I lately promised to discourse upon, that according to
my constant custom, I cannot take the Gospel of the day for my Text, nor use
many Latin words.

But notwithstanding those matters that I shall handle, shall be such as may be
easily confirmed out of Scripture.

In the first place (beloved) I would not have you ignorant, how there are very
many to be found, who attain to a clear knowledge, understanding, and a
rational decerning in Heavenly matters; but it is altogether by Images and
Forms in their fancy; impressed there sometimes by the study of Scripture,
sometimes without it. Many of these when this speculative Light of their own
intellect by the aforesaid means; either by the study of Scripture, or some way
else begins to shine, they sit down in it, abundantly satisfied; but all such
(questionless) are far enough from the top and highest degree of perfection:
but if any one such could be found, who had pierced and passed through the fore
mentioned attainment, and were totally and centrally mortifyed to it, and who
had got above all sorts of Images and Forms in the fancy; Such a one would
infinitely be more dear and acceptable to God, then an hundred thousand of the
other sort of men, who live in their own habitual institutions, and modes,
taken up by themselves, out of self-will, and insensible and intelectual
Images, so totally taken up with them, that they take no care to deny and
mortify themselves. For indeed God is altogether hindered from entering into
and possessing such, by reason of their self will, and their own proper working
in their own strength, by which they are detained in their own dearly beloved,
and delighted in intellectual imaginations. But those that have passed through
such, and by a kind of dying have resigned up themselves to God, and have gone
out of all manner of imaginary comtemplations, and finally with humble
resignation, have offered and given up themselves, free and naked, above all
intellectual imaginations, (as St. Dionisius says, that the Light of Faith
requires, that a man should mount above the utmost power and capacity of
reason, or intellect:) such (I say) as have come to this state, in them God
finds a resting place, where he may dwell and work all their works in them;
when, where, and in what manner he pleases: For when as God sees in them no
impediment, he works in them his own work, and does act and lead them to
himself, and in himself. Such men as these are unknown to any; because there
lives and conversations are hidden to all, unless those that are of the same
Attainment, State, or Complexion, of which I fear there are very few. But to
this height and perfection of Life, no man can attain, but by the profoundest
and deepest humility, a perspicuous and pure intellect, and a clear and
illuminated reason. Although indeed (which cannot be denied) once many
intelligent Spirits which by Nature are nothing else but pure intelligences,
fowlly erred, and fell from that eternal Unity, and were also forever secluded
out of the Chorus of Angels; the same thing likewise happens every day to such
which look upon themselves with self-pleasing flattery, and by usurping
self-will, and a vain complacency in their own subtilty, make themselves like
those fallen Angels. Wherefore (beloved) it concerns us to know, and to be able
to distinguish, who are truly illuminated and wise Contemplators. Truly I have
found so far as may be gathered from Scripture; four and twenty Particulars
which a truly illuminated Man ought to have in him: which Particulars I shall
willingly deliver at this time, and so conclude.

1. The First Particular, even the chief Doctor of Doctors, and Teacher of all
true Wisdom and Knowledge; Christ Jesus our Lord mentions, where he says, John
13.
By this shall all men know that you are my Disciples, if you love one the
other, and shall keep that my Commandment, which I commanded you, John 15.
that you love one another even as I have loved you; as if he should have said;
although ye have all knowledge, and skill, all Mystery; if there be wanting
Fidelity, and Charity, it profits nothing. For it is said of Balaam^, that he
was endowed with so piercing and subtle a wit, and reason, that he foresaw
those things which God many hundred years afterward brought to pass, and
manifested: but this profited him nothing, because as he ought he did not
faithfully in love adhere to the truth known; Thus much shall suffice for the
first point. 2 The Second Point is this; namely, That he be free from, and
totally delivered from self; which notwithstanding will never seem so to him,
but rather he will always think that he ought yet more and more to be divested
of self, and to renounce all things. 3 The Third thing is, That he be deeply
and thoroughly resigned to God, in so much that God may not find in him the
least impediment; but that he may work freely all his works in him, which
perfection he will not rashly ascribe to himself, but will think himself of all
men farthest off from it. 4 The Fourth follows, That he do totally go out of,
and deny himself, and all thing else, in which he has heretofore inordinately
loved, sought or intended himself, whether they have been things Temporal or
things Eternal. 5 Fifthly, That he seek not his own or himself in any measure;
either in himself, or any Creature. 6 Sixthly, That he always, and in all
places diligently attend, and observe what God requires of him, and what he
would have him to do, and cheerfully (relying upon Divine Grace) perform it;
and satisfy Divine expectation; but not in the least what ever, from thence
arrogate to himself any thing. 7 Seventlhy, That continually without
intermission he conform himself to Divine Will, so as that he will nothing else
but what God wills. 8 Eighthly, That he would so strongly and powerfully work
and exercise himself in God, and by and immence force, strongest bands of love
so bind and unite himself to him, that God may not as it were do any thing in
himself without him, nor he likewise perform any thing without God. 9 Ninthly,
That in all things which shall happen to him, whether they be pleasant or
bitter, yea in every work, in every performance, in every place, at all times,
he enjoy sensibly Divine presence. 10 Tenthly, That he receive nothing at all
whether it be grateful or grievous, as from the hands of any Creature; but all
things nakedly and simply as from the hands of God. Whatever God shall do, or
permit to be done by Creatures, he receive it no otherways then as from God
himself. 11 The Eleventh point is this, That he never suffer himself to be in
any measure overcome, or taken with a natural delight or savor of any
Creature, without true and accountable necessity. 12 The Twelfth point is this,
That neither he be to much deprest or overwhelmed, nor immoderatly vexed or
inwardly grieved, with any whatever adversity which may happen to him from the
truth, but always constantly adhere to the truth. 13 The Thirteenth point,
That he suffer not himself to be deceived by any false Light, or by any
glistering show of any Creatures; but cheerfully and lovingly leave all things
as he found them, making the best of every thing, and contending earnestly to
be made the better by every thing, and by nothing to be made worse. 14 The
Fourteenth point, That he be always upon his guard, sufficiently provided of,
and armed with all sorts of Virtues to resist all Vices whatsoever, that so he
may never be otherways then Conqueror, and in all conflicts bear away the Palm
of Victory. 15 The Fifteenth point, That he nakedly endeavor to understand and
contemplate (so far as God permits, and he be able) truth, as it is in it self,
and according to it lead his Life, and study to satisfy and answer the known
truth in every thing. 16 The Sixteenth point, That he be perfect, just and
upright, and that he esteem himself nothing less than so. 17 The Seventeenth
point, That he be sparing in Words, yet full of inward Vigor and Life. 18 The
Eighteenth point, That his Life be faithful, retired, humble, which by a good
Example rather then Words may Preach to all, and Speak by doing. 19 The
Nineteenth point, That he suffer himself willingly to be overcome by all which
contend with him, and that in all things which belong to himself, but not in
things which concern God. 20 The Twentieth point, That above all things he seek
the Glory of God, and aim at, and intend nothing else in all his actions. 21
The Twenty first point, That he rejoice not at all in any Privilege, which he
has in any thing above others; but that he altogether himself is unworthy of
the least. 22 The Twenty second point, That from his Heart he believe himself
to be one of the most unprofitablest men in the World; yet nevertheless, let
there be always found in him great Vigor, Faith, Hope and Charity; and let him
not at all value his own Wisdom, nor all his works done by humane reason. 23
The Twenty third point, That in all his Words and Works he set before him as in
a Glass, the Life and Doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that in them he
continually contemplate himself, and as much as possible, renounce, cast away,
and mortify all whatsoever shall be found in him, unlike to the lovely Image
of our Savior. 24 The Twenty fourth and last point, That after all, he now as
it were first begin, like a little Child as yet, to make proficiency in true
profound deep and perfect humility, and think no other ways, than that he is
now to begin to implore Divine benignity, that it would find him out a way and
afford assistance, whereby he may become a good man. And if he be esteemed so
by some, or else for that cause he appear vile and base in the eyes of men;
even that will be more grateful and acceptable to him, then if he should enjoy
the favor and good will of all.
But I fear my beloved, least I have been too tedious; Therefore these are the
signs of a rational and purged ground, which the Splendor and beautiful Image
of all truth does enlighten and teach. Let every one therefore look within
himself, and diligently search, whether he find within himself these twenty
four Points, which if he do let him rejoice; but if he do not, let him know
that his understanding, though never so lofty and towering, nor all his subtle
and witty works of his own reason, worth a rush; for he that is the Fountain
and Pattern of all truth, can perform in him no supernatural work, unless he do
prevent him by his singular and special grace, as we read he did to St. Paul.
But this in my judgment happens very ^arly in these our times. Finally, let the
Eternal Truth our Lord God, grant that we may all be made by his grace, true
Contemplators in true and perfect humility, to his Praise and Glory.

Amen.
It follows how the Layman did in secret partly discover to the Doctor his
hidden Sanctity, and how he convinced him that he was yet in the night of
Ignorance, and that his Vessel was unclean, and that himself was of the number
of the Pharisees.
THE fore-written Sermon being ended, the Layman straight hastening to his Inn,
there Writes it out word for word as it was delivered by the Doctor, comes with
his Notes to the Doctor, and said thus to him; Reverend Sir, your Sermon I have
writ out fair, and if it be not too troublesome I will repeat it out of my
Paper.

Doctor, Truly I Will very willingly hear it: then the Layman read the whole
Sermon, which being done, he spoke thus to the Doctor.

Layman. I pray Sir tell me if I have omitted any of your Words, that I may
write them.

Doctor. Believe it dear Son, you have exactly taken my Sermon word for word,
as I Preached it; and I Will assure you might I gain never so much I could not
again write it so exactly and verbatim as you have done, unless I would take
again the same pains which I did in the search of Scriptures; and I profess I
cannot now sufficiently admire your happy wit and parts, and that you should so
often make your confession to me, and yet I never perceive till now. Then the
Layman made as though he would take his leave of the Doctor, and said to him.

Layman. I entend (Sir) God willing to return home.

Doctor. Away, away, what is it that should compel you to return home, whereas
you have neither Wife nor Children to take care of; and what hinders, but that,
fith you have no body at home, you may as well live here as there. I Will promise
you shortly (God willing) I will Preach another Sermon of the utmost perfection
of a Spiritual Life.

Layman. I Will assure you Sir I came not hithet for the Sermons, but that I
hoped by Gods Grace assisting, I should do some good.

Doctor. What good prithee Son did you think to do here; fith you are a simple
Layman and ignorant of Scriptures, neither permitted to Preach? Pray stay here
a while, and peradventure by Gods assistance I will give you such a Sermon, as
you will gladly hear.

Layman. There is something Sir that I would willingly have spoke to you, but I
doubt whether you can patiently bear it.

Doctor. Prithee Son speak boldly what thou have to say; I trust in God I shall
patiently bear it, what ever it be.

Layman. Behold Reverend Sir, you glister in your Priestly dignity, and lately
Preach a Sermon to us full fraught, with excellent precepts; but you take no
care to hold them forth in your Life and Conversation, and even now how
childishly did you say to me, stay here and I will Preach you another Sermon
that shall please me. But take this for certain Sir, that neither your Sermons
nor any Words whatever, which can in this Life be outwardly spoken, can be much
profitable to me. Nay I Will assure you, the Sermons of men do oftener do me hurt,
then profit me; because that oftentimes various Images (or Imaginations) do
insinuate themselves into me by reason of those Sermons, which afterward
returning home, I can hardly with much and long labor again rid my self of or
forget; and (Sir) if you be remembered, you had among others, this passage in
your Sermon. That he ought to be free and clear from all Images (or
Imaginations) to whom the chief Doctor and Teacher of Souls Christ Jesus will
vouchsafe to come; who I will assure you as often as he is pleased to come to me,
he teaches me more in the space of an hour, then either you (Master Doctor) or
all the Doctors in the World, could teach me till Doomsday.

Doctor. Prithee, dear Son, for the Lords death sake, stay with me here a
longer time.

Layman. Truly (Mr. Doctor) you enforce me to stay by this deep adjuration,
and if out of obedience to God, I do yield to stay here, it shall be upon this
condition, that you promise me faithfully, that whatever has past or shall
pass between us, you will keep secret under the privacy of confession.

Doctor. That I will assure you (dear Son) I will willingly do, upon the
condition, that you will stay longer with me. Then the Layman after this manner
spoke to the Doctor.

Layman. Mr. Doctor, in your late beforementioned Sermon, you delivered indeed
to us many excellent good things; yet whilst you were speaking, such a
similitude as this came into my head, that me thought your good discourses did
no otherwise proceed from you, then as if good and generous Wine were drawn
through muddy dregs.

Doctor. Prithee (Son) what meanest thou by this similitude.

Layman. Nothing else (Mr. Doctor) but me thought, your Vessel was not clean,
nor rinced from dreggs; and that is the reason that the Letter kills you, and
(alas) you daily suffer it, yet daily more and more to kill you; for (as you
better know) the Scripture says, the Letter kills, but the Spirit quickens
and makes alive. Nevertheless the same Letter that now does kill you, would
(if you would) quickly quicken you. But truly at present for your condition it
is this; You are yet in the Dark, and there is no Light in you, by which you
might clearly and distinctly understand the Letter, and truly as yet you
belong to the number of the Pharisees.

Doctor. I profess (dear Son) since the hour I was born, I never heard from any
man such hard language.

Layman. Very good (Mr. Doctor) I pray where is now your Sermon? See, see how
you are caught! but besides, though it may be my words may seem hard to you;
yet intruth it is so as I have said, as I shall easily prove even from your
self.

Doctor. Really I would willingly see that, for I cannot tell that ever I cared
for that generation of Pharisees,

Layman. In the first place (Mr. Doctor) give me leave to show you how it is
that the Letter kills you; you know (dear Sir) that as soon as ever you came
to years of discretion, you betook your self to the study of Books, in which
notwithstanding you did only seek your self, and are not at all even to this
day free from that vice; but truly you are (though secretly) in your nature,
proud, and do much rely upon that knowledge, and attribute much to that title
of Doctor, wherewith you were honored; neither have you in all these things
purely with love and fervency of mind, sought God only; Neither out of love
have you any Eye to his Glory in all your studies, but do too too much love and
seek your self in the applause and favor of poor Creatures, and that
especially in one certain person, toward whom you would often steal a look, and
whom I fear you do inordinately love. And this is the reason why the Letter
kills you. That also which I said is too too true likewise; Namely, that you
possess an empty and an unclean vessel; For indeed you do not in all your
actions purely and singly Love God, but in many things you too well know that
you seek and love your self. And therefore it is true that I said, that your
Vessel is empty and foul with Lees; from whence it comes to pass, that that
good and generous Wine of Heavenly Doctrine, and Divine word, although in its
self excellent and pure, yet passing through such a Vessel does not at all
relish to a purged mind, that heartily loves and bends toward God; neither
does it profit at all such an one. That which I said besides; namely, that you
did as yet sit in midnight darkness, is also most true, which will evidently
appear from hence, that you cannot say that any of the Sermons or instructions
proceeded from a supernatural illumination or Divine Grace, but only from art
and study. Lastly, in that I did affirm you were a Pharisee, that also I prove
to be no less true, although I will not say that you are altogether one of
those false Pharisees. But tell me (Reverend Sir) did not those false Pharisees
seek and love themselves, not in all things, purely aiming at the Glory of God!
And now pray consider your self, whether you are not before God a Pharisee, and
not a whit better. You do not (I suppose) doubt, that there are many living
this day who in Gods esteem are no better then Pharisees, yet are so more or
less, according to the condition of their lives and conversations.

When as the Layman had said these things, the Doctor affectually embracing
him, kissed his Cheek and said; you bring that passage into my mind which is
not unlike to my case, and the same things seem to have happend unto me, which
did to the woman of Samaria near the Well; for you have truly laid open and
told me, all my most hidden, and secret miscarriages; but especially that, that
I did sometimes secretly cast a glance at a certain Person, who yet
notwithstanding knows nothing her self, since I never yet any way discovered to
her that I loved her; Neither does any man living, I am confident, suspect any
such thing. And therefore I doubt not but this secret was revealed to you by
God; wherefore I do most earnestly entreat you for Christ's passion sake, that
you would be now unto me a Spiritual Father, and accept of me a miserable
sinner for your Son.

Layman. Believe it (Reverend Sir) if you persist thus extravagantly to talk, I
will stay no longer here, but speedily return to my Country.

Doctor. Nay, but (Son) pray do not so, let me entreat you to stay a while with
me, and I will faithfully promise you, that you shall have no such Language for
the future: And (believe it) I am fully determined to endeavor to amend my
Life and take a new course, and to that end, do earnestly desire the
furtherance of your good Counsel, and whatever it be that you shall advise me,
that (by the Grace of God) I will endeavor to follow and effect.

Layman. Truly (Mr. Doctor) that is very necessary for you to do, for
knowledge of the Letter, has miserably puffed up and seduced very many learned
men, some of them who were altogether false Pharisees, even to the eternal
damnation of Hell; but others to a most grievous and horrible Purgatory. For
(believe it) it is no small matter for a Man to receive from God Almighty, so
subtle a natural understanding, and so clear a reason, as by them to be able
to understand clearly Divine Scripture; yet so to mispend this precious talent,
as not to study thereby to shape and frame his Life and Conversation, according
to the Scripture.

This ensuing Discours^ contains a Narration, what wonderful and stupendous
things God did work by this Layman, and also how for this cause besides others,
he obtained so great Grace and Favor, because God found in him an absolute
resigned up humility.
Doct. GOod Son, let me desire you to take the pains for God sake, to show me
by what means you have attained to so perfect a life; how you began, what have
been your exercises, and finally by what rules you have framed your life and
conversation.

Layman. I Will assure you Mr. Doctor, your desire is altogether a simple one;
for certainly should I take it upon me to rehearse, or write all those great
things, which God Almighty within these seven years has vouchsafed to work in
me, a miserable finner, I dare say you have not a Book of that Volumn as to be
able to contain it all; nevertheless, I shall willingly tell you some things,
which at this time are most fit for you. In the first place, it was an
exceeding mercy, that God did indulge unto me even this very thing; ^amely,
that I were endowed with a true profound and most resigned up humility: For my
exercises it will not much concern you to know what they were, that I observed
outwardly in my Body, since that the dispositions, natures, and complexions, are
so diverse. But this is a sure rule, that whosoever does from the bottom of his
heart, humbly resign up himself to God, him God will lead by inward
temptations, and outward occurences into such exercises, as he knows to be most
profitable unto him, and such as (if he will) he can best bear; for he that is
inquisitive to know from diverse, what are their exercises, is wont for the most
part to be deceived, and led away. For each man telling his proper exercises,
when he would fain follow and imitate, no regard being had of his own strength,
it is no marvel if he be thereby deceived and lead away. For it oftentimes comes
to pass, that those exercises which are very good for one, and exceedingly
helpful, may to another, if he persist in the using of them, be pernicious and
destructive. And hence it is, that the Devil very often is wont with false
suggestions to persuade men, whom he sees to be of a weak nature and
constitution, to take upon them the most strict and rigid excercises. To this
end, that either thereby they may shorten their days, or get an infirm and
crazy brain; which thing that you may the better understand, I will tell you
briefly what happened to me at the beginning of my conversion. I did peruse as
it happened at that time, a Book which in the German tongue, treats of the
Lives of the Saints; and when I marked each of them, their austeir and strict
manner of Life, I began thus to think with my self; these were men in this
World as well as thou, and peradventure did never so grievously offend God as
thou have done. Hereupon I had a great mind to imitate each of these Saints in
something or other, with as severe and rigorous excercises. Whereby in a little
time I contracted such exceeding weakness, that I were even at the point of
death. But one day above the rest it happened, that about Sunrising, having
beyond measure continued my exercise, that through exceeding weakness and
weariness, even whilst I were at my exercise, I fell fast asleep: my thought in
my sleep I heard a kind of voice saying to me. Go to, self-willed man, if you
kill your self before your time, you shall certainly suffer for it most
grievous punishment. But if thou will suffer thy self to be exercised by God,
he will do it infinitely better then thou thy self can do, by the counsel of
the Devil. At these words, especially at the naming of the Devil, such a fear
and terror seized one me, that I suddenly waked out of sleep, and rising,
began to think with my self, that I had taken up the foresaid exercises rashly,
and without advice; wherefore immediately I hyed me to a Wood which was close by
the place where I then were. There I made my case known in order, to a certain
old Hermit, and entreated him that he would give me his advice. The old man
having heard me out, gave me this answer: If thou would have me give thee
counsel, you must first tell me what the manner of your Life has been, and
what have been your exercises. I told him as I were bidden, all my strict
exercises, and how I had read over the Lives of the Saints, and how I had a
great mind to imitate them. Then he asked me, by whose advise did I do thus: I
confessed to him, that that which I had done, I had done by no man's advice but
my own, and out of my own will. If so said he, then take it for certain, it was
the Devils counsel; and therefore you had need to take great heed that you
follow him no more, but resign and give up your self wholly to God, and he will
exercise you far better, than either you or the Devil can: Therefore according
to this old man's advice, I instantly gave over my exercises, and did with all
my heart give up my self wholly to God, and left my self in his hands, to
exercise me as he thought most fit. Truly (Mr. Doctor) I were by nature of an
ingenuous temper, and of an excellent complexion, and of a subtle wit, even as
I perceive you are; only in this I was short of you, that I had not studied
the Scriptures, nor skilled them, which I perceive you do; yet notwithstanding
I was naturally inclined, with so subtle and sublime an understanding, that as
often as I thought fit to make use of it, I found my self capable and
apprehensive of very great and high matters. Hereby once it came to pass, that
by reason of the subtilty of my understanding. I began to think thus with my
self; certainly thou art naturally endued with so happy a wit and towering
understanding, that without all doubt, if thou would seriously and intensly
make use of it, thou would be apprehensive of some extraordinary and divine
matter, concerning even God himself. Which thoughts immediately after their
suggestion, I perceived to be the fallacious Counsel, and pestilent Advice and
Suggestion of the Devil: Thereupon I brokeout into these words, O mischievous
and malignant Connsellour, What Advice is this that thou have suggested to me?
Verily, if we had such a God as could be apprehended by reason, I should not
value him thus much. After this, one morning when I was ready to read morning
Prayers, I had an exceeding vehement desire, insomuch that I brake forth in
these words, and said to the Lord; O most merciful God, if it be thy blessed
Will, make me now by experience to feel something, that may transcend and pass
all understanding and reason. But I had no sooner ended these words, but that a
vehement horror possessed me, because that I should dare to desire so great a
favor; and therefore again said unto the Lord, Ah Eternal and ever to be
adored Majesty, pardon I beseech thee this my rashness, for it exceedingly
repents me, to have done this: And how should it be O Lord, that so miserable
an Earth-worm as I am, and no man, should ever find such a thing to enter into
his heart, as to dare to desire so transcendent and excelling favor and grace;
when as I know sufficiently, and am convinced within my self how vile I am, to
how many sins I am prone, and how that through the whole course of my life, I
never as I ought, loved my God, or regarded him, but have always made my self
by reason of sin, so odious in the eyes of thy glory, that I know very well,
that I am unworthy that the earth should bear me; and therefore since I have
presumed to suffer such a desire, of so transcendent grace to arise in me, it
is absolutely needful, that my body should undergo direful, and suffer bitter
things. Having thus said, I stripped my self, neither did I cease to strike my
self with hard stripes, till the blood ran about my shoulders. And so it came
to pass, that whilst I was revolving such like thoughts in my heart, and spoke
such like words even till Sunrising, upon a sudden an exceeding shining light
filled my whole Cell, and in that light I fell into an ecstasy; so that for a
time I was deprived both of my Reason and Senses. But Oh! that hour seemed
extremely short unto me. And after I came to my self, I found so exceeding and
supernatural impression pression and seal of truth upon me, that I had good
reason to say with St. Peter the Apostle, Lord, it is good for us to be here.
For (believe it) in that short hour I did receive more truth, with more clear
light, and certain evidence; more truth (I say) than what either you, Mr.
Doctor, or all the Doctors in the world can teach me, even till Doomsday. But
(Mr. Doctor) I suppose I have spoken enough already, as much as concerns your
present state and condition.

This following Discourse, shows how the Lord was pleased to Convert by the
means of this Layman, a certain Pagan that lived in a far Country. It shows
likewise how the Holy Ghost even at this day does pour forth the same Virtue
and Grace, upon minds that he finds apt and well prepared to receive it, that
he did upon the Apostles at the day of Penticost: As also it shows, how this
Layman did at large explain these things to the Doctor; and how by plain and
clear Reasons he proved the Doctor to be a Pharisee, and at last brought him to
this, that he resolved fully with himself to take a new course, and amend his
life.
Doctor. DEar Son, if thou have any thing more to say, I would willingly hear
it; for truly I have been much taken with those things which you have hitherto
discoursed of. But above all, I entreat you again that you will stay with me,
and by no means yet leave me. If you want money to defray your charges, I will
willingly supply your want, though I do pawn my Books to take up money: only I
desire you by all means to stay with me.

Layman. Reverend Sir, I pray God reward you for your proffered Courtesy
toward me. But I would have you know this, that I stand not in need either of
yours, or any other man's Temporal goods, for God Almighty has made me his
Steward, and I have near five thousand Crowns which are Gods, and I would
willingly spend them all wheresoever it shall be necessary, or where ever God
requires them at my hands.

Doctor. I perceive then, if so, that you are Steward of a very rich and
munificent Lord: But I cannot sufficiently admire at what you even now spoke:
That neither I nor all the Doctors in the World, are able to teach you so much,
even between this and Doomsday, as you have in one hour learned of God. Let me
ask you this Question, Did sacred Scripture proceed and flow from the Holy
Ghost?

Layman. Yes, they did without all doubt, and so the Catholic Faith teaches
us to believe. But Mr. Doctor, it grieveth me that I have said so great things
unto you, and that you notwithstanding should talk so childishly. But see you,
I will propound one Question to you, and if you can by Scripture or without it
resolve me, I promise you I will give you on Gods behalf a thousand Crowns.

Doctor. Prithee good Son tell me what Question is that.

Layman. I would know of you (Mr. Doctor) whether you can instruct me how I may
write a Letter in such a Language, to a certain Pagan living in a far remote
Country. that he may be able both to read it, and understand it? and how the
form and manner of the Letter may be such, that the same Pagan by the reading
of it, may be converted to the Faith?

Doctor. Truly (Son) I know not what to say to this; for such kind of works as
you, are even the works of the Holy Ghost. But I beseech you tell me whether
any such thing ever happened unto you, and if you did thereby understand by
what means this may be done? or whether you your self were not he that did it?

Layman. No Mr. Doctor, it was not I that did it, but the Holy Ghost was
pleased to work so by me an unworthy Instrument. And truly much may be said
touching this matter, but it were too tedious to rehearse all; for if this
whole business should be written, it would even fill a Volumn. But I shall tell
you a few passages, from whence you may collect the whole matter. There was a
certain Pagan, a true hearted honest man, and in his way very just. This man
for a long time together did cry unto Heaven, and daily did call upon him, who
created both him and all Creatures, and did daily pray after this manner. O
God, thou Eternal Creator of all things, behold I am born and bred up in this
Country, and in the Faith of it. But I perceive the Jews have another Belief,
and likewise the Christians follow another Faith: do thou therefore O Lord, who
art over all, and have made all things, show unto me I beseech thee by what
ever means it pleases thee, whether there be any other Faith better or truer
than this in which I have been born and bred, that I may believe it; and I will
willingly and readily obey thee, by taking upon me that Belief. But if thou
shall refuse to signify thus much unto me, and it shall happen that I die in
this Faith because I know no better, surely this will be hard measure. After
the Pagan had thus prayed, it came to pass that a Letter was written unto him
from me; which when he had read he was converted unto the Christian Faith. He
likewise did write back again a Letter to me, in which he fully showed how it
happened unto him; which Letter I will assure you was so written in our vulgar
High Dutch, as I could very well read it. Many things (Mr. Doctor) remains to
be spoken concerning this matter, but you have in brief the sum of it.

Doctor. Truly God is wonderful in his gifts, and I will assure you (dear Son)
these are strange and rare matters which you have told me.

Layman. Verily I do enough fear (Mr. Doctor) that I have told you more than
was fit for me to tell you. And to say the truth, I do perceive that I have
spoken somewhat that does something trouble you, and go against your stomach.
For whereas I am but a Layman, and illiterate, but you a great Dr. of sacred
Divinity; nevertheless I have taken upon me by way of tutoring and teaching,
to tell you so many things; it cannot be but this must somewhat offend you.

Doctor. Son, if you would not take it ill, I would tell you what does
displease me.

Layman. Assuredly I will not take it ill, you may speak all your mind freely.

Doctor. Dear Son, I cannot away with this, but do what I can it goes against
my stomach, that you when as you are a Layman, should teach me a Doctor and a
Divine; as also that you should call me a Pharisee.

Layman. Is there any thing more in me that does displease you?

Doctor. Not the least I assure you, that I know of.

Layman. Will you give me leave patiently (Mr. Doctor) to satisfy you in these
two things.

Doctor. Dear Son, you have not only free leave, but I again and again desire
you to do it

Layman. Pray tell me (Mr. Doctor) how it should come to pass, and by whom was
it brought about, that the most blessed Virgin Katherine, when she was about
fourscore years of age, should in discourse and dispute overcome fifty most
acute Philosophers, so as they did all most willingly offer themselves to die
for Christ? Tell me I say (Mr. Doctor) who was that that did this, or who spoke
there? That one tender Virgin should overcome so great Philosophers.

Doctor. No man doubts but that it was the Holy Ghost who did that.

Layman. Do you not believe (Mr. Doctor) that the Holy Ghost, is as powerful
now as he was then?

Doctor. Yes I do certainly believe it.

Layman. And what hinders then, but that you may also believe, that the same
Holy Ghost can speak to you by me a miserable sinner, when as he once deigned
to speak by Caiphas who also was a sinner. And truly if you so hardly bear
those things which I have spoken, hereafter I shall discourse with you more
cautiously.

Doctor. I entreat you (Son) do no so, for I will now correct my self in this
matter also.

Layman. You said moreover (Sir) that this also did somewhat gall you, that I
should call you a Pharisee: But when I said so there was then such an account
given of it by me to you, that ought fully to have satisfied you. But since you
were not content with that, I shall again with another Reason prove to you,
that you are more guilty in that point than I then said. Surely you know (Mr.
Doctor) that our Savior does exhort us in one place, and speaks in this
manner; Beware of the Pharisees, for they bind heavy burdens and grievous to
be born, and lay them upon men's shoulders, but they will not touch them with
one of their little fingers. Now consider and reflect upon your self a little:
Certainly you did lay upon our shoulders Twenty four Points, or Articles, which
you your self will hardly lightly touch. Likewise in another place, our Savior
speaks of the self same Pharisees, All whatsoever they say unto you, that keep
and do, but do not after their works, for they say and do not.

Doctor. Those words indeed the Lord spoke once.

Layman. That Is no matter, for he speaks the same yet continually. But see now
(Sir) whether you have not given us most excellent Rules and Precepts, which
notwithstanding how much you-follow in your Life and Conversation, God knows,
and you also are not ignorant; and as things stand with you at present, I do
willingly follow your Doctrine, but should be very loath to imitate your Life
and Conversation: wherefore now I pray judge you your self, whether before God
you are not truly a Pharisee; yet not of the number of those false and impious
Pharisees that deserve Hell.

Doctor. Truly (Son) I have not what to answer, but confess and acknowledge my
self to be a sinner. And now I determine to amend my life, though I should
hereby incur the hazard of death. Neither can I any longer defer it, but do
again and again entreat and beseech you (Son) that purely for Gods sake you
would Counsel me, how I may begin a better life, and that you would also show
me by what means I may attain the highest perfection, which in this life may be
attained.

Layman. It is very hard (good Sir) let it be spoken under favor, to give you
any Counsel in this matter; for your life and manner of conversation which you
have hitherto led, and been used to, you have by long custom turned almost into
another nature. So that if you should deny and cease from your long accustomed
manner and course of life, (which of necessity you must do) it could not be,
without grievous trouble and anguish to your nature; especially since you are
(if I mistake not) about 50 years of age.

Doctor. Thereabout indeed (dear Son) I think is my age; But what then? they
that came at the eleventh hour had their full wages, and received their penny.
And therefore now I am fully resolved and purposed in mind (though I were
certain thereby to suffer death) from hence forward to turn over a new leaf, to
change my course, and to renounce, deny and forsake my old fallacious life
(that was only given to speculation and curiosities of wit) and also to deny
all vice, and all manner of sensuality; and endeavor by the grace of God, to
order my life for the future after your Advice and Counsel. Wherefore I most
earnestly entreat, that laying aside all delay, you would instruct and teach me
for Gods sake, how I may begin the reformation and amendment of my life; for I
cannot endure it should any longer be deferred or delayed.

Layman. Well (honored Sir) since there is such grace conferred upon you by
God, that you refuse not to humble your self, but are willing to submit your
self to a vile poor creature. It concerns us in the first place to give God the
honor, due to him. And since it must be, that I for Gods sake am to give
Counsel and Advice to you, I shall humbly seek Gods help; and that I may be the
better able, I shall do it from his. love, and for the love of him. In the
first place, truly I shall begin to teach you after the same manner as they
instruct Children at School; that is, I shall commend to you a certain
spiritual Alphabet, consisting of 23 Articles or Sentences, so many as there
are letters in the Alphabet, with which they begin to teach Children.

Here follows a Golden Alphabet, delivered by the Layman to the Doctor, that
by it he might begin to mend his life. Frequently to read which, and according
to lead our lives, without doubt would be exceeding profitable to us All.
A Golden Alphabet.
A ATtempt in the fist place, and set upon a good, pure, and spiritual life,
not triflingly or childishly, but stoutly, and with a resolved manly mind. B
Both do good, and shun evil, and that carefully and diligently. C Conserve, and
keep the most congruous and modest mean in all things. D Diligently learn to
bear about with you, both inwardly and outwardly, modesty and humility. E
Extirpate and utterly deny for Gods sake your own will, that so you may remain
in union with God. F Fervently, constantly, and seriously persevere in God. G
Give your self with joy, simply and studiously to obey, and show thy self
willing and ready without murmuring to all, whatever is of God. H Hanker not
after, nor look back upon the world. I Inwardly accustom thy self to ruminate
and meditate in thy heart, upon divine and spiritual matters, and with tears
bewail and deplore thy former life. K Keep constant guard, and courageously
resist the temptations of the Devil, the World, and the Flesh. L Leaving behind
all temporal things, contend with a cheerful and valiant mind after Eternal. M
Mind always to preserve a love to God, and your Neighbor. N Never covet any
man's goods, of what nature soever they be. O Orderly make the best of all
things, and never turn any thing to the worst. P Punishment, and remorse for
sin, from whence soever it happen to you, whether from God or from Creatures,
take it kindly, and receive it with a submissive mind. Q Quietly and heartily
forgive all, what ever they be, that have offended you, or done you any injury,
in thought, word or deed. R Retain with all possible diligence, thy chastity,
both of Body and Soul. S Seriously observe meekness and mildness in all things,
and study to be made better by all things. T Take heed that without guile,
hypocrisy or fraud, you keep your Word, and observe Faith with all men; and
exercise your self in works of charity, both bodily and spiritual, according to
your ability. V Vigilantly take heed, neither in eating or in drinking, or any
other matter you exceed due measure. X XTS. Life and Doctrine revolve always in
your mind, and to the utmost of your power imitate it, and lead your life
according to it. Y Ymportune the undefiled Virgin Mother with devout Prayers,
that she may be assisting to you in the through learning this my Institution. Z
Zealously accustom your self with severe Discipline, to keep under and bridle
your will, and sensual affections; that they mildly yield to what ever God
shall do with you, or suffer to happen to you.
How the Doctor soon, though not without labor, truly learned the Alphabetical
Institution: How afterward the Layman taught him a nearer way to perfection.
Moreover, how the Doctor was fain to enter upon a dying Life; and therein so
long exercised himself, until he had overcome himself.
Layman. GO to now (Mr. Doctor) receive this childish Institution from God, who
delivers the same unto you by me an unworthy sinner.

Doctor. To you peradventure (dear Son) this Institution seems but childish;
but I confess to you, me thinks, it is sufficiently man-like: but be it what it
will be, I am resolved by the grace of God to take upon me the learning of it.
But pray tell me, what time will you set me to learn it in.

Layman. For the honor of Christ's five wounds, which are the signs of his
immeasurable love to us, take five weeks, that so you may the more perfectly
learn it. In which time you must be your own Schoolmaster, 1. Whip your naked
shoulders with Rods.
and enjoin your self sharp penance, if you mistake and happen to fail in any
of these Articles, or to do any thing contrary to them.

Doctor. I Will follow your Counsel (Son) and undergo all your Injunctions.

Now when 3 weeks were near spent in this manner of living, the Layman enquired
of the Doctor, how it was with him. To whom the Doctor answered, I will assure
you dear Son, I have in these three weeks undergone more and sharper penance
in the learning of this your Institution, than in all the studies of my whole
life past.

Layman. But how is it with you now (Mr. Doctor) are you skilful in the
Articles and Letters of the Alphabet as yet?

Doctor. How much soever I be Master of it (and by the grace of God, things go
well enough with me) yet I would willingly more perfectly skill it. But
moreover, I beseech you instruct me further, and show me yet more perfect
things.

Layman. You very well know Sir, that in Schools they never set boys higher
Lessons, till they have well learned their first Elements.

Doctor. I confess, then (dear Son) I should be guilty of a lie, if I should
say, I have thoroughly learned your Alphabet.

Layman. Therefore it is more advised for us to proceed no further, till you
have perfectly learned it.

Afterward, when again about 3 weeks more were spent, the Doctor sent a friend
to the Layman, to desire him to step to him, who accordingly presently came;
and the Doctor said to him, O Son rejoice with me, for I suppose now through
the grace of God, I am pretty perfect in the Alphabet; and if you please, I
will willingly give you an account of it.

Layman. There is no need Sir, that you should so do; for I doubt not of the
truth of what you say; and do much congratulate you.

Master. Truly Son, with much difficulty have I learned this Institution; but
now I beseech you farther to instruct me.

Layman. Take it for certa in Mr. Doctor, that of my self I cannot farther
instruct you, but if it please Almighty God farther by me to instruct you, I
hope I shall not be backward to do my best endeavor, and will be a willing,
although an unworthy instrument of his, by whom he may do what he please;
neither shall I in the least advice you to any thing, but what he shall give
in, and supply me with, and this I will do singly, and of the pure love of God,
and desire of your Salvation. And if it shall happen unto you, as it did to the
young man in the Gospel, who when he heard the Counsel of our Lord, to sell and
leave all that he had, went away sorrowful; if (I say) it shall so fall out
with you, I for my part will be solely blameless.

Doctor. Let not that (Son) at all trouble you, for I am fully resolved in my
mind, not to regard at all what can in this matter befall me; but purpose to
follow and obey Gods and your Counsel.

Layman. Well (Sir) since you now are of so resolved and ready a mind: I do in
the first place out of charity and the love of God advise you, that by all
means you remain obedient to your Order, and to all your Superiors; For it
cannot be but that if you enter upon the right, straight and narrow way, you
will be grievously oppresled and vexed; and that chiefly by your Order and
Brethren. And when this shall befall you, straight-ways your subtle
understanding, and sensual nature, will be devising many things, and urging you
to go to the chief Bishop, or some whither, and find a thousand ways whereby to
avoid this Cross. But herein you must take great heed, and rather bear
patiently what ever shall happen grievous unto you, and continually persevere
in humble obedience; for truly the same way that our Lord showed unto the
forenamed young man, that way must you go, you must take up your Cross upon
your shoulders, and follow the Lord and Savior, and in some measure his
example, and that with true, great, and patient humility: Furthermore you must
renounce and deny that acute, subtle and pompous understanding, which you have
acquired out of the Scriptures. And for a while give over all reading, studying
and preaching. And when those that used to make their confessions to you, shall
come again unto you to that end, you must show your self in simplicity; and
confession being made, immediately withdraw from them, speaking nothing, nor
giving them any counsel, but only saying, I will first learn how I may counsel
my self, and when I have well learned so to do, I will be ready to inpart
advice to you. And if they be inquisitive when you will preach, you may without
injury to the truth, simply and nakedly answer, that at the present you are
wholly taken up with another business. So by this means you will by little and
little, alienate and estrange your self from men.

Doctor. If preaching be forbid me, there is nothing then (Son) that I have to
employ my self in: what therefore shall I do?

Layman. Betake your self to your Cell, and there perform your hourly Prayers,
and as often as you can, do the same, in Quire with others. Likewise every day,
except some just occasion hinder you perform Divine service, and celebrate the
Mass. Afterward, what ever time remains, you shall spend it in meditating of
the Life, Death, and Passion, and example of Christ; diligently considering how
unlike your Life is to His. Isa. 32.
Here call to mind, and in the bitterness of your Soul, think of the years, and
all the time past, in which you have sinfully loved your self, taking notice
how little your love has been to God: and contrary-wise, how great his love
has been to you. Of these things Sir, let your study humbly be, for hereby it
may so come to pass, that by degrees you may attain to true humility, and
change your old conversation, and ancient Custom into a better. Furthermore,
when that time shall come, which God well knows; he will on a sudden change you
into a new, and another man. But before this regeneration can be wrought in
you, you must first sell all whatever you possess, and humbly resign all unto
God; Namely, you ought wholly to renounce and deny, all your curiosity and
subtility of your senses, and understanding; and whatever it be, by which you
may acquire honor or delight to your self; and lastly, all that delight, which
hitherto you have possessed in your nature, and in which according to your
nature, you have falsely, and inordinately found rest; Luke 7.10
and with blessed Mary Magdalen humbly cast your self prostrate at the Feet of
your Lord. For indeed you must totally dye to all these things forementioned.
Now if you shall begin to set upon these things, you will render your self a
pleasant, and acceptable spectacle to Almighty God: who indeed cannot behold
these things without delight: and it is probable, he will not leave, but will
drive and compel you to such trials as were of old, that you may so much the
more be proved, and be thoroughly purified as gold in a furnace; It may be (I
say) he will reach out to you in some measure that cup of love, which he gave
to his only begotten Son: which is, that it may so fall out, that whatever you
do or leave undone, yea, and your whole course of life may be disesteemed, and
despised of all: and those, who have hitherto been wont to confess themselves
to you, may stand a far off from you, as one destitute of sense and reason:
yes, and all your friends, and a great part of your Brethren, that live with
you in your Monastery, may be offended and scandalized at your life, and may
say one to the other, that you have taken up a strange and unusual way of life,
such as has almost rendered you a dolt, or fool. Wherefore when as these things
shall happen unto you, see Sir that by no means you be terrified, but rather
triumph in your God, because your Salvation is nigh. Notwithstanding your frail
nature (without doubt) will be something terrified at this; but do you stoutly
trust in God, who will by no means forsake you. Furthermore, when you shall be
brought into this distress, it can hardly be, but that at sometime or other, it
will come into your mind, to ask and desire of God, that he would vouchsafe
unto you some supernatural consolation, and make you to taste some sweetness;
which when it shall happen to you, be sure such a desire is not from God; but
from hence rather, that as yet, there is some pride lurking in your nature. For
truly, it is great presumption for any to be so bold, as to ask of God such
supernatural Gifts. And therefore if this should befall you, that you should
perceive any such desire to arise in you; instantly set your self against it
with your whole strength, and supress it with very great and humble
resignation, saying both with heart and voice; Ah most Merciful God, it does
extremely, and from the bottom of my heart grieve and displease me, and I very
much lament, because I perceive so great and high a desire to arise in me; when
as I clearly perceive I am altogether unworthy of such great gifts; yea, and
unworthy that the Earth should bear me. And when you shall utter these words
with your mouth, although as yet you be not so perfectly sensible in your
heart; be not much terrified: but only as often as such like desires shall arise
in you, you must punish your self with Rods. But if neither by such means, such
thoughts will cease, then endure them as a temptation, so long as God pleases,
you should bear them. Finally (worthy Sir) if you resolve to undergo this
course of life; you will perceive nothing more profitable to you, then that
with a profound and courageous resignation, you humbly commit your self to God
in all things, which shall happen to you, whether they be sweet, or whether
they be bitter, whether they delight, or whether they torment; so as that you
may be able truly to say unto God; O most Merciful God, and most worthy to be
adored, although it were thy Will, that I should remain in this life, and in
this heavy pressure even till the last day of Judgment; yet I would by no means
forsake thee, but constantly and ever adhere, and cleave to thee. Verily Sir, I
sufficiently in the Grace of God understand, that this thought now is in your
heart, that you may justly inwardly say to your self, that what ever has
hitherto been spoken by me, is extreme hard and difficult. And therefore I
before made this protestation, If it shall happen that you start aside from
what is proposed to you, (as did that Young man forementioned) then I will be
free from all blame.

Master. It is (dear Son) very true, which you say; and moreover this your last
speech seems to me yet more hard.

Layman. And yet Sir, you entreated me, to show you the nearest way to the
highest perfection attainable in this life. And truly, I know no way more
secure, then that, which leads to the imitation of the example of the most Holy
Humanity of Christ. Wherefore I sincerely advice you, to take sufficient time
of consideration, and betake your self into your self; and whatever by Divine
inspiration you shall understand, ought to be done by you, that, you may safely
set upon.

Master. I like well (Son) your counsel, and intend to follow it: and as I
shall be able, I will take heed by the assistance of Divine Grace to overcome
my self.

What afterward befell the Doctor. How he endured grievous pressures in his
nature, and underwent the contempt of men, insomuch that his strength began to
fail him.
ABout eight days after, the Doctor sent a certain Messenger to the Layick, to
desire him to come to him; And when he was come, the Master said to him: Ah
most dear son, it can hardly be uttered, what fightings, what grief, what
strife, and contention, I have inwardly undergone both night and day, before
with Gods assistance, I could so far attain, as that I might overcome the
Devil, the Flesh, and my own Nature. But now through the Grace of God I have
obtained an undanted, and ready mind, and also a true and perfect will; so that
I will cheerfully (God assisting) enter upon that way, which you have taught
me: and although (likely) it will be very troublesome to my Nature, yet that
ought patiently to be endured, neither shall I for that cause draw back, but
will through the Grace of God persevere steady and constant in this purposed
course.

Layman. Do you keep still in your memory (Doctor) those Words which I lately
spoke to you?

Master. Immediately after you left me, I carefully wrote them all down.

Layman. I congratulate to you Sir, and heartily rejoice with you, that you
have obtained so ready, so vigorous, and so undanted a mind; neither do I in
this less wish well to you, than I do to my self. Therefore now safely in the
Name of God begin, and behave your self manlike. And so taking his leave, the
Layick departed.

Now the Doctor obeying the instructions, and counsel of the Layick, presently
set upon the work: And forthwith forbore every thing, that he was required to
forbear. In so much, that before a year was come about, he was as much had in
contempt by all, that lived with him in the Monastery, as he was before had in
esteem, and honor; yea, and his special friends, and as many (whether men or
women) as were wont to confess themselves to him; finally, all that knew him,
and respected him, became so estranged from him, as if they had never seen him:
which was not a little troublesome and contrary to his nature. Moreover, he
began to feel much infirmity and weakness in his head, which struck him with
greater terror, than all the rest. Wherefore by a Messenger he sent for the
Layman, and declared to him, all that had befallen him, and how that his
natural strength began to fail: but chiefly how he was not a little distressed,
by reason of the infirmity of his head. The Layman made him this answer. Be not
terrified Sir, but humbly resign your self to God, and put your trust firmly in
him. Truly, I hitherto well am pleased, and like matters, as they stand with
you; and indeed things are very well with you, and will be better without
doubt; you well know; that he that will find the right Way, and walk therein,
must through some sufferings at least, and afflictions, follow the example of
Truth it self; namely, our Savior Christ. Therefore in the least be not
terrified at all, but leave your self totally to God; for it thus heretofore
befell me likewise. Notwithstanding in the mean time, whilst this infirmity is
upon you, you may discretly succor your Nature, by the use of better meat. I
had made for me, when I were in the like infirmity, a certain confection of
Aromatical druggs, which did comfort my head; and the like I Will get made for
you. But this is certain, that I always left my self totally to God, to do
with my Soul or Body what he pleased.

Master. But now you teach me otherwise, and advise me to relieve and succor
my self with better meat, in this my infirmity.

Layman. No man ought Sir to tempt God; so long as you continue in this
weakness, God does freely permit you to help and comfort your nature, and
especially your head. Go to now Sir, and with Divine assistance go on as you
have begun, joyfully resign up your self to God in all things, with true and
deep humility. Put your trust in God, and wait for his grace, and whatever he
then requires of you, whether it be sweet, or whether it be bitter, be sure to
the utmost of your strength to yield him obedience. As for my part, I pray you
for Gods sake, take it not ill, that I can no longer at this time abide with
you. For a weighty business, compels me at this time to bid you farewell. But
if you cannot spare me altogether, send some body to that place, and there I Will
be found. But it would be far better for you, if you could go on without the
comfort of any mortal creature.

Master. Do not (I beseech you dear Son) say so; for indeed I cannot long want
you. And truly it afflicts me much, and fills my ^ind with vehement anguish,
because you now will depart from me. But since, as you say, so weighty a
business, and which concerns God, compels you to be gone; I will content, and
resign my self, and bear your absence as well as I may.

Layman. Now therefore Sir, since you are brought under the Rod, and scourge of
the Lord, to which also you have offered your self willingly, it concerns you
very much to lead your life discretly. Be careful therefore to give your self
your just due. And let it not disturb you, that you are forsaken by Creatures.
But if you should want money, pawn some of your Books, and borrow upon them;
but take heed that you sell not one of them. For if I be not mistaken, the time
will come, when they will be all necessary to you. Having thus said, the Layman
bidding the Doctor farewell, departed; the Doctor in the mean time weeping for
his departure, and commending himself to God.

How the Doctor was wonderfully visited, touched, and illuminated by God: and
how the Layman returned to him again, and meekly exerted him, that he should
again take upon him the care of Preaching, which for some time had been omitted.
When as now the Doctor had for 2. years together continued in most grievous
temptations, together with the great contempt of all his Friends and extreme
poverty, insomuch that he was compelled to borrow money, upon some of his
Books, which he pawned; and also had undergone with much humility the grievous
weakness of his whole nature: It came to pass that night, which immediately
goes before the day celebrated for the Conversion of St. Paul, that a most
grievous Temptation rushed upon him, such as the heart of man cannot imagine,
whereby he conceived such a great weakness of his whole nature, that that night
he was not able to go forth to Morning-Prayer, but abode sitting in his Cell,
resigning himself from the bottom of his heart to God, with huge and true
humility, being destitute of all help and comfort from any mortal Creature
whatever. And whilst he was kept in this weakness, he began amongst other
things to meditate on the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, thinking with
himself, with what infinite love Jesus Christ did follow him; and contrariwise,
he reflecting upon his own life, perceiving how unconsiderable his life was, if
compared with the Life of Christ, and how as nothing his life was, compared
with the immence charity of Christ. Great contrition, and sorrow for all his
sins, and for all his ill spent and lost time, ceazed upon him. So that with
his whole affection, with heart and voice he said to the Lord: Ah! merciful and
compassionate Lord God, have mercy, have mercy upon me for the abiss of thy
mercies sake, because I am not worthy that the earth should bear me. Whilst
these words were in his heart and mouth, being broad awake, he heard with his
bodily cars (yet seeing nothing) a voice saying unto him. Now receive thy
peace, and put thy trust in God; and take it for certain, that when he lived
upon earth, that whatsoever sick person he cured in body, the same he likewise
healed in Soul. Which words being ended, instantly the Doctor fell into an
ecstasy, and was deprived of all rational understanding, insomuch that he knew
not what was done unto him, where he was, or whither he was snatched. But after
that he was restored to himself, he found in himself in his whole nature, a new
and great power, and vigor; such as he confessed he had never in all his whole
life time felt by experience before; as also so clear and enlightened a
discerning, or illuminated reason, as never was in the least known to him
before that time. But being amazed, he wondered with himself, from whence these
things should so suddenly happen unto him, and began to think thus with
himself. Certainly thou will never be able to clear up this matter of thy self,
send therefore for thy Friend to come unto thee, and lay open the whole matter
in order unto him. And so he did. The Layman being sent for, readily obeyed the
Doctor, came to him forthwith; the Doctor told him every thing in order, as it
happened unto him; which when the Layman had beard, he said. How gladly, even
with my whole heart Sir, do I hear this news. I know that you have first now
truly experienced the true grace of God, and are now first touched in the
superior powers of your mind. Know also, that as heretofore the Letter killed
you, so now the same will quicken you, because all the holy Scripture proceeded
and flowed from the holy Ghost. Neither doubt Sir, but the knowledge of the
holy Scripture will for the future very much profit you now that you have been
found worthy to be illuminated by the light of the holy Ghost. For many things
now will be made manifest to you by the Scriptures, which were altogether
unknown to you before. For you know, that the holy Scripture seemed to you, and
many other Theologists, to be contrary to it self in many places. But he who
rightly knows how to look into it, in the light of the holy Spirit (as you
hence-forward will be able to do) such a one does plainly know, how that it
agrees with it self throughout. Wherefore now you will begin wisely to
understand Scripture, and rightly to follow the true Pattern and Exempler of
Truth, our Lord Jesus Christ. Now also you must again take upon you the care of
Preaching, which for some time has been intermitted; that by the Word you may
edify and instruct your Neighbors. And now the time is come also, that you
must fetch home your Books again, and fall to reading, and perusing them. And
be certain, that hereafter, one Sermon of yours will be more profitable and
fruitful, than a hundred of your former; for those that shall hear you
hereafter, will be profited and amended far more, than they have been
heretofore; and that, because the Word which you shall hereafter utter, will
flow from a clean vessel, and therefore will be very grateful and acceptable to
a clean mind, and a lover of God. Furthermore, know this that as heretofore you
have been by many accounted contemptible, and appeared to them dispicable; so
now you will appear to them all, an hundred times more amiable, and be more
acceptable than ever heretofore. And now multitudes of people will begin to
flock together to hear you; so that it will for this cause be exceeding good
for you, to keep your self very humble, and more carefully to watch over your
self. For as you know, he that has any great Treasure, has the more need
carefully to guard them from Robbers. And certainly, those hellish Robbers, the
evil spirits are very much affrighted and always terrified, as often as they
perceive that God Almighty has bestowed upon any man so great a treasure. And
therefore be sure, they will turn every stone, and make use of all their
strength and cunning, to steal from you, or rob you of this Treasure. Therefore
it exceedingly concerns you to keep it with all care and vigilance. But you
will be able, by no means better to preserve it, then by a silent, true and
profound humility. Finally, as things are with you, there is no more need that
for the future, I should converse with you, as an instructor of you; No verily,
I now exceedingly desire to be taught by you, and intend here to remain so
long, till I have heard diverse of your Sermons. And because (as you have
acknowledged) you have felt and experienced a certain great power, and such as
is understood both in Nature and Grace; I very much desire, if the Lord permit
that you would again Preach.

Master. What advice therefore do you give me, (dearest Son) for I have pawned
several of my Books, and have taken up upon them, no less then thirty Crowns.

Layman. Send some body for them, and I on (Gods behalf) will redeem them, and
will give thee so many Crowns; and if after you have redeemed your Books, any
thing shall remain, you shall restore it to God: so the Books were brought and
redeemed.

After these things, the Doctor caused it to be given out, and spread abroad,
that upon the third day after he intended to Preach; which when it was heard,
every body much wondered; and because of the novelty of the thing, a huge
multitude of People came together. The Doctor therefore when he was come, and
saw so many People come together, got up into the Pulpit, and covering his Eyes
with his hood, he thus prayed to himself, O Mercyful God, of it may be pleasing
to thee, grant I may so speak and do, as that thy most acceptable will may be
done in me. Presently after he had spoken these Words. 2 pang of weeping
without any endeavor of his, fell upon him, and he shed many most sweet Tears;
which continued so long, that the People began to be weary of so tedious
expectation, So that one of the crowd; said with a loud voice; How long (I pray
Sir) do you intend to keep us? Now it grows late, and if you will not begin,
say so, that we may rise and go home. And when the Doctor himself did take
notice, that the time was nigh past; he said again unto the Lord. Ah Merciful
Lord my God, if it be thy will stop these Tears, and grant I may Preach this
Sermon! Which thing if thou deny me, I fear that thou judge, I have not yet
been sufficiently derided, notwithstanding fulfill in me all thy good pleasure
according to thy will. But whatever he said, or whatever he prayed, he nothing
at all availed: but his Tears rather more prevailed. Perceiving therefore that
it was the Divine will and pleasure; he said to the People weeping. Truly
beloved, it sufficiently grieves me that you have been so long in expectation.
But so it is, that I cannot at this time bring forth one Word. When the People
heard this, they arose and went their way. And straightway the fame of this
passage spread it self through the whole City; So that then again, the Doctor
began to be laughed at, and to be had in contempt; every one saying; See now we
perceive as clear as none-day, that he is stark mad, and deprived of his Reason
and Senses. Whereupon his Brethren did severely and solemnly suspend him from
his Office of Preaching, telling him that he brought upon them no small damage
and shame, since by his singular and unusual manner of living, he had weakened
his brain. Among these troubles, the Doctor sent for the Layman, and told him
in order all that had befaln him The Layman answered him; Be of good courage
(worthy Sir) neither let any terror take hold of you: it is certain your
affairs were never in so good plight as now they are; for the Omnipotent God
will have you wholly to be his friend. And therefore it is probable, that till
then something of pride lay hid in your mind, which now God has mortified in
you; when being set up in a high place, after the Example of Christ, you were
derided by men. And truly you ought with a willing mind to accept so great a
Gift of God; for be confident, what remainder of sin lay hid in you, is now
wholly abolished and cast out. Wherefore Sir, be of good courage, and humbly
bear with patience this your humiliation. Neither let this seem to you a new
and unusual matter, for I have also known the like befall others. And take heed
that you do in no wise condemn this burden of the Cross, which the Lord has
sent you. But be advised by me, to retire your self from all humane converse,
for this five days, in honor of the five Wounds of Christ. Afterward you may
speak with your Pryor, and peradventure he will permit you to Preach in some
Monastry. But if he shall deny you, entreat him that he would first make trial
of you, and give you leave once in your Covent, to read a Lecture to your
Brethren. To all which words of the Layman, the Doctor yielded obedience
willingly; five days being spent, and leave being asked and obtained of the
Pryor; The Doctor read so excellent a Lecture to his Brethren, that they did
all exceedingly admire his excellent, Spiritual and Divine Doctrine. So that
presently it was concluded by them all in the Chapterhouse, that they would
make trial of him once more, granting him leave once more to Preach to the
People. Wherefore they gave order to one of the Brothers, who was to Preach in
a certain Covent, that after Sermon he give notice to the People, that the
Doctor intended the next day to Preach in that place. Therefore that Brother,
after he had ended his Sermon, said to the People, I am commanded to give you
notice, that to morrow in the forenone in this Place, the Doctor intends to
Preach. But if any thing befall him like that which lately happened to him,
impute it in no wise to me, seeing I do but what I am commanded. Yet take this
for certain, that lately he read to us in our Covent, such a Lecture, so
Excellent, so Divine, Profound and Spiritual, that many of our fraternity dare
say, they have not these many years heard so Divine and Heavenly Doctrine. But
what he will do before you I know not. The next day after the Doctor went to
the Monastry appointed (it was a Monastry of Virgins;) And when he was thither
come, he began his Sermon as follows.

A Rare and Devout Sermon, which the Doctor Preached in a certain Monastery
after his Illumination, concerning Christ the true Bridegroom of the Soul: and
how the Soul ought to follow him in True, Modest, Humble and Patient
Resignation: and how Christ does first diverse ways prove the Soul, and at last
graciously receives it. This Sermon may not unfitly be Preached upon the
Festival of some Virgin.
Behold the Bridegroom comes, go you forth to meet him, Ma. 25.


IT is now two years ago (if I be not deceived Dearly Beloved) since I last
Preached unto you; and in that my last Sermon, I delivered to you 24
Particulars, or Articles. And as you may remember, it was my usual custom at
that time to mingle many Latin Words and Sentences in my Sermons, which for
the future I shall in no wise do. But when I have a mind to use the Latin
tongue, I will do it amongst those who are skilful in that Language, and can
understand what I have to say. But now for the obtaining of Divine grace and
assistance, let us say over the Angels Salutation.

The Verse which I have pitched upon for my Text (Dearly Beloved) and to which
I shall confine my self throughout my whole discourse, is this: Behold the
Bridegroom comes, go you forth to meet him.

The Bridegroom, is Christ Jesus; the the Spouse, is humane nature. We
therefore all (Dearly Beloved) are called Spouses of Christ, and we ought
therefore in duty to go forth to meet him. But alas! the fault is on our part.
For the true Ways and right Paths, which lead to meet the Bridegroom, are
become very desert and overgrown: And we, alas! do little take notice of them,
and too seldom and very rarely now adays is any one found, that entered into
those Paths. But there are many other Roads, in which multitudes go astray. So
that rarely do any now arise and go forth to meet the Bridegroom, as I shall
God willing hereafter show you. But now, least I should be too tedious, I will
in silence pass over. But whereas we are all called Spouses, I must first lay
open what behooves every Spouse to do, that she may go forth to meet her
Bridegroom. First therefore, it is the duty of every faithful Spouse, to be
bashful and modest, and to avoid all things that may offend her Bridegroom; as
for example, such as the vain glory of this fallacious and ill-rewarding world,
pride, envy, and other common sins of the world: Also, all the pleasures of
corrupt nature, whether it be in profit or idleness, or in any other things
whatever, but what are upon a true and rational account necessary. And when the
Spouse has rejected such and the like things for the love of her Bridegroom,
then she begins somewhat to please her Bridegroom. Secondly, If thou will
yet more please him, she must humbly bow and incline her self, and offer up her
whole self unto him, saying both with heart and voice, Ah most sweet Lord and
Bridegroom, thou know the hearts of all; therefore I do with my whole heart
profess unto thee, that I will freely and with a willing mind do all whatever I
shall know or be able, which thou teaching me, I shall see to be acceptable and
pleasing to thee, neither will I ever depart from thee, but perpetually and
with all my might cleave unto thee. When therefore the Spouse has thus
bethrothed her self, the Bridegroom now turning his face, to her begins to
behold her, and commands that some rich Jewel be given her; you will ask me
what Jewel? I answer, such an one as this, namely, That she be sussered to be
exercised both inwardly and outwardly with diverse temptations, as his manner is
to do with all his singular and choice Friends. Then it falls out, that if the
Spouse be yet somewhat tender and delilicate, she strait addresses her self to
her Bridegroom, saying. Ah my most merciful Lord, these are exceeding strange
and unusual things, and too too heavy, such as I never felt the like, and they
make me greatly fear, how I shall be able to bear them, and subsist under them.
Wherefore I earnestly entreat thee, most dear Lord, to take off this burden,
and free me of it. The Bridegroom answers her: Tell me my beloved Spouse,
does it seem equitable to you, that the Spouse should fare better then her
Bridegroom, thou must first of necessity in some measure follow him. And
certainly it is altogether comely, just and also tolerable, that the Spouse
should endure something, at least for the love of her Bridegroom. When this the
pleasure of the Bridegroom is made known, the Spouse is stricken with terror,
and trembling, says to the Bridegroom. Oh! my Lord and Bridegroom, I beseech
you be not angry with me, for I am now ready to obey thee; Therefore suffer
what thou please to fall upon me, I will through the assistance of thy grace
bear all for thy sake, willingly and contentedly. When the Bridegroom hears
this, he conceives a greater love to his Spouse. And therefore bestows upon her
yet a more excellent gift, namely, that all her performances, exercises, ways,
and all her works, yea, and at least whatever she does or leaves undone,
although they be all good in themselves, yet they seem to her self wholly
unsavory. Furthermore, she accounts her whole time lost, whatever she spends
it about, though that which she does be good; and that in all she offends the
Bridegroom, and continually fears that after this lise she shall suffer
grievous punishment for all. Furthermore, this gift is granted her, that she be
had in derision by most, and that her whole life and conversation, as mere
folly be vilified and set at naught by men. But by this means the Spouse
becomes much weakened in her nature; so that she thinks every hour she shall dye
no other death. And whereas she is yet tender, faint-hearted, and fearful, she
is exceeding terrified. Wherefore she earnestly calls upon her Bridegroom,
saying. Why is it most sweet Bridegroom, that thou leavest me in this sad
condition, when thou notwithstanding know full well that I cannot possibly
undergo it, but it will cost me my life. The Bridegroom answers her, Why how
now my chosen Spouse, if thou will go forth to meet the Bridegroom, it is
equitable and congruous, that thou should at least in some things at first
follow him; and travail part of the journey he went. Whereas therefore the
Bridegroom suffered death for the love of his Bride, and endured most direful
torments, and innumerable pains 33 years, think you it not congruous to reason,
and every way fitting, that the Spouse also out of love should endure some
hazard of death. Certainly, if your love were great and faithful toward your
Bridegroom, it would easily shut out all such fear from you. The Spouse
fearing, such or the like, answers from the Bridegroom, is ceased upon with
exceeding great fear and shame: and speaks thus from her most inward bowels,
with heart and mouth to her Bridegroom. Now most loving Bridegroom, I fully
understand that I have done unjustly and evilly: and I am even overcome with
fear, and do grieve truly with my whole heart; because I have not resigned my
self faithfully unto thee, even unto death. And behold, hence-forward I commit
my whole self to thee; That whatever thy will and pleasure is, the same may be
mine, whether it be sweet or whether it be bitter, whether it be health or
whether it be sickness, whether death or life, or whatever it be that thy
pleasure is shall come upon me, shall be welcome to me. And so for the future,
I wholly renounce my own will; and so surrender and offer it up to thee, as
never-more hereafter to re-call it or desire it.

Thou also most merciful Bridegroom, do with me a sinful wretch, whatever thou will, both in Time and in Eternity. For as much as of me is, I plainly
understand that I am unworthy that the earth should bear me. When now the
Bridegroom perceives so resolved, so constant and perfect a will in his Spouse;
What do you think he does to his Spouse? Even this, (...) has mercy on her;
but how you will ask? Why thus? He will then first reach out to her an
excellent and glorious Cup, namely this, That over and above all the pressures,
temptations and straights in which already she is held, he permits that far
more, and far more grievous then ever she suffered before to fall upon her. The
Spouse by this time understanding this to be the pleasure of her Bridegroom,
suffers all willingly and freely, for the love of him. And bowing her self
humbly to her Lord, says; Even thus most dear Bridegroom is it most fitting
and meet, that not what I will thou should will, but what thy Will and
Pleasure is that I should will. Wherefore for thy sake, I will freely and with
a willing mind take off this Cup, and receive this gift of thine, let it
torture and afflict my nature as much as it will; nevertheless, I accept of it
as at thy hand. Whilst therefore the Bridegroom in his Eternal Wisdom beholds
this will and resolution in his Spouse; she is rendered above measure dear unto
him. So that even out of superabundant love, he permits her to suffer through
her whole nature by the said Cup of precious affliction given unto her, until
she be thoroughly purged and cleansed from all her spots, sins, and
imperfections. But then he says unto her. Arise now my beautiful and comely
Spouse, for now thou art all fair, and there is no spot in thee; and withal
looks upon her so amiably, and kindly, as is far above all Expression.

After this the Eternal Father of the Bridegroom comes also to the nuptials,
and joyfully says to them: Arise quickly make haste. It is time that they be
led to the Temple, and joined together in a marriage league. And taking both
the Bridegroom, and the Bride, leads them both together to the Temple, and
joins them mutually to himself, and with so strong and great a mutual nuptial
love does couple and bind them one to the other; that neither in time, nor in
eternity can they ever more be put asunder, or separated one from the other.
Now whilst these nuptials are celebrating, the Son the Bridegrom says to his
Father; Eternal and most loving Father, whom will it please you, shall be our
Cup Bearer, and Comptroller of our nuptial Feasts? The Father made answer, and
said: This office and business belongs to the Holy Ghost, and he shall be the
Governor of the Feast that day. Presently without any delay, that Magnificent,
Highest, and Most adorable Cup Bearer gives the Spouse to drink, and take off
such an overflowing Cup of Love, that she is wholly overflowed, and drowned in
Charity; and altogether flows forth, and is dissolved, and melted into her
Bridegroom. And falling into an Exstasie, she becomes so drunk even with over
much Love, that she loses and forgets her self, and all other Creatures,
both such as are in time, and such as are in Eternity. For truly (beloved)
whoever attaineth to these nuptials, the same then first is arrived at the very
true solemnity of joys indeed, and of Eternal nuptials. And whosoever is made
such a Spouse, such a one is become a true Worshipper; adoring the Father in
Spirit and Truth: John 4:
and the same has found peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. For verily in these
nuptials there is joy upon joy: as also there the peace is greater, and
Triumphant joy more abundant in one hour, then all Creatures whether in time,
or in Eternity can make. For the joy, which the Spouse here takes in her
Bridegroom, and receives from him, is such, and so great, that no Reason, no
Sense can possibly understand it, attain to it, or be capable of it. At these
words, One cried out with a land voice: It is true, it is true, it is true. And
immediately fell to the Earth, as if he had been dead. At which sight, a certain
Woman spoke aloud to the Doctor; give over Master Doctor, or else this man will
give up the Ghost in our arms. The Doctor answered? Well dearly beloved, if it
seems good to the Bridegroom to take away with him this Spouse, we ought
willingly to leave her to him. But be ye silent a little while, for I shall
even now make an end.

Let us all (I beseech you, dearly beloved) let us all with one consent lift up
our voices unto Heaven, unto the Lord, imploring his mercy. For truly, it is a
thing extremely to be bewailed by us, that we should be made such Fools, so
dull, and sottish; as that, notwithstanding we are none of us ignorant, how we
are all called the Spouses of God; yet scarce one of us, or very rarely, has
the courage to hazard his Nature, in manfully following the Bridegroom, until
he be found worthy to be made partaker, and taste by experience somewhat at
least of the wonderful and most pleasant solemnization, of these supreme
Triumphs, and most happy nuptials. Verily, in these latter times there are but
few such found, as do in truth go forth to meet the Bridegroom; such, as of old
time there were many. Wherefore it exceedingly concerns every one, to examine,
and seriously and diligently to try himself; and to have a vigilant care of
himself: For now the time draws near, and is even at the door, when the
greatest part of men will indeed have Eyes, and yet see not, and Ears, and yet
hear not.

Wherefore now, my dearly beloved, come on, let us all do our utmost endeavor
to come to the experiencing of these most pleasant, and even too too happy
nuptials. B^ that I may pursue my purpose, and come to a conclusion; After that
the Bridegroom and the Bride are gone asunder, and withdrawn each from other,
and the Bride again coming to her self, perceives that she is yet left in this
time of exile, she says to her self; Ah me miserable wretch, am I here again?
And begins to be somewhat sad. But she is now so modest, so sunk into the depth
of humility, and finally so perfectly, and fundamentally resigned to her
Bridegroom, that she durst in no measure think of the enjoying, or desiring his
company, for she very well know^s, that she is altogether unworthy of it.
Notwithstanding the Bridegroom neglects not ever now and then to have an Eye
upon his fair beloved, and dearest Bride, knowing full well that none can
comfort her but himself. And now in the winding up of my Discourse, let me give
you this caution (dearly Beloved.) Let it not seem strange unto you, what I
have said unto you touching the Discourse, which the Bridegroom and the Bride
have with one another. Certainly no man can believe, except he have had
experience of it; what strange kind, and unheard of Discourses the Bride has
with the Bridegroom; Nevertheless the Holy Scriptures also often make mention,
how a loving and devoted Soul Discourses with the Bridegroom, and in such a
manner, that her words hardly will bear sense with them. Which also sometimes
happens even at this day; namely, that the Bride uses such expressions to the
Bridegroom, that if any one heard them, he would certainly say, she were either
drunk or mad. But I fear (Beloved) I am too tedious.

God therefore and our Lord Jesus Christ the true Bridegroom grant, that we may
be all made his true Spouses, and be able to go forth to meet him in true and
great Humility, and deep and perfect resignation of our selves to him, to the
Praise and Glory of the Almighty God.

Amen.
Of certain wonderful Things, which befell some upon the Hearing the foregoing
Sermon, which afterward were understood. From whence we may take notice, How
great things God works by fit Instruments; namely, by the Sermon of any one
Illuminated Man's, much more then by the Sermons of an hundred others.
THIS Sermon being ended, the Master went into the Temple, dispatched Divine
Service, and administered the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Body to very many good
men. But in the Garden of the Monastry, there remained sitting above forty
men. Which thing the Layman had taken notice off. And when the Sacrament was
ended, coming to the Doctor, he told him of it: and taking him with him, led
him to the place, where he might see it. But in the mean time, whilst the
Master was administering the Sacrament, all were risen, except twelve, whom they
found sitting there still. When the Master saw this, he said to the Layman:
Dear Son, what shall we do to these men? Then the Layman went to them, and
touched, and jogged them one by one, but they felt nothing, and seemed to be no
otherwise then dead. At which the Master did not a little wonder, for he had
never seen any such thing in the least before. And says again to the Layman;
Think you Son that these men are dead? The Layman smiling said, if they be
dead, it is the fault of you, and the Bridegroom.

Master. If the Bridegroom have a hand with me in the business, we shall easily
find a Remedy for this evil.

Layman. You need not at all doubt Sir, but that all these men shall live yet
in time; and I could wish, that you would speak to the Holy Virgins of this
Monastery, that they would cause them to be carried within the first Cloisters
of their Monastery, to some warm place, least by reason of the damp ground they
should catch harm. Accordingly it was done; the Virgins very modestly
commanding them to be carried into warm Rooms: and they told the Doctor, that
they also had one of their Sisters rapped into an exstasie, and lying upon her
Bed, whither they had carried her as one dead. The Master answered them, I
beseech you (Beloved) be not troubled at this thing; but when any of them comes
to themselves, give them (if they will take it) some kind of warm broth. The
Virgins answered him, That they would willingly do. And so the Doctor together
with the Layman departed, and went together to the Doctors Cell: Where the
Layman said to the Doctor. What think you, Reverend Sir, did ever the like
matter befall you since you were born? you see now, what great things God does
work by a fit Instrument. And I doubt not, but very many more will be sensible
of this your Sermon, and what was done at it: For they will tell one another.
Wherefore I shall like it well, if you please, that you would suffer these your
weak Sons and Daughters to rest a while. For truly, this Sermon will find them
work enough for a long time. But I verily think many would reap much benefit,
if you would likewise (God permitting) Preach to the secular men. For now
during this time of Lent, they will more readily run to Sermons. And I believe,
very many will flock together the more, because of this Sermon, which you
preached to day.

Master. If you advice me to it (dear Son) I will willingly follow your
counsel. And (as I remember) this next Sabbath day, is the Feast of the Virgin
S. Gartrude.

Layman. And pray what is the Gospel appointed for that day?

Master. It is concerning the Woman taken in adultry, and brought to Christ.
But whatever the Gospel be for that day, I intend not to stick only to that;
But will easily take from thence some sentence or other, which shall be the
scope of my whole Sermon; and from it I will take occasion as Divine Grace
shall assist me, to set before Men's Eyes their sins and Iniquities. Neither do
I much care, what becomes of me for so doing. Though I easily believe that
first this will be my portion; my Brethren will do what they can to expel me
out of the Monastery; for I am resolved neither to flatter them, nor any body
else: but will simply speak the naked truth, as the Lord shall enable me:
neither will I balk that, though I should be therefore to suffer death.

Layman. Truly (I believe Sir) for these two or three hundred years, or more by
past, there has not been so much need, to speak the naked Truth simply and
seriously, as now in these our days. Wherefore be not at all moved with
whatever can happen. For if you be not suffered to abide here, you may be some
where else: and wheresoever you be, God will in no wise forsake you. The Master
therefore gave order to one, that at the end of his Sermon he should give
notice to the People, that he intended to Preach the next Sabbath day, which
was consecrated to St. Gartrude. When that day came, a very great multitude of
Men of diverse ranks came together, to hear the Doctors Sermon. Who coming at
the time appointed; Thus began his Discourse.

A Sermon of the Doctors Preached to the People, in which he sharply reproves
Sin.
What shall I say, or where shall I begin my Discourse (Dearly Beloved) seeing
it is obvious to every Eye, how ill it is with us in many things, and unless we
amend our Lives, undoubtedly things will grow worse, and worse, and more
dangerous? But before I enter upon my Discourse, I earnestly beg this of you
all; that none of you would take that grievously, which I shall say unto you.
For truly, it is more needful at this time to speak the Truth plainly, and
openly, then it has been any time these two or three hundred years, or
upwards. Whereupon I have resolved with my self to reprove the Faults of us all
in general, and not at all to flatter any man; but without any daubing, obscure
glosses, or comments, to speak simply and nakedly, whatever the Lord shall
teach, or suggest to me: being ready for the Love of God, to undergo any thing
that shall be laid upon me for this cause. But if I shall be hindered by the
shortness of the time, to finish now what I have to say, I shall at another
time (if liberty be granted me) make an end of it. Truly, I have purposed to
handle so many things in this Sermon, that I will neither meddle with the
Gospel for the day, nor speak any thing of blessed Gartrude, to whom the day is
consecrated, nor mingle any Latin sentences in my Discourse, that so I may
have the longer time to speak what I intend. I have only taken for my Text a
Verse or two out of this days Gospel, upon which I will only insist. The Words
are these;

The Pharisees bringing a Woman taken in Adultry to our Lord, set her in the
midst, and accused her, that she ought to be stoned; The Lord said unto them,
He that is without Sin among you, let him cast the first stone.

When they heard this, they went one after another out of the Temple. Verily
(Beloved) if in these our days, our Lord Jesus Christ should speak the same
Words to us Christians; I verily believe, very few of us could remain behind,
who ought not to go forth. And least whilst I am reproving others for their
faults, I should seem to pass by my own, and the sins of our Order; I will
begin with my self, and my Brethren, the Preachers and Confessors. How many
think you of us, would stay behind upon these Words of our Savior, who being
conscious to themselves of no sin, would not be compelled to go forth? Truly we
are called, and accounted poor, and live upon the Patrimony of the Crucifix,
that is, upon the Alms of the faithful. But how worthily in all things we
answer this our calling, the Lord knows, and the Devil knows. Truly I fear
there are very few among us, who in hearing confessions do purely love God, and
aim at his Glory: Of which thing this is an evident Argument, that for the most
part, we are more ready to hear the confessions of the Rich, than of the Poor.
And that this is so, is plain by this. If any such of us be taking the
confession of any Poor man; and word be brought us that such a Lord, or such a
Lady is come, we presently arise in have, and dismissing the Poor man, hie us
away to my Lord, or to my Lady. And why is this? but because we are covetous,
and love honor, and are tickled, if we can make our braggs, that more Lords
and Ladies make their confessions to us, then to others: in the mean time we
make mention of the Poor Saints. But how, and in what manner we be have our
selves toward those Rich ones, God the righteous Judge knows. Certainly it
is our duty to teach them the way of Truth, and uprightness, and in what manner
they ought to lead their lives; and not, when they desire to have their wicked
and unlawful customs indulged, and permitted, to frame and invent many subtle
Glosses, and shifts, and tell them their lewd customs are not repugnant to the
Scriptures. Nevertheless we tell them, that which is false. For the Scripture
no where says, that covetousness, pride, luxury, or the like sins may be
indulged, or permitted; Neither is this any other than the inventions and
council of the malignant one. Wherefore (my Beloved) those of us, as are such
Confessors, do show unto you not the way of truth, but the way of perdition:
and so we first run headlong into the Pit of eternal perdition, and then also
lead you along with us into the same; there is only this difference, that we
shall be thrust lowermost, and you cast upon us into those pains. But though ye
rich men are not so deeply plunged into those pains as we; yet your condition
shall not therefore be the better; seeing your own Reason, and Conscience often
tells you, that we in no wise show unto you the right, and safe way. Further
more, we in duty ought also (beloved) when we are in the Pulpit, to preach unto
you the right way, and in few words, without lying and glossing, to show unto
you the very truth. Which if it ever were needful to do, is now much more
needful. But alas! the most of us, are too too foolish, and cowardly, and stand
more in awe of men, than of God. Now the reason of this is, that in these our
times, matters are come to that pass, that if any of us will speak the very
truth, he will hardly be tolerated almost in any Monastery, nor suffered to
Preach: and presently another shall be put into his place, who will reject, and
confute whatever the former has said.

Truly (Beloved) things are not right among us; therefore I will not be
partial, but speak the Truth. Nay, rather I will (as the Lord shall enable me)
simply set before all our eyes in general, of what state or condition soever we
be, our vices, and failings: let what will befall me therefore; I will endure it
all willingly, for the love of my Lord God. He of you (Beloved) who is without
sin, (if there be such a one) let him cast the first stone at them I have
mentioned. What I have hitherto spoken, may, at the first view, seem as if I
had only aimed at my Brethren of our Order. But my intention was nothing less,
than only to mark out them: but my reproof was directed against all those,
together with our selves, who hear confessions, and are Preachers of the Word:
whether they be Pastors, or Priests, or of some Religious Order, of what rank
soever they be, to whom the aforesaid Authority is committed, and given: To all
these (I would have you to understand) was my discourse directed. Here now I
should say something of the Bishops and other Prelates of great Authority, and
Power, who hold many Churches. But I suppose here is not any one present.
Nevertheless, least any should think, that if I pass over these in silence, I
do it for fear of them, or upon some other consideration, as if I would
flatter, and seek to curry favor; I shall (I say therefore) say something of
them: and there will not be wanting some, or other it may be, that will go and
tell them what I say; which thing I shall not at all mislike, nor be troubled
at. Certainly, in what Province soever any Bishopric is, the Bishop is the
Pastor of that Province, how far soever the bounds of his Jurisdiction or
Diocese extends. He is, I say the Pastor, and Head of his Bishopric, and that,
for to feed his People; and to take all vigilant care, that the whole Flock
committed to his charge, be trained up in the due observation of Christian
Religion and Christian Ordinances. But alas! when as now for the most part the
Pastors are blind, no wonder, if their sheep go astray, and become a prey for
Wolves. But what need I use many words, when you easily perceive what I hint
at? I fear truly, that many of our great Priests, and potent Prelates, who hold
at one time many Churches, are likewise held and entangled themselves in many,
and grievous sins; and are sometimes even worse than thieves, and robbers; for
these only rob men of their Goods, but these wicked, and unworthy Priests, rob
and plunder even God of his Goods; for all Church livings are Gods, and his
Alms, which of right he has given to none, but to such, as are careful to
spend them in his service. But when it comes to pass, that such a Priest laden
with many Churches, dies, what kind of Will and Testament leaves he to his
Heirs? Verily, a lamentable one; for the same way, which he walked in himself,
does he show unto his Heirs. For his Heirs greedily catch his Goods, and hasten
with them to the same place of Perdition, whither he is gone before. At least
if they dye without Restitution, I am not able in a short Discourse to express,
how dangerous their estate and condition is. But let him who is without sin
among you, cast the first stone at them.

And now in the next place, I must have a word to the Secular Priests, of
inferior rank; many of whom (I fear) do too too sinfully, and dangerously lead
their lives: Plainly, whatever Priest follows the course of Gamesters, and
Fornicators, such a one is worse than Judas, who betrayed our Lord and Savior:
as it may easily be proved.

For Judas was a thief, a slippery fellow, a betrayer of our Lord Jesus Christ.
But a Priest, he has an Ecclesiastical Benefice, which is Gods, who therefore
has granted it to him, that he should perform his Office, and permits him to
take of it what is necessary for life, and what he cannot without inconvenience
want; but if any thing remain over and above, seeing that is totally Gods; if
he restore not to God in his poor Members, but spends it upon some other
unlawful use; such a one truly commits a worse theft than Judas did. For such a
Priest consumes the Goods of his God at Dice, and diverse other ways does wast
the Alms given to the poor, truly worse than Judas did. Furthermore, such a
Priest with the same impure hands, fears not to handle his God upon the Altar,
with which he has touched filthily a vile Harlot; and kisseth her with the
same mouth, by which God entered; and gives her his heart, which he ought to
devote to God alone; and at last breaks his Vow, and Oath, which he made unto
God, and therewith betrays God, when he joins himself to a woman, when as he
ought to be united to God only: neither does it suffice him, to do this (as
Judas did) but once, but he does it often. Truly, Judas did but once receive
the Lord in the Sacrament; and peradventure he neither was consecrated, as is
the Priest, nor had made a Vow of continence, as does the Priest. From hence
therefore do you your selves now judge (Beloved) whether such a Priest be not
worse than even Judas himself. Verily, I am sufficiently afraid, that many now
adays outstrip Judas. But let all such (I beseech them) consider the frailty
of their condition, and uncertainty of their life, and from their hearts amend
their life's; which of all things does most concern them. Truly, I cannot but
extremely wonder, that any woman can be guilty of so much presumption, as to
dare to suffer her self once to be touched by any Priest. But now if Secular
Priests, who are subject to the foresaid vices, are worse than Judas the
Traitor: we, who are called the Religious, and live in Sacred Monastical
Orders, if we commit the like, we certainly are yet far more wicked. But if a
Prelate commit such like, his sins are yet more grievous. If a Bishop, he sins
yet more notorious. If lastly the Pope, his sins of all others were the worst,
and most heavy. For by how much the higher the station is, by so much the more
grievous is the fall, and greater the fault. But if a Virgin dedicated to God,
a Monastical Virgin, shall commit any of these things, she does exceeding
enormously sin. For such a one ought both in body and Soul to conform her self
according to the example of the Virgin Mother. For as our Lady the Glorious
Virgin, brought forth her only Son without any violation of her Virginity; so
all the consecrated Virgins have made a Vow to follow the example of the Most
Blessed Mother, in all chastity; that they may be the better enabled to breed,
and bring forth God, the Son of God continually in their hearts. But who is
there here without sin? If such a one there be, let him first cast a stone at
all these, I have mentioned.

But now whilst I stay overlong in reproving only Spiritual Persons, or the
Clergy; you Seculars and Lay People may suppose I have forgot you: Therefore
now I must bring you forth into view also. For neither are you without sin, but
even as we, so are ye in many things reproveable. But there is no reason, why
any one should cast all that is said, upon another; but rather examine himself,
and his own heart; where I believe (if he do it as he ought) he will find so
much business at home, that he will hardly be mindful of others faults. But I
beseech you (Beloved) do not take grievously those things, which I am now about
to speak. Truly, I shall begin with the Supreme Judges and Magistrates of this
City. You therefore my Lords the Judges and Magistrates, (if any of you be
here) tell me I beseech you, how stands it, and what agreement is there between
you and God? Ye your selves know that ye admit no man into your Order, except
he be of sufficient age, and have his lawful Wife. And this you do justly
enough. But why this is done, ye do not in the mean time well understand.
Heretofore in old time, the ancient Judges did very carefully and with much
prudence enact this; that no young men should be admitted in their Order; but
such as had first arrived at a Just age; that so in that time they might a^ain
to the knowledge of the Civil, Imperial, and Provincial Laws; and learn the
Laws of their Ancestors, and Statutes of their Country. And when they had
arrived at a fitting age, and had thoroughly learned all these Laws; If they
were also Just men, and endowed with the fear of the Lord; so that they might
be accounted worthy of trust, and fit for such an Office; then at last did the
Ancients choose them, and receive them into their Number. That all, who are of
your Order, ought to have lawful Wives, it was therefore ordained, least they
should desire in their hearts or minds any other women, besides their own
Wives. Here now, I beseech you, my Lords examine your selves, whether you be
exact Immitators of your Ancestors. Truly, it does not so appear to me. For you
admit many into your Order for favor and affection only; and admit such to
sit upon the Judgment Seat, who, as it is sufficiently known, have no fear of
God; love riches, and receive money where ever they can get it, caring not at
all whether lawfully or unlawfully. But truly such gifts and rewards, which
are thus received, whilst they are in Judgment, do subvert, and pervert
Judgment and Justice.

Furthermore, you receive Adulterers into your Number, which, yet is altogether
unlawful, and in special manner forbidden, that such should be admitted to sit
in Judgment; whose lives are contrary to God, and good Laws. And for this
cause oftentimes false, and unjust Judgments are passed; which doubtless the
Lord God, the Supreme Judge, will heavily revenge at the last day, upon all
those, who have given them. For the Lord himself has appointed Justice; and
Judgment is his. If any one therefore turn Gods Justice, into Injustice; he
will certainly not suffer it long to pass unrevenged. Behold my Lords, ye that
are Judges and Rulers of the People, I have chosen to begin with you; because
you hold the Supreme Power of Judicature. If you therefore reform and amend the
Supreme Judicatories, of which ye are Presidents; the inferior will easily
after your example be reformed: because your Authority will sway with them, and
bring it to pass. But if there be neglect on your part in this matter; what
ever is done amiss in inferior Courts, will be charged upon you, as being
mostly the cause of it. Believe me, your condition is very dangerous, except
you amend your life's. For doubless Justice is no small matter in the sight of
God; but is a business full of difficulty. And we see in the Old Testament, how
God was wont grievously to revenge unjust Judgments, Adultery, and Pride: And
doubtless he does the same at this day; although we are grown so sottish, and
stupid, as not to perceive it. Beloved, if it be not burdensome to you, I will
briefly tell you a strange, and terrible thing; namely, how great mischiefs,
and grievous sins had their rise from one act of Adultery, within these few
years. Neither will I tell you a Dream, or a Fable; but what I my self know to
be true. When I were in the thirtieth year of my age, and by the Order of my
Superiors followed my Studies in a certain Town; I be came familiarly
acquainted with two Citizens of the place. They were both young men, and very
rich Merchants. These two loved one the other entirely, and managed their Trade
in common: they had both of them young Wises much alike; who did also no less
love one another. And when it happened at any time, that either of them went
from home about business; (such trust and confidence had they in each other) he
always committed his Wife, his House, and all his Goods to the others care. It
fell out, that after I had been acquainted with them about a year; One of their
Wives, came to me at a certain time, and privately told me, with a mournful
voice, and many tears; That she had been, of a long time, an heinous sinner,
and that she should be no better than a firebrand of Hell. Which when she had
said, she shed such abundance of tears, that she could not speak one word more:
I being moved with her tears, and suffering with her, in her sorrow, I desired
her to lay open the cause of so great a sadness, promising her, by Gods
assistance, (whose mercy I told her was infinite) to give her faithful Council.
At last, she taking heart, she said, Ah Sir, my Daughter N. is not ligitimate,
but begot in adultery by my Husbands Friend. For when, above five years ago, my
Husband was a great while from home, his Friend upon a certain time, abusing
that too much confidence, which you know, we have in one another; whilst we
were familiarly conversing together, fell at last in the sin of adultery with
me; and of him I conceived my foresaid Daughter N. Furthermore to aggravate my
damnation, I never made confession of this sin, after this my fall; but like
the Traitor Judas, have nine times since received with polluted heart and
mouth, the most Holy Body of our Lord. When I heard this, I wished her, if she
desired right advice, to tell me the naked truth, whether she had more then
once layn with that adulterer; and also, whether he knew that her Daughter N.
was his, or no. She answered, that they had but once (she thanked God)
committed that sin, and that they had both so much repented them of it, that if
it could be, they would give any money it were undone. Neither could he
possibly ever know that N. was his Daughter; because she for certain reasons
had always kept that secret to her self. I advised her therefore first, that
she should find out some way, whereby she might safely declare the whole matter
to her Husband. To which she answered, that she durst in no wise do that. For,
if my Husband (said she) should come to the knowledge of this, I am certain,
that he would either kill the adulterer together with me, or else be killed by
him; and so this thing would straight be spread abroad among the vulgar. Then
said I, if you dare not attempt this Counfel; yet at least do this by all
means; procure that your illigitimate Daughter be placed in some Monastery, and
let her in no case have possession of any part of your Husbands estate,
together with his true Heirs, to their damage, and the eternal damnation of
your Souls; for if she should in herit any part of your Husbands estate, she
would possess it unlawfully. And you may tell your Husband, that you have
devoted that Daughter to Religion, and be urgent with him, to suffer you to
fulfill your Vow. Accordingly the woman did very often endeavor it; and I backing
her, tried by many reasons to persuade her Husband; but all our endeavors were
in vain. At last I again told her plainly, that if she would deliver her own
Soul, she must find out some means, in the sweetest manner she could possibly,
to declare the whole matter to her Husband; that so he might not take the
business so heinously, as she feared; and this, before her Daughter be disposed
of in marriage; that so at last she might be delivered from this dangerous and
troublesome remorse of Conscience. But while she was ^oo long in suspense; It
fell out that the two Merchants, by the Mediation and counsel of Friends, made
up a match between the ones Son, and the others supposed Daughter; but indeed
between the Brother and Sister, who being thus incestuously joined, wonderfully
loved one the other. When I beheld so great iniquity, out of pity suffering
with these miserable People; I tried diverse ways, if by any means they might
be separated the one from the other. But when I saw I a sailed nothing, and
that the forenamed Virgin N. was with child by her Brother, her Husband; and
being called home by the commands of my Superiors; I counseled her, that had
committed the first Sin and Adultery, that she should discover in confession
her whole sorrow to one Brother N. a pious and learned man, and follow his
advice. And so I departed.

But how unhappily these matters afterward succeeded with them, (as that
Brother wrote me word) I am hardly able to express. And truly, all this Story
is of my own knowledge. Therefore how many probably may there be of Brothers
and Sisters, and other near kindred, which I know nothing of, which may in
other places be joined together in Matrimony. Truly, I fear, that there is a
certain Father (which verily is not fit to be spoken of) that does commit
Incest and Adultry with his own Daughter. Plainly (Beloved) it can not be
spoken how many and grievous sins have their birth and original out of Luxury
and Adultry. Take it for certain, that Adultry is an enormous crime, and very
odious to God. Therefore has Hell enlarged it is mouch without bound. Believe
me an Adulterer, or Adulteress is in a manner worse then a Thief or Robber. For
a Thief, and a Robber do but take away a man's temporal Goods. But an
Adulterer, or Adulteress, do commit a more heinous crime by committing Adultry.
For God himself instituted Matrimony, and therefore it is properly His, and He
himself does so strongly join twain mutually together in all faithfulness, that
they are called one Body, and ought not to be guilty of the least
unfaithfulness one to the other, since they have both vowed and promised to
God, that they would constantly be faithful the one to the other. A Thief
therefore (as I said) and a Robber takes away a man's Goods. But an Adulterer
and Adulteress incur the guilt of perjury, and therefore steal that which
belongs to God, and as much as in them is, spoil and rob him. For certainly,
sacred Wedlock is ordained of God himself, that it might be his; and that men
in much faithfulness and sanctity might beget Children; to this end, that his
Kingdom might be filled. Hence therefore now you your selves gather, whither
Adultry be not far worse then Theft and Rapine; when as Adulterers steal that,
which is Gods: But Thieves and Robbers only take away what is man's. Wherefore
(Beloved) beware of Adultry, because it is a grievous and enormous wickedness.
Truly, If I would go about to lay open all the dangers and evils springing out
of Adultry, this whole day would hardly suffice, and yet I fear I have already
been to tedious. I should now speak of Pride, of covetous men, of Soldiers, and
their Comrades, and Wives, of handy crafts men, and their Wives; but the time
does not permit. Truly, I have yet many things, which I shall say in their due
time, except I be silenced from preaching. But I warn you beloved, let not any
one hit another in the Teeth with these things which ye have heard, because I
have only touched the vices of some. For we are all guilty and obnoxious to
sin. But if there be any one here without Sin, let him first cast a stone at
them, whom I have mentioned. Believe me, as things are with us at present, it
does exceedingly concern us, that with what speed possible, we should amend our
lives. Otherwise except we so do; there are some among you, who may live till
that time, wherein God Almighty may permit some grievous, and unusual distress,
and pressure to happen to men. But arise now, and let us pray the Lords Prayer,
and repeat the Angels salutation.

How after this Sermon, the Master was forbidden by his Brethren to Preach
again.
AFter this Sermon, all the People of the City did talk much, and variously of
the Master; some praised him, some dispraised him: but the greater part did
commend him, saying, He is certainly a good man, and devout toward God, who
fears no man, but speaks the very mere truth of himself, and all others. But
his Brethren presently after this Sermon, being met together in the
Chapter-Room, unanimously concluded, that he should be wholly silenced from
Preaching: and they studiously enough endeavored to bring it about, that they
might send him away to another Monastery of their Order. Which when the Rulers,
and chief men of the City found out; they went to those Monks, and entreated
them to grant License to the Master again to Preach: and likewise inquired of
them, what fault they found in him, that they should prohibit him from
preaching, Who answered, He has offended our best friends, and turned them
from us. To which the Lords said, we believe that ye have no better Friends
certainly in this City then we; who can better take care of your affairs, and
be more helpful to you then we. Therefore we fear that ye rather take it ill,
that he publicly reproved you. But he reproved us also, and yet we take it not
ill. Truly, ye ought rather at any price to purchase such a man, as he is; who
dares speak the Truth to men; and as it ought to be, fears not the face of any
man. So therefore out of respect to the Lords, and for their sakes, It was not
only permitted to the Master, to remain there, but also to Preach again.
Afterward the Master was entreated by the secular men, to Preach again another
public Sermon to them. He told them, he would do as they desired, if the Lord
gave him leave, the very next Lords day after the ninth. Now that Lords day was
Judica, or the Passion of our Lord in Lent. And when the appointed day and hour
was come, a very great multitude of common People came together; thither also
came the Master, and thus began his Sermon.

The Masters second Sermon to the vulgar People.
THE Gospel for this present day, Beloved, is that, where the Lord says to the
multitudes, and to the chief Priests: Who among you convinces me of Sin? If I
say the Truth, why do ye not believe me? He that is of God, hears the Words
of God; For this cause ye hear not, because ye are not of God. This Gospel is
long, and because I hope most of you have heard it of your Pastors to day;
omitting it, I do make my Discourse so much the shorter. But before I begin to
obtain Grace, let us call upon the Mother of Mercy, and all Grace, saying Ave
Mary, etc. Truly (Beloved) of right, when as to day, the Lord's Day after the
Lords Passion is Celebrated, I ought to Preach of the Passion: but I have so
many things to speak of, that that cannot be done at this time. For it is
exceeding necessary, that we should be spoke to of our sins and failings.
Nevertheless, if it may be commodiously done, I have purposed upon some
convenient day this week, to Preach a Sermon of the venerable Sacrament; who
namely have right to come unto it, and who not: and what it is hinders them,
who ought not to come. Afterward also, I shall make a Sermon upon the most
bitter Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. And indeed at this time, Beloved, I
can say nothing to ye, unless I do speak of the Community by their several
Names and Titles. Wherefore also I would have you take this advice, that if any
be here, to whom my discourse shall not belong, let not them wrest it as spoken
to them; neither let them judge them, to whom peradventure it shall belong; but
give God thanks, that he has preserved them from evil: But they, who shall
understand themselves to be guilty, and whom my discourse shall note, let them
the more speedily repent, and amend their lives. For this will be exceedingly
necessary for them to do. This common true saying is found in almost every
man's mouth; when we say that Adam and Eve did exceeding wickedly, whilst they
followed the Devil, and transgressed the Commandment of the Lord their God. But
if any one rightly did weigh it, how many (do we think) would he find now a
days entangled in more grievous sins, then Adam and Eve were? Certainly, every
rash, and swaggering Soldier, and his proud, and lascivious Wife, do commit far
more and greater evils, then Adam and Eve did. Eve indeed followed the Devil,
and violated the Command of God. Adam also had respect to the Woman, and being
willing to please her, he transgressed the precept of God. But presently for
the violation of this one command, they were both driven out of Paradise: and
in such a manner has the wrath of Divine vengeance raged against them, and all
their posterity; that from that time, for the space of five thousand years, it
suffered none to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And in the mean while Adam
and Eve, were compelled so long in the Limbo of Hell, to wait in expectation,
until that fullness of time came, wherein God the Father did vouchsafe to
deliver them by his only begotten Son.

Truly (Beloved) I know that Adam and Eve never neglected, but this one
command; neither have I found in Scripture that they committed any other
grievous sin. If therefore Almighty God has so severely and horribly revenged
upon them this one sin; there is no cause certainly, why these proud, immodest,
and vain Women do discommend them for many things, and accuse them of many
crimes. For verily be certain of this; if these Women go on in those courses,
and actions, in which at present they live; I know not what will become of
them. For they, not once only as Eve did, do transgress the Divine Commandment,
but too too often, in diverse manners, at diverse times, and seasons. Wherefore ye
proud, foolish, and rash Women, repent at last, I beseech you: especially since
ye know that the Lord of Majesty, whom ye offend by your iniquities has so
grievously taken vengeance upon Eve for sin; yea also, and does yet daily even
too severely take vengeance; as ye in the pains and distresses of childbearing
learn by your own experience. Repent, Repent, I say, ye Women beloved in
Christ. Otherwise except ye so do, certain it is ye lead too too dangerous a
Lise. And truly, it is a thing much to be bewailed, and a thing exceeding
pernicious and dangerous, that we, who attend upon the hearing of confessions,
should connive at such things in you, whereby we are exposed to as great danger
as your selves. But your Husbands stand in greater danger, who imitate Adam, in
indulging, conniving, and permitting you not once, but frequently to play the
Eves. But hear me thou, who ever art such a Husband, such an Adam; Certainly,
God has not committed unto thee thy Eve, for this reason, that thou should
suffer her so often to violate his commands: but rather for this cause has he
given her unto thee, that thou should keep her, and take such care of her,
as not to suffer her to neglect so much as one precept. But now thou do very
carefully regard her, who, when thou ought to hinder sin, art a helper of
her to commit sin. But whilst you connive at those evils, which she commits,
you your self are not innocent, but are partaker of her sins, and so often
trangress the Divine Commandment. I exceedingly fear (Beloved) that at this
time there may be found some Consessors, who fear not to administer the Holy
Sacraments to very many, both Men and Woman, whom notwithstanding they know to
lie in some mortal sins. And most of these, as I fear, at the end of their
lives, are drowned in the depths of despair, and so incur the miseries of
perpetual damnation. For the Devils are very busy about such like worldly men,
when they come to dye. For they grievously set before them all the sins, which
ever they committed. And what heart, think ye can those wretches have then,
when they have their whole life long been given to this fallacious World; and
when the Devils are so exceeding subtle, and full of craft to deceive? Now
therefore, dearly Beloved, if any of you know themselves guilty in any of these
things, let them blush (I beseech you) before God and Men, and make have to
reform themselves. For it is certain, that many Jews and Pagans are not a
little scandalized at your lives. Yea, verily the Pagans, when they hear that
Men and Women among us are clothed so shamefully, and immodestly; they, as I
have been informed by those that heard them, say thus: Christians probably are
not true men, because they go clothed so like beasts; but peradventure have
something in them of the nature of beasts. And ye all know, that the Jews dwell
among us here in our Country: Who, when they hear (and they hear it but too
often) how in juriously we treat God by our impious and horrible swearing; say,
as it has been told me by others, nay, and as I have heard my self, when upon
a time I spoke with them concerning our Christian Faith: they thus say. Can we
believe that he is our God, whom you say is your God? Certainly, we are thus
persuaded, that if your God were of so great power; he would in no wise permit,
nor suffer it to go unpunished; that you often do so impiously deal with him with
wrathful minds, too often fwearing, and for-swearing: Doubtless if he were God,
he would never bear it. Wherefore ye need not doubt, but ye unmeasurably sin,
whoever give the reigns to your tongues thus impiously to swear. Believe me,
God will not suffer this long to go unrevenged, but either here, or in the
World to come, where sins are too too bitterly punished; will take vengeance on
you for it. And you unchaste Women, who wear so lascivious and wicked habits,
take it for certain, that the most pure and great God will speedily punish
terribly the wantonness of your Garments: for he will not long endure it. Where
is now that honest, chaste, modest, and well-ordered Conversation of yours? How
has the Devil robbed you so of it almost all? I fear, I fear truly, that God
the just Judge will call you to a severe account for your impudent and sinful
manner of life. For he himself says: If a Man look upon a Woman, or a Woman
upon a Man, if one lust after the other, he has then committed Adultry in his
heart; and now death is completed, though yet the act be not done. Whither I
pray shall a man turn his Eyes; where he may not behold you, O ye scornful
Women? Alas! your condition on both sides is too too dangerous, Ye are always
blaming Adam and Eve, because they broke one only Commandment; though they have
for that transgression suffered so many evils even to death, yea and after
death: But it were better that instead of Adam and Eve, you did reprove and
blame your selves; seeing it is to be feared, that ye have oftener by far
transgressed the Commandments of God than they. But whereas in this Discourse I
have only mentioned Military men and their wives; let not therefore any one
think, that I intended to mark only them. For truly, I would put to rebuke all
what ever, both those that are above, and those that are below the rank of
Soldiers; namely, Merchants and their Wives, and in brief all those that are
upon the forementioned account blameable, of what rank or quality soever they
be.

Again, it is not a little to be feared, Beloved, that there are many to be
found who are reputed Christians, and yet so live, as that if they should
depart out of this world in that their evil life, they would find it worse with
them, than with the Jews. For the Jews know no other, but that they may
Lawfully practice Usury, to get their living. But it is not at all hidden to
Christians, that it is sinful and unlawful to practice Usury; and yet
notwithstanding they do it. Therefore they will be thrust below the Jews in
Hell. And here I would have all those in like manner to be understood, who
before God are Usurers, and yet would not be accounted, nor called so by men.
And lastly, I here note all those, who practice unjust morgaging, and hunt for
unlawful gains from moneys, I remember truly, that I lived in such a time,
when it was exceeding rare, and unusual to use morgaging, and few at that time
did practice it. And if then any contracts were made with the condition of
Re-emption, they were sincere and simple, and according to God; so that I my
self also did permit some to make such contracts. But I will tell you upon what
account I did it. There came at that time to me certain honest men, one of whom
said unto me: how do you advice me Sir? I have bought of this man some certain
Rents for my money upon his inheritance. He also is come to me beseeching me
for Gods sake to do this thing for him; to permit, that writings be made, that
may contain this condition, that if God enable him to redeem his estate, I
would permit him for Gods sake so to do. Having heard this, I thus said to the
man: tell me prithee, do thou eye or intend nothing else in this matter, but
only to do this purely for Gods sake? To which he answered. Truly, nothing else
do I mind in this business. For what else should I seek, or what else should
move me, but only that it pitties me that this man's estate should be for ever
made over to me and my Heirs? otherwise I had rather possess the Goods as my
own, according as I purchased them. In this manner, Beloved, I sometimes
heretofore consented to redemptions; but take notice, I beseech you, how
purely, how simply, and according to God, heretofore this was done. But now in
these our times, we do by our pride and covetousness, so pervert, and corrupt
these redemptions, that for the most part they are more then half Usury before
God: the blame of which is almost mostly ours, who are Confessors, because we
permit such things. Behold, I will tell you, Beloved, into what great misery in
this age we are slidden. Not very long ago, there happened a certain Citizen to
come to me, and said to me: I beseech you Sir, give me some advice in a
business, which I shall declare to you. Behold, I, and my Wife, and my Sons
have not sufficient where withal to maintain us according to the fashion of
this age. And therefore I have thoughts to sell my estate upon condition of
re-emption: but I would do nothing in it without your advice. If therefore you
so advice me, I fully purpose so to do. I made him this answer, I will not in
the least advice you to it; but rather dissuade you by all means I can
faithfully and sincerely. He answered me, I have not then wherewithal to live
according to the custom of these times. To which I answered, Take it for
certain, if you follow that course, you have told me, you will grievously
offend God, and will commit some mortal sins. For I would not have you ignorant
that all contracts of buying and selling Rents, or Possessions, in which the
buyer reserves power to himself, ever to call in again, when he pleases the
principal sum; (all such contracts I say) are not free from usury: for in all
those contracts, in which upon loan any gain is expected, by covenant or
principal intention explicitly, with what color soever; notwithstanding many
endeavor now a days to excuse it: in all those contracts, I say, for the most
part, there is a mixture of usury. So therefore; first, you will make your self
partaker of another usury, if without pressing necessity you make use of a
common Usurer; or else you draw your neighbor, who before used it not, to
practice usury. Secondly, you incur the guilt of avarice, (which is one of the
seven capital sins) whilst that moves you to do this. Thirdly, also you will
sin by pride, whilst you do this: for this end, that you, and your wife, and
your children, may be conformable to the luxury and pomp of the Age, and be
like to others. Wherefore, for these reasons, I dare by no means advise you to
it; but rather, with what faithfulness I can, I give you this counsel, That you
live contented with your lot, and with those goods which God has granted you,
after the manner of ancient time; and be thankful to God, who doubtless will
succor you so doing, that you shall have what is sufficient for you.
Certainly, if you acquiesce in this my counsel, and do as I tell you, you shall
perceive it will be profitable to you, both for body and soul. Then said he, I
give you thanks, Reverend Sir, for this wholesome counsel, which you have
bestowed on me, which I fully determine to follow, and let pass that which I
had thought to do. See now Beloved, whither we are fallen. Afterward I
perceived that the same honest man, the same year went to a certain other
Doctor who permitted it him, as lawful: so that he sold all his Estate under
the forementioned doubtful condition of Redemption. Plainly it is we make for
you the way too broad; and yet in truth it is not so; but strait is the way
which leads to life. Matthew. 7.
Alas, which is never enough to be bewailed, things are come to that pass now
a days, that there are few affairs among Christian People, which are wholly
just and sincere. Alas for grief, how many blind guides are to be found at
this day? And if the blind tumble upon the blind into Hell, both their
conditions will be so much the worse. Wherefore, Beloved, it very much concerns
you to look to your selves: for I fear that the friendship of the men of this
world, is too dear to many of us Confessors. I will tell you something of my
self, and I Will speak the simple truth; but I beseech you let no man be
scandalized thereat. At a certain time it came very importunatly into my mind,
that I must go beyond the Seas, and expose my body to the dangers of death, and
must preach the Word of God to the Pagans, and try, if by God's help I might be
able to convert any of them to the Faith of Christ. This will increased in me,
and waxed so strong, that I were now resolved even to prepare me for the
journey, and did think with my self of the manner, how I might come thither.
And when I were carefully taken up with this matter, it fell out on a certain
morning, that when I had returned to bed, and was now fallen asleep, me thought
I heard one speaking to me these words: Whither do you intend your journey?
There is no need to pass the Seas to Pagans, for you shall find many of them
here among Christians, who whilst they bear the Name of Christ, live worse than
Heathens. When therefore you have preached so long to these, till they attain
to a true life, and a life worthy of a Christian; then at last take free leave
to pass to the Saracens. This admonition was given me in my sleep three times,
and always in the same form of words: from whence it came to pass, that I
recalled my mind from contriving to pass the Seas.

Hence now something should be spoken of the Merchants, but I fear that I am
too tedious. Notwithstanding I will speak a few words concerning them. There
are some Merchants now a days, who do get their estates by very unjust ways,
and such as are exceeding contrary to God, and that by so various and diverse
unjust means, that I cannot here relate them all. But be sure of it ye
Merchants, whereas ye sell any thing, in what Country soever, the dearer,
because of time respited for payment, (dearer I say) than otherwise you would
have done, if the buyer had paid you ready money; whatever you receive in this
case above the just price, all that extends to usury before God, seeing ye
extort that from your neighbors. The same is to be thought, whilst you
exchange your money, assign, or lend it for a certain term; which when it
comes, ye know what gain is to be allowed you out of every hundred crowns, as
for your Interest (as you call it) because of the damage which ye pretend to
receive by the forbearance; in the mean time concealing the word Usury. Alas,
what end I pray will there be of your covetousness? If ye will be wise
Merchants, why do ye not rather get eternal riches, Luke 16.
by making to your selves friends of the mammon of iniquity, to wit, the poor,
whose is the Kingdom of Heaven, of whom ye may hold it, and into which rich men
shall not enter, without works of mercy? Woe unto you (says the Prophet) Hab. 2.
which gather together those things which are not your own. How long will ye
heap up against your selves thick clay? In the mean time indeed, you and your
Confessions may cover over these things with a cloak in this world, and defend
them by some false comments; yet they will not therefore be just before God. But
when we come into eternity, there every covering will be taken away, and what
ever shall be unjust, will appear to all clearer than the light.

But to be briefer, look upon your own selves, I beseech you, ye dealers in the
world (for this is chiefly necessary for you) and take heed to your selves; for
very many times in your buying and selling ye tell lies, and impose upon your
neighbor, sby certain subtle glosses and equivocating words. How ye spend
also Feastival days, which ye ought to have in reverence, and observe, ye best
know. Finally, how many customs and will-wayes are now risen up, ye are not at
all ignorant. Furthermore, all these things, we, who receive your confessions,
ought to reprove: but alas, many of us do dissemble more than is fitting, and
wickedly tolerate you. Truly I fear, that some of us receive sometimes some
presents from you, and because of them permit and suffer you to heap and keep
together by any manner of means, as much as would suffice an hundred to live
on. Which goods, though they should be justly got, yet you ought nevertheless
to relieve those that want out of them, for to that end were they conferred
upon you by God. Luke 16.
Verily that rich man who was clothed in purple and silks, and fared
sumptuously every day; when he was dead, he was buried in Hell, for this cause
doubtless, because he kept to himself the goods granted to him by God, and used
them according to the lust of his nature. And although we read of nothing that
he unjustly possessed, or that he took by violence any other man's goods; yet he
was compelled to undergo the endless torments of Hell. Hear now ye Merchants,
behold your selves I beseech you, and examine your selves: For hardly, as I
truly judge, can it be, but where ye gain such great sums of money, and so much
superfluous goods, but that ye possess the same with Pride and Covetousness;
yea, and with many other great sins, which usually for the most part mingle
herewith; Which you your selves would plainly discover, if it were not irksom
to you rightly to search into, and examine the matter. Here by the way, I Will
tell you, Beloved, what befell me within these five years, if I rightly
remember. There came to me a certain Merchant, a very rich man, and entered
familiarly into discourse with me, and among other things told me, that there
were due to him in a certain foreign Country, very much, and very great
Commodities. I required of him, how it came to pass that so much was owing to
him in a foreign Country? He answered, that his Wares were there sold, and
delivered to Chapmen, and that they owed him so much. Again, replied I, tell me
the truth; if any one would have bought of you those Commodities at somewhat a
lower price, but yet with ready money, would you have let him had them? Yes,
doubtless, answered he, I would have let him had them, and had rather have had
it so; that with ready money I might have bought other Commodities. I replied
and said, be sure therefore whatever you receive for respiting of time, more
than you would have taken in ready money, all that is unjust. And although it
has not got the name of Usury among men, yet so it is called before the right
and just judgment of God. Contrarily, replied he, It is otherwise; for this is
the manner and custom of all Countries to do so. I answered him, That matters
not, neither is it therefore just and equal; for you make such will-customs,
and naughty inventions, and have made them; and therefore it is the worse. Will
ye make customs, which are contrary to God, a Law? it will therefore also be a
custom to descend into Hell. Wherefore, as I said before, take it for certain,
if you any where whatever, or in any Country whatever, fell any thing dearer,
because of time given for payment, than you would have done if they had paid
ready money; or, if you get gain for money lent, because of time given for
payment; whatever you thus receive, it is all to be reckoned among unjust and
ill-gotten goods; and therefore also must be restored to them from whom it was
received, if ever you will be saved. When he heard this, he said unto me, Truly
you are a hard man: my Confessor always permitted me this thing. I answered,
Your Confessor peradventure took your money, and permitted you that, which God
himself with all his Omnipotency cannot permit you. See here, Beloved, how
pernicious a thing Covetousness is. That rich Merchant thus went from me, not
so much as in word testifying any purpose ever of amending his life. Believe me
Beloved, it is above all things necessary for us all, from our hearts to amend
our selves, and to reform our evil lives: for we live in too too perilous
times; and it is to be feared that yet more perilous times are at hand. But
what shall I say, when as it is told me, there are not wanting some who do
blame me, as if I did preach too rigidly and severely? But I doubt not
constantly to affirm, that there is not one of all these standing here before
me, who would not preach much more severely than I do, if so be he had
experienced what I have; and that it lay upon him as his duty ordinarily to
preach, as it does on me. And if it would not be too tedious to you, I would
tell you some things, which would be not a little congruous to this place, and
would be profitable for you to hear it. Then very many of the People altogether
with one voice said, Speak assuredly Sir, for you shall find us patient and
benevolous hearers. I rehearse therefore unto you, Beloved, a thing that befell
my self. Upon a certain time I sat alone in a Cell, and when I had began to
think of the wonderful things of God, and how strange the state of the Church
was at this time, how all good order was too much neglected, and went to rack.
In the midst of these meditations, I heard a certain voice with my bodily ears,
speaking to me, although I saw no body at all.

But after this manner it spoke: Arise, now you must experience some things,
whereby you may be enabled so much the more certainly to speak the truth openly
to your neighbors. And at this last word I were deprived of all my sensual
discerning, and being taken into an ecstasy, I was in that very rapture
permitted to see into Purgatory; where I beheld the torments of multitudes of
men, (many of which I knew) so painful, and so intolerably bitter, and so
immense punishments, and sorrows so intense, and fearful, that no reason, no
understanding is sufficient to express them. In brief, take it for certain,
that I beheld there so many, so various and diverse kinds of torments, in a
wonderful manner painful, that such a terror and trembling has seized upon
me, that all the natural joys of this life can in no wise make me merry; and
if I should live yet an hundred years, I think I should never be merry, except
God should make me so by some supernatural means. But I beseech you, Beloved,
let not any be offended at this, that I would relate such things as these are
unto you. Truly I fear, that some peradventure do think, that in divulging
these things, I seek glory to my self. But let me assure you, I seek or wish
the praise of no man, nay nor the wealth of any one for this reason: for I am
abundantly contented with those things, which in our Monastery, according to
the custom of the Covent are provided for me: Nay, I am never without fear,
lest peradventure I should take that which is superfluous, of those things,
which are set before me in our Hall. And certainly I believe that there is not
one here present, who, if he had seen and experienced those things, which I
have seen and experienced, namely, such horrible and fearful punishments, but
would peradventvre have been better contented with a small provision and
allowance, than I am. Therefore let none of you be scandalized at my words
fore-spoken. In good earnest I find no other cause why God would have me to see
such things, but because of my sins and iniquities, that I might both reform my
self, and the more boldly speak to others the truth, which I have certainly
known; and in no wise flatter their wickednesses and sins. And hence, if I were
sure for this cause to be put to death, I should nevertheless speak the naked
and simple truth. Truly, I saw some in those most vehement pains, and was taken
with extreme admiration, that they should desire to remain so long, in so great
anguish, since some of them had departed this life many years before, who,
whilst they lived, I did believe were both good and pious; and yet they did
undergo in those places of Purgatory so great and ineffable punishments, that
no man can in this life ponder or understand them, as they deserve. Wherefore
this, I from my heart do counsel all, that we slight not Purgatory; but be
speedily converted, and seriously reform our selves. Certainly if you did know,
how above measure valuable and profitable the present time is, you would not
esteem it so little, nor suffer it to pass away so foolishly; for truly, when
we are brought out of this transitory time, into things future and eternal,
there exceeding speedy, simple, right and rigid judgment passes upon those,
who suffer this present time foolishly to pass away. But what shall I say,
Beloved? for if I attempt to speak any thing to you of divine Justice, that is
so immeasurable, strict, and rigid, that I fear some of you may take occasion
of despair from hence: If contrariwise I would discourse of his infinite mercy,
how ready he is to show it to all in this life: I fear on the other hand some
would presume so upon it, that they would live worse and more foolishly, and so
may admit of some such sin, as (it were to be feared) God would not pardon
either here or hereafter. I fear truly, Beloved, lest I have been too tedious,
although many things yet remain to be spoken of diverse sorts of men, and diverse
affairs; because that we have gone too far astray from the right way. And in
truth if I did, laying aside all things else, attend only the duty of Preaching
for this whole year, I think I could in no wise sufficiently lay open all our
defects and sins. But when the Lord shall order it, I will further speak of
this matter. Arise now, and say the Lords Prayer, with the Angels Salutation.

After these things, it fell out on a certain time, that the Master made a
journey to a certain Inclusory, in which there abode five Inclusis, which
earnestly entreated him, to preach to them a Sermon of the true and perfect
secluse life. To whom he said, that he would willingly do what they desired, if
the Lord so ordered it, upon the Lords day next following. When therefore that
Lordsday was come, there came together to that place a multitude of men, and
the Master began his Sermon thus.

The following Sermon was preached upon the Lords day of Sexagesima; the
subject of it was this: namely, Why St. Paul kept in silence his Rapture into
the third Heaven so many years: That the Gifts of God come by afflictions, or
at least are confirmed by afflictions. Of a twofold Self-denial, one of Nature,
the other of the Spirit. Lastly, What belongs to a true Incluse.
I knew a man in Christ above forty years ago, etc.

2 Cor. 12.2.
SAint Paul, Beloved, has delivered unto us in his Epistles to day a wholesome
and necessary instruction. But because the said Epissle is too long, I will not
rehearse to you all of it, but only part of it. The Apostle therefore says,
speaking of himself, I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years since, such a
one (whether in the body, or out of the body, I know not, God knows) taken up
even into the third Heaven. Here my Beloved, take notice, I beseech you, how
the holy Apostle kept in silence this his Rapture, for full fourteen years
together, neither would he bring it forth in public until it was permitted him
so to do by God. Against rash bablers of their visions.
He did not certainly, as some men now a days, who, when they receive
peradventure some small grace from God, instantly break forth, and tell it
others without the permission of God, and declare it sometimes to such men, as
do as little understand thereby, what it is, or whither it tends, as themselves;
whereby also very many times it comes to pass, that such Grace is taken away
from such like Bablers, and given to another more illuminated, Therefore see,
my Beloved, that without the permission of God, ye never divulge the gifts,
which are conferred upon you by him, being sure that few are to be found now a
days, who are endowed with illuminated reason or discretion. And therefore
heed is to be taken that the gifts of God be not brought forth suddenly, and
without his license. Now that it was permitted to S. Paul by God, to speak of
those things which had happened to him, it was permitted by God for our warning
and necessary instruction; namely, that if it should happen that he should
infuse into any one of us his preventing grace, winhout any merit precedent;
such a one should not afterward be shaken with terror, if he suffer him to be
afflicted, even as it usually befell blessed Paul. To whom the gifts of God do
come.
Yes verily, it is to be taken for certain, that the gifts of God come by
afflictions: but if they come before afflictions, certain it is that yet they
ought to be confirmed and proved by afflictions. When as therefore it is a
matter of so much nobleness and profit to endure adversity; for that reason the
Almighty God has suffered so heavy afflictions to meet with all his beloved
Saints; and for the same cause he gave leave to the blessed Apostle to relate
to us his afflictions: for he says in this same Epistle; 2 Cor. 11
Are they the Ministers of Christ? I speak as a fool, I more: In very many
labors, in prisons more abundantly, in stripes above measure; in deaths
frequently: five times of the Jews received I forty stripes but one: Thrice was
I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck; a night and
a day I was in the depth of the sea; in journies often, in dangers of rivers,
in dangers of robbers, in dangers from my kindred, in dangers from the nations,
in dangers in the city, in dangers in the deserts, in dangers in the sea, in
dangers among false brethren, in labor and toil, in watchings, in hunger and
thirst, in much fasting, in cold and nakedness etc. These and many other things
the blessed Apostle commemorates in this days Epistle, by him to have been
endured; in reciting of each of which, lest I should be the more tedious, I
will add only this one, which among the rest he adjoyns, saying, 2 Cor. 12.
Lest the Greatness of Revelations should lift me up, there was given me a
prick of my flesh, the Angel of Satan, who might buffet me: Because of which I
besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me: and he answered me, My
Grace (Paul) is sufficient for thee: for strength is perfected in weakness.
Willingly therefore (says he) will I glory in my infirmities, that the virtue
of Christ may dwell in me.

Now therefore, Beloved, after that St. Paul, a vessel of Election, has in this
his Epistle abundantly proved unto us, how great the profit of Afflictions is;
truly it deserves, that we should give credit to so great an Apostle, and
imitate and follow him. Yea, truly, it cannot be, that ever we should attain to
a praiseworthy and fruitful life, except we willingly renounce the pleasures
of Nature. What it is to renounce Nature.
Because to renounce Nature, is nothing else but voluntarily to refuse and deny
all things in which Nature is delighted; those things only excepted, which upon
a rational account are necessary to the sustentation of Nature; which shall be
such things as may be helpful to us in the service of God, and in the coming to
God: all other things are to be forsaken for God's sake. Neither indeed can any
one experience, or receive the superior sweetness of God, except he bid adeu
to the sweetness of fading things, and to the inclination and pleasure of the
senses. And hence the Apostle says, Romans 8.
If ye will live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if by the Spirit ye shall
mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live. Here let us contemplate, and
(to the utmost of our power) follow the every way lovely example of our Lord
and Savior, so as the same Apostle does admonish: Romans 13.
Put off (says he) the old man, and put on our Lord Jesus Christ.

And furthermore, there is yet another much more noble and excellent
Self-denial, than that is by which we deny Nature; Ephesians. 4.
and that is, when willingly we renounce the Spirit; which how it is done, I
would have you mark. After that the Spirit has wholly tamed the flesh, and
reduced it to obedience, and now is climed above all caducal and slippery
things; then it takes, as it were, a leap into everlasting good things
themselves, which doubtless are much more delightful to it, both in taste and
fruition, than natural delights were before. When therefore any one comes to
taste, and enjoy those excellent highest goods, he ought then no less to
renounce those delights and affluences of Spirit, than before he was fain to do
those of Nature; so as he may know how to leave to God his gifts and
operations, according to his will and pleasure. This Renunciation also is not a
little difficult at the beginning, to them who have tasted God according to the
deliciousness of Spirit. This same Renunciation is called Poverty of Spirit, of
which the Lord speaks, saying, Blessed are the Poor in Spirit, for theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven. Yea verily, oft-times it falls out that some come to
that pass, that they exceeding subtly snatch and draw what ever shines and
savoureth in them. to themselves, into their ground, into their will and
arbitrament, neither leave themselves to God by way of mortification: But
whoever are thus, they doubtless use the grace and gifts of God too too
unfruitfully; the reason of which is, that when it is not hidden to God, that
unless he infuse into them light and savor, they will quickly depart from him;
therefore he retains them with some sweet lesser comforts, lest they should
altogether forsake him; Such like men are as yet exceeding frail and weak;
because they are such as are full of self-will, and love and embrace the shadow
instead of the thing it self: who have also this fault, That though they are
mostly outward and external, yet they think themselves after a manner to be of
us: but they are too much deceived in their opinion.

Furthermore, they that from the bottom or ground, resign and offer themselves
to God, and who do receive from him sweet and bitter alike; who, lastly, though
the influence of light and savor be withdrawn from them, do not in any wise
therefore depart from God; these are the true internal ones.

Verily, whoever after this manner, now spoken of, have denied themselves, and
with a willing mind have penetrated through the sweetnesses, as well of Spirit
as of Nature, and have got above them; these certainly have made a profitable
and fruitful through progress, and have penetrated through more than can be
spoken. But afterward such have need of very much vigilance and watchfulness,
whereby always they must diligently observe themselves, be circumspect and
careful that they may ever persevere in very great humility: For their hellish
enemies cease not then, but continually endeavor by all means they can to draw
them back.

Believe me, Beloved, profound resignation, and voluntary denial of our selves
through our whole nature, is a certain good beginning, if so be it be joined
with true humility: Even as St. Peter says, Dearly Beloved, humble your selves
under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in the time of visitation.
And, O that we could learn, how we might attain to true subjection of spirit in
profound humility, that when God does withdraw from us sensible Grace, we may
be able easily to resign it to him, and to restrain our appetite or desire, so
as not willingly to cover it. This is that which St. Dionysius says, When God
makes his abode sensibly in my soul, I am filled with such joy, and it is so
well with me, that if he should bestow upon me such authority, that all
creatures that very hour should no less obey me than himself, it would not go
so well with me, as it does by his presence only: But when his sensible presence
is withdrawn from me, (I confess) then some desire of it lays hold on me: But
when that happens to me, my weakness surely is the cause of it; Seeing Solomon
says, that in all the Works of God we ought to have rest and peace. Behold
that breathing and languishing desire holy Dionysius accounts his weakness: Why
so? but because the holy man clearly understood that himself was not as yet
fully resigned to God, when as he so desired the presence of God; seeing it is
the greatest resignation, to resign our selves to desertion, and in all manner
of desertion to be resigned: Which thing does chiefly belong to them, who have
deliciously experienced the sweetness of God.

It behooves us truly, Beloved, so manfully to strive, that we may be made so
prudent in God, that we may be able, having divine assistance, to transcend and
penetrate all creatures, until we attain unto God himself. There now we are
taught in the Holy Ghost to tread upon, by our reason, and get above all
natural things, that we may be able with St. Augustine, to say, All creatures
are unto us an highway unto God. So as what ever we happen to see or hear, of
what nature soever it be, we may have the skill to bend all to our own use, and
turn it to the best, and to draw some good out of it. Certainly a Christian
ought by his reason so often and so humbly to exercise himself, and so often to
penetrate all creatures, until he has lost all created things; and he should
so strongly and manfully, and that not once, but many times, abstract himself
from all things, until he find God alone the joy of his soul, and the beloved
of his heart; of whom the blessed Apostle speaks, when he says, 1 Cor. 6.
Who adhereth to God, is one Spirit. In which transformation, the spirit of
such a one is transformed, and is made one with the one. If any one in this
matter would venture himself, and perfectly renounce both himself and all
creatures, he surely would by Gods help, or by the power of God, overcome all
things; which thing Paul witnesses, where he says, Philip. 4.
I can do all things in him that strengthens me.

Go to now, Beloved, make speed, be doing, hasten, learn to live, being also
sure that a man may in this present time attain to that condition, that he may
experience so immense supernatural joy, such as all creatures cannot afford
even until Doomsday.

Lastly, Come on then, and let us all endeavor to learn, by what means we may
be made true Worshippers, John 4.
worshipping the Father in Spirit and Truth. But I fear lest I am too tedious,
since those Incluses have entreated me, that I would declare unto them, what is
the duty of a true Incluse: What the Duty of Inclusis is
And now this I shall dispatch in a few words, and will tell what manner of one
every true Incluse ought to be: It belongs therefore to every Incluse, that she
be simple, and both in mind and body, that is, both inwardly and outwardly to
be an Incluse. It does not become her to look out at the windows, and be
inquisitive what is, or what has been transacted here or there; it is meet
that she should lead so pure, so abstracted a life, that if she should pour
forth prayers for all the Souls that are detained in places of Purgatory; she
may be found worthy, sufficient, and able to free them all from thence. Truly
an Inclusory life, is no small matter: It behooves plainly an Incluse, so
sincerely and purely to live, that she may be able to obtain all that of God,
which the Universal hely Church, by the seven told grace of the Holy Ghost,
does obtain: If she do otherwise, she is not a true Incluse. She ought also to
lead such a life, that if all Ecclesiastical Laws were taken away, it might not
at all prejudice her to Godward: The corrupt state of Incluses.
But alas! things are now come to that pass, that Incluses entertain Guests in
the evening, and in the morning administer to them many things: which is not
the Office of Incluses, but of Hospitallers.

Incluses must keep silence.
And moreover, it belongs to an Incluse, diligently to observe silence, except
only upon reasonable and real necessity; as also purely and earnestly to pray.
It belongs not to her to perform the office of an Hospitaller, and to discourse
with men; but this rather is her duty, that she perpetually persist so
resolutely and immovably in true and divine resignation, that she may be able,
even with a sensible delight, and joyful consent, always to wait the sensible
presence of God, and nevertheless persevere faithful unto him, and therewith to
renounce all creatures for his sake.

To whom it belongs to serve the Poor.
But now you may hear some Incluses say, That it is their duty to exercise
themselves in virtues toward their neighbors; but such ought to have betaken
themselves not to an Inclusory, but to an Hospital rather, and there humbly
exercise themselves about the Members of Christ, which then had properly
belonged to them as their office; for this they ought faithfully to do, who
live in Hospitals.

Again, others say, I must serve and succor my neighbors for God's sake. But
neither is this the duty of a true Incluse: for if she would more narrowly look
into it, she would surely find, how that secretly it does fight against her
purpose. Every true Inlcuse ought to lead so pure, so absolute a life, so free
and so abstracted from all creatures, that her merits may be able to succor
and help all universally, that are enrolled under the Name of Christ.

But yet there are others, which say they are of so weak and frail a nature,
that it is necessary for them, that they should relieve themselves, by
discoursing with men, and by that means succor their infirmity. O such
miserable Incluses! how wholly are they deceived by the counsel of the
malignant one? Take it for certain, Beloved, whoever seeks any thing else in an
Inclusory, than for Gods sake willingly to suffer, such a one does unadvisedly
betake her self thereto.

Now some may be found, who enter into an Inclusory, that in it they may be fed
by Alms with peace and ease; which Alms notwithstanding they would but very
unwillingly beg as exiles, in a despicable manner openly in the streets: but as
many as are after this manner, do rashly take to themselves the name of
Incluses ( alias pure Nuns:) and it would be much better for their souls, that
they should lie as Exiles in the highway, in such a plight as might move the
minds of all passengers to pity. But when any Incluse enters into an
Inclusory, she ought to offer her self purely, freely, nakedly, and voluntarily
to Christ, for to undergo the Cross for all men; bearing in mind those words,
which Christ spoke upon the Cross, Mat. 27.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? That blessed and venerable Mary
Magdalen, was a true Incluse; seeing she of her own accord renounced all the
comfort of creatures. Certainly, God the Father Almighty sent his Son unto the
Earth, and would have him take upon him humane nature, that in it he might
suffer; and yet notwithstanding we always fly suffering. But whatever we can
do, it is most certain, if we will take the nearer way, and sooner, and more
subtily penetrate all things; that cannot otherwise be done, than by following
the most true Example of our Lord and Savior, by suffering at least in some
measure.

And nevertheless, which here I bring for our comfort: Truly God the heavenly
Father is not so hard and severe toward us, as he has been toward his only
Son. For verily, if we with our whole strength offer our selves to God for to
suffer, so as that we become willing of our own accord, and freely to undergo,
whatever pleases him we should bear, neither in the time of affliction depart
from him, neither do fly from afflictions when they meet us: When he shall take
notice of this, he will the more speedily, when he shall see time, take away
from us all afflictions, and will fill us with his divine and supernatural,
pleasant and sensible consolation; which truly to whomsoever it happens, namely
that he experience in himself this festival and pleasant Solemnity, such a one
afterward relishes no earthly festival. He is not made joyful like common men
at the solemnity of a Mass, nor at the feast of Easter, or of Penticost, nor
finally at any other feast. This huge internal feast only, namely, whilst the
Omnipotent God comes unto him with his supernatural and present Grace in
Jubilee and Triumph; this inward feast (I say) does fill him with abundant joy.
And that at what time of the year soever it be transacted in him, at the same
time all the aforesaid Solemnities and Festivals are together celebrated and
fulfilled. Wherefore (dearly Beloved) we ought willingly to bear whatever
adversity shall happen unto us: for whoever he be that does by sufferings
attain to this supernatural and pleasant Solemnity, this man becomes thereby
exceeding prudent, essential, and well composed, and obtains so great a
wisdom by the influence of the Holy Ghost, that he does abundantly understand
what belongs to him to do, and what to leave undone. Then certainly all his in
him are made fruitful, yet he then has nothing at all of himself: but always
persevering in great humility, supposes himself an unprofitable servant, and
evermore keeps himself in a certain filial and amorous fear; neither fears
any thing else, but lest he should not fully satisfy the beloved of his heart,
his most loving Father. In this state, (that is) when he attaineth thus far,
all his own private institutions, and customs of his own will, that is, such as
are taken up of himself, fall off, and his conversation becomes simply, truly
Christian, and erect to heavenly things. In the mean time, he is nevertheless
unknown to all men, except one of the same life, who has experienced the same
grace, and solemnity.

God Almighty grant, that we may learn by afflictions to endure, and by
sufferings, merit to attain unto this supernatural, joyful and happy solemnity,
the eternal Truth it self, our Lord Jesus Christ bringing us to it, who, with
the Father and Holy Ghost, lives and reigns, one God, throughout all Ages of
Ages.

Amen.
Three certain excellent Institutions.
Whosoever thou art who at any time have a desire to attain unto God, and unto
the most excellent state, which in this life can be obtained, it will concern
thee studiously to observe these three things which I do add.

1. The first is, That in all things thou aim at God, and the honor of God,
and not thy own, but chiefly at his will, and not thy own. 2, The second is,
That in all thy doings and turnings forth, thou studiously observe thy self,
and take diligent notice of thy bottomless nothingness, and attend with
continual diligence, whatever thou be about, what is doing in thee; and
lastly, have an eye always upon thy own ground. 3. The third is, That by no
means thou intrude thy self into those things which are not committed to thee,
but let all things alone in their own state and order. Let those things that
are good, be good. But the evil judge thou not, but rather being turned into
thine ground, there persevere, diligently and sedulously harkening to the voice
of thy Father, exhorting thee that thou abide in him constantly, even to the
end.
Whosoever shall observe these two things following, shall attain to great
matters.
1. FIrst, Let him be both inwardly and outwardly in Truth, and from his very
ground and bottom and not in words only, little and abject: Let him be (I say)
in his whole understanding, in his ground, and in his own eyes, without any
dissimulation, wholly little and nothing. 2. But, secondly, Let him be endowed
with the love of God, not that sensual, which we call Love, but essential; that
is, that he do inwardly in his ground purely intend God. Wherefore every one
ought for this cause to be naked and freed from all self animadversion,
understanding, and sensuality; because God Almighty is naked and free, so
thereby the Spirit may be fitted and prepared for his pure and naked essence:
for so it is necessary that the soul be naked and empty, that it may be capable
of his secret mysteries. Wherefore there is a necessity that every one endeavor
to cut off all those things, in which he finds any thing of Self.
Of the DEATH of the MASTER, and how after his Departure he appeared to his
Friend the LAYICK, giving him an account of his severe and horrible departure
out of the body; declaring that he endured that instead of his Purgatory: and
also assuring him of that huge Joy, and everlasting Felicity, which he had
obtained from God by means of his wholesome Doctrine.
HEre we must by no means let pass, how the often beforementioned Master, did
daily make proficiency in a true, humble, and spiritual life, and increased
very much in virtue; Yea verily, he was made so prudent in the grace of God,
that whatever was to be done in that City or Country where he dwelt, whether it
had been Spiritual or Secular, all much desired to make use of his Counsel and
Wisdom, because he was acceptable to them, and they had confidence in him, and
puttrust in him, and did obey his counsels. He made also very many Sermons, as
well to Secular as Spiritual men, after the form of those which we have already
above recited. And when he had laudably finished nine years in this so
profitable and fruitful life, and (as it is said) was acceptable and dear unto
all in all that Country and Town. These nine years being finished, it pleased
the most high God to receive unto himself this his Servant and beloved Friend,
and no longer to leave him in this exile. And because he had decreed to
translate him to the celestial Mansions without Purgatory, he suffered him to
fall into grievous and lasting pain and sickness of body, so that he lay for
twenty weeks sick of a Palsy, and suffered very sharp torments.

When twenty weeks were now expired, he by Divine Grace understood not
obscurely, that within a few days he should depart this world, and that God
would put an end to his torments.

Knowing this, he desired his servants that they would take care to bring his
Layick unto him, and that they should acquaint him with his approach and
departure, and that he had no small desire to have him present with him when he
died. Without delay, when the Layick knew hereof, obeying the Master, he came
to him speedily; and being very familiarly received, he enquired how it was
with him? To whom the Master answered, Truly I think that that day is not very
far off, wherein the Lord will take me out of this world. Wherefore you may
know that it will be very acceptable to me, and no less comfortable, if you
will vouchsafe your presence with me when I die. But, says he, I would entreat
you, that you will take those Paper Books, in which you shall find diligently
written all whatever has for a long time been spoken or transacted between us:
There is also something of my Life, some things which God vouchsafed to work by
me, his miserable and unworthy Servant. And, if you shall see fit, and the Lord
grant leave, compile them all into one little Book.

To these things the Layick gave this Answer: Behold, Sir, I have by me five of
your Sermons, which I writ from your mouth: if therefore you think fit, I will
put them in among your other Writings, that of them all one little Volumn may
be put forth under your Name.

To whom the Master answered; I entreat and beseech you (dear son) with as much
love as I am able, That you put not out any thing for my sake, nor under my
name. Neither indeed are they mine, neither would I they should be known either
in my life, or after my death. But they are all Gods, who vouchsafed to do them
by me, a miserable wretch. But yet if you do think that it may be profitable to
my neighbors, and make for their edification, to publish those things, I am
not against it, but that they may be set forth, only with this caution, that
you mention not me, or my name. But you may write after this manner, (to wit)
The Master said, or did this or that, always concealing my name. But be
careful of this, that when you have compiled this Book, you deliver it to no
body in this City to read, lest peradventure they should apprehend it to be
mine: but rather carry it away with you into your Country.

Finally, the Master had many other good discourses with his Layick for eleven
days together, even to the hour wherein he gave up the ghost.

When that hour was come, he said thus to he Layick: I would fain (dear son)
have on your part your consent, That if it shall please God, I may return unto
you in spirit after my Death. To whom the Layick answered, If it shall (said
he) seem good unto God, I shall like it well that his will may be done in this
matter.

Moreover, when the Master was even at the point of death, falling into an
Agony, he expressed such horrible and fearful gestures, that his Brethren, and
as many as were present, from the sight of those gestures, fell into no small
fear, affright and sorrow. And so at last he ended his last hour, as much as
can be gathered from external signs, with great horror. And when he was now
dead, almost all the City were moved, because he was exceeding dear to them all
universally.

Furthermore, when as some of that place had taken notice how familiarly the
(oftmentioned) Layick stuck to him to the last, they went about to honor him,
and invite him to their feasts. But when he perceived this, he presently fled
from the City into his own Country. Being onward upon his journey, and
traveling now upon the third day, about Sunset he came to a certain Village;
And because he could not farther travel by reason it began to be dark, neither
could find in that Village any public Inn, he requested a certain honest man,
whom by chance he met in the way, to lodge him and his servant, and bid him
take of him what he pleased. To whom the man answered, that he was ready with a
willing mind to do what he desired, if he would accept of such entertainment as
he could make him: and accordingly took them in to lodge them: he lodged the
Layick after the best fashion he could, but brought his servant into a barn
upon straw. After they were layen down, the Layick being awake in the night,
heard a kind of slender voice near him, yet could see nothing: thereby he began
to be a little affrighted. Then the voice speak to him thus: Fear not, dear
son, for I am the Master.

When the Layick heard this, he said: I would very willingly know of you, Sir,
if at least it be the will of the Lord, how it is with you, and what was the
cause, that, as far as we could perceive, you finished your life so horribly
and fearfully? Verily some of your Brethren began, as it were, to doubt of you;
and truly I fear lest your severe end has offended some of them.

To which the voice of the Master answered thus: I will even now open those
things to you. Be certain it was so decreed of God, that my soul as soon as it
was gone out of my body, should be received by the holy Angels, and by them be
defended from the Devils, that they should bring me no further trouble, nor
that I should any more see them, nor have any thing more to do with them
afterward; And therefore it behoved me to shut up my life with so fearful an
end, and to undergo it instead of Purgatory. And in truth the malignant spirits
did bind me fast with so great perplexities, and did assault me with such
subtle and crafty falacies and deceits, that I thought I should have utterly
despaired: And if my voice had not been taken away, I had sent forth such
cries, that it had been wonderful to have seen my calamity; hence might my
Agony which my Brethren did discern, have been taken notice of. But God
Almighty rendered me a plentiful reward for that pain and torment: for, as soon
as my soul was gone out of my body, it was received by the holy Angels, who
brought it into Paradise, telling me that there I must wait five days without
fear or care; neither fear that the Devil should henceforth do me any mischief;
and finally, that I should undergo no more labor: only I should want for those
five days the glorious society of the heavenly Inhabitants; which being
performed, I should be wholly clean, and that then they would return with joy,
and bring me with great exaltation into inestimable never to be ended joys.
More than this (dear son) enquire nothing of me, for I have now told you
whatever I can tell you; neither have I any license to add any thing further;
But I beseech my God that he would bless you, and that he would be your
eternal rewarder in everlasting joys, for that faithful Instruction and
wholesome Counsel you gave me.

Then the Layick said, I beseech you my honored Master, when you shall come
unto God, earnestly intercede with him for me. After that, whatever the Laick
did either ask or speak, it was in vain, neither could he get so much as one
answer more from him. Which when he perceived, he endeavored as much as he
could to take a little rest, but in vain, for he could not sleep one wink; and
so lay awake, impatiently expecting day. Day breaking, he took his Pen and
diligently wrote to the Prior and Brethren of the dead Master, how he had
appeared unto him, and all his words he had spoke to him.

The eternal Truth, our Lord JESUS CHRIST, grant to us, that we may conform our
selves to his lovely and dilectable Image, and follow it to our utmost power,
to his praise and glory. Amen.

To God Almighty thanks.
FINIS.

