Love, Kindness, and due Respect, By way of Warning to the PARLIAMENT Of the
Commonwealth of ENGLAND, That they may not neglect the great opportunity now
put into their hands, for the redemption and freedom of these Oppressed
Nations, Whom the Lord has once more appeared to deliver, and has proffered
his loving kindness in overturning, overturning the Powers of Darkness, that
Truth and Righteousness in the Earth might be established, and Sions People
sing and shout for joy.

From a Servant of the Lord, who has born his Testimony for the Lord in the
day of Apostasy, and has been a Sufferer for the Testimony of a good
Conscience, by Oppressors, under the name of a Quaker.

J. Hodgson. London, Printed for Giles Calvert. 1659.

A warning to the Parliament of England.
Friends,
THe Lord God has committed the Authority of these Nation to you, and has
wonderfully overturned many, that you might again come up, and be tried, as he
has tried many before you, and they have been as chaff before the wind, and
has not answered the end for which the Lord entrusted them; and therefore did
his displeasure wax hot against them, for departing from him and loosing their
way, in the dark in going about to root out that in the earth, and from amongst
them which had been their defense in time of trouble, and the Rock of their
safety in their greatest straights; and because they would not hearken to the
Lords voice to choose his ways and walk therein, but grew hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin, slighted the Lords warnings till he overturned them, that
you might once more be tried; now therefore beware what you do, and tempt not
God as they did, nor provoke not the Lord to wrath against you, by doing that
toward his beloved people, for which the Lord will not hold you or them
giltless: take heed how you grieve the spirit of the Lord, by standing up to
vindicate that which is for destruction: Oh, that you were so wise as to take
the Lords Counsel, then would you exceed all that has been before you; but
alas, alas! are not you already beginning to plead for those things which even
those before you pleaded for, honor and respect to your persons, as if men
were altogether incapable for the service of their Country, that cannot bow,
swear, and give respect to persons, although in all things else duly qualified;
if this you do will you not thereby exclude the Lords people, your best and
surest friends, out of your Assemblies, because they cannot swear, respect
persons, and say theo and thou to a single person; know ye not that they that
respect persons and gay clothing commit sin, Jam. 2.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and they
that bow to the Creature, be it flesh, gold, silver, or precious stones, or any
other thing above or under the earth, bows not to the invisible God, but to the
Creature, and so worships the Creature more then the Creator, To. 1.25. unto
whom every knee should bow both in heaven and in earth. Oh how do the streets
of every City abound with gross Idolatry, bending cringing and bowing even to
the ground to one another Images, the creatures of God, and workmanship of
their own hands, decking one another with gold and costly apparel, thereby to
be bowed to, respected and honored of men. Oh how is the spirit of the Lord
hereby grieved, because of these and other abominations? And how shamefully and
barbarously have the people of God suffered in this Nation of late years,
because they could not run with the world into all manner of excess and
wickedness; and especially because they could not so much idolize men's persons,
and worship the beasts Image, as was required of them? Therefore were they
hailed, imprisoned, and grievously fined, and for other things accounted
offenses, where no known Law was broke, did they suffer as heinous
transgressors, the like of which in ages past can scarcely be paralleld (and
this from persons who call themselves Christians.) Consider with your selves
and examine well whether creatures persons, or visible substances, celestial or
terrestial bodies, though never so glorious, or that unclean spirit, that adores
and worships them more then the Creator, be to be bowed to, or the invisible
power, by which all things were made that are; o that of God in you I appeal
for answer. If then the power or name be that to which every knee or thing in
heaven and earth must or ought to bend, Phil. 2.10. then they whose souls are
hereto made subject, worship the Lord in spirit, and cannot worship the
workmanship of men's hands, nor yet men's persons, but commit sin, and yet can
truly honor all men in the Lord, for the Lords sake so now come to rule in the
Authority and Power of God, that in the Lord we may you honor, and be cautions
at what you stumble, that truth and righteousness may be cherished, and all
deceit and wickedness quite discouraged: Take heed to your selves, least in the
steps of those that went before you, you be found (with whom the Lord was
displeased) and broke to pieces; think not to your selves you shall be
established, if you be found hindering the Lords work; for except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of those that was before you (whose
mercy was cruelty) you shall not escape the vengeance; the Lord will not be
mocked by you, who make mention of his name; what you sow that shall you reap;
and if examples to these Nations, you stand in all righteousness, meekness,
justice and mercy, and every good work, a blessing to them shall you be, for
want of which the world has abounded with all manner of wickedness, because
the Governors thereof was out of the Lords fear, and abounded in folly, and
was examples in pride, and encouragers of the wicked in every place, even like
unto those the Lord God cast out before them, imitating their heathenish ways
and customs; yea, and those same things that they cried out of in the zeal of
their spirits, when they grew great, did they again establish, and thereby
grievously vexed the righteous, and became persecutors of those who could not
bow to their Apostasy, and for this cause the Lord did not establish nor bless
them, because their hearts was darkened, and they given up to believe lies: God
has tried them, and they are fallen as example to you, that you may not sin as
they did; therefore be wise and quit your selves like men, that you may be
honored in doing that which all before you hitherto have refused to do;
consider the great oppression of the filthy proceedings of the Laws of this
Nation, and the vexatious covetous Lawyers, who make merchandise of men for
moneys, who with others sell their filthy lies at to dear a rate, to the
undoing of many; and consider the oppression of the Ministry of England, and
their forced maintenance, the suffering of the Lords people from themward, has
been cruelty without mercy, as hundreds can witness; and consider well of the
hard measure the Lords people have received from many that are and have been in
Authority in this Nation, because they could not put off their hats, swear,
lie, and for going to their peaceable meetings, with other things too tedious
here to mention. Be counseled Oh ye Rulers, and be wise Oh ye Magistrates,
least as others you be overturned; if you do well happy shall you be, and are
joycing to those hearts, whom others before you by oppression have sadned, and
you even you shall be established in much peace, and all before you, as you
abide in the Lords power, shall fall; but if you will not hearken to the Lords
voice, to do that which is well pleasing in his sight, to do justice and love
mercy, and walk humbly with our God, but neglect the opportunity put into your
hands, negligently and slightly do the work of the Lord, then shall you
likewise be overturned, the Lord God of Hoasts has spoken it, and the Lord our
God shall dash to pieces as a potters vessel, all who are hinderers of his
work, that he may rule, whose right it is. I have herein discharged my self
before the Lord, whether you hear or forbear I am clear in his sight, and
according to your work, so shall be your reward.

J. H.

FINIS.

