THE QUAKERS Looking-Glass Looked upon; And turned toward Himself; IN A SOBER
REPLY TO AN Uncivll Pamplet Published by Luke Howard a Quaker, Against A
NARRATIVE formerly Published, Setting forth the Folly and Presumption of
Charles Baily a Quaker, sometimes a Prisoner in Dover.

In which REPLY The Truth of the said Narrative is further Evidenced and
Vindicated against the Cavilling Quakers.

There are many Devices in a Man's heart; Nevertheless, the Council of the Lord
shall stand,

Prove. 19.21. To the Law and to the Testimonies; If they speak not according to
this Word, It is because there is no light in them,

Isa. 8.20. ^ONDON, Printed for Francis Smith at the Elephant and Castle, near
the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. And also at the same Sign the first Shop without
Temple-Barre. 1673.

To the Reader.
FRiendly Reader, I do here Present thee with a small Tract, Containing a Brief
Reply to a Book put forth lately by Luke Howard a Quaker, Entitled, A
Looking-Glass for the Baptists; The Contents of which Book, and the Intents of
the Author is to obscure the Truth of the Narrative which is hereunto annexed,
which Narrative is a Relation of some Remarkable Passages Concerning one
Charles Baily an Eminent Quaker, and sometimes a Prisoner in Dover upon the
Quaking account, during which time of his said Imprisonment those
(Extravigancies were committed by him) and also to reproach and defame the
Publisher of the said Narrative; But how little he has accomplished his End in
the first, (in opposing himself against so manifest a Truth) and how much he
has discovered his folly and envy in the latter, does in some measure appear
in this following Discourse.

I also hereby further certify thee, That the aforesaid Narrative was not
Published to blemish the Persons of the Quakers, nor yet from a spirit of
Envy, as the Quaker would insinuate, but to show what enormities the pretended
light (to which they make the Scriptures give way and bow) leads them; And that
those that are in danger of being beguiled, by heeding a Light within
themselves, above the light of the Holy Scriptures, may not be deceived by
them, to follow the uncertain motions of their own Heads, but may rather follow
the Council of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 19.20 We have a more sure word of the
Prophets, (says he) meaning the Scriptures, to which ye do well that ye take
heed (mark) as unto a light that shines in a dark Place, etc. And finally, he
that knows the hearts, knows that this is my end in Publishing both the
Narrative and this, and he will one day decide all Controversies depending
between them and us, and then shall every man receive according to his Works;
In the mean time read and consider what follow: And so I leave thee to the
Guidance and Blessing of the Lord,

And remain, Thine in the Hope of Eternal Life by Jesus Christ, Richard Hobbs.

THIS Quakers Looking-glass is false, it presents two Faces, one as if they
did, another as if they did (...) Charles Baily for an eminent Quaker; And that
this is so, see what he says page 10. viz. some new Converted Friends, says
he, did own Charles Baily; but the Men Friends, (meaning himself and three or
four more Prisoners in the Castle) did not own him so much; But this we did not
acquaint the Baptists with, says he; Hence note, Luke Howard appears in his
Looking-Glass with two Faces; First, one toward the Baptist, as if he did own
Charles Baily as an eminent Quaker, but now as with another Face he pretends it
was not so much as we did think; And here his Glass is true if turned toward
himself, but false to the Baptists, because we know not (as himself
confesses,) but that he owned Baily as much as the rest did. Secondly, from
hence we may also note by the way, what little Cause the Man has to make such
an Outcry against the Baptists, as if they forged and published falsehoods,
when we say no more then himself confesses, That to our knowledge they did own
Baily a that time for an eminent Quaker. The which I shall make further appear
by these three following Particulars.

1. That the said Baily did prophecy, see false Visions, and pretend to work
Miracles, as appears by the Narrative hereunto annexed. 2. That he was then in
fellowship with the Quakers, and owned by them. 3. That Baily was led by the
Quakers spirit into these delusions. 4. Examine the Quakers evasions, by which
he endeavors to shift off the Truth of our Narrative. 5. Pluck up by the roots
the Authors prodigious root of the Baptists in Kent, and discover the Authors
Apostasy from the Truth. 6. By some sober reflections upon his false
accusations, as they are scattered through his book.
First, that the Quakers did own Baily for an eminent Quaker amongst them
before and after his pretended Vision, Prophecy and Miracles mentioned in the
Narrative, appears, by their then affirming and justifying him to be led by the
true Light, as they did by their hearing him preach, and devoutly joining with
him in Prayer.

But this is a poor Proof, says our Looking-Glass-Maker, page 9. To which
answer, That if this be not a sufficient proof they owned him. I know not what
is or can be sufficient, nor do I know any Rule the Quakers have, by which I
shall know when they own one another. But to shift this off, the Quaker says,
they were only new convinced friends that owned Baily; Himself and three or
four more then in prison with him, did not own him so much. Reply. If by (so
much) you mean ye did not join with him in his devotion, I grant it; for your
restraint from him hindered you in that; but at the same time ye justified him
as highly as the rest in your Discourse concerning him and his actions, and
condemned the Baptists for opposing him in his foolish attempts, though now ye
would have the World believe, ye did not own him so much as friends at liberty
did.

As if all the Quakers in Dover and Folkstone, and thereabouts, that had
fellowship with Baily, and were daily privy to his words and actions, were so
Moon-blind, that they could not see Baily was led by a false light, so well as
our Looking-Glass-Maker could, through the stone-walls of Dover-Castle, see how
this man lifts up himself above his brethren.

But Luke, to heal up this tells us, That friends abroad were afraid to judge
Baily, but when they came to the Quakers in the Castle, they would speak the
thing as it was, and that Baily erred.

But this we did not think fit to acquaint the Baptists with, says he. Reply.
Behold, here is the Quakers Method: That although they know a thing to be true
and justly charged upon them, yet it is their prudence to deny or not
acknowledge it, That they may preserve the reputation of their erroneous light;
and those poor silly souls that are led aside thereby, and contrary to their
knowledge and conscience will justify the evil doer, and bear world in hand as
if the Baptists were transgressors for speaking the thing that is true.

2. That Baily was owned by the quakers as one in fellowship with them, and
that not only by new converted friends without, but also by Luke and his
Brethren within the Castle, is further manifest, that after his foolish
prophecy, vision and miracles they did Justify him in those his fopperies
before Susanna Tavenor, and condemnd her as a lying envious person because she
said to Luke and the rest in Prison, that Baily had prophesied falsely in the
name of the Lord, and had seen a false Vision, (meaning that mentioned in the
Narrative, and so violent they were against her for so saying, that she could
not be at quiet amongst them when she came to the prison to visit her then
husband John VVarrison, who was a Quaker, and then in prison with L^ke, and the
other Quakers in the Castle; Again, that they did own him for an eminent Quaker
is further evident, in that diverse of them went to him for cure of their diverse
diseases; As for instance, Luke Howard (our Looking-Glass-Maker) and An^e his
then Wife, went to him to be cuted of her sore eyes; and Baily touched them,
(as his manner was, in order to cure her, and she reported that he had cured
her; and this Luke knows in his own Conscience is true.

Likewise Katherine Fernn a quaker now living in Dover came to him to be cured
of Convulsion fits, and reported that she had received cure by him, also Edward
Sa^isbee of Deal another Quaker to be cured of his sore leg, which he said he
also received cure for. by Baily, and thereupon he threw away all his
plasters, and clouts that formerly he used. And this was trumpeted about town
and Country, that Charles Baily a quaker being then in Dover Prison had an
extraordinary gift healing, by which (as they reported) he had cured Diverse,
insomuch that diverse others that were not Quakers came to the prison to him for
cure, namely William Williams, who had a swelling in his face, and Baily
stroakt it in order to cure, and Samuel Tavenor came from Dcale (upon Edward
Salisbee's report of these cures, to advise with Baily about the cure of his
Wife who had bin long weak and lame. But of all these he cured not one except
the Quakers, nor all them neither, as some of the Quakers have in my hearing
lately confessed; yet had he Cast the Devil out of Woollet but as effectually
as the Quakers say he cured them, (which he said had been done if some of the
Baptists had not been present) doubtless he had been cried up for that miracle
far more then for all the rest of his foolish projects but now the poor man
failing in their losses the honor of all the rest, so that to conclude this
particular, I say, if the Quakers coming to Baily to be taught by him, to be
healed by him, to pray with him and to Justify his words and actions against
all opposers, and to give him the hand and fixed look, were owning of him, then
did our looking-glass-maker himself and his Brethren in this Town and
hereabouts own Baily as a most eminent Quaker, both at and after the projects
he played mentioned in the Narrative.

3. That Baily was led by the Quakers spirit, Luke will by no means allow, and
so acquit himself from the crime of being led by a deluding spirit, he says
Baily was not guided by their spirit, when he acted as in the Narrative is
expressed, in page the twelfth, of his Looking-glass he says, This Baptist
Pastor and many of his flock and of his mind would have the world believe that
Charles Baily and the rest of the Quakers were led by one and the same spirit
when he erred in his heart.

To this I reply, and say, he was led by the Quakers spirit and preached their
doctrine, and was in all respects as deep died a Quaker as Luke Howard himself,
and if Luke had used a little more plainness, and told us when and in what
Baily Erred, he had saved me some labor to Query when he so erred, if Luke
mean in the Business of Woollet; I grant he did err in that, but he did not in
that err from the Quakers, for it is evident he was moved by the dictates of
the same spirit, by which he pretended to cure the Quakers, in which they
highly owned him, and doubtless his and their design in those attempts of his,
was to confirm their doctrine and to proselite the Baptists to the owning of
their principles, and to this purpose he called the Baptists to see this
Tragedy, and told them they should see the Power of God. And that he might
further show this to be his intent, he desired God to show his Power for the
confirmation of his Eternal truth, as he did of old Again, that he was Carried
forth into that action by the Quakers spirit: Appears by the operation and
working of it with him at that time; which was in the same kind and after the
same manner that it frequently had done in other Quakers, viz. By its violent
motions, throwing him down upon the floor, as it also handled another Quaker
about the same time in the same Prison, where he lay some time upon the floor,
Plunging and Beating himself, and Groaning as if he would have given up the
Ghost (and this Person is now none of the meanest Quakers in Dover) nor did the
posture and actings of Bailys two female companions that joined with him in
that attempt upon Woollet, show any other but that he and they were all led and
acted by the same spirit; nay, and I my self have seen the same spirit show it
self by the same operation upon our Looking Glass-Maker himself, making him
quake and shake, that people without doors heard the violent noise of it; by
which it appears, that Baily and the rest of the Quakers are led by one and the
same spirit.

And it is evident also Baily was acted by the same spirit with the Quakers, in
his Vision and Prophecy against me, and the Judgments that he denounced
against me; for that which gave the occasion was, my opposing him and them in
their Quaking Principles and Doctrine; and doubtless, he did as much design the
Confirmation and Crediting their doctrine in this, as he did in the other of
his Projects* But if Luke think Baily erred in this his attempt concerning me,
I think so too; and that our Looking-Glass-Maker and the rest of the Quakers
erred with him therein: for they justified him and condemned me as he did.
Truly, if Luke had told us in what Baily erred, and for what they now deny him,
as he pretends, his Glass had been clearer, and he had done his Cause some
right, in taking off a just ground of suspicion, that Baily first forsook them
seeing himself deluded by them.

From all this it evidently appears, That neither the Pastor nor any of his
Flock (as Luke scoffingly words it) do wrong the Quakers at all, in saying that
Baily was a Quaker, and led by their spirit at the time of his Projects
mentioned in their Narrative: But to wipe away all this, Luke tells us, that
Baily is departed from them, and therefore they are not to be charged with his
Actions, no more then the Christians of old with those that departed from them:
and seems to be much offended, page 13. What now, Baptist-Pastor, (says he)
would thou have judged all the disciples, because Peter denied his Master,
and for Judas's sake, have said they were all alike, and led by one and the
same spirit, etc. And then, as if the Man thought himself an Artist at
Looking-Glass-making, he says, See thy face thou blind Pastor, thy Jewish
spirit would have accused all the Brethren for their sakes, that went out from
them, and have said they were all alike, etc.

Reply. The case in hand between Luke and I is not equivolent, to that he
alludes to, for neither Peter nor Judas did pretend, in denying their Master,
to advance their Ministry and the Gospel, as Charles Baily did the Quakers
doctrine, in what he did in his Prophecy, Revelation and prodigious Miracles:
And therefore it would have been as impertinent for any to have charged all the
Apostles with their sin, who never owned them in it, as the Quakers did Baily
in what he did, as it is proper for me to say, That Baily was led by the Quakers
spirit: And the case of them which went out of the Church, John 2.19. to which
Luke Howard alludes, makes as little to his purpose, for they departed from the
Apostles doctrine, Act. 2.43. (as Luke himself has done) and their case is more
applicable to himself then to Charles Baily, who so highly owned the quakers
doctrine at that time that he preached it up, suffered for it, Pronounced
Judgment against the opposers of it; and pretended to work miracles to confirm
it, and therefore, his being rather an act of persevereing in, then a departing
from your Spirit and doctrine, quite alters the Case and all Lukes Cavilling
comparisons fall to the ground; But Luke goes further, and to Assure his reader
that Baily was no sober quaker when he acted as in the narrative expressed, he
terms them mad Actions, page 8.

Reply, Luke, in this is very uncharitable methinks to his old Friend, (though
then he and the rest of the Quakers befriended him) in that they Judge Baily
now according to thr event of his actions, and not according to the intent of
his mind, which was to advance that which Luke calls truth, and as disingenious
to himself, seeing he is led by the same spirit by which Baily then acted, nor
is Luke less Injurous to his two female Friends, who were as madd in that madd
action (about Woollet) as Baily was, but those he wholly screens from the world
in his glass, and lett^ them not be seen therein at all, though he know in his
conscience they are co-workers with Baily in that undertaking, but this argues
that Bailys leaving them since that time is his greatest crime, and therefore
the Burden is by Luke laid and left upon Bailys back, and the two female
friends are Befriended.

But lastly, Luke to clear the case at once, tells his Reader in the same page,
That they are as clear from Charles Baily in the sight of God, as they are from
us: Reply, That Luke Howard is clear from us I grant. For he (long since) left
the Baptists and turned a lewd Ranter, scoffing at, and opposing the ordinances
of Christ then, at he does now. But he was no more clear from Baily when he
acted as in the Narrative then Judah was from his sin with Thamar; when she had
his Bracelets, Signet and Staff, for then Baily had their spirit, held their
principles, and Preached their Doctrine, and here is an end of his shifts to
evade the truth or Narratve concerning Baily and his fellow Females.

In the next place, I shall (according to what I have propounded) take off his
evasions, by which he endeavors to darken the truth of the Narrative, and
first, Luke tells us in page the 10. That his Wife did send a Letter to London
about Baily: Reply, how incongruous is this to reason, That she on whom Baily
had newly wrought a miracle, should write against him, and that then the rest
of the Quakers here should not know it, to disown him with her, no, nor no body
else knew of it unrill now, let the judicious reader Judge of this.

Again in the same page he tells us, two friends came and testified against
Baily, but did not disown him, nor does he pretend so, for Baily preached
amongst them after he came out of Prison, which was some Months after his false
Vision, etc. But was this known to the Baptists (who say Baily was a deceiver)
that two friends had testified against him; No says Luke, this we did not
acquaint the Baptists with, and why so, why faith Luke because we knew they
waited for mischief. Reply.

What silly fenceless shifts are these, to evade that which Luke knows in his
own conscience to be true. As if the only way to cut off occasion of reproach
from such as wait for it, were to own and Justify the offender, and to condemn
and censure the innocent and offended; And in page the 7. The Quaker to evade
that which Justly sticks upon him, tells the world that Baily was not
established amongst them. Reply,

This is strange (if true) what, one that zealously owned and preached up the
Light within, confirmed the same doctrine by miracles (if the reports of
Quakers may be credited) denounced Judgments against the opposers thereof, and
endured imprisonment for their doctrines sake, and yet not be an established
Quakers* If these be not the indelible Characters of an established Quaker, let
them show me what they are, and by what rule; (if they have any) I may know
which are, and which are not Established Quakers; mean time they must needs
give us leave to let Baily pass for one, having all the forenamed Characters
upon him.

But in the next place the man, (to make his Glass Clear) he gives it a Rubb,
and that (as he thinks) to purpose two: And do ye not know (says he) in your
consciences, that he, viz. Baily, has been by us called Quakers denied for
many years. Reply,

But not a word, where when or for what he was denied, and so ye make this
evasion impertinent your self; And though ye do disown him now, that is nothing
to us in the case in hand, we say in the Narrative that Baily was then owned
by you, when he played those preposterous Pranks, and was then led by the same
spirit with you, and I have made it appear to be true, and I further say, I do
not know whether you have yet denied him (as ye term it) for some of ye have of
late reported that he has past through the town and no: took so much notice of
his old friends as might be expected, and methinks this smells as if he were
not quite dislocated from you, or else that this strangness of his toward you,
arises from this, that he perceiving himself to be deluded by your Light, he
keeps a loof from you as a company of poor deluded and mistaken Creatures.
Another while, (in page 7. you have the Quaker speaking in favor of his old
friend a little, and tells us, that we have belyed him in some things, as bad
as he was, or as we would make him to be, but names, no particulars wherein we
have wronged him, Reply.

To this I say, there is two ways of wronging a man in this case, one is when
we declare more of him then is true, the other is when we do not declare all
that is true, in the first of these I have not failed; But in the latter I
have, and when I know in which of these two our Looking-glass-maker means I
have wronged his friend in, it may be I may make him an amends.

But in the mean time I shall go on to examine his prodigious root.

And first here I take notice, that whilst Luke Howard is alarruming the world
against us, as if we were the veryest miscreants that ever lived, for Blabbing
out a tale of truth, which he would have had been hid, he clamours thus (what a
thing of ten years standing) that is the great crime, see page 8. and page the
II. And you shall see he himself runns into the same transgression over shoes
and Boots two, and Retrogrades 28 Years back, to rake for matter to reproach
us. This man sure instead of making us a Looking-glass, had need have made
himself a Prospective-glasse, but to his story, page the 5. in the years 1643.
and 1644. says he, the Baptists, had their entrance into Kent and many were
Dipped by William Kiffin into the belief of particular election, and amongst
others Luke Howard and Nicholas Woodman professed repentance and faith and were
dipped, as Luke in derision terms it, and then in page the 8. he tells his
reader, this Nicholas Weodman proved an idle person, he took a wife who married
him for his profession-sake, that he proved a lewd man, spent his wifes estate,
abused her body and then lest her and went and Preached Water Baptism etc.

Reply* For Nicholas Woodman, I know not whether there were such a man or no,
but by Luke Howards and some others report, who say, he lived as orderly as
Luke Howard, for they both proved profane sinners against the Light and grace
they had received from God, VVoodman to Idleness and loose living, and Luke
Howard to a wanton and lewd Ranter. And may not another by the same rule, that
Luke upbraides us with VVoodmans bad living, twitt us with Luke Howards too,
who was Baptized with him and cast his looss life as dirt in our faces; And in
particular his Railing book that he has writ against us, in which he expresses
more enmity then our common opposers usually do, But seeing our
Looking-glasse-maker had no other but his Apostate Brothers faults to blemish
us with, he would have seemed a wiser man, and have done himself a kindness, to
have concealed them, for no wise man would have raked in that hole where he
knew his own Infamy lay buried* But this shows the height of his anger against
the Baptists, that he will pluck out his own Bowels but that he will besmear
them. Truly in this business our Looking-glasse-maker has as much need of a
Looking-glass as his neighbor, mean time, let him see and know, that
Woodmans Bad living, and Luke Howards wanton actions, and ertoneous principles,
are alike disowned by the Bapttsts, They being alike contrary to Christ's
Doctrine and the Baptists Practice.

And that the man might manifest himself so far degenerate from his Baptism
and faith, as if he had forgotten that Jesus Christ is the root, in his own
example and command of believers Baptism Math. 3. and Math 28.18. he tells us
page 8. that Nicholas Woodman was the rise and root of the Baptists in Kent,
But that this Paragraph is false, Appears presently from his own Pen, for he
tells us many were Baptized in Kent by William Kiffin before Nicholas Woodman
preached or Baptized any, for William Kiffin he says Baptized Woodman, so that
if a man be the root of the Baptists in Kent it must be in Kiffin, and not
Nicholas Woodman according to his own glass, pray neighbor look in your
glass again; and further Luke mentions none that Wooodman Baptized, it is a
question therefore whether Woodman Baptized any or no. And lastly, here are
more then an 100 Baptists in and about Dover that were not Baptized by Woodman,
nor by any that he Baptized, who are living witnesses against the Quakers
falsities, and can (if need require) give a better account of the Original and
line of their Baptism then Luke Howard can: And thus you see the Quakers
Narrative of the Root and Rise of the Baptists in Kent, is plucked up Root and
Rind: And to proceed to take notice of his fifth and sixth page, where he
says, But some of those baptized by William Kiffin changed their opinion, and
believed the universal Love of God to all: Well; and what then, Why some, says
he, thought it their duty to be baptized into the universal Love of God; But,
he says, none were Baptized again in all Kent except one Cox of Canterbury.

Reply, Here is a great Cry and little wool, a talk of rebaptizing and yet but
one in all Kent was Baptized; but then our historian tells us, the rest held
their Baptism but changed their opinion into the universal love of God, and
devoutly preached it up; if they had been naturalized into that by their
particular baptism, and upon this the man falls to calumnizing stoutly, calling
us a confused brood of Baptists all rooted in Babell and confusion, blind
leaders of the blind with other such like terms, and he concludes that their
baptism into the faith of particular election being false, neither branch nor
fruit can be true. etc.

Reply it is usualy for such as once owned and professed the way of the Lord,
and after depart from it as Luke Howard has done, to become the fiercest
opposers of that truth they once professed; see for example Acts 20, 29 and 30.
and therefore it is no marvel if he give such fowl measure to the Baptists; but
to requite the Quaker for his kindness, that the Reader may see his Spirit is
not good, I will show where he would have found such another brood of Baptists
as he has found in Kent, namely, the Church at Jerusalem, the 3000, Acts the 2.
were Baptized into the faith of Gods love to the Jews only, and after changed
their opinion both Preachers and people, and believed the universal love of God
to the Gentiles, also see Acts 11 18. when they heard these things, they held
their peace, and gloryfied God saying, Then has God granted to the Gentiles
also Repentance unto life, here they changed in their opinion but held their
Baptism, for no mention is made of re-baptizing any of them.

Now if this Quaker had lived amongst them, and been led by the same spirit he
now is, he might by the same rule he clamours against us, have condemned them
for a confused brood of Baptists, rooted in Babel and confusion. First Baptized
into the particular and then changing their opinion into the General, and
devoutly preach that up as Peter did, Acts, the 10. and thereby have concluded
them blind leaders of the blind, as he blindly accused us.

Now I shall return to page the 8. where he tells us, that since Woodmans time
there are many filthy unheard of abominations amongst us, both in spirit and
practice, and there might be more said, as some of our selves know, but that he
tells his Reader he is not willing to relate in print except he be provoked to
it, etc.

Reply, Does the man think, that I should return him thanks for his civility in
concealing that which he had not to say, or if said, could not prove, but
however he has disclosed his Masterpiece, he shoots at random for he names no
person amongst us: and so hitts no person that I know of: for I know none
amongst the Baptists that are guilty of such unheard of abominations as he
talks of, and were not my neighbor Howard a Quaker, that pretends so much to
plain dealing, I should take this for very fowl dealing, to put forth in print
such a charge against a whole Congregation of People to reproach them, and
mention no person or particular thing amongst us, that the accused if guilty
might be known, or if innocent might defend themselves; but this being the
measure the Quaker usually meets to him that opposes him. I shall place this
for some of his plain dealing.

But to follow him a little further in his own Track, ^n page 8 11 and 15 I
find him very angry because we bring forth a thing of so long a standing,
Calling us Wolves in Sheeps clothing, and that the Ravening nature is standing
in us, which can look 9, or 10. years Back (says he) to smite with the fist of
wickedness, and to Persecure an innocent people, and with many more such evil
terms he upbraids us, and here I may answer him with his own argument. Are the
Baptists Ravenous, etc. for looking 10 years back, and is not Luke Howard by
his own rule and Glass, much more ravenous, who Ranges above twenty, yea,
near thirty years back, to rake up matter from his own Companion to reproach
us with, and to smite us with the fist of falsehood; if Luke make another
Glass, I advise him to look in it and see himself before he send it out to
others. And now I shall collect a few more of those many accusations, with
which his book is stuff, page the 10 he calls us blasphemers against the light
of Jesus which they declare, calling it natural, and the Quakers dark light,
with many more blasphemous words, as the Jews did of old, hereupon he brands us
with odious terms of men-slayers and murderers, and that the body of death is
standing in us; where the murderer lives, and where the Serpents life is, whose
wisdom is earthly, sensual and Divelish, that bites at their heels, and accuses
us with things of many years standing, and then as if he had forgot his own
story of 28 years standing, he tells us page the 15. that if we had not been
drunk with the Whores Cupp of abomination, and envious holiness, getting words
to talk, and professing in the ravenous nature, we would not fetch such old
matter against Quakers of ten years standing and print it, etc, To which upon
the whole I answer, with that Scripture Romans 2.3. Think thou this, O man
that Judge them and do the same things, that thou shall escape the
judgment, thine own mouth condemns thee and not I, yea, thy wicked own lips
testify against thee Job 15.6. for if the Baptists be such wickeed persons as
Luke pretends, for reporting a truth of 10, years dat (which Luke in his
conscience knows it so) Is not Luke then by the same rule much worse, in
fetching up a far older story, and that falls on two, as appears by his own
glass.

Again, if Luke had proved by some convincing arguments, that the Quakers Light
is Christ, and then made it appear that the Baptists had blasphemed, in denying
that men are redeemed and justified by that light within themselves, and not
rather by faith in the death, resurrection and Assention of Christ without us,
for us, which is the chief point in controversy between us, and spared his bad
language, this might have taken some impression upon a judicious Reader. But it
seems that Luke finds, that to Callumnize his opposer is the easiest way of
answering, and it is like, himself is best furnished with such Arguments.

Again, to show the heat of his Anger against the Truth, and to render us vile
and odious, he tells the World, That we make those which we dip more foul in
heart, and twofold more the Child of the Devil then they were before page 4.
and 8. And then, as if he had given us a mortal wound, he exalts himself and
his party as high as Heaven (in his own conceit) telling the world that they
viz. the Quakers do worship God in spirit and truth, which the devil and all
they that do his works of envy are out of, page 12. And then to show himself
to be no boasting Pharisee, he tells me, That I do Caperna^m-like exalt my
self, and that for no other cause that I see, but my saying, that if the
Quakers denied that they owned Charles Baily they would render themselves false
persons.

To all this I reply, that if Luke Howard were as able to prove, as he is apt
to accuse, he would be an able Quaker: But failing in his proofs, he appears
more like a Scold then a sober Christian, whereas now if he had made it appear
in some particular person or persons, who after Baptism in water (according to
the Command and Example of Christ, had become twofold more the Child or
Children of Hell then before: He had made his Glass a great deal clearer to any
Judicious Reader: But it may be he, supposing himself guided by an un-erring
light, he counts his Say-so is proof sufficient to condemn all his opposers.

And then to beguiie his credulous Reader into a Fools Paradise, he tells him,
The Quakers worship God in spirit and truth, which the devil and all that do
^is works of Envy are out of.

Reply. These are great swelling words of vanity, but when Luke has proved the
Quakers are so free from the Devil and his Works, and do worship God in spirit
and truth (by comparing the Scriptures and their Practice together, it shall
then be part of my Creed too, to believe they are such, but not before.

Now after all this with many more clamorous accusations (as may be seen in his
Looking-Glass against the Baptists, he concludes his fallacious Narrative with
a boast, page 11. Our Rock is not like yours, our Enemies themselves being
Judges, says he. And then (Oh ye fools) so soon as ye have liberty to meet,
where you were afraid to meet before for fear of a man, and ye crept into
corners, etc.

Reply. The Boaster builds upon the Sand, and this his accusation is as sandy
as his foundation: for I appeal to all the judicious inhabitants in Dover, who
are VVitnesses in this case, who know that whilst the Quakers meet without any
interruption, we were interrupted for several months together, almost every
Lords day, at our public Meeting Place, and there we continued till our
Meeting House was defaced, the doors barrd and locked up: After that, we met
elsewhere in Town constantly; And truly, I cannot but admire, that the Quaker
should have the face to publish such a falsehood in Print, in which the
Magistrates and People of the Town, and his own Conscience too (if not seared)
will all bear witness against him, and on our part in this matter: but this is
just like the rest of his Glass.

FINIS.

