The skirts of the WHORE DISCOVERED, And the mingled People in the midst of Her.

In a Letter sent by Denis Hollister to the Independent Baptized People, who
call themselves a Church of Christ in Bristol, but are found to be a 'Synagogue
of Satan' in Answer to a Charge brought to him from them by some of their
Members, and by him for the sake of the Simple-hearted among them, from whom it
has been kept, and for the manifesting of Deceit and Hypocrisy published.

Together with another Letter written by him to Thomas Ewens, a Teacher among
them, who before several Witnesses has often denied himself to be a Minister
of the Gospel, as his fruits also declare] referring to his speaking among his
people of having Sarah Latchet a servant of Jesus, once a member among the
Baptists, sent to Bridewell, and whipped for testisying to them in the name of
the Lord in their meeting the second. day of the ninth Month. 1655.

And likewise an Answer to 16 Antiqueries directed to the People called
Quakers, which Answer was sent to Thomar Ewens, from whom the Antiqueries were
received, though John Pendarviss a long time after published the Antiqueries by
the name of Queries, without the Answer to them, or taking the least notice of
it [in a Book entitled Arrows against Babylon] which has occasiond the
presenting of the one, and the other, now to the view of those who read, and
understand, to judge of the whole, and of their unfaire and deceitful dealing.

For the greatness of thine iniquities are thy skirts discovered, and thine
heales made bare.

In her tkirts is found the blood of the souls of the poor innocents, I have
not found it upon secret search, but upon all these.

Were they ashamed when they had committed these abominations? nay they were:
not at all ashamed, neither could they blush.

I know the Blasphemies of them, which say they are Jews, but are not, but are
the Synagogue of Satan.

Take away her Battlements, for they are not the Lords.

Forlo I will raise, and cause to come up against Babylon an Assembly of great
Nations from the North Country, and they shall set themselves in array against
Her, from thence she shall be taken, their arrows shall be as of a mighty expert
man, none shall retu^^ in vain, all ye that bend the bow, shoot at her, spare
no arrows, for she has sinned against the Lord.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his Shop at the si^
of the Black-Spread-Eagle at the West End of Paul's. 1656.

To the Reader.
Reader,
HAving received a charge of several particulars as to sin, by Robert
Simpson, Robert Purnell, and Richard Moon, from the baptized
Independent-People, who call themselves a Church of Christ, with whom I have
walked in oustward fellowship many years; and about the space of 8, or 9 years
past, at their request taken the care of them as an Elder (they having no
pastor, nor Teacher) to which upon my refusal they often Eected me, I
prepared my defense thereunto in Writing, which thou have in the second
following paper, which I intended only to themselves (and not to be made
public to the rest of the World) in answer to what they seen to me, and to
manifest to their Consciences that deceit and hypocrisy in which of a truth
they inhabit; so that the dreadful terrible day of the Lord, in which no
iniquity or deceit can stand, which is now at the door, and hastes greatly, is
like to be upon them before they are aware, and to awaken, if it were possible,
those slumbring Virgins that are yet amongst them, after whose souls of a
truth my bowels yern; that so they might be gathered out of all deceitful
paths, in which they are led by the sleights of men (like an Ox to the
slaughter, and a fool to the correction of the stocks) up to Christ Jesus, the
Light, and the Life of men, yea the Wisdom and Power of God, and so come to
Witness not only a Lamp of profession, but Oil in their own Vessels, whereby
the true Light is maintained, by which alone the Bridegroom can be followed
into the Marriage-Chamber.

But knowing how subtly the Serpent, whose head must be bruised, works in
some Children of disobedience amongst them to keep them in the snares of Satan,
in security and blindness, that the true way to everlasting peace they may
never know, but the things thereunto belonging hid from their eyes: not only by
crying peace, peace to that, which of a truth is for destruction, and dawbing
with untempered Mortar that house, of which according to my measure I bear
testimony shall never stand, when the winds blow, and the floods beat: but also
by corrupting, opposing, and keeping from their hearing whatsoever might tend
to their good: There appeared to me some disficulty how to get it truly and
faithfully read, and communicazed among the people to whom it was intended: And
therefore having sent for Robert Simpson, and Robert Purnell, two of the
Messengers they sent to me, and read in their hearing what I had written to
their Company, I demanded of them whether they were free to take it, and read
it truly and faithfully to the rest at a full meeting? Who replied, they saw
nothing in it, for which it ought not to be so communicated, and promised to
do it, if the people would hear it; only desired me to take notice, that
notwithstanding they could not but acknowledge they were guilty of what I had
therein charged upon them, viz. pride, hypocrisic, envy, slandering,
backbiting, railing, lying, etc.) yet it did not reign among them, but was
their burden: Yet notwithstanding, when it was made mention of to be read in
the meeting, so great was the deceit among them, that it could not be suffered;
and the better to cover the deceit, that the simple might be beguiled, and not
discern it, a fasting day, as they called it, being appointed, a clear answer
from God to some is pretended, that the said Letter must not be opened and
read, lest the weak be thereby stumbled, or to that effect: And so after about
a months space was it returned, and left not with me, but with my servant, and
never permitted to come to the hearing of those to whom it was intended, nor
any reason or cause signified to me why it was so returned, although I waited
patiently above three months for it; but in stead of receiving any answer to
their first lying accusations and standers, of which I know I am clear in many,
if not in all their Consciences, the aforesaid persons came the second time
pretending themselves Messengers of the Church of Christ, and in his name to
lay the former things with some other, as false additions to my charge, and
admonish me thereof.

Which when they had done, I beginning to reply, and to vindicate my self from
their accusations, and to answer what they had said, they hasted away, and
would not hear, and said they were not to stay to receive any answer, which was
their manner also in many other places, fulfilling the Scripture, that the
Wicked cannot stand in judgment, nor sinners in the Congregation of the Just,
but flies when no man pursues. Now forasmuch as hereby it plainly appears,
that the intent, and end of those who sent the aforesaid charge to me, was but
to slander and accuse, as has been the manner of the Devil and his
Instruments from the beginning, who is the accuser of the Brethren; and for
that, hereby my just and necessary defense is kept from the simple-hearted
amongst them, after whom my soul longs, and for whose sakes it was principally
intended: Therefore that they may come to the knowledge thereof, and that the
exceeding deceit and filthiness of the rest may be made manifest, and the
skires of the Whore discovered, I am even constrained thus to make it public,
that not only themselves, but all, in whom any spark of honesty and true
discerning is, may read, and judge, and so be led to consider their ways,
brought to repentance, and acknowledgement of the truth, that their sonles may
be saved im this great and notable day of the Lord Jesus, which is the true
desive of him, that was, and is a Lover of their souls, known by the nature of

D. H.

TO THE INDEPENDENT BAPTIZED PEOPLE IN BRISTOLL.
Friends,
Whilst I slumbred, and slept in security, and outward fellowship among you
absent from the Bridegroom, and the Fathers house, and knew not the Bread of
Life which came down from Heaven, and is the life of men, but fed you in
wisdom of words, and spoke unto you smooth things, how was I as a prophet well
esteemed among you? but after that the kindness and love of God appeared, and
by the ministration of the Spirit, which excells in glory (after which my soul
had long traveled) I was made in some measure to see the sandinesse of all
Foundations, and Professions, which stood in the Imagination, not in the Life,
and so the emptiness of your Form, and the foundation of your Religion to be
but in the imaginations, which is only evil continually, and all your Worships
and Services which from thence proceed, to be but the Witchcrasts and Sorceries
of Babylon, by which Nations are deceived, and the Priests your Leaders to be
one in the same nature with the Magicians and Sorceres of Egypt and Babylon,
who by the same spirit withstood Moses and Daniel then, as they and you do now
the truth; and so the same necessity and ground to separate and withdraw from
you, and your worshipping, as formerly from the Parishes, and their Whoredoms,
and began to warn you of it; how soon were you offended, and some of you
greatly enraged! Yet so tender was my heart toward you, that for your sakes I
did bear my burden among you for a season, till he, who has mercy on the
ignorant, and those that are out of the way, pluckd me, as a brand out of the
fire, from amongst you, and gave me opportunity by your passionate, furious,
and unchristianlike behavior in your Assembly, when others took their leave,
and testified against you, to acquaint you (after I had been witness against
that spirit that then acted you) that although I was altogether ignorant till
then of any others being there to take their leaves, yet had I the same thing
to propound concerning my self, and so tender over you I was, that I only
desired leave (till I more sully saw which way the Pillar and Cloud moved) to
come into your meetings, or not; and if I came, and had not freedom to speak
among you, as formerly, but in silence to wait, that offense might not be taken
by any, assuring you that I made not this motion out of any levity, or
lightness of spirit, but of awfulness, sear, and dread of the Living God; not
to satisfy the flesh, the affections, or lusts thereof, by living idly,
loosely, or carelessly in the World, but to deny my self, and crucisie the
flesh, by casting off whatsoever might feed and nourish the same: Not because I
was at all shaken in mind as to sellowship, or communion of Saints, but
because I seared you were not the Spouse of Christ, but an Harlot, and that
your communion and sellowship was not in the light and life of the Spirit of
Christ, but in the spirit of the world, which is the spirit of Whoredoms: And
how tenderly I behaved my self afterward toward you, without doing, or
speaking ought by which you might be offended, or your minds made
evill-affected toward the truth, is in part known to some of you.
Nevertheless, the wrath and rage of many of you waxed great against the Truth,
and was made manifest, by much railing, reviling, slandering, and false
accusing in your, Pulpits, and other your Meetings; those that entertained the
same, in which my selse was a Sharer, and matter was sought for, whereof to
accuse me; but when nothing justly could be sound, an accusation made up of
apparent lies, falsehood, and deceit (as is manifest in my Reply) is prepared,
and sent me by three of your Members, being all the men you have lest of those
to whom I was joined) and two of them became Imitators of Water Baptism, a
practice disowned and testified by those to whom I joined; but when I had
prepared my Defense, in answer to your Accusations, I sent for two of your
aforesaid Messengers, to whom I read what I had written to you; and manifested
my desire to have it publicly read among you at a full meeting, and asked
their freedom to do it, who answered, they were free to do it, and saw no
reason why it should not be so done, and told me, I had created more trouble
and pains for my self, because an Answer to it I might be sure to receive;
yet when it came (so great was the deceit among you that) it could not be
permitted to have an hearing by you, lest thereby (as was pretended) the weak
should be stumbled; but the truth was, lest deceit and hypocrisy should be
thereby manifested to the view of the simple-hearted among you, who discerning
the same, might be drawn out of your snares, and Satan lose his dominion over
them, and that the eyes of their minds might be the more effectually blinded,
kept it was till a Fasting day was appointed, and therein an Answer pretended
by some among you from God that it must not be read.

Isa. 58.4. Behold you fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist
of wickedness.
And so after a months space, or thereabouts, was it returned, not into mine,
but into the hand of one of my servants, without signifying in the least to me
any reason why it was so returned. And as if your former wickedness had been
too little, in laying things to my charge which I never knew, and refusing to
receive, or to hear my charge which is just and true, you proceed to another
wickedness little less then the former, and send your Messengers again in the
name of the Lord (as they said) who charged me once more with the same false
accusations, with some other feigned and false additions, who, as soon as they
had done, fled away as men surpised with fear, or accused by their own
Consciences, and said, they were not to receive any answer, and so hasted away,
espeially the two Baptists, notwithstanding I urged them by several Arguments
to hear a little, and told them it was the wicked that did flee, and could not
stand in the judgment, but the righteous was bold as a Lion: And afterward
meeting with Robert Simpson, who was the mouth of your three messengers (my
bowels moving toward him) I put it to his Conscience what he had done, and
asked how he durst come to me, and in the name of the Lord lay to my charge
that I affirmed the Scriptures of truth were one of the greatest plagues in the
Land, when as I never spoke, nor thought any such thing? Who answered, he spoke
it not, nor laid it to my charge, neither did he hear any such thing from me; I
told him I had it under his hand, which he confidently denied before several
witnesses; I told him I could show it; he replied, if I could, he would
acknowledge himself a liar before those then present: I desired him to stay a
little, and I would fetch his paper, who answered, he should not stay; I
desired him to call again that Evening, or the next morning, and he should see
it; who replied, he had other business to do, or to that effect, and so
passionately departed: upon which, the next day I writ to him as follows.

The Letter to ROBERT SIMPSON.
Robert Simpson,
IT came upon me in soberness yesterday to manifest to thy Conscience a little
of the deceit in which thou inhabitest, not knowing of another opportunity by
reason of thy sudden departure for London, and therefore charged thee with
coming to me with lies in the name of the Lord, and demanded of thee how thou
durst in the name of the Lord tell me, and so lay to my charge that I said or
affirmd that the Scriptures were one of the greatest plagues of the Land, when
I never spoke, or thought any such thing: To which thou replyedst, thou never
spoke it, nor laid it to my charge; I told thee I had it under thy hand, which
thou boldly and confidently did deny again and again; and when I told thee I
could show it under thy hand, thou replyedst it was not so, or to that effect;
and that if I could produce any such thing thou would acknowledge thy self a
liar before those men who were then present: Now the liar is without, and for
the Lake; and a proud look, a lying tongue, and a heart that devises wicked
imaginations the Lord hates: But thy lips has spoken lies, and thy tongue has
utterd perverseness; and as the false witness shall not be unpunished, so he
that speaks lies cannot escape: Now having found thy paper, the fifth thing
thou layest to my charge, is in these words, which thou may see when its
convenient: viz. Speaking reproachfully of the precious Scriptures of Truth: As
first affirming it was a blinding to souls; and secondly, one of the greatest
plagues of the Land; where thou may take notice of a lie invented among you,
a lie prosecuted, a lie denied, and the lie proved upon thee: Therefore
ought thou to own thy condemnation, which is just, and repent before he
appear, who is a swift witness against all liars: And by this also may thou
with the rest of thy company take notice what the nature of the rest of the
Charge is, which in the name of the Lord, which is dreadful, both thou and
they have laid to me.

Friend, I do not insuli over thee, nor delight in thy woe and misery, but
sorely grieved I am, to see how the man of sin, that wicked one, whom the Lord
is now risen as a mighty man refreshed after wine to destroy with the glory of
his coming, it exalted among you, who once were so dear unto me, and that your
eyes are so blinded; and that thy heart is so hardened, that though your root
is become rottenness, and your fruit withers, and you become like stubble
fully dry; yet art thou insensible, and can not see, but under a cloak of
Profession hide your selves, as if you were delivered to commit abomination;
but all that I desire at this time as to thee, is, that thou repent, and pray
God that the thoughts of thy heart may be for given, and that thou fear and
tremble before the dreadful God, whose name thou have taken in vain, and
cannot be hold guiltless: Which is the groaning of thy friend, who is a Lover
of thy soul, though a Witness against thy deceit, who in the world is known by
the name of D. H.

25th. first month, 1646.

Upon the reading whereof I shall not now mention his wrath and passion, though
it much exceeded the bounds of moderation, but to the Letter I have received no
answer: Now therefore upon the whole matter, let the unjustness of your
proceedings be considered: Nicodemus a Pharisee could say, Does our Law judge a
man before he be heard? And Festus, a Heathen Roman Governor, was so noble,
That he heard Paul's defense as to the accusations made against him by his own
Countrymen: And King Agrippa said unto Paul, Thou art permitted to speak for
thy self: But ye have falsely accused, judged, and condemned me, and refused to
hear my defense, which in writing I sent you; and not only so, but sent your
Messengers the second time with like false accusations, which Messengers, would
not receive my answer, saying, They were not to do it; and when I met with him,
who was the mouth of the three, and put it to his conscience what he had spoken
with his mouth, and writ with his hand, he denied it, and fled, and refused to
hear any farther; and when I charged him with it, he (like the man cast into
utter darkness) became speechless, so as not to answer me by word or writing.
Are these the people of the Lord? are these his doings? Is this the Church of
Christ, or the Harlot? Ye who are simple-hearted among the people called
Churches, consider of it, take advise, and speak your minds, whether such
things as these have been done in Israel? And whether being thus dealt withal
and constrained, I could do less then publish this to the view of all men,
without an apparent suffering of my self, and the everlasting Truth of God by me
owned, which is dearer to me then thousands of gold and silver, to lie under
such false accusations and slanders, as a fore said.

And now friends, having thus given you a particular and true account of
proceedings, and the manner of them, let me ask you what aileth the mountains
and the hills: Are ye grieved, that I (having at last sound the Pearl of great
price, which in the field of this World was, and is hid) am in some measure
made freely willing to sell all, yea, the repute and esteem I had with you and
others, called Churches, that I might possess it; and that I have found him
whom my soul loves, even him of whom Moses and the Prophets did write, and the
Apostles, and living Saints did, and does witness, even Jesus which saves his
people from their sins, and redeems them from all iniquity, who is the light of
the World, and the life of men; the living Way, the Resurrection, and the Life,
the faithful and true Witness; the First and the Last, the Beginning and the
End, who was dead and is alive, and lives for evermore: Whom you with me were
long seeking among the dead, but could not find because he was not there, but
was risen, and is gone before his people, whom he leads with a strong hand from
under Pharaoh and all his host, his Magicians and wise men; the King of Babylon
and all his Counselors, to give them freedom and rest in the promised Land, to
the terror and astonishment of the World, and the disquietment of the
Inhabitants of Babylon, where they shall feed as in days of old, and the Lord
delight to dwell amongst them, and multiply them, and set his Sanctuary in the
midst of them for evermore.

Are the pillars and foundation of your building so feeble, that a Letter from
the hand of a friend, that dearly loves you, (and is become as your enemy only
for telling you the truth, and embracing it) makes it tremble and shake, so
that you durst not suffer it to be read amongst you, lest it fall: Has fear
indeed surprised the Hypocrite? Does the wicked know that he cannot stand in
Judgment, but must be destroyed by the brightness and glory of Christ's
appearing and coming? Have ye not read in the Scripture, That they that trust
in the Lord, shall be as mount Sion, that cannot be shaken; and that the house
built upon the rock stands, notwithstanding the wind, rain, and floods beat and
dash against it: Yea, that all the gates and powers of hell cannot prevail
against it; and that they that serve God acceptably, receive a Kingdom that
cannot be shaken, and that all that may be shaken must be removed: Why then are
ye afraid? Do ye not hereby declare and manifest, that ye are children in whom
is no faith, and that the light of God in your consciences has manifested to
you that your building is on the sands, not on the rock, and that your
foundations is not eternal, but in the imaginations only, though to it you
attend not? And is not he your friend, that warns you of it in time, and bids
you attend to wisdom, which cries and utters her voice in your streets, and
says, Turn ye at my reproof, and I will pour out my spirit upon you.

But why must not my defense be heard, if it contains only truth, must it
therefore be shut out from among you, and not suffered to have an hearing in
your Assembly, least thereby deceit and Hypocrisy be discovered, and the man
within you is so strongly armed, lose his Palace? if it contain other then
truth, why had you not made it manifest, that I might repent, since you pretend
your love is so great that pou cannot cease praying for my return back to you,
though I have often denied those Prayers? Isa, 1.15. When you make many
Prayers, I will not hear.

Are ye not many, and I but one, and such an one whom you may easily encounter,
if truth and power were on your side? Did not your messengers tell me they saw
nothing in it, for which it might not be read in your meeting, and that I had
but created more labor and trouble for my self, because an answer to it I might
be sure to receive? To which I replied, An answer to it I would willingly
receive from them to whom it was sent, and advised, that they took care it were
to some purpose, and not a parcel of weakness and confusion; to which end you
might call to your assistance the men of your Confederacy, the Tabernacles of
Edom, the Ishmaelites, Moab, and the Hagarenes, etc. and instanced some lately
invited and entertained by you, who opened their mouths in Blasphemy against
God, his Tabernacle, and them that dwell therein: And this I did the rather,
because I have seen put sorth by Priests and People such parcels of falsehood
and confusion (yet its like the best they had) that is was no ways worth
perusing or answering.

Why had not your messengers delivered it into mine own hands, from which it
was received, that their promise might not be broken; or signified some reason
or other, why it was so returned; and why could they not stand to receive a
sober and true answer from my mouth, when they came the second time with your
false and feigned accusations? had shame and confusion covered their faces, or
was there so much guilt in their consciences, that they durst not appear to
deliver the one, least some reason should be demanded of its return, and they
confounded, and the refore shufled it into the hand of a servant, without so
much as asking me in 3 months time, whether I had it or not, that they might
be clear of their promise; or to receive a short answer to the other, least
thereby their guilty consciences should so far condemn them, that they be
forced to acknowledge the truth, both of mine innocence and their own, and your
hypocrisy and wickedness: Is fear, the pit, and the snare fallen upon thee?
Oh, thou inhabitant of the earth! has the Lord, who tries the righteous,
rained upon thee snares as the portion of thy cup, that thou become every way
ensnared in the work of thine own hands!

Oh! that your eyes were opened by him, that is given for a Covenant, that you
might see it and repent, and seek after the living God, whose wisdom and
strentgh is against you to cut you down, except you return: How can you say you
are wise, and the law of the Lord is with you? what Judgment is there in your
goings? do not the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees far exceed yours?
Read, consider, and be not deceived, for the day of Visitation is come, and the
Lord waits to be gracious, and wisdom cries in your streets, though ye regard
it not, but set at naught her counsels, and refuse her reproofs, and the
redeemer is come to Sion; and to all that turn from ungodliness in Jacob, the
voice of the turtle, and singing of birds is heard and witnessed in our land,
and the cry at midnight is made, Behold the Bridgroom comes, and many are
gone forth to meet (and have met him) And therefore awake, awake ye sleepy
Virgins, arise ye women that are at ease, hearken and hear ye careless
daughters, whose vintage has long failed, and whose gathering does not come;
who art wearied in thy way, yet say not there is no hope; who have wickedly
abused thy self to obtain that which Moses by faith refused: Happy would you
be, if your souls, which long have been in captivity under the wisdom and
policy of the first Adam might be raised, and have dominion, and you come to
witness your part in the first resurrection, where the second death has no
power.

O my friends, what shall I say unto you, or how shall I entreat you! for I
bear you record, that some of you have a great zeal of God, but not according
to knowledge, but going about to establish your own wisdom, have not submitted
your selves to the wisdom of Christ, nor his Cross, which is foolishness to
some, and a stumbling block to others, but is known and witnessed by those that
are saved, to be the very wisdom of God.

Now in the words of Job I shall conclude to you, Job 13.1, 2. Loc, mine eye
has seen all this, mine ear has heard and understood it; what ye know, the
same do I know, also I am not Inferior to you: Surely I would speak to the
Almighty, and I desire to reason with God; but ye are forgers of lies, ye are
all Physicians of no value: O that ye would altogether hold your peace, and it
should be your wisdom! hear now my reasoning, and hearken to the pleading of my
lips: Will ye speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him? Will ye
accept his person? will ye contend for God? Is it good that he should search
you out, or as one man mocketh another, do ye so mock him? he will surely
reprove you: If ye secretly accept persons, shall not his excellency make you
afraid, and his dread fall upon you? your remembrances are like unto ashes,
your bodies to bodies of clay.

Now all the Churches in England and Wales, Baptized and Independent so called,
to whom I have been known in the flesh, and the Elders that are among them, I
exhort (who also was accounted and called an Elder) that by the Light of
Christ, with which you are every one enlightened (and is the true Light, of
which John was a witness) you search your selves, whether ye are indeed that
which ye account your selves to be, or else but the likeness, the picture, or
the image of the thing, without the life or living power of God within you to
act, order, and direct you: For the day of the Lord is great upon all the
Idols, Likenesses and Images, which have eyes and do not see, and feet, and do
not walk, etc. Like unto which are all those that make, or trust in them; and
sad will be your portion, if you be found worshipping in the house of your
Imagery and Imaginations, setting up the Images of Churches, in which the true
life is not; or the likeness of Elders (without the power which the living
Elders had) which is the works of your own hands; for the Scripture says,
Confounded be all they that serve graven Images, that boast themselves of
Idols: And also I exhort you to be sober, Come out of Egypt, and stand still
that you may see the salvation of the Lord, who is now leading his people like
a stock, out of Egypt, and out of Babylon, as in the days of old, at which
Pharaoh with all his Host is angry, and the Magicians and Wisemen of Egypt
withstand, with whom many of you have already been partakers, in persecuting
and in unwarrantable cruelties exercised upon the true Israel of God; by which
you have sufficiently declared your selves to be the feed which was born of the
Bondwoman after she flesh, which persecuted, and must be cast out; and not the
seed which was by promise born of the Freewoman, from above after the Spirit,
which shall be Heir, and must reign, who in all ages was persecuted under one
pretense or other, but did never persecute; but as then He that was born after
the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the spirit; so it is now.

And the innocent blood of righteous James Parnel, who has suffered to the
loss of his life, for the testimony of Jesus, in the Goal of Colchester, will
sadly witness it to the Consciences of those pretended Ministers and Members of
the Churches in Essex, who were his unjust betrayers and persecuters, against
whom it cries aloud for vengeance; let some Members of Churches, whom I know in
Norfolk, and other parts of the Nation, also consider this and repent: And
therefore amend your ways and your doings, and execute true Judgment and
Justice; oppress not the stranger, the fatherless and widow, and shed not
innocent blood, nor walk after the abominations of the Heathen, whom the Lord
has cut off before you; and trust not in lying words that cannot profit,
saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Ordinances of God, The Churches of Christ,
etc. For will ye lie, swear, deal unjustly, persecute, and imprison the
righteous, slander, and abuse, and shed innocent blood, and do worse then your
Fathers; and come and stand in that you call a Church, as if you were delivered
to do these abominations? Is the House that is called by my Name become a Den
of Robbers, or Persecutors in your eyes? Behold, I have seen it, says the
Lord: And although he has daily sent unto you his Servants, and Prophets,
warning you in his Name, and in his Power, yet have you not hearkened unto him,
nor inclined your ears, but hardened your necks, and many of you done worse
then your Fathers; and therefore go see what he has done to your Brethren the
Persecuters, which he cast out before you.

And for mine own part, I must deal plainly, and tell you, the beholding and
observing the unrighteous actings, and deceitful hypocritical dealings of many
of your eminent Members, and other high pretenders to Religion, whilst I sat
with them in Parliament, and other chief places of Counsel and Trust in the
Nation, was one of the first things that put me upon consideration, what the
root of that Profession should be, from whence such sour grapes, and fruits of
bitterness proceeded; where I obtained mercy through the light of Christ, that
enlightneth every man that comes into the world, to see the root and the fruit
to be the same; your foundation rotten in the imitation and likeness of the
truth, not in the truth as it is in Jesus; your way too broad to lead to life,
your Principle and profession weak and powerless, not able to carry and lead
you out of the World, and its crooked and deceitful ways; but in the lustful,
proud, vainglorious, envious, oppressive nature, to dwell equal with the rest
of the world, from whence it is since broken sorth into the monstrous Viper of
plain and open Tyranny, Violence and Persecution; in which you are observed
greatly to exceed the Generations that went before you. Upon consideration of
which, notwithstanding I have known what it is to be accounted something among
those called Churches: what the preferment of Pharaohs Court is, and the great
things of England, and have had a nature prone enough to embrace the same; yet
for the sake of him, whom the world knows not, (and therefore persecute) who
was ever a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, have I chosen rather to
suffer afflictions with the people of God, then to enjoy the Pleasures and
Treasures of England; and can truly say, Much rather would I be a Doorkeeper in
the House of God, where the living presence and power of God is manifested,
known and witnessed, then with you to dwell in the Tents of ungodliness, where
pride, oppression, violence, and persecution is owned and practiced: These
things are found among you, if any of you deny the Spirit of persecution, let
him declare it; and any of you are tender hearted, and desire after the Lord,
Come forth from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not
the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and
ye shall be my sons and daughters, faith the Lord God Almighty.

The LETTER to the INDEPENDANT-BAPTIZED People.
Friends,
ALthough I cannot own any power at all you have over me, neither am careful of
the judgment of man, who must abide the judgment of God, before whose seat
all must shortly come: yet some Messengers from you having some time past been
with me, and told me they were sent by the Church of Christ, and in the name of
Christ to warn me of some things they lay to my charge as sin: The true love I
ever had to your souls, constrains me to give you an answer in all simplicity
and plainness, and by the same spirit by which I often spoke among you, when
many could not bear it, but were offended, as they still will be, which I
matter not, well knowing from what fountain of darkness and ignorance it comes.

But before I proceed to answer the Particulars, I must in faithfulness to your
souls tell you, that I am even constrained to bear witness, that you are no
Church of Christ, neither know the name of Christ, but a Synagogue of Satan,
and a Cage of unclean and hateful Spirits; in which lodges Pride, Hypocrisy,
Envy, Slandering, Backbiting, Railing, Lying, love to this present World; and
conformity to the fashions, customs, and conversation of the same (
notwithstanding there is that in some among you, after which my soul does
greatly groan with much longings, that the salvation of God were come out of
Sion, etc.) but the Temple of God is holy; Christ dwells not with these unclean
Spirits: And it becomes all who name the name of the Lord, to depart from these
iniquities; his Name is dreadful to it, and those that know his Name, know it
so, etc.

To the Particulars.

1. You say my sin lies in leaving the Church, which has these three sad
considerations in it as you judge. The drawing of many from the Faith, and way
of the Gospel: The offending, staggering, and grieving many weak souls: And the
opening the mouths of many to speak evil of the ways of Truth. To which I
Reply, That all Judgment is given to the Son, whom you being ignorant of, and
enemies to in your minds by wicked works, by what can you judge, or what is
your judgment worth? The Church I own as the Pillar and ground of truth, which
are all living stones built upon the living Foundation, and grows up into an
holy Temple for God through the eternal Spirit, in which the Lord God Almighty
dwells, and walks, and manifests himself, which Church I have not left: But if
by the Church you mean a company of people dead in trespasses, without the life
and power of godliness, or true knowledge of God by the Revelation of the
Son, living in pride, in the customs, and loves of the world, serving
diverse lusts and pleasures, ever learning, but never comes to the knowledge of
the Truth, walking like other Gentiles in the Vanities of their minds, having
their understandings darkened, and hating the true Light, so that they are
alienated from the life of God through ignorance, feeding on ashes, not on
bread, having a dead Form without the living power of Godliness: From this if
I turn away, it is not my sin, but my duty; and from this if any be drawn, it
is matter of joy in Heaven, and of no sadness, except to that which is beneath,
and to be cast out: At which, that which is offended, staggered, or grieved,
may well be said to be Weak, and must perish. It is true, the mouths of many are
now open to speak evil of the ways of Truth, and of things they understand
not, as ever it was of old. But, as many among your selves, are not the least
in that transgression, so shall you not miss of righteous Judgment, (except
you repent) in this approaching day, when God shall judge the secrets of men by
Jesus Christ, Who is to be reveald from Heaven in flames of fire, to take
Vengeance on them who know not God, nor obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ, etc.

2. You say my sin lies in neglecting and comtemning some of the Ordinances of
Christ. To which I Reply. The Inventions, Traditions, and Imaginations of men's
carnal wisdom withal that is done in the first nature, being bus Cains
Sacrifice, and nol acceptable to God, I am learning to neglect and disesteem:
Yea all that of which the Lord by the true Prophet Isay complains, Isay 11.10.
to the 16. where you may read, that in the account of the pure God the
multitude of Sacrifices, Oblations, Incense, New Moons, Sabbaths, solemn
Assemblies, appointed Feasts, spreading forth the hands, and making many
prayers, was to no purpose, no delight had the Lord in it, he required it not
at their hands; it was vain, abominable, and burdensome to him, who could not
away with it, his soul hated it, it was a trouble to him, it was iniquity
coming from impure hearts, and bloody hands; but the ordinances and
appointments of God to his people I own, approve, and long after in the pure
light, life, and spirit, in which the true Saints had communion and fellowship.

When I asked your Messengers (as they called themselves) what they meant in
particular by the ordinances that I neglected: They rereplyed, Baptism by
Water, and breaking of Bread. To which I answer: How can you but blush, when
you consider that degree of deceit and hypocrifie in which you now speak, does
not that of God in all your Consciences reprove you? I know it does, if you
will observe it; and therefore in plainness, yet with true love let me ask you;
how can you say to me pull out the mote that is in thine eye, when behold a
beam is in your own eyes? Can you judge me, and not condemn your selves, who
do the same things? A Member of an Anabaptist Assembly I never was, but did
bear witness against it, as ye know; and the people with whom I walked was once
near upon casting out one for entertaining that opinion of Water Baptism: And
when did you baptize (as you call it) your children? I have known no such thing
in use among those with whom I walked these many years: And although many
among you are now running from mountain to mountain, building Altars in your
own inventions, yet can you not from thence Enchant, nor ensnare the Israel of
God, the true Seed, whom the Lord has blessed, and with whom the Lord of a
truth is. And whereas you charge me with neglect of breaking of Bread, I
answer: Have not you your selves neglected it, have you meddled in any such
thing for some years past? Oh my Friends, durst you pretend to come in the
name of Christ with such things as these? know ye not that his Name is
dreadful to all Hypocrites, and his wrath to be reveald against such
Hypocrisy and Deceit? He loves truth in the inward parts, and those that name
his Name must depart from iniquity. But Baptism and the Supper of the Lord I
own, etc.

3. You say my sin lies in extreme censoriousnesse, and rash judging, not only
of men abroad, but if the Church, calling the Church of Christ an Harlot. To
which I reply, the charge is false, and from the Father of lies; for I never
called the Church of Christ an Harlot, but do own it dearly, and in my measure
know it to be chaste and pure, yea an habitation for the Lord, who dwells not
with impurity, I judge it to be so; but the Harlot is an Harlot, and not the
Church of Christ; and it is not my sin, but my duty to declare it so *. And let
the Spirit that moved in your Assembly not only that day that proves my parting
day, Rev. 1. chapter 3.9.
and when Eliz Marshal was sent of the Lord among you for your good, but at
many other times since manifest, and testify who dwells there, and an
habitation for whom you are; and whether you are an holy habitation for the
pure God, or a Cage of unclean and hateful Birds: And truly in this, my desire
is, that prejudice, passion, and fuay may not so blind your eyes: But that in
the pure fear and light of the Lord you may consider, and try your selves,
that so you may not be deceived, and prove rebrobate silver in the day when God
shall try you; for to trial you must come, etc.

4. You say my sin lies in asserting the Church-Principles contrary to Truth:
As first that Faith is an eternal thing. To which my Reply is, That Faith is a
Mystery held in a pure Conscience, hid, and unknown to all ignorant and
vulturous eyes (as well as to yours) And when you are guided by the pure light
of Chr. to know what it is they speak, til which time it will be your wisdom
to keep silence: For the wise man's eyes are in his head, but a fool will be
meddling. Yet let me ask you, whether that Faith by which the Saints are
justified, by which they overcame the world, by which they saw him that was
invisible, by which their hearts are purified, by which Enoch was translated
that he saw not death, and is the substance of things hoped for, be eternal, or
carnal, or what middle place you have to account it in? Oh that you were not
wise in your own eyes!

Secondly, That Christ and Faith were all one. To which I only reply, that I
never asserted any such thing, but enquired after it, as you very well know. --
Yet this I say, let the difference be manifested by you, if you can, and how
you will divide them.

Thirdly, That Christ Jesus is not the object of Faith. To which my Answer is,
that the word object (in this sense) is your own, not mine, nor the Scriptures;
and therefore is denied, with much more of like stuff in use among you: But
that Christ Jesus is the only foundation laid in Sion, and that no other
foundation can be laid besides him, is it that I have, and still do assert,
and affirm against all gainsayers and opposers whatsoever: And withal, that
but very few in the world know this foundation, but are offended at him, and
stumble at that stumbling stone, as it was in days of old. But plainly and
honestly let me ask you, Why floe you question me for these Principles as you
call them) now, i^ it be for Connscience sake, as that which is your duty; why
had you not done it sooner, or while I was among you? Why had you not then
disapproved me by the Scripture? Why would you suffer things which you call
Principles contrary to truth to be asserted among you without rebuke? I advise
you once more to take heed, and beware of this Hypocrisy and Deceit; for God
is not mocked: His name is dreadful, and must not be pretended to cloak and
cover such deceitful actions.

Did not many of your hearts burn within you when I spoke? did you not wait for
my words? Why then do you now rake together things in your carnal imaginations
to lay to my Charge, which I know not, and pretend the holy and dreadful name
of God to it. Am I become your enemy because I told you the truth? Truly these
hidden things of Esau will be sought out, the skirts of the Whore will be
discovered, and all deceit manifested: And then woe from God will be the
portion of thousands: But if the ground upon which you charge me be your
passion, your corruption, carnal wisdom, and pretenses to have something
whereof to accuse me (as doubtless it is, and that in your Consciences will
witness it) then I demand of you, whether your Charge, as well as your Church,
is not to be denied, and witnessed against by every son and daughter of Sion
as carnal, sensual, and devilish, and much like unclean persons, which whiles
together in acts of uncleanness approve each others practices; but when
separated, accuse one another of evil deeds. This cannot stand with devouring
fire.

5. You say my sin lies in speaking reproachfully of the precious Scriptures of
Truth, affi^ming that it is one of the greatest Plagues of the Land, a blinding
to souls, and not the Word of God, nor Rule of Life. All which is false, and
from the Father of lies; for I never affirmed any of the three among you;
though something of query has been put concerning the two last; and therefore
my Reply shall be to each, and shall say: The Scriptures of Truth I ever owned,
and still do, as that which was given forth by inspiration of the Spirit, and
is profitable, etc. But that ever I said, or thought, or that it ever entered
into mine heart to think that it was one of the greatest Plagues of the Land,
is so utterly groundless, false, and proceeds only from the father of lies, and
invented by his instruments among your selves, that I cannot but wonder what
spirit has possessed you, and that you durst mention such filthy Untruths, and
pretend it in the name of Christ: But surely the righteous Judge, in whose
presence the lying lip, and double tongue can never stand, will require it at
your hands.

Its true, I said the thing called the Body of Divinity by the Wizards of this
world, was a plague to the Land, and do still affirm it to be so: Although I
perceive some among you are so blinded by the god of this world, that they know
not how to put a difference between the spirit of Witchcrafts, which acts in
the Diana called Divinity, and the pure Spirit of Christ, by which the
Scriptures were given forth.

And whereas you accuse me for saying the Scriptures were a blinding, or a
veil? I demand, where are your eyes? Has the god of this world indeed so
blinded it, that you cannot read plain words of Scripture, but lay that to my
charge as sin, which is according to that which came out of the mouth of him
whom you pretend to honor? Does not Christ Jesus, the Light of the world, and
the wisdom of God, say, Mdrk 4.11, 12. Unto you it is given to know the
Mysteries of the Kingdom; but to them that are without, all these things are
done in Parables, that seeing, they might see, and not perceive, and hearing,
they might hear, but not understand, etc. And the like words in Luke 8.10. Was
not Isaiah sent to this purpose, to make the peoples hearts fat, and their
ears heavy, and to shut their eyes: And to say unto them; hear ye indeed, but
understand not, and see ye indeed, but perceive not. Isa. 6. Do ye not
understand that the Letter kills, and the Spirit quickneth; besides many
other Scriptures manifesting the same thing.

Oh my Friends! were you not wholly given over, and become past feeling,
without any sense of the life and spirit of God, how can these things be,
especially at such a time, when the night is so far spent, and the day so much
appeared, and the true Light come, and the glory of the Lord risen, and the
children of the Lord walking in the light of the Lord, and calling each other
thereinto according to the Scriptures? were it not your way to be silent, and
not manifest your ignorance and folly in accusing others for speaking upon the
matter the very words of Scripture; when it is your own ignorance, even of the
very Letter of Scripture, that is the cause of it?

And whereas you accuse me for affirming in the Church, that the Scriptures
were not the Word of God, and Rule of Life; when I only propounded it among
you, to consider whether it was so or not. In this you manifest your ignorance,
as well as in the former: And therefore I demand of you, where does the
Scripture call it self the Word of God, and to whom was it the rule of life?
It is true, the Holy Scriptures of Truth declare of the Word, and that Word of
which it declares, was God, and took flesh; and by that Word was the world
made, and by the same Word it is reserved to the judgment of the great day:
And if you can find the Scriptures declaring of any other Word of God, let me
know it; and till then be silent, and add not your imaginations (which are
only Evil, and that continually,) to the Scriptures.

Thus having answered what you sent to me, I shall further add, that I take
notice that God has granted me that mercy, that in all studied accusations
raked up together against me, you cannot find one particular thing to lay to
my charge condemned by the spirit of Christ to be contrary to the Scriptures of
Truth; and that all, or most part of what you seem to gather up, is of that
which was done, or spoken, whilst I was among you, and not then reproved; and
so your own evil is manifested, and not mine.

But to conclude, for my heart is moved after some of you, why would you stone,
or otherwise harm me, what evil have I done? Why do ye wait for my Halting,
and lay snares for him that reproved you in times past by words, and now by
silence? Why are your spirits embittered against him that thought nothing dear
to do you service? Have I not served you freely many years together, and been
a keeper of your Vineyard? In which all my reward from you was to bear, and be
broken under your backbitings, murmurings, formality, and unfruitfulness, and
other evils, not a few then in being, and still is among you.

Is it not time now for me to look to my own Vineyard, and to mind my Eternal
Habitation? Have I ever made a gain of you, or any of you? Surely I have been
servant to you near as long as Jacob was to Laban for both his wives: And may I
not now be permitted to mind mine own, but you must pursue like Laban after
poor Jacob, when God bid him return? I know, and am persuaded, that the most
embitter'd spirit among you cannot but say I have been more righteous then you,
more discerning, more faithful and diligent then you, (though I am not thereby
justified, neither have I whereof to glory) And may I not say to you, as
sometimes the poor Ass abused by the blind Prophet, said to his Master, what
have I done? Have I not been your servant these many years? was I wont to do
as now? Surely if ever the Lord take pleasure in you, and open your eyes, you
will soon see the Angel in the way, and that the poor Ass has more discerning,
then the wilful, angry, and passionate Prophet.

You are my Witnesses, that some manifestations of truth was breaking forth in
me some years past, and was sometimes manifested among you, at which some of
your hearts burned, some trembled, and some were offended, and contradicted,
etc. My self in all was groaning after power, spirit, and life, without which
no satisfaction came to my soul; from whence I ceased not to warn you from day
to day of your danger in the state where you stood short of the life. But you
not being warned, how often has mine heart lamented in your hearing in these
and the like words.

To whom shall I speak and give warning? you will not hear, your hearts are
uncircumcised, and you cannot hearken. The word of the Lord is a reproach so
you, and you have no delight in it. O that my head were water, and mine eyes a
fountain of tears, etc. Oh that I had in the Wilderness a lodging-place of
Wayfaring men, that I might leave my people, and go away from them; for they
are Adulterers, an Assembly of treacherous men, and bend their tongues like
bows for lies, but are not valiant for the Truth upon Earth, etc.

But this seemed as idle words, yet was I made to proceed, and to warn you of
the mighty day of the Lord now at the door, in which you could never stand I
told you your foundation was on the sand, short of the life; your profession
was in words, not in power; and that your mountains must be brought low, and
your valleys exalted, before the Lord come to your Temple; and at last, that
your Church was but an Harlot, and the spirit of whoredoms acted therein: All
which, with much more not being believed, nor received, but entertained with
offense and prejudice: What could I do but shake off the dust of my feet, and
stand as a Witness against your deceit, and so betake my self into the
Wilderness, as before I had said, in which the Lord speaks comfortably.

And give me leave without offense to tell you, that in all this I understood,
and knew what I spoke: Yea when I professed among you my ignorance of Christ, I
well knew what I did; for mine eyes began to be opened by him, that was given
for a covenant to open blind eyes: And therefore do bear testimony, that that
knowledge also which you had then of Christ, shall profit you nothing; and that
your habitation is in the midst of deceit, and through deceit ye refuse to know
the Lord, but are feeding on ashes, not on bread, and so are a people robbed
and spoiled; yea, all of you snared in holes, and hid in Prison-houses, and are
for a prey and for a spoil: And this shall ye know and witness eternally, when
happily no place for repentance may be found, but the things belonging to your
peace be hid from your eyes: But who among you will give ear to this? who will
hearken and hear for the time to come? But when I consider both your danger and
your confidence, and see but little probability of escape: How am I wounded at
the heart, and made as it were to cry out, My bowels, my bowels? I am pained at
the heart, I have labored in vain, and spent my strength for naught; for the
treacherous dealers have dealt very treacherously, and so you proceed from evil
to evil, as appears this day; though the God of this world has so blinded
your eyes, that you cannot see it.

I told you also whiles I was with you, that as many desired, and seemed to
delight in the day of Christ's first appearance in flesh, could not stand when
he appeared, but became his Betrayers and Murderers; so in his second
appearance in Spirit, Power and Life, many of those that expected him, seemed
to desire and earnestly pray for that day of Christ, would be found the
greatest Enemies to him, and told you some of you would betray him; and how
sadly it is already fulfilled in you, and made good by you: Let all to whom God
has given any measure of true discerning, judge, and see, if in envy, wrath,
and rage, some of you exceed not the Heathen; yea all your Fathers, who in
envy, wrath, and rage, persecuted the Prophets and holy men of God; that
witnessed the truth in their generations.

But my Friends, Against whom do ye sport your selves? against whom make ye a
wide mouth, and draw out the tongue, yea and the hand also? Are you not
children of transgression, a seed of falsehood? Are your actions the actions of
Isaac, the true seed, to whom the promise is made; or of Ishmael, that scoffed,
or mocked, and must be cast out? of righteous Abel, or wrathful Cain; by your
fruits are ye known, and the Harvest is come in which the wheat is gathering,
and the tares and chaff is scattering and burning, and your saying, Lord, Lord,
will not serve turn: Your saying and imagining you have Faith, will not save
you, when your works are contrary, and proceed not from above, but from
beneath. Why do ye rage and imagine vain things? why do ye set your selves, and
take counsel together against the anointed one? why will ye break all his
bonds, and cast his cords from you? by which he would draw and gather you to
himself, in this day of his mighty power: The Lord has set his King upon his
holy Hill of Sion: Who from thence declares the decrees, and the Law is gone
forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem; and thousands are
witnesses thereof, although it be your lot to be of that number that despise,
and wonder, and must perish according to the Scripture, except ye repent: And
therefore be wise, and kiss the Son, lest he be angry, etc. For truly you may
associate your selves, and take counsel of the enemies of the Lord; you may
strike in confederacy with the enemies of our God, but you must be broken to
pieces, for the Lord of Hosts is with us, and the shout of a King is among us,
though we are as signs and wonders in Israel.

But to be plain, from whence comes Wars, and Fightings that are among you? why
do ye beat in your meetings (likewise Enemies of Christ in their Synagogues) as
some of you did the tenth day of the seventh month at Richard Moons; if you
had there met to call on the Father, who without respect of persons judges
righteously, why had you not past your time in fear; but if you have bitter
envyings, and strife in your hearts (as it is evident you then, and at other
times had) glory not, and lie not against the truth, for this comes not from
above, but is carnal, sensual, and devilish; and where strife and envy is,
there is confusion, and every evil work: Therefore cleanse your hands ye
sinners, and purify your hearts ye double-minded; be afflicted, and mourn, and
weep; let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy into heaviness,
for God accepts not your sacrifice, but his wrath and fury is to be revealed
against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in
unrighteousness, as you do this day: And therefore the sinners in Sion are
afraid, great fear has surprised the Hypocrites.

I beseech you read uprightly, without prejudice or deceit, the 83. Psalm, from
end to end, and see if it contains not both your practice and portion: I advise
you to stand still, if you will see the salvation, the Lord of a truth is
working for his people: But if you will stand on the other side, rejoicing over
the children of Judah in the day of their calamity, and speak proudly in the
day of her distress, and be like one of her enemies: Know, that the day of the
Lord is near upon all the Heathen, her enemies, and as you have done, it shall
be done unto you; as the Prophet witnesses, Obadiah 11.12, 13, 14, 15. And if
you will be one with the enemies of the Lord in sin, must ye not be one in
plagues? And if you (although ignorantly) will be lifting at the burden some
stone, and fighting against Jerusalem, must ye not be broken, and receive the
plague from the Lord God, that must be poured out upon all that fight against
it, Zach. 14.12. Can any pretense whatsoever cover you? Consider this, all ye
that put faraway the evil day, and cause the seat of violence to come near; who
beat and abuse the servants of the living God, which in his Name he sends among
you for your good, so that they bear your marks in their bodies, as of old they
did from your Fathers; and whether it be not an evident token of your
perdition, but to us of salvation, and that of God. But what shall I advise or
counsel you; I know from of old many of your hearts are hardened, and you will
not hear; and therefore I shall say no more, but with Paul, From henceforth let
no man among you trouble me; for I must bear about in my body the dying of the
Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in my mortal body:
however you take it, this is written in much feeling and love to your souls;
and therefore in plainness, by one that has been, and still is a great lover
of your souls, though a witness against your deceit: Known to you by the name of

Dennis Hollisler.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Shall spare to make much mention to you of your carriage to a Servant of the
Lord, who came into your meeting the second day of this ninth month; and of
your threatening her with Whips, Stripes, and Prison: Having written more
largely of it to Th^mas Ewens your Teacher, where you may see how contrary your
practice is to the Saints in all ages; and the Churches of Christ; and one with
the Seed of the Serpent, the enemies of Christ, who was ever found in
imprisoning and persecuting the Saints, as the Scriptures testify.




The Letter to Thomas Ewens.
Thomas Ewens,
THy Letter of the second day of the last Month I received with the enclosed
Papers from Henry Iessey, and John Pendarviss, as thou say, in answer to some
Queries sent to me by them, which is not true; for I sent none to them in
particular, that I know, but to the People to whom they were directed, viz. The
Baptists, of which as that time a very great number was in Town, from whom some
reasonable answer might be expected; instead of which, I reveived a Paper
signed Henry Iessey, John Pendarvis, pretending some Reasons why they answered
not; and in thy Letter a show of an answer to them the said Quaeries, but
indeed a parcel of such dull stuff, that its not worth observing, much less
replying thereto, by those, whose time is not their own, but his that sent
them: Enclosed thou may receive an answer to their Anti-quaeries, from those
to whom they were directed: A reply also to the pretended answer of the
Quaeries, thou and they might have expected, had it been worth the while; but
instead thereof, you (viz.) the Baptists, are desired to review your own
Answers, and take notice of the confusion and deceit therein contained, and how
far short it is of an answer to the Queries, and amend the same.

I shall instance in one particular, namely your answer to the eight Query, in
which you speak of two Baptisms under the New Testament, besides that of John;
when the Scripture says, One Faith, one Baptism; you say, Christ in his own
Person only Baptized with the Spirit, none other being appointed nor enabled,
etc. When the Scripture says, Some were made able Ministers of the Spirit, not
the Letter: And he that ministered the spirit among the Saints, Did he it by the
works of the Law, says that able Minister of the Spirit? And where was it,
that Christ in his own person Baptized in Scripture expressions, Were not all
the Saints Baptized by one Spirit into one Spirit into one Body. See ^ Cor.
12.13.
without wresting? sithence the Spirit was not given, till that person was
ascended: And he that spoke by the Spirit, said, Though ye have known Christ
after the flesh, yet henceforth know ye him so no more: And what is that Name
of the Lord Jesus, in which you say you Baptize?

I shall say little to your Spiritual ends there mentioned of your water
Baptism, or my stical holdings out, or representtions, etc. But would rather
have the terms and things proved by the words of Scripture to be so, because
the shadows do now begin to fly away, and the true Light shines, and deceit is
manifested; so that words, colors, and pretenses, will not now prevail to
blind and deceive those that live, and walk in the true Light.

And whereas thou say, If there be any thing in either of the Papers, that
may tend to recover my precious Soul out of the pit and snare into which it is
fallen; as it would be a rejoicing to others that love me, so to thy self, who
would be as ready as ever, to serve me in love, and in the Lords way.

To which I reply Were my soul, (which indeed is precious in the eye of the
Lord) fallen into a pit or snare, I see nothing in either of those dull,
confused, liveless, and powerless Papers like to recover, or lift it out: But
why do thou not tell me what the snare and pit is, into which it is fallen? The
mistaken blind generation, in all ages accounted the people of God, who were
escaped their pollution and snares, and turned from the darkness to the Light,
and from the power of Satan unto God, deceived, fallen, and mis-guided; and
therefore hated, reviled, and persecuted them, as people fallen into a snare, fit
for their prey and spoil, and to be whipped, and imprisoned, etc. I do not say in
Bridewell, but shall leave it to come out of thy mouth, as it did the second
day of this present month: and is that the Lords way, in which thou art so
willing to serve me, I utterly deny that way, and the Lerd of it, which is the
god of the world, the Devil, and all that by him are led and guided therein; it
is the devil that casts the Saints into Prison, as the Scripture says, It was
wretched Pilate that scourged Jesus: It was those Masters, whose gain came in
by Divination, joining with the multitude, that carried Paul and Silas before
the Magistrates, and caused them to be beaten, and many stripes laid upon them,
and cast into prison: It was Jesus, that foretold his Disciples they muse be so
used by the world, the generation of Vipers, that must fill up the measure of
their Fathers iniquities, that upon them may come all the righteous blood, that
has been shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel, etc. It was
Paul, the able Minister of the Spirit, not of the Letter, that proved himself
the Minister of God, in much patience, intumults, in stripes, in imprisonments,
etc. and more a Minister of Christ, then the false Ministers that encountered
him were, by labors more abundant, in stripes above measure, in Prisons more
frequent, that five times of the professing Jews, received forty stripes save
one, and was thrice beaten with rods. But is is Thomas Ewens, a Minister of the
Letter, not of the Spirit, as all the false Apostles and deceitful Workers
were, who trans form themselves into the Ministers of Christ, as Satan does
himself into an Angel of Light, that is at least threatening the servants of
God, and witnesses of Jesus with stripes, with whipp ings, and with Bridewel.

O my Friend! How great is the wrath, and how heavy is the indignation, that
from the Lord God is gone forth against thee except thou repent, who waxes
worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived; and little do thou think the
extreme height of wickedness; into which thou art spreading above many thy
Companions, if the Lord prevent not: Alas, alas! Why was I warned from
invisible sights many months, if not years past, to beware of thee? something
of whose condition was then manifest, which I could not believe, till in time
it began to be made manifest by its fruits, and now begins to be visible, and
breaks out like the fire, which thou can not contain within thee, but openly
opposest the appearance of Christ, where it is found in life and power.

O my Friend! Tender, and open is my heart toward thee: what would I not do
that thou might escape the pit, out of which no redemption can be? How often
am I wounded, and my heart troubled in minding of thee! O that thou might st
know the things belonging to thy peace, and how sandy thy foundation is on
which thou stand, and the deceit which fast thou holdect, and so be led to
repentance, and not shut up the Kingdom of Christ against thy self and others!
My bowels are even turned for thee, not knowing how to give thee up, who am thy
friend as thou love the light.

D. H.


To this no answer at all was returned, but many months after the said
Antiqueries by the name of Quaeries were published in a book entitled Arrows
against Babylon, without taking the least notice therein of the answer given to
it long before; of the honesty, equity, and justness of which proceedings the
wise in heart may judge, and by the true light which lights every man that
comes into the world, of which John was a witness, come to see where deceit
reigns, and the spirit of whoredoms, witchcrafts and abominations rules; but
the answers were as follows.

The ANTIQUAERIES answered.
Query 1.

Whether you be willing that the depth of your persuasions concerning Christ
his being contained in the Heavens, the raising of our dead Bodies after
natural death, try all of Spirits and Doctrines according to the Scriptures,
should be clearly and openly known and published?

Answer. 1.

Yea, and clearly and openly do we publish and declare the way to God according
to the Scripture: Christ who is risen, of whom we bear witness, and that he is
ascended into Heaven, and set down on the right hand of God: But as for his
being contained, you ask you know not what: And as for our persuasion of the
raising of your dead Bodies after natural death; or as you say, the corruptible
Bodies that are laid in graves, or cast into the sea, literally we say, flesh
and blood inherits not the Kingdom of God, neither does corruption inherit
incorruption: But our persuasion is, that the wicked and unjust shall arise to
shame and everlasting contempt, and therefore we warn you in the presence of
the Lord to hearken unto the Light, that shows you sin, and come to repentance,
that you may witness a change, lest that day come upon you unawares: And the
resurrection of the Just we own to everlasting life; but we are not of those
that say, How are the dead raised, and with what body do they come? but we know
that there is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body; and we confess,
and are persuaded of the resurrection of the just and unjust, and to every seed
his own body, according to the Scripture: And trial of Spirits, and doctrines
we own, and are willing thereunto by the Spirit of the Lord to try, and to be
tried; and our persuasion is known unto the children of Light, and the truth is
plainly published; and yet not known unto the world, nor by its wisdom, but to
the Saints well known, and in the light have we fellowship with the children of
God, unto whom his secrets are revealed.

Query.

If so, What was the reason you gave no answer, when it was put to you whether
you did agree to those few plain Scripture truths concerning Christ, and those
weighty things before named?

Answer.

The spirit of Christ, by which we are guided, is not limited to your time, and
if you do conclude (because there was not an answer, when it was put) that we
deny Scripture truths, you are given over to believe lies; the same may be
drawn concerning you, for not returning an answer to our Queries when they were
put; and likewise your own reasons may be turned upon you, if no particular
answers to your Antiqueries were given, and you judged out of your own mouths.
First, Because there is an intruding by you into the things not revealed.
Secondly, Because some things are of less concernment, and because in the
conclusion there is an answer required in a masterly manner: In all which, you
show you allow your selves in the things which you condemn, and that you are not
taught by the light within to do as you would be done unto; although you say
the light within, which is the light of right reason, shows the
unreasonableness or inequality of such a way of proceeding, in taking of so
casie a work, as to hand out a heap of questions, in number twenty seven, but
rightly distinguished, amounting to a far greater number: And here you are seen
not to own the light of right reason, to show you your own unreasonableness,
who have sent out a heap of Queries, by number sixteen; which are near as much,
if they be not altogether, as our twenty seven Questions and your particular
Answers to them: And your Answers are dull stuff, saving the Scriptures, which
we own, as they were spoken by them who lived in the life; but the unclean
spirit of confusion, by which you speak, we utterly deny. You say, The Church
under the New Testament, being the Kingdom of God, there is the cup of the
Lord, who is the true Vine; which cup is an outward cup you say, in which you
show your ignorance, that you neither know the cup nor the Vine, nor the
Kingdom of God: You say, The worship of Devils, and sacrificing, and seasting,
and the cup of Devils was outward, but say you, the cup of fornication, and
abomination, which all the world drinks of, is not to be taken literally, but
mystically: And here you have shown your confusion, who say, The cup of the
Lord, which is the true Vine, is an outward cup; but the cup of fornication and
abomination is mystically to be taken, which you have done accordingly; yet you
say, the sacrifices and feastings to Devils is an outward worship, but
fornication and abomination is mystical, and denotes a certain measure of the
delusion of the Whore: And whether the drinking of the cup, and sitting at the
Table and feasting and sacrificing to Devils, was not abomination, and a
certain measure of the delusion of the Whore, let all that can discern, judge,
and whether it concerns not you to examine, if this be not a certain measure of
the delusion of the Whore, to be in such confusion that you cannot discern the
mother of Harlots, the father of Lies; neither know the Wine, the Church, the
cup, nor the Kingdom of the Lord, further then you can imagine in your earthly
sensual wisdom, and you being so blind, and in such confusion without the
power which laid the foundation, as you confess, we deny your spirit, and
account your stuff in your Answer, as not worth mentioning to rake up after
you; but what you want in answering, you can make up in asking, showing
unreasonableness by your own confession: And likewise appears, that you would
cover your selves and hide your persuasions, and had rather pry into the
conditions of others, then bring your own deeds to the Light; and seeing there
is insulting, because of our not answering in your time, and false conclutions
drawn, we bear witness against your deceit, and proceed to answer, declaring,
that we differ by the power of the living God, who by his spirit has quickened
us, by which we see, and discern you to be in the Will Worship, in the wisdom
which is from below, of that number who are measuring your selves by your
selves, and comparing your selves among your selves, and not according to the
measure of the rule which God has distributed, with which we agree; but that
to us from you does not reach, and therefore your voice and spirit we deny,
though you take the Scriptures to talk upon, and trade withal in your earthly
imaginations, looking that the Kingdom of God should come with observation; and
say, The cup of the Lord, which is the true Vine, is an outward cup, when as
the Kingdom of God is within.

O ye blind guides, how can you teach others, who are your selves ignorant of
the Kingdom and of the cup of the Lord? and we bear witness to the sive things
at least of great concernment, and with your spirit we do not agree. First, We
own and witness, that God by Jesus Christ calls sinners, to repentance; and
saves his people from their sins, and redeems them from the wrath to come, soul
and body, as many as rightly believe and work by love: And that the same Jesus,
that at Jerusalem was crucified, and before Pilate witnessed a good confession,
is now in the Heaven; and the same that descended, did ascend, and comes again
in like manner; and also that our vile bodies shall be made like unto his
glorious body, and be flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone. And again,
Every spirit we credit not, but believing in the Lord Jesus, we try the
spirits; and yours is tried, and seen to be the spirit of the world, and not
believed by us, nor credited (though you pretend to come with light) therefore
your spirits are rejected. And lastly, We know that it is not every one that
says Lord, but he that does the will of the Lord, that enters into the kingdom
of God: And such have right to the Tree of Life, and interest in the Promises
made to Believers, who worship God in Spirit and Truth, and keep the
Commandments, according as they have received, not by tradition, nor imitation
by and in the earthly carnal wisdom, but led and guided by the spirit of the
living God, by which spirit we bear witness against your traditions and
inventions, and herein we differ, and we do agree with that which convinces
you of sin, and makes manifest your deceit, and calls you to repentance from
dead works, that is the light which we love, and you hating it, and walking
contrary to it, and loving darkness differs you from the children of God, and
there is your condemnation; and for answer to your other Quaeries take as
follows.

Query 2.

Whether you do not by many of your sayings craftily hide your persuasions
from the sight of some honest people: And is not this dissimulation at the
best, or lying after the manner of Ananias? Acts 5.2.

Answer

Dissimulation at the best, or lying against the Spirit we deny, and from
honest people we do not craftily hide our persuasions, but by manifestation of
the truth commending our selves to every man's Conscience in in the sight of
God, not walking in craftiness, but renouncing the hidden things of dishonesty;
and if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost.

Query 3.

Whether your selves, even all of you be not Men and Women of finfull failings
and imperfections, as those godly people you cry down; If not, tell us who are
the persons among you without their failings, and imperfections, and how they
came so to be?

Answer

This Query is raised from a Lie, godly people we cry not down, but deceit in
all we witness against by that which is Eternal without imperfection: And for
being free from sin, we say the Son of God is come, which takes away sin,
and he that's borne of God sins not; he that is in Christ is a new creature,
and this many among us are Witnesses of; but the sinful failings are without,
and such we do not justify by saying they are not where they are, or pleading
for them where they are.

Query 4.

Do your in your judgments of the Congregations of Believers look after those
things which are commendable, as well as those which are condemnable in their
practices, doc you not on the contrary cry them down in general without any
mercy?

Answer

Yea, we do look after those things which are commendable in Believers, and
own them; but they that say they are Believers, and are not, are to be
witnessed against: But to cry all down without any mercy, is false, and the
liar is for condemnation with the Light, and with it we have unity.

Quere 5.

Whether your declaring against isntrumental Teaching, and yet going about
informing and instructing your selves and others, does not discover a gross
contradiction between your principles and practices; and whether it be right to
set them against it, to bring them to hear your declaring, altering only the
name?

Answer

Against the Teachings of Man, or such who know what they know naturally, we
declare; yet we are sent to turn from darkness to light, and this is right,
and no contradiction, but as the Prophets, and Apostles, who went up and down
declaring against Seducers, Deceivers, and false Teachers, and they informed
and instructed, and they that were of God heard them; and this is not only
altering the name: But the Spirit is another, and so the nature, which bears
witness against the spirit of the world, where ever it rules: Let your name be
what it will, your nature is seen, and witnessed against.

Quere 6.

Whether isntrumental Teaching be unsuitable unto the new Covenant? If so, why
did Christ, being ascended, appoint Pastors and Teachers, till all came into
the Unity, ordaining Ministers for the Work, while Work remains, did Christ
burden his Saints with needless appointments?

Answer

Its confessed, we go about informing and instructing our selves, and others,
and the New Covenant we own, where all are taught of God, and why Christ
appointed Pastors and Teachers, is answered in the query, and what he appoints
is not needless.

Quere 7.

Whether the Scriptures you bring to oppose the Practice of Gospel Ordinances
do not serve only to reprove the practice of Circumcision, or the walking
after the traditions of men, or the carnal formalist practice or Idolizing of
the true Gospel Ordinances? all you say making not at all against a spiritual
practice of Gospel-Church-Ordinances, as of Breaking of Bread, and Exhorting
one another, etc.

Answer

We bring not Scripture to oppose the practice of Gospel Ordinances; but we
bear witness against your traditions, carnal formalists, and Idolizing
practices by the same spirit, as they did then, who said, It is neither
Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision, but a new Creature: And the spiritual
practice we own, and press unto it, and against the formal, and the carnal,
all we say not making at all against a spiritual practice of
Gospel-Church-Ordinances: And whether the spiritual be taken, practiced, and
fulfilled in the carnal, let the Spiritual Judge, who compares spiritual
things with spiritual; and here your queries are in your confusion, who before
drew a conclusion we cried all down without mercy, and now say, all we say
makes not at all against a spiriruall practice: Here the unclean Spirit has
confessed truth.

Quere. 8.

Whether it be better to wait on God in his good old ways, expecting his work
to be gradually carried on, so running with patience your spiritual race, or
as the manner of some is, to forsake the assembling our selves together, in
hopes to start up from a low stature suddenly into perfection by embracing a
new Doctrine?

Answer

In this query we are not concerned, by your own confession we inform and
instruct our selves and others, and we assemble our selves together for
edifying; waiting upon the Lord in patience to run the spiritual race; and
for your starting up into perfection, your envy is seen, and against what you
start, and such starting we deny your; slander returns upon your own head.

Quere 9.

Whether Jesus Christ has not prayed for those that believe through the word
of the Apostles? Is so, whether they are not in a good and safe way, who
believe accordingly? And whether it be better to credit their testimony so
fully confirmed and owned by the Lord, or to forgo that, and embrace and
follow the sayings of some of your company?

Answer

Christ has prayed for those that believe, and they are in a good and safe way
that believe accordingly; and for crediting their testimony so fully confirmed,
you have Drunkards, Liars, Swearers, Covetous, proud Hyocrites, and deceitful
Ones to be of your company to confess the truth of their words, but are as far
from witnessing the life and power the Believers witnessed, as the Hypocrites,
as the Drunkards, and swearers, yea, and many in this day of the Lord are
brought to repentance, and enter into the Kingdom before ye graves and painted
sepulchers: And for your secret slandering some of our company, where nothing
is instanced, there needs no answer: But all we say, as you confess making
nothing at all against a spiritual practice we judge it safe to follow that;
and they that believe and follow otherwise, it is not for the better.

Quere 10.

What is that Faith which the Spirit speaks expressly some should depart from
in the latter days. giving heed to seducing spirits, and dostrines of Devils

Answer

It is the Faith of the Son of God, and Faith is a Mystery held in a pure
Conscience; and you that are ignorant of this Faith, are among the seducing
spirits, and the last and perilous time is fulfilled upon you reprobate
concerning the faith, having a form of godliness, but denying the power, as
you confess, that you profess no tto have the power the Apostles had, by which
the foundation was laid; yet you say you can build, but what your building is
worth, let the wise in heart judge, who have not the power, that laid the
foundation. O ye blind guids! are your consciences so seared, that you cannot
see that you are out of the doctrine of Christ without the power that laid the
foundation, building among the company beforementioned: In the presence of the
Lord are you seen, and witnessed against to be in the doctrine of devils
without the power of God, giving heed to seducing spirits, and seducing,
Repent, repent ye Hyyocrites, this is love to your souls, and the Witness in
your Consciences will answer it in the day of the Lords account.

Quere 11.

Whether that Doctrine, which in some is no more, but look to the Light Within
with a curse upon disobedience, and a blessing upon obedience thereunto be that
glorious Gospel Preached by Christ and his Apostles? or whether it be not a
renewing the old Doctrine of Justification by Works, w^^ein the mystery of
iniquity works to darken the grace of God in justifying the Ungodly without
works freely by his grace, and to make void the sufferings of Christ?

Answer

This query is grounded upon a lie; but the true Ministry is to turn from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God: And this is the way to
receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them that are
sanctified by faith that is in C. Jesus, and that the wrath of God is to be
revealed upon the disobedient, is found Doctrine, and your deceitful coverings
will not hide you, who obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: And glad
tiding, and plenteous redemption through his blood do we witness, and the old
doctrine is denied by the sum of what we declare, and the carnal profession
and hypocrisy contrary to the grace of God, which teaches to deny
ungodliness, and the form without the same power that laid the foundation,
there the mystery of iniquity works, and from thence came this query, which
is utterly false, as it is applied to us.

Query 12.

Whether the Light that is in every man does reveal Jesus Christ as crucified
for sin, and risen again? If so, how came it to pass that so many strict men,
and Paul himself walking according to his Conscience before Conversion, were
ignorant of him?

Answer

Do you not here show your ignorance? Is Christ revealed crucified for sin, and
raised again before Conversion? Is this a learned question, how it comes to
pass that Christ is not known before Conversions, seeing the Light reveals
him? The Light condemns the Unbelievers, though they make a Profession that
Christ is come, and crucified for sin, and risen: Ye are in the darkness it
self, as near Egypt as Babylon: Did Paul know Christ, til he was revealed in
him, and does darkness reveal him? While Paul walked in the zeal without the
true knowledge persecuting, he was ignorant and injurious, and the Son not
revealed: But in the Light is Christ known and revealed, and the true Light
lights every man, and he that believes in the light, is a child of light.
But one question after your manner of counting to you among your heap, whether
it be not the Prince of darkness in you, which denies that the Light reveals
Jesus Christ, that so ye may draw people from the true light which lights
every man, to follow your own inventions, building in the credit of others
testimony, without the power which laid the foundation, and so set up a Form
without the power in your gross dark imaginations, and call that Light, showing
your selves to be false Christ's, crying lo here, and lo there. And seeing
some may be Witches that Preach up the outward. Commands in the Letter without
the Spirit, Whether are not you Witches, that deny the power the Apostles had,
by which the foundation was laid? and whether he that brings the same doctrine
the Apostle brought, has not the same power which laid the foundation, seeing
he has the Father and the Son? and whether you that have denied this power,
can deny but ye are seducing spirits, and in the doctrine of Devils?

Quere 13.

Whether you have not among you many who presume to be Masters, or masterly
Teachers, contrary to the word of Christ, Mat. 23.10. Do not they usurp
authority over the Consciences and judgments of their followers* requiring
them to believe and obey what they say, without asking their meanings, and
examining their sayings by the Scriptures; whereas Christ expounded his sayings
to his Disciples, and the Bereans were commended for searching the Scripture?

Answer

Nay, we have not many such among us, contrary to the Word of Christ; neither
do they (whom we own to be Ministers) usurp authority over the Consciences and
Judgments of their followers, requiring them to believe what is said without
trial; this is an absolute lie. Ah ye dissembling Hypocrites, does not the
light condemn you for this Hypocrisy, who are found in this very practice,
contrary to the word of Christ, and would hide your selves by casting it upon
the innocent? Truly your condemnation slumbers not, though your hearts may be
hardened.

Query 14.

Whether it be not high presumption, and spritual pride for some among you to
break Christ's commands, and teach men so, and to judge the secrets of men's
hearts, and rathly without knowledge of men's conversations to affirm they have
not the Spirit, may not others know by such things how to judge of you?

Answer

This Query as it is laid down is a lie, and by your uttering forth such deceit,
we know how to judge of you: We deny breaking Christ's commands, and teaching
men so; bring in those some, and let them be made manifest, else ye are
slanderers manifest: But to judge the secrets of men's hearts, the Lord does it,
by which spirit the Saints are guided, and judge the Unlearned and Unbelievers,
the thoughts of their hearts being made manifest; and this we witness against
spiritual pride which would not be judged.

Query 15.

Whether you do not esteem the sayings of some among you of equal authority
with the sayings of God in Scripture, and as readily, or more to be believed or
obeyed, without enquiring whether they agree with Scripture or no, even though
they plainly contradict the Written Word: Is it not an usual thing with many
of you to travel up and down, to and fro, far and near, in obedience to such
voices not warranted by Scripture, but contrary thereunto?

Answer

This query is absolute Lies, as it is laid down: But that which God speaks now,
we own to be of the same authority with what he spoke formerly, and is to be
believed and obeyed accordingly, though the wicked generation, who have the
words formerly spoken, do reject the Word of the Lord now, as the Hypocrites
did, who had the Prophets words, but owned not them who spoke by the same
Authority, and your building the tombs of them your fathers slew will not serve
to hide you in the dreadful day of the Lord, you will know that the Lord has
sent his Witnesses among you; and for contradicting the Scripture, it is not
showed in what, let the slander lie upon you: As for wandering up and down, to
and fro, far and near, that is not contrary to Scripture, but was the
practice of the holy men, who spoke as they were moved, and wandered up and
down, and to the voice of God were obedient in so doing, and some of them to
the going naked, though you be so blind and ignorant, as to oppose the same in
them, who witness it a sign to such as you.

Query 16.

Whether Satan that old deceiver, who often changes his shape, being
discovered in many of his old devices, may not now be expected to come in his
best dress, as an Angel of Light? And if so, ought not all men to take heed
how they believe every spirit; as also how they hear, and follow every Prophet
that comes in sheeps clothing; and are not such in the way to be easily
seduced, who are taken with a fair covering, and outside carriage of persons,
as to embrace their Principles, without a serious, spiritual,
Scripture-triall?

Answer

Satan in his best dress is discovered by the Light, and the children of the
Light are not ignorant of his wiles, but by the power of the Lord are we
preserved from that transforming, and see him to become working his lying
wonders with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish; and
though you have got into as high a form as you can, even professing the
doctrine of the Apostles, yet wanting the power the Apostles had which laid the
Foundation, we see your dress to be the well-favour'd Harlot: And seeing it is
so, we believe not your spirit, but try you, and find you to be Wolfes and
false Prophets, and they that receive you, and follow you, or such, are in the
way easily to be seduced: and here again is confusion in the Queries, who speak
of spiritual pride in judging secrets, and say the outside, the carriage, and
the covering is fair, and said, all we say makes not against a spiritual
practice, and yet condemns us deceivers. Ye blind guides, who are expecting
that Satan may come, and are so blinded by him at present, that you are acting
his part. One of you said his soul was in the pit, to whom these Antiqueries
were sent; was not that judging a secret? and whether such deceit, lying, and
confusion from such blind guides, and seducing spirits, be more likely to
recover souls out of the pit, or lead those who follow them into the pit, let
the impartial spiritual Judges bear Witness.

And here your queries are answered in particular in clearness and plainness in
our own Judgments and Consciences; and they whose eyes are opened may see your
Error, and give glory to God.

Answered by them to whom they were directed.

To England I have this to say.
OH England, England, who wast Chief among the Nations, and Princely among the
Provinces, in the midst of which the right hand of the Lord became glorious in
power, and dashed in pieces his Enemies, and in the great^esse of his
Excellency overthrew and brought down the Oppressor, and gave thee
opportunity to perform thy Vows, Promises, and Declarations, which in the day
of thy distress thou made to God and men against Injustice, Oppression,
Tyranny, and Wrong, and in the behalf of Equity, Truth, and Right: But now
the Lord by his power having given thee Victory and Peace, How soon is the
just man perished, and the upright in thee not found, but the wonders of the
Lord forgotten, and his wrathful judgments against Oppressors, and the Proud
accounted happy, and they that tempt God and do wickedly, delivered and
exalted, whom Pride compasses as a chain, and violence take hold as a
garment; so that the wicked compass about the Just, and devour the man that
is more righteous then he! How woefully is truth fallen in thy streets, and
equity cannot enter; but he that departs from iniquity is made a Prey, and
Judgment turned away backward, and Justice stands afar off! Oh how is the
Foundations broken up, and the Sluices opened, whereby injustice oppression, and
almost all ungodliness has again overspread thy face beyond what it did in
the day before thou wast made a field of blood; so that by the overspreading of
abomination, how great is thy desolation, and all thy seeming Religion and high
Profession, which stood in Words and Forms, but not in the Life, discoverd and
manifested to be but scum and deceit in this day when God has tried thee! How
is thy Silver become dross, and thy Wine mixed with water, and the faithful
City become an harlot, in which Righteousness once seemed to lodge, but now
murderers; and all thy Vows, Promises, and Engagements both to God and men
forgotten in this day of thy pride; and how are the hidden things of Esau
sought out, and the blood-thirstinesse of Edom in thee manifested, and the wise
men destroyed out of Edom, and understanding out of the mount of Esan, whose
calamity comes upon him from the Lord for his perpetual hatred against his
Brother; as the Scripture witnesses, which also says, As Troops of Robbers
wait for a man, so the company of Priests murder in the way by consent and
commit lewdness, as it is seen this day! Who would have thought that the
wonders of the Lord should be so soon forgotten in thee, and the ways of the
Heathen so exactly learned, and the deeds of the wicked overpassed, whom the
Lord cast out, as thou have seen! How shall the Lord pardon thee for these
things? or how shall thy heart endure, when he shall visit it upon thee, whose
controversy is so much increased, because truth and mercy is perished in thee?


FINIS.

