A True state of the CASE OF Mr. Hotham, Late Fellow of Peter-House; Declaring
the grounds and reasons of his Appeal to the Parliament, against the sentence
of those Members of the Committee for Reformation of the Universities; who on
May 22. last, Resolved the writing and publishing of his book Entitled The
Petition and Argument, etc. to be scandalous and against the Privilege of
Parliament; and himself to be deprived of his Fellowship in that College.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed in the Year, 1651.

To every Member of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.
A true state of the case of Charles Hotham of Peter-house, lately deprived of
his Fellowship in that College, by the Committee for Reformation of the
Universities.

Humbly representing for the more full and clear understanding of the grounds
and reasons of his Appeal to the House against their censure.

THat in the year 1644. The University of Cambridge, being by multiplicity of
ejectments of Delinquent Masters and Fellows, almost wholly depopulated, and
there being a great want of men of reasonable seniority, for the supply of
those many vacancies; he did, not of his own seeking, but upon several motions
from some of that College, and after near half a years deliberation, accept of
a poor Fellowship in Peter-house, confered on him by authority of Parliament;
which Fellowship he has ever since that time stood seized of, with all the
rights and privileges thereof, as his just and legal possession; and has, as
he can well make it appear, demeaned himself in that charge both as becomes a
Christian, and a faithful member of that College and University, and of the
Commonwealth of England; whose interest he has always to this day zealously
promoted to the utmost of his power.

That in pursuance of the same Commonwealth interest, he did on the 27. of
March last past, prefer a Petition to the Honorable, the Committee for
Reformation of the Universities, against the negative voice of the Master of
that College; and for the fuller extirpation of that destructive power of one
man over a Community, did pray of that Committee, that a remedy might be
granted the College agreeable to what was granted by Parliament to the Common
Council of the City of London, in the year 1648. against the negative voice of
the Lord Mayor of that City.

That on April the tenth last past, being the day appointed for taking his
Petition into consideration, he did (as he humbly conceives) make it appear
before the said Committee, that the Master of the Colleges claim to a negative
voice, was not at all warranted by the Statutes of the University rightly
understood, and was besides contradictory both to the Founders intention
expressed in the Statutes of the College, the grounds of our war against the
late King, the common Law of reason, and the interest of a Common wealth. And
that to the taking away the many sad inconveniences of the negative voice, the
remedies by him Petitioned for, were of little less then absolute necessity,
being no other in substance, then what the wisdom of Parliament had thought fit
to be granted in a parallel case to the City of London, where yet the danger
was not so great, as in our smaller Corporation; their chief officer being
annually changeable, and new elected to his trust; but ours, one and the same
during the whole term of life.

And he was hopeful that these his endeavors would have procured a speedy and
effectual redress of that fundamental grievance of the Masters negative voice;
and his power of calling or dissolving of meetings, and propounding or refusing
of questions at his own only pleasure.

But the Committee (possibly not having power to go further) were pleased, that
day, only to make a resolve of taking a view of the Statures of every College
throughout both Universities, that they might be reduced to such a state, as
might render them most conducing to the advancement of true piety, and the
interest of a Commonwealth; and did then appoint a sub-Committee of their own
members, or any three of them to meet, consider, and make report concerning the
same; some of which about 15 days after, did meet, and give order, that the
Heads of Colleges, and officers entrusted with the government of the
Universities for the time being, should send them transcripts of the said
Statutes; and should likewise themselves meet, and propose to them their
opinions of what they should find in the said Statutes prejudicial to Religion,
piety, learning, good manners, or the present government, or of any defects in
the said Statutes, and the best remedies for supplying them.

Which way of proceeding, however intentionally good in those worthy Gentlemen
of the sub-Committee, yet he feared that through the suggestions of the Master
of the College residing in London, and his assistant Mr. Byfield, together
with some College impediments, would prove a way of prolongation and
perplexity, tending to the wearying out of those that were really desirous of
reformation, and rendering all their endeavors fruitless; The suppression of a
negative voice, though the main scope of the Committees first resolve, being
not once mentioned in that Order: and it being besides very unlikely, that the
Head of our House, whose concurrence was as to our College specially required,
would be instrumental to the abatement of his own prerogative.

Whereupon knowing of what great concernment it might be to some principal
points of the Reformation resolved on, that both the first Resolve, and the
occasion upon which it was made, should be publicly known by all that were to
be actors in it; he did (for the better information both of the Universities,
and very many Members of the Committee not present at the making of the first
Resolve) publish in print his said Petition and Argument, with a full
historical Narrative of that days proceedings, as to that College, of which he
was a member, together with two Prefaces, the one to the honorable Committee,
the other to the Society.

In the former of which he did with all due respect, and in humble manner, make
to the honorable Committee, a discovery of such obstructions as he conceived
would retard them in this way of their intended reformation; And was hopeful
that his publishing thereof, would both have appeared a necessary and
acceptable service, and have procured a removal of those obstructions. But the
contrary soon appeared.

For no sooner was his book published, but it was on their very next sitting
day complained of in that Committee; and was by them referred to a
sub-Committee of diverse of their Members, or any two of them, to consider of
the said book, and report their opinions concerning the same on May 29th next
ensuing; which he hearing of, did on that day present himself before them: And
being ask't the question, did (except in some inconsiderable escapes of the
Printer) own the book; Whereupon he was commanded to withdraw. And immediately
(upon one or two of the sub-Committees report) without his being at all called
to hear any charge, or make answer for his defense, his writing and publishing
of his book was adjudged scandalous, and against the privilege of Parliament;
and he to be deprived of his Fellowship in the said College, which at their
very next sitting was conferred upon another. Which extreme hard measure, not
usually proceeding from Committees of Parliament, he cannot but impute to the
evil influences of the Master of the College, and of his officious agent Mr.
Byfield, who though no member or officer, either of the University, or of that
Committee for Reformation Some employment he has at the Committee for
augmentations, sitting on wednesdays: but when they sit as a Committee for
Reformation of the Universities on Thursdays, he has (as far as I can learn by
any means) no pretense of office there, but is a mere intruder: and therefore
being no ways entrusted by the University, nor called to it by the Committee,
his uncivil intrusion into their privacies, together with his other
intermedlings, renders him justly suspected.
, yet intrudes himself to be present, a hearer and speaker in their private
debates, even in such cases wherein he has pleaded as a party, and when those
most concerned to be present, and could give truest information, have been
commanded to withdraw. And has further sometimes endeavored to intrude his
alloy into the penning of their orders.

Of which strange censure and proceedings against him he is the more sensible,
because he knows in his own conscience that he has in these his
representations of truth to the honorable Committee used much candor; and has
been very tender and careful of not giving them any just cause of offense; and
is as yet altogether ignorant that his book contains any thing of that
nature; there being nothing therein but what he verily believes he is able upon
an indifferent hearing to make appear to be consistent with truth, and with
that respect due to such an honorable Assembly; and much tending to the
advancement of the true principles and interest of the Commonwealth of
England. Nor does he know that he has done any thing against the privilege of
Parliament; and is certain he should have been very careful to have avoided any
thing tending thereunto, had he been so happy as to have had any means of
knowing what those privileges were.

And in all humility wishes they were published to the whole Nation, that
other men might not be thus split (as it has been his hard lot to be) upon
rocks under water. And he is further wholly unsatisfied how so great a power
can be in that Committee, as to enable them to adjudge that scandalous, and
against the Privilege of Parliament at their own private discretion, which no
precedent Law, Act, or Declaration of Parliament has manifested to be of that
nature; or to deprive any man of his just and legal possession, whether
descended to him by the ordinary course of Law, or confirmed upon him by
authority of Parliament, without due trial and conviction for some offense
punishable with such forfeiture; An arbritary power in any Court of Judicature
having been always accounted (as in the High Commission, Star Chamber, etc.) a
grievance of the highest nature, and the same declared by the Commons in
Parliament, April the 17th 1646. (when the Assembly of Divines desired such a
power to be invested in their Presbyteries) to be inconsistent with the
fundamental Laws and government of this Nation.

Yet that these their proceedings against him were wholly arbitrary, may here
appear in that he was neither by those of the sub-Committee, which were
appointed to consider, and report their opoinons of his book, nor by the
Committee it self, once called to hear any charge, or to make his defense, as
to any scandalous matter contained in his boook; or any thing therein tending
to the infringement of the privilege of Parliament, or any Law by him
trangsgrest in the writing or publishing thereof.

Their only charge laid against him in his absence, as is attested by their
public officer, was verbatim as follows.

The Petition and Argument of Mr. Hotham, The book though Without a name, owned
by him, dispersed by him, his Letters about it. Epistle to the Committee, His
Argument against the Order of the sub-Committee, p. 4, and 5.

This I say, that that power which can eject a man out of his legal possession
for a misdemeanor of a date of near two years old committed and punished in the
days of his minority, long before his entrance into that possession, must sure
be very transcendent and above that of any either Common Law or Chancery, that
I have heard of, p. 45, 46.

Gilb. Millington. Peter Temple.

To which though he (being not suffered to be present at their making the
report) holds himself no ways obliged to make answer: yet for the better
vindication of his integrity, he cannot but take notice

1. That it seems strange to him the book should be said to be without a name,
his name being prefixed both in the very front of the Title page; and to each of
those two several Prefaces, in both of which he owned the whole book. 2. For
his owning and dispersing the book, by sending Copies with Letters to Members
of the Committee, till the book it self be duly proved and adjudged scandalous,
he hopes will be accounted no crime; and for his Letters about it, he appeals
to those Gentlemen themselves to whom they were written; and requests of them
that favor, that if there were in them any scandalous or unseemly expressions,
it may be declared before the whole House.
Concerning his Epistle to the Committee and Argument (as the Reporters style
it) against the order of the sub-Committee, he hopes the prefacing to the one,
or in a fit manner representing to the other the inconveniences or
imperfections of their order was a thing not at all contrary to any Law of the
Land, or of common reason; books having been usually put forth with Prefaces
Dedicatory to the Parliament it self, with many Petitions representing ways of
Reformation, diverse from their present proceedings.

The only offensive passages culled out of the whole book by the reporters, are
pages the 4 and 5 of the Preface, and page 46 of the book it self: All which
seem to reflect either upon Mr. Byfield, or upon the Committee, or
sub-Committee themselves.

As for Mr. Byfield, he being already proved to be a mere intruder, or, as the
Apostle phrases it, a busy body in other men's matters, no reason why he might
not be made bold with; and if he were resembled to that Switzer, who by his
tall stature, and grave aspect, sumptuous coat, and gilded halberd (which the
Country fellow might possibly take to be a Royal Scepter) together with that
imperial power he exercised in knocking away the rude multitude from the gates,
and those many low congies that were made to him for admittance into the Court,
was by the Idiot mistaken to be the King himself; its a similitude will hold
water in the most material circumstances.

For that this man is by many of the University and others looked at as a great
man, and sought to by most of those that make addresses to that Committee, is a
thing will not be denied by any; and much disputing there has been both in the
University and elsewhere, under what notion, or in what relation he was so
constant an attendant there: some said he was the Clerk, some a member of the
Committee, others that he stood there to represent the Assembly of Divines,
whose Scribe he once was. The only grand circumstance the similitude fails in,
is, that to stand at the gate was the Switzers office, being its like the
Porter: But that Mr. Byfield has not so good plea for his officious attendance.

To all which if you add this further, that he is generally reputed to be a man
of a mere Kirk interest, and attending there to promote it (of which you have a
taste in that speech of an observing man in our College quoted page 3. of the
Preface) he hopes 'twill not be thought ill service to have given the Committee
notice how by this man's intrusions, a general disrepute was in danger to be
cast upon their whole proceedings.

And for charging upon him a suspicion of having had a finger in the penning
that Order of the sub-Committee, 'twas not altogether groundless, he having
been in a former case deprehended in the very manner, grossly tampering, as may
appear by the following attestation of one of our College, who was present
with me at the discovery.

When Mr. Hotham and I came to Mr.Needler for the Order concerning
Probationership, granted upon our Petition the day before, by the Honorable
Committee for Reformation of the Universities; and having read it over, told
him, it was not drawn as we conceived according to the sense of our Petition,
or the Committees grant: One that was then with Mr. Needler, answered, it was
well enough before Mr. Byfield caused it to be altered, and put into those
terms. Thereupon we desired Mr. Needler to give us a sight of that Order which
was first drawn, which he speedily brought to us, and told us he had drawn it
up according to the sense of the Committee, but that the other which Mr.
Byfield caused him to draw seemed to him nonsense.

Ita testor James Clark.
Therefore having these just grounds of suspicion, that those deficiencies in
that Order might probably have their original from the same fountain; he might
well think it his duty to manifest them.

And for the Order it self, he hopes 'twill appear enough out of what he has
expressed in the second and third pages of his Preface, that his design was not
to carp at, but applaud it. And as for those obstructions pointed at, he leaves
to any indifferent man to judge, whether they were not really such. As, 1.
Whether the not sending down to the University (being now called in to act
their parts in the Reformation) a transcript of the Committees first Resolve;
or at least the suppression of its very life and soul in this second Order, by
an exchange of that vivacious and clear phrase of [ Advancement of the interest
of a Common-wealth] into that low (...) expression of [ Prejudicial to the
present government] were not (though far from those Gentlemen's intentions) in
its reality a mist cast before the eyes of the Universities, and tending
naturally to make them set up their rest in the mid way of their journey? 2.
Whether the Master of the Colleges concurrence being required as a principal
ingredient in presenting of matter for the Reformation, and yet he suffered to
reside at London, where he had such large opportunities of obstructing it; and
besides the sting of his Negative voice not yet taken from him, were not of
probable danger to envenome or obstruct its progress? 3. Whether a company of
young unexperienced Novices, most devoted to the Masters interest, invested (by
their being made complete Fellows a year before their time) with equal power in
this grand transaction with those of ancientest standing, and experience; and
these probable to be abetted by the Masters power at London, were not a just
discouragement to our College from acting their parts?


And for what was there alleged by him of these lads necessary ignorance and
inexperience in College affairs, and Statutes, of their incapability of that
power of acting as complete Fellows by our fundamental Statutes, of their being
by their several relations and obligations to the Master most devoted to his
interest, and of the strong probability there was that they would act according
to his private instructions; these things falling most properly within our
College cognizance, he dare appeal to the consciences of all there present,
whether he has not spoken the truth; and humbly propounds whether they of the
College are not the most competent judges of the truth or falsehood of this
assertion.

But how these Novices came to be invested with that extraordinary power
amongst us, because in that passage he has seemed to be most bold in
reflecting upon the Committee it self; he has annexed hereto a full account of
the whole proceedings of that controversy.

To that excerpt out of the latter end of his book he might alledg, 1. That
that short Apologetical preamble with which 'twas ushered in, and which might
have procured a more favorable aspect on the whole sentence, is by the
reporters cut off, viz. these words [though I will not take upon me to enquire
into the hidden mysteries of a superior power] yet this I shall say, etc. 2.
That his very words are altered, which were not [this I say] but [this I shall
say.] Upon which exceptions though he lays not much stress (being resolved to
make use of point blank reason, not any Leguleian shifts to vindicate his
integrity) yet he appeals to any indifferent man whether such omissions smell
not something of a desire to prejudice him.


But take the words as they are set down by the Reporters themselves, and he
dare appeal to the consciences of all Englishmen, whether they are not a clear
truth; viz. This I say, That power which can eject a man out of his legal
possession for a misdemeanour of a date of near 'Twas near three years.
two years old, committed and punished in the days of his minority, long before
his entrance into that possession, must sure be very transcendent, and above
that of any either Common Law or Chancery that I have heard of.

Lastly, he humbly propounds to your consideration the nature of the Commission
directed from the Committee to these Gentlemen of the sub-Committee, or any two
of them, which was not to consider of the book, and only to cull out matter of
accusation, but to report their opinions of the whole, under which
consideration would have fallen naturally these questions;

1. Whether those impediments of the Reformation he gave the Committee notice
of, were not really such? 2. Whether those things objected against Doctor
Seaman and Mr. Byfield, might not be proved to be consistent with truth, and of
good use to be inquired into? 3. Whether 1. That treacherous dealing of the
Master of the College in hindering us of an Election we desired, upon pretense
of keeping the Fellowship vacant for College debts, and yet giving way to his
own man to get it to himself. Besides the taking with him to London a Letter,
in which were some expressions of seeming, prejudice to the College, and to
give it in to Mr. Byfield to have pleaded it if need were in his man's behalf
against the College Title: Which Letter being delivered to him in a College
meeting, he hastily upon the reading put up in his peeket, refusing to leave it
to be kept either by him to whom 'twas written, or by the President, among
other papers of public concernment.
2. And afterward in another Election instead of coming down to be present, or
acquainting the Fellows before the Election, with what particular exceptions he
had against the person in view to be Elected; to appear after the Election,
with his exceptions before the Committee, in effect as an enemy, and accuser of
the President, and Fellows for Electing him. 3. And lastly, his refusal so much
as to join in a Petition, that one made Pellow by the Committee, who had not
long before publicly in the face of the whole College, paralleled the
Parliament with the plotters of the Gunpowder Treason, might stand Probationer
for one year according to our College Statute, were not high breaches of his
trust to the College; and of his engagement to be true and faithful to the
Commonwealth of England; and he for this and the former causes deeply meriting
to be removed from his office of the Mastership of that College?
4. And principally, whether his Argument against the Masters Negative Voice,
with those other appendant powers there mentioned, were not full fraught with
reason and convincing evidence, that they ought to be declared against and
abolish't: and whether both in the Prefaces and throughout the whole Book it
self, a strong endevor toward the promotion of true Parliamentary Principles
and advancement of a Commonwealth interest were not most visible and apparent?
And therefore for the Reporters without once taking notice of any one of those
most material points of inquisition, or giving their Opinions of the whole, to
fix only upon a few passages of the Preface and Conclusion conceived most
obnoxious to Censure, and to represent those only to the Committee that
entrusted them with the consideration of the whole Book: he humbly leaves it to
the judgment of every Member of Parliament, whether it were an indifferent
discharge of their Commission, or rather the pursuance of a design both to
ruin him, and discourage others from ever appearing for that true
Commonwealth-reformation by him contended for.

Therefore finding thus contrary to all expectation his faithful endeavors for
the advancement of the Commonwealths interest (in the extirpation of that root
of tyranny, a Negative voice) thus suppressed, his person disgraced, his sincere
affection to the Parliament misrepresented, his good intentions and endeavors
for public good misconstrued, and his legal possession wherein he might have
been further serviceable, thus taken from him, having no hopes of redress
there, where unheard he has been condemned, and where he has cause to fear
the malice of his adversaries has been too operative, he has taken the
boldness (and craveth leave) to make his Appeal from the proceedings and
censure of that Committee, unto the Supreme Justice of this Honorable
Parliament, in full assurance,

That you will be pleased to take into your own serious consideration, the
manifold prejudices of a Negative voice, and those other destructive powers of
the Master of the said College, largely set forth in this Book, to which he
humbly refers. And that you will abolish the same for ever, as you have done
in the City of London 'its abolition in a public Nursery of youth, being (as
he hopes he has in that Book demonstrated, page 22 23.) of most eminent
concernment to the whole Nation.

2. That you will sadly lay it to heart, in what an unsure condition the
freedom of every Member of the Commonwealth of England stands, if like Tenant
at will he may be at the pleasure of a Committee, upon a mere general pretense
of scandal, or breach of Privilege, not declared such by any precedent Law,
thrust out of that possession or office he enjoys as his Freehold, whether by
ordinary legal descent, or Parliamentary authority.

3. And withal in numerous Committees, where no particular member is
necessarily required to be present, but any five, or the like small number
suffices to make a Quorum; how easy it is in Committees so constituted for any
just and innocent man to be oppressed by a few misinformed members, while
others, either not knowing, or not regarding, or by their necessary diversions
in other Committees, are enforced to be absent. And how if timely care be nor
had for prevention, it may come to be many of your own cases (...)

4. That you will please to consider how probable it is that nothing but his
constant and open appearances for Commonwealth principles may have been the
true original of these exasperations of some against him: and how great
discouragement must needs fall on your cordial friends both in the Universities
and elsewhere, where his constant good affection to the Commonwealth, attested
in the following Certificate, (B) under the hands of many eminent and well
known persons in the University; and abundantly expressed in that very Book he
is condemned for, and these unheard of proceedings against him hereunto
annexed, (A) shall come to be compared together.

And how great a color it will give to enemies to calumniate your Authority if
you shall suffer an Endeavourer after the best Reformation to fall under the
like doom with that of the rebuilder of Jericho.

And lastly, That upon a due consideration of the premises, you will be pleased
to use your particular endeavor, that his Petition now in the hands of a
worthy Member of the House may be taken into speedy consideration.

Charles Hotham.

May 22. 1651. At the Commit for Reformation of the Universities.
ORdered that Doctor Palmer, Mr. Nevil, Mr. Oldsworth, Mr. Moile, Mr.
Millington, Mr. Dormer, Mr. Peter Temple, and Mr. Rous, or any two of them be a
Sub-Committee; to consider of the book this day presented to this Committee,
Entitled, The Petition and Argument of Mr. Hotham, etc. and to report their
opinions concerning the same to this Committee on this day seven-night.

The Report. The Petition and Argument of Mr. Hotham.

The Book, though without a name, owned by him, dispersed by him, his Letters
about it;

Epistle to the Committee; His Argument against the Order of the Sub-Committee.
p. 4. and 5.

This I say, that that power which can eject a man out of his legal possession,
for a misdemeanor of a Date of near two years old, committed and punished in
the days of his Minority, long before his entrance into that Possession, must
sure be very transcendent; and above that of any, either Common Law or Chancery
that I have heard of, p. 45, 46.

Gilbert Millington, Pet. Temple.

May 29th 1651. At the Committee for Reformation of the UNIVERSITIES.
Upon hearing the Report from Mr. Millington, touching the Book Entitled the
Petition and Argument of Mr. Hotham, etc. And upon long and serious debate
thereof,

It is resolved by this Committee,

That the writing and publishing of the said Book, which was this day publicly
owned before this Committee by the said Mr. Hotham, is scandalous, and against
the privilege of Parliament.

Resolved by this Committee,

That Mr. Hotham, Fellow of Peter-house in Cambridge, be deprived of his
Fellowship in the said College from this time forward, and the President of
the said College is to see that this be put in execution accordingly.

Present at the making of this Order, besides the Chayrman, were these Members
following: Mr. Oldsworth. Mr. Salloway, Sen. Sir Arth. Haslerig. Mr. Say. Mr.
Millington. Mr. Peter Temple. Mr. Rous. Colonel Harvey. James Chaloner. To.
Brewster. ^a^ Whittaker. Will. Say. Gilb. Millington.


June 12. 1651.
We whose names are hereunder written, being requested to declare our opinion
concerning Mr. Charles Hotham of Peterhouse in the Universitie of Cambridge, do
hereby freely and from our consciences testify concerning him. That as he has
for many years been generally known and approved of by the most godly and best
affected men in the said Universitie for a man of very great eminency in
Learning, strictness in Religion, unblameableness in conversation, and good
affection to this present Parliament; So he has to our knowledge in
particular, as well in his private converse, as in his public performances,
fully answered, if not exceeded common estimation. And we further testisie,
that he has in the most dangerous times publicly asserted, and in his place
zealously prosecuted the Parliament Cause; and that he has at all times, as
occasion has been offered, and especially in the year of his Proctorship, with
good success endeavored the advancement of Religion and Learning, and promoted
the Reformation of the University. And we do verily believe, that as he has
been an ornament, and a happy Instrument of much good to this University. So by
the blessing of God upon his further proceedings, he will be very serviceable
to the Commonwealth in whatsoever place the providence of God shall call him
unto. In witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands the day and year above
written.

Isa Worral. Charles Robotham. Rob. Cheek. Rich. Stedman. Alex. Akehurst. Jo.
Davis Walter Catstry. John Nidd. Will. Harrington. Sam. Fairelough. Sam. Ball.
Will. Owtram. Geo. Rust. Tho. Fuller. Jo. Templer. Tho. Gibs. Will. Lynnet.
James Clark. Fran. Brock. Edw. Sammes. Chapter Mildmay. Rob. Dade. Jo. Wilson. To.
Metcalf. D.D. Ral. Cudworth. D. D. Jo. Prat. D. Med. Nath. Rowles. D. Med. Ed.
Stoyte. D. Med. Hen. More. Joh. Wells. Sam. Cradock. Joh. Smith. Ph. Meadow.


A true Account of the Controversy, once depending before the Honorable the
Committee for Reformation of the Universities concerning some Fellows of our
College put in by that Committee, who refused to live one year in the quality
of Probationers according to the Statute and Custom of our College.
Humbly represented by Charles Hotham of Peter-House, for the fuller
understanding of that clause so much excepted against at the latter end of the
4th, and beginning of the 5th page of his preface to the Committee.
We had in our College a Fellowship void by an ejectment of one Mr. Maxwel by
the Earl of Manchester, about the year 1644. which we were by an Ordinance of
Parliament, bearing date February the 14th 1645. enabled to supply by election;
but it falling out to lie long vacant, partly thorough some difference that
fell out betwixt the Master and Fellows about a person pretended to be elected
into it, partly by the Masters positive refusal to have any elections till we
should apply our selves to the Committee for a decision of a Controversy that
was among us betwixt two Statutes; one Sir Goodall (of whom mention is made,
page 45. of my Book) mean while rides up to London, and upon a slight
information of our having kept the Fellowship so long vacant, gets the
Committee to dispose of it to himself.

This though it might seem strange, that the College without being once heard
should have their right of Collation taken from them, yet in obedience to
Authority, he was forthwith admitted; only was told he must according to our
Statute live one year in the quality of a Probationer; but he not content
therewith, procures from the Committee another Order to make him forthwith an
absolute and complete Fellow; which Order being delivered by him in a meeting
of Master and Fellows, 'twas by the Fellows universally looked at as a double
grievance, of which 'twas thought fit we should Petition the Committee for a
Redress; and the Master being by our Statute entrusted with the Patronage of
the College rights, and management of their affairs, was desired to take upon
him that charge, but he utterly refused, hereupon on January the 2d ensuing,
four of the Fellows (two of which were then the Deanes of the College)
presented to the Committee this Petition ensuing.

To the Honorable, the Committee for Reformation of the Universities. The
humble Petition of Charles Hotham, James Clark, Francis Brock, and Edward
Sammes, Masters of Arts and Fellows of Peter-house in Cambridge.
Shows,
THat whereas by the constitution of our College, all the Fellows of our
Foundation do equally partake in all emoluments and power, invested in them by
virtue of their admittance into the Society; our Lawgiver having for the
quicker encouragement of Scholars in their. Studies made men capable of
preferment to Fellowships, presently upon their taking their degree of
Batchelors of Art in the University; yet considering the manifold
inconveniences might arise, by a sudden promotion of young Scholars from their
state of minority, into an equal power and privilege with their Superiors; did
for the prevention thereof wisely ordain, that all men admitted into
Fellowships should for the first year be admitted only into free Commons with
the Society, neither receiving any further profit, nor at all intruding
themselves into the Government of the College till (their year of probation
expired, they were adjudged worthy of that trust.

Now whereas James Goodall, Bachelor of Arts, late admitted Fellow of our
College, by order of this Honorable Committee, has by some undue information,
procured your Order for his exemption from this Wholesome Ordinance, which we
hope will upon more mature deliberation prove far from your honorable
intentions;

Your Petitioners do therefore humbly pray, That for this and other reasons
which they are here ready to produce, neither he, nor any other under the
degree of Master of Arts complete may be admitted to any such exemption, but
may live one whole year in the quality of Probationers only, as those that are
Statutably elected into-Fellowships use to do.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.
This Petition seemed to carry so much reason in the very Front, that without
our being called in to back it with any reasons, 'twas unanimously assented to,
and an order therepon granted as follows.

Jan. 2d 1650. At the Commitee for Reformation of the UNIVERSITIES.
Upon reading the Petition of Charles Hotham, James Clark, Francis Brock, and
Edward Sammes, Masters of Arts and Fellows of Peterhouse in Cambridge: It is
Ordered by this Committee, That all Fellows admitted or hereafter to be
admitted into the said College by Order from this Committee, being under the
degree of Master of Arts at the time of their admission, be Probationers
according to the Statutes of the said College for the first year, to commence
from the time of their admission. And at the expiration of the said year, this
Committee will judge whither they are fit and worthy of any further trust.

James Chaloner.

But Sir Goodaell with other two since put in by the Committee, not acquiescing
in this Order, He that was the Masters man comes up to the Committee with this
following Petition for a Revocation.

To the Right Honorable the Committee for Reformation of the Universities. The
humble Petition of James Goodall, Thomas Church, Ralf Heywood, Batchelors in
Arts.
Humbly shows,
THat it having pleased this Honorable Committee to constitute your
Petitioners in the Places and steads of several Fellows ejected out of their
Fellowships in Peter-house in Cambridge, by which means your Petitioners have
wholly declined those other helps they were capable of for their subsistence in
the University, depending upon the advantage of their Fellowships whereby to
enable them to attend their studies; yet upon some information given by Mr.
Hotham, Mr. Clark, Mr. Brock, and Mr. Sammes in the absence of your
Petitioners, they have procured your Honors Order, that your Petitioners
should be only as Probationers for the first year, thereby sweeping away that
maintenance that did formerly belong to the said ejected Fellows, and since
conferred upon your Petitioners by this honorable Committee, although the said
Complainants were settled by Authority of Parliament, and some of them at the
time of the said settlements were upon the same pretenses they urge against
your Petitioners, equally uncapeable as your Petitioners of enjoining their
Fellowships, had that been any ground of exception at all.

For that by the aforesaid Order, the Complainants with the rest of the Fellows
who have ample encouragement from the proceed of their own Fellowships,
without coveting that bread your Honors have been pleased to give for your
Petitioners, will by this means divide among themselves the profits of your
Petitioners Fellowships likewise; and it having been your constant course in
reference to the Reformation of the said University so happily carried along
hitherto by your Honors, to confer the proper benefit and advantage of every
ejected Fellow upon him whom you have from time appointed to succeed him.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray your Honors confirmation of the former
Order, whereby the said Fellowships are respectivly conferred on your
Petitioners, and the reversing of the said order granted in yours Petitioners
absence.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, James Goodall. Tho. Church. Ralp.
Heywood.


So upon these bare suggestions strongly urged by some in their behalf, without
our being once heard to make answer, or having the least notice to appear for
that purpose, the Committee were pleased upon a debate among themselves to pass
this following Revocation of our Order.

Ian. 23.1650. At the Committee for Reformation of the UNIVERSITIES.
Upon reading the Petition of James Goodal, Thomas Church, and Ralph Heywood,
Batchelors in Arts and Fellows of Peter-house in Cambridge: And upon reading
the former Orders of this Committee for constituting them Fellows of the said
College; And likewise the Order of this Committee of the 9th of January
instant, made upon the Petition of Mr. Hotham and other the Fellows of that
College, concerning Probationers; This Committee finding by their former.
Orders whereby the aforesaid persons were respectively constituted Fellows of
that College, That they wre to receive all profits and privileges as Fellows
to all intents and purposes, do now Order upon debate of the whole matter, that
the former Orders whereby the Petitioners were constituted Fellows, be pursued
and observed according to the directions therein given.

James Chaloner.

One thing suggested by diverse of the Committee, why they might the better pass
this Revocation, was (as I had certain information from a stranger there
present) that they were not present at the making of our Order; else it should
never have been granted. I hope the like may be alleged by many more Members
of that Honorable Committee, why the sentence of my ejectment may as well be
revok't, there being of their whole number which is forty at least, (if not a
hundred) not above eight or ten at the most, present at the passing of that
Censure.
At the receipt of this Order of Revocation we were much astonished, and almost
wholly discouraged from all further addresses: yet rerceiving the fundamental
error of all these proceedings was only the passing of Orders in the behalf of
one party without hearing the other: we desirous that open reason might put an
end to the controversy, having first given notice of our intentions to two of
the parties then in Town, and to the Master of the College their Patron, made
bold to assay the Committee once more with this our last Petition.

To the Honorable Committee for Reformation of the Universities. The humble
Petition of Charles Hotham, James Clark, Francis Btock, Edward Sammes, and
Charles Mildmay, Fellows of Peter-house in Cambridge.
Shows,
THat whereas James Goodall Bachelor of Arts, made Fellow of our College by
order of this Honorable Committee, did upon some undue information procure
your further Order for his present enstating into all the privileges of a
Fellow, without first living a year in the quality of a Probationer, according
to the Statute and laudable customs of our College; according to which
Statute, as well those put in formerly by the late King, as all others coming
in by election, have been usually admitted and not otherwise: You were pleased
upon the humble representation by some of your Petitioners, of the great
inconvenience of exempting men from that Statute, to order, That both the said
James Goodall, and all others admitted, or hereafter to be admitted Fellows of
our College, by Order of this Honorable Committee, being under the degree of
Master of Arts at the time of their admission, should (as others that come in
by Election) live one whole year in the quality of Probationers, as above said,
and after their year of Probation expired, to stand to the judgment of this
Honorable Committee for there confirmation to further Trust.

Yet a small while after this your Order granted, and your Petitioners retired
to their Studies, or other affairs, the said James Goodall, together with two
more late admitted Fellows by Order of this Honorable Committee, have again
Petitioned, and obtained an annullment of that your Order granted upon our
Petition, with re establishment of themselves in the first exemption, to the
great detriment of the College, and frustration of those good ends aimed at by
our Law giver in that Statute.

Now seeing your Petitioners did not (as Was in a late Petition insinuated) go
about by partial information to obtain that Order you were pleased to grant us
in the Colleges behalf, but did give to Doctor Seaman Master of our College
timely notice of the day and matter of our Petition, that seeing he had refused
to act with us, he might (if he pleased) appear to object what he thought fit
against our Petition; But on the contrary, this revocation of your grant to us
has been procured in our absence, and without our privity upon some
suggestions, the invalidity whereof we doubt not but evidently to demonstrate.

We therefore humbly pray, that the cause we manage may not be finally
condemned before it be fully heard, but that we having now again given timely
notice both to the Master of our College, and likewise to the abovesaid James
Goodale, now in Town, of our resolution to Petition this Honorable Committee
for a hearing and determination of the controversy this day, that both our
selves and the other party (if they please to appear) may be heard speak: And
if upon a full hearing of what shall be offered to your wisdoms on each side,
it shall appear, that your grant to us was agreeable to reason and justice,
that then the same grant may by the favor of this honorable Committee have
its full and final establishment, for the making of these and all others under
the degree of Master of Arts, with such reserve, as was in that Grant
specified, Probationer, according to the Statute, and Custom of our College,
any former Order to the contrary notwithstanding.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc. Charles Hotham. James Clark. Francis
Brock. Edward Sammes. Charles Mildmay.


Our Petition read, I being there present, was very desirous to have spoken to
it, and the Master with the other parties were present too: But our request of
their hearing both sides together speak, before a final determination, would
not be granted: But upon a bare allegation of some, that we had not been
Probationers our selves; that men should not be admitted to Petition against
Orders: That at the passing of that Order we Petitioned against, they had had a
long debate upon the matter (though neither we nor any instructed in our cause
were there to answer to the Objections) we were without audience commanded to
withdraw, and this conclusive Order passed against us.

Feb. 13th 1650. At the Committee for Reformation of the UNIVERSITIES.
Upon reading the Petition of Mr. Charles Hotham, James Clark, Francis Brock,
Edward Sammes, Charles Mildmay, Fellows of Peter-house in Cambridge, and upon
long and mature deliberation and debate of the whole matter, it is Resolved and
determined by this Committee that the said Petition be dismiss't, and that the
Order of this Committee of the 23. of January last, made upon the Petition of
Mr. James Goodale, Ralph Haywood, and Tho. Church, directing the observance of
the former Order of this Committee, whereby they were constituted and appointed
Fellows of Peter-house; and to receive all profits and privileges thereof, to
all intents and purposes do fully stand good, and is hereby confirmed: And this
Committee declares that they will not hereafter receive any more Petitions from
any of that society, against the last three persons abovesaid, concerning
Probationership. And hereof all the Members of the Society are to take notice.

James Chaloner.

By virtue of this last Order, both these three, and two more afterward put in
by the Committee (being all of them under the degree of Master of Arts) which
make up the number of five, mentioned in my Preface, were (as is there
mentioned) made capable a year before their time of intermedling in the
College government, to the great detriment of the whole College, and
frustration of those many good ends aimed at by our Lawgiver in that Statute
for Probation, as was allead'gd in our Petition; and will further appear by
this following Plea, which I was ready to have made in the Colleges behalf,
might I have had the justice to have been heard speak.

Thus far is a true and full account of the whole proceedings of the above
named controversy, which if called to it, I shall be ready to make good.

Charles Hotham.

My Plea, because it lays open more fully the whole state of the controversy
then can be gathered out of the forementioned Petitions and Orders, and will
both justify our iterated Petitions, and those passages in my Preface, which
touch upon that matter; I thought it necessary to be here annexed.

The Plea.
SIR,
BEcause the paucity of the number of your Petitioners, was in our absence
objected as an argument of weight against us; I desire leave in the first place
to tender something for the taking away that misprision. Which is,

That the whole number of our foundation is but of 15. persons, viz. one Master
and 14 Fellows: One of these Fellowships has been ever since our coming to the
College, through connivence laid vacant as an augmentation to the Mastership,
till the State can provide a better subsistence: Of the remaining 13. three are
those late put in by this Committee, whose quality is now in dispute: Of the
other ten, one lives a half distracted man at many miles distance; another
lives a Chaplain in the Country: So the whole number of the Fellows now present
at home or employed here about College affairs, is in all but eight, five
whereof are you see engaged in the Petition; and one more there is, viz. the
President of our College, who I can make appear concurs with us in his
judgment, and desire of the thing, though he will not have his name to the
Petition.

So it is apparent all the present society but two are for the Petition, and
neither of those two so far dissenting as to appear against it.

Nay, the Master of the College his reason and judgment, if he contradict not
himself, is with us (though not his hand, which we have reason to think is
rather much against us) for I shall, if called to it, make proof that he did in
our College affirm that he was in his judgment wholly against this way of Sir
Goodale's coming in by the Committee; that he had himself told him that in some
of his carriages about this matter, he had broke his oath; And at another time
that had he been in the College when his Order came, he would have admitted
him but as Probationer.

So you see it is, though the Petition but of five, yet the judgment and
desire in effect of the whole College.

I come now to the matter it self; Wherein I humbly conceive the question is
not of the meaning, but equity of your first and second Orders, whereby Sir
Goodale was made complete Fellow: Whether those Orders or that latter granted
us in the Colleges behalf for making him and the rest Probationers according
to our Statute, be the more reasonable and fit to be stood to.

For to say your latter Order must be a nullity, because it thwarted a former,
will I know upon your second thoughts be adjudged a reason not sufficient,
especially it appearing that 'twas made upon the bare suggestion of one private
Scholar, greatly to the whole Colleges prejudice, and without any notice given
them to appear to the pleading of their rights. Else were those that reside at
home, honestly attending upon the duties of their several charges, in a
miserable condition, if upon the bare information of such as lie here watching
at advantages, they may have their rights taken from them and given to others,
and the mere plea of an Order passed in the case shall stand as a bulwark, to
keep them from access to you, to reason out and Petition for their rights.

Besides, Orders from above of this nature have been upon representations from
Colleges frequently revoked in ancient times, nor was it then thought any
diminution, but rather an honor to the powerfullest authority to strike sail to
Justice.

We were indeed at first something discouraged by some, telling us, that in
Petitioning against an Order, we should but make our selves ridiculous; yet
could not we for all that foster in our breasts such a prejudicate opinion of
this Honorable Committee as to think you would prefer any Order of yours before
the Laws of Equity and Reason, if appearing to stand in competition; which
Honorable opinion of your justice, we doubt not, but you will think your selves
rather engaged to maintain, then that of an absolute power.

I hope you will pardon my thus prefacing; the Arguments made use of against
the very admittance of our Petition, has enforced me to it. I shall now fall
upon the substance of the Controversy; and crave leave to tender you a few
reasons for the preferring of your grant to us before your former Orders.

Reas. I. My first Reason is from our College Statute. Your first Order was
against a wholesome Statute of our College, the latter granted to us was
agreeable to it. Now Sir, it is your great honor, that both your style and end
of your sitting, and whole series of your actings, tends only to the
Reformation of what is amiss in our Persons, Manners, or Statutes, not to the
violation or eversion of any Ordinance of our Founder settled upon good
grounds, and no ways prejudicial to the Commonwealth.

When the State Collates into a Benefice, they give the man no more then others
use to have by the gift of the Patron; So in a Fellowship, your gift cannot be
equitably construed of more then what one of the same qualification coming in,
in right of the Founder could have laid claim to. Now those its apparent have
for the first year their Commons only, and are by Statute expressly excluded
from Government.

Reas. 2. My second Reason is from the constant Custom wherewith this Statute
has been backed in parallel cases alleged in our present Petition. All those
put in by mandate in former times were Probationers, as well as those that came
in by election, as appears by remarkable Presidents out of our College Books;
which, because the carriage of them hither is chargeable and hazardous, I have
desired some of our Society to make search, and certify the truth. This is
their report.

We whose names are underwriters, do hereby testify, that by the relation of
those that have been long Fellows, as likewise by the College Books it does
evidently, and fully appear to have been the Custom of the College of Peter
house in Cambridge, for those that have been admitted Fellows, either by
Election, or the Kings Mandate, to be Probationers for one year, not
intermedling with the Government of the College, not receiving any profits
besides their Commons in the Hall. In witness whereof we have set our hands.

January 28th. Anno Dom. 1650. James Clark. Francis Brock. Charles Mildmay.


And if the testimonies of these Gentlemen be excepted against, because parties
to the Petition; I am ready, if required, to produce yet further undeniable
evidence of those that are no parties.

And as for those Fellows that came in by Election, there was never any the
least doubt: one of your Petitioners, though now absent, Mr. Mildmay by name
(one who has more real worth in him then all these three put together) did
live one whole year in the quality of a Probationer.

Its true, we that were put in by my Lord of Manchester were not probationers.
But for that there were great and weighty reasons which will not hold good in
this case.

First, 'Twas not my Lord of Manchesters Order, so much as a stringent
necessity for the accomplishment of that end we were put in for, enforced this
exemption upon us: the condition of the College at that time no ways
admitting of this diminution of our Power. We came into a depopulated College,
all the old Fellows, but the President, and another, either actually turned
out, or ready to be turned out for Delinquency, as fast as ever there could be
get men to supply their rooms; not one of those left (the President excepted)
would once in public own the Master by coming to Colledge-Meetings, or
otherwise.

So then, if we had been Probationers, there would have been a Master and
President without Fellows, an University-Monster; they two should have
swallowed up the whole College Revenue, and engrossed the Government wholly
into their own hands, which had been a flat contradiction to the Founders
express Will; who was so great a Favorer of Liberty, that he thought it not
wisdom to entrust the Government solely in the Masters hands; but appointed two
Deans as Collateral Governors with him; two Bursars for receiving and issuing
out of the College Revenue, a public Lecturer, with others subordinate under
him for training up the Scholars in learning; all which Officers are annually
chosen in full Meeting of Master and Fellows; and besides these Officers
designed to their several tasks, the Master is in arduis Collegii, to consult
the Fellows in Common, and stand to the determination of the major part; in
which meetings we esteem nothing done to be valid, if a major part of the
Society, viz. eight at least be not present. So then had we not been admitted
complete Fellows, there could have been no choice of Officers for Government of
the College, nor any meetings according to Statute for ordering College
affairs, nor any lease to our tenants valid in Law, our Statutes excluding
Probationers from intermedling in either.

But now we have ten standing Fellows of the Society, enough for the choice of
Officers and Government of the College, every way according to the Founders
intention.

Secondly, we entered into our Fellowships, Flagrante bello, when the war
'twixt the late King and Parliament hung in suspense, ran great hazards, and
the town being not fortified, we often upon Alarums from the enemy, forced to our
great charge, to relinquish our homes: Therefore 'twas but reasonable, that in
compensation to our hazard, and charge extraordinary, an unusual exemption
should be then allowed to us, though now denied to others, not having the like
reason to claim it; yet we did live a great time, as to profit, in little
better condition then of Probationers, having received, till near about a
twelve month after our admission, not five pound a man above our Commons in
the Hall.

Thirdly, At those times the Harvest was great, and the Laborers but few,
'twas near the whole body of the University that was pulled up by the roots;
but there was great penury of fit men for a new Plantation. I remember very
well, that when my self came out from being posed in the Assembly, Mr. Palmer,
the new made Master of Queens College, told me, that he wanted men for a
supply of some places there; and asked me whether I could recommend to him any
fit persons to make choice of. Now if in the midst of all those vast hazards
and charges incumbent, there had not been allowed some unusual indulgences to
allure men thither; no body of tolerable parts, and any way considerable to
those ejected would have accepted the places; but now the case is quite
otherwise: we have diverse of our College hopeful youths of greater eminence
for Learning, Piety, good affection to the State, that would be glad to accept
of these Fellowships, with that statutable limitation of Probationership, which
these men stumble at.

Fourthly, To this I might add, that four or five of us were at our admission
Masters of Arts, some of us of great standing; now our Petition desired the
probationership only of those under the degree of Master of Arts, and no
others; for our Founder, having in Elections confined us to Bachelors; we
conceived his statute of probationership ought in equity to reach no higher,
the putting in of Masters of Arts being a case beyond his thoughts, though at
our coming in the necessity of state and penury of men to supply those
vacancies did enforce a temporary disregard of both those statutes of election
and probation.

But these reasons being now ceased, we hope an Argument drawn from them to a
present infringement will be judged of no force.

Therefore that great objection now taken away, I desire leave to tender to
your Wisdoms a few of those remarkable inconveniences that will ensue from the
exemption of these men from this statute, and those not imaginary, but grounded
upon fresh experience of the effects of this man's promotion, who was the
beginner of these troubles.

First, Those good ends aimed at by the Founder, viz. 1. The better fitting men
for government, by a gradual and leasurely ascent to it. 2. The prevention of
those distempers, occasioned in the spirits of young men by a too hasty
promotion. 3. The trial of men's spirits, and securing of the College from
being prejudiced by such as upon sufficient discovery should show themselves
unworthy of trust.


All these, and many more good evils are frustrated by this exception.

Secondly, the State is no less hindered thereby, from that excellent advantage
they might make by the observance of this Statute, to try whether these they
advance be true genuine sons of the Commonwealth, or only compliers for
preferment, before they settle them too fast in their trust; Durius egeritur,
quam non admittitur. It must be some high crime only can prevail to ejection;
but for non-admission a strong suspicion may serve. It has been the wisdom of
our forefathers to make Laws Probationers for a time; much more ought men to
be so, and surely if you saw how men of all principles, even those most
disaffected to the Commonwealth, flock in to the Engagement as to a common
Asylum, and yet hold to their malignant principles as firm as ever, though
perhaps you may deem him an enemy that refuses it, yet would you not esteem
every one a friend and worthy of trust that takes it; nor would you presently
give every man admission into your guards that had learned this watch word.

Therefore I hope you will think it wisdom rather to enlarge the practice of
this Statute to all those Novices you put in (except such few as you have
special assurances of) then to take it away in those places where the Founders
providence has prepared it to your hands.

And of all men there is the greatest need of that caution with this man who
first began this dispute; for he was once (no longer agone then last year
November the 5th 1649.) so virulent an enemy to the Parliament, that in a
public Oration in the College Hall, he paralleled their proceedings against
the late King with the Powder Plot contrived by the Papists and Jesuits,
affirming to this effect, that both pretended Religion for what they did, but
Religion disclaimed both as an adulterine brood; with much more to this effect;
for 'twas the chief subject of his Oration. Nor has he further then by his
mere taking the Engagement given us any probable demonstration that he is
changed in his principles. And therefore seeing he goes about with others
before sufficient time of trial, to fix himself into an immovable station, I
thought it my duty to give this Honorable Committee warning to take heed whom
they trust; for it is not to be imagined, he will make any great scruple of
breaking when time serves, that promise he made in the Engagement, who the
Master will tell you, has as he believes in some of his carriages about the
acquisition of this Fellowship made shipwreck of his oath: for he affirmed in
my own and others hearing that he had told him as much.

3. A third inconvenience of this exemption, is, that the present Society is
very much wronged by it. This profit accrewing from Probationers is one of the
rightful appurtenances of our Fellowships; and the Parliament has been
hitherto so far from impairing ought of the rights of the University, that they
have in the Headships thought fit rather to make augmentation. Our Fellowships
I assure you are poor enough, and this year by reason of the Taxes like to be
much impaired. We Fellows of Colleges having been so modest as to desire no
augementation of the state; I hope therefore you will not think it equal, those
casual augmentations allowed us by our Founder should be taken from us.

Nor I hope will this Argument diminish ought from the strength of what has
been, or shall be further produced; for if a man will will cut a slice out of
my Coat to mend a hole in his own, and I implead him for it, his alleging that
I have self ends in my accusation is no just bar to my plea for the recovery of
my right: Yet might those that charged us with acting herein only upon money
considerations, well have reserved that charge for those whose fingers have
reason to stick closer to such dross. I am sure all I should be a gainer by
your grant of our Petition, would not counterfeit half my expense. The truth
is, we that are the Petitioners, are through the Masters neglect to do his
duty, enforced at our own great hazard and charge to pursue the College
rights; but it is they that either sit still, or act against us that will be the
only clear gainers, if the cause be cast on our side; so that had it not been
more a common good, then private advantage we aimd at, we had been worse then
mad men to have stirred in this cause; but that which they alleged of our
depriving them of bread to enrich our selves, was a vile scandal; for they are
not denied to have according to Statute and Custom their commons allowed them
freely, even throughout the whole year of their Probationership; and the
remaining profits (though our right to dispose of as we see cause) is not
determined to be divided amongst our selves, but would I think rather be
thought fit to be seposited to exonerate our College stock of some debts it is
encumbred with.

4. A fourth and very great inconvenience of this exemption, is, that if these
men have this great privilege above those that come in by election, of being
admitted a year before the Statutable time into present power and profit,
'twill much slacken the endeavors of younger Students, to approve themselves
to us under whose charge they live, in that eminency of piety and learning
which may recommend them before others to promotion, when they see before them
hopes upon these or the like vacancies, to procure preferment with more
advantage from a higher power.

And for this allegation, this man's carriage when he brought his Order to the
College, gives a just ground; for being told by the Fellows assembled in
meeting that he must not expect to be admitted Fellow in other quality then of
Probationer, he returned this scornful answer, that then he had as good have
come in by Election.

5. The fifth and last inconvenience is, That this sudden ascent of young
Scholars from a state of minority, to the highest power of command and equality
with their Superiors, is both a strong temptation to pride and
self-conceitedness, and of great danger to procure disorder and misgovernment
in College affairs: And lastly, to make the College government contemptible
to the younger Students, and so uneffectual to those good ends to which 'twas
ordained.

And if any object, that all these reasons notwithstanding, those put in
everywhere in other Colleges, both of Cambridge and Oxford by this Honorable
Committee, are not Probationers but complete Fellows.

I Answer, That the Statutes of some Colleges require no Probationership at
all; in others the junior Fellows are by their constitution little better then
Subordinates to a set number of Seniors, entrusted with the sole power of the
College; and so the like inconveniences would not ensue there, as with us
where all are equal.

I have now only one thing more to add.

If these of whom the Question is, were either men of eminent worth, or great
standing, or men that had in their spheres done any considerable service for
the State, or were but remarkable for their good affection to the
Commonwealth: We could well have been content our privileges should have
slept a while for their sakes; we should have appeared here with thanks rather
then complaints about any indulgence you should have granted them.

But no such eminency of any sort appearing in them, to diminish the whole
Society, to make way for these men's greatness. I hope you will think it small
justice.

The first of them you have heard proved to be scarce free of malignancy, and
therefore a years time would do well to be given him for the working out that
distemper.

Of the second I think I could allege something very material, but all I will
say at present, that he is for his person a diminutive wretch, I think scarce
two foot high, a child or dwarf, I know not whether; one that durst never that
I hear of appear in person with his Petition before you.

Nor ought this to be esteemed an unserious argument.

God in old times, willing to make his ministry honorable amongst men, would
not admit of any that were in their outward persons notoriously defective; but
would have them left to some meaner employment. I hope it is not your desire to
make the Society of Peter. House contemptible.

If he must needs be Fellow, yet one years growth, (if he be capable of it,)
would do well to make him Complete-man before he were made Complete-fellow.

As for the third, viz. The Masters man, against whom we have formerly
petitioned, I must beg leave, (seeing his ambition to live above his Last, has
forced me here again upon the Stage) humbly to represent,

That, as I have it from those that knew him from the beginning, he was at
first, being then judged insufficient, permitted to have his name entered into
the College at the instance of a Minister, upon Apology for him that he was
poor, and willing to take pains to amend his defects, and that meanwhile, to
let him have his time running on, would be a deed of charity.

That from this first time of his admission, till the Midsommer before his
Commencement, he resided not at all as Student in the College. All that while
(which was about three years) never appeared to us in any other habit, then of
the Masters man, waited upon him in a cloak whithersoever he went. After that,
all the time he continued member of the College, was only one year, in which
time he was made by the Masters nomination, first poor scholar, then
under-Butler, and from thence we know not, whether by his own or Masters merit
is now promoted into a fellowship, and not content with that, will be aut
Caesar, aut nullus.

There are only four things can be alleged as a seeming plea for his
capableness of this preferment.

1. That being a Schoolmaster at a private house in the Country, he has
trained up a scholar or two for the University. 2. That he had taken his degree
of Bachelor of Arts in the University. 3. That for a while he was made a
Logic Lecturer in the College. 4. That he was by our selves recommended to a
fellowship in S. John's College.
To the first I answer, That to teach children the rudiments of Latin, and to
be a fellow of a College i. e. one able to train up the riper youth in all the
varieties of the best learning of all sorts, are two vastly different
employments; yet in that learning of his proper sphere he pretends to some
sufficiency in, it is generally believed, he will upon due examination be found
notoriously defective.

To the second, that to be stopped of a man's degree in the University is
accounted such a hideous disgraceful punishment, as it is seldom inflicted on
any, but where there appears a concurrence of some scandal in life and
egregious duncery together; the stopping a man of his degree, having sometimes
near cost the poor discontented party his life. In regard of which, degrees
have been given to some, rather as an alms of charity, then reward of merit.

To the third we answer; That he was indeed made Logic Lecturer once for a
small time, but 'twas only because there being at that time no choice of
Bachelors of Arts for that service, the Lecturer must have made him or none;
but if that were argument enough to make him fellow, we could find enough in
our house of not two years standing should outstrip him in that skill.

Lastly, to his Recommendation to a fellowship in S. John's College by most of
us that now except against him, 'twas a thing done by us (if done at all,) upon
a surprisal, with such inadvertency, that none of us have the least remembrance
of any such matter; but by diligent enquiry from others, we are informed that
he had two certificates: one in English subscribed only with three hands, (my
self none of them) the other in Latin, in that old frigid form, usually given
to such as are cut out for Country Curates, and Ladies Chaplains, to which I Am
told I have subscribed, which I confess might possibly be; for not knowing my
self any thing of him, save only that he was our Butler, and seeing one of my
Seniors hands at it, I might possibly not heeding the matter, subscribe upon
his Credit. We have diverse testimonials come often to us to be signed testifiing
only the Scholars degree or continuance, etc. of which note for ought I knew
this might be; for I verily believe I did not read it.
But that either of these Certificates contain in them any Recommendation to a
fellowship in S. John's, whosoever asserts it, will I Am confident upon good
information be found void of truth.

Yet might that man not unfitly be thought capable of a junior fellowship in S.
John's College, where the government being only in a few Seniors, he could not
of many years, be capable of such considerable trust: and yet the same man
unfit for a fellowship in Peter House; where by the constitution after one year
(by your order presently,) he is capable to participate as Fellow, in all
points both of profit and government, equally with the greatest Senior of the
College.

But admit that upon his pretense to stand for some poor preferment abroad to
find himself bread, and that without being speedily accommodated with some kind
of testimony from the College, some of us upon a sudden surprisal not taking
time for sufficient enquiry, were so Charitable as hastily to signify in that
old Latin form our presumptions rather then knowledge of him.

For him having by this cheating pretense gotten his alms, to make use of our
Charity as a sword to wound ourselves with, will I hope be thought no fair
dealing, so as to find from you the least encouragement.

Yet this is the case, and this is Mr. Byfields Godly youth, and such are the
practices of those who contrary to the tenor of the 15. Psalm. make truth,
faithfulness, plain dealing, moral honesty (those great cements of humane
Society) no essential ingredient into their notion of Godliness; Nor the
contrary loathsome vices any defects in it.

-- Hic niger est, hunc tu Roman caveto.


Therefore ought not this piece of legerdemain to be allowed of as a fence
against a fair trial, whether those imputations of duncery, that are laid to
his charge be true, of which there are, besides what I formerly hinted, these
pregnant suspicions.

1. His Master, Doctor Seaman himself, if ask't the question, will, for some
thing I know, scarcely deny his own suspicion of it. 2. Here Is one of our
Society who was Moderator at one of his exercises he performed, and can witness
he did it very miserably. 3. Both Mr. Sedgwicks private examination, that he
might have something to say for him, and Mr. Byfield so studiously strengthening
himself with defenses in that point, before ever we in private, or in public
objected any such thing, argues strongly he saw there was a weakness there;
else there would not have needed so much art to fortify that passage.
Now for my own part, I have against the person no private prejudice at all,
(he being a man I never took notice of, otherwise then as of a Butler,) only
desire that true worth wherever it most appears, in him or others, may take
place: For this will both give greatest encouragement to virtue, and industry
in the College; and will tend most to the vindication of the repute of this
Honorable Committee.

For however those whom you put in, what ever they be, may in reverence to your
great authority pass among us for current coin, yet twill not be for your
honor, where there is much fine gold ready for the impression, to set you
stamp upon Copper.

Therefore seeing those that come into Fellowships by elections from us, pass
first a public examination before the whole Assembly of Master and Fellows,
and seeing we ourselves and all others, put in by my Lord of Manchester, were
not admitted till we were first publicly examined of our sufficiency before
the whole Assembly of Divines, we humbly entreat that this man's examination by
one Divine alone in a private Chamber may not pass for authentic, but that
this further Petition I here present you with, from a considerable part of our
Society, may together with something I have to speak to it, be taken into
consideration.

To the Honorable, the Committee for Reformation of the Universities. The
humble Petition of Charles Hotham, Francis Brock, Edward Sammes, and Charles
Mildmay, Fellows of Peter-house.
Shows,
THat whereas some of your Petitioners having on January 2. last past,
presented to this Honorable Committee two Petitions; the one for making those
put into Fellowships of our College by your Orders, being under the degree of
Masters of Arts, Probationers according to the Statutes, and laudable Customs
of our College: the other for suspension of that your Order, Whereby Sir
Haywood, first the Masters man, then under-Butler of our College was promoted
into a Fellowship, till that equitable title the College pleaded to a
Collation into that Fellowship might have its full trial before the Committee
of Visitors sitting at Cambridge: the first of which Petitions was with some
reasonable restriction granted, the other denied.

We Humbly pray, that seeing upon the Petition of others, your grant of our
first Petition has been revoked, and we put to the great vexation of
petitioning for another hearing: our second Petition also which was denied, may
upon some new matter we have here to present, be taken into a second and
serious consideration.

That seeing it was certainly our Founders intention, that the best and ablest
of our Students should have the benefit of his Fellowships; which good design
of his, we humbly conceive 'twas never your Honorable intentions to make
frustrate; and that we have diverse of our College, some of them Batchelors of
Arts of good standing, others of this ensuing March, very eminent in all
accomplishments of Piety, Virtue, Learning, and Faithfulness to the
Commonwealth, to whom it must needs be a great discouragement to see one of far
inferior desert preferred before them.

That therefore you will be pleased, either to grant leave to the College (who
have best means of knowing the sufficiencies of their own Members) to elect the
best, and most worthy into this Fellowship: or to receive from the College a
Catalogue of such as they know to be every way the best qualified, to be
examined jointly with this Sir Haywood by some unprejudiced men in some open
place: and that he whom these Examiners shall represent the most worthy, may by
the Justice of this Honorable Committee be preferred to this trust.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, Charles Hotham. Francis Brock. Edward
Sammes. Charles Mildmay.


SIR,

TO this Petition, I have three things to offer of a considerable import.

The first is, That a Fellowship of a College is not such a contemptible
trust, as some weighing it in other then Reasons Scales, may be prone to
imagine: much of the temperature of the whole Nation will in a short time be
altered for better or worse by these men according as care is had of their
choice, as I could, if it were not for tiring you too much, at large
demonstrate.

Secondly, Because in this case so much stress is laid upon a testimony got by
surprisal, I must needs acknowledge your Wisdom and Justice in resolving to
prefer none to Fellowships, without a Certificate, under some of the hands of
the place where they have lived. Yet I beg leave to tell you,

That it is a great mistake, that when a man comes to you with a
Colledge-testimony (which cannot justly be denied to those that are not
exceedingly scandalous in point of Learning or Manners) you look at them as
recommended for the most deserving in that College to their Fellowships: which
is not so: those that come a begging to you with these Passes, are often men of a
desert far inferior to those modest men that sit at home, waiting upon Gods
Providence to stir up the hearts of those at home that are knowing to their
merit, to give them without asking the due reward of their deservings.

The third and principal thing which I am persuaded will prevail with you, not
in this only, but in all other cases to devolve (with some reasonable
restrictions) all your power into the hands of Colleges in point of Elections,
is, those admirable remedies we have, partly by the Wisdoms of our several
Founders, partly by some good Customs of ancient use among us, provided against
all base and sinister proceedings, which in our College (and I think other
Colleges want not the like) are these,

1. Presently upon any vacancy of a Fellowship, we are by our Statute This
Statute the Master, though more then once urged to it in public meetings,
could never be brought to observe.
to proceed toward an election, except upon such grounds as are specified in
another Statute, we shall, with the Bishop of Eli's approbation, determine to
keep it vacant; which determination ought, according to ancient President, to
be Registered in our College Records.

And this is an excellent provision for those Scholars, who by being rightly
qualified, may justly claim the right of having (except such good cause as I
named can be shown to the contrary) an Election pronounced upon any vacancy
that shall fall; and so not be wearied by delays out of the hopes of that
preferment the Founder has provided for their subsistence.

And if any man be wronged of his Right in this kind by want of an Election,
his Tutor may and ought in a civil way, desire of the Master, or if need be,
demand to have an Election called.

2. Our Proceedings toward an Election are not by our Statute to be hurried on
in a clanculary way of precipitancy; but first there is to be pronounced by the
President in a full meeting the first warning (as our Founder styles it)
toward an Election to be made the eighth day after this monition.

This with some other cautions I shall tell you of, is an invincible remedy
against packed meetings for an Election: for by this means any Fellow, not
above a hundred miles distant, may have notice to come up to be present; or
notice may be given to any deserving man of the College or University, to come
up and stand for preferment.

3. The eighth day being come, the Master or President is to send Summons to
all the Fellows at home to come to the meeting, and we customarily proceed not
to action in those or any other meetings, till we are sure each man at home
has had his due Summons; and if we doubt it, we usually before we begin to
act, send one to knock at his chamber door, who we suspect might want notice;
which is another admirable way of prevention against deeds of darkness. And for
this we have a most excellent provision in our University Statutes, by which
it is appointed, that besides Summons to every congregation given by the Squire
Bedels of the University in some precedent meeting, or by a threefold
Proclamation in the open Courts of every College, an hour or thereabouts
before the congregation, the School-keeper is to ring a Bell which may be heard
all the Town over, whereby the whole University may be again put in mind of the
meeting; which Bell commonly holds ringing for half an hour at least; and our
Statute says, that nothing transacted in the Regent house before the ceasing of
that Bell, shall be valid.

This prevents an excuse that might be drawn from the uncertainty of Clocks,
for that unsquare practice of a few men's entitling the whole University, to the
hudling proceeds of an anticipated Assembly, or stolen Congregation: For which
we have likewise another brave provision, both in the University, and
particular Colleges, viz. That we cannot create a President of the Assembly
for half an hours service, but must stay still for his coming, whose standing
office it is to preside.

4. It Is not in our College a tenth or twentieth part that by our ancient
customs can make a meeting; but of our whole number of Master and Fellows,
which is 15. there must be a major part present at the scrutiny, else we
account our selves not in a capacity of acting as a College assembly; and
therefore the Master, upon these or the like urgencies, has power to summon
even those absent with leave, in what quarter of the world soever they be, in
England or beyond Seas, which is another excellent remedy against oligarchical
combinations.

5. A day or two before our Election, if either there be like to be
competition, or he that stands be not agremial, and one of certainly known
sufficiency, we have a public examination of him or those that stand for the
Fellowship, in full meeting of Master and Fellows.

6. When the point of Election comes, we are solemnly prepared to it, and put
in mind of our duty by a deliberate reading both of that Statute of Eliz.
against bribery directly or indirectly, and of such of our local Statutes as
contain matter of direction to us in the point of Election, especially of the
quality and conditions of the person to be Elected, which are particularly
specified out to us, and we enjoined by virtue of our oath to choose sic
conditionatum, and non alium, one thus particularly qualified, and not another;
and if we do otherwise, that our Election is a mere nullity.

And this is another strong fortress against partiality, bribery, persuasions
of friends, Letters of great men; and other temptations, which they lie open to
who have not these obligations of Laws, and oaths to restrain their consciences
from transgressing: This provision has in former times been a bulwark of that
strength, that it has for many shocks withstood the battery of an imperial
mandate.

Besides, those that come to preferment in this manner, come to it in a
generous way upon plea of right, or merit, have no temptation, much less dire
enforcement (for counterbalancing the like proceedings of their corrival) to
any ignoble solicitations of such as have votes in the Election to come in
purposely for them, or to favor their cause. For all at home are to be there
of course, it is their duty, they cannot plead avocation to other assemblies:
And he that should seek to engage men that go upon oath to the Election of a
particular Favorite against the Founders prescript, would be looked at as the
vilest Pander, and his motion by all men rejected with scorn.

7. We come not to our Election with our heads full fraught with multiplicity
of affairs of another nature from that we have in hand.

8. In our Elections we continue from the beginning to the end (except it be
rarely that one with leave steps out for a small time) one firm standing body,
not fluent like that of a River, whose waters you cannot call the same for one
hour together.

And we being the same persons most what present at every meeting, have by that
means the whole series of all our transactions fixed in our understandings, can
make each part from end to end agree with other, and can if need be, give an
account of any thing done, a whole month or half year after.

9. Another excellent order we have, that in all Elections every man is to
write in a sheet of paper laid before us for that purpose, his own name,
together with the name of the party he chooses: which paper is to be laid up in
the College Treasury, that so if complaint be made of any undue Election by
transgression of Statute or otherwise, it may appear who were the transgressors.

10. We are accountable for what we do to a higher power, where none of our
body being Judges, there is not the least temptation of interest to favor and
patronize us in any our unjust actings.

11. He that is Elected by us, takes an oath to the observance of the College
Statutes, which is a great obligation to him in Elections afterward, and all
other transactions to deal uprightly: we our selves at our admission did in
effect the like; made a solemn promise in the presence of God, that we would in
our places promote piety, etc. with respect to all the good and wholesome
Statutes of the College.

But these put in by this Committee, come in upon us without any such
obligation upon them.

12. It Is our great interest to choose those into our Societies that are every
way the most deserving for their piety, virtue, learning, and all other
accomplishments; they being like to be our constant companions, not only in our
public meetings, but convival discourses, and more familiar privacies.

If any one of those precious conditions our Founder specifies be wanting in
him we Elect, he proves within a small time a prick in our eyes, a thorn in our
sides, a scandal and infamy to our whole Corporation: And on the contrary, to
have such as are most eminent for their parts and virtues incorporated into our
fraternities, is the great delight of our life, the highest improvement of our
happiness, and choicest ornament of our Communities; to obtrude an empty dull
soul or vicious person upon a College Society, is to bind up the dead and the
living together into one faggot.

When any one of a College goes to perform his public exercises in the
Schools, all that whole College are to attend him orderly in their formalities
to the place; where if it be his ill hap to play the Dulman, all the whole
College are ready to blush, and almost hide their faces for shame; but if he
perform his exercise like a rational man and a scholar, every one of the
Society think themselves sharers with him in the glory.

Hence it comes to pass that if there be anywhere a man of eminency, Colleges
are sometimes ready to fall into unkindnesses through contention who shall have
him.

Therefore we having besides all these obligations by Statute, and all those
wise provisions against partiality and packing, a strong interest of our own to
oblige us to regard virtue and true merit: the only way to have every College
replenished with men of worth, is to leave them to their free Elections.

And if those that stood Candidates for preferment, were but to be examined of
their good affection to the Commonwealth, as well as of their learning and
piety, and withal some obligations put upon the Electors, to have special
regard to that amongst other qualifications; And the Masters negative voice
abolished.
I know not then what could be wanting to make College Elections the surest
step to a most flourishing University, and every Colledgea Nursery to supply
the Commonwealth with choice and able spirits for public trusts.

But I will not take upon me to prescribe to your wisdoms in the general; only
it is my humble request that, that face of the discourse which looks with a
particular eye upon our present controversy may not be disregarded; and
further that if against what I have delivered, any material Objection be
propounded by the Master of our College or others, I may have the favor to be
admitted to a reply.

This was as far as I can recollect it for substance, that which I was prepared
to have spoken in the Colleges behalf, for making those young Youths
Probationers according to our statute, and suspension of our Masters man; which
well considered of, will I hope abundantly justify what I have asserted in my
Preface concerning that matter.

And I might, had I been then aware of it, have product another argument as
strong to the point as any of the former, viz. this most Honorable resolve of
the Committee it self, which though entitled, through the Clarks inadvertency
with an etc. cannot I think be judged the proceeed of any other Committee.

April. 11. 1650. At the etc. Ordered,
THat this Committee will not recommend any more persons to Fellowships or
schollerships in any of the Colleges or Halls, in either of the Universities
respectively, where there is a competent number of Fellows to choose according
to Statute.

Now if our Grant for Probationership were to be nulled because it crossed the
first Order, and no Petition or proceedings upon it must be received to stand
good against a preceding Order: then, how so many Petitions for Fellowships in
our College; (where we are a competent number of Fellows to choose according to
Statute) and Orders thereupon issued out for disposing of them to the
Petitioners, can be valid against this general order of a precedent date, is a
thing I cannot possibly understand.

All what I have said notwithstanding, I did then fully acquiesce in the
conclusion of the Honorable Committee, till about half a year after, upon the
fence of the evil consequences like to issue thence upon the great work of our
College Reformation, I was enforct once more to mind them of it: after which,
my resolution was, as having done my duty, to have sitten down and slept in
silence; but I have been awakened against my will, and it is only the duress of
a harsh censure has extorted from me these Remonstrances.

I hope and much wish I may not have occasion to write any more of these
Subjects; being desirous to withdraw mine eyes from beholding vanity, and
retire back into my heaven of a contemplative life.

Charles Hotham.

ERRATA.
Page 5. l. 18. r. conferred. l. 28. r. hence. p. 12. l. 5. r. a tenant at
will. p. 17. l. 4. for make r. declare.

FINIS.

