DIATPIE' PEPI' PAIDO-APTISOY^ OR A CONSIDERATION OF Infant Baptism: Wherein
the Grounds of it are laid down, and the Validity of them Discussed, and many
things of Mr Tombs about it Scanned and Answered.

Propounded to the Consideration of the Church of God, and Judgment of the
truly Religious and Understanding therein.

Together with a Digression, in Answer to Mr Kendall; from Page 143. to the end.

By J. H. an unworthy Servant of Jesus Christ, and Preacher of the Gospel to
the Congregation at Lin Alhallows.

While they made ready he fell into a trance, and saw Heaven opened, and a
certain Vessel descending unto him as it had been a great sheet, knit at the
four corners, and let down to the Earth; Wherein were ((...)) all four footed
beasts of the Earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the
air: And there came a voice to him, Rise Peter, kill and eat, etc. God has
showed me that I should call ((...)) no man (of what ever Age, Sex, Nation, or
condition, for so far the word (...) will reach) common or unclean.

Acts 10.10, 11, 28. Suffer little Children to come to me, and f^rbid them not,
for Of Such Is The Kingdom Of Heaven. Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not
receive the Kingdom of God As A Little Child, he shall not enter therein.

Mat. 19 14. with Mark 10 14, 15. Try all things; hold fast that which is good:

1 These. 5.21. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for H. Cripps, and L. Lloyd, and are to
be sold at their shop in Pope's Head Alley, near Lombard Street. 1654.

To all Conscientious, Judicious, Faithful men, whether Paedobaptists or
Anti-paedobaptists, to whom these shall come; Grace, Mercy and Peace from Jesus
Christ.
Men, Brethren, and Fathers,
I Propound unto your consideration this ensuing Discourse upon this
much-discussed point of Infant Baptism, not that I conceive my self able to
instruct you, but because I desire the point may be well looked into and
further scaned, that the truth of God therein may be made more evident to all,
that what is Christ's may be owned and more cleared to be his, and what is of
Antichrist may be discovered and thrown down, and that the Churches of God may
be established in more Peace and quietness in this matter, to which things by
my forwardness I would provoke others that hitherto have done little or nothing
herein. I have herein acted to my little ability, according to the talent given
me, searching the Scriptures about this matter, rather then old Ecclesiastical
Authors, of whom I am not so richly furnished, as many others be, and amongst
whom I find difference, and little certainty save in this, That diverse
testify that the practice of it has been very Ancient, and none of them point
us to any certain known beginning of it in the Church of God. Some rather
disliking it unless in some cases of supposed necessity, and others commending
and pleading for it, none that I find wholly condemning it, I mean none of
primitive standing within the first five or six Centuries at least; for the
manner of Baptizing Anciently they seem more clear that it was usually by
plunging or diping in their heads, save that some did it but once, some thrice;
but I question whether their practice be at all obliging, I conceive not
further then the Scripture has tied us. I would not willingly abet any
Antichristian practice, and as unwilling am I to condemn that that is
Christian: how I conceive it to have ground and bottom enough in the Gospel and
Apostolical writings, I have here expressed; if any of you see further into it
either pro or con, I desire not to shut my eyes against it, but yet further to
weigh what shall by any of you be propounded to the Church hereabout, and
therein to my self, who shall God assisting, engage that if any or all the
Antipaedobaptists shall substantially Answer and confute what I have here
propounded, I will (unless God give other and further light yet) never more
Baptize any Infant, but I conceive they will not do it, but leaving my self and
endeavors to Gods blessing and your perusal, I am bold to subscribe my self

An unworthy servant of Christ, and of you for Christ's sake, John Horn.
From South Lion in Norfolk. Ianu. 25. 1653.
A Table of the Contents of this Book.
Baptism considered in its 1 Kinds; viz. as 1. With Spirit. Page 1. 2. With
Fire or Affliction. 3. With Water, and so as an outward Ordinance, p. 2. the
thing chiefly enquired into, and therefore further spoke to in its
2. Grounds; Both 1. More general; the grace of God in Christ toward men. p.
2. 2. More Special, The Commission, for it given 1. To John. 2. To the Apostles.

3. Ends; Both in respect of 1. God and the Baptizer. 4 2. The party baptized.
4, 5
4. Subject, which is principally sought after; and therein whether Infants be
of its Subject. Whereabout therefore, 1. Nine Observations out of the Scripture
are laid down. 6, 7 2. Whether the want of express Precept or Instance
mentioning Infants be sufficient ground of excluding them, is spoke to
Negatively in six Considerations. 1. By way of Retorsion on the
Antipoedobaptists. 8 2. By showing the Negative in other cases instanced. 8, 9
3. By asserting Christ less circumstantiate then Moses in outward Ordinances,
p. 11. though not less perfect, therefore showed. 11, 12 4. By propounding to
consideration Rev. 11.2. 13 5. By considering, that some things are couched in
Scriptures where they are not expressed. 13, 14 6. That those things so couched
are no less true then if expressed. 15
3. Diverse Scriptures viewed conceived to give ground for Infant Baptism, viz.
1. The Commission for Gentle-Baptism, Mat. 28.19, 20. p. 16 2. The Apostles
practice in Baptizing the Gentiles, Acts 16. p. 35, 36 1. Cleared from the
Antipoedobaptists, 1. Inferences from it. p. 19, 20 2. Objections against it.
p. 25
2. Further opened and applied. 26, to 35 Mat. 19.13, 14, 15 3. That in 1 Cor.
10.2. p. 40 Objections answered. p. 40, 41, 42, 43 4. The Infants brought to
Christ, p. 44. Wherein is considered, 1. The end of their being brought to him.
45 2. Their entertainment by him. p. 45, 46 3. That Assertion, Of such is the
Kingdom. p. 50 1. What meant by Such. 51 2. What by kingdom. Ibid.
4. Twelve Objections answered, p. 57. Where also About 1. Positive Ordinances.
70 2. The use of the Law in them. 73 3. The Analogy between Circumcision and
Baptism 1. Negatively. 76 2. Affirmatively. 77
4. The Covenant made of God to Abraham. 82, 83

5. Romans 11.16, 17. 92 6. 1 Cor. 7.14. 98 7. Acts 2.38, 39. p. 101. the 39
verse more fully spoke to. 103, to 116 8. Acts 3.25. Ibid. 9. John 3.3, 5. 118
4. Some Arguments from the foresaid Scriptures briefly sum'd up. 125 5. Four
more general Objections Answered, p. 127. viz. about, 1. The disorder, and evil
members brought in to the Church by it. 127 2. The want of Antiquity for it.
129 3. The form of Sprinkling: And so it is further spoke to as to its. 4. The
needlessness of it to Infants. 143 Which being occasioned by some passages of
Mr Kendals to Mr I. Goodwin, ushers in the Conclusion with a Digression to the
said An^er.



5 Form. p. 134




THE ERRATA.
Courteous Reader, I desire thee to mend with thy Pen these faults escaped in
Printing, which were occasioned through my absence from the Press.

P. 9. l. 32. for now, r. nor 22. l. 14. ^. inforces 24. l. 7. for one of, r.
one with 28 for when, ^. whom 35. for so, r. see 27. l. 35. r. Matthew. 28. 35.
l. 4. r. (...) 38. l. 38 r. nor yet do I make 39. l. 27. for I, r. if 41. l.
20. for not, r. now 44. l. 10. blot out, as 45 l. 26. r. Infants) brought to
him 46. l. 30. put the comma after, for 49. l. 21. for. and 17, 19. r. ^cts
7.19 50. l. 13. r, Mark^ reads 51. l. 2. r. conceive l. 19. for price, r. grace
l. 9. for general r. Greek 56. l. 16. for sincerely, r. scarcely 57. l. 2. r.
for forbidding 62. l. 32. r. that if there 64. l. r. for, of it, r. of
receiving it l. 3. r. doubling 71. l. 19. for ye, r. the 72. l. 34 put out,
and; and then. l. 36 73. l. 7. put the comma after, not l. 27, r. In things 75
l. 27 for 31, r. 30 77. l. 25. for All. r, as 81. l. 2, r. of doctrine l. 4. r.
rather then 89. l. 19. blot out, or Christ 91. l. 19. for him, r. them l. 22.
for, forbidden, r, forebidden 100. l. 17. r. opposed
P. 105. l. ^. for in termine, r. intervene 106 l. 6. for prefer, r. press 107.
l. 5. for or, r. of 108. l. 11. r not to take in 110. l. 26. r. as to 111. l.
4. r. what account l. 11. r. nor was it l. 20. r. and such were l. 37. r.
Ephesians. 2, 2, 3 115. l. 31. for through, r. though 116. l. 35. put out in 118.
l. 23. for more, r. now 119. l. 1. for where, r. whence l. 19. for her, r. he
120. l. 20. for mentioned, r. conceived l. 23. for his, r. this 121. l. 33. for
there, r. thence 122. l. 12. r. in their civil l. 34. blot out, in 123. l. ^.
r. earthy things l. ^. for his, r. this l. 36. r. in consistent 124. l, ^. for
outed, r. noted 125. l. 5. for cited, r. noted l. 25. r. there is need as to
the 126. l, 22. r. premises 130. l. 3^. for baptized, r. discipled 133. l. ^.
r. ^eniant l. 22. r. suits not 134. l. 11. for cleanness, r. clearness 135. in
the margin, r. Novatus aeger (...), non (...) 143. l. 36. r. John 3 144. l. 35.
for then, r. them.
The mis-printings and mis-accentings in the Greek words are very many too; as,
(...) for (...) for (...) for (...), p. 22. (...) for (...) for (...), p. 50,
etc. But because they that understand Greek will easily perceive them, and how
to correct them, and others will understand them never the better though
corrected, I have omitted them. Vale.

Infant Baptism Considered, and the true Grounds thereof laid down, Opened, and
Maintained, etc.
THe Apostle advising, Romans 14.5. That every one [(...)] be fully carried, or
persuaded in his mind in the things that he acts toward the Lord (as all we do
we are to do in his Name, Col. 3.17.) and I having been exercised with doubts
and scruples in my mind (the rather by occasion of opposition sometimes met
with) about Infant Baptism, it put me upon a more diligent Search of Scripture,
together with other means of satisfaction thereabout. In which search, what I
have found, I have here set down, as well for the helpfulness of others that
may be exercised with like doubts, as also that it being tried what is found
light therein, may be discovered, and others hereby occasioned to hold forth
clearer light.

And first I shall propound what I find in Scripture more generally concerning
Baptism, (the want of right understanding therein administering much occasion of
the doubts and mistakes thereabout) and then descend more particularly to what
may thence be deduced for Infant Baptism.

1. First then, I find for the kinds or ways of Baptizing, a threefold kind or
way, all tending to make up and effect that (...), one Baptism spoken of,
Ephesians. 4.4. the washing, cleansing, and fitting a man for Gods everlasting
Kingdom. Some call them Flaminis, Fluminis, Sanguinis, to which some add a
fourth Sermonis. The Scripture thus,

1. A Baptism of, or with the Spirit, as Matthew. 3.11. Acts 1.5. He shall
baptize you with the Holy Ghost, which is the pouring out of the Spirit upon
men, on some more plenteously, on others in less measure, according to his good
pleasure, to teach, sanctify, and fit them for the inheritance and service
they are called to, and to seal them up to the day of redemption, 1 Cor. 6.11.
Joh. 16.13, 14, 15. Ephesians. 1.13, 14. and 4.30. The speaking with tongues in the
first pouring out of the Spirit, was neither common to them all, 1 Cor. 12, 30.
nor for continuance in all Ages, 1 Cor. 13.8. being but a more miraculous and
evident demonstration, that he was indeed poured out upon them, and so of the
faithfulness of Christ therein for clearer satisfaction to others, Acts 10.45,
46. and 11.15, 16, 17, 18. and for present usefulness to them that spoke with
them, for being fited to carry forth the Gospel to peoples of diverse languages,
Acts 1.4.8. 1 Cor. 14.21. and also for signs to unbelievers that did not
credit that Doctrine, nor receive the Authority of the Scriptures, 1 Cor.
14.22. But the other operations of the Spirit are of more general usefulness
and continuance, and therefore this Baptism in that regard is most necessary;
But of this is not our business herein.

2. A Baptism of Fire, or with Afflictions, Matthew. 3.11. and 20.22, 23, Luke
12.50* called a Baptism because through the death and resurrection of Jesus
Christ for us, they are not for destruction but correction, they are ordered to
us (and by him sanctified) for our cleansing and purging, which being effected
according to his gracious mind, we come out of them again, Isai. 27.9. Heb. 12
8, 9, 10. Job. 33.29. Hab. 1.12. of which though all partake not alike, some
are more deeply plunged into them, some more lightly sprinkled with them, yet
all in some measure partake that will live godly in Christ, and are Gods
children, 2 Timothy 3.12. Heb. 12.6* 7. Rev. 3.19.

3. Baptism with water, Matthew. 3.11. Acts 10 47. I indeed baptize you with
water. To these three, some, as I said above add;

A Fourth, Of the Word, because the word Baptism sometimes comprehends also the
Doctrine baptized into, as in Matthew. 21.25, 26. Acts 10.37. And indeed the word
is compared to water frequently, and therewith God does besprinkle and wash the
souls of men, and makes them clean, as John 15.3. yet I think this rather
accompanies the several ways of Baptism before mentioned, as being that that
the Baptism of water obliges to, and seals, that which the Spirit properly
baptizes with, and by, and that which afflictions are ordered to seal home, and
bore the ear of the soul unto, then that the Scripture calls it by it self a
Baptism, however this is not it that our enquiry is particularly about, but
about that of, or with water. Concerning which,

2. Secondly, I find the Grounds thereof in Scripture, are either,

1. More general and fundamental, viz. The grace of God toward poor lost man
testified in the gift of his Son to be the Savior of the world by suffering
for its sin, removing its curse, and procuring life, and blessing for it into
himself, John 3.16, 17. and 6.51. according to that to Abraham, In thy seed
shall all the Nations and Families of the Earth be blessed. This indeed is the
main foundation and ground of all Gods gracious dealings with, and
dispensations to the sons of men, and of all his Ordinances both before, and
since his coming; only with this difference that those before his coming were
grounded on, and to mind and lead us to him, as one to come; those since, are
grounded upon his being actually come in the flesh, and upon his being
perfected through his sufferings, for bringing blessing to all families of men,
and saving to the utmost all that obey him; that this word of the beginning of
Christ is the foundation of Baptisings, in all its ways, is clear, Heb. 6.1, 2.
For indeed otherwise no Gospel nor Baptism into it, no Dispensation of Spirit
to us; Afflictions had been destructions, not corrections; and so in particular
its the Foundation of this Baptism we speak of.

2. More immediately, and particularly; The Commission given for baptizing,
which I find was twofold.

1. One to John called then the Baptist, Luke 3.2, 3. called the Baptism of
repentance, because joined with a Doctrine detecting the false confidences, and
erring ways of the Jews, from Christ the Seed of Abraham, and the free grace of
God in him, and ca^ling them to repent of them, and turn in again to him, Mat.
3.2. John 1.15.29.

2. The other, to the Disciples and Apostles of Christ, Mat. 28.19, 20. and
between these two I find no difference prescribed as to the form of acting,
only in these two things. 1. John's was to be practiced upon the Jews only, and
so such as were before members of the Church of God. The Disciples upon the
Gentiles also for discipling them. 2. John's was unto Christ to be revealed to
them, and for revealing him while he was but yet about his work for us on the
earth: The Disciples was chiefly after his Ascension into the Name of Christ,
as more fully and clearly revealed, and so into the Name, and to the worship of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, more distinctly opened in their Doctrine.

3. For the Ends of this Baptism, I find it is,

1. Negatively, Not to distinguish between chaff and wheat, the spiritual, and
carnal seed, that is Christ's own work, not his servants, Mat. 3.12 and 22.10,
11, 12. nor to approve the state of every such person as is baptized, and seal
to them an undoubted enjoyment of Eternal life, or that they are really, and in
Spirit one with God and Christ, or the like.

2. But Affirmatively. 1. On Gods, and the Administrators part, ministering in
the Name of God, and of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20.

1. To hold forth, ratify, and confirm the truth of the Contents of the
Gospel, and so to witness to the grace of God in Jesus Christ brought unto men,
so John not as a man barely, but as a Preacher and Baptiser witnessed to
Christ, and so were the Apostles to witness to him in all their Ministration as
God himself does by them; John 1.7.15.29. and 15.26, 27. 1 John 5.10, 11. yea,
as all the Ordinances of God both before, and since his coming, stand upon him
as the gift of Gods love to man, so as the Cherubims of old to the Mercy-seat,
they all look and witness to him, Romans 3.21. Heb. 10.1. And so in Baptism
particularly, God, and the Administer as from God, holds forth intimately the
uncleanness that is in men one or other, by their natural birth, or humane
actings, the emptiness of all their own righteousness though after the Law; And
that in Jesus Christ by his death and resurrection for them there is
forgiveness and redemption for them, and blessing, even righteousness and life
brought unto them, which in submitting to him, and his Government, they shall
certainly receive from him, and that he will by his Word and Spirit, so wash,
cleanse, and sanctify them, as to make them meet for fellowship with God,
Ephesians. 5.25, 26.

2. To testify and declare, that neither God nor they (in case they be guilful
in the receipt of this Ordinance, and grace tendered there with) do hold them
bound under the guilt of former, either natural, or actual pollution, so as to
hold them out from his Church, or Kingdom, but do remit all past, so as not to
refuse to admit them to fellowship with themselves in his Church, its
ordinances, and blessings, as they be capable thereof. So I look upon that in
Acts 22.16. Wash away thy sins, with Acts 10.28. Mat. 18.18. 2 Cor. 5.19.

2. On the Baptized's part it is, 1. That he might have the promises held
forth, sealed, and ratified to him. 2. To disciple him to Jesus Christ, and so
subject them to his Regiment, teaching a way of worship appointed and taught by
him, Matthew. 28.19, 20. Disciple all the Nations, or Gentiles, baptizing them,
(...), unto the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; that is, unto the
receipt, belief, and acknowledgement of the Doctrine of God, as so distinctly
made known, and into the worship of him, the only true God, the Father by,
through, and as made known by, and in the Son, his Mediation and Doctrine,
declared and opened by the Holy Ghost in the Gospel, and in his power working
there-through in the heart, teaching them to observe all things that I command
you, etc. Even as the people of Israel in being baptized in the cloud and sea,
were obliged to believe and obey Moses, and the Lord as ordering them by him, 1
Cor. 10.12. and so also by being circumcised, Gal. 5.2.3. And herein they that
are baptized, are baptized into the death of Christ, to expect all their life
there-through, and follow him therein, and do in this sense put on Christ, Gal.
3.26, 27. that is, An Engagement an Obligation to listen to, and believe on
him, as they have him declared, and are capable of listening to, and believing
on him, and so a professed subjection to his order, and to worship God by him,
and take content in the grace in him, even as being further baptized by his
Spirit in the opening the truth to their hearts, and shedding his love abroad
therein, they more really and spiritually put him on by way of actual
confidence, and faith in him, as their righteousness, rejoicing, and complete
redemption and salvation, and his virtues by being conformed to him; and the
more yet by being also baptized with trials and afflictions, Romans 13.14. Ephesians.
4.21, 22. Rev. 7.13, 14, 15. 3. To admit the baptized into the Church, and
Kingdom of God, and so to have the Name of God and of Christ put upon them. So
Matthew. 28.19, may also be understood, Baptizing them into the Name of the
Father, etc. So as that they may have the Name of the true God upon them, be,
and be called the people, or Church of God, Christians; as of old the Name of
God was by Circumcision put upon Israel; and so also to bring them under the
protection, help, and blessing of that Name. For where Gods Name is put upon,
and owned by any people, God has respect unto them for his Names sake, and for
that cause often spares, helps, and blesses them, that he might glorify his
Name upon them, and make other people know, that it is better to be his people,
worshippers, and callers upon him, and under his protection, then any other
Gods, or powers whatsoever: To this purpose are these Scriptures, Psalm. 124.8.
Ezekiel. 20.9, 14. etc. Jer. 14.7. Isai. 48.9. Psalm. 115.8, 9. 4. And so to
distinguish them from all other peoples that are not baptized into the Name of
Christ, and receive not his Gospel, as Acts 11.26. Isai. 63.18, 19. And to
oblige them to unity in judgment and affection amongst themselves, as 1 Cor.
1.10.13 I beseech you, Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, (which
is but one, and is upon you all) that ye all speak the same thing, and that
there be no divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly joined together in
the same mind, and in the same judgment. Not to say, I am of Paul, I am of
Apollos, I am of Luther, I am of Calvin, I am of Arminius; to make and maintain
Parties, Sects, and Factions, in the Church; but every one to own truth from,
or by any one, and singly follow after it, and all own themselves only obliged
to Christ, and his Name, and to every one to each other for that Name sake;
whence it follows, were ye baptized into the Name of Paul, that ye should only
cleave to him, and neglect, and slight all other the servants of Christ for
Paul's sake, and only follow and cry him up. Which might be applied to our
divisions, were we baptized into the Name of Luther, or Calvin, or the like,
and so to divisions nearer home. The being all baptized into the Name of
Christ, should make us all adhere to Christ, and to receive his truth by any
one he speaks it by, and love one another for his sake, according to that also,
Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5.

4. Concerning the Subject of Baptism, the thing principally inquired after in
this Discourse. 1. I find not any Scripture in so many words say, That Infants
are to be baptized, or instancing that the Apostles did baptize Infants. 2. I
find not any Scripture expressly or intimately prohibit the Baptism of Infants,
or denying that they were baptized. For, 3. I find not any Scripture say, That
only believers may be, or were baptized, or none but such as have repented, do
confess their sins, profess faith, etc. 4. I find indeed, that in the first
practice of Baptism, it being preached to men of age and understanding, with the
doctrine it baptized into, they being persuaded to receive that doctrine, and
be baptized into it, did some of them confess their sins, Mat. 3 6. Acts 8.38,
39.
others, profess their faith, And such were baptized, having not ever before
they, or their Forefathers been instructed into that doctrine, or been
baptized thereinto. But, 5. I find not that either John, or Christ's Disciples
ever turned away any that came to be baptized of them. That Position of the
Antipedobaptists, That John Matthew. 3. turned away the Pharisees and Sadduces,
is without proof. It Is true, that diverse (yea, prabably most) of the Pharisees
contemned his Baptism, and rejected the counsel of God against themselves, Luke
7.30. but neither John, nor any other servant of Christ, is ever said to have
rejected them therefrom. John in that Matthew. 3. indeed takes them up more
roughly then he did some other, as more needing it, (and yet Luke tells us, he
said the same to the multitude, Luke 3.7.) but withal says, he baptized them.
For so are the words, I indeed baptize you, Mat. 3.11.6. Thence I find too,
That the Subject of this Baptism was not a truly spiritual seed of Abraham,
born of the Spirit, either as administered by John, or Christ's Disciples; for
John calls them he baptized, a generation of vipers, an Epithet too harsh for
persons truly regenerate, Luke 3.7
and says, he baptized them not upon their repentance, or that had repented,
but (...), unto repentance, that they might, or instructing them, that they
should repent, Matthew. 3.11. And so not upon faith, but saying, (...), That they
should believe in him that is to come, Acts 19.3, 4. Thence also it is said to
be (...), not upon, or after usually, but for, or unto the remission of sins:
Yea, John plainly intimates, that he admitted chaff as well as wheat into the
floor, and such as should be burnt in unquenchable sire, Matthew. 3.12. he
baptizing such as still received the Name of Publicans; yea, all the people,
the generality doubtless of them, Luke 7.29. and 3.21. And for Christ's
Disciples, they baptized and discipled such as our Savior that well knew them,
tells us, did not believe, John 6.64. yea, such as were in the gall of
bitterness, and bond of iniquity after their baptism, Acts 8.23. yea, they
brought into the house all they found, good and bad, Mat. 22.9, 10, 11, 12. and
13.47, 48. 7. I find indeed, that once the Gift of the Holy Ghost preceded
Baptism, viz. in Cornelius, and his friends, Acts 10.44 48. They being
uncircumcised Gentiles in the flesh; and therefore God to demonstrate that they
were thenceforth amongst the Gentiles to be admitted into the Church by Baptism
without Circumcision, (the want whereof was no impediment to him for having
fellowship with them, and to take away scruple from the believing Jews, that
they might also admit them to their fellowship without it) poured forth his
Spirit first on them, whence Peter says, Can any forbid water, that these
should not be baptized that have received the Holy Ghost? But 8. I find that
usually persons were baptized before such receipt of the Holy Ghost, as Mat.
3.11. Acts 2.38, 39. and 8.12, 13, 16. Yea, 9. I find that diverse being
converted had their whole families baptized with them, as Acts 16.31, 33. and 1
Cor. 1.16. And some the faith of whose family before Baptism there is not the
least mention of, as Acts 16.14, 15. But now happily it will be said, That here
is enough said against Infant Baptism, because it is granted that no Scripture
expressly says, that Infants were, or ought to be baptized; which is indeed the
great pillar upon which Antipedobaptism leans, nor matter they that no
Scripture says, they were not, or ought not. For what is not written, say
they, is not to be believed, or practiced. Concerning which, I propound to
further consideration. 1. Whether that Maxim strikes not down one main pillar
of theirs. For if what is not written, is not to be believed, then its not to
be believed that all that were baptized were capable of faith, or (rather)
actually professed it before Baptism. For its not written, that either all in
the Jaylours house, or that any in Lydia's house beside her self professed it
before Baptism, Acts 16.15.33. the word (...), believed in, ver. 34. is of the
singular Number, and agrees with the Jailer, and so is the word (...),
rejoiced, and word (...), (house wholly) is such, as concludes not all in the
house actually either in believing, or rejoicing, it may signify as well in,
or concerning all his house, as with them all as companions in those actings.
The Prophet calls the women with their sucking Infants to assemble solemnly,
and to humble themselves before the Lord, Joel 2.12. 14, 15. And Nineveh men
and beasts are said, to cry to God, and put on sackcloth; and yet its certain
that neither the beasts nor Infants were active in those repentings, and solemn
humiliations. And as for Lydia's house, not a word of any of them hearing the
word, or believing before Baptism. And the like we might say of the household of
Stephanas, 1 Cor. 1.16. Therefore if nothing is to be believed that the word is
silent in, why press they upon men to believe that all that were baptized did
profess faith, and repentance first, seeing it is more then can be proved? 2.
It Is to be examined, whether it be true and right or not, that we are to
believe, or do nothing but what we have some express Command of Christ, or
example of the Apostles in terminis, to warrant us in. I suppose its not every
way current: for by that rule its not lawful for a man that is a Christian to
take upon him the Office of a Magistrate, or Civil government over Christian
people; For neither has Christ, not any of his Apostles in express terms
commanded it, nor did any of the Apostles practice it. The like we might say
for keeping the first day of the week, or any one set day for a Sabbath, for
translating the Scriptures into our English tongue, and for women's partaking of
the Supper, though a thing generally allowed of, even by the Antipedobaptists.
If a man of a contentious spirit lifted, he might make as great stirs about it
to the disturbance of the Church, as is made about Infant Baptism, for there is
neither express Command of Christ, or practice of the Apostles, or Churches in
their times in which there is express mention of women's participation of it in
all the Scriptures, no more then for Infant Baptism. The institution of the
Supper was at the Passover (whereof neither is there any where express mention
that any woman ever did eat) with the twelve Apostles or Disciples who are
numbered up and named, Mat. 10. and its evident enough they were all men, and it
was to them that he said, Take eat etc. and drink ye all of this; and do ye
this as often as ye eat it, etc. in remembrance of me. If any shall say that that
all was a representative of the whole Church, he may happily say true but more
then by any express Scripture he can prove. I know no one expression in
Scripture that says either let women participate of it, or that women did; and
that's as much as is mainly urged against Infant Baptism there were its true
three Thousand converted in one day, and then they continued in breaking of
bread, Acts. 2. but that any of them were women is no more expressed, then that
when its said all the people were bapeized, there were some Infants amongst
them, in the fourth of the Acts. verse. 4. where the number of the men is said
to be five Thousand (which is conceived to be the number of them in general
that were converted, and not only of those that were converted at Peter's second
Sermon there mentioned) the word is (...), males, men of the Masculine sex. We
find again, Acts. 20.5.6. that the Disciples came together to break bread, but
that there were any women amongst them is not expressed, the word is (...), of
the Masculine gender too, whereas the word for a woman Disciple is (...), Acts.
9.36. and though its true that we have a Rule, that the less worthy gender is
comprehended in the more worthy, yet that neither proves that where ever the
Masculine is used the Feminine too is comprehended (for that's evidently false,
as might be by hundred of places showed) now that its so there, unless it were
first prooved that there were some of that less worthy gender at that meeting.
I know again that the Apostle bids that a man should examine himself and so eat
and drink in that Supper, and the word (...) is utriusque sexus, may be applied
and often is to men and women both, yet there is no express mention of women,
and forasmuch as its often used of men only without inclusion of women (as in
John. 3.1. (...) (...). There was a man named Nicodemus, 1 Timothy 2.5. (...), the
man Christ Jesus. So in Mat. 19.5. Mar. 10, 7. and Ephesians. 5.31. (...) a man
shall leave father and mother, and shall be joined to his own wife. So Ioh.
7.22. On the Sabath day ye circumcise (...), a man; surely women were neither
circumcised, nor had wives. See the like in Heb. 5.1. every high Priest is
taken (...) from amongst men. Heb. 7, 8. there they that are (...), men, take
tithes, and ver. 28. The law made (...), men priests. In all which places, it
is evident that men signifies men of the male kind only (now seeing it is so I
say) any man that would stand as stiffly against this, as some do against Infant
baptism, might puzzle his Antagonist to prove that it is there to be taken for
men and women both, especially too, seeing he bids them or affirms of them,
whom upon examination he admits unto that ordinance, that they do (...)
annunciare, declare or show forth the Lords death, when they participate, and
its expressly forbidden women in the same Epistle, Chap. 14.34, 35. to speak in
the Church, or Congregation. And whereas it may be said again, that the Epistle
was writ to all the Saints in Corinth, and all that call upon the Name of the
Lord Jesus, it might easily be replied (and truly too) that all things in the
Epistle are not therefore applicable to every one of them its writ to, as that
in chap. 1.8. That they were enriched with every thing in Christ in all
utterance and knowledge and came behind in no gift, seeing he says in chap. 8.
All have not this knowledge: and chap. 15. Some of them had not the knowledge
of God. Yea its plain, that some things ^n it concern women and not men, as
about silence in the Churches, and covering their heads, cap. 11. and 14. And
other things men and not women, as in the same Chapters, however its evident
that here is no express commandment nor practice of the Churches related, in
which there is express mention of women's partaking of the Supper, and I think
all Churches agree about it, that its lawful and good that they partake of it.
So that the bare want of express command in so many words or of the like
express mentioning a thing as practiced by the Apostles, is no sufficient
ground to conclude a practice sinful, they that make that their rule in
approving or condemning practices might make as great disturbances in other
things that are warrantable enough as well as in Infant Baptism. For,

3. Its to be considered further, that Christ is not so circumstantiall in his
precepts or injunctions of outward mere positive Ordinances as Moses was:
Moses, or rather God to and by Moses, sets down to every pin and peg in the
Tabernacle, how it must be made, and delivers more circumstantially the
commands of Circumcision and Passover as the age and time in which they were to
be done, how often and in what form, but so does not Christ, he has not by
himself or by his Apostles set down at what certain age a man should be
Baptized, or eat the Supper, nor in what Form, whether all the body or some
part of it must be dipped, or washed in Baptism, how often and upon what times of
the year the Supper is to be taken, nor in what gesture. He has not bounded
the Church thus in the circumstances of his Ordinances. Nay he has not as we
noted before, said any where, ye may, or ye may not (in terminis) Baptize
Infants, or ye must not Baptize men till they have first believed.

Now whereas its commonly objected, Moses; in my mind its ignorantly spoken,
and they that so object consider not in what the faithfulness and perfection of
Christ's ministration above Moses stands. For,

1. Sure his faithfulness stands in this, Sol.
That he discharge all that Office that his Father has imposed upon him, be it
what it will. Now if his Father no where enjoined him to such
circumstantiateness in his Ordinances, he is not chargeable with unfaithfulness
if he do not so circumstantiate them.

2. Moses was a servant and amongst servants, and his Law was a ministration of
servitude, and though to sons also, yet to sons under age, and nothing
different from servants in respect of tutelage, even the most believing of
them: Gal. 4.1, 2. Heb. 3.2, 5.
But Christ is the Son in his house, in which are sons also not under that or
the like tutelage, yea his people are to him in the capacity of a wife or
Spouse. Now whether is greater perfection to lead to, and leave at, more
liberty in external matters not morrall, or to bind up to more servitude and
with more charges. Servants and Scholars may have every part of their work set
them with more formality or exact mention of every punctilio, especially while
under none age, but a wife or son more grown, may be left more to liberty and
their discretion, and not so bound and tied up with outward formal precepts.
Nor follows it thence, that then we have greater liberty to sin; Romans 4.15.
for, where no Law is, there is no transgression: there is no sin in those
things but whyt stands in crossing a positive Law, or binding upon men, that as
a Law, that he has left at liberty and not bound us to; these things being
applied only to things of external Form and Ordinance, not to the things of
the inside and Spirit, and what flows from thence of moral practice, such as
the love of God and man with the branches of it, which are due from us, though
God should not expressly by word enjoin them to us, there being a Law of Nature
and Grace too, to enjoin us thereunto.

3. But to come more up to the business: In the Law was a less discovery of
love, and more of service in carnal things, shadowing out those spiritual
things in which the love of God was more brightly to be evidenced: In the
Gospel is more discovery of Love, and therefore more spirit, and less carnal
service. As the Sun growing higher, the shadows shorten; So the Gospel being
now more clear, the shadows of external Ceremonies or Documents are less
insisted on.

4. The time of the Law being as the time of Infancy, and less growth in
understanding, and the time of the Gospel as the time of riper years; as men
grown can take hints of things, and perceive the Speakers mind in them, when
little children need to be told plainly every circumstance: So then, the
Ministration fitted to those times needed to be more circumstantial; whereas
now having the light and help of those former Documents, some hints in
Scripture may declare the Will of Christ to our understanding, where there are
no such exact express mentionings of it. So that that Objection vanishes. It Is
so far from being Antichristianism, and a denying of Christ come in the flesh
(as some would have it) to say, that Christ is less exact in the matters of
external Forms, rhat it is rather Antichristianism, and a tacit denial of him
come in the flesh, to make him so exact in Forms. And yet something of Form he
has left us too, we being not yet come to full age, to perfection in knowledge
and fullness of Spirit, but much carnal yet. And I acknowledge and believe, that
what Ordinances he left us we are not proudly to despise, slight, alter and
change, as if needless to us, or matters to be ordered merely by our wills; but
it becomes us to wait upon him in them, not setting up our Posts by his Posts,
nor yet being more holy then God and Christ, Ezeck 43.8.
and more strict and circumstantial then he has been in prescribing them to us.

4. Yea I propound to Consideration that passage, Rev. 11.1, 2. where it is
said, A Reed like a Rod was given to John, and the Angel said to him, Rise and
measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that worship therein; but
the Court that is without the Temple cast out, and measure it not, for it is
given to the Gentiles. By the Temple of God, is plainly in the Scriptures meant
the Church in union and fellowship with Christ by Faith and Spirit, as he is
the Altar and Sacrifice, and they that worship in it are the particular Saints
worshipping and adoring God in the Mediation and Sacrifice of Christ, and in
the unity of Spirit with Christ and one another; that is the Temple worshipping:
These are to be measured with a Reed like a Rod or Scepter; these are to be
cared for peculiarly, and the proportion of them diligently to be taken, both
Temple and Worshippers; God will not have an inch of them lost, nor will he
have any defect or redundancy in this spiritual Worship; according to this men
are to be reckoned of, accounted and esteemed the Sion of God. By the Court
without the Temple, is meant that into which all the people come, (for it is an
evident allusion to the Temple of old,) the external outward profession with
the things of it, the worship of external Services or Forms; this is not to be
measured, with such exactness to be insisted on and proportioned to the true
Worshippers, as if they were to be known, or men to be reckoned such by that,
but to be left out as given to the Gentiles, the profane Heathen in hearts;
it is given to them to come in thither, to have the Name of Christ, and of the
outward Court, whence (as those things that were done in the outward Court were
said to be done 2 Chro. 6.24. Psalm. 12 2. with Luke 1.10.
in the Temple) 2 These. 2.4.
Antichrist is said to sit in the Temple of God; namely, in the outward Court
of external Profession, yea in every various Form, trampling under feet the
Sion and Jerusalem of God. And it is considerable to me, whether all the stir
and hurly-burly about external Forms and outward Ordinances, is not men's
endeavoring to measure the outward Court, and to take it from the Gentiles
(that worship not at the Altar and in the Temple) to whom yet it is given: and
if that be not, what it is I would be willingly informed.

5. I consider, that things not plainly expressed in the Scriptures by way of
Precept or Example, may yet be couched therein; and the truth and lawfulness of
things may be rightly deduced from places that plainly in words affirm them
not. As for instance; Christ proves out of the Books of Moses to the Sadduces
(who are said to have accounted no part of the Scripture Canonical but them)
that the dead shall rise again; whereas in all those Books there is not one
expression of the dead rising: He proves it as contained in the bowels of that
saying of God to Moses, I am the God of Abraham, Mat. 22.32.
and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And so the Apostle proved from the
Scriptures the needlessness of Circumcision to the believing Gentiles, though
there is not an expression openly saying it through all the Prophetical
Writings; but he shows it by considering the ground and end of Circumcision,
and some other truths of Scripture whence he deduces it. The like may be said
of women's partaking of the Supper, and a Christian man being a Magistrate. Yea
the very Denyers of Infant Baptism take, or pretend to take, this course in
what they say against it. For there is not (as we said before) one express
saying, that Infants should not be baptized, or that none but Believers
actually, or such as profess Faith and Repentance should be baptized; or that
all rhat were baptized, did so believe or profess: only they speak of some
Instances of former practice of the Apostles baptizing such, from whence they
draw those deductions, and with which they make a great noise, and easily take
silly women and simple people that cannot see into the Scripture depths, nor
well understand reason according to Scripture: Though they may exclaim against
deductions in others, yet they are full of them themselves. It Is not said (in
terminis) Baptize Infants, or that the Apostles did so, therefore they may not
be baptized; which is but like that, It Is not expressed that women received the
Supper in the Apostles times, or that Christ instituted it for them also,
therefore they ought not to eat of it: Or that of the Sadduces; Moses no where
mentions the Resurrection of the dead in all his Writings, therefore from his
doctrine it cannot be proved.

6. Things couched in Scripture grounds, and thence deduceable, are no less
truths or warrantable then truths plainly expressed. As it is as very a truth
couched in Moses his Writings, that Abraham, and so the dead, shall arise, as
it is in the Apostle's plain saying it, though not so easily by every one
perceived. And so, that Jesus is the Christ, is a truth as really couched in
the Prophetical Writings, as if it had been in so many words expressed, though
there is no such plain expression in all the Prophets. The like may be said for
Justification by Faith without the Works of the Law, as Paul has thence
gathered and proved substantially, though such an express saying is in none of
them Scriptures to be found. It Is true, by the Apostle they are made evident to
be truths, but not made truths by his evidencing them; they were there couched
and contained before his searching them and bringing them out, nay they could
not rightly have been deduced thence, if they had not formerly been there
couched. Now they that see not the truths couched in sayings, nor pierce to any
truth but what is plain in the saying, they cry out that such things are
falsehoods that they cannot there see; not because they are so, but because they
see them not as they lie there couched. As the Sadduces clamored against the
Pharisees, that their doctrine of the Resurrection of the dead was an Error,
not delivered to them from God by Moses their Lawgiver, because they could not
see it in his Writings, though there it was, and there Christ found it: and as
the false Apostles clamored against Paul, about the doctrine of Justification
by Faith without the Works of the Law and Circumcision, upon the like grounds,
and with as little reason. And this Consideration might at least stop the
clamorousness of men, that, with the fool, Prove. 14.16.
rage and are confident upon this ground, merely that the Scripture has no
such open and manifest expression, lest by their rashness they deny truth
contained more hiddenly in the Scriptures, and trouble the Churches of God
needlessly, as the Sadduces did. I grant, it is true, that there is no truth
couched in Scripture, and thence to be deduced, that does contradict or
evacuate any plain express truth of Scripture: any collection from Scripture
contradicting the open saying of Scripture, is to be rejected as not rightly
deduced; for the Scriptures, though in some places they may seem, yet in no
place does deny or contradict it self in other places: But many truths are
couched in Scripture, that are not so openly expressed in plain sayings as some
others be, as we before instanced. I conceive if those called Anabaptists did
seriously consider this (and yet this is as plain and undeniable a Truth as any
can be pleaded for) it would make them more sober toward others in this point
of Infant Baptism, and not so vainly to vapor, and so proudly to insult, as
some of them do in their own conceptions of the undenyableness of this ground
for denying it, viz. that it is not plainly expressed in any Scripture Instance or
Precept.

And now let us in the next place see if any ground for it may be found couched
in the Scriptures: and therein first of all let us view the Commission given by
Christ to his Apostles for Gentile-Baptism.

1. That Commission we find in Mat. 28.19, 20. All Power in Heaven and Earth is
given unto me, go ye therefore disciple ye all the Gentiles, baptizing them
into the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching
them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, etc. Where, first,
we have to be noted, the ground of this Commission, in Verse. 18. All Power is
given to me in Heaven and Earth; that is, Though as the eternal Word I had all
Power over all Creatures before, they being all made by me, Joh. 1.2, 3 Col.
1.16. yet could I not with consistence with my Truth or Holiness order all of
them, or any of lost mankind, as now upon the account of my Death and
Resurrection I am in the nature of man empowered to do: had I not dyed and
risen for men, I must have destroyed them all for ever; but as virtually upon
this account before, so actually now and in the nature of man am I invested
with Power and Authority, as of Lordship over all Creatures, to order and
dispose them as I please agreeable to my Fathers Will; so over Mankind, to help
and save them, and make all things subservient to my designs about them:
Therefore also have I Power to make new Orders, and grant out new Commissions
what and to whom I please, as also to protect and defend them that I employ in
the execution of my said Orders and Commissions: Therefore I command, require
and commissionate you to be my Servants and Messengers in the Work that I
please to enjoin you; Go ye therefore. And further, For as much as by virtue of
my Death and Resurrection for all men, I have ransomed all men, even all the
Nations of the world out from under the power of the sentence to death and
condemnation, to which the Covenant, broken by Adam as soon as made with him
almost, did bind them over; so as that now, that Sin and Law notwithstanding,
you and what ever Death by occasion thereof falling upon them, I can save any
of them in looking up to me; and for so much as that is the way to their life
and happiness, the only way to it, that they be obedient and subject to my
Government, and believe on me; * God having given all Nations to me for mine
inheritance, Psalm. 28 8. Isai. 49.7. Acts 4.12. 1 Cor. 1.21. and Joh. 1.4.5.9.
and the utmost ends of the Earth for my possession, and me to be his Salvation
to the ends of the Earth, No other Name given under Heaven by which they can or
may be saved: and for as much also as the light of the knowledge of God by me as
the eternal Word, in the fullness of time to be made flesh suffer and dye, held
forth to them formerly in the Wisdom of God, they by wisdom knew not, but the
light shining in darkness they do not comprehend: It Is therefore my pleasure to
send a plain Declaration of my Mind unto them, and not only to reserve that
privilege to the people of Israel, as formerly, (the partition wall between
them and all other Nations being broken down by my sufferings.) Ephesians. 2.15.
Therefore, Go ye, my chosen servants, and Ambassadors, Disciple all the
Gentiles, baptizing them into the Name, etc.

Here then secondly, we have the Commission it self, wherein baptism was first
by our Savior appointed to the Gentiles, as a medium of their being discipled
to him. I confess baptism was practiced before, and that too upon all the
people, (...), Luke 3.21. people of every sort at least, a word large enough to
include infants too, Deuteronomy. 31.12. Luke 9.13. with Matthew. 14.21. Jude 5. but to
our purpose this commission is more pertinent, because it was given for the
baptizing of the Gentiles, and discipling them, and so its rather to be read,
All the Gentiles, (as the same phrase, (...), is translated in other places, as
Acts 15.17. Romans 15.11. 2 Timothy 4.17. and the word (...), Gentiles, commonly)
they having sufficient warrant before for discipling and baptizing the Jews in
the former practicing of baptism by John, and themselves upon them, and the
commission given them, Matthew. 10. when the Gentiles were expressly excluded. No
other being to be baptized, but such as were of the visible Church of God
before, Children of the Kingdom, upon whom the name of God was called, and so
baptism was not to them the way of taking into the Church and Kingdom of God,
but for further instructing, and taking in further them that were somewhat
instructed in it before: for that is clear that the people of the Jews were
already in the visible Church, the Vineyard of God, and Children of the
Kingdom, as in Matthew. 8.12. and 21.42, 43. The hedge was yet about them, and the
clouds rained upon them, etc.

But now unto the Gentiles, (not fore-proselited and circumcised) baptism was
the way of taking them in, and declaring and owning them to pertain to the
Church: nor do we read of any Gentile, or Heathen, coming into the visible Body
and Company of the Church, to be accounted of them by any other way or medium
of outward institution after Christ's resurrection, circumcision being not
practiced upon them and theirs in their admission, as was formerly used in
proseliting them. Indeed that the false Apostles stood for, and would have had
the way of their entrance and admission still: in which two it is observable,
that they make no mention of circumcising their infants, but that they, the
Disciples, ought to be circumcised, as was the manner of Moses; and Paul
speaking to the Galathians, says, They constrain you, and would have you to be
circumcised, Gal. 6.12, 13. not mentioning infants, and yet it is certain that
it was the manner of Moses to circumcise the infant male of all that came in,
and so by that rule they are included under the words You, and Disciples also;
they were reckoned as parts of them in the external profession. A man might as
colourably wrangle and plead that the false Apostles desired only the
circumcision of the actual believers of their Gentiles, and not of their
infants, because they never mention their infants, and because Paul says, But
they desire to have you circumcised; as that they baptized such only, and not
infants, because there infants are not expressed in the mention making of their
baptism. If the Apostle include their infants in the word [you] speaking of the
way of admission into the Church which the false Apostles pleaded for, then I
see no reason or colorable ground to exclude them, when they speak of the way
in which the true Apostles did admit them. Nor find I any such argument used by
the Apostle against the Gentiles circumcision (which yet were it as the
Antipedobaptists say, would have been a good one) as this, viz. that in case we
admit circumcision according to the custom of Moses, then we must bring in
infants too into the Church again, which are as incapable of being members of
the Church now, as dogs or swine, (as some of the Antipedobaptists are ready
over rashly to say,) this would presently have struck the nail on the head; for
they that were according to the will of God circumcised, were taken thereby
into the Church of God, the Kingdom of Heaven, according to the outward visible
Court. Had this been a known principle or maxim amongst the professors of
Christ, and had Christ and his Apostles taught them such doctrine, as that
children are to be no part of the Church instituted by him, there had been no
ground for the false Apostles to have stood upon circumcision after the manner
of Moses. And no doubt but the Apostles would have made use of such an argument
against them, had there been such a Maxim, seeing it would easily and
evidently have confuted them, and served to settle the Church in peace in that
hot contention. The exclusion of children from admission into the visible
Church, would have broken in pieces the ordinance of circumcision, that
appointing all the male children to be circumcised, and so to be admitted into
the visible Church with their parents. The general silence of this argument
against them in so hot a contest, and when the Apostles writ so much to the
believers to settle their minds against circumcision, and its doctrine, as also
of the Jews, and false Apostles, taxing the Apostles with casting out, and
rejecting children, is to me as good or better an argument to prove that there
was no such Maxim, as the exclusion of infants from the visible Church, then
the general silence of infants baptized is to prove that there was no infants
admitted by baptism. But to return to the Commission for discipling the
Gentiles, Go, disciple all the Gentiles, etc.

The Anti-pedobaptists find two Arguments here to exclude children.

1. That our Savior says, they are first to be discipled before they be
baptized, and that children cannot be.

2. That the word them, [(...)] agrees not with [(...)] Nations, or Gentiles,
it being neuter, but the word (...), masculine; but it rather agrees with the
word (...), included in the word (...), them, Disciples. Of these two things I
confess they make a great noise, but when they are examined there appears no
cause for it. For,

1. To the first it may be said, not only, 1. The order of words is not always
the order of actions therein spoken, for if so, then John baptized before he
preached (which they will in no wise admit:) For it is said, Mark 1.4. That
John was in the wilderness baptizing and preaching the baptism of repentance.
If the order of words show the order of actions, then John baptizing before he
preached the doctrine of baptism, baptized some that did not believe that
doctrine; for how should they believe it before it was preached, and so by that
way of arguing they get nothing, and yet this they often make use of, as again
in that of Mar. 16.16. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. See,
say they, believing is before baptizing, no man must be baptized till he have
first believed, not considering that by the same way of arguing, men must first
confess with their mouth to salvation that Christ is the Lord, before they
heartily believe to righteousness that God has raised him from the dead;
because such is the order of words, Romans 10.9. If thou confess with thy mouth
that Jesus is the Lord, and believe in thy heart that God has raised him from
the dead, thou shall be saved. And yet who sees not that that should be a vain
confession of his Lordship, and not to salvation, as ver. 10. that proceeds
from a heart, not first believing that Lord. And by the like way of reasoning,
when our Savior says, Joh. 10.16. Other sheep I have that are not of this
fold, them must I also bring, and they shall hear my voice; because he first
mentions bringing them, before their hearing his voice: it should follow that
they must first be brought by him, (namely, to that fold, as follows, and there
shall be one fold, etc.) before they hear his voice. Well then, let us so take
it, but by what manner of action must they then be brought by him to the fold,
that is, to his Church, whereof his Disciples were the members: if not by
causing them to hear his voice, for that follows after their being brought,
(though usually to that he himself goes out to them with his servants, to call
and bring them in, Prove. 9.3, 4. with Luke 14.21.) then sure it is by his
servants baptizing them in their infancy, before they be capable of hearing
him, for by what other action men should be brought to his fold before hearing
him, I cannot tell, and if that be the action to go before, let it pass for an
impertinent place to our business, but so we shall get much more by the
bargain, if not, let them show us how else he brings them before they hear him,
or else quit this manner of reasoning from the order of words. But I say not
only this may be replied to it: but also,

2. It Is not true, that Christ bids them make them Disciples first, and then
afterward baptize them. For the words are not going Disciple and baptize, but
going Disciple, baptizing, etc. And it is usual in such manner of speaking, for
the Participle to declare the manner of or some mediate act unto the thing
spoken of in the precedent Verb: as to give some instances. The Apostle, Tit.
1.11. says of the Circumcision, That they subvert whole houses, teaching
things that they ought not, etc. was not teaching things they ought not the way
by which they subverted whole houses? not that they first subverted them, and
then taught things they ought not; but first taught things they ought not, and
then, yea thereby, subverted them: so in the same Chapter, describing a Bishop,
he says, He must be blameless as the Steward of God, not self-willed, etc. a
lover of good men, sober, just, holy, temperate, holding fast the words of
life. Will any rational man say, that he must first be all those things before
he hold fast the word, or rather, that this is the way to be all that, holy,
blamless, just, etc. So Heb. 12.1, 2. Let us run with patience the race set
before us, looking unto Jesus. Must men first run with patience before they
look to Christ, or rather is not this looking the way and means to that patient
running. Running with patience 2 springs from that looking to Jesus, The like
may be seen in Matthew. 14.25. and 15.9 30. and 20.8. and 21.22. and 22.12.29.
etc.
not e contra, So 2 Timothy 3.13. Wiked men, and deceivers shall wax worse and
worse, deceiving and being deceived. Deceiving and being deceived, is that in
which, and by which they wax worse and worse. The like is in the Commission
formerly given them for preaching to the Jews, Mat. 10.7. Going, (...), Preach,
saying, the Kingdom of God is at hand, and ver. 5. He sent them away charging,
or having charged them, saying, Into the way of the Gentiles, enter not. I
might multiply like speeches to this purpose, Ephesians. 5.15, 16.26. and
6.14.15.16. etc. but I shall only add one or two of their own urging, viz.
Matthew. 3.6. The people were baptized of John in Jordan confessing their sins.
Do they gather thence, that because confessing their sins, follows these words,
they were baptized, that therefore they did not confess their sins, till after
they were baptized, or that men ought not so to do till then, or rather, do
they not say, that they first confessed their sins, and upon that were
baptized; and so that the Participle following the Verb, holds forth an act
done before the act spoken of in the Verb. So when its said, Luke 7.29. The
Publicans justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John, say they, not
thence that the being baptized was the way in which they justified God. I might
mention also, Acts 8.3. Saul made havoc of the Church, entering into every
house, haling out men and women, and committing them to prison. Could we not
have understood such a speech as this, Go, proselite the Gentiles, circumcising
them, teaching them to observe all the Law of Moses: And can we not in like
manner understand this, Go, disciple all the Gentiles, baptizing them, and
teaching them to observe all things, that I have commanded you. Disciple them
in this way, viz. Baptizing them into the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, and teaching them to observe what I have commanded you.
So that its evident, that the phrase disciple, Baptizing, holds forth, for
infers at least no such understanding of what is said, as that they ought first
first to be discipled, by teaching and brought to actual believing that were to
be baptized with water by them.

To the second, that the word (...) not agreeing in Gender, with the word
(...), but rather with (...), instructs us, that only Disciples, such as
profess faith and repentance ought to be baptized, its very weak. For the
Scripture usually puts the following Adjective, or Relative to (...) in the
Masculine Gender, as having more respect to the nature of the thing signified,
viz. mankind, or Gentiles, (...), then to the word signifying, as in Acts
13.48. it has for its following Adjectives, (...) and (...), both of the
Masculine Gender. In Acts 15.17. we find, (...) and in Chap. 21. 25. (...). In
Chap. 26.17. (...). In Chap. 28.28. (...). In Ephesians. 4.18. (...), etc. Rev.
2.26. and 19.15. and 20.8. in all those places its relative following it is
(...), and those are all the places save one or two in which the Relative to
that word is p^r^picuously discernable in its Gender: so that unless we will
say, that the Gentiles which Paul was sent to, and that had their
understandings darkened, and that Christ shall rule over with an iron rod, and
that Satan shall deceive, and gather together to battle against the Saints, are
all people fore-discipled, believers, or professors of faith and repentance,
that observation of the change of Gender will do nothing.

Now these two main Fortresses of the Antipedobaptists being smitten down, the
Commission will not prove their assertion, nor hinder the taking in of Infants
unto Baptism. For now it appears, that (...), all the Gentiles were to be
discipled by baptism and instruction. So that this word is as large as (...),
to include women to the Supper, to include children to this discipling, and
baptism; for there is no doubt but there were children too of the Gentiles and
Heathen; and of them there is no exception or exclusion. They were to bring
into the house all that they found, as in Matthew. 22.9.10. And it may be minded,
that neither here nor elsewhere its said, He that believes shall be baptized,
and till a man believes let him not be baptized, but going disciple all the
Gentiles, baptizing them, etc. So that we may note, that the Apostles had
authority and commission for discipling any Gentile, baptizing him into the
Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, etc. Their Doctrine and Baptism
concerned all, and were free for all, and ought to have been submitted unto by
all without exception of any one or other, and to disciple all thus to the
utmost of their power given them they were to endeavor. And this agrees with,
and is confirmed by, yea, and in part is grounded upon that truth delivered by
the Apostle in 2 Cor. 5.19 where the Apostle writes the Commission given to
them of God, with the reason and end of it. God (says he) was in Christ,
reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their trespasses to them, and
has put in us the word of reconciliation. Now we therefore as Ambassadors for
Christ, as if God did beseech you by us we pray you in Christ's stead be ye
reconciled unto God. In which we are to mind, whom God was reconciling, and to
whom he sent his servants to bring them in, and that is the world, which
compared with Romans 11.12, 15. appears to be Gentiles, the residue of the world
beyond and beside his people the Jews. 2. Its to be minded wherein their enmity
stood, and what there reconciling is there spoken of, now their enmity lay both
on their parts, especially in that they knew not, nor regarded God, nor
observed his Law, and ways given to his people, nor came in to be one with
them: and then on his part in this, that he admitted them not to fellowship
with him in the Commonwealth of Israel, and privileges of his people, and the
reconciling them stood in this, That 1. He in Christ brake down the partition
wall, the Law of Ordinances that stood against them in their uncircumcised
condition, and kept them from the privileges of his Church, and he imputed not
their trespasses so against them, to them, as to exclude them any longer, but
opened his Kingdom to them also equally as to the Jews, that were naturally as
by descent from Abraham, and by Circumcision therein, yea sent out his servants
to invite them to come in to his house, and feast therein prepared, and to be
one of those that refused not their own mercy out of fullenness amongst the
Jews already therein. Matthew. 22.9.
Now whom did the partition wall the enmity from the Commandments in the Law
of Ordinances debar from the Commonwealth of Israel, and so from fellowship
with God therein? were they not all the Gentiles, one and other, all the
uncircumcision in the flesh? And whom did Christ break it down for? was it not
the World, the whole Body of the Gentiles? Was not, and is not the Law of
Ordinances taken from them all, so as that the passage into his House and
Commonwealth is free and open for them all: And whom then was God in Christ
reconciling to himself, not imputing their trespasses, Mark. 6.15.
was it not the world, all the Gentiles? Did he not send his servants with the
Word of his Kingdom to them all? to hold it forth to all, to every creature, to
all Nations, without limitation and restriction, and to reconcile ministerially
them, that God in Christ (as in him the partition wall is broken down, and the
enmity slain) was reconciling: which Ministry of Reconciliation is executed in
discipling them, baptizing them, etc. And shall we now set up a partition wall
between the Church of God, and any Gentiles that shut not out themselves by
their wilful rejection? Or shall we say, That Infants are not Gentiles, or are
not of the World when God was in Christ reconciling, and to whom his servants
were sent: Did Christ leave a partition wall yet standing between the Church of
God, and them, that they should not take them in into unity and fellowship with
them? If the servants of Christ should keep them out of, and at a distance from
the Church, sure they should be far from putting in execution their Commission
for reconciling, discipling and baptizing them. Consider this seriously, and so
if the Antipedobaptists deny not Christ come in the flesh, and to have broken
down the partition wall, or at least that God was in Christ reconciling the
world to himself, and bringing them to himself in his Church, and Kingdom.

But then its objected, that then the practice of the Spaniards forcing Droves
of Indians to Baptism is warrantable, Mr. Tom.
and that the Disciples needed to have done nothing else in observance of that
Command of discipling, but to baptize, which would serve for a good plea for
non-officiating and non-preaching Priests.

But neither of these follow thence. Not the first, Gentiles, baptizing them,
etc. yet had they no warrant to force any to it, nor did God furnish them with
power thereunto, nor had they in times past to proselite by force any the
Inhabitants of the Nations, they were instructed into that before. For when
Christ first sent them out, he bid them tender their peace to men, and if a
house was worthy, that is, if there was a Son of peace there, one that peace
prevailed with, their peace should rest upon him: yea, if the Householder did
accept their message, and submit unto it, their peace was to rest upon him, and
his house; as appears by comparing Matthew. 10.12, 13. with Luke 10.5, 6. and
19.9. but in case any house or City received them not, then were they to depart
from it, and shake off the dust of their feet against it, for a testimony
against them, that they came to disciple them, and bring them into subjection
to the faith of Jesus Christ, but they refused it: which direction also we find
that they practiced, Acts 13. 51. and 16.14, 15.32, 33. etc. so that here is no
room for allowing that forcing: we must distinguish between the persons whom
they had authority to disciple, baptizing, and the course they were to take for
exercise and execution of that authority, and then that Objection vanishes.

Nor 2. Follows it, that then the Apostles then, or the Gospel-preachers now,
had nothing else to do for putting that Commission in practice, but outwardly
to baptize; for they had something to do to bring them that were not of
themselves acquainted with this, and that were naturally averse to it, to be
willing to yield up themselves, and their children to walk in this way, and
follow after this Name unto which they were to baptize them: They must use
persuasions perhaps to Kings and Rulers, not to use their power to resist their
discipling of their Subjects to this Name, and to subject themselves, and all
their government to it, and so to Masters of Families, and Parents, to yield up
themselves unto this Name to be baptized unto it, and to observe the things of
it, and yield up their little ones also to be brought up therein; for that is
plain they were to take none away by force from under any of their parents, but
as they yielded up themselves, or was yielded up to the institution and nurture
of the Lord by them: yea, in that it is said, Disciple, baptizing them into the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; it is plain enough,
that they were to declare and unfold that Name to men that they might know
whereto they baptized them, and theirs, and to what they were to instruct and
bring up their children, which to men grown must be before baptizing them with
water, as was the constant practice of the Disciples formerly, and of our
Savior himself, Joh. 4.1. yea, and of the Pharisees too in proseliting men to
their religion, though they proselited their children also with them. But this
Objection implies, that the framers of it thought there was none but Infants in
the world, and so none that could or would oppose their endeavors to disciple
them, when Christ gave out this Commission; or that this Baptism was not for
discipling them to the Name of Christ, and so to be done as a means to bring
the parties baptized to be subject to his Government, externally at the least,
and to profess his Doctrine; nor minded they what follows in the Commission,
that they are to teach them too to observe Christ's Commands, as of old the
Proselites, even after Circumcision, were to be taught those of Moses. But for
seeing better into this, let us consider a little the force of the word (...).

(...) is of (...), and that of (...), disco: we translate it to teach, but not
so properly, as all that well have minded the force of the word confess. Its to
disciple, to make scholars, or to bring to learn, so that they may become
Disciples, and so the Apostles were to endeavor to bring all Nations, or all
the Gentiles to that, any of them they might bring to it, and all of them ought
so far to have become subject to their Ministration. We find that word twice
more used in the active voice, but in neither place is it evident how far it
was effectual in the persons acted upon. Its used Acts 14.21. (...), Discipling
a good pretty company. They preached the Gospel there, and this was the effect
of it, that a good many were discipled, but what, or who, or how far it had
effect upon them, is not expressed. Its probable there were diverse thereby
convinced, and persuaded to join themselves, and possibly their families too,
as well as in other places to the Church. Its used again, Matthew. 27.57. of
Joseph of Arimathea, of whom its said, (...); We translate it, He was a
Disciple to Jesus, and that is a truth confirmed by John, Chap. 19.38. But
whether that be all the truth, I question, seeing the word is never otherwhere
used in that Neuter sense, I propound it to consideration whether we might not
as well translate it, He also (though secretly) discipled to Jesus: that is,
was such a Disciple as that he also drew in others with himself to him: but
which way soever we read it, its neither any thing for or against the business
we have in hand, only I thought good to note it. Once we meet with the passive
word, viz. Matthew. 13.52 (...), Every Scribe discipled, brings out of his
treasure things new, and old. Where certainly the word Discipled signifies well
instructed, made a good Scholar, as it were. For this is a word that has
reference to School affairs, teaching, and learning, and is comprehensive of
many acts; as he that puts, or by persuasion prevails with another to put his
son to school, though but for the present to be kept in order, yet with
intention and design to have him learn as he grows up, does (...), disciple,
make him a Scholar, as we use to say, and he that instructs such a one so
subjected to him, does also (...), disciple, though it be but in the first
Rudiments or Elements of learning; and he that does lead up such a one as in
some continuance has learned the first Elements, and brings him to be
proficient, and Master of the Science he instructs him in, does (...) still,
disciple in a higher and further act; and such a one is called (...), and so
certainly is that to be taken in Matthew. 13.52. as our Translators also imply in
rendering it, Every Scribe instructed unto the Kingdom. So that I conceive
(...), to disciple, contains all the acts from the first to the highest, from
the bringing to be subjected to one for learning, to his bringing up to perfect
understanding of the things taught, and so it seems to me that in this of
Matthew. 20.19. its in that capacity to be taken; and that our Savior expresses
this discipling in all that follows, baptizing them, and teaching them to
observe all that he commanded: though all this could not be done in so little
time as they usually took before Baptism, See Act. 16 34.
nor in their baptizing them, though that was one act in the performance of it.
The very bringing them into the Church, and therein subjecting them to its
nurture and instructions, is a discipling them, as appears by Luke 14.21. where
this Commission is spoken of in other terms, and for (...) here, there it is
(...), bring them in hither; and the opening the lessons and mysteries therein
to be taught, is still a discipling, or making further Disciples; though that
be done by many steps and degrees, as they are able to receive it, till they
come to be perfect men in growth and understanding: and even then they are but
(...), discipled ones too, as we before noted. Whence it appears, that the
Apostles and Gospel-Preachers now have more work then the objection supposes:
but yet in our usual speaking, the subjecting people to the School of Christ,
or to the Church State, Nurture and Government, is a discipling of them; as we
call the bringing a child to school, and to the care, government, and nurture
of it, the making him a Scholar: And so in that Acts 14.21. its applied to the
first subjecting men to the way of Christ, as it must of necessity have that in
it too in this Matthew. 28. Now the Apostles were about this work of discipling
in all their preaching, and whole employment; they were endeavoring to
disciple, though yet in their teaching, and holding forth the Gospel only; they
are not said to have discipled those that rejected it, though they held it
forth to them: But its called discipling, as with reference to, so when
accompanied with this effect of bringing men into the Church of Christ, and so
putting upon them the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost: and upon such their Commission was actually, and more or less
effectually put in execution and practice: and such were denominated usually
Disciples, a word too of a large latitude in its signification, as the word
Scholar is, for we use to call him a Scholar that is put to school, and him
that has begun to learn, though primarily it signifies such a one as has
received, understood, and has attained to ripe knowledge of the things that
have been taught him. So in Scripture they that professed the Doctrine of
Christ, and submitted to be his followers, and to learn of him, are called his
Disciples, though yet very rude and raw; yea, we read of some that have that
Name given them, who yet know not the Alphabet of Christian Religion, Acts
19.3. knew not what they were baptized into, viz. to believe on him that came
after John, nor had so much as heard (by their own confession) whether there
was a Holy Ghost, or no. And some that turned back from him, when they came at
an hard lesson are called Disciples till then, John 6.64. Though yet a Disciple
indeed, is one that continues in Christ's word, John 8.31, 32. and denies
himself, to that purpose, in the exercise of, or leaning to his own reason,
where it crosses Christ's instructions, and the following his own designs,
affections and will, where it hinders the practice of his teachings, Matthew.
16.24.

Now whether that Name ever include Infants, may be a question. In Acts 11.26.
its said, The Disciples were in Antioch first of all called Christians. Its
very probable, that they called all brought up in the nurture of the Lord, and
who thereby were distinguished from the rest of the world, Christians, as the
followers of the Pharisees were from their very youth, So the Infants of
Protestants are included in the name Protestants, the chidren, or infants of
Papists, are called papists to^.
and at beginning called Pharisees, as Paul says of himself, being the Son of
a Pharisee, Acts 23.6. from his youth, and from the beginning he lived a
Pharisee, Acts 26.5. And the Pharisees discipled others to themselves, whom
they called also Proselites, Matthew. 23.15. And yet it was their manner to
proselite little Babes too with their Parents. Now that Christians also were,
and are to bring up their children indefinitely, in the way and nurture of
Christ, is plain in Ephesians. 6.4, 5. Again in Acts 15.10. Peter under the name of
Disciples, upon whose neck the false Apostles would have put the yoke of
Circumcision, comprehends their Infants; for its a known thing that they would
have had their children circumcised in Infancy too, for that was the manner of
Moses. Why tempt ye God, (says he) in putting a yoke upon the Disciples necks,
which neither we, nor our Fathers were able to bear? Nor matters it whether the
false Apostles pressed Circumcision upon others, then Disciples, perhaps they
might endeavor too to circumcise the unconverted and unbrought in Gentiles;
yet that is more then is mentioned. Its to the purpose, that Peter pleads only
the Churches cause, that were therein to be yoked, and that yoke was inevitably
to fall upon the children of the Believers with them, who now should have been
brought up in the nurture of Moses, and to the observation of his Law; whereas
otherwise, they were only to be under the yoke and nurture of Christ; and he
calls all those in the Churches thus to be yoked Disciples: Nor is that valid,
that some say, that the act of circumcising was not the yoke, but the opinion
of its necessity; for neither is that true, that the opinion of its necessity,
was the yoke put upon their necks, that was rather put into them, then upon
them, and made way for their taking the yoke. The yoke was the subjection to
circumcision, and the observation of the Law thereupon, as so urged, Gal. 5.3.
and this they were to put upon Infants, circumcising them with that intention,
and to that end, that they might be subjected to the Law in their after
training up. Its true, they felt not the weight of the yoke put upon them, till
they being come to understanding, saw the greatness and strictness of it, and
began to carry it, but upon them it was put even in their Infancy, and as they
grew up, they also felt it. Again, in Acts 20.30. its said, some would (...),
By speaking perverse things, seek to draw away Disciples after them. Draw them
away, to wit, from the Church, whose before they were. Now compare this with
Tit. 1.11. and there the Apostle tells us how far that extends often, They draw
away even (...), whole houses, or families. Now that they should always happen
upon such as have no children, in them is very absurd, and foolish to conceive,
and contrary to all experience: yea, that this especially lights upon the
little children who knows not: For as for children or servants fore-principled
and instructed, there they often fail, (though often they prevail with such
also) but for the little ones in the tuition of their Parents, and as yet but
rasae tabulae, empty leaves, fit to have any form of instruction imprinted upon
them, they are more sure to be subverted and overturned from the right way, (in
which they were destined to be instructed) in the subversion of their Parents
from sound Doctrine; and especially this was true of that Sect of the
Circumcision there in particular specified, They subverted children too from
the Christian institution to the Jewish. Again in John 9.28. We find the Jews
affirming themselves to be the Disciples of Moses, (though yet they mistook
him, as much as many Christians mistake Christ, who yet pretend to be zealous
Disciples to him.) Now how were they made so, but in Infancy, by circumcision,
and thereby subjection to his Law and institution, from their youth, in that
strict way of the observation of his precepts, as understood by them. Surely
the very Infants of the Jews, and Pharisees, were discipled, gradatim, into
Moses, and so they were said of old to be baptized unto him in the cloud and
sea: so that at least this word (...), Discipling, will reach to Infants also,
they are as capable of being baptized to Christ from the beginning, as the
Jewish children were of discipling unto Moses, and to be educated in that way,
in which it pleased God then to administer the knowledge of himself: yea, they
are fitter also to be doctrinated, and apter to receive instruction, as they
grow up to years of discretion, then men of years that have been otherwise
principled, and have much to say against such Doctrine: Thence our Savior
makes them the patterns to which others of age are to be in that respect
conformed. Except ye be converted, Math. 18 3.
and become humble as a little child, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. And again, He that receives not the Kingdom of Heaven as a little
child, (viz.) as a little child receives it; for such is the force of such
speeches, (as I shall show anon) cannot enter thereinto. Little children, as
they have not those great capacities that men of years have, so neither are
their judgments so forestalled, or their affections so fore-byassed, with, or
to other doctrines, or principles, then those of the Gospel, that men of riper
years before the Doctrine of Christ be propounded to them have; nor have they
those strong conceits of themselves, and their knowledge otherwise, and
therefore more hope of them, then of those grown up, that conceive themselves
wise, and yet are not rightly principled; according to that, Prove. 27.12.
See thou a man wise in his own eyes, there is more hope of a fool, (one that
as yet knows nothing at all) then of him. Unless such a one fall back to his
first child-like humility, and docibleness, to receive the things of the
Kingdom, he cannot enter it: Remarkable is that of Isaiah to this purpose, Isa.
28.9. To whom shall he teach knowledge, and whom shall he cause to understand
doctrine? them that are weaned from the milk, them that are drawn from the
breasts. Besides what principles they then suck in, they are apt to hold fast,
according to that, Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem -- Testa diu.
And that Teach a child ((...) an Infant) in the way that he should go, and he
will not depart from it when he is old. The Gospel-Preachers had much ado to
persuade grown men to come into the Christian School, wherein Christ is the
great Teacher, to be his Disciples, (as such are hardly yet persuaded to learn
any lesson of his contrary to what they have formerly apprehended.) A great (if
not the greatest) part of the difficulty of the Apostles work stood in that,
because they knew not the Name they would have them stoop to; and the doctrine
they would have them learn, was novel to them, they had much to say against it,
as that their wisemen, Forefathers, and Rulers, neither knew, nor approved it,
and the rest of the world would hate them for it, etc. thence they were not,
nor would be baptized unto Christ, till they had first assented to the
Doctrine. It was their being convicted of the truth, that made them willing to
leave the world, and its doctrines, and become Scholars or Disciples unto
Christ, and to be initiated under his Government and Teaching. But now its not
so with children born to them that are discipled, their Christian Parents are
bound to bring them up in the nurture of the Lord, and they to receive it as
they are capable, which also usually they are apt to do, at least so far as to
the external profession, and acknowledgment of Christ and his Name, if it be
carefully, as is required, put to them; and that profession and acknowledgment
with orderly walking, is as much, or more then diverse of them had, whom John
and the Apostles baptized, Matthew. 3.7.11. Acts 8.13. Chap. 19.3, 4.

Therefore also it seems to me a great absurdity, to require that beforehand
of them for their matriculating, discipling, or receiving in that is urged upon
those that have been otherwise principled, and have much to oppose which they
have not; and to bring an heap of proofs, instancing what such so
fore-principled did, to be a rule for those that are not so. It is as inept as
if they should alleadg the Jews proceedings in requiring confessions, and
acknowledgments of them that came unto them from the Gentiles, to show that the
like was requirable of their Infants before their Circumcision; or like as if a
man should say, that because God requires of grown men actual repentance,
faith, and invocation of him to salvation; therefore he requires them of
Infants too, and so that they dying before may not be saved: If God dispense
with their non-acting those things through incapacity, and yet saves them, why
should it seem irrational that he dispense with the want of such
acknowledgments, or with the want of those things themselves, to admit them
into the outward Court of his Kingdom: If he dispense with them for the
greater, why should we not for the less; especially when we know he did
actually dispense with the want of those things in them for admission into the
Jewish Church, which yet were there required for their admission into it, that
were men of years; and we find no one title of his, that he would have them
excluded his Church or Kingdom amongst the Gentiles; Nay, his Commission
insisted on is in such large terms, as do abundantly include them. The Jews
never had so large a Commission for circumcising Infants as this is for
baptizing them, though there be not such express mention of them herein: for
all the Gentiles comprehends all Infants, male and female too, whereas the Jews
were limited to males only; and whereas they were tied to the eighth day at
soonest, that so they might have a Sabbath pass upon them for their cleansing;
now they are clean at any time, those uncleanness and ways of cleansing being
done away in Christ, the Commission gives power to do it to all in discipling
them, though through the wickedness of the world rejecting the counsel of God,
and refusing to submit to Christ themselves, or to subject theirs to him, they
cannot do it to all that their liberty and power extends to; but such surely
are guilty of resisting the Messengers of Christ, as either hinder them from
discipling themselves, or withhold and forbid their children.

From what has been said, then it appears, that there is no need of searching
after particular express mention of Infants to warrant their baptizing; for
when a man has a general Commission, what needs the particularizing the
several branches in it to warrant a man's acting upon them? If, Let a man
((...)) examine himself, and so let him eat, etc. be warrant enough for women's
eating the Supper, because the word (...) is in it self comprehensive enough of
the female Sex, why then should not, Disciple all the Gentiles, or all Nations
here, be warrant sufficient to disciple Infants, baptizing them, etc. seeing
that word is every whit as comprehensive of Infants? If a man should scruple to
baptize an English man, or a Scotch man, because he finds not those Nations
expressed in all the Scripture, would not any man laugh at him, seeing the
Commission is to all the Gentiles, whereof they are part? Or when its said,
Christ died for all, would it not be a fond scruple to say, It Is doubtful
whether he died for Infants that dye in their infancy, or not? The like is,
this to say, What warrant have we to baptize Infants now, when the Commission
is, Disciple all the Gentiles, baptizing them? If a King should say, Go into
such a Country, and subject all the Inhabitants in it to my Government, and
protection, putting them into my Subjects fashions, and way of living, it would
be a vain thing to say, What should little children be subject to him too, and
brought up after the manner of his Subjects? Sure, in bringing all the
Inhabitants in, their Infants must needs be included, and be taken for subjects
with them, and be brought up after his subjects fashion. And now I hope, I
shall not need to say much by way of answer to that Objection, that (...), is
of (...), to learn, but Infants can learn nothing till they begin to be grown
up. For so a Proselite, (...), is denominated (...), from coming and joining
himself to the Jewish Church, which Infants could not properly be said to do
till grown up, and yet they were also with their Parents proselited. So a
Subject is he that voluntarily is subject to, and obedient to his Prince, which
Infants cannot properly be, and yet they are in the number of Subjects too. But
besides this, we have showed that (...), is rather in its first act to bring
into, and subject to the Government of the School, that they might learn, then
to make to have learned, (though in its further acts it will reach to that too)
and that may be done to Infants now as well as in the times of the Jews. Why
may we not rather say, that (...) signifies that that all are capable of, (that
w^lfully refuse it not) seeing our Savior commissionates them to do it to all?
Would he bid them do that to all the Gentiles, that they were not capable of
having done to them? Nay, we find that little children ((...) pueri, pueruli,
Infants) are comprehended under the same word, (...), here used in a business,
where more action is signified, then the word (...), or Disciple, necessarily
implies to be required of them, as in Romans 15.11. with Psalm. 117.1. Praise the
Lord all ye Gentiles, (...), and laud him all ye people. Sure one would think
children much more incapable of being sharers in this action, then of being
discipled, a word more passive, and yet see how the Holy Ghost teaches us to
take them in too in that expression, see it Psa. 148.6.12, 13. Both young men,
and maidens, old men, and [(...) pu^ruli, infants,] children, let them praise
the Name of the Lord. Yea, that we may be sure the least Infant is there
included, that has life, See Psalm. 150.6. Let (...) every thing, or one that
has breath, praise the Lord, or every soul praise the Lord. Reason might
object, and say, How can little Infants praise the Lord? much rather then, how
can they be discipled to the Lord? the way of discipling being also added by
being baptized, a more passive business, and of which they are capable not only
as its an outward act upon them, but also as it puts an obligation upon the
baptized to believe and submit to the Doctrine and Name of God and Christ, as
we shall anon more clearly show; therefore I shall say no more to that here,
but pass to another Consideration.

2. Let us in the next place view the practice of the Apostles upon this
Commission: viz. in their baptizing the Gentiles, wherein I shall not have to
speak of their baptizing the Jews, and Proselites, (such as those in Acts 2.
and 8. for the Samaritans and Eunuch were such, else would they have scrupled
eating and drinking with them, as afterward they did Peter's with Cornelius) but
of the unproselited Gentiles, such as were not fore-brought into the limits of
the Church visible, which as yet the Jewish Church was accounted, Baptism being
as yet not the first admission into the Church, as then reputed, but into the
acknowledgment of Christ the Lord of it already come; for as yet the Jews were
not unchurched, as yet the Apostles frequented the Temple, and Christ's
Disciples joined with them in observations of the Law, Acts 3.1. and 21.20.22,
23. etc. nor as yet did the Disciples understand the extent of their own
Commission, but thought that it extended only to Proselites of all Nations,
till God opened the matter in a vision to Peter, Acts 10. and let him see that
all were as clean for his conversing with, and admitting, as the Proselites of
the Circumcision. They might go and preach to any man, converse with any, and
upon their accepting the salvation of God, it was to come upon them, and their
houses, as before upon the Jews, Matthew. 10. God taught him to call (...), no
one (of what Country, Nation, Age, Sex soever) common or unclean: He might
kill and eat any of the four-footed beasts, for they were all let down to him.
Till this, I say, they see not the extent of their Commission. But after the
relation of this the rest of the brethren were convinced that God had given
also to the Gentiles repentance unto life, and now they began to put in
practice their foregoing Commission; for now soon after this Paul and Barnabas
were chosen, and sent forth to the Gentiles, and they endeavor upon the Jews
rejecting to disciple them: but upon their discipling according to their
Commission, some false Apostles, or Believers of the Sect of the Pharisees
began to stir up a contention, and to trouble the Churches, pressing upon them
that they ought to circumcise those they discipled, Put a yoke (as Peter calls
it) upon their necks, even the yoke of Moses Law. About this question then (
Paul and Barnabas having begun, and made some progress in their
Gentile-discipling) the Brethren sent them to Jerusalem to discuss this
business with the Apostles, and the Church there, that there might be unity
amongst them, where it was determined by letters that they needed not
circumcision to disciple them, or upon their being discipled. After which we
first read of Paul and Silas baptizing, and the first instance we have of their
baptizing after that Revelation to Peter of the extent of their Commission, and
after the decission of that question about Circumcision, was Lidia, concerning
whom the Holy Ghost gives an account of Baptism suitable to the Commission; for
its said, That she hearing Paul, God opened her heart that she attended unto
the things spoken by him, and she and her house and family were baptized:
without the least mention made of any of their hearing and believing, but she
only. After which she says to them, If ye have judged me faithful (not if ye
judge us) come into my house. Whereas if the rest of the house were men of age,
they might have as well questioned their faithfulness as hers, as being able,
if unfaithful, to betray them to evil men as well as she: but not a word of
their believing or professing faith; and I am sure there is a word sufficient
to include Infants, or little children, except they can be proved not to be of
the household. Again, a little after, we find the Apostle preaching thus to the
Jaylour, Believe thou in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and
thy house: viz. as the Israelites were out of Egypt, Jude 5. from the wrath of
God that he feared upon himself and his, upon the Earthquake, and from the
refusing Gentiles condition under darkness, and Gods displeasure against them.
However God might judge the rest of the world, them and theirs that rejected
Christ, yet he believing salvation should come to his house, they should be
with him under Gods protection; they should at least fare much better for his
sake, as Potiphars house for Joseph amongst them. Upon that, He bringing them
out, Paul preached to him, and to all his house, (which might include infants
and children too, as well as Moses his holding forth the Covenant to little
ones too, Deuteronomy. 29.1, 11, 12. and as its said, Acts 26.22. That he testified
the things of the Gospel to small and great: which words are used to comprehend
the youngest infant, with the oldest man, and most decrepit, Revel. 20.12.) And
its added, That he, and all his were baptized straightway. Its true, it is said
also, That he rejoiced with all his house, believing in God: but its
remarkable, that the words believing and rejoicing, are both of the singular
number, as agreeing properly to the Jaylors own person, and the word (...),
[house wholly verbatim] is such as might be applied to him, with his family,
all coming into subjection to the School of Christ, though every particular of
his house did not actually believe or rejoice. As when its said, All Judah
rejoiced, and all the people of the Land rejoiced, it follows not, that every
one, little and great of them, were actual in that rejoicing. A man may be said
to do a thing with his house, or whole family, as to keep a Sabbath to the
Lord, or to keep a Fast Day to him, when yet every one in the family are not
actually capable of acting to the Lord. We instanced before in Joel 2.16. so 2 Chronicles. 20.13. the (...), house wholly, may be understood to mean, in behalf of
them all, with himself brought under the Government and Protection of Christ:
he, and all his, (as its expressly said) being baptized. Now a man, and all his,
and a household, are words large enough to comprehend infants also. We read also
of the household of Stephanus being baptized, as 1 Cor. 1.16. From which places,
we may note,

1. That we read of more baptized, then are said to have had faith, or to have
professed faith before baptism, or then can be proved so to have had or done;
as was before noted.

2. That we have words large enough to include Infants in the instances of the
Apostles baptizing; words as large for that as we have any to include women's
receipt of the Supper. Yea, why may not a man hence argue thus, What the
Apostles practiced in baptizing is lawful to be practiced now by us: but they
practiced the baptizing of whole families, therefore so may we, presupposing
still that we do nothing by compulsion, forcing the Gospel on them that
actually reject it. And if so, then their Infants will fall under Baptism;
except we can show that they are not of a family, or that there were no Infants
in any of those households baptized by the Apostles, or that Christ or they has
given us precept or example to exclude them in baptizing such families as have
them; none of all which I am sure can be showed. So that here is another
Scripture including them. If it be said, we cannot prove that there were
Infants there; I answer, Where the Holy Ghost is silent, there it appertains
not to us to inquire. I walk by that that is expressed, I baptize but the family,
that that is concealed, I have nothing to do to search for. If the Holy Ghost
would have had me put exception in families, then would he some where by
precept or instance have expressed that exception, or ground of exception; As
that in case there be Infants, then the whole household is not to be baptized;
or none may be baptized, but they that first profess faith; but there is no
such command or passage in all the Scripture. But its said, that these
instances must be measured by other places, that relate their practice.

To that I answer, 1. That there may be different practices according to
different occasions. Besides, this is the first we read of baptizing after the
understanding of the extent of their Commission, except of Cornelius, where all
in the house too were hearers, and baptized, Et primum in unoquoque genere
mensura est reliquorum. And therefore not to be regulated by those places,
wherein baptizing was upon other grounds, and with less understanding of their
Commission.

2. Their practice in all places is to be measured by their Commission, and not
by one another, where occasions (as of single persons, and without families
belonging to them) might alter the expressions about their practice.

3. Nor is there any mention any where of their practice, wherein it can be
showed, that they excluded Infants, much less about baptizing Gentiles, and
bringing them into the Church; so that those exceptions avail not. Nor yet do
make their being of a household simply the ground of their being baptized; for I
confess there may be diverse in and of a household, that in some case, that is,
of positive refusing to stoop to the Gospel, may not be baptized; As an
unbelieving wife, servant, or child grown, they are by persuasion to be won in,
or else let alone. This springing from the foresaid ground of not forcing
Ordinances upon men: but I make the grounds of their Baptism, the tenor of the
Commission that bids them disciple all the Gentiles, and of the Gospel, holding
forth grace to all, one and other, no man being common or unclean in that
respect in Gods account, but as they render themselves so by their willing
rejections of the grace tendered to them, with their being under the tuition of
those that profess faith, and subjection to the Doctrine of Christ, and the
non-resistance found in them, and the duty lying upon parents to bring them up
in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Whence it is to be noted, that its
said of the Jaylour, he, and all his, not all his household, but all his were
baptized; possibly some in the house might not be in his dispose, but so many
as were his were baptized. If any man say, its an act of force to disciple an
Infant; I say no, of no more force to baptize them to Christ, then to lay them
in their cradles, or carry them in their arms; they have no will nor reluctance
against it, ye may do with them what ye will: whence they are a pattern of
right entering the Kingdom, He that receives not the Kingdom of God as a little
child, etc. They receive it as God, and his people order them into it, and in
it. And for their discipling by instruction, they usually, if well educated,
drink it in, and submit to it better then others, as to the outward profession
at least, as was before said. And I find not that Baptism was ever denied to
any that would submit themselves to learn the Christian Profession. For that
frivolous objection of some, that they show its against their wills sometimes
by their crying, Its not worth the answering; for by the same reason, we may
say, that some of them that are dipped, finding the water cold, do shrink and
shudder in their going into it, therefore they are baptized against their wills
too: not to mention the like carriages in Infants circumcised, who yet when
they came to years of understanding, owning what was in Infancy done to them,
were never therefore reputed members of the Church, or Proselites by
compulsion. But I pass from this also to another Consideration.

3. Though it be true, that we find no express Command to baptize Infants, in
terminis, or such an instance of Infants baptized, yet we do find by undeniable
consequence, that Infants in the language of the Apostle Paul, and so of the
Scriptures, were baptized; so that to that common demand, Where read we of any
Infants baptized? we can produce an answer very demonstrative: And that is in 1
Cor. 10.2, 3. Moreover, Brethren, I would not have you ignorant how that all
our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and were all
baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the Sea. I pray let it be well minded,
All our Fathers, says Paul, were baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the
sea. Search the Scriptures, and we shall find that amongst these Fathers, there
were many that when they passed through the Sea, and under the cloud, were but
Infants, See for this the History in the Book of Exodus. First, in Exodus 10.8,
9. Pharaoh, after several plagues poured out upon him and his people, for
refusing to let the Israelites go out of his Land, being persuaded by his
servants, calls for Moses and Aaron, and bids them go, and serve the Lord: but
would know of them, who should go? To whom Moses gave this answer: We will go
with our young, (...)
and with our old, with our sons, and with our daughters, with our flocks, and
with our herds: And whereas Pharaoh then would not condescend to that
Proposition, God bringing another plague upon him, brought him to yield to thus
much of it, That their little ones might go with them, only leaving their
flocks and herds with them. Ver. 24. Only let your flocks and your herds be
stayed, let your little ones also go with you: the word is in the original
(...) and (...) signifies parvulus, a little child; so that here we see plainly
they had little children amongst those Fathers, that after proved Fathers too
of the Jewish Nation: these too passed under the cloud, and through the Sea,
and were baptized to Moses in them.



Moses in his Writings, but yet by way of Exception, I say its much to the
purpose. For,

1. The Scripture here, and the Apostle calls it Baptism, and therefore it may
not be denied, to have been truly Baptism, though not so instituted by Christ
come in the flesh, as that we have to treat of, so that still our assertion is
true in the Apostles language, which may not be gainsayed by us, that those
Infants were baptized.

2. Yea, this Baptism is mentioned, and spoken of by the Apostle, as answerable
to the Baptism the Believers and Churches of Christ received into the Name of
Christ, as a privilege answerable to this of the Gospel-baptism, and a
testimony of Gods favor toward them answerable to what this Baptism is now to
us, and upon that account partly has it the Name of Baptism put upon it by the
Apostle, his intent and scope here being to show that those Fathers were all
partakers of like privileges; yea and in substance of the same with the
Churches of Christ now, only the difference was in way of Administration, those
Privileges and Ordinances being administered by the hands of, or under the
conduct of Moses, these, nor by and from Christ himself, come in the flesh,
those typing out, or fore-signifying Christ then to come in the flesh, these
signifying and leading to confess him come in the flesh, and the grace that is
in him as so come, and held forth to us by him, which is the same grace (as
well as the same Christ, as the Apostle says, ver. 3.) that was pointed to by
them, now more clearly witnessed and held forth, then not so plainly. And
indeed, if this be not so, that that Baptism was equivalent with, and
answerable to this of ours, since Christ manifested in the flesh, as to the
substance of it, the Apostles argument as much as ours from it would be rendered
invalid: For whereas he brings these instances of them to answer a secret
objection (occasioned by his discourse in the preceding Chapter from his
exhorting them so to run, as to obtain, and from his setting before them his
own Example, how he kept down his body in subjection, lest having preached to
others, he himself should prove, or become a Reprobate, Chap. 9.24.27.) That
they were called by the grace of God, into the grace of Christ, and baptized
into him, and so delivered from that state of enmity, and irreconciledness, in
which as Gentiles they before lay; yea, were under his conduct, guidance, and
protection, his Church and people observing his Ordinances, and tasting the
sweetness of his goodness, and therefore what need of their so running, as if
they were in danger else to lose the prize, or to be rejected of God again; the
Apostle brings the Fathers of old as instances of people under like favor and
privileges, according to the dispensations of those times, baptized as well as
they, and eating the same spiritual bread in substance and signification with
them, and yet God was displeased with many of them, as follows, ver. 4.5. etc.
Now they might easily have replied that the case was far different, that was no
baptism in comparison of theirs, their privileges were not like theirs, etc.
and so they might as easily have retorted the Argument in that manner, as the
Antipedobaptists may to us, if there were not a truth in it, that that was to
them as much for that dispensation; yea, the same with this to us as to the
main matter or substance. We must either argue the Apostle guilty of a weak
argument here, as to his purpose of proving them alike privileged with us, and
we notwithstanding our privileges as obnoxious to displeasure from God, in
case of unbelief, or unworthy walking, as they, or else we must confess this to
have weight in it for this business: viz. That those Infants though not
baptized into Christ expressly and immediately, yet were truly and really as to
external baptism baptized into the Doctrine of God then delivered concerning
Christ, as we be, or the Church of Corinth were; they had that that carries
correspondency with, and was answerable to our Baptism.

3. Yea further, Its to be minded here, That all our Fathers, and so the
Infants of them, I mean such of them as then were but Infants, were baptized
into Moses, or unto Moses, that is, had an obligation put upon them by those
their passages under the cloud, and in the sea, to listen, to obey, and follow
after Moses, and his Doctrine, what ever incapacity was in them in respect of
years, and want of actual understanding, then while they passed through the
sea, and under the cloud, to apprehend, or have made out to them, either what
they passed through, or what Moses was to them, or was contained in his
Doctrine. And so it clearly evinces, that Infants are not incapable of being
baptized into the Doctrine of God, or Name, Authority, Faith, or Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

For first, That that is the meaning of that phrase, I suppose is clear to any
indifferent understanding, viz. that by being baptized into, or unto Moses, is
not meant, that they were baptized, dipped, washed into the person of Moses, as
the matter of their baptism for that was impossible, but the word (...), there,
is of the same signification, as in Matthew. 28.19. (...), etc. into, or unto the
Name of the Father, and of the Son; so they were baptized into, or unto Moses,
Moses being there as in other places, used to signify Moses his doctrine, as
in Luke 16.29. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. So also
John 5.46, 47. Though I will not deny but Moses his authority as a Prophet and
Conductor of them, authorized of God, is, or may be therein also signified.

And secondly, I see no reason but an Infant is in every whit as good a
capacity to be baptized into, or unto Christ, as then unto Moses: Its all one
in substance as to what concerns the business requiring capacity, that was into
the Doctrine and Authority of God by Moses; this, into the Doctrine and
Authority of the same God by Jesus: that was to be subject to Moses, and his
Doctrine, and Institutions, when, and as they grew capable; this into Christ,
his Doctrine, and Institutions, when, and as they grow capable. I think no man
will deny, that children now are as capable of the outward act of Baptism, to
be acted upon them, be it what it will be, whether to be dipped into, or have
water poured upon them, as these Infants were then to be carried, or pass
through the Sea; and that they cannot now engage as much to be subject to Gods
Authority in Christ, as then to it in Moses, or understand as much what the
Gospel says, as what the Law said then, and much what both alike; I cannot
perceive what ground any man can have to deny, except they will say, that Moses
spoke more darkly and figuratively of Christ, but Christ more plainly and
perspicuously both of himself, and his Father. And if we get but this by this
place, That Infants in Paul's own language are capable of being baptized into a
Name, or Doctrine, and thereby to be obliged to that Name and Person we have
gained, I conceive not a little.

Some happily will object again,

All were baptized that eat that spiritual bread, much less speaks he there of
any eating by faith, but rather only of an eating in a figure; but he says
positively, They All were baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the sea, and
did all eat the same spiritual mea^ Beside, that they all eat not by faith, is
clear from thence, that Many of them so baptized, and eating, were destroyed
for not believing: Compare ver. 4, 5, 6. etc. with Heb. 3.15, 16, 17. etc.

All our Fathers.

All that then were Fathers, or all the Fathers amongst them, but All our
Fathers: and many of them that were their Fathers, were then little Infants
when they passed through the Sea, as before we showed. And again, Had he only
meant it of them that were then Fathers, he might rather have said, With them
all, one or two excepted: and so small a number seldom makes exceptions,) God
was not well pleased. But now he says, but with many of them; because though
with all the then Fathers, as that were above twenty years old, some two
excepted, he was displeased, yet with the children from twenty years old
down-ward, he was not so, but them he carried into Canaan, and possessed them
of it.

for they eat of the same spiritual meat, etc.

Let a man (...), examine himself, and so let him eat: but there is no such
condition required generally to Baptism.

I shall nextly consider, what we find expressed by Christ about his will
concerning Infants: where I shall pass over that in Mat. 18.1, 2, 3, 4. where
Christ makes them our patterns, because we have occasionally spoken of it
before, and shall meet with it elsewhere again: that in ver. 6. is
considerable, He that shall offend one of those little ones that believe in me.
Some are of opinion that Christ speaks that of little children in age, and
think Christ reckons them believers in him, because they have no other hope or
confidence, exercise no self care, self trust, or distrustful thoughts of
God, but are cast upon him, and take submittedly what he orders to them;
according to that, Psalm. 71.5, 6. Thou art my hope, O Lord, thou have been my
trust from my youth, upon thee have I been cast from my mothers womb. So Psalm.
22.9, 10. Thou did make me hope when I was upon my mothers breasts, I was
cast upon thee from the womb. And as they are Psalm. 115.13. and Revel. 19.5.
numbered with the fearers of God, Ye that fear the Lord, both small and great.
And the scandalizing such is the harming them, especially by perverting them to
vain hopes and ways. I confess I am not satisfied in that my self, and yet I
think there may be something in it, and the rather for that the next foregoing
speech does certainly include little children, viz. when he says, He that
shall receive one such little one in my Name, receives me. I know Beza's
conception is, that by (...), is meant, one that humbles himself as a little
child; and that he speaks not there properly of children; but Luke, who is of
better authority, says expressly, Chap. 9.48. that Christ said that of that very
little babe too, that he took in his Arms, and set in the midst of them: He
that receives this little child in my Name, receives me. And so in Mark 9.36,
37. expressly, He that shall receive one of such little children, (without
mention of any other foregoingly, but the child it self taken into his arms)
receives me. But I shall pass that, and come to that that is more full, viz.
that in Matthew. 19.13, 14. where its said, that our Savior having in the former
part of the Chapter answered thee Pharisees about Divorce, there were certain
little children, or infants, (in Luke 18.16. (...), sucking infants,) and its
considerable, to what end they brought them; and how Christ entertained them,
but chiefly, what he says of Infants, by occasion of them.

1. For the end of their bringing, its in Luke 18. That he might touch them;
but in Matthew, That he might lay his hands on them, and pray. Now the laying
on of hands especially, when joined with prayer, is an Ordinance or Institution
in the Church of God, named after the Doctrine of Baptisms, Heb. 6.1, 2. and
therefore, if there be any strength in their way of arguing, that from the
placing of words one after another, as baptizing after believing, would prove,
that believing is to be first found in persons, before they may be baptized;
then the same argument would prove that these Infants were formerly baptized;
because they came for imposition of hands, a right usually following men's
baptism too in the practice of the Apostles, as in Acts 8.17. and 19.5, 6. Nor
can the ablest Antipedobaptist give us any certain proof or demonstration, or
ought, besides their own presumption, that they were not.

Indeed I find laying on of hands, used in Scripture, in these three Cases:
viz. In healing diseases, Ordaining to office, and sending forth to the work of
them, and praying for the Holy Ghost, and his blessings: where its mentioned to
the first intent of healing, its usually expressed, either to have been to that
end, or that that was the effect, as in Mark 5.23. and 6.5. and 16.18. Luke
4.40. and 13.13. Acts 28.8. in none of all which places find we our Savior
joining prayer with it: or that he blessed them he so healed. Only that
instance of Paul, has mention too of joining prayer with it: nor is there any
appearing probability, that these came for healing to Christ, as some would
conjecture, because mention is made in the beginning of the Chapter, of his
healing some. For when there was any healing wrought in the things mentioned,
its common for one Evangelist or other to express it; but none of them say any
such thing of these. Besides, his discourse with the Pharisees about Divorce,
if not also some other, as those in Luke 18. intervened between his healing
acts, and these children coming to him. And he was also gone from that place
where he had been healing, and come into the house, Mark 10.10. Besides, its
too simple a conceit, that the Disciples should prohibit them upon that ground,
for they could not be ignorant that children might stand in need of healing,
and be as capable of it as other persons; and its most probable that it was
some conceit of the unfitness of Infants for such a business as they came; for
that made them rebuke those that brought them: nor could it be for ordination
to office, and therefore it was for the Holy Ghost, or some blessing of his
upon them; yea, its plain it was for blessing, and that is acknowledged by Mr.
Tombs to be a greater thing then Baptism. Baptism being but an outward witness
to Christ, and the Doctrine of Christ, and a matriculation of them into the
School of Christ, that they might be in the way of his blessing: whence to use
the Argument that Peter makes use of a majori, ad minus: Can any forbid water
that these should not be baptized, that have received the Holy Ghost, etc. So
we may argue here, Shall Christ admit them to his blessing, and shall not we
admit them to outward Baptism to be brought into his house, and to have his
name put upon them, that they may be more in the way of his blessing? when he
himself gives them that that follows after Baptism, viz. Baptism having so
large a Commission for discipling and Baptism.

But its said by some that this was an use amongst the Jews, to bring their
children to Prophets,

But if so, then sure the Disciples would not have been so against them, as to
forbid them, if it had been an usual matter of honor put upon holy men amongst
them; since they were not unwilling to have their Master honored, I conceive
its likelyer they had some unworthy, low, and despicable thoughts of Infants,
as below their Masters business, and care. Besides, they that tell us of the
foresaid use, are fain to fetch it from Isaacks blessing Jacob, and Jacobs
blessing Joseph's sons. Strange instances to tell us of fathers blessing their
own children, to prove that people used to carry their children to Prophets for
their prayers and blessing; especially too to prove their carrying Infants to
them when as Jacob and Esau both were men grown, or well toward it, when Isaac
blessed them; for Isaac was but sixty years old when they were born, and he was
now grown old and dim-sighted, so as he could not discern one from the other
when he blessed them; yea, Esau was wont to go a hunting, yea, and was married
too some time before this. And for the sons of Joseph, they could not be less
then about twenty years old, for they were born to him before the years of
famine came, Genesis 41.50. two years of which were passed before Jacob came down
into Egypt, Genesis 45.11. and yet he lived in Egypt after his going thither
seventeen years, Genesis 47.28. Beside none were blessed by them, or by Christ,
but members of the Church visible; And therefore, if that may yet be done, (as
I think none can find ground to deny it) then they may first be made members of
the visible Church, that so it may be done unto them.

2. For their entertainment. We find the Disciples forbad them that brought
them, and would not have had them come to Christ It Is likely, as we have said,
because they thought it a vain thing, and that Christ would not regard such as
they: but its remarkable how ill Christ takes it, (...), (valde aegre tulit,
Pass.) he took it very ill, or was very angry with them: which shows Christ's
account of Infants, and great favor to them; as he did also Chap. 18. And as
God also testified his love and pity toward them in sparing Nineveh upon that
account, that there were so many thousand Infants in it, and it instructs us
into this, That Christ will not thank, but take it very ill at that man that
shall under any pretense of piety, or otherwise, keep back Infants (or
endeavor it) from that that is for them in his Kingdom, and that should make us
wary, lest we also run into such like errors about them to incur against our
selves also his indignation. After this it follows, that he called them to him,
and said, Suffer little children, or the little childen, to come unto me, and
forbid them not.

Sure here he approves men's bringing little children to him to be under his
care and blessing, who came for all Ages of men, to lighten every one, and
despises none, no, not the least, but came to save them: And how little
children should now be brought to Christ, but by bringing them to his Church
and people, with and amongst whom he is yet spiritually present, I cannot see.
Note further also, that he calls their bringing them, their coming: for its not
said, That there came little children to him: as if they came of themselves,
but they brought little children to him: so it is in all the three Evangelists;
nor did the Diciples rebuke the children, but them that brought them; yet here
he says, let them come to me. They not resisting, or rejecting his goodness,
its reckoned to them as if they came and desired it, though they in their own
persons, did not desire it. Where we see confirmed what we said before, viz.
That those things that are required of men of understanding, to receive his
blessing, or an ordinance of his to be acted upon them, (as laying on of hands
and praying, is an Ordinance of God) are not required in Infants. Men grown
must come of themselves, being convinced and persuaded by the truth, or else
they are not blessed by him ordinarily, or received into his grace; but here
children, though but brought, are said to come, and he accepts and blesses
them. For so it follows, Mark 10.16. He took them in his arms, put his hands on
them; and blessed them. Wherein its also to be noted, that he deals with them
as with Disciples; for I find not that Jesus blessed any persons else, but them
that were his Disciples, in any other place that speaks of his blessing, Luke
24.50.

I know its surmised by some, Mark 10.37.

To which I say, come to me, but let them come to me. Nor have we any thing as
said to the Infants by way of instruction of them, but to his Disciples, and
them with them only; nor any thing said by them Infants unto him, or to any
other: to say nothing that its usual to call an Infant in another arms: the
word is, (...), an Infant, Luke 18.15. which as Beza notes, Beza. in Luke 1.41,
44. etc.
Proprie dicitur de partu recens edito: is properly an infant newborn: yea, in
Luke 1.41, 44. its used of an infant in the womb, but in 1 Pet. 2.2. and Luke
2. 12.16. and 17.19. its evidently children newborn. Against this is objected,
that (...) may signify one capable of teaching, because its said, Timothy knew
the Scripture, (...), of a child, or infant, 2 Timothy 3.15. To which I answer,
That (...), and (...), may much differ: (...) signifies properly, Ever since
ones Infancy, since thou came out of Infancy. Beside, I deny not, that the
word (...) may comprehend all the Age from the birth, to six or seven years
old, before the term of which years a child is capable of instruction, yet it
is usually used for children lately born, and it is improbable that these here
spoken of were capable of instruction, both because they were brought, and
because we find nothing spoken to them for their instructing, which its no way
likely that Christ would have omitted, had they been capable of it. The very
pleading for that capability of instruction savours of the Disciples disease,
who very probably for some such reason forbad them, because they thought them
incapable, and argues that had these men been there, they would in case of
their incapacity for learning have joined with the Disciples in prohibiting
them.



Math. 28.19. 2 Timothy 4.17. and Romans 15.11. and (...) ver. 16. All the Gentiles
admits of no such restriction by virtue of that article; and so when the
Apostle says, Let us do good to all, and chiefly to (...), to the household of
faith; he limits it not there to some certain believers, as the Teachers, or
the like, of whom he had been before speaking: yea, the same expression, (...),
Matthew. 18.3. is not these little children, but indefinitely, little children.
Whence mark, for (...), read ( Mark 10.15.) (...), as a little child. So in
Matthew. 26.9, 10. (...), is not some certain present poor, but the poor
indefinitely: So that that is (...), simply in Matthew. 19.13. is in Luke 18.15.
(...), where yet it connot be translated, these Infants. See the like, Mark
7.27, 28. 2 Cor. 12.14. Its not (...), these, or those little children: as its
usual when the speech is limited to things present, as (...), in Matthew. 26.11.
is this ointment: (...), is all these words, ver. 1. (...): these, my brethren,
Matthew. 25.40, 45. (...). In these two Commandments, Chap. 23.40. The like is to
be seen, Mark 13.2. Luke 3.5. and 9 28.44. and 24.18. John 10.19. Acts 3.24.
and 4.16. and 5. 36, 38. nor is it, (...), those children, as (...), Matthew.
24.22. and (...), Luke 19.27. but simply, (...), the little children, or little
children.

2. Though he bid that them very children should come to him, and not be
prohibited, yet that he limited not his speech, or the good will to little ones
therein declared to them, only is manifest in the ground he lays down,
whereupon he would have them to come to him; for that is such as is not tied up
to them, but affirmed of children more largely and indefinitely, viz. For of
such is the Kingdom of Heaven: and so we come to view,

3. What he says of Infants upon this occasion, as the ground of his
willingness to have them come to him, and of his anger against his Disciples
for prohibiting them: (...), For of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. Where its to
be minded first, that he says not, (...), for of these is the Kingdom, lest we
should perceive some peculiar occasion not ordinary or common to Infants, but
peculiar to these only; some secret thing known to Christ alone, and so should
say, it was to be stretched no further, but to them, or them that we can
discern to be elected, etc. Nor is it (...), to them that are like these, the
Kingdom of Heaven belong, though many would conceive it so; for that could be
no greater ground for children, then for Doves and Lambs coming to him; the
general word (...) generally signifies of that kind that is spoken of; these,
and such as these; whether it be applied to things or persons, not such in an
Allegorical similitude. So Romans 2.2. The judgment of God is against those that
do (...), such things: that is, those very evils, and such like. So ver 3. and
chap. 1.32. Gal. 5.21, 23. (...), against such things there is no law: that is,
against those virtues and fruits of the Spirit, and whatsoever else is of the
same stamp or nature. So also 1 Cor. 7.15.28. (...), such shall have trouble in
the flesh: that is, such as he had spoken of before, viz. they that marry, etc.
Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. The Kingdom of Heaven, what is that? I answer,
The Kingdom set up by the God of Heaven, in which he is King, and reigns by
Jesus Christ, prophesied of long since to be established in the house of David;
A Kingdom of which the Jews were the children, it was preached to, and the
promise of it set before them, yea, they were educated under its Ordinances in
part, and to the expectation of it in the more Heavenly things: The Kingdom
more fully preached by Christ, and (in its privileges, rise, and growth, and
its administration by Christ in the humanity, in a more heavenly way,) then
nigh at hand, and ready to be revealed, though not in its height of glory, and
large spreading luster: This is the Kingdom of Heaven, of which there are
diverse stations and degrees of entrance into it, and diverse manifestations of
it. viz.

1. There is the outward Court, the Church visible as visible, or as outwardly
privileged by God, and distinguished from other people not in it: or if ye
will, the Government that Christ exercises in administration of his Heavenly
Ordinances and Rites, over men as visibly subjected to the profession of him,
the Church State with its outward Ordinances, the Oracles of God, and his
Statutes, and Appointments. So the Church State of old among the Jews, was part
of that Kingdom, that God through Christ, and for him erected: The Wisdom of
God had there his House, and Pillars, Ordinances, and Provision, though less
heavenly, and more carnal, then as now its ordered by Christ come in the flesh;
and therefore rather called the Kingdom of God, then of Heaven, Matthew. 21.43.
This Government in the hand of Christ come being more properly both, because as
of God so more heavenly, and less carnal, then that before.

2. The inward and invisible uniting with Christ by faith, and so the
Government of the Spirit writing the Law in the heart: The power and
privileges enjoyed in the inner man; in forgiveness of sins, peace, joy,
conformity to God, etc. And this also is the Kingdom of God, the more inward,
more heavenly, and spiritual part of it: and this also is held forth in the
first, and the right receipt of the first, with all the documents thereof, and
spiritual operations afforded therein, is the way to enter into this step of
it. For this is it into which men enter not but by regeneration: Of this the
Apostle speaks, Romans 14.17. The Kingdom of God, is righteousness, peace, and
joy in the Holy Ghost. And 1 Cor. 4.20. That consists in power, etc. Into this
the believer is translated out of the power of darkness, Col. 1.15. The other
step is more visibly upon men that are in it, this more properly in them. They
that are but in the former Regiment, may be cast out, and often are for their
unfruitfulness, not receiving its instructions, and operations of Spirit
therewith, as a little child, so as to enter into this more spiritual
Government, Matthew. 8.12. and 21.43. that, or the Kingdom of God in that part of
it, (for its but one Kingdom in all its Regiments, as the Temple of old was but
one in all its Courts) being like a Net gathering all sorts, and like a man
sowing good seed in the field, wherein also the envious man sows tares, out
of which all things that offend shall be gathered, Matthew, 13.24.41.42.47. And
like to the wedding made by the King for his Son, to which the bidden guests
refusing to come, all that could be met with in the highway and hedges were
called, and brought, Matthew. 22.1.9, 10. yea to that all have liberty to come as
the way to enter into it in its higher steps, or more inward Government, and
Dominion. But now this second step is yet more holy, and into it may none enter
but they that so have received the grace of God, in what is held forth in the
former, as to be made an holy Priesthood unto God. The former has Laws for its
Ordering and Government, and in it is the power of Christ to order it, which
all ought to obey, and be subject to in their several places and stations, as
in other Kingdoms; but these are more visible and outward, as Baptism, the
Supper, Exhorting, Teaching, Hearing, Prayer, Communion, Censures, etc. As also
subordinate Officers, Bishops, or Elders, Deacons, etc. Its Keys of Doctrine
and Censures, its Public Register, and Notary Book, the Scriptures, wherein
its Laws and Orders are written and recorded. This latter has its Laws, the
same for substance with the other, but written also more inwardly in the heart,
where the Spirit is more immediately Governor and Ruler, and supplies all
grace to the soul also: These have fellowship with God, and with Christ in
spirit, and heavenly things, as well as one with another in outward Ordinances;
which these also have (the inner Regiment being in these who are under the
outward, though not in all of them.) These have the inward true spiritual
Baptism in the blood and price of Christ, 1 Cor. 10 17.
sprinkling their consciences, and making their hearts pure; and they feed
spiritually upon Christ himself, eat all of that one bread, and partake all of
that one spirit in him. So as to be really and inwardly, (though mystically and
spiritually) one body, being baptized into it by the Holy Ghost, and made meet
for the inheritance; as well as outwardly baptized, and outwardly eating the
Memorials of Christ, as the outward Regiment more generally do.

3. There is also beyond both these, a third step, or way of regiment in this
Kingdom, like unto the Holy of holies, that into which Christ himself is really
entered, and all they that are in the second form do enter by hope, but not as
yet by real possession. The Kingdom in Glory and Power exalted above all other:
This is that which is yet to be manifested; Which Christ is gone to receive,
and which he shall come in, even in the Glory of his Father, and possess all
his Saints that here have followed him faithfully withal. In which the
righteous shall shine as the Sun, Matthew. 13.43.
and be filled with their Masters joy. Christ and they being all manifested in
glory, even the glory of God; Col. 3.34
so as that as Christ is now admired in himself by them, that spiritually
discern him, so then he shall be admired also in all his Saints, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10,
11.
and they shall be glorified with him. In this all his, and their enemies,
shall be put under them, and bow before them, even all that here have
persecuted, and hated them; and they shall be possessed of all the happiness
prepared and laid up in Christ for them, even their inheritance. The fullness of
God, and glory, and perfect freedom from all the bondage of sin and servitude,
and from what ever did afflict and trouble them. And this state of the Kingdom
Christ shall come in, at his glorious appearance again from Heaven, when he
shall raise up all his to meet him, and be ever with him: therefore also its
coupled with his appearance, in 2 Timothy 4.1. This is the Kingdom in its flourish
and compleatness, as Solomon in his glory, when as the other two are but the
tendencies to this, and like the Kingdom of David in the midst of oppositions.
The Keys of the Kingdom in the first state are committed to the servants of
Christ, to Peter, and the other Apostles, with their succeeding
Church Officers, and they may let in, or put out there, and when they walk in
the Spirit in so doing, Christ approves what they do, and admits too gracious
operations of Spirit for blessing his Ordinances to them, or withholds his
presence from them as they admit, or put out. But for the other two states, the
Key is only with himself, Revel. 3.7. and into them none but he can give
admission: Whom he shuts out, to them none can open, and to whom he opens none
can shut this state against them. Into the second, he admits by the spiritual
Baptism those that receive the grace of God held forth in the outward Court,
(and witnessed to by the outward Baptism) rightly and effectually, Matthew. 3.11,
12. Those that by the Word and Spirit accompanying it, are truly prepared for
him, turned to him, to look toward him, and wait for him, Luke 1.16, 17. and
3.4. And these wait for, and shall in patient continuance inherit the third;
into which no ungodly person, no chaff in the floor of Christ, none without the
wedding garment though come into the house, none that work iniquity, though
within the outward form and state of the Kingdom, shall find entrance, 1 Cor.
6.9, 10. Gal. 5.20, 21. Matthew. 13.41, 42.

And let this be noted, that though ordinarily when mention is made of the
Kingdom of God, and of Heaven preached, and exhorted to be sought and entered
into, all these three stations of it are infolded in one another. As when its
said Paul or Christ preached the Gospel of the Kingdom, or preached the Kingdom
of God, etc. yet as that they ultimately aimed at, was the bringing men to the
Kingdom in glory, so that they most immediately, and nextly urged unto men to
receive and submit to, was the first station, The coming into the Church State,
and submission to Christ in his Government, Word, and Ordinances therein, as
that which he set up as the Medium to bring them into union with himself, and
so to participation of his glory; as the house in which his Feast is made
ready, and in a First Fruits in the regiment of his Grace and Spirit to be
pertook of by those that duly and rightly receive the outward Ministrations in
his Church, the waters where the Spirit moves for the renewing of those that
duly and submittedly wait upon him, and wash therein: The Bed of Love wherein
the immortal Seed of the Word of God, the Promise and Covenant made to Abraham,
is poured forth for the begetting children to him. Under the Regiment of Christ
here all ought to come, all the Gentiles are to be discipled, all, (so many as
they found without choice, distinction, discrimination, Matthew. 22.8, 9, 10.
and limitation) are to be brought, and here under to be nurtured that they
might enter the second, into which yet none of these do enter, but them that
entirely submit to him therein, (as we said before.) Those that obey him, Acts
5.32. the upright hearted, the poor in spirit, the righteous, they that bring
forth the fruits of it, and they shall have an abundant entrance, Psalm 84.11.
Matthew. 5.7. and 18.3. 2 Pet. 1.11. And going on therein shall be surely
rewarded with the third, Revel. 2.26, 27. and 3.34. and 3.21.

Now how the words are to be taken here, appears by what is said, and by what
follows in the Text, viz. He that receives not the Kingdom of God as a little
child, etc. that receives not, in the present Tense. Now the Kingdom to be now
received by us, is that that comes now to us, and that is certainly the
Government of Christ in his Word and Ordinances, as then to them ministered
externally by Christ, and as now left unto us in the writings of his Servants,
and by such as he has instructed therein, yet ministered unto us; with all the
operations of spirit that come along therewith in convincements and teachings
to fit us for entering into the inward regiment or privileges of it in
righteousness, joy, peace, etc. This was that that came to the Jews, or
approached nigh unto them, Matthew. 3.2. and 10.7. Luke 10.9, 11. and 11.20. But
they received it not, and some of them that received it, yet not going on to
receive it as little children with selfdenial, humility, meekness, they could
not enter in to the inward regiment, and its privileges, but finding the
entrance too strait, turned back again from it, John 6, 60.64. and 8.30, 31,
34. etc. The Kingdom as it shall come in glory has no rules annexed to it
about men's entertaining it, that I know of, but its evident, this of the
external Ministration, with the spiritual operations afforded therewith, for
bringing us into the state of spiritual union with Christ, has, and we find
that many could not become so far children in simplicity and self-nothingness,
as to receive it, it being as ordered by Christ every where spoken against, and
we find yet that men not receiving the instructions of the Word of this
Kingdom, as held forth to men in the Scriptures, in the reproofs and teachings
of it, stick in the form of godliness; nay sincerely attain to that, muchless
enter they into the inside of this Kingdom, to have the Law writ in their
hearts, and to experiment the peace and joy that is therein. Of such is the
Kingdom, the Government of Heaven, and of God. Nay, I know not how to exclude
them right to any part of it, if we shall take it for the Kingdom in its Glory,
as some do; for then much more should they have right to any other thing in it,
as they were capable of having it put to, and vouchsafed them, according to
Peter's arguing: But sure he meant the Kingdom of God, as they had the Keys of
it, or were to have; and so as they had power of taking in, or excluding,
suffering to come to Christ, or forbidding them: and as the blessings of it
were to be obtained for, and imparted to them, through man's ministration: for
it was not from the after-glory, or inward communication of spiritual grace
that they went about to detain them, but from that dispensation of blessing
which they were brought to Christ for, in an external way of ministration: And
therefore it is meet that we understand his Speech, so as may reprove and
correct their thoughts in that for which he faulted them: As if he should say,
The Kingdom of Heaven, which I preach, and am instructing you to be my
Ministers in, and which I am setting up, and gathering men into, is of such as
these Infants, or for such as these whom you thus slight and reject, therefore
forbid them not, but let them come unto me, as to the great King thereof, and
Prophet, therein to be blessed by me. As for the phrase. (...), we have the
like in Matthew. 5.3. (...), The Kingdom of God is theirs, or of them, they have
right to it, and it takes them in. Now shall right be withheld from them to
whom its due? Are we authorized to disciple all the Gentiles, baptizing them,
and that discipling them is a subjecting them to his Kingdom and Government;
and has our Savior said, That the Kingdom is of such as those Infants: And
shall we deny to disciple them thereunto, by baptizing them into his Name, to
be subject to his power set up in his Church for the nurture of them? Do not
they that deny them admission into the Kingdom run into that evil of his
Disciples here, or savor of the same root in them, for which Christ (...), was
very angry with them, and to correct which, and prevent it for the future, he
gave out this instruction. For of such is the Kingdom, etc.

But here we are encountered with many scruples and objection. viz.

1. That these children were not brought to Christ to be baptized, nor did he
baptize them, or bid his Disciples do it,

It Is true, these children were not brought for Baptism, with his
after-commission for Gentile Baptism, we ground the right of their Baptism. But
for the cause of his anger, it is more probable it was their low thoughts of
them; for their error which he rebuked them for, is best to be understood by
what he says for correction of them, had his displeasure been against them for
letting him in doing good, or merely cherish the bringers faith, etc. His
speeches would have been to that purpose, they would have contained the ground
of his rebuking them, as usualiy in all other cases they do. But now its
evident they contain the freeness of his grace to children, and their capacity
for the Kingdom, and by consequence of his blessing, therefore their fault by
in the contrary, their too low thoughts of them, as if unmeet and unworthy of
Christ's care of them, and acting in his Kingdom ministration toward them. And
no doubt but much of the wisdom and goodness of God and Christ is herein to be
seen, in ordering this providence, that so he might take occasion to open his
will toward them unto us, in that which he foresaw would be much questioned,
and to order it to be so diligently recorded by three Evangelists, that under
the mouth of three witnesses, we might be more confirmed in childrens right to
the Kingdom, and so by consequence to Baptism that takes them into it, and
acknowledges their right, and might not keep them out upon such an opinion of
them as the Disciples had of them. As for these, it was not perhaps so material
to baptize them, they yet being of the Jewish Church, and so in the Kingdom by
Circumcision, and especially now when neither he nor his Disciples were about
baptizing, nor they brought to him for that (which as we said perhaps they had
received before.) These things were done and said rather for instruction to his
Disciples, for their after-carrying on the business of the Kingdom, then for
their present information about them particular children. As usually his
Doctrines and Speeches to his Disciples upon any such occasion had a special
eye at their fitting for that business, and out instruction. All that discourse
in Matthew. 18. is plainly instructive to the Disciples about things pertaining
to the Kingdom, not only as at that present, but rather as it should be ordered
after his departure by them: the determination of that question about Divorce,
Marriage, and Continency, was plainly instructive to them too for ordering the
Affairs of the Kingdom in those matters too: and this about children follows
very fitly for their direction and instruction about them, as also in the same
order the Apostle gives hints of instruction about them, 1 Cor. 7.10.14. I say
not that the act of Christ then was a standing rule for Baptism. But in his act
doing that that is greater then Baptism to them, and in his expressions of the
ground of it, and instructions about it, he holds forth a fair intimation of
his will, and ground of their admission in the Church State for the future, as
well as formerly they were. Sure its a far more evident intimation of that,
then that saying, I am the God of Abraham, etc. was of the resurrection of the
dead to any ordinary understanding. The Commission authorizing to disciple all
the Gentiles, baptizing them, and this telling us expressly, That little
children are not to be kept from coming to him, because of such is the Kingdom:
They together afford sufficient foundation for their discipling, and admission
into the Kingdom, and so for their Baptism. And I think, the words here are
such as might justly occasion the Antipedobaptists to question their way
whether it will not rather expose them to Christ's indignation to deny admission
into the Kingdom to them, then any place they can produce give color to deny
it to them.

But some say further, Bring them to me, then suffer them to be brought.

He neither says the one nor the other in terminis, But suffer them to come to
me.

But neither say I, that here is an express command to baptize them, but a
declared ground of their right thereto, and a prohibition to hinder them that
in faith bring them to Christ, seeing of such is the Kingdom into which Baptism
is an outward declarative admission; and in prohibiting them to forbid their
coming to him, is an intimate instruction to admit and let them come in to him;
yea to further them therein. And I think none can deny, that the coming to the
people, or Church of Christ, to be under their care, and ministration is a
coming to Christ, in and amongst them; as of old, They that joined themselves
to the Church of God, are said to join themselves to the Lord, Isai. 56.3, 6.
To Christ in his Church as there protecting, covering, and holding forth life
to men, the servants of Christ do call men, testifying both to small and great,
Acts 26.22.
(which words are comprehensive of the least Infant, Job 3.19. Rev. 20.12.) the
grace of God in him. And yet when any man comes upon that call, whether of
himself, or brought by others, as these were, should we keep them out, and say,
Oh no, the Kingdom is not for you, the grace of Christ is not for such little
ones, nor to be testified toward them by discipling them, and admitting them
into the Kingdom, till they appear to be elect by showing faith and repentance.
We cannot tell whether there be any cover or protection here for them? Is not
this to reject the testimony of Christ, that says of such is the Kingdom of
Heaven? Is this to cherish the faith of those that bring them, or do we not
therein rather say, They err in exercising such faith, and so with these
Disciples rebuke them? Surely we therein fulfill not the Commission that bids,
Disciple all the Gentiles, baptizing them.



That follows not: for its one thing to have the Kingdom given them, and so be
admitted into it; and another to have every Ordinance of the Kingdom. If they
be admitted into it, and have the care and blessings of it, then have they that
which they have right to; then are they in part discipled, and put into the
School, where protections, guidance, and learning is to be had. Other things
they are to partake of as they they grow fit for it, As the Infants of old at
eight days old were admitted into the Kingdom set up in Abraham's Family, So say
the Hebrew Doctors, See else Ainsw. on Exodus 23.17. See also 1 Samuel 1.22.23.
and Isreal's Posterity, though they went not up to the Feasts, till they were
able to go in their fathers hands. Every one to whom the Kingdom belongs, and
that are to be Discipled, and baptized into it, is not therefore by and by
capable of every Ordinance and Office in it, no more then every one that is a
Subject is therefore to have every privilege of Subjects, as children to make
choice of Burgesses, etc. Again, there is a difference of Ordinances, some are
such as in which in the form of them persons are but passive, as to be
baptized, to be prayed for, and blessed, and such children are therefore more
capable of; others are such as in which persons are required to be active, as
the eatng in remembrance of Christ, the praying for, and blessing others, etc.
Such children are not capable of; yea to the Supper there is an express
Command; (...), Let a man (in general that comes to it) examine himself, and so
let him eat and drink: but of this Infants are not capable. But then its
replied, so neither are they capable of that that is required to Baptism, viz.
to believe, and repent.

I answer, There is no such injunction in all the Scripture that whosoever
comes to be baptized, should first believe and repent, and then be baptized.
Some indeed were baptized with this instruction, That they should repent,
Matthew. 3, 11. and that they should believe, Acts 19.2. But its not said, That a
man must first believe and repent, and so be baptized, as laying that down for
a general rule, as its in the other, to examine himself. Its again true, That
Peter speaking to persons opposite to Christ, and his way, and capable of
repentance, bids them, Repent, and be every one of them baptized into the Name
of Christ, Acts 2.38. but its to be minded again, That he speaks to persons
that had actually rejected Christ, and that could not nor would be baptized
into his Name really, and in truth, Except they did repent of their evil
thoughts of him, and carriages against him. 2. That his speech there is
applicative to the present people, when he says, Repent ye, and no prescription
of a general rule for baptizing in general, like that in 1 Cor. 11. about the
Supper, as when the Prophet having faulted the people for treading in Gods
Courts in their wicked ways, bidding them, Wash them, Isai 1 15, 16.
and put away their evil ways, do judgment, relieve the oppressed, and then
come, its not safe from thence to gather that none might come into Gods Courts,
till they had actually put away evil deeds, did relieve the oppressed, etc. and
so exclude children of three years old, because as yet incapable of such
actions; so is it unsafe from thence to draw a general rule, That none but
persons repenting must be baptized, because he first bids those persecuters of
Christ, repent, before he speaks to them of Baptism. 3. Its also to be minded,
though in exhorting them to repent, he speaks in the second Person
applicatively, Repent ye, yet in speaking of Baptism, he changes the phrase,
and speaks in the third Person, And let every one of you be baptized into the
Name of the Lord Jesus, a phrase that may be of larger construction then the
former. Its not, (...), Let every one of you repent, and be baptized: nor
simply repent ye, and be baptized, but repent ye, and let every one of you be
baptized: as if he should say, Repenting, come ye, wholly, all of you, of every
age into the house of Christ, or to be Disciples to Christ. While they were so
evilly affected to, or thoughted of Christ, they neither entered themselves into
his Kingdom, nor yielded up theirs to it, but repenting, they would both be
baptized into his Name themselves, and bring theirs in with them, and so every
one of them be baptized into the Name of the Lord Jesus. This is that that he
would have of them, and and therefore lays down a suitable reason, The promise
is to you, and to your children, etc. If they repenting had not yielded up
their children to Baptism, they had not been every one of them baptized into
that Name; so that that place may make more against such a rule then for it. I
know that of Philip to the Eunuch is alleged, Acts 8.37. If thou believe
with all thy heart, thou may: where some gather, That no person may be
baptized lawfully, but he that first believes with all his heart.

But to that I answer, That (besides the want of this verse, wholly in five
Copies, (it is observed by Beza, and others; and the omission of it by the
Syriack and Arabic Interpreters which does some what weaken its authority) all
that can be safely drawn from that expression, is this, That it behooves men of
years that come to Baptism, to be real, cordial believers of the truth of that
Doctrine, that they desire Baptism into, and not to dissemble with God, and his
servants, and deal hypocritically in what they pretend to give credit to. And
that persons so believing, be they of what Nation soever may lawfully be
baptized. But its not safe to conclude thence, That no person till actually so
believing may be baptized lawfully; that is more then Philip (if these were his
words,) ever said that we find Negative conclusions from such Affirmatives, are
not always safely drawn. As to instance, God says to Abraham, If there were
fifty righteous found in Sodom, he would not destroy it: yet we know it was not
therein couched as a truth, that unless there were so many he would destroy it,
nor is it safe to conclude, that there were not full out ten righteous persons
there he would not spare it, because he says, If there were ten such he would;
nor is it safe to say, that none but them that actually believe in Christ, and
that keep the Commandments shall enter into life, and be saved, and so exclude
all Infants as not actually capable hereof, because Paul says to the Jailer,
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved: and Christ to the
young man, Matthew. 19. If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments. It
might have been said to any uncircumcised Gentile, that if he was indeed
willing to walk in the Jews Religion, and bear the burden of their Law, he
might be circumcised, and yet it followed not thence, that such a saying
employed that no person might be circumcised, and so none of his male-seed till
actually so willing. So that place shows but how persons of age never
fore-brought up under, nor fore-instructed to the Name of Christ, upon their
being instructed into it, ought to come, but lays down no general rule for
Baptism, as if none till so grown, and so believing, might be baptized; As the
other about the Supper contains a general rule for those that are to come to
it, the speech being not only applicative to some persons, as those others
are, but in the third person indefinite.

But the phrase is, Not of these is the Kingdom, but of such: that is, Of such
in resemblance and spiritual frame.

Had it been of those, Jews only, that were members of that Church, and
therefore Christ says not so, lest we should mistake him, But of such.

2. The word (...) generally signifies, Ejusdem generis, aut speciei, or
ejusdem conditionis. Such in kind, nature, condition, and not metaphorical
resemblance only. We gave instances of it before, and comparing Matthew. 18.5.
with Luke 9.48. and Mark 9.37. it plainly appears, that (...), such a one
includes, (...) this very one, and such like, in nature the only place that
seems to have it in another signification, to me is that in 1 Cor. 15.48.
(...): As is the Heavenly one, such are they that are Heavenly: And yet I think
its clear there too, that such are they, is more then simply such in
Metaphorical similitude, even such in substance, and quality, and condition of
body, in the resurrection. Of such, then unless we will straighten the word
unwarrantably below its ordinary signification, is of such in nature,
disposition, and kind, as well as in metaphorical, spiritual representation
also: And it seems to me, that the next words will lead us so to understand it:
For when our Savior says, He that receives not the Kingdom of Heaven as a
little child: Is it not plainly couched in that speech, That little children
also do receive it? And that their manner of receiving is a fit platform and
resemblance of it in higher steps when we are grown men? Its an usual thing for
such manner of speeches to imply a doubting of the Verb, or act spoken of, As
to instance, Be wise as Serpents, innocent as Doves: who sees not that there is
an employed concession that Serpents are wise, and Doves innocent: and the
speech is all one with this, Be wise as Serpents are wise, etc. So Ephesians. 2.3.
We are by nature children of wrath, as the rest, that is, as the rest are
children of wrath, So Ephesians. 5.29. and 33. Let a man so love his wife, even as
himself, and as Christ the Church. That is, as a man loves himself, and as
Christ loves or cherishes his Church. I might add hundreds of such speeches,
yea sometime the Verb is repeated, as Job 10.4. See thou as man sees, Psalm.
125.1. As the Mountains are round about Jerusalem, so is the Lord round about
those that fear him, etc. And the word [receive] too is used of things of as
little action as Infants, As the Altar is said (...), or (...), to receive, or
not receive its sacrifices, 2 Chronicles. 7.7. And the Heaven (...), to receive
Christ, Acts 3.21. Yea children are said to have received circumcision, John
7.20 The word there, I confess is, (...), but (...) and (...) are sometime
indifferently used, as (...) in Acts 22.18. ^s all one with (...), John
3.11.32. And so (...), John 13.20. is the same with (...), Matthew. 10.40. And
that children of Christians are every whit as capable of receiving the external
Government of Christ by Baptism, as the Jewish children the Government of God
by Circumcision, we have before showed; as also how fit they are to receive the
instructions and form of Doctrine in the Kingdom of Christ, and submit
themselves thereto as they grow up. And it may be seen further in Timothy, who
of a child began to know the Scriptures, being trained up thereto by his
Mother, and Grandmother, as is most probable; and whether he might not be
baptized in infancy too, is wholly uncertain, there is no appearance to the
contrary. Paul found him a Disciple when he first met with him, and he was but
very young then, Acts 16.1, 2. etc. I am sure Christian Parents are to train up
their children in the Christian, as well as the Jewish were in their way of
institution, Ephesians. 6.4. But I pass this also.

But this is but however to be extended to elect Infants,

To which I answer, Esau, he was not in Infancy rejected from the Kingdom of
God, at least in its outward Regiment, or Church-stare; no, nor from
possibility to enjoy the eternal state of life, by any thing I can find. All
that is said of him while an Infant was this, That he should serve the younger.
And I am sure to be a servant to Christ, and his Church, is not to be rejected
from the Church, that is no more then is appointed to all Nations. And that was
the thing that Jacob and his posterity was chosen unto, to have the Kingdom
seated in his seed and posterity, and all others to have blessing in serving
him, but curse in despising and rebelling against him: as the Seed promised was
of, and in him, and there to set up his Kingdom. As for the same reason all the
other Tribes was to bow down to that of Judah, Genesis 49.9. and yet they were not
therefore reprobated from eternal salvation: In this respect Jacob is said to
have been loved, not personally only, but Nationally in his posterity, even to
Malachies time; for in his time that was uttered, Jacob have I loved, and Esau
have I hated, Mal. 1.2. That love to Jacob is brought to prove his love to
them, called also by that name Jacob, even as Jacob also while in the womb is
called the younger or lesser people; that it might be evident that that was not
spoken of his single person only, as men usually expound it, of a purpose of
his personal glory, and Esau's personal damnation: for that neither suits the
Oracle speaking of two Nations and Peoples, nor could be a fit convincement of
his Posterity so many hundred years after that God loved them, not the purpose
of Esau's personal damnation be any manifestation of hatred to his posterity,
in whose times his Mountains were laid waste: nor suits it with the Scope of
the Apostle, who was not speaking of Gods electing, or rejecting their persons
to eternal salvation, or damnation: nor perhaps of such purposes there at all.
But of his rejecting the Seed or Nation of Jacob, (formerly so loved) from
being his Church and People through their rejecting the Gospel, his earnest
wishes and prayers for their salvation, his endeavoring it also in the
Gospel-preaching; his saying, God could yet graff them in again, and that they
stumbled not that they might fall, argues, That he judged them not under an
absolute decree of eternal damnation, but that he speaks there of their
breaking off from the Church in their visible condition, See Romans 10.1. and
11.11.14.23. So that that Exposition and understanding of it, is a mere mistake
of the Apostle, and Prophet. Sure Esau had a birthright, and by that right to
blessing too, till he profanely sold it, and was in the Kingdom and Church of
God, notwithstanding that Oracle made known to his Parents till he threw
himself from it.

2. Had this been the reason of Christ's blessing of them, then was there less
reason for his being so much displeased with his Disciples, Matthew. 18.11.
they being wholly incapable of knowing a secret purpose not yet manifested. He
had told them, that he came to seek and save that that was lost; and they might
know that children were lost too, but of Gods secret purpose toward them they
knew not. And so this reason might excuse men for not praying for, and blessing
their children, because they know not whether they be elect, and so whether the
Kingdom be of such as they, or not.

3. Then should he rather have said (...), for of these is the Kingdom; and so
have put some difference between them, and other children; and showed them that
had they been some other children, he would not have been angry with them for
putting them back, because not such as these; but for these being elect
Infants, or Jewish Children, theirs is the Kingdom.

viz. That these Infants might belong to the Kingdom, because such as Christ
would bless, and therefore all that can be inferred from it this; That such
Infants as Christ will bless belong to the Kingdom.

Lord we knew not thy purpose of blessing these; and Christ should rather have
said, Of these, then Of such: as distinguishing them from other Infants, but
neither says he so, nor of such as I will bless, but of such as these are even
before he blessed them, or said he would bless them. Besides, this makes his
purpose to bless them, the ground of the Kingdoms belonging to them, whereas he
lays down their right to the Kingdom, as the ground whereupon he would have
them admitted to his prayers, and blessings; and upon that ground was
displeased with his Disciples for hindering their coming to him: yea, that
would found the ground of similitude between them, and such others grown men as
may enter the Kingdom, not in any thing in the children, but in his affection
only to them, in which is identity or sameness toward them and others, rather
then similitude; and so the after-instruction is out of the way that speaks of
our receiving the Kingdom as a little child, not of secret purposes and
intentions in Christ.

But will you say all Infants belong to it? Turks and Heathens may be admitted
into it too.

To this what my answer is may be seen by what is said before Matthew. 28.19.
Gentiles, and that we have put on the Name of Christians, we have not forgot
our selves, or rather the grace of God that admitted us, and put on the Jewish,
Pharasaical principles, to count the Indians and Turks, as common and unclean,
as their Pharasees counted us. Surely so far as God has cleansed, we ought not
to account common Yea, God has showed us that we ought not to call any man
common or unclean, that is, As the Son of God, Christ Jesus died for all, and
risen again, that they that live should live to him; and as God has to that
end also made him Lord of all, and has given all Nations to him, even the
utmost ends of the earth for his possession: and has given forth Commandment
to publish in his Name glad tidings, even the Gospel of his Kingdom to all, and
sent his servants in as much as in them lies, to disciple all the Gentiles,
(without exception) baptizing them into his Name, etc. so bringing them into
the obedience of his faith: So, did the whole world yield to his gracious
Proclamation, they might be into his Kingdom received, but such as refuse it,
refuse their own mercy, and choosing to follow Satan, do abide in his Kingdom,
and are out of Christ's. And their Infants are kept out with themselves, not
that they may not be discipled, and brought into the Kingdom, or as if the
Kingdom was prohibited to them, but because they are not brought, or come not
to it; their parents, and those that have the tuition of them hindering them;
and God for and by their refuseal lets them go, and theirs with them, and lie
in the darkness of the world, which they prefer before his Kingdom: otherwise
did even Turks or Indians yield up their children to Christians to be brought
up by them in the Christian way, or did God by his providence bring any of them
to be under their tuition, they may, yea ought to disciple them, baptizing
them, and training them up in the instruction of the Lord, notwithstanding that
their Parents were, or are Turks, or Pagans. Christ's Kingdom is free for
Infants to come into, any Infants, and those that come are to be entertained in
it, and not forbidden. They do well that bring them to it to be made Disciples
to Christ, and they do evilly that prohibit them.



Simon Magus, and in those that were baptized in the same hour, Act* 16.33.
that they heard the word first in, or very presently upon it, they and their
houses; for any that profess that themselves will (as it may be charitably
conceived) be willing to bring up theirs in the same way with themselves. Only
this we are to mind, that whom we admit, we take in to be under Christ's
Regiment, and to be trained up in his Name, and so in his Fathers, and Spirits,
in and with him, otherwise we should not disciple, baptizing them according to
the Commission, and therefore they that will not yield their children up to
that, and endeavor it by themselves, or yield them up to the care and
endeavor of such as will; their children are deservedly to be refused in this
business, because they should not thereby be discipled, or taken rightly into
Christ's Kingdom. And yet herein the servants of God are to beware of rashness
in judging men's intentions, and ought seriously to admonish and instruct men,
even as John did the Pharisees and Sadduces that came to his Baptism. And as
the Apostle wishes those that profess themselves believers to bring up their
children, Ephesians. 6.4. When the Lord and King comes to take view of his Church,
he will separate the good from the bad in his baptizing, and admitting into the
more inward states of his Kingdom, Gathering the wheat into his Garner, and
casting out the chaff into unquenchable burning.

But some object yet further,

To which I answer. 1. That its said without preof, Laying on hands, and
Praying, was a work of Ministry, yea of ordinary Ministry, at least it was so
in the institution of the Christian Church, and therefore it is by the Apostle
mentioned with other ordinary doctrines and practices. Heb. 6.1, 2 3.


2. The rule and ground of baptizing must come to us, and has done so from the
great Prophet of the Church Jesus Christ, and is to be searched for in his
words and actions. All that he did and said were the deeds and sayings of an
extraordinary Prophet; yea in his Ministration, he acted and spoke usually as
an extraordinary one, and yet in those his doings and sayings lie all the
grounds of our Religion.

3. We do not so much look upon, and urge his action, (though that a so is
considerable, and testifies his good will to children) as at his Doctrine and
Instruction left for us upon that action, as we said before.

But its said further:

Of such is the Kingdom.





2. That the External Ministerial part of it was rather there spoken to, we
have showed before. So much of the Kingdom may be given them as may be without
any proper action fore-required of them. And as for the Kingdom in its
spirituality and glory, that is not of them as they are children in nature, but
to that its required that they have a new birth: For the words are (...),
Unless any one be born of water, and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. However they that are of that, are much more of the outward
Court of it, or may be admitted into it by Peter's reasoning, Acts 10.47.



for him, is not merely positive, but moral, being part of that duty that God
enjoins to parents, and those that bring them up according as they have
knowledge and ability; and natural love graciously ordered will lead to it,
only the outward Ordinances witnessing and engaging to that truth, and way of
God, whether Circumcision, or Baptism, is merely positive.

2. The Command for Baptizing lies not simply here, but in Matthew. 28.19. where
all the Gentiles are commanded to be discipled, baptizing them; and that is a
Commission positive enough, large enough to include them, as large as to
include women, or uncircumcised ones, that is the Commission for it; and this in
Matthew. 19. instructs to the clearer understanding of that Commission with
reference to children, that they also are to be admitted into the Kingdom. And
whereas its added, that this is without reason, that is not so; for here is the
reason for their admission to Christ, which the Commission wills, viz. For of
such is the Kingdom of God. As also there is another before the Commission,
Matthew. 28.18. That all power in Heaven and Eearth is given to him; and
therefore its but meet that all ye children as well as others be discipled to
him, and baptized unto the acknowledgement of his Name: Which Name also is a
Name of grace to all, and so to them, the Savior of the world, and so of them,
as a part of the world. And for example, we have instances of baptizing in
expressions large enough to include them, as all the people, whole houses, etc.
yea, clearly including them, 1 Cor. 10.2.

3. Diverse other things merely positive have less, or as little clear
institution by Christ, in any of his practices and sayings. As the Supper of
the Lord is of as positive institution as Baptism; and yet there is as obscure
a Command or Example for women's partaking of it: As for this, as we have
showed, though its (...), Let a man examine himself, and so eat; yet as its not
every one that is (...), man, that may upon self-examination eat of it; for a
Jew, or Turk, though he should first examine himself, yet without renouncing
his former way, and submitting to be one of the Church of Christ, he might not
eat of it: So also a Company of men in Church-Assembly, though without women
amongst them, are (...) too, as well as when women are amongst them. Besides,
if that be warrant good enough for women to eat the Supper, because (...) is a
word of signification large enough, to include them, then why are we partial to
throw Infants out of (...), all Nations, or all Gentiles, us the Subject of
Discipling and Baptism, when that's every way as large to include them. If it be
alleged, that in 1 Cor. 10.17. its said, We all partake of that one bread, its
easily answered, that that (...), we all, is the same with (...), in the clause
before. The many that eat that one bread, are one body, and one bread, because
they all eat it, and that may be true, though none but men eats it: They being
many men are one bread, and one body, inasmuch as they all eat of one bread.
The Disciples that eat with Christ were many, and they all o^e bread, and one
body, inasmuch as they all eat of one bread, and yet there were neither all the
Church of Christ there, nor any women. Besides, That one bread that all that
eat of, are made one body and one bread by, may rather be interpreted to be
Christ, then the bread in the Supper. So that there is as much Command or
Example for admitting Infants to Baptism, as wom^n to the Supper; and for
reason there is as much laid down for it as is for them. If it be said of
women, That they are of the Body of Christ: so its said concerning Infants,
That of such is the Kingdom of God. The Kingdom being for such, is as good
reason for admitting them into it, as women's pertaining to the Body of Christ
to admit them to the Supper to remember it. Yea, might we not as warrantably
(against all the Hebrew Doctors) affirm, That no woman was to eat of, or did
eat the Passover Lamb in Israel, as that no Infant was, or may be baptized,
because that being a mere positive Ordinance, its never said, Let women eat of
it, or that they did: Nay its said; None that is uncircumcised shall eat of it:
And the Antipedobaptists say, Circumcision reached only to males: And if it be
replied, That all the Congregation of Israel was to keep it, Exodus 12.47. we
might after the same manner as the Antipedobaptists except against as large
expressions for Baptism, as all the people, all Nations, and say, That all the
Congregation might mean only of all the males that were all then to meet; for
that phrase is used when then there is little color for including the women,
as in 1 King. 12.2, 3. Besides, They might all keep the Feast of unleavend
bread, by abstaining from leaven, and yet not by eating the Passover Lamb. All
strangers too in their houses were to do the first, but not the second. So for
keeping the first day of the week as a Sabbath, of day of rest, and worship to
God, and not keeping the Seventh Day yet Sabbath, has as little positive
Command, and less too then this of Infant Baptism. Indeed, we find that on the
first day of the week the Disciples met to break bread, Acts 20.7. but he
says, Not to keep it a day to the Lord. Again, in 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. the Apostle
bids, That they should (...), every first day of the week lay aside something
for the poor Saints; but that they should keep it, or any other one day as a
Sabbath, not a Word. I might also mention Christian men's being Magistrates,
and the lawfulness of making Wars, and of Oaths in the Name of God for
Confirmations, but I pass them.

4. That children should be admitted into the Church State they had formerly in
custom and practice under the Law, and therefore for that there needed less
positive institution; only that which was of difference between that state,
and the state of it in the Gospel-time since Christ's Ascension was meet to be
declared; As that persons should be admitted into the Kingdom of God, and
discipled by Baptism, and that the Male-Infants of the Gentiles should not be
circumcised; and that females as well as males should be baptized; all which
are held forth in the Commission, Disciple all Nations, or all the Gentiles,
baptizing them: Though indeed it was formerly in use, as the Hebrew Doctors
say, To baptize their females in the times of Circumcision. Things that were
not to be altered, they might follow the light hinted to them in the Law, in
planting the Churches, though yet Christ left them not to that, but tells them
plainly, That of such as Infants is the Kingdom that he preached, and set up.
And such a hint as that with a large general Commission might suffice for that,
considering what had been their practice for receiving in Infants. And in this
way the Apostle made use of the Law, and ordered things in the Christian Church
with a correspondency, by way of analogy and proportion in like matters to what
was ordered in the Jewish Church in diverse particulars. As to instance, About
subjection of the woman unto the man, the Apostle says, I permit not a woman
to speak in the Churches, but to be in subjection, as also says the Law, 1
Cor. 14.34. And speaking of the lawfulness of the Gospel-Preachers, receiving
maintenance of the people, that they preach to, and labor amongst, he backs
his saying, and order with the authority of Moses Law. 1 Cor. 9.8* 9, 10.
Say I these things only, or says not the Law also the same: For it is
written, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn:
Thence inferring a minore ad majus: and by way of analogy, that if God regard
Oxen, and would have them sustained in their work by them for whom they work,
then much more the Preachers of the Gospel that labor for men's souls should be
by them also so sustained, 1 Cor. 9.8, 9, 10. Which direction he tells us, is
not (...), a bare humane prudence, but a duty approved of God. And so ver. 13.
he proves the same thing more plainly by the Order of God in the Law for their
Priests and Levites, alluding to Deuteronomy. 18.2, 3. with an (...), as if they might
well know, and could not reasonably plead ignorance of the mind of God in this
matter, from what they read in the Law of Moses before, and without his thus
writing unto them. Know ye not that they that ministered the holy things, eat of
the holy things, and they that serve at the Altar, partake of the Altar: even
so (...). The Lord has ordered or ordained that they that preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel. The main substance of the Law is yet observable,
though not the particular circumstances of tithes and offerings in that Legal
way. We cannot say thence indeed, That tithes are jure divino, but thence we
may say, That maintenance by the people, of those that preach the Gospel, and
labor in the work of God amongst them is an Ordinance jure divino. And if the
people by themselves, or their Representatives, whom they elect and choose to
make Laws and Orders for them, do pitch upon that way of tenths to do it in,
then is it in that way lawful to receive maintenance of them, that being the
way that the people have thought good to observe Gods Order in. The like I
might say about the Supper concerning the Apostles allusions to the Sacrifices,
and amongst them the Passover in his speaking of the nature of it, 1 Cor.
10.18. and 5.8, 9. Yea what else was their choice of Elders in every City, and
their laying on hands upon them in ordaining them, but a manifest reference to
the Law, and the Order of God therein in choosing Elders over the Congregation,
and laying on hands on them so chosen, upon which also followed the spirit of
Prophecy, in the first institution of them, Number. 11.24, 25, 26. with Deuteronomy.
34.9. And what other precept had they from Christ for so doing in the
particular Churches that we read of. And yet see the practice, in Acts 14.23.
even as their baptizing men, and all theirs, householders, and their households
together, seems to be a plain imitation of the circumcising men, and all their
males at the first institution of Circumcision and the after-proselyting of
Heathens to them. Now whereas some say, By the same reason we should have one
universal High Priest, or Bishop too, because they had an High Priest. I
answer, So we have, even the Man Christ Jesus, who then was not come in the
flesh to be High Priest to them: and that we should have another on the earth
follows nor, for they never had two together appointed them. Besides, That all
that Order of sacrificing and ceremonies, we have express testimony for the
ceasing, but of ceasing to have children in the Kingdom of Christ, or to bring
them up for the Lord, as Disciples to him, we have no expressions, but clearly
to the contrary, even as they were to disciple them to Gods Law and Statutes,
etc. Only whereas they had an Ordinance acted upon males only, (yet so as the
females were counted of the Circumcision in and with them, as if they had been
circumcised too) the Commission is in such expressions as take in both Sexes,
and the practice of baptizing both Sexes is expressed in Acts 8.12. They were
baptized both men and women: Which words are sometimes used to denote both
Sexes of any Age, rather then grown Ages only of either Sex, as may be seen, 1
Cor. 11.3.11.12. 1 Samuel 27.9.11. and 31.2, 3. As also in that of Ai, Josh.
8.25. (...). And all that fell in that day of men and women were twelve
thousand, even all the men of Ai. We must either say that there were no Infants
or children in so great a City, which is no way probable, or say that the
words, men, and women, denote or include the several Ages in each Sex. The like
I might note on Judge. 9.49, 51.

But there is no Analogy between Circumcision and Baptism,



1. They differ in the outward rite or matter of observance. Circumcision was a
cutting of the foreskin of the flesh, Baptism is a washing of the flesh. That
had blood in it, because true blood was not then shed that should make
atonement and expiation for our sin, to which that therefore pointed: This
has no blood shed in it, because the true blood that is propitiatory is shed,
and no other propitiatory Sacrifice is remaining, only washing and cleansing in
the virtue of that that is shed, is now needful. And therefore such an
Ordinance only is left to us for our coming into the Church of Christ, as
represents that to us.

2. They differ in the subject of them: That was only upon males, they being
only capable of it, and yet so as that females were by way of interpretation
included in them, as we noted before; else all the females must have been
excluded the Passover, contrary to the Jewish Doctors. But the Ordinance of
Baptism is upon male and female both: yea the Jewish Doctors say, it was ever
so amongst the Jews, when they proselyted any to them, all their males were
circumcised, baptized, and brought an Offering, and all the females were
baptized, and brought an Offering.

3. In limitation of time, Circumcision was required on the eighth day, though
in some cases they might omit it then. Baptism is not so strictly tied to a
day, or set time. The reason we hinted before.

4. Circumcision bound over to the observation of the Law given, and to be
given to the Fathers, and by Moses; and so to all the whole observation of the
Jewish Religion: but Baptism binds not thereto, but to the faith and yoke of
Christ to observe all things commanded by him, Matthew. 28.19, 20.

5. Circumcision was to bring them under the profession of an expectation of
the promised Seed yet to come, and not as then come: but Baptism is to bring
men under the profession of the promised Seed, as actually come, and now to us
Gentiles, as having accomplished in himself the sin-offering, and work of
Sacrifice for our salvation, and so into the Name of Jesus Christ, and of God
as known in him, Father, Son, and Spirit, Acts 2.37, 38. Matthew. 28.19. In these
things they differ, but in the main end they agree.

1. They agree in this, in being both the way or mediums of proselyting or
bringing into an acknowledged unity with the Church in outward profession, and
obligation, to observe the worship of God therein according to the respective
Administrations of it, now, and then: for as Circumcision was the Ordinance by
which persons were admitted and declared to be of the Church of God, and
Religion of the Jews, Branches of the stock of Abraham: So Baptism is that
Ordinance by which persons are admitted into, and declared to be of the Church
of Christ in its external Form, and Government, and become from the Gentiles
ingraffed visible Branches of the stock of Abraham too, as shall after more
appear: They that should not have been reckoned Branches of Abraham but by
Circumcision, are now so reckoned by Baptism. And as that (Circumcision) bound
to the observation of the Religion then of God instituted to instruct men to
Christ, so this (Baptism) obliges to the Religion, and worship of God,
instructing us about Christ, as now instituted by Christ. So that children of
Christians being to be brought up in the Christian institution, nurture, and
instruction, it follows that they are to be brought up in it, and obliged to it
by Baptism; all the children of the Jews and Proselytes were in their way by
Circumcision.

2. They agree in this: That as Circumcision was but an external Ordinance
instructing to an internal Circumcision of the heart, and sealing the
righteousness of the faith of Abraham that he had in his uncircumcision, viz.
That he did righteously in believing in God according to his word concerning
the promised Seed, and his blessing of him, and that God would perform his
promises righteously to him, and all that walk in that righteous faith of his:
So Baptism is but an external Ordinance too, instructing to the inward washing
and purifying of the heart by the grace of God in Christ to the meet making of
a man to participate of the Covenant, and promised Inheritance; and it
witnesses to the same promises partly as performed in the coming, death, and
resurrection of Christ, and partly as nigh at hand, and ready to be performed
to men in believing on Christ, that promised Seed, as Abraham did: as that all
that so do shall be blessed with faithful Abraham, shall have remission of
sins, righteousness, the Holy Ghost, and eternal life. And thus its said, That
John witnessed unto Christ the true light: which is to be understood of John,
not as a man simply, but as preaching and baptizing: so that his Baptism
pointed to Christ to believe on him with the promises of forgiveness of sins,
and the gift of the Holy Ghost to them that should so do. As Circumcision
sealed not the present righteousness of the party circumcised, as if all that
received that Ordinance were partakers with Abraham in the righteousness
reckoned to him, but to the righteousness of his faith: so neither does Baptism
witness the righteousness of the party baptized; for such may be a generation
of vipers; chaff, and not wheat, in the gall of bitterness, and bond of
iniquity, but to the faith of Christ, the Doctrine published concerning him, as
that He is the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world, and that
whosoever believes in him shall be reckoned righteous, and have eternal life.
So that the use of Baptism in its testimony and witness does nothing more
obstruct the baptizing Infants, then that attested to, and sealed in
Circumcision, obstructed formerly their Circumcision.

3. There is the same distinction of Baptism, as of Circumcision into outward
and inward, and the same emptiness in the one, as in the other, where merely
outward. There was a Circumcision of the flesh, and a Circumcision of the
heart, and the former without the latter, was no Circumcision in the sight of
God for admitting persons to the enjoyment of the righteousness of God: So
there is a Baptism in water unto repentance, instructing to that inward washing
of the heart, but that alone saves not, nor makes a true spiritual Christian
more then the other external Ordinance made a true spiritual Israelite: This is
but the putting away the filthiness of the flesh, but its the washing, and so
the answer of a good conscience through the Resurrection of Christ, that gives
right to fellowship with God in spiritual grace and glory, and which seals up
the soul to the day of Redemption, Matthew. 3.11. 1 Pet. 3.20, 21. So that
nothing more is in the nature of this Baptism, then was in Circumcision to
debar Infants from it.

4. There was no more compulsion to be used in proselyting by Circumcision,
then in discipling by Baptism. The Gentile proselytes were to declare
themselves as willing to renounce their false worships, and accept of the
Jewish Religion with its Ordinances, as ever we read that any Christian
Proselytes, or Disciples did, and yet their Infants were proselyted
notwithstanding any want of such personal profession. Thus (as Ainsworth out of
the Jewish Rabbis informs us in his Annotations on Genesis 17.12.) was their
practice. If they received of the Heathen a servant grown, and he was not
willing to be circumcised, his Master deals with him a whole twelvemonth
more then that it was not lawful to keep him; and if in that time he was not
willing, he sold him to the Heathen. And so for a woman taken captive that any
had a mind to make his wife, they forced them not to be Jews, but dealt with
her a whole year to accept their religion, and if she accepted not, they might
sell her. This for those under their own power, and dispose, whether bought, or
taken captive; but for such as came to be proselyted, they used to inquire
diligently, lest they came for by-respects, Ainsw. on Deuteronomy. 21.12.
as riches, or for dignity, or for fear; and if they find no such thing, then
they make known to him the Laws weightiness, and the toil in doing of it above
what other people have, to see if they will leave off. If they take it upon
them, and withdraw not (unto which there must be some public profession; for
it was never done but in the presence of three) then they receive him. So that
that confession of sins, or profession of faith, in those that came to Baptism
in grown years, was no unusual thing or unlike to the practice of Proselytes in
being circumcised to their Religion.

5. When they came to be circumcised; in coming to join themselves and their
families to the Church of God, they came under the wing of his protection; so
when men and their families come unto the Church of Christ, and are by Baptism
obliged to his yoke and doctrine, they come to under his protection and
salvation. Whence these phrases of salvation coming to such a house as where
Christ and the Gospel was received, and they were thereupon baptized, as Acts
16.31. Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, and thy house. So in
that of Zacheus, Luke 19.9, 19. of which protection nothing but the willing
refusals of some party in the house could deprive them.

6. Circumcision was but once acted upon persons, and that was in their
admission into the Church of God, ( except in that case of the children in the
wilderness, Josh. 5.4.7.) So neither find we any warrant for iterating Baptism,
that has been made into the Name of the Lord Jesus. Indeed there is a place in
Acts 19.4, 5. that seems to say that some Disciples fore-baptized were baptized
again. But the answer to that is known, that these words, ver. 5. [When they
heard this, they were baptized into the Name of the Lord Iesus] relates not to
those Disciples, but to the people baptized by John, which I confess does not
satisfy me. I think the Text may afford another, and bettet answer, viz. That
they were baptized again, because as themselves confess they were baptized into
Baptism: For when they were asked into what they were baptized, they say not
into the Messiah held forth by John, but into John's Baptism. Its probable that
some that thought it necessary for them to be baptized, and yet understood not
into what Name or Doctrine, but minded more John's act of baptizing or washing
them, then the Name or Doctrine declared by him, had come and pressed a
necessity of baptizing them, as John baptized the people, but held not forth
the Doctrine concerning Christ which he baptized them into, and so they were
baptized into his Baptism, and not unto the Name and Doctrine of Christ Jesus.
And I am the rather induced to believe that this is true, because Paul relates
unto them the Doctrine that John baptized into, as a thing which they had not
minded, and as that which they could never have been baptized and discipled to,
but that they must in knowing or hearing of, that have heard of the Holy Ghost.
And besides its said, that When they heard that, (as if they had never heard it
before) then they were baptized into the Name of the Lord Jesus. And truly it
seems to me to be thus with many Rebaptizers, they baptize into Baptism. For
the Name of Christ men had been baptized into before, and instructed more or
less into the faith of him, even the generality of those they urge Baptism
unto, and baptize again; yea there is often nothing concerning this Name of
Christ, in which they that are thus baptized by them differ from others; nor
from themselves, while content with their Infant Baptism, only they have been
by them baptized upon profession of joining with them in their way and Doctrine
and Baptism. Whence its clear that they are baptized into Baptism, or into
fellowship with such a man, and his way of Baptism then into the Name of
Christ. And whereas formerly Baptism into Christ was the note of distinction
between those that acknowledged Christ the Son of God, and Savior of the
world, and looked for salvation by him; and them that believed not so, but
worshipped either Heathen Idols, or God in another name, and not in Christ: now
they make it a distinction from the generality of them that profess that Name,
though in point of faith nothing differing from them, so that its the Name of
Baptism that they run out withal, and baptize into, crying, Oh this is Baptism,
an excellent and needful Baptism. Its not the Name of Christ that they make the
proper Character of their Church, and which they are distinguished from others
by, for that they had as much before perhaps, and others have as substantially
that profess and own not another baptizing. Such seem to me to need rather to
return back again from that their Baptism, then to press others to be baptized
thereinto, as if it was the necessary thing in which men are to have salvation.

7. And indeed herein also Baptism and Circumcision agree, That as that was the
Note of distinction (Circumcision I mean, as witnessing the righteousness of
the faith, and obliging to the Law) between the Church of God, and all other
people, so as that all that were circumcised by virtue of that appointment of
God, were reputed the Israel of God according to profession; though of
different Tribes, Nations, and ways of worship, (as after happened between the
ten Tribes, and the two, and so the Samaritans,) so as that though upon their
erring from the Law, and right form of worship, they were no therein to be
joined withal, yet upon sight of their error, and idolatry, and renouncing
it, they might be received into unity of worship with them that rightly
worshipped, without a new urging or alteration of their former Circumcision,
although done in those times that they or their Fathers worshipped not aright
according to the Law which it obliged: So Baptism distinguishes, and was at
first the badge of distinction between the Church professing the faith of
Christ, and worship of God according to him, and all others, whether Jews, or
Gentiles, not submitting to the Christian Name, and Institution; and such as
retain that Name and profession, and are baptized thereinto, though in their
particular beliefs and ways of worshipping in that Name, they have exceedingly
erred and corrupted themselves from God, yet need nothing for their having
fellowship with those that worship aright in that Name but the renouncing and
letting go their departures from Christ in their idolatrous and evil
principles, and practices; without any altering or iterating their former
Baptism. So that the Analogy between these two, is such as affords ground
enough for arguing; as the Apostle did in cases before mentioned, it being a
clear case that children are to be subjected to Christ, and brought up in his
nurture and admonition: So that the less need of an express Command in a case
so like to what was practiced constantly before; and which succeeded that of
Circumcision too especially, as to us Gentiles. They being now to be taken by
Baptism into Abraham's family, or Church, propogated by the holding forth of his
faith, who formerly were to have been not so taken in, and joined to them but
by Circumcision: Nor mattered it against this that they were for a time
together in the Jewish Church, for so was Solomon anointed during David's life
and reign, and yet his Successor, and so the Apostles who succeeded Christ in
point of Ministration to the Church, did yet minister sometime before his
Ascension. Nay, there being no prohibition of this practice of taking in
children in express or employed terms, its as a silent confirming of that order
in the following way of admission. Yea, his telling us that the Kingdom is of
such as those little ones brought to him, and express bidding his Disciples
disciple all the Gentiles, baptizing them, amounts to little less then a
positive express Order for baptizing them.

Now whereas its objected further, that Baptism and Circumcision pertain to
diverse Covenants: Abraham, and his carnal seed; This is to Christ, and his
spiritual seed. That was a Covenant of carnal promises, and earthly enjoyments:
This a Covenant of spiritual promises and heavenly enjoyments: therefore none
should be admitted into the Christian Church but spiritual stones, real
believers. As Circumcision was upon carnal Infants, or natural children: so
should Baptism be upon spiritual Infants, newborn babes in Christ. I shall
consider nextly (by Gods assistance) what substance is in it.

1. The Covenant that God made to Abraham, that in him, and his seed should all
the Nations be blessed, Genesis 12.3. which the Apostle calls the Gospel preached
to him, Gal. 3.8. That God would be his God, and the God of his seed, and that
he should be the Father of many Nations. The former of which is the most
spiritual promise set before the believing Gentiles, 2 Cor. 6.16. to be their
God. A promise reaching beyond this life, even to the state of Glory. Whence
Christ proves by this very privilege of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, That the
dead shall rise, even those dead persons, Matthew. 22.31, 32. And the Apostle
tells us that upon it is grounded, or therein is contained Gods providing them
the Inheritance it self, even that City or state of Glory with his seed, that
as yet he has not received, or had not in his life time; Far they died in
faith, not having received the promises, Heb. 11.13, 14, 15, 16. Yea, what
greater glory or privilege is set before us Christians, or shall be inherited
by us in the New-Jerusalem then this? He that overcomes, shall inherit all
things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my Son, Revel. 21.7. And they
shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them their God, ver. 4. And
for the making him a Father of many Nations, this the Apostle tells us, takes
in the spiritual Seed, even all the believers through the Gospel, or word of
promise revealed to him, and now more fully to us in Christ Jesus. Yea at
length the world, Romans 4.12, 13. when they shall all remember, and turn to God,
Psalm. 22.27. And sure his giving him Christ to be his Seed, that all Nations
should be blessed in, and by virtue of union with him multitudes out of all
Nations, and in due season the generality of all the Nations to be his Seed,
was no carnal, but a most spiritual blessing; and so the Apostle sets it before
the Gentiles, as a most spiritual blessing, to be the Seed of Abraham according
to promise, and to have him the Father of us all, Gallat. 3.29, Romans 4, 16, 17.

But we find that God promised to make him exceeding fruitful, and to give him
the Land of Canaan, Psalm. 105.8, 9, 10, 11. And are not these things carnal?

Canaan was not only nor so much the Land in its then estate; for so neither
he, nor Isaac, nor Jacob, (nor many of his seed) had it in their life times:
For he gave him none inheritance in it, no not to set his foot upon, Acts 7.5.
They lived not to enjoy it for their portion, and though his seed after the
flesh had it, and dwelt in it, yet that was but a little while, Isai. 63.18.
whereas in the Covenant it is given for an everlasting possession: Therefore
sure the Glory of Christ's Kingdom in it is the thing mainly promised, and so in
the restoration of all things they shall possess it, even the spiritual Seed,
when made new, and in a new and glorious way, in the New-Jerusalem, when become
the joy of the whole Earth.

2. Though these promises were fulfilled carnally, out of his loins naturally
Kings and Princes came, and many of his natural Seed had, and dwelt in the
Land, yet that would not make the Covenant to be carnal: for if promises of
carnal mercies in a Covenant make it carnal, then the Covenant in Christ now is
carnal too, for therein also is the promise of this life, as well as of that
that is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. Thence the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.3. applies that
carnal promise of the Land of Canaan with a little alteration to children of
the Gentiles now: That thou may live long in the earth: answers to that,
That thou may live long in the Land that the Lord thy God gives thee. Those
temporal promises then cannot make it to have been a carnal Covenant, no more
then the adding of promises for the things of this life makes the Covenant in
Christ a carnal Covenant. Indeed the Mediation and Ministry of Moses, as a
Minister of the Old Testament given by him, was exercised more immediately
about those carnal promises, as Deuteronomy. 28.1.14. As Types of the more heavenly
things, (even as his Law was an injunction of typical carnal Services, and
ceremonial Observations, Heb. 98, 10.) To which the Ministration of Christ, and
Mediation of better promises, Heb. 8.5, 6. is opposed (as is evident throughout
the Epistle,) and not to the Covenant and Promises made with Abraham, to which
Circumcision was first annexed.

3. Though Circumcision obliged to the Observation of Moses Law, when it was
given, yet (as the Apostle tells us) it was a seal not so much of the carnal
promises, as of the righteousness of Abraham's faith: viz. That God would
reckon them the Seed of Abraham, and impute righteousness to them, as to
Abraham, in so believing, Romans 4.11, 12.23. So that the Covenant as
circumcision was annexed to it as a Seal was rather as it was a Covenant of
spiritual promises: even as to such promises Baptism especially witnesses.

2. The Seed of Abraham interested in, and heirs of this Covenant, are, and
were always not a carnal as such, but a spiritual Seed: Though a multiplication
of his carnal seed also was promised in the Covenant, as to his own particular,
yet the proper heirs of the Covenant in the righteousness of the faith that
circumcision sealed, were only a spiritual Seed, the Sons of promise. The
Apostle is clear for this, when he makes Christ the Seed, to whom the Covenant
or Promises were made, and that is Christ personally and mystically. Gal.
3.16.29. If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to
the promise. And so in Romans 4.12.16. Abraham is Father not only of them that
believe being circumcised, but of those that are Gentile-believers of the
uncircumcision also: They that are of the steps of the faith of Abraham,
whether circumcised, or uncircumcised, they are the Seed, and the promise is
sure to all them. And what more plainly then that in Romans 9.6.8. That not all
that are of Israel, therefore are Israel; nor because they are Abraham's seed
are they therefore children; but the children of the promise, they are counted
for the seed: that is, They that are born of the promise, or grace of God held
forth in the promise or Gospel of Christ: For in his death and resurrection,
the promise is said to be performed to us that was made to Abraham, Acts 13.32,
33. There is no branch in the Covenant of Abraham sealed and confirmed to all
the natural seed of Abraham, as their proper legacy and portion that God would
not fail to give them absolutely, no not in the things that were but external:
the Land of Canaan was not the portion of them all, nor enjoyed by them, nor
fruitfulness in issue, etc. Its true, all the outward mercies that the natural
seed enjoyed; yea, their very beings of his offspring, were parts of the
faithfulness of God to Abraham, and they themselves were in a part the
fulfilling of the Covenant to him. But those things that Abraham has heirs in
after the Covenant, (heirs of the Covenant promises) were not to the Seed after
the flesh, but after the Spirit, Christ, and his members.

3. That Covenant made with Abraham, is the same that the believers of the
Gentiles are under, and its performed in them, and to them. In them as his seed
in Christ, to them as God is their God, and they his people, and shall have the
New-Jerusalem, and Canaan with him; as they are blessed with him in remission
of sins, and righteousness. And this flows from the former, For if they be his
seed, and heirs, then inheritors of his blessings, Gal. 3.14. And if not so,
then not his seed, and heirs, if what they enjoy, or are interested in, are
other riches then those given to him. Indeed this is peculiar to him, That he
is Father of us all that believe, even of many Nations; and so that Christ in
whom the seed is chosen, and begotten, is his Son according to the flesh, and
was to come of his seed after the flesh. Though in this latter the peculiarity
is not his from all others, for many of his seed also had it with him, but from
multitudes of his seed, and others that had not so. But the Scripture is
express, That the uncircumcised Gentile-believers have interest in the same
Covenant in other things, in that it calls them, (...), and (...), of the same
Body with the believing Jews, and partakers of the promise in Christ; graffed
into the same root with them, and partakers of the same juice and sap; not of
other, but the same: thence fellow-heirs, and brethren, Abraham being the
Father of them all, in respect of the Covenant. Indeed the Administrations or
holding forth of the Covenant, and means for nurturing men up in the
expectation, (and enjoyments of it in some beginnings) were diverse. There the
heirs were under the Law, and all the seed of Abraham after the flesh were to
be trained up in that way of bondage under types and shadows pointing to
Christ, but now under the Gospel-declaration in a plainer way, and more
spiritual, with such Ordinances, as are annexed and fitted thereto; that Law of
Ceremonies being accomplished, and so put to its period in the coming and death
of Christ. Thence there is a difference both of Gospel-preaching, and
Ordinances now from what was then, they having such as might nurture them to
the expectation of the promised Seed, the Son of God in his coming in the
flesh; we such as witness to him as already come dead, risen, and glorified,
and instruct to expect him coming in power, and spirit.

4. The Medium for begetting and bringing in sons to Abraham according to the
Spirit, was, and is one and the same in substance, though otherwise now, then
then in its declaration. They were always born of the Gospel, and not of the
Law, though nurtured under the Law, both before and after. And the Gospel was
the same as preached to them, and unto us, the same in substance: viz. That in
Abraham and his seed all the Nations of the earth should be blessed; not in the
works of the Law, but in him believed in. To the which faith the Law shut them
up, taking away all possibility of life, and blessing in and from themselves,
while it discovered their sins, and showed them their obligation under the
curse for its transgressions. Indeed then that Seed was preached as to come,
now as already come, and perfected for saving us: But always of that Gospel, or
Word of Gods free grace, were the true Seed begotten: they were in all times
the believers, and not the workers for life, and trusters in their works: And
the word of faith was always Jesus Christ, or the Seed that is Jesus Christ,
who was yesterday, to day, and the same for ever.

These things being considered, that difference before objected appears false,
and to spring from wrong apprehensions. Thence the inference therefrom follows
not, viz. That Baptism must be upon a spiritual Seed, as Circumcision was upon
a carnal; both of them in their several seasons have been upon a spiritual, and
upon a carnal too. Circumcision was upon a carnal seed in Ismael, and all the
natural Israelites upon a spiritual, when a stranger joined himself to the Lord
in love to his Name, Isai. 56.3.6. 1 King. 8.41, 42. And so Baptism was upon
the natural, carnal seed, and not spiritual, when the multitudes, even the
generality of the people were baptized by John, chaff, as well as wheat; And
upon the spiritual, and not carnal seed in the Eunuch, Cornelius, and others of
the Gentiles. That inference springs from this wrong conception, that the one
and the other, are seals of the Covenant, as due to the parties signed with
them: which we have showed before to be an error: Circumcision sealed but the
righteousness of Abraham's faith held forth to them, not the righteousness of
each person circumcised, and his enjoyment of the Covenant, otherwise then upon
condition of his so believing as Abraham did: neither does Baptism witness the
faith of the party baptized, or that he is an heir of promise, but to Christ,
and the faithfulness of God in performing his promise in Christ: that we are
sinners in our selves, and need cleansing, otherwise not fit for fellowship
with God; but that there is in Christ a cleansing and propitiation made ready
for us, that he takes away the sin of the world; and that whosoever believes in
him, turning from all other things to God, by him shall meet with
righteousness, and forgiveness: they are both of them Ordinances of the outward
Court, or of admission into the outward Regiment of Christ's Kingdom, in which
men are to wait upon him for instructions and teachings to salvation; and
therefore it says men should believe in him, and having believed, that they
should yet go on to do so, and they shall meet with a performance of the
blessing of Abraham unto them. The Baptism with the Holy Ghost, is indeed upon
the spiritual Seed only, (if we grant them in Heb. 6.4, 5. to have been
spiritually born) sealing them up to the day of Redemption: but the outward
Baptism is not so limited, it being a more carnal thing acted upon the flesh.
Nor say I that persons (Infants, or others) are to be baptized upon this
ground, that they are in the Covenant, and heirs of it in a proper sense: but
because Christ being Lord and Savior has salvation and forgiveness in him for
them all, and they are to submit unto him, and be trained up for him, that in
minding and holding fast his sayings faithfully they may become heirs, and
inheritors of his Covenant, and Kingdom; as to that purpose we find John
instructing the people that came unto his Baptism, That they might be made meet
to inherit with the Saints, or to receive the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, and be
gathered into the Garner, Luke 3.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Matthew. 3.9, 10, 11, 12.
And we find him baptizing Publicans, Soldiers, Pharisees, Sadduces: yea, the
generality of the people, concerning whom he never says, That they were
therefore the Heirs of the promise, or Seed of Abraham according thereunto, but
exhorts them not to reckon themselves so, because of their birth of him, nor
think because of their present Baptism, that they were sure enough, telling
them, his Baptism was but with water unto repentance, or to instruct them that
they should repent; that he admitted one and other, chaff, and wheat; that
Christ to whom he witnessed, and instructed them to look, had the true Baptism,
that would indeed cleanse and renew them, the Baptism of the Spirit, etc. The
like we may observe of the Apostles baptizing the Gentiles, That it was a
bringing them into the house of God, where the Feast is to be had, into the
society of those that acknowledge him come in the flesh, and to be the Son of
God, there to attend the Kings coming to them, and taking them into his
banqueting Chambers, Matthew. 22.9, 10. And he puts the difference between those
that are made meet for the Feast by and in his Servants Ministration, and them
that are not, and accordingly deals with them. Indeed its too low a conceit to
think that an external Ordinance should seal an internal, spiritual heirship.
That Is the work of Christ, or Christ by the Spirit of promise. When men in the
Gospel hearing have believed, and in attendance to such outward nurture as the
external form of the Kingdom affords, are brought into, and made single for
Christ; then he seals them with his Spirit of promise, and owns them for heirs,
as the Scripture witnesses, Tit. 3.6.5. Heirship follows his justifying by his
grace, which is met with, and received by faith, Romans 5.1.9. and 1 Cor. 6.11.
and then after that follows the Spirits sealing, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. Romans 8.15,
16. Indeed there is a double justifying, washing, and cleansing. One,
Ministerial by men, as when a Jew, or Pagan, turning in to the Doctrine of the
Gospel to own it, is washed by Baptism, and therein ministerially acquitted,
and cleared from all his former idolatry, so that the Church charges it not
upon him, as to their carriage toward him. The other is Gods act, when a soul
in, and through the Gospel, thoroughly and cordially believing is acquitted and
owned of God: Upon this second follows his sealing. Its true, the Jews with all
their Proselytes, were called (...), the children of the Kingdom, because in
its outward Court, or Regiment, and because to them it was in the first place
in its altered form to be tendered, Matthew. 8, 12. And in this respect too they
were called (...), etc. Children of the Prophets, and of the Covenant that God
made with Abraham: Which signifies not only that they were the natural Seed of
the Prophets, and of Abraham, (for perhaps that they might not all be, there
might be many of them who had grown in with them out of other stocks, by
becoming Proselytes) but all that were circumcised (as they were) were to have
the Covenant first tendered to them, and indeed conditionally made with them;
and they were under that part of it that afforded directions and means to them
to become of the spiritual Seed, viz. The Doctrine of the Messiah, and the
salvation in him, (further explicated by the Prophets in their succeding
generations) and that added Doctrine for Precepts and Ceremonies for
instructing unto him, and for shutting them up in sin from all confidence in
themselves, that they might be forced to accept of him; this they were under,
and children of, and born, and brought up in a way of nurture to seek after,
and look for its most glorious promises, which in obeying the voice of God so
as to have their hearts circumcised thereby, to walk in the steps of the faith
of Abraham, they should also have had made good unto them; as is clear to me in
Jer. 11.4, 6. where the Prophet calling upon the people to hear the words of
the Covenant, and pronouncing a curse to every one that obeys them not, tells
them its the same he commanded them, when he brought them out of Egypt, saying,
Obey my voice, and so shall ye be my people, and I will be your God, that I may
perform to you the Oath that I swear to your Fathers to give them, a Land
flowing with milk and honey. What more clear then that the Covenant of Gods
being a God unto them, and taking them for a people, and the things absolutely
promised to Abraham, and his spiritual Seed, were conditionally made and
propounded to them that were the natural seed and family of Abraham; yea, and
so he was also with them to protect and keep them, yea, to circumcise their
hearts, and draw them nearer to him, while they were with him: but in forsaking
him, and hardening their hearts against him, he also withdrew from them from
doing them good, Psalm. 81.9, 10, 11, etc. 2 Chronicles. 15.2. Psalm. 95.6, 7, 8. So
that in this sense they were foederati, in the Covenant, it was held forth to
them upon condition of walking in the steps of Abraham's faith and obedience of
faith, and they were taken in under the wing of the Almighty for the nurture of
his Law and Doctrine with reference thereunto. In which they were privileged
above all other peoples, and distinguished from them, they being an holy people
to God, and all others unclean to them unless proselyted to them; and yet the
seed of Abraham, to whom the promises were properly made, were as we have seen
only the seed according to grace that walk in the steps of the faith of
Abraham, to them only God engaged himself to give the righteousness of his
faith that was sealed in the sign of Circumcision; and not to any of them that
mistaking the mind of God, thought themselves Abraham's seed, because born of
his flesh, and therein rested; or because observers of the Law commanded for
their instruction and convincement, and there rested, or sought righteousness
therein, Romans 9.6, 7.31, 32. But now the promised Seed being come, who is the
heir of blessing, and that brings it down to us, and he having done and
accomplished all those things in himself, that those foregoing shadows of the
Law pointed to concerning him, they were now to have ceased looking to him, and
in stead thereof have come to him, and his institution, even all of them, Mat.
23.37. as may appear clearly in this, That those that rejected him, were old
and young, infants and sucklings, included in the punishment denounced upon
rejecters of him, viz. desolation and unchurching, Matthew. 10.14, 15. and 11.21,
22 23, 24. Luke 19.44. And by this that when they shall come in, the whole
Nation shall come in together, Isai. 66.8. but now most of them refused him,
and his Kingdom. Whereupon (the partition wall of the legal ceremonial
Ordinances being broken down in Christ's death) it pleased God rejecting them
again, to set forth his salvation unto all people, and to send his servants
with as full and large a Commission for bringing in all Nations into his house,
as before they had to invite the Jews that were forbidden, Matthew. 22.8, 9. that
so he might perform his Covenant and promise to Abraham, in making him a Father
of many Nations. Thence that Command, Go and disciple all Nations, or all the
Gentiles, (not circumcising them, and subjecting them to the former way of
nurture fitted for the times and ages before Christ's actual coming, but)
baptizing them, and teaching them to observe all things, (not which Moses, but)
which I have commanded you. About which rejecting of the Jews, and taking in
the Gentiles, that we may yet the better see whether all Infants were rejected
from the external Court of Christ's Kingdom, or those only that were in tuition
of those that actually rejected it, let us

5. Consider a little that of the Apostle, in Romans 11.16, 17. in which he
compares Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as having the Covenant, Kingdom, and
Worship of God to a root, and the members of that Church or people in that
faith or profession to branches growing upon that root, whereof some he says
are (...), according to nature, born of them, and brought up to that faith and
profession: Others, (...), besides nature, by nature branches not only of other
parents, but originally, or naturally, springing and growing up under other
Religions, and so wild. Now he tells us some of those branches were broken off
through unbelief, namely from unity with Abraham, etc. in the privileges and
blessings derivable unto men in, and through the Covenant and Kingdom given
them, and from being owned of God as members of their Family, and subjects of
that Kingdom, in which the faith and covenant of Abraham are rightly held
forth, and where Gods protection is engaged, and so from fellowship too with
them that are thereof, and therein, and whom as yet God had not rejected, and
cast out therefrom. Which Subjects with their privileges were of a double
rank: viz.

1. Those that are born of the faith of Abraham, begotten unto God, believers
in him as he was; and to them by virtue of the Covenant appertained the special
presence and blessing of God in justifying, sanctifying, owning peculiarly and
absolutely as his people, and making out himself to them as their God to
eternal life.

2. Such as were brought under the tenders of the Covenant, with whom God was
dealing, and whom he was instructing to hear and listen to him, and so
conditionally holding forth the Covenant to them, but not overcome as yet, to
be of his spiritual Seed, to believe and walk in faith as Abraham did. Yet to
them he granted the liberty of his Ordinances, and the Instructions held forth
therein, and therewith, and such a dispensation of his presence, and operation
of his Spirit with them, as in yiedling to which, and following on after him
therein, they might be brought to the true Circumcision of heart in the
spiritual knowledge of God, and so to be of that spiritual Seed, with much
patience and goodness toward them, with protection and defense of them against
those who for their profession sake would harm them, Psalm 81.9, 10, 11, Isai.
48.17, 18. and 5.3, 4, 5.

The latter of these (many of them) not being by the operations of the Spirit
vouchsafed, brought to believe, and to be circumcised in heart, but contenting
themselves with an outward profession after many rebellions of themselves and
Forefathers, were broken off from those ordinantial privileges and
operations, and protection of God therewith afforded them, and so from the way
and means of participating of that juice and sweetness peculiar to the
spiritual Seed, much more from the enjoyment of those things themselves. As
many of them in their particular persons had been before-time more secretly and
indiscernably for their miscarryings in the receipt of, and subjection to the
Doctrine held forth from Abraham, and in his house broken off from liberty to
the former, who yet possibly might continue in the external profession and
society of the Church owned by God unto their deaths: so now after many desires
to gather them, and after their many resistings of the Holy Ghost, the
generality of them, or the greatest part of their present springing branches
with multitudes of their dependant twigs; that is, their posterity, were broken
off and unbodyed from the latter also, his servants with their message being
sent from them, (to whom God used formerly to send his Prophets) to the
Gentiles, and not only the promises held forth to them, but the
Church-form-state and privileges delivered to them. And this is to be minded,
that the thing most evidently spoken to in this business of breaking off, and
graffing in, is that Church State which is more visible, and outward, with that
presence and operation of Spirit that is suited thereto; and not as some say,
The invisible state of the highest favor by election, for that those broken
off never had, nor could those graffed in been in possibility to have lost, as
is intimated in that expression, If thou that art grafted in, do not continue
in his goodness, thou shall also be broken off.

But does not that distinction of Branches that are (...), imply that there is
a difference put between Jews and Gentiles, as to their childrens having right
of branchship: the Jews were under the Covenant as they sprang up naturally
from Abraham; but the Gentiles only by election, and inward gracious implanting
by faith and spirit into Christ, otherwise believing Gentiles children should
be natural branches too.

Jews naturally sprung up under, was not that election to eternal life, for to
that only spiritual-birth entitled them, they being in that regard by nature
children of wrath as well as others; and therefore concerning that the
distinction into natural and preter-natural is not made.

2. Its true, that no Gentile, or his children, has so immediate right by
nature to branchship in this root, as Abraham's natural Seed had. No Gentile is
of this tree or stock but by insition, nor ever was in the times before Christ;
which insition is not tied up to election, and an inward gracious implanting
therefrom, springing as the Objection says; for as to the branchship in
Church State, the Jews rather had that by election then any other people, they
being in that respect called an Elect people, Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8. and 10.15. And
as for the eternal Covenant-state none are more or less naturally in that then
other, it being merely by grace, in which there is no room for fear, lest they
be broken off, if the Doctrine of Election be not mainly mistaken. Its plain
that that which the one were broken off from, the other were graffed in into,
and that from that there is supposed a possibility of some of those graffed
ones to be broken again; and its plain that unto that branchship in standing in
actual and visible fellowship with Abraham in the institution and profession of
the faith delivered to him, as to its substance, and so to the external
Church State and privileges, some came according to nature as born of him, and
brought up from their beginning therein, (as out of the true Olive spring
naturally many branches that never were brought from other, whereunto it,
though even of those branches all may not prove fruitful, and so many be lopt
and cut off,) and others by natural growth or birth spring not out of that root
and stock, but are taken out of other wild Olives, and are implanted into this
fellowship, and thereby have union with, and partake of the sap of the root.
Now those twigs which naturally shoot up from these latter are also in the same
root with them from which they spring by virtue of their insition into it till
some way broken off, though neither they nor their branches from which they
spring are originally natural branches to the root, but branches by insition,
which this root naturally and originally did not produce. And so in all ages
the Gentiles were (...), ingraffed preter-naturally. When a man became a
Proselyte, he became of that stock by faith: by first believing the Doctrine
either really or professedly, and so by insition or adoption into that society
or tree, and by virtue of that insition all his children that sprung up from
him (while in that Stock or Church Fellowship at least) became branches of it
too; but yet inasmuch as they sprung naturally from an ingraffed branch, and
not from the natural, they were originally ingraffed, (...), They have it
naturally to be branches of that ingraffed branch, and so they should have
been, had it stood in the wild Olive, and never been translocated, but they
have it not by nature to be branches of this tree, and such, or so disposed as
now, that they have by virtue of their being twigs or branches of an insition:
between which and the natural branches, as to right of participation of the
juice and fatness of the root, there is now no more difference. Thus it was
with the Gentile Proselytes, in regard of the Common matter sealed or admitted
to by Circumcision, and thus it is still (by the Apostles arguing there) the
Gentile Converts became branches of that stock of Abraham, not naturally, but
by insition, by which insition their children come to branchship in that Olive
too, and not by nature in respect of the root, and natural stock of the
Abraham, to which that distinction of (...), and (...), natural, and against
nature, refer, as is evident to any judicious Reader. So that that difference
of phrase makes no more for the denying believers Infants of the Gentiles a
branchship in this tree, by virtue of their parents insition, then it does to
the Infants of Proselytes in former times; a branchship, I say, till by
unbelief broken off, for then the case is altered again with them, as with the
children of the Jews broken off for the same reason: Which reason is also worth
the minding: viz. That those of the natural branches which were broken off,
were broken off (...), by, or for unbelief, and not otherwise. Well then, if
so, then the children of believing Jews were not broken off in Infancy, having
neither their own or parents unbelief to break them off by; not their own, for
we never find that God charges Infants with unbelief in themselves, nor does
the words (...), and (...), agree to them, unless we shall say, they are all
damned, Mark 16 16. Luke 12.46. Indeed the unbelieving parents that reject the
Gospel, and its Ordinances, do of necessity deprive their Infants too thereof,
unless anew graffed in again, but that those believing parents laid not in
their way. Now if their natural Infants were natural branches of the Olive, and
had a standing in the branchstate, till rejecters actually, then they must have
the ordinary badge of branches, that is, the external Baptism. Of which I have
yet met with no colorable plea to deprive any branch, not yet by actual
refusing and unbelief, breaking off himself therefrom, nor by others before
off-broken: for I think all grant that, that whosoever is of the Church visibly
as to his right to him Baptism may not be denied by us. To which if we add
that the partition wall being broken down between Jew and Gentile, especially
the believers of both, that which appertains by way of privilege to the one,
as to matter of Church State appertains equally to the other. We shall conclude
that their Infants are branches too by virtue of their parents naturalizing or
insition, Ephesians. 2.19.
and so have the like right to Baptism. For that this branch-state is the state
of visible Churching unto God, and of right to the privileges flowing
therefrom in union with the root thereof laid in Abraham, and not as is
imagined by some, the inward invisible state of union with Christ, and
election, we have in part showed before, and shall (because that is the main
thing that can colourably make against what is here said) be further proved.

For to what has been said, it may be added, That if the state of branchship
here spoken of, was a state of eternal choice and election to eternal life,
which the Gentile branches are affirmed to have here, then might they rejoice
against the Jews, as in a less fearful case of standing; the Jew stood so as to
be broken off, but the Gentile is in no capacity to that, that is indeed
ingraffed in; whereas the Apostle tells us, That their standing in this
branchship is by faith; so as if they reject that, God would break them off
too: Nay he uses it as an Argument of aw and fear, That they were branches
beside nature, and the Jews by nature, for if God spared not the natural
branches, take heed that he spare not thee, ver. 21. And again he tells us,
ver. 28. That as pertaining to the election, they are beloved for their fathers
sakes, and are shut up under unbelief, that he might have mercy upon them all:
But its for the Gospel in regard of their not accepting that that they are now
enemies to him, as if he should directly tell us, that he speaks not here of
them according to election, but according to their carriage toward the Gospel,
and so they being now thrown off from the privileges of those that receive and
own it, those they are broken off from, which otherwise they should have now
had also. Such a state of faith and election, as some Antipedobaptists put this
branchship in could they not be broken off from. I know against this they have
this silly conceit, that they are said to be broken off that seemed to be
branches in that stock, or to be ingraffed, though they were never branches
indeed; but this is a contradiction in adjecto, to talk of breaking off that
that was never in, Nay, to speak of natural branches, as those that were so
according to nature, and yet to say, they were never at all branches; sure such
an argument would have no terror, nor show of reason, they that seemed to be
branches but never were so, were thrown by; then take heed lest thou that
stand by faith, be thrown by also. And that in ver. 20. of the ingraffed
branches, should rather be, Thou may happily have neither faith nor standing
at all, therefore be not high minded: Then thus, Thou stand by faith, be not
highminded, but fear. The like fond conceit they have upon John 15.4. Every
branch in me that brings not forth fruit, shall be taken away, etc. That is,
say some, that pretends to be in me, but is not so at all: As if Christ spoke
according to the lying apprehensions or dissimulations of men, and called them
branches in him, which only belyed themselves, and were no way in him indeed:
not considering that there are degrees, and gradations, and diversity of
implantings: As one into the trunk and stock of the tree, another step into the
very sap, spirit, or life of it. The former is the mean and way to the latter,
and in the latter too there may be gradations, some partake of spirit so far in
the Doctrine they are brought into, as to bear leaves only, others fruits also,
Matthew. 13.20. Heb. 6.5, 6. But I shall not spend time and paper about answering
so fond a conceit.

But in the next place consider briefly of that of the Apostle in 1 Cor. 7.14.
where the Apostle says, That the children who have one of their parents a
believer, are (not only clean as all the Gentiles were made by the breaking
down the partition wall, but also) holy. Acts 10.28.
Sure as to the more special care of God, and propriety challenged in them by
God, then in other children whose parents were both unbelievers, they being as
it were born to God. The wife that believes not, being sanctified in the
Husband; namely, Vide Beza in locum.
that believes: (For of such its plain the Apostle speaks, and so some Copies
also express it,) which is not only legitimated to him as is commonly
interpreted, (for so they were each to other before one of them believed, when
yet its never said of two Infidels, that either of them is sanctifiid in the
other,) but also set apart, or separated in respect of others to the
procreation of an holy seed, Ezra 10.2. And yet this is not in her self, but in
her Husband, in regard that he is set apart to act for, and be holy too, and so
in point of procreation to propagate unto God, or as the word (...) often
signifies, she is so by her Husband, he as it were puts a sanctity upon her as
to holy use, or use to procreate for God. As of old, the holiness of the
Priests unto the Lord, as to liberty to eat of the holy things, did put a
sanctity upon their wives, as to that liberty, who otherwise perhaps might not
have eaten of them, being of other Tribes. And so its for the other part, The
unbelieving Husband in the believing wife, else says he were your children
unclean, because believers are to be holy unto God in all things, and if their
children should not be holy to them, they would be unclean, not fit to live
with them, or to be admitted into the Congregation of the Lord, as of old those
that were born of strange women, Ezra 10.12.44. Neh. 13.27, And such as the
Jews call (...) which we translate Bastards, Deuteronomy. 10.2. but indeed were such
as were born of strange women of another religion. As if the Apostle should
say, If the same unholiness was in the unbelieving wife, or husband here, to
the believing husband or wife, as was in the Jewish state in the strange women,
so that these must be separated, and put away from the believers, as well as
the strange women there from the Jews, then is there the same course to be
taken with your children as with theirs, they may not live with you neither,
nor be of the Lords Congregation no more then those might, Deuteronomy. 10.2. but now
seeing its otherways your children are holy Tam ex seminis praerogativae quam
ex institutionis discina. ^ert. de Any.
. Now what was the holy seed there, but the seed set apart for God, the people
in his Church, and under his Name, and more peculiar care? There were none that
I can find that were called the holy seed by them, but such as were admitted or
admittable by their branchship to Abraham into the Lords Congregation, and
thereto appertained. Now the children of one parent believing, (that is, owning
and professing the Christian faith, for to all such those Apostolical rules
reached) are affirmed to be holy, and therefore admittable sure into the
Congregation of the Lord. And that this is thence deduceable appears in this,
That no person is ever in Scripture called holy that is without the bounds of
the Church of God, but in as much as they are within the bounds of that which
is a holy people, consecrate unto God, they are called holy, a holy seed, a
holy people. But many things without may be lawful, and persons not of it may
be legitimate, but holiness is a Church-word generally in the Scriptures, that
in Romans 11.16. If the first fruits be holy, so is the Lump, if the root be
holy, so are also the branches, says this: That if Abraham, Isaac, etc. were
holy, that is, set apart by, and for God, to be a people for his Name, so were
they that sprung from them, and are under their institution while branches,
till broken off; but then they cease to be so, and those that are graffed in
through the faith of Jesus come in their room, and have place amongst the
branches, participate as much of the virtue and sap of the root for intituling
their offspring to the place of branches, and to the holiness of branches, as
they that are broken off had for themselves, and theirs before their breaking
off, as we noted before, otherwise the branches graffed in beside nature,
should not occupy the place, and receive the same sap and juice from the root
as the other had, and so should not participate with the natural; but there
should yet be a partition wall to sever the one from the other, contrary to the
Apostles Doctrine of Christ as come in the flesh; yea, contrary to the constant
course of God in former times; for he admitted the stranger Proselytes then
graffed in amongst the Jews, the same privileges for their children, as they
that were of Abraham's seed had so far as they have Church Fellowship.

Against this that is said about childrens being holy, I find it objected, That
(...) signifies chastity, in 1 These. 4. and therefore (...) here signifies only
legitimate: which seems to me to be a strange inference, for (...) thence
should rather signify chaste too, and if applied to children while but in
Infancy, no man can doubt of chastity in them, at least so as to denominate
them unchaste, whether their parents marriage was holy or not; And if applied
to children grown up, they may be chaste, though born in unholy wedlock, or in
fornication, and they may be unchaste, though never so legitimate.

Beside, 2. There is no such cause of such confidence as I see is used in that
affirmation of (...), signifying chastity in that place. I think (...)
signifies chaste, but not (...) in any place of the New Testament, but as
chastity is included necessarily in sanctity. Its thrice used in that Chapter,
verses 3.4.7. and I am sure its signification is larger then chastity in the
seventh, for its exposed to uncleanness in overreaching or defrauding a
brother in any matter. And I think that when its said, we are called (...), its
better to translate it in holiness, then in chastity only, we not being called
only to, and in that particular branch of holiness, but in and to holiness in
all manner of conversation. And holiness including chastity, fornication, and
all abuse of the vessel or body might well be thereunto opposed. Surely the
Apostle enlarges the use of the body in holiness further then to chastity only
as opposed to bodily fornication, in Romans 6.19. Yield up your members servants
to righteousness, (...), unto, or for holiness: which holiness is there opposed
to uncleanness and lawlesness, (...), so that its nearer the Text to say that
holiness there signifies a consecration unto God, and to the Government of his
holy Spirit: to that or in that, we are called, and so to abstain from
fornication, as well spiritual as corporal; though corporal fornication is also
a profaning that that was given up to God, as 1 Cor. 6.15. Your bodies are the
members of Christ, (given up to be holy for him, and for his service, and
glory,) and to be the habitations of his Spirit, (sure that is (...) in
general.) Shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of
an harlot? that is a profaning them in special. We might then as well say that
for our bodies to be the members of Christ is only to be chaste, because that is
opposed to fornication, as for the same reason to affirm that (...) signifies
but so much: Yea holiness must needs be more then chastity simply considered,
as opposed to adultery, and as it may be a virtue: Amongst the Gentiles, there
were chaste persons, as Lucretia and others, but their chastity was not (...),
a holy consecrating their bodies to the Lord; and out of that respect an
avoiding and detestation of fornication and adultery. So that here is yet
nothing of force against what is said about (...), that it is a Church word,
attributed to persons brought forth to and for God, or separated from others to
be more peculiarly a people to him: I say, when it is attributed to persons, as
when to other things, it is to things separated for God or his Churches use;
and it is yet to prove, that any person is ever in Scripture called holy, that
might not be admitted into Gods Congregation, and thereupon be accounted of his
Church. I shall not spend time about what is alleged out of this or that
Author, as their Interpretations or Opinions upon either this or the forenamed
Scripture. I see some quote Musculus, Melancthon and Camerarius for their
conceptions upon this latter; which (though I reverence them as good men in
their ages) I esteem of as small weight against what I have said, as they that
quote them esteem of Beza and others against what they conceit. If any man can
by Scripture, and solid argument from Scripture, avert what I have said, I
shall listen to him, otherwise not.

With these Scriptures, that in Act. 2.38, 39. well agrees, and by them it may
be opened: For the Jews being natural branches, and holy by that their
branchship, were therein also children of the Covenant made with Abraham, and
so had right to the tender of the choice promises therein, and to have the
means afforded by God for nurture thereunto, which God also sent unto them, and
would have had them receive, there being nothing but their own voluntary
rejection of them that could or should deprive them thereof; and that must
needs do it, for they could not be discipled unto and have the Ordinances of
Baptism and the Supper, etc. unless they would yield thereto, and that they
would not do, so long as they believed not that Christ was sent of God, and the
Christ to be baptized unto and saved by: Therefore Peter bids them Repent, and
let every one of them be baptized into the Name of the Lord Jesus for the
remission of sins, and they should receive the promise of the Holy Ghost set
before them, the promise being to them and their children, etc. In which the
Apostle does not prescribe a Rule for all that should be baptized, how much
must be in every such one before he may be baptized; but tells us what hindered
and let their being baptized into the Name of Christ, and so coming unto the
enjoyment of the promise, viz. their evil thoughts of Christ, and rejections of
him and his Doctrine: So long as they stood out against him, and came not under
his Government, they deprived themselves of the means of their Salvation, and
of the promises of God; He bids them therefore Repent (or change their
thoughts) viz. of their unbeleeving and evil carriages toward Christ, whose
Name they hitherto would not own; and whereas they would not own his Name, nor
come under his Government, now to submit to it, and be every one of them
baptized to it; even (as I understand it) the whole people without exception;
they being all the children of the Covenant, and so the promise being made to
them and their children, as to all afar off too, so many as should be called to
or proselyted to them; for as yet Peter understood not the breaking down the
partition wall. If we should say to the Antipoedobaptists, Repent of your
conception, which causes you to make a rent from your Brethren, and be you and
yours all subject with the rest of your Brethren to the Name of Christ, and
baptized into it; we do not therein prescribe a general Rule what all must do
before Baptism, or what others not of their mind should do, or else their
children could not be baptized; but we exhort them to lay aside that that
hinders them and theirs from unity in way of nurture and subjection to Christ
with others, seeing they may lawfully and ought so to be at one, though
hitherto they keep at a distance through their own misperswasion. It Is a
strange mistake that an Exhortation given to some who stood in their own light,
and kept out themselves from God freely held forth to them, to put away that
their evil thought and way, and accept what God tendered them and theirs, and
they and theirs had right to look for, should be drawn into a Rule for others
in general in whom there is not that way and evil thought by which they
endeavor to keep themselves therefrom, as it is evident in the case of the
Infants of Christians. The Apostle Peter would have them lay aside that crooked
thought that made them keep themselves and theirs from Baptism, and so from
being in the way to enjoy the promises; and we would make use of it to keep
persons from Baptism, and from being under the Institution and Kingdom of
Christ: He says, the promise was to them and their children; and the
Antipoedobaptists would build up another partition wall between them and us,
and say, our children have nothing to do with the promise: or of their own
heads limit it to children of age only, when here is no such limitation in the
Scripture laid down: And to get a color for that, they would have the last
clause, so many as the Lord God shall call, to have relation to all that went
before, or at least to that of their children, as well as those afar off: as if
either the Apostle Peter had first exhorted that they should every one of them
be baptized in the Name of Christ, etc. and then afterward have laid down a
ground that should possibly not include them all, they might happily not be all
called; or else confound their children with them afar off, and make them as
far off from right to look after the promise, and from Liberty to the
Ordinance, as they that were then afar off: Sure that distinction of their
children, and them afar off, was needless, if their children were far off from
it too. Besides, it is plain, the Apostle reckons the Jews not as already
converted, but as Jews not yet cast off, the children of the Covenant, and
makes that both here and in Chap. 3 25. the ground of his calling upon them to
repent of that their wickedness against Christ, by which they thrust from them
what God had provided for them, and gave them liberty to, and so endangered
their own breaking off: Yea the word (...) argues (in my apprehension) that
that clause is peculiarly annexed to them afar off, because it signifies a
calling to, or a calling a distant person or company to another forementioned
company.

But for fuller understanding of this place, and further confirmation of what
is said to it already, I shall take a fuller view of that that is laid down in
Verse. 39. For the promise is to you and to your children, and to All afar off,
so many as the Lord our God shall call. In which these particulars would be a
little more distinctly minded; viz. 1. Whereof this is brought as the reason or
ground. 2. What the Promise is here mentioned. 3. Who that you, and your
children, to whom the Promise is said to be. 4. How the promise was to them and
their children. 5. Upon what account it was to them and to their children. 6.
Who are meant by, All that are afar off. And, 7. Why that is added, and whereto
it pertains, so many as the Lord our God shall call.


1. For the first, I conceive it is clear, that it is added as a reason of both
the duties exhorted to, and the asserting of the benefit propounded as
certainly to be met with therein: as if he should say, Repent ye of your
opposition and enmity against Jesus Christ, for the promise is to you; and by
opposing and rejecting him, ye deprive your selves of the enjoyment thereof:
Let every one of you also be baptized into his Name for the forgiveness of
sins, for the promise is to you and to your children; and that Baptism into his
Name will both testify outwardly your repentance of your oppositions to him,
and will be, if sincerely on your part submited to, a yielding up your selves
and yours to the Regiment and Order appointed by Jesus Christ for you to walk
in for your receipt of the promise from him, he having received the promise to
make it good to you, and that being his way in which he will have men wait upon
him to make it good to them. And indeed it is more generally and directly the
ground of men's being baptized into Christ, then of their repenting for their
oppositions against him, in this sense, that it is a ground of repenting more
accidently, as they to whom it is propounded, and that are to be subjected,
discipled and baptized into Christ, are found actually straying in some evil
way, from which they must first turn, and of which they must necessarily first
repent, or else they cannot be submitters to Christ, and be discipled and
baptized into his Name; as was the case of these men of grown years, to whom
the Apostle speaks: so that it is the ground and reason of calling upon them to
repent; as Repentance was the Removens prohibens, the removal of the hinderance
of submission to Christ in his Ordinance of Baptism, and in the
after-administration of his Kingdom to them: Whereas directly the promise, and
men's title to it (such as is here spoken of, and we shall by and by explain)
gives ground of, and calls for men's submission, and being discipled to Christ
for the receipt of it, and so of being baptized into his Name, whether there be
repentance needful to in termine between them, and that submission to him, or
not. Such of them as were from their Infancy trained up in that way of God, and
walked righteously therein, and upon the first hearsay of Christ closed with
him, or such as had formerly repented, and walked with God before the hearsay
or proposeal of that Ordinance of Jesus Christ to them, and upon that proposeal
of it kicked not against it, or in a word, persons not needing repentance, (as
these did) yet by the virtue of this promise to them in Christ, might and ought
to yield up to him, and be discipled in his way of Baptism for the receipt of it
from him; And so the promise being to their children, gives ground for their
childrens being discipled to Christ, by being baptized into his Name, though
their children happily were nor, or (their parents submitting to Jesus Christ,
and training them up in his nurture) would no need so to be spoken to, and
exhorted to repent, as these their parents who had actually swerved and gone
from the way of God, and rejected it, were, and needed to be exhorted; And so
we find, That Cornelius a man fearing God, and Lydia a woman fearing God, and
waiting formerly upon God in such ways as they knew, Acts 10.
were baptized: And therefore no doubt but were also instructed and exhorted to
be baptized into the Name of Christ, Act 16 14, 15.
(the promise belonging to them upon Gods call, as well as unto these, as
appears by the Apostles after clause in this Acts 2.39. And to all afar off, so
many as the Lord our God shall call,) And yet no mention of calling upon them
to repent, that presupposing that the persons we so exhort do actually go on in
a wrong and evil way before, which those did not. The foresaid words are also a
reason and ground of the Apostles implying to these Jews that They in obeying
his counsel, should receive remission of their sins, and asserting or promising
their receipt of the gift of the Holy Ghost: As if he should say, Ye shall
surely in obeying my counsels, receive the Holy Ghost, etc. For the promise is
to you, and to your children, etc. And truly as it is a reason and ground of
his asserting these benefits, as consequent to their walking in those foresaid
ways, and so of their expectation of them therein, so it also more strongly
lays down ground for their so repenting, and letting every one of them be
baptized into the Name of Christ, that that tends to strengthen men's
expectation of good in such a way necessarily tends also to bring them into
that way. But that it is as well a reason of the duty as of the promise annexed
to it, we may further see in Chap. 3.25. Where the same reason of their being
children of the Covenant, and Christ being sent to bless them, is urged by the
same Apostle as a reason to prefer their repenting, and being converted, namely
to Christ, to listen to him, as to that great Prophet, and submit to his Orders
and Ordinances appointed them Acts 3.19.25, 26.
. Where by the way before I pass from it, I might note the blindness and gross
mistakes of some men, though very bold and confident in their assertions, as of
him who is not ashamed to say, That God gives unregenerate men no hope at all,
Mr. Kendals Answer to Mr Goodwin. Chap. 16. p. 143 144, 146. Chap. 18.30, 31.57.
but bids them expect the just vengeance of eternal fire, that the thundering
of damnation to such is the only way to bring them to salvation, gives them no
encouragement to enter the strait gate, that God hates and abhors all men
whatsoever, while they continue without a change of their nature, and all the
good things he gives them, are but as we throw cut scraps to dogs, and till
they be new born none of them may expect the least expression of love from him,
etc. Surely God so loved men, while yet ungodly and unchanged, that he gave his
Son for them, and gives his Gospel to men while unregenerate to better purpose
then we give scraps to dogs, even to regenerate them; And the Apostle Peter
here uses other arguments besides Damnation to move men to repentance, and
regeneration, even the promises: As also God himself uses other not unlike
this, in Isai. 55.7. Ezekiel. 33.11. Matthew. 22.4. But I pass it, only could not
but note it for the monstrous unreasonableness of those sayings.

2. For the promise here what it is; we may say either, that it is the (...),
The promise of the Spirit, mentioned ver. 33. And here again, ver. 38.
Prophesied of, and promised by Joel, Joel 2.28, 29. which the Apostle Peter had
been speaking of in this Chapter, ver. 17, 18, 19, 20. Or else we may take it
more largely for the whole Contents of the Gospel preached to Abraham,
concerning the sending forth of Jesus Christ, and blessing all the kindreds of
the earth in him. Sometimes called the promises, Gal. 3.15, 16. Sometimes the
Covenants of the promise, Ephesians. 2.12. Sometime the promise, as Acts 13.32. We
declare unto you glad tidings, that the promise made to the Fathers, God has
fulfilled the same to us their children, in that he has raised up Jesus. And
that this may be the meaning of the Apostle here too may be gathered from Acts
3.25, 26. where urging the Jews again to repent, and be converted, ver. 19. he
uses the same way or persuading them, telling them there, They were the
children of the Prophets, and of the Covenant that God made with Abraham,
(called sometime the promise, Heb. 6.13.) saying, In thy seed shall all the
kindreds of the earth be blessed, unto you first God having raised up Jesus
has sent him to bless you, etc. Where by the way let me propound my
apprehension, that by the word (...), raised up, there used, And again Acts
13.33. is not meant, having raised him from the dead, as the Translatours in
that place, Acts 13. rendering it, raised up Jesus again, seem to have
understood, and as very usually it is understood, but simply, and in a more
large and comprehensive sense, that God has raised him up, sent him forth,
appointed, furnished him to save and bless us, etc. So the same word (...), is
used, Acts. 3.22. A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up to you, (he says
not, out of the grave, as speaking of the Resurrection, but) from among your
Brethren: and so its used in diverse other places, as these in the Margin Sam.
2.25. (...). I will raise up to me a faithful Priest, 1 King. 14.14. (...), The
Lord will raise up a King that will cut off the house of Jerohoam. So also, 1 Chronicles. 17.11 Ie. 2^ 5. and. 30.9. etc.
; to say nothing, that so it will better suit that quotation of the Apostle
Acts 13.32. out of the second Psalm, as taking the word begotten thee, in a
more comprehensive and first sense, and that there speaking of his
Resurrection, ver. 34. he adds for distinction sake the Particle ((...)) and
the words (...), but (or And) that he raised him up from the dead: as if he
spoke of raising him up in another sense before: But to return again to our
business.

The word promise here may the rather be understood in this second and more
comprehensive sense, because so it also includes as a particular therein the
promise of the Spirit, that being a choice branch of the Blessing promised to
them, and their Offspring, as in Isai. 44 3. where Spirit and Blessing are
used, as (...), words of the same import, and explicatory the one of the other.
I will pour out my Spirit upon thy seed, and my Blessing upon thy offspring.
Only let this be further minded, that the word promise, (be the matter of it
what it will) is of a double signification in Scripture-use. Sometime
signifying the promise making, or the form or manner of speech in which
something is promised. So Heb. 6.13. When God made promise to Abraham. So also
Heb. 11.17. 2 Cor. 7.1. Romans 9.4. Whose are the Service of God, and the
promises. Sometime the thing promised, as Heb. 11.13. All these died in faith,
not having received the promises, but having seen them afar off, etc. So Heb. 9
15. 1 John 2.25.

3 By you and your children, are meant here the Jews, and particularly those he
exhorted to repent, and that were pricked in heart, though not so bounding up
his speech to them in particular, as to take in the body of the people in
general, as will be more evident by and by. And by their children, such as were
their natural children, begotten and descended naturally of them, of what Age
or Sex soever; for though all such were not the children of God in its prime
notion, yet they were all their children, either older, or younger, that were
begotten by, and descended of them. Difference in age or sex, made no
difference as to that matter; therefore no matter though grown men also are
called the children of their Fathers, for their growth gave them not that
Denomination, but their descent of them; they were as really their children in
infancy, as when so grown. So that here is no ground for excluding Infants in
their infancy from being comprehended in this expression: The Holy Ghost using
no Note of distinction between some and other of their children, nor any word
that might limit to men grown; he says not, to you and your grown children: but
indefinitely, to you and your children: Yea, we find expressly that in Deuteronomy.
29.10, 11. (To which the Apostle seems to me here plainly to allude) the
Covenant, and so the promise of being to them a God, and taking them for his
people, (which includes also the sending Christ to bless them, and give his
Spirit to them, for that is part of the work of God, as manifesting himself a
God to a people, and making them his people) is to the little ones of that
people, as well as the rest. You stand here this day all of you before the Lord
your God, your Captains of your Tribes, your Elders, and your Officers, with
all the men of Israel, your little ones, your wives, and thy stranger that is
in thy Camp, etc. That thou should enter into Covenant with the Lord thy
God, and into his Oath which the Lord thy God makes this day with thee, that
he may establish thee to day for a people unto himself, and that he may be unto
thee a God, as he has said unto thee, and as he has sworn to thy Fathers, to
Abraham, Isaac, and to Jacob. Neither with you only, etc. but with him that
stands here with us this day before the Lord our God, and with him that is
not here with us this day. To which clause the Apostle Peter seems to allude in
saying, And to all afar off, etc. Yea, and one clause of that Covenant made
with them, and their children, even their little ones there, is expressly in
their returning to the Lord, and obeying his voice, (namely in listening to the
great Prophet, and to the word of faith, as compare Chap. 30.11, 12. with Romans
10.8, 9.) To circumcise their hearts, Deuteronomy. 30 6.
and the hearts of their seed to love the Lord, etc. Which how is it done but
by the giving forth his Spirit in his Church, and Ordinances to them? And what
is it in substance, but that in Acts 3.26. Unto you first God having raised up
Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of you from your
iniquities? Which though now at this time they almost generally rejected, yet
in their turning in again, shall be performed to them, and their children, Mark
10.16.
as he did actually give his blessing to those little children that came (that
is, were brought) to him.

4. To that, how this promise was to them, and their children? Let me say,

1. Negatively: Not so as it was to Christ, who had actually and immeasurably
received upon his Ascension the Promise of the Spirit in the man, or nature of
men, to communicate to them in listening to, and obeying him, and who is the
Storehouse, and way of making out all the promises of God, 2 Cor. 1.20. So
they neither had, nor could have the promise to them, or their children. Nor
if, were the things promised absolutely theirs, nor the promise as made in an
absolute form so, or upon such terms, as that they must certainly, and without
fail receive the Holy Ghost, and the Blessing of Christ, whether they repented
of their unbelief and obstinacy, yea, or no, or were discipled to him, and
baptized into his Name, or not; for that would rather have undermined the
Apostles counsel to them, then have added strength to it, making their
Repentance and Baptism needless to them, or their children. Now many of them,
though called, Chap. 3.15. children of the Covenant, and though Christ was sent
to them to bless them, not hearkening to the great Prophet, received not his
blessing, but were broken off, and wrath came heavily upon them. But,

2. Positively, and Affirmatively. The promise was to them, and their children,
because they were made by way of proposition to them, and the proposal of them,
and so the promise, or promises, as so made, were given to them, and their
children, as their standing privilege in which they were preferred before all
people, who in that respect were strangers to the Covenants of promise, Ephesians.
2.12.
and knew them not, nor were born or educated up under the hope, and in the way
of enjoyment of them. Thus their's was the adoption, they were chosen to be a
people nearer to God, Exodus 4.21, 22.
and had his Name put upon them, (as the fathers name is on his child) and God
more especially owned, and cared for them, and they were born and educated in
the Kingdom of God, where his Blessing and Spirit was conversant for teaching
and bringing them to be the children of God by faith and regeneration. And so
theirs was the glory, they had the manifestations of Gods glory amongst them,
and were honored above all other people; theirs were the Covenants, to them
made, with them left, that they might be trained up in the knowledge of them:
So theirs was the giving of the Law, and the Service, or way of Gods worship,
and the promises; they were promulgated to them, and they were brought up under
the hope of them, being children of the Kingdom, Romans 9.4, 5.

2. They were made as the choice things promised conditionally with them, so as
that they submitting themselves, and training up theirs to, and for God,
according to his will manifested to them by Moses, and all the Prophets, and
now by the Great Prophet Jesus, he would be a God to them and theirs, Jer.
11.7. do all to and for them that was needful to be done of God for making them
his people, a people every way happy, and so now sent his Son to them, (having
died for them) to bless them, in turning away every one of them from their
sins, which blessing, even the forgiveness of their former sins against him,
and wickedness against Christ in crucifying him, and the Holy Ghost to be
present with, and bless them and theirs, according to their several capacities;
if they would repent of their wickedness, and every one of them be subject to
his Government, being baptized into his Name, they should receive: otherwise
they to be cut off from the Congregation of God, and from the Blessings
promised them.

5. By what has been said, It appears how or upon account the promise was to
them, and their children: not in respect of any particular birth, repentance,
or faith, or the like, in the senses even now cleared: for this is asserted
concerning them, not by way of promise, as something that should accrue to them
by their repenting, and being every one of them baptized, (only the things
promised they should actually receive in so doing) but as a motive and ground
to move them to repent, and be baptized. Was it to them, as they were pricked
in their hearts; for the same is affirmed of them in Chap. 3.25. that were not
as then so pricked, that we have any mention in the least of, yea, of those for
whom the Apostle had great sorrow, and heaviness of heart, as actually
rejecting their own mercies, and not attaining the blessings promised, yet
theirs, also says he, are the promises, Romans 9.4. But as they were the seed or
family of Abraham, either lineally descended from Jacob, as the natural Jews,
or adopted, or proselyted thereunto, as the Proselytes of the Gentiles, (and
such as were here amongst the people that Peter preached to, Acts 2.10.) by
virtue of Gods having called and chosen them, the Family of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, to be to himself an holy people, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8, 9. And so as they sprung
from, or grew upon that holy root, that was holy by virtue of Gods call and
account, as Romans 11.16. So they are called natural branches, though by their
actual unbelief after broken off: So even their children were born to God, and
owned as his. Ezekiel. 16.20, 21. Children of the Kingdom, and members of Gods
Congregation, or Church: as appears by this, Genesis 17.14.
That they not being circumcised at eight days old in the times of the Law,
they are said to be cut off from the Congregation: that is, they were exempted
from being Federates, or having the Privileges and Commonwealth of Israel, as
pertaining to them, so as to be enjoyed by them. In other respects, they could
not be called natural branches, or children of the Kingdom, as we have seen,
being by nature, as in themselves, children of wrath, as well as, and no better
then others, Ezekiel. 2.23. Romans 3.9. Their Infants then, as their Infants born
in, and to the Church of God, were members of the Church, and pertakers
according to their capacities with them in their privileges, The Covenants,
Promises, Adoption, Glory, pertained to them, and they were concerned in them,
and had their share of blessing in them, and in Christ also who was of them,
sent to them, and refused not to bless them, as we have seen, they being
brought to him, and brought up in his way, Ordinances, and Appointments in his
Kingdom; of which blessing they only were deprived by their parents unbelief,
as not bringing them to Christ, or discipling them to him, Genesis 17.14.
and so bringing them into his Church, and Kingdom, or (and that more
especially) by their own voluntary refusing to listen to that Great Prophet,
when they grew up to be capable of understanding, and following after him, Acts
3.22, 23. which may yet be further seen in what follows, viz.

6. Who be meant in that phrase, and All that are afar off. And that is clearly
the unproselyted Gentiles, included in those phrases of Joel 2.28.32. All
flesh, and whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord. This is clear, I
say, in Ephesians. 2.11.13.17. where Those that were in times past Gentiles in the
flesh, called the uncircumcision by that that is called the circumcision in the
flesh made with hands: are said expressly to have been afar off. But now ye that
were sometimes afar off, (namely, before their being called) are made nigh. And
he came and preached peace both to you that were afar off, and to them that
were nigh. Afar off they were not only in opposition to what they were now
after their call, but also to the Jews that are said to have been nigh, even
before Christ actually, or by his Ambassadors after his ascent preached peace
to them. Afar off, because they had not the Adoption, nor the Glory, nor the
Covenants, nor the Giving of the Law, nor the Service, nor the Promises, nor
the Prophets, nor the Revelation of Christ, as the Jews had, in which respect
the Jews were as a people dwelling in the City, when they were as people lying
by the highway sides, and hedges, Mat. 22.7, 8, 9. etc. yea, that in what they
were afar off, is expressed, Ephesians. 2.12. They were without Christ, not only in
respect of what interest they had in him upon believing now, but also in
respect of what the Jews had, as Jews called of God, and they had in and by
their being called to the Church of God, in which the Jews till they broke off,
were, that is, they had not Christ revealed to them, and sent to them to bless
them as the Jews had: And they were aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel,
even from those privileges, and more special means of Grace and Ordinances,
with the presence and blessing of God, and Spirit accompanying, that the Jews
had afforded to them, and to all proselyted to them in common: And so they were
strangers from the Covenant of promises; then it follows, the Jews and their
children were not so, for otherwise they should be afar off too, and the
distinction between their children and them afar off should be groundless, and
come to nothing: No, they were to them and their children, the other, were
neither born under, nor brought up to the knowledge and hope of them; fathers
and children were without them, and so by consequent without hope, the fathers
had not that hope for their children, nor for themselves, that the promise held
forth for and to men, and as the Jews had, or might have had in minding and
believing them: they being without God, that is, the knowledge of God, and the
Covenant of God, and so God had not engaged himself to them, to be with them,
and their children, to bless and keep, and protect and own them, as he was the
God of the Jews, whence also their hope for themselves and theirs sprung. So
that by this also, it yet further appears, that the children of the Jews as
such by virtue of his foresaid choice and calling them, and so (the partition
wall being broken down) the children of the Proselytes and Disciples of the
Gentiles were such, as to whom the promise was, into which Baptism as an
Ordinance of Christ, further admitted, and was one way or step toward the
meeting with the performance of, and therefore they to be baptized, and
nurtured to the expectation of it. And lastly,

7. By this it also appears, why and whereto that is added, So many as the Lord
our God shall call to. Namely, that it speaks to the Gentiles, because they
being far off could not have the promise, either propounded to them, or set
before them to follow after it; nor conditionally made with them and theirs,
much less could they enjoy that blessing in Christ promised, neither call upon
God, nor be saved, unless called by God to Christ in his Church. Romans 10.14.
The Call of God by sending the Gospel to them, preaching peace to them, and
inviting them to come in, was needful and sufficient for their having the
promise to them, in the former sense, and so much only the word call often
signifies, as in Prove. 1.24. Matthew. 22.2, 3, 4. Though the being called of God,
so as to be prevailed with to believe and obey, where capacity is given, is
needful for the enjoyment of the blessings promised: These Jews with their
children had the promise to them already, and before this, as we have fully
showed, and were not now to call, to have them made in that sense to them, in
which it is affirmed, It was then ((...)) to them, they were called hereto in
Gods calling Abraham, and calling his seed in Isaac, and in his calling them
out of Egypt to himself, and making his Covenant and promises further with
them, and in all the Prophets, and Christ, and his Apostles calling them, and
their children were called in their fathers being called with them, as when
they were called out of Egypt. As generally, when God calls parents to his
Church, he calls theirs under their tuition with them; Thence the Salvation of
God, (the means of salvation, that is at least) is said, to come to the house,
or household, not to them of understanding, or that actually believe only; and
they are to bring up theirs in the way of the Lord, and disciple them to him,
or worship him with them, as Joshuah says, Josh. 24.15. But the unproselyted
Gentiles were not as yet (the body of them) called to the Church, the
Commission only was given forth, (the partition wall being broken down) for
calling and discipling, baptizing them, and not circumcising them, as before,
Matthew. 28.19, 20.

Sum up all this together then, and we see its clear, That the promise was to
their children, one and other, till they wilfully put it away, and they, even
the least of them, were therein near to God, capable of Christ's blessing them,
and so had that that is here laid down as the ground and motive for being
baptized into Christ's Name, for the forgiveness of the sin of their Nature, so
as to own them, and care for them, that notwithstanding, as his upon whom he
had put his Name, and so of having the Holy Ghost to be with them, and
circumcise their hearts, and sanctify them, as they grew more and more capable
thereof. That they were of the Lords Congregation, and it was the Jews sin,
both against themselves and their children, to oppose and put from them Jesus
Christ, which they ought to have repented of, that every one of them being
baptized into his Name, and so submitting to him, they might receive the
promise now brought nigh, and tendered to them by Christ in his coming. To which
adding that (which the Scriptures, and we from them, have before showed) That
the partition wall is broken down, and we Gentiles that were afar off, are now
made nigh by the blood of Christ, called to be partakers of his promise by the
Gospel, as Ephesians. 3.4.6. Then it will roundly follow, That our children now are
as near as theirs were then, and so are of Gods Congregation, are children of
the Covenant and Kingdom by insition, (though not by natural descent from
Abraham) and so have the true ground of Baptism, the Seal of that promise, way
of admission into the outward Court of Gods Kingdom, into his Church, and under
his promise and blessing now to us, as Circumcision was before Christ's
Ascension, and the badg of difference between the Church, and Congregation of
God, and them that are strangers to his Church and Covenant, and to deny or
defer it to them, is to bewray our ignorance of Gods grace and gracious mind
toward them, and to cut them off, or keep them out of Gods Congregation, and so
from the blessing of Christ, there to be dispensed to them. And I pray God help
the Antipedobaptists to see and consider the injury they do to themselves and
their children, so would they repent of their mistaken zeal, and be as zealous
against their abuse of this, and other Scriptures, as now they are against
Infant Baptism.

Whereas they object, That only they that heard the word gladly were baptized,
ver. 41.

I answer, That they were baptized that heard the word gladly, is certainly
affirmed, but he that shall turn it, and say, That all that were there
baptized, did gladly receive the word, shall speak as much beyond what he can
prove, as he that supposes it might be otherwise. Children are often included
tacitly in their parents, at least in passive matters spoken of through the
descriptions of those concerned in those passive matters, may be by such acts
as only suit to the parents, or those of years only. As its said, That the Lord
removed Israel out of his sight, and the King of Assyria carried Israel
captive: and the reason is rendered, That Israel had sinned against their God,
and walked in the statutes of the Heathen, and built them high places, and set
up Images: which things Infants were not capable of acting in, and yet they are
without all doubt included in what is passively affirmed of them for Gods
removing them, and their being led captive, 2 King. 17. So in Genesis 34. Simeon
and Levi, making (though fainedly) a Covenant with Hamor and Sechem, requires
that every male of them be circumcised, (which certainly included not them they
spoke with only, but their children, and Infants too, as every one of you in
Acts 3.37. may do.) And in ver. 24. its said, All that went out of the gate of
their City, hearkened unto Hamor and Sechem, and every male was circumcised,
all that went out of the gate of the City. Shall we say, that because its said,
All that went out of the gate of the City hearkened unto Hamor, and they were
all circumcised that went out of the gate of the City, therefore all that were
circumcised did actually hearken to, or consent to Hamor and Sechem, and that
no child or infant, but such as were able to go out of the gate of the City,
and to give actual consent to Hamor, were circumcised; surely it will not
follow. So Psalm. 10.6. its said, Our Fathers provoked God at the red Sea, yet
God saved them, and led them through the red Sea, (in which the Apostle tells
us. They were baptized into Moses, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2.) And it follows, That they
then believed his word, and sang his praises, even Moses, and the children of
Israel, Exodus 15.1. And yet I think no man will thence gather, that only those
that provoked God at the Sea, or that after believed, and sang praises, were
saved, and led through the Sea. Many other instances might be given to the same
purpose, so that nothing can be thence concluded from what is said of those
that are mentioned to have been baptized, that will enforce a straitening of
the right to Baptism to such qualified persons; which is also rather to be
sought and minded what it is from the grounds of it as laid down in Scripture,
then from what is expressed as to the practice of it.

That Scripture often mentioned by us, in what we have said to this of Acts 2.
viz. Acts 3.25. compared with Genesis 12.3. That in the seed of Abraham all the
Families of the Earth shall be blessed, may come in for another Evidence to the
point in hand by it self, for what does it signify less then that, In Jesus
Christ (he through his death as a Ransom for all, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. 1 Timothy 2.6.
And Resurrection from the dead, having answered the Law, abolished death for
all, and so become Lord of all, and the propitiation for the sins of the whole
world, Gal. 3.13. 2 Timothy 1.10. Acts 10.36. 1 John 2.1, 2.) has in himself
blessing for all Nations, and for all the families of the Earth: and not only
for some persons in those Nations or Families. God was in him reconciling the
world to himself, not imputing their trespasses to them: And has since his
Ascension committed the Ministry of that Reconciliation, by preaching and
baptizing, etc. to his Apostles, and such as succeed them in the Gospel, 2 Cor.
5.19, 20. In which Righteousness is unto all, extendible to all, and in the
Gospel terms held forth to all, so as that it comes upon all that believe,
close with, and receive it, Romans 3.22. According to that in Romans 5.18. The
free-gift is to all men to justification of life, through the righteousness of
one, Jesus Christ: Even as by the disobedience of Adam the evil came to all men
to condemnation, Though its the receiver of the abundance or overflow of grace
that shall reign in life by him, ver, 17. And this indeed is the bottom ground
of preaching the Gospel, and therein tendering the blessing in Christ to all
Nations, the whole world, and to all the families of the earth, as also of
discipling them, baptising them into his Name, that they are all given over to
him as their lawful Lord, and in him through his death is Redemption and
blessing for them all: From which they only are excluded who when its tendered
to them, put him and it from them, and so exclude themselves by cursing,
vilifying, The word in Gen 12.3. is (...) a (...), vilem l^vem habere, vib^
pendere. To slight, or set light by.
or setting slight by him the Seed of Abraham, in his Person, Doctrine,
Government, or Blessing, Genesis 12. Luke 10.10, 11. Acts 13.46. Now does not the
word Families clearly comprehend little ones? Are all the families of the earth
without Infants? or be they no considerable part of the families in which they
are? Surely they are so considerable, that God would have them included in the
Covenant of his favor, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11. and Christ would not have them
excluded his Kingdom and Blessing. Why then do any question the giving them the
seal of his blessing? and so putting his blessing upon whole families, that the
whole household may upon the parents receipt of the Gospel be under Gods
salvation. As Acts 16.31. Except such as being capable of understanding, do
wilfully refuse, and thrust it from them. Surely they that deny Baptism to
little ones, then do discover much ignorance, and unbelief of the grace of God;
and tenor of the Gospel of Christ, how much soever they seem to know it, and
their zeal is as ignorant and reprovable, as that of Christ's Disciples, Matthew.
19.13, 14. what ever they think of it as commendable. Which will yet further
appear; if we,

Lastly, Consider that (...), much mentioned, saying, by the ancient Doctors
of the Church, that we have John 3.5. Except a man be born of water and of the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Which they generally applied
as to the water there mentioned to Baptism by water. And if their
interpretation of it be current, it will conclude more then lawfulness, some
necessity at least of baptizing Infants. And sure their Authority and
Antiquity, though it may not cogere in Sententiam, enforce our consent to them,
yet may deservedly challenge a sober consideration of it, that we be not guilty
through rashness of that fault we are often admonished of, Prove. 22.28. and
23.10. Let us then examine what may be said for, and what against it.

The Scope of the place favors it, thus: Nicodemus coming to Christ by night,
and confessing him a Teacher sent of God: our Savior instructs him what was
needful for seeing, understanding, and enjoying, and entering into the Kingdom
of God that he preached; Namely, That he must not rest in what he had already
in Moses Ministration, but submit to him whom God had more actually sent forth
to be the Savior of the world, to receive a New Birth from him in his
Ministration, without which no entrance for any one (as the word (...)
signifies) into that Kingdom. Now that which he did in his Ministration for
admitting and leading men into that Kingdom, we know was together with his
Doctrine, baptizing with water by his Disciples, John 3.21.22. and 4.1, 2. And
with the Holy Ghost more immediately by himself, John 7.37, 38. Acts 1.5. And
unless a man submitted to him in both these Administrations, he could not enter
into the Kingdom of God, as set up of God in his Regiment and ordering.

The Order of the words in setting water before spirit, suits with the Order of
those Administrations of his twofold Baptism. Baptism with water usually (yea
always that we read of, except in that extraordinary case of Cornelius, of
which we have given an account elsewhere) going before the pouring out of his
Spirit, As Matthew. 3.11, 12. Acts 2.38, 39. and 8.16, 17. and 19.4, 5. Where
also that Ordinance of laying on of hands, in which the more visible and
evident givings of the Spirit was vouchsafed after Baptism, Acts 8.16, 17. Heb.
6.2.

3. This Interpretation agrees with that in Tit. 3.5. whereby by most
Interpreters Baptism is called the Laver of Regeneration, and I conceive it is
not to be excluded in that expression.

4. The Text will run as well or better this way, then in and according to
other Interpretations: For to view them.

1. Some by water think the Spirit to be signified by an (...), like that in
Matthew. 3.12. The Holy Ghost, and fire; but this looks too like a Tautalogy, it
amounting but to Spirit and Spirit; that of Matthew. 3.12. may admit of a better
Exposition: viz. by fire, to signify fiery trials, as in 1 Cor. 3.13, 14. 1
Pet. 4.12, 13. 2 Timothy 3.12. I know it is said, that by water is signified, the
cleansing operation of the Spirit, and so it amounts to, Except a man be born
of the Spirit, and his cleansing operation. But then water should be rather set
after spirit, then before it. To say nothing that all that yet amounts but to
spirit for her being holy, the birth of him must needs produce holiness or
cleanness too.

2. Others (as I my self have) understand by water the grace of God, as held
forth in the Gospel, and received by faith, the word, grace, and knowledge of
God being in Scriptures often so called, as Deuteronomy. 32.1, 2, 3. Isai. 11.9. with
Joel 3.18. And this indeed would well agree to men of years, but how will it
reach the extent of the word ((...)) any one, which reaches to every Sex and
Age? Little Infants by this must be excluded Gods Kingdom then, they being not
capable of hearing and understanding the word in Infancy, contrary to our
Saviors express saying that tells us, that Of such is the Kingdom of God, and
their receipt thereof is propounded as a good pattern for those of elder years,
as we have seen before.

But (to view what may be said against this Interpretation) our Savior says,
ver. 3. That this birth is a birth (...), ver. 31.) from above, but this water
in Baptism is Elementary, and from below.

Answ. 1. Our Savior tells Nicodemus, ver. 12. things earthly, or done on
earth, though from Heaven, and such is this Baptism: For,

2. Though the water in it be elementary and earthy, yet the Ordinance of
Baptism is from Heaven, Matthew. 21.25, 26. Even from God, and his heavenly Son,
Luke 3.3.

3. Nor is this birth of water only, but of spirit also, and he is from Heaven.





1. That this speech is figurative, not proper, and so to be understood in a
similitude to natural birth only, it being a Metaphor.

The word (...), and (...), comprehends and takes in into its signification,
the acts of generation, conception, and birth, or bringing forth, and so is
diversely in diverse places translated, as in Matthew. 1.20. (...), is, that which
is mentioned in her. In 1 John 5.1. (...), is born of God, and in the same
place, (...), is begotten of of him. So that if there be but a tendency to
birth by Baptism, its enough to entitle it to his word.

3. The whole Birth is not ascribed to Water alone, but to Water and Spirit.
Now then to answer the foresaid Objection. I say,

Corruption unius formae, and productio alterius; a passing from one to another
form, or manner of being. So in this Ordinance of Baptism there is,

1. A Significant, letting go, dying to, or renouncing all other rights,
titles, or claims to Gods Kingdom, as set up in the Ministration of Christ,
whether from natural-birth from Adam, or Abraham, or spiritual or symbolical
birth by Circumcision, and the Ordinances of Moses. Though the Kingdom of God
be for, and is tendered to men as born of Adam, or Abraham, and the circumcised
were the children of it, as to right of its tender to them, and their duty to
receive it, yet the Kingdom and the blessings of it by way of receipt and
enjoyment, they could not, nor might have abiding but in that condition, or
under that Ministration, to receive the Kingdom; they must pass further, be
born from above, that is, of water, etc. be baptized, in which was,

1. A putting on, and being brought into a new kind of being, title, and claim
to the Kingdom of God, a putting on Christ as come in the flesh, and bringing
by his death for all men life, righteousness and blessing through the free
grace of God unto them. For in being baptized into the Name of Christ is a
putting on of Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.26, 27. symbolically, professedly, and as to
obligation to him, and to worship God by him. Something of the some nature was
in Circumcision, whence I conceive our Savior reprehends Nicodemus, his gross
ignorance and mistake of his meaning, saying, Art thou a Master in Israel, and
know not these things? John 3.10. For in Circumcision there was intimately a
renouncing of all claim to the blessing of God by any natural birth of Adam, or
Abraham, or any thing of themselves, whence the foreskin of their generation
was cut off, and an owning or coming in unto a new birth or being, namely, to
have a being in Christ of the seed of Abraham, as promised to him, and so in
the Covenant with Abraham, promising blessing to all the families of the earth
through him. Only that that gave title to the blessing as promised, would not
suffice to give title to the exhibition of it, the being brought into the
Covenant, and so into Christ as promised, served to bring into the Church, as
under that Ministration of Moses, and the blessings suitable thereto, but to
the Kingdom of God preached and administered by Christ come in the flesh. It was
needful to be born of water, that is, to be baptized into him, as so come in
the flesh, etc.

2. There also there is some Analogy in Baptism to the customs used upon
newborn persons in nature, as in Ezekiel. 16.3, 4, 5, 6. There is a washing of
the Infant newborn before it be fit to be educated, or nourished amongst
persons that are clean. So here the party to be baptized by his submission to
Christ, is made partaker of a new birth, or title to the Kingdom, and is
washed; to signify that Christ forgives sins to the submitter to, and believe
on him: Like as amongst the Jews, If any Heathen family submitted to the Jewish
Religion formerly, they were all beside Circumcision of the males, baptized or
washed. See Ainsw. on Genesis 17.12. For being by the submission of the parents to
the Law, as it were newborn to that Religion, they were dealt with as newborn
Infants, washed, etc. Yea, such a right we find to have been practiced amongst
the Grecians, (the Devil imitating sometimes Gods Ordinances) that if one had
been given out to have been dead, and his Funeral solemnized, if it was found
afterward that he was alive, and appeared amongst them again, they looked upon
him as unclean and abominable, not fit to join with them civil, much less their
religious fellowships, till (according to the Oracle, Given at Delphos to one
Aristinus, whom such a Disaster befell, Plut. Quest. Romans 5.
(...)
(...),)
They were washed and dealt with again as new born babes, whence they were
called (...), Posti minio nati, born again after death, but (not to turn aside
to fables -- Nec sacris miscere profana, ne mulier formosa superne. Desinat in
pisciem,) I shall pass that.

3. Whereas this birth is not only of water, but of water and spirit, there is
this tendency therein further to the birth of spirit, That,

1. It brings into the Church and Kingdom of Christ, where he as King and Lord
dispenses his Blessing and Spirit. And seals the dispensation thereof to the
baptized in his there according to capacity attending, and submitting to him.

2. We may presume that there is a concurence of the Spirit with his own
Ordinance in part, to bless the receiver according to his capacity, he not
dealing guilfully in the Ordinance of God. He having promised where ever he
record his Name, to meet with us, and bless us, of what ever age the comer to
him be therein, Exodus 20.24. with Psalm. 115.13. In respect of these
considerations it may well be called a Washing or Laver of Regeneration, as
Titus 3.5. And men be said, to be born therein.

Necessary to salvation. So as in Infants, or others dying without Baptism must
be damned, but we know the penitent th^ef on the Cross was saved, and Cornelius
received the Holy Ghost before Baptism.

I conceive it follows not: because,

1. Christ speaks here of things, (...), ver. 10. If I have spoken to thee of
things on earth. So then by the Kingdom of God here is signified, the Kingdom
preached and administered by Christ on the earth, or in his life. In which as we
have showed before is a twofold state, External, and into that no man can enter
so as to be reputed, and taken as a member of it, as now ordered by Christ come
in the flesh, but by being baptized with water, into that Cornelius entered not
otherwise, nor the thief entered at all, if not formerly baptized of John, as
none can tell but he might be.

Internal, and into that none can enter, but by being born of the Holy Ghost,
that is, by being brought into, and united unto Christ by him, so as to have
him the only hope of glory, the only righteousness, redemption, life, and so to
have our dependence on, and rejoicing in him, and God through him. This twofold
principle of birth then may have more direct reference to the twofold state of
it, as here administered. And yet as Cornelius entered in some measure into the
second, before he had the admission into the first; so may a man possibly be
admitted into that estate, that is not here on earth to be enjoyed without it;
but to enter it in both its estates here, both are required to be born of
water, and the spirit. Besides,

2. This word (...), cannot, does not always signify an absolute
impossibility, but only an unusualness, or an inconsistency with such ordinary
ways, or principles. As when its said, The children of the Bride-chamber cannot
fast, so long as the Bridegroom it with them, Matthew. 2.19. So it cannot be,
that a Prophet perish out of Jerusalem, Luke 13.23. He could there do no mighty
works because of their unbelief, Mark 6.5. The world cannot hate you, John 7.7.
with diverse others. Which are to be interpreted some of them, (...), some of
them, (...), its not usual, or insistent with such principles, or ways
appointed. So here a man cannot in an ordinary way enter into the Kingdom of
God, the Regiment of God by Christ here, and so meet with the blessings and
privileges dispensed by him, unless baptized with water, and with the Holy
Ghost: Nor yet may it be said, That Baptism giving an admission, what need then
of the Holy Ghost too.

For, 1. The outward Baptism, as outward, gives but admission into its outward
state, though therein it brings into the way for meeting with Spirit, and so
the inward state of it.

2. The outward Baptism, as was outed above, is not without the presence and
blessing of the Spirit in some measure, where not guilfully or deceitfully
received.

3. The word (...), does not only signify, the first stepping into, but also
the passing on into the thing entered, and so a continued act of entering, as
Heb. 4.3. We that have believed, (...), do enter into rest; we are yet but
entering, And so in Matthew. 18.3.8, 9. Such are in part entered, as the
Disciples were, Matthew. 11.11. Yet unless they do put away, and turn from such
evils as they occasionally are corrupted with, and are offended by, they cannot
(...), enter, or pass on, but will stop in the passage, and at length be cast
out again. As it was needful then for Cornelius, entered into the internal state
in part to be baptized with water, for entering the outward state of the
Kingdom of Christ. So its needful for those that have been baptized, and
entered the outward; yea, and begun to enter the inward too, to yield up to
Christ his Doctrine, Reproofs, Counsels, that they may (...), pass into the
inward farther, and so be prepared for the eternal state of it in its glory.

3. Though we cannot conclude then, That no outward Baptism, no salvation, yet
the ordinary passage into the inward state of Christ's Kingdom here, being by
the outward, and so through both into the state of eternal Glory, I think we
may safely conclude it to be desperate folly and madness, for men to neglect
the entering into this Kingdom in its outward state, either in themselves, or
theirs, presuming to enter the inner and future state without thar. If this be
the way of entrance without which no ordinary entrance, Who will be so mad to
put himself or his, upon an extraordinary, when the ordinary is before him, and
may be had? It being not Gods way to work extraordinarily, where his ordinary
ways or Ordinances may be enjoyed, and are slighted. Indeed, where God denies
the ordinary means, we may hope his mercy and goodness dispenses with the wants
in men, they seeking and hoping in him according to what they have, but no
ground for thinking so, where the ordinary means are slighted, appointed for us
by him; in such a case a man neglecting Gods way of entering into the Church or
Kingdom of God, or bringing his thereinto, cuts himself or his off, as we have
cited before from Gods Congregation, as Genesis 17.14. And though there be
blessing for all men, Nations and Families in Christ, yet where he has
promised that it shall come upon men to eternal life, and enjoyment of his
Kingdom in its glorious state, where through unbelief, or slighting it, men do
not enter it in what estates of it are here to be entered; I know not, nor
believe I, that any man can demonstrate to me. Indeed, the poor Infants of such
persons cannot help it in themselves in Infancy, nor could they under the state
of the Jews before Christ, and though I know no promise of salvation to them in
such a case, we may hope that the mercy of God would not impute it to them to
an eternal rejection of them, but in such a case the parents engage Gods
displeasure against themselves, and so do all such as be accessory to such
their actions; Exodus 4.24, 25, 26. Mark 10.14.
and I see not but God also punishes them in their children in threatening to
cut them off from the enjoyment of such blessing, as here they might in his
Kingdom meet with on the earth; That soul that is not entered into the Covenant
of Gods blessing in Christ, being cut off from, and so not reputed or dealt
with by God as one of the Congregation, Genesis 17.14. So that there is now as the
blessings of Gods Kingdom here on earth both to the parents and children of
their being baptized, and so born of water, though there be not absolute
necessity as to eternal salvation.

And now let us sum up that which has been hitherto said for it, and we may
put it into these following Arguments.

1. All the Nations, or Gentiles, are within the Commission, for discipling, by
baptizing them, etc. Or thus, Christ has commanded to disciple all the
Gentiles, baptizing them, etc. But our little Infants are also Gentiles,
therefore to be discipled, baptizing them.

2. What the Apostles practiced in baptizing, we may lawfully; But they
baptized believers with their households without exception of any, because
children, that we read of; therefore so may we.

3. If the Kingdom of Heaven signifying, or including the Church State, is not
to be denied to little children, then neither is Baptism. But the Kingdom of
Heaven including the Church State, is not to be denied them, because of such it
is, therefore not Baptism.

4. If the Infants of parents that are the branches of the stock of Abraham, be
not broken off from that stock, until, or unless they come to renounce that
faith and profession of his, or in his family, then they are till then to be
acknowledged as holy, and as branches, and not deprived of the badge of that
acknowledgement, that is Baptism: But the Infants of such Parents, are not
broken off, till, or unless they come to renounce that faith and profession:
Ergo,

5. If the promise of God appertains to children with their parents, and the
blessing of Christ belong to whole families, except in case of wilful
rejection, and such right of it to them be ground of their coming to, and
receiving Baptism, then are the children to be baptized with their parents. But
so it is as we have seen. Ergo,

6. If children have need of entering into the Kingdom of God for his blessing,
and the way of entering be by Baptism, then need and ought they to be baptized;
but the promises are true, as we have seen, Ergo, etc.

So then, he that will implead, and cry out against Infant Baptism, must prove,

1. That children are not included in all the Nations, or Gentiles, to be
discipled by baptizing them; or that they cannot so be discipled.

And 2. That the Apostles baptized not such households as in which were Infants,
or in case they did, they yet left out the Infants in them.

And 3. That when our Savior says, Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, the word
such signifies not such in kind, or the Kingdom of Heaven, as there mentioned,
includes not its outward Regiment, or that that may be theirs, and they
admitted to it, and come to Christ in it, and yet not be baptized.

And 4. That the Infants of believers, or of persons not broken from the stock
of Abraham are unbranched, till actual believers, or may not have the outward
Baptism, and be acknowledged members of the Church, though not unbranched. I
say, these and the like things are needful to be proved, which I conceive a
very hard task for him that shall reject Infants from Baptism.

There are I confess, yet some other Objections against it, as that,

1. It occasions great disorder, and confusion in the Church of God, filling it
with dead unprofitable members, and profane persons, That,

2. There is no great Antiquity for it, or not such as is pretended.

3. That however the form that is now used, viz. of not plunging into, but
only washing, or sprinkling with water, cannot be allowed to have the
essential form of right Baptism in it. To all which, I shall say a word or two
particularly, and so conclude.

1. Its said, Infant Baptism brings in a swarm of ignorant and profane persons,
that have nothing but the name of Christians.

To which I answer, 1. That it cannot be denied indeed, that many evil men are
in the Church of God, as Matthew. 13. Tares as well as wheat, many that do
iniquity, good and bad are in the net. Yea, and this is to me an Argument of
the vanity of those that go up and down to rebaptize, and gather into
themselves thereby, as if they were not in the Church, or Kingdom of Christ,
till discipled by their Baptism, when as they may be in the Kingdom and Church
of Christ, though workers of iniquity in it: The Gentiles are within the
outward Court, and its given to them; and its a vain thing for men to say, its
not the outward Court of Gods Temple, because they be Gentile-multitudes that
be in it: Nor may any say, the Kingdom spoken of in Matthew. 13.41. is the
Kingdom of Providence, because the field is said to be in the world: For then
should they be gathered out of his providential Government, which they cannot
be; for even hell it self is under the Kingdom of Power and Providence, which
rules over all. The world indeed is the field, but the field is not the
Kingdom; the Kingdom is in the field, or world, but its not the world. Its the
Church State in which they are, and in which they offend, and do iniquity, and
from thence they shall be gathered, they need not then another Baptism of water
to bring them into the Kingdom, or Church State, in its outward Court, or
external form; for they are in it already: But,

2. The reason of men's being such bad members in it, is not Infants Baptism,
the Infants I am sure are least in the fault, or their being baptized. If it
were, yet we see there began to be such in the Apostles time, and therefore if
Infant baptism be the cause, that was then too, there were then diverse that had
not the knowledge of God, 1 Cor. 3.1.2. and 15.34. James 2.17. 2 Timothy 3.5. 1 Timothy 6.4, 5, 6
and that judged and walked carnally, dead Christians, that had a form, but not
the power of godliness, men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith,
contentious, envious, brangling persons, some that would be drunk in their very
solemn meetings. And the further the stream runs from the fountain, the more
mud and corruption it contracts: but the truth is, 1 Cor. 11.21.
the cause of this dissoluteness in the Church, is rather men's sleeping, that
is, their carelessness in attending to Doctrine and Discipline; Parents have
been neglective of training up their children in the Nurture of the Lord, and
Church-censure, Admonition, and Excommunication have been laid aside, or
abused, otherwise, the Church had not come to this corruption. Not the
admission of children then by Baptism, but want of carefulness in members of
elder years for disciplinating their children, and of the Church for warning,
watching over, and casting out, have been the true causes of so much rubbish
coming in.

3. This might be retorted upon the Antipedobaptists, the evil consequences and
fruits that frequently follow upon it. Not to mention the business of Munster,
too much talked of, our own Country affords too much of the sad consequences
that have followed in many upon their rejecting their former, and betaking
themselves to another Baptism; as their growing to slight their brethren,
though gracious, and formerly so approved; their falling off from Ordinances,
yea, from Christ himself, and turning some of them to be little less then
Atheists: but for the fuller opening and speaking to these sad things, I refer
the Reader to a Book upon this subject, lately set out by my godly Brother, T.
M. Surely John intimates that into the floor of Christ, by outward Baptism,
there would enter chaff as well as wheat, and therefore if the Commission take
in all the Gentiles of what Ages, or Sex, or Country soever, we may not exclude
infants, because through some neglects, and want of vigilance, many of them
prove ignorant and vicious.

2. For ancient Writers upon this point, Master Marshal has to my hand
produced diverse, as Ireneus, Origin, Nazianzen, Cyprian, Augustine, Ambrose,
etc. The first indeed has not the word Baptism, but renewing rather, his
Latin phrase is thus, Omnes qui per cum renascuntur in Deum, infantes, and
parvulos, and pueros, and juvenes. Which some object against, Mr Tombs.
as if he spoke of Sanctification, not Baptism: When as yet Sanctification
signifies a devoting to God, and we read not that the Ancients esteemed any so,
not of the Church, or not admittable to Baptism: yea, its a confessed thing that
they used the word Renasci, to signify to be baptized, and accounted such to
be Renatos. Its said again, That possibly Ireneus being a Greek writer, had
some other word or phrase then what suits with his Latin Translations. But
that is a mere vanity as to matter of disproof of what we have in the
Translations, if any Copies of him could be showed that speak otherwise, it
were something to the purpose.

For Origin, its true, he had his Errors as all the Fathers had, but sure he
was without error able to say what was the practice of the Church in his time,
and that is all that we seek for from the Fathers to this business: He must be a
notorious falsifier, if he should wilfully misreport the Churches known
practices, and we should have found some so honest, as to have cried shame upon
him for it. Indeed, some suspect those passages not to be his, but Ruffinus
his; which yet at the most is but suspicion. The most ancient Writers that we
have, have delivered nothing to the contrary: as if Infant Baptism was not in
their times practiced, or as if it were unlawful (however in cases of sickness
and death approaching) to practice it.

The rest are more plainly and undeniably for it, especially Cyprian, who lived
about 240 years after Christ, and with a consent of 66 Bishops determined that
Infants were to be baptized, and surely we can scarce imagine, that so many
Bishops should all be ignorant of what was the practice of the Church for
diverse years before that their determination; yea, had it been some innovation,
its not probable, but in those more fervent times for Christ, in which so many
suffered gloriously for him, some would have detected and cried out upon them.
As we see they did oppose Cyprian in point of rebaptizing Heretics. But then
against them there are two things objected.

1. That their grounds were rotten upon which they maintained that Doctrine and
practice, as if no children could be saved without Baptism.

To which I answer, 1. That the Ancients have mistaken the grounds of the most
undeniable practices: As of Baptism it self in general, though to men of years,
and upon profession of faith, as if it was of the same absolute Praescribitur
nemini sine Baptismo competere salutem, ex il^a maximi pronuntiatione Domini,
nisi quis ^atus suerit ex aqua, non habet vitam obscrinxit fidem ad Baptismi
necessitudinem. Tertul. de Baptismo.
necessity to salvation, and as if it blotted out, or took away, in whom ever
original sin, yea, in men of years, all other sins too. Shall we therefore say,
They were wrong in holding forth any such thing as Baptism, because they
mistook its grounds; the like we might say of the Supper, etc. The practice of
the Church they might better understand then the grounds of those practices. It
cannot be proved, that any of them were the bringers in of those practices, but
the propugnators of them already, and before times in use; only they grew
superstitious in their conceits of those practices, as may be seen in others of
undeniable Apostolical institution, as the Supper of the Lord, etc.

2. The ground that Cyprian gives, viz. Nemini Dei gratia deneganda est, etc.
is indeed the bottom right ground of baptizing them. For Christ's descending
into the waters of affliction, yea into death it self in behalf of all, his
rising again is that which is both the ground of Gospel-preaching to all, and
affirming the good will of God to all men, That he would have them saved, and
come to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Cor. 5.13, 14, 15. Mark 16.15. 1 Timothy 2.4
6. And the ground of all men's being obliged to him, to live to him that dyed
for them, he being by that means the Lord of all, Romans 14.9. And the door of
hope set open to all, the passage through which God tendreth his grace in the
Gospel, and extends his mercy and goodness to all one and other, and also the
very ground of opening his Kingdom before-seated amongst the Jews unto all the
Nations, and Gentiles, and commanding all to be baptized into his Name, by
baptizing them thereinto, and setting his Commands before them, and so of
bringing them into his house, or gracious Government in his Kingdom. Through
that there is forgiveness of sins with him, and that held forth to, and for
all, that in looking to him they might receive it; through that these waters of
affliction, and wrath, that would have drowned all, are made as waters of
Baptism to those that receive, or put not from them his salvation. Upon that
ground we call persons to, and are to receive, and bring them under his wing in
the outward dispensation. And though its true, he may otherwise show mercy to
those whom we with the Disciples would forbid to come to him for outward
testimonies of it, yet our forbidding such is an implicit (at least) denial of
his grace to them, denial of his Kingdom in the outward Regiment thereof, in
which is a dispensation of his grace and favor more then to others without;
though not so much as to those more within, and under the Regiment of spiritual
Renovation, and Communion with him. Yea indeed, if the matter be well looked
into, we shall find that the greatest cause of most men's denying
Infant Baptism, springs from their unbelief of the Gospel in its extent,
because they know not whether Christ has died for them, and has opened his
Kingdom, thereby to entertain them, whether he any way looks upon them as under
the Covenant of Abraham, and branches of the Church State set up in his family,
in this alteration of its form of Government, and so whether any of the sap and
juice thence flowing, may he shared in by them. Sure, when we deny them
Baptism, we deny them place in Christ's House, and the blessing accompanying it;
we deny them that wing of God stretched out over all upon whom his Name is put
for their protection and leading, till they wilfully break Covenant with him,
and run from him; we deny them that place in the prayers and blessings of the
Church of God put up for all of it, which otherwise they should share in; we
deny them much, so far as lies in our power to deny, or grant to them. But its
said again,

2. That Tertulliaen an Ancienter Writer, who was in Cyprians account his
Master, argues rather for delaying Baptism, except in case of necessity, till
they come to riper years. To that I answer.

1. That Tertullian, and after him Nazianzen, does so indeed, but then its to
be minded, that they neither deny Infant Baptism to have been practiced in the
Church in and before their times, or in the Apostles times. Nor 2. That its
lawful to be practiced, for in case of necessity they both allow it. Yea, its
to be noteds

2. That it was practiced in those more ancient times, even within 140 years
after Christ without any known beginning; for Tertullians arguing for their
delaying their Baptism, implies as plainly that there was then an use to
baptize them, as in far latter times Barnards noting some to have denied
Infant Baptism, proves, That there were Antipedobaptists in those latter Ages,
in, or before Bernard's time: yea, its to be noted also,

Non minori de causa innupti quoque procrastinandi in quibus tentatio per
parata est, tam virginibus per maturitatem, quam viduis pervagationem, donec
aut nubant aut continentia corroborentur. Tex. de Bapt.
3. That by the same reason we may as well deny Baptism to young men unmarried,
and widows, though they profess faith in Christ, for even their delaying
Baptism too, till either they be married, or are confirmed in chastity, that
is, in a resolution of a single life, the same Tertullian endeavors to
persuade in the same place. And indeed, there is as little positive mention of
young unmarried persons being baptized, though of twenty years of age, or
upward, (that were not single all their lives after it at least) as there is of
Infans being baptized, and yet I think no Antipedobaptists in the world will
deny, that such unmarried persons, though not resolved against marriage, may
lawfully be baptized. Its no rare thing to find the ancient Writers regarding
some reasonings of their own to grow superstitious in delaying, or denying Gods
Ordinances, as is evident again in Tertullian denying the lawfulness of second
marriages; and what other but superstition was Constantines, and others,
putting off Baptism, till toward their end? Sure we can find no one Scripture
instance for putting off persons that come to be baptized, till a greater
knowledge attained, or more exact walking testified, or the like. That practice
rather sprung from a conceit that Baptism cleared them of all their sins, and
so they thought it good wisdom to act out what sins they had a mind to act, or
thought they should act before Baptism, rather then after, and so they deferred
Baptism the longer. Besides, we may note,

4. That Tertullian is as weak to the full in his arguing against
Infant Baptism, as any in arguing for it.

For, 1. He takes for granted, That that Speech of Christ to his Disciples,
Suffer little children to come to me, speaks of coming to Baptism: But answers
it thus, Viniat dum adolescant, etc. Let them come when they are grown up, let
them be made Christians when they can know Christ? Were not these, or some such
like, the thoughts of the Disciples with whom Christ was offended? And can that
be the meaning of Christ, when he rebuked them for not letting them come at the
present when as yet they were not grown up? and when he in their very Infancy
blessed them, and said, Of such is the Kingdom? But would Tertullian indeed
have them come then when they are grown up? No, they must stay a little longer
too, till they be married, or settled in their resolution of chastity. And
whereas he says further, Why should innocent Age hasten to the remission of
their sins? It appears, he thought that Baptism gave remission, as well as they
that reasoned for it: And indeed, that being granted, his reasoning must needs
be the worse of the two, for he speaks, as if they were so innocent, as that
they needed no remission, whereas the truth is, They also are by nature so
polluted with sin, and under the guilt of it, as that they also need washing
and remission, or else they cannot be partakers of eternal salvation. This
seems to savor rather of the forementioned ground for their delaying Baptism,
till they have committed many sins, that so therein they might receive the
forgiveness of them all together, and not with the Scripture-grounds of
Baptism. Though that God does hold forth to men the forgiveness of their sins
in Christ, and seals or testifies it in Baptism, I believe, viz. That they
submitting to his Government by Christ, for the future shall have remission of
what is past: yea, by believing in him shall meet with eternal salvation. And
the Church so receiving, remits all that was past, reckoning them no longer, as
in the unbaptized state in the world, but as Subjects unto Christ, till
after-follies appearing, bring them under new censures.

The practice we find then without any known beginning in Ecclesiastical
Record, but the warrantableness of that practice we must have in the
Scriptures. Now what warrant there is for it in the Scriptures, I have before
showed: To which I know not what more can be added, except we should take in
that Prophecy too, that speaks of the Gentiles bringing in children to the
Church of God on their shoulders, and in their arms, Isai. 49.22. Which why it
may not be as literally to be verified as the 23d. That Kings shall be their
nursing Fathers, and Queens their nursing Mothers, I think is hard to show:
Except we will jurare in verba, take this or that man's bare saying, its
otherwise for sufficient proof of it. Christ being a child born to the Jews,
and born in Bethlehem-Judah, and his coming meekly riding on an Ass, his being
pierced in his hands and feet, their giving him vinegar to drink, and parting
his garments, and for his vestment casting lots; all these, with many other
passages, had their literal fulfilling, and why this may not be so understood
too, is not sufficiently proved by those that deny it. But as of it self, it
has not cleanness enough in it to satisfy an inquisitive heart in the point
in hand: so is the very Commission for discipling and baptizing, so full and
general in its expression, and other considerations before laid down seem to be
so convincing, as that there may be no further need of it; and therefore I
shall pass it, and come to the last point objected, or to be considered, viz.

3. The Form of baptizing in water, what it is, whether dipping, plunging, or
washing with water: Concerning which, I consider,

1. That there is no express command tying us to any of them, or expressing,
whether the whole body, or some part, or what part is to be dipped, or washed,
etc. as was noted before, page 4 and 5.

2. That the word (...), is capable of any of those actions, The Pharisees
washing themselves before they eat, though it were but their hands, is called,
(...), Except they be baptized, they eat not. So it is, verbatim, Mark 7.4.
compared with 3.6. Luke 11.38. The Israelites being weted with the Cloud and
Sea, though into them they were not plunged, (the Cloud they could not, it was
above them, the Sea they passed through on dry ground, and the water stood up
as walls on either hand) is called, their being baptized, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. So
Heb. 9.10. (...), is with diverse kinds of washings, in which I conceive their
sprinkling with clean water, and the ashes of an heifer alluded to perhaps in
Ezekiel. 36.25. may be included. And whereas some say, its to dip, Luke 16.24. its
observable,

1. That the word there, is, (...), of (...), and not (...), of (...), of the
same root it is, but not of the same word.

2. That Is applied to a small part of the body, and not to the whole body, the
tip, or top of the finger.

3. That the construction gives it rather to be thus, that he may wet his
finger with water; for its not (...), into water; but only (...), that he may
wet in, or with water.

3. That though its said, Some went down into the water, yet its not said,
whether the Baptist washed their body there, or plunged them over head and ears,
the word will bear either, as was noted before; And they went, (...), Acts
8.38. may as well be translated unto, as into the water; the word (...)
frequently so signifying.

The Holy Ghost then being no more circumstantial in his expressions, as
whether thrice, or but once dipped or plunged, and neither at all plunged, but
only washed, and whether all over, or but some part; not any where tying us to
any form, I think it somewhat too superstitious to bind to any of those forms,
and put religion to this or that, and say thus, and in this form it must be, or
else it is not Baptism. I think dipping or plunging, is a very good way, and
very warrantable Veteris non aliter, quam mersione vel unica, vel trina
baptizabant. Graeca Ecclesia hodie baptizand^s me^git; at climici quod
deoumberent baptizati sunt, non lavacro integro, sed toto corpore aqua perfuso:
ita baptizabatur novatus ager. (...), non (...), Casnub.
, and its probable they were so baptized: But I cannot say absolutely it was
so, and make it a point of faith, and of necessity to be practiced. I conceive
the washing with water in whole, or in part, so it be into the Name of Christ,
and to disciple them into his faith and doctrine, is essentially Baptism, for
ought that I can see, substantially produced against it, the rather because
such washing has that name put upon it, when not used in that way, and to that
end, as was showed before: therefore such a washing to this end, viz. into the
Name of Christ, etc. is very capable of the Name of his Baptism, or Baptism
unto him: for its the use or end of the application of water, that is rather to
be respected in this Ordinance, then the outward form of applying it, there
being nothing in all the Scripture by way of prescription, or tie in it.

4. But what if the Holy Ghost himself do give us an interpretation of the word
(...), and declare unto us by what manner of action on the party baptized, the
thing therein signified is performed, shall not that weigh more with us then
all the authority of the Masters of the Greek tongues, and all the variety of
significations that they put upon the word, amongst whom we find difference
enough? Me thinks, I hear all parties agreeing to it, that if we can find an
interpretation of that word of his giving, they will listen to it, because he
is an Author beyond all exception, and knew his meaning in his own words,
better then Scapula, Budaeus, Hesichius, Stephanus, Casaubon, Zepperus, Beza,
or any other whatsoever.

But may some say, Where shall we find him giving its interpretation?

I answer, If we diligently compare the Scriptures, we shall easily find it.

To this purpose then let us compare the promises made by our Lord Jesus
Christ, or predictions concerning his baptizing, and the performance thereof by
him, and sure that Act that he used in performing, is a good Interpretation of
his meaning in predicting and promising it. Well then, let us look into Matthew.
3.11. and see there what John the Baptist says, I indeed (says he) baptize you
with water to repentance, but there comes one after me mightier then I, he
shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and fire. See also, Acts 1.5. John
indeed baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not
many days hence. Now the question is about the manner of act signified in this
word Baptize, whether it be accomplished by dipping, plunging the party
baptized into the matter of Baptism, or that wherewith he is baptized, or
whether it be performed by sprinkling that upon him, or by what other action.
Now compare with these forementioned Scriptures those passages in which this
baptizing promised was accomplished, and they will clearly unfold unto us by
what kind of action the signification of that word Baptize, is answered. And
first, let that be minded, that this promise of Christ to baptize his Apostles
and Disciples with the Holy Ghost, was performed on the Day of Pentecost, that
soon after followed, as all Interpreters grant, and is sufficiently clear, by
comparing this first of the Acts, with the next following Chapter. Where we
have the accomplishment of this promise spoken to by the Apostle Peter first;
in the Prophet Joel's words, and afterward in his own, in the Prophet Joels,
Chap. 2. ver. 16, 17. This (says he there) is that that was spoken of by the
Prophet Joel, And it shall be in the last days, says God, that I will pour out
of my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy,
etc. In his own, ver. 33. This Jesus being at the right hand of God exalted,
and having received the promise of the Holy Ghost, has shed, or poured forth
this that ye now see, and hear. What more evident, then that the Holy Ghost
himself here gives this action of pouring forth the thing wherewith the party
is baptized upon the said person, as the signification and interpretation of
the word Baptize. That which is called baptizing in the promise, being in the
performance both in the Prophet, and by the Apostle called a pouring forth, or
out upon. See it further cleared, by comparing Acts 10.45. with Acts 11.16. In
the former place its said, That upon the Gentiles was poured forth the gift of
the Holy Ghost: And in the latter place, Peter tells his Brethren, That therein
he called to mind the word of the Lord, who said, John indeed baptized with
water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost: Plainly implying, that in
pouring out the Holy Ghost upon them, he performed his word of baptizing them
with the Holy Ghost.

Now if Jesus Christ himself baptized with this manner of action, pouring the
matter wherewith he baptized upon the parties he baptized, and the Holy Ghost
tells us the act signified in the word Baptize, be in that manner acted, who
can deny that that manner of acting upon the party baptized, is a right way of
baptizing them? Can we have a better pattern in Baptizing to imitate, then the
Lord himself? Or can we baptize in a better form of acting then he? Or can we
doubt that this form of pouring out water upon the party baptized, is Baptism
wi^h water, when the same form of pouring out Spirit, is plainly the baptizing
with Spirit? The difference in the matter of Baptism changes not the
signification of the act employed in the word Baptize: especially that phrase of
baptizing with Spirit, and pouring out of Spirit: having evident allusion to,
and being borrowed from the pouring out of water, and baptizing with water, if
baptizing with water be not to be performed by pouring out water upon the
person we baptize; neither then is it proper to call the pouring out of Spirit
upon one the baptizing him with Spirit, in Metaphorical Speeches words being
borrowed from the things to which the resemblance is made, and applied to the
things resembled. Now in that way used in the Congregations in England, that
are Pedobaptists, it cannot be denied that the Act of Baptism is performed by
pouring water upon the child, or person baptized, less or more, and less and
more herein makes no essential difference, so there be water poured out upon
them, with intent to, or for discipling to that Name of Jesus, by the Holy
Ghosts own interpretation of the word, it may truly be called Baptism,
sprinkling with water, being not different from pouring out much water upon
them, except in the quantity of the water: And both Metaphors are used in the
Scripture, to signify the same spiritual thing signified in Baptism. As in
Isai. 52.15. He that is Christ shall sprinkle many Nations. And truly, I am not
satisfied that the Holy Ghost there uses that expression only to signify his
sprinkling his grace or doctrine upon them, but also to signify and foretell
the sprinkling them by way of Baptism into his Name by his Servants, and that
with reference to that foreseen, he uses this phrase, to signify his
sprinkling them with his grace or doctrine also. Why we may not interpret the
Holy Ghost as literally here, as in the expressions next following, and all
along the next Chapter, I see no convincing reason as yet that can be produced.
So in Ezekiel. 36.25. I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean,
differs not in substance from that in Isai. 44.3, 4. I will pour water upon him
that is thirsty, etc. Though I confess there is another Metaphor in it, and
another operation of the grace of God there hinted: So that I hope by the light
of this consideration, the Antipedobaptists will see that there is no such
necessity of plunging or dipping for the baptizing a person, as men are ready
to be persuaded by they noise the make about it.

being buried with Christ in Baptism, Romans 6.3, 4. Collos. 2.12. As if the
Apostle there in spoke of the external rite of Baptism, burying the body of the
party baptized under the water for some short space of time, as is used in
plunging men.

much less these instanced in the Objection: And I am sure we have no express
command tying us, (as is once, and again said) to the so doing: Its true, we
read of some, that they went down (...), into, or unto the water, See Act:
8.39. Matthew. 3.16.
and that they did (...), come up again, (...), from, or out of the water: but
then these phrases are evidently distinct from the act of baptizing, the one
prceeding it, and the other after it, and not either of them of the essence of
the baptizing, which whether it were by washing them, or plunging them over
head and ears, or pouring water on them, is not mentioned: Nor are these
phrases always used about baptizing, as in the Baptism of Cornelius, and his
friends, and household; there it is, (...), etc. Can any forbid water that these
should not be baptized? The phrase of prohibiting water may seem rather to
signify that water be brought to them for that purpose to baptize them,
however we read not that either they, or the Jaylors house, or Lydia's went
into the water.

2. But those phrases of Burying with Christ in Baptism, seem not to determine,
or tell us the outward rite of baptizing with water, for then the rising with
Christ too should point to something in the same, for they both are said to be
in Baptism, Col. 2.12. Now that the latter does not, me thinks, this will
evince, That that rising with him said to be in Baptism, is a rising by the
faith of the operation of God that raised Christ from the dead; which faith
sure gave not the power of their bodily rising up from under the waters in
Baptism, but they rose from under them by the power naturally in their own
persons, or in them that baptized them: for neither had all that were baptized
that faith of the operation of God raising Christ from the dead, as is evident
in many of the multitudes baptized by John, Who though they rejoiced in his
light for a season, yet abide not to the faith or understanding of Christ
raised from the dead. Acts 8.20, 21, 22, Ti^. 1.16.
And as its evident in Simon Magus, and many in the Churches charged to have a
dead faith, a profession of knowing God, but indeed were in works denyers of
him, etc. Who either rose not from under the waters by the faith of Gods
operation, or else had afterward lost it again: but I conceive it cannot be any
where probably proved, that they then had any such divine believing.

3. I conceive then that those phrases speak either of the internal baptizing
by Spirit, which the Saints and faithful had proved, in which their hearts were
broken off from self, and world, dead and buried to all confidences in the
flesh, and buried into fellowship with Christ in his death, to yield up to
conformity to him therein, in which also they experimented a quickening and
raising up of their hearts to confidence in God, and readiness to walk in
newness of life. Upon which grounds the Apostle after infers, If then ye be
risen with Christ, seek those things that are above, Col. 3.1. In which surely
he must need speak of their internal rising by the answer of a good conscience
in the inward washing them with the grace of God; for as to the rising up out
of the water of Baptism in the external Ordinance, there could be no ground for
an if, as if any of them, in case they ever were plunged or buried under it,
never came out, or rose up again there: Yea, why might he not upon that ground
put in that partitive clause (...), so many of us as were baptized into Christ,
Romans 6.3. Gal. 3.26, 27. As if perhaps not all outwardly baptized, and of the
Church in its external form, had experience of this Baptism here spoken of.
Beside, Circumcision is sometime so spoken of, not for the outward Ordinance,
but the inward frame of the heart, or circumcision in the spirit, as in Romans
2.28, 29. Phil. 3.3. Jer. 4.4. And why the Apostle might not speak of Baptism
in such a way too, as to speak of the inward real Baptism of the heart, and not
of the flesh, I see no reason can be given of any force at all. Nay its sure
the Apostle Peter does speak of Baptism in that sense, 1 Pet. 3 21. Baptism now
saves us not the putting away the filth of the flesh, which is done in the
outward act of the external Ordinance, but the stipulation or answer of a good
conscience through the resurrection of Christ: which place seems well to open
and answer to that in Col. 2.12. Or,

4. If we take them to speak also of outward baptizing, then it shows not so
much the external form and ceremony of it, as the inward end, intention, and
scope of it. Its a coming into Christ at least, so far as to the outward
Institution and Government, and so a professed Obligation to him, and to his
death, to look for all salvation there-through, and have fellowship with him
therein. In which the person baptized was deaded to the world in its former, or
all other Institutions, Religions, Hopes, Fellowships, Privileges, and as it
were buried thereto, (especially as things stood in those times, in which he
that came under the acknowledgment and profession of Christ, became therein as
a man dead, and buried to all esteem, and repute or love of the world,) that so
they should, or might walk in newness of life, after the new Institution and
Doctrine of Christ, unto which we are in Baptism delivered, and not according
to the old and wild inclinations of our nature or customs, and institutions of
the world. And this holds true be the external form of baptizing what it will,
and let Baptism be understood to reach as far as it will; for whether the body
be dipped or washed in whole or in part into the Name and profession of Christ: A
man is thereby buried with him, and made as a dead man out of sight to the love
and esteem of the enemies of Christ; and is obliged and bound to be so, as to
the hopes, confidences, delights, customs, and vanities of the world, to be to
all them as dead and buried, that so he may walk in the Doctrine and
Instruction of Christ, which also will render a man as a dead, crucified, or
buried thing to the world. And here is a putting on Christ, as to external
profession and obligation, so much the outward Baptism brings under the bond
of, and delivers up unto: And where ever the soul is inwardly baptized into the
death of Christ, there in that death of his its buried with him to all its
former hopes, confidences, and principles, really and actually, (though
spiritually, and not carnally) and therein its quickened up to live to God in
newness of life, having really put on Christ, as to interest in his
privileges, and conformity to him, crucified as to the old man, but quickened
in the new. Which word (crucified) is there used of that said to be done in
Baptism, as also the word planting together with him, ver. 5, 6. Though I think
they should grossly mistake the Apostle, that should thence argue, that they had
some such outward rites of resembling a crucifying, and an implanting in their
external baptizing.

In what is said, I suppose their mistake also may appear, who from these and
the like places argue, and conclude, Mr Law^.
That the External Baptizing is a Seal of union with Christ, and forgiveness of
sins, etc. which cannot be true: Except by union with Christ they mean by way
of profession, or engaged subjection to his doctrine, as all baptized into
Moses, became in that sense one with him; or as they that subscribe and come
under the Parliamentary Authority, are in that sense one with them. And so
indeed its true. That in Baptism we are buried with Christ, to external
Circumcision, and so to the Observations of Moses Law, and become of his party,
or under his way of institution, and nurture, obliged to his doctrine and
commands, in whom we receive the end of all Moses his institution; and except
by forgiveness of sins, is meant the not imputing former trespasses, or the
guilt of them, to the prohibiting or keeping out from his Church and Kingdom,
but that they may be admitted thereinto to wait upon him, and attend to him
therein for spiritual union with, renovation by, and conformity to Christ; for
so we grant, God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing
their trespasses to them, and has so blotted out the handwriting of
Ordinances against all Nations, Col. 2.15.
that he welcometh them in their coming in to him, and reckons them no more
unclean, nor will charge their follies upon them, so as to debar their coming
in amongst his people, to be a people to him, as we noted before. Only such
Jews, as (like the elder son in the parable, Luke 15.) stumble, and will not
come in, and such Gentiles as count it a foolish offer that is made them, and
join in unbelief with the Jews, or make fond excuses, and refuse, deprive
themselves of the benefit of that non-imputation of their trespasses, which the
Gospel proclaims to all, and Baptism seals to all that come in by virtue of
that general Proclamation, 2 Cor. 5.19. Romans 11.11, 12, 15. But if by union
with Christ, is meant, as I conceive it is, union in spirit, and spiritual
privileges to eternal life, and by remission of sins, such a forgiveness, as
to take them into Covenant, as proper heirs of its peculiar privileges and
blessings, and right to the eternal inheritance, then though Baptism witnessing
to Christ, and pointing us to him, witness to the enjoyment of that union and
forgiveness through the hearty belief on Christ, yet it seals them not to the
several parties baptized outwardly, as their undoubted portion and privilege
in and by coming to this Baptism, and so to be professed Subjects in the Kingdom,
or Church State of Christ, to be enjoyed by them. The sealing of that is the
proper work of the Spirit of Christ, as has been noted before. And thus have
we also viewed these Objections. But,

4. In perusing Master Kendals Answer to Master Goodwin, I have lately met with
one other Argument, which though propounded only Ad hominem, and by way of
Objection by him to Master Goodwin, as endeavoring to show an inconsistency in
his principles, and doctrines, yet as I apprehend may seem to carry some show
of weight in it amongst some of the Antipedobaptists, that believe the Extent
of Christ's Death and Ransom; yea, it makes me call to mind, that it is a prime
Argument with many of them, and therefore I conceive it very needful to say
something to it, and show its invalidity. It is to this purpose.

Christ by his death and sufferings has wholly dissolved, Adams sin, and so
from all Infants, so as that none shall perish now, but for his own personal
sinning against the Government and goodness of God by Christ; therefore as
Tertullian says, Quid festinet innocens aetas ad remissionem? Seeing Infants
are not in danger of perishing while such, nor have any sin to be washed from,
no need is there of their being baptized. To this purpose is Master Kendals
reasoning once and again, and particularly in Chapt. 17. Page 203. twice, and
again, Page 207. To which I answer.

1. By denying the Consequence, because though Christ indeed has dyed for all,
and through his death the benefit is to all men to justification of life, Romans
5.18. So as that there is salvation extendible to them in the public person,
and tenderable to them in the Gospel. So as that They are so far redeemed from
under the Law, or first Covenant made with Adam, as that though they have
broken it in him, yet they are not under a necessity of destruction, but Christ
has power to forgive their sins, and bring them unto God, that sin and law
notwithstanding: And no Scripture speaks of any perishing finally, for that
Adam sinned but generally for their own personal rejections of the light,
imprisonings of the truth, abuses of goodness, and patience, and rebellions
against Spirit, by and through Jesus Christ extended and afforded, as witness,
Prove. 1.22, 23, 24. etc. Ezekiel. 24.13. Josh. 3.19. and 12.48. Romans 1.18, 19, 20,
21-28. 2 These. 1.7. and 2.10. Rom, 2.4, 5. with diverse others, which also seem
to me, Part. 2. p. 83.
may be enforced from Master Kendals own concessions; As when he grants, That
all the goodness, patience, mercy, men enjoy, they have it as the purchase, and
procurement of Christ; no such good thing being extendible according to the
Covenant with Adam, broken by us, for from thence will it not plainly follow,
That he stood in the breach, stopped the course of the Law, cursing us only, and
debarring us of all good, and gave it its satisfaction for all for their breach
of it, and sin against it; that being in it self inflexible, and not otherwise
diverted from accursing us, and depriving us of all good but by satisfaction
given to it in some other bearing its sentence for us; for if the Law could
upon other terms have dispensed with our enjoyment of good, and suspended its
sentence; yea, have permitted mercy to us instead of curse; we do in vain put
the enjoyment of of those good things upon Christ's Mediation. If then he has
suffered the curse of it for all, and so given it its demands, as that he has
power to give contrary to its sentence, then are all men no longer under it, as
the Covenant of life, and favor in the sight of God, or in regard of his
binding them to live by their personal obedience of it in Adam, and themselves,
or else for ever to be accursed, and perish; Though in men's consciences it have
this dominion, unless and till their ignorant hearts be better informed, Isai.
42.6. and 49.6, 7. Matthew. 25.31. to the end.
and believe the truth, and as a means of convincement of sin, and so tending
to salvation, it is yet in its force, as in the hand of Christ, who is become
the Covenant to the people, according to men's subjection, to whom in the light
he affords, or sinning against him, they are now to be judged. Though all this,
I say, be so, yet it follows not from thence, either,

1. That Infants are guilty of, or have no sin in them: For the death of Christ
neither makes them less guilty of having sin in Adam, or of being guilty of
that sin as in him, nor does it take corruption or uncleanness out of them by
its self; men may be guilty in themselves of that that is not imputed to them,
and for which being forgiven, they shall not suffer. Paul nevertheless charges
himself with being the chief of sinners, because his sin was forgiven him
through the blood of Christ, 1 Timothy 1.15. And it is not Christ's dying for men
simply renews then, but the discovery of the grace and truth of God to them,
and the belief of it with the operations of the Spirit of God therein, that
cleanses both the conscience and spirit of men. Children are conceived in
iniquity, and born in sin, spring out of an unclean root, and therefore are
unclean in themselves, Job 14.4. Psalm. 51.4, 5. or,

2. That Baptism (were it so) is needless for,

1. The Death of Christ for a man is so far from rendering Baptism needless to
that man, that indeed there is no ground for baptizing any man but by virtue
of, and upon the account of his death for him. Christ as dead, and risen for
us, is the ground and foundation of all mercies, and of all ordinances, and the
promise of him was the foundation of all the ordinances before his coming, 1
Cor. 3.11. Ephesians. 2.20. as might easily be evidenced. Had it not been for his
stepping in, we had forthwith upon breach of Gods Covenant layn for ever in
death and misery without any mercy, or favor to us, or hope of delivery: but
for that Christ had not had authority and power over any man to dispense favor
to him, or deal otherwise with him, then according to the desert of his sin,
and sentence of the Law, nor had there been any remission of sins either to be
sealed to, or sought for by any person, nor no way for adoring or worshipping
God, nor could ten thousand baptisms do, or have done any man the least
benefit, had not Christ dyed for him; therefore, me thinks, its strange, that
the granting of this should make Baptism needless, but for which Baptism is
wholly groundless. This might easily be retorted against himself, that there is
no ground for baptizing children, or very uncertain if Christ dyed not for all;
it would then be rather needful of the two, to say till they grow up, and give
some testimony of their faith, and so hopes that they are of the Election,
especially Baptism being into the death of Christ, Romans 4.2, 3. that we may
have good ground to baptize them into that that is for them.

2. Baptism does neither take sin out of the nature, nor off of the conscience:
I say this Baptism by water, 1 Pet. 3.21. much less does it take sin from
before the presence of God, so as that he imputes it not to men, that the
having these things undone, should be the ground of its Administration, as the
Objection supposes, while the supposing those things to be already done by the
death of Christ, is brought to argue it needless. As its the sufferings of
Christ that has satisfied for sin, and redeemed men from under the first
Covenant, to be now dealt with in, and through Christ the Mediator, and has
opened the way for men to God again, so its the belief and receipt of the
truth, and grace of God, in, and upon which, God forgives and acquits actual
sinners of foregoing sins, and justifies them, and that both washes sins off
from the conscience, and purifies the heart, and conversation. This outward
Baptism then does neither after believing, nor before, take away sin. That
phrase, Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling upon the Name
of the Lord, Acts. 22.13. signifies but either, that in calling upon the Name
of the Lord, and yielding himself to his Baptism, he should,

1. Declare and manifest his hearty closing with the Lord Jesus, and that he
did repent him really of his former practices against him, and so should
manifest, That he received forgiveness of his sins, or,

2. That so he should receive the external soul, or ratification of forgiveness
of sins to the believer.

And so, 3. Receive a Ministerial forgiveness, or washing them away, so as to
be no longer reckoned by the Church a persecuter of it, and stranger from it,
but to be owned by them, as cleansed from his former sins: and that phrase,
Baptized for the forgiveness of sins, Acts 2.38. That that has sealed
forgiveness of sins in Christ to them, to be dispensed in believing, and that
in yiedling to the Name, and entering into the Profession, and Church of
Christ, they were in the way to receive it from him, or have it sealed to them:
But those phrases prove not, That the outward Baptism either satisfied for, or
procured cleansing in conscience or heart from sin.

3. The having sin taken away off from men in point of obnoxiousness to
punishment, or off of their consciences; yea, the putting a man into such a
condition, as in which he is actually capable of salvation, and so the rendering
Baptism not necessary to salvation, does not take away the need of Baptism, or
make that the Administration of it should be groundless, for,

1. Then none should be baptized at all; for we do not find Baptism asserted as
necessary to salvation to any in the Scripture, (I mean the outward Baptism,)
so as that without it no salvation. We find. He that believes and it baptized*
shall be saved, Mark 16.16. but never he that believes must be baptized, that
or else he must be damned; Certainly the thief on the cross, unless baptized
before, was not at all baptized, yet was saved; and surely Cornelius being
justified of God, and the Holy Ghost being poured upon him, might have gone to
Heaven had he dyed then before he was baptized, and many went to Heaven before
it was instituted.

2. Then both the Antipedobaptists, and Master Kendal baptize needlessly, for,

1. The Antipedobaptists say, All its necessity, is but a Necessitas precepti,
as the precept for it makes it necessary^*
They believe before they are baptized, surely if they believe they are
actually under the promise of forgiveness; yea by faith are justified from
their sins, and the death of Christ without doubt has discharged them before
God, and brings remission to their consciences, and begins to purify their
hearts, and so they are translated from death to life, before Baptism;
therefore by their rule Baptism is needless for them.

2. Master Kendals principles make it needless too, for did not Christ dye for
the elect Infants; and if so, ought they to dye again, or perish in the sins
Christ dyed for? Or ought they not rather, as Master Owen says, to be
discharged of all actions and suits that may be made against them? Say they not
all, its unjust that Christ should bear their sins, and themselves too? So that
they are safe enough from condemnation, nor possibly could perish, though not
baptized with outward Baptism. And as for all other Infants, they can have no
good by it, but must perish, it notwithstanding being reprobate; Ergo, no need
for Baptism by that reasoning.

But 3, There are other uses and ends of Baptism, and reasons of its
appointment, in order to which there is need of it: As,

1. The obeying and fulfilling Christ's Commission for discipling all the
Gentiles, baptizing them, Matthew. 28.19.

2. The bringing or admitting them to Christ in his Church or Kingdom for his
more special protection and blessing, Matthew. 19.13, 14.

3. The discipling them to, 1 Cor 10.2. Matthew. 28.19.
or obliging them to be brought up to the acknowledgement of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, and not in the ways of prophanness, and Gentilism.

4. The sealing the righteousness of the faith of the Gospel preached to, and
believed by Abraham, but more fully performed and declared now; as that though
by nature we, and all ours, are unclean, unfit for fellowship with God, and
admission into Kingdom, yet through the death of Jesus Christ for us there is
forgiveness for us in him, and for ours, an entrance into his Kingdom where
blessing is to be met with, for making us meet for fellowship with himself.

5. The solemn profession of the Parents, or Nurturers faith in the Gospel of
Christ, Ephesians. 6.4, 5.
in bringing them to have his Name put upon them, with a knd of public
engagement upon themselves, to bring them up for Christ.

6. The putting away the filth of the flesh, 1 Pet. 3.20. the stain of
Gentilism, and so the putting a Note of distinction between themselves with
theirs, and the Heathens that have not the Name of Christ upon them. So that no
ground for, nor substance in that Objection flung so often in Master Goodwins
dish, by Master Kendal.

Indeed I rather wonder upon what what account he can baptize Infants, that
makes the Scripture Language so uncertain, as that all Nations or Gentiles by
his Line of interpretation may possibly reach but a few unknown persons of some
Nations, and that expresses such rash conceptions of the Reprobation of many
Infants; Page 72. Chap. 8.
As when he says, Page 72. Chap. 8. Though they dye in Infancy before they be
capable of doing any work in one kind or other on earth, yet they shall
acknowledge Christ in hell, and bow their little guilty knees, etc. I am sure,
no Scripture tells him so, Me thinks, his doctrine is far more obnoxious to
doubts and scruples about Infant Baptism, then the other. Concerning which
Doctrine, (seeing I have had occasion to mention him) I must needs say, Master
Kendal is more beholding to his Metaphysics, then to the Scriptures, for his
belief and maintenance of it. As not only his Book throughout, but his own
positive confession therein, Chap. 16. Page 159. declare: Where he says, It was
his laying a good foundation in Logic and Metaphysics, that kept him upright
in these controversies of Divinity. See I pray then upon what a good foundation
that Doctrine is built and upheld; not upon the only good and sure foundation
of the Prophets and Apostles, Page 123. Chap. 4.
Ephesians. 2.19, 20. (whom he plainly confesses that Christ never sent to read us
any Metaphysical Lectures, about those points of the simplicity of God, and so
by consequence not about Necessity, Contingency, Liberty*) but upon Philosophy,
which the Apostle bids us beware of lest it spoil us in the matters of our
faith, telling us it is but the vain deceit of man; and however solid and
substantial it seems to be, it will but deceive us, Col. 2.8. A goodly
foundation that both he and his doctrine stands on. Gramercy then, (to use his
own phrase) to Logic, and Metaphysics, for his being right in the faith, more
then to the Grace or irresistible power of God, at least more then to the
Gospel, and holy Scriptures, and Grace, as therein declared; for however the
unlearned Apostle tells us, That they, the Scriptures are able to make us wise
to salvation, (to preserve himself and others from seducements.) Through faith
in Jesus Christ, yea able to furnish the man of God perfectly to every good
work, (whether to teach doctrine, rebuke evil practices, reprove and stop the
mouths of gainsayers, save himself and hearers.) Yet Master Kendal had not
gone wrong, and had not been able to have made so solid an Answer, as he
supposes his to be to Master Goodwin, had not his Logic and Metaphysics stood
him in more stead then all the Scriptures. In answering or speaking to which he
usually bungles. No marvail that he so seriously and highly commends these
Studies, (of which the Apostle bids us beware we put not too much in them) to
the Fellows and Students of Exeter College in Oxford, in his Epistle to them,
telling them, It is impossible to be profitable without those Studies. Oh
what is become Paul of thy assertion of the Scriptures sufficiency to make us
perfect and profitable to every purpose! Nay he tells them, They will find that
a bare pair of shears and a met-yard, he means (he says) a little Logic and
Philosophy will stand them in I know not how much stead. Yes, they serve
notably* as he uses them, to measure the Essence and Nature of God, the manner
of his willing, knowing, acting, and the dependencies of all things and actions
thereupon by his rule of effects and defects, and applications of them to the
truths of the Gospel, to limit and shorten them most gallantly, and to leave us
but a little of that truth and goodness they seem to have in them.

As to instance, 1. To Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live, says the Lord, Chap. 16. Page
152.
I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, etc. He applies his
Metaphysical yard-wand, and measuring it by that, he finds, that what ever God
has no pleasure in shall not take place, and so measuring it further by the
appearance in the event he finds it will agree only to the Elect; nay, and by
another false application of to it, to his Met-yard, makes it to run but even
with the persons spoken to, the House of Israel, forgetting the Mood Darii,
That particular Applications may be well made from general Propositions; And
then comes his Philosophical-shears, and at one cut snips off all them wicked,
that in conclusion do dye, and so the truth of that saying, Ezekiel. 18. ult. yea,
and yet further by virtue of his former application of his Met-yard snip away
all the reality of that dying there spoken of, and makes but the force of him
that dies, to be him that by his sins did deserve to dye, but indeed dies not:
yea, snips away all our Interest in that notable testimony of good will to
sinners, and encouragement given to wicked men of the Gentiles to repent. Again,

2. Applying the said Met-yard to 2 Chronicles. 36.15. where its said of Jerusalem,
Chap. 16. Page 160.
and the Jews, That God sent his Prophets to them, and Messengers rising up
betimes, and sending them; Because he had compassion on his people, and on his
dwelling place; and by that he measures his compassion to be but a respiting
their overthrow for a time, till he had sent his words, Prophets, and
Messengers: and then by his Phylosophical-shears off goes all his love of pity
and benevolousness of affection to them: in which he desired not their
destruction, but their repentance, and living rather; yea, and all the
dependence of the sending of the Prophets, and Messengers upon any compassion
in him as the cause of it; yea indeed the sending of his Prophets was rather by
this Met-yard, the cause of the compassion toward them; for he did but respit
their destruction till he should send them his Word and Prophets, and therefore
sure had it not been for that he would not have respited them: Nay indeed, this
compassion was such a respiting of their destruction, as argues an absolute
purpose to destroy them only; yea, by his effects and defects, purposed
according to the rule laid down by him, Page 85. Chap. 2. it contained further
in it a purpose to bring them to a greater ruin. And this in his Metaphysical
Divinity, is Gods compassion.

3. Applying the same Met-yard to John 3.16, 17. or rather that to it he finds
that the love of God cannot reach so far as to the world of mankind in general,
so as to have prepared such an Object of faith of his Son, and such
plenteousness of salvation in him, That whosoever of it believes, shall be
saved; therefore with his shears, he snips off all but the Elect, that is, such
as are eternally saved. And further to make sense of the phrase, (that
whosoever believes) he snips it so, as to make it, That whosoever of the Elect
of this, or that Nation, condition, or at this, or that time believes, shall be
saved, as still implying possibly not all of them, of all Nations, and in all
Ages, shall so believe; and here he snips so desperately, that he cuts so much
off, (as in all the rest almost) that of what he cuts off, it may as truly, or
rather be said, God so hated the world, that he gave not Christ for them to
believe on, or as such a Medium of salvation, as affords any good ground for
their believing, or possibility of their salvation; but absolutely destined
them through sin into destruction: yea, and he snips off the truth of that in
John 12.47. where Christ is affirmed so to come not to judge the world, but to
save the world: as to include the unbeliever on him too therein.

4. Applying the same to 1 Timothy 4.4. he cuts out off all the greatest part of
all; as if we might not pray for all, Chapt. 6. Page 26, 27.
because not for some in all cases, as in case of the sin to death; and because
Christ praying for things whereof only men as actual believers are capable
excludes the world, (that is, men as, and while yet uncalled) from being the
objects of those requests, when as yet his end in praying for those things for
believers was the good of the world amongst whom he sent them, Ver. 18.21, 23.
of Joh. 17.
and that they might believe that God sent him, even as the then believers
already had done. As if because when we pray for Magistrates, for things
properly suitable to them, as Spirit of Government, and excluding the common
people as the objects of those petitions, though their good be the end of them.
We should be by this snipping faculty, denied to pray at other times, and in
other requests, (as it is evident our Savior did, Luke 13.6, 7, 8. and 23.34.)
for other men. Thence also he once, twice, thrice, snipt out the word all, from
1 Timothy 2.2. For Kings, and all in authority, because he (its likely) see that
stood in his way to hinder his scant measure of but some of all sorts, and
renders it for Others in authority, and ver. 4. changes the phrase, will have
all saved into, will save all. As if between these two there were no
difference: As by the same rule he snips with his Philosophical-shears the
greatest part of the signification of All and Every, in all other Texts
alleged with those words in them in this controversy.

5. By the same Rule and Shears applied to 1 John 2.2. he snips and scants the
whole world, so that it will lie in a narrow compass, and snips the words to
you that believe, 1 John 5.13. which shows to whom his Epistle is directed, all
away to the believing Jews, because ver. 7. of Chap. 2. he tells them of the
word they heard in the beginning, though that be no more then Paul's (...), 1
Cor. 15.2, 3. to intimate, that he preached no new doctrine now, from what he
and his Brethren had always from their first preaching doctrinated them in; but
by that sense of the whole world, All the Gentile Churches lie in wickedness, 1
John 5.19.

6. By the like Application of Romans 14.14. and 1 Cor. 8.11. to his Mety-ard, he
by his shears snips off all the Apostles Argument drawn from the mischief that
might accrue to the weak Brother that Christ dyed for, and makes little better
then a mere scarecrow of it, like the bidding of an Archer, take heed, if
shooting with his arrow the roof of Paul's down, which would fall alone, if not
so mightily supported with strong marble Pillars, that ten thousand Arrows
cannot bring it down, though they may do some little damage by sticking in the
wood-work, or rasing the Leads. Yet he gives such large measure to (...), him
for whom Christ dyed, by making him to signify men of that species, that he
quite snips out the weak man Christ dyed for.

Chap. 18. Page 157.
7. Applying to the same Rule or Met-yard the Type of the Brazen Serpent, (to
pass over many particulars) he snips out all the blind men that were stung
before he proves there were any such, though were there such no more was
required of them then what God requires of blind men, and they are supposed
possibly they may do, Isai. 42.18. To look toward the object with their blind
eyes, that they might see.

8. And to say no more, Applying to it that in Matthew. 23.37. How often would I
have gathered thy children. He measures it so scantly, as that he cuts off the
Godhead of Christ from that, See the like Expression spoken of God, Ezekiel. 24.13.
Would have gathered, and by that means not only clips off the authority of
those places, in 2 Esdr. 2.20, 30.32, 33. where those words are applied to the
Lord Almighty, but also clips his wings so short, under which they should be
gathered, making them but the wings of a man, as that I fear they could not
give sufficient protection to them; To say nothing, That in the Manhood he came
not often to them, but by his Prophets in his Spirit he came often, (which
concurrence also of the Spirit with the outward means afforded, as the patience
of God to such as perished in impenitency he clips off, contrary to Genesis 6.3.
and 1 Pet. 3.19, 20. And so from other means more plentifully afforded to those
Jews, contrary to Neh. 9.20.30. Isai. 5.3, 4. Isai. 63.10, 11, 12. Zach. 7.11,
12. Acts 7.51.) Yea, Contrary to John 14.9, 10, 11.
he snips off all the real similitudes of God from Christ, and faithfulness in
not doing his own, but his Fathers will, by himself asserted, John 6.37, 38.
While he makes Christ indeed as man to will their gathering, and endeavors it,
when as God had no love or compassion toward them, nor willed their gathering.
As for Christ's purchasing faith and repentance for the Elect, (by purchasing,
understanding the obliging God to make them actually believe,) I think its a
shred of humane Tradition, that he brings not any Scripture to prove, nor is it
sown with the thread of any firm connection with his own principles; for if God
without respect to Christ's death decreed absolutely to bring these and those
persons to glory, surely there needed no obligation to be put upon him by the
death of Christ, to give them that that is necessarily requisite thereto.
Christ needed not except to remove the Sentence of the Law, and so sin as
obstructing the dispensation of those good things conducing to glory, and to
keep them from stopping up the passages of his love, and then his own purposes
and good will, will (yea, saves engaged for the execution of themselves to)
give to every one according thereunto. Christ has procured that without
violation of truth or justice, he may give grace and glory to men, and so much
he may as he pleases give to any man without any such violation. As for his
snipping the 2 Pet. 2.1. and cutting off the real aggravation of the false
Teachers, sin by making the Text of no brother a meaning then only that Peter
spoke charitably, or according to such a judgment as there could be no ground
for (his speech being not about any Church Members as such, but dogmatically,
and by way of Prophecy, both of the way and end of some persons in the future,
who being described to be such, and to have such an end, could not together
therewith be charitably supposed, according to those principles to have been
bought or redeemed; nor being false Teachers were so much as in a seeming way
to be bought, but rather in an appearing way not to have been bought by his
principles; false teaching being no probable sign of Election, though to
establish his seeming good gloss on this place, he impertinently quotes as a
place without exception to prove that the Scripture speaks in that Dialect, 2 Chronicles. 28.23. Ahaz worshipped the Gods of Damascus, which slew him; Sure he
forgot that the Gentiles worshipped Devils, 1 Cor. 10.20. and they by the
Syrians might smite him, as well as rob Job by the Sabaeans. As also that Names
of places are put for the Inhabitants, as O Jerusalem, thou that killest the
Prophets, Matthew. 23.37. And so are of a plural signification, and so the sense
is as Tremelius also renders it, Sacrificavit Diis Damascenor percutientium
ipsum, The Gods of Damascus, which Damascus smote him. This I say, I shall pass
over, he that will see more thereabout, may see it in my Answer to Master Owen,
which if he please, he may have at Master Cripse, or Master Moules, or Master
Calverts Shops in London.

Indeed he deals with few Scriptures in this Controversy, but he miserably
scants and clips them. If my Tailor kept such a false Met-yard, and could keep
his shears no better from snipping away all my cloth, he should have little of
my custom; but I think, though he be no man of his word, he can keep his
met-yard and his shears honest enough. Master Kendal might have afforded the
Students too a Philosophical needle of a piercing tongue, and Goose of a
pressing wit, and then they might have been fit to do less harm on a Shop-bord,
then in a Pulpit with their worldly rudiments, and humane Divinity. I hope the
Reader will pardon this digression, and Master Goodwin, that I have here put in
this bit to stay stomachs, till he have prepared a fuller meal of Reply to him.
Indeed the unsavouriness and ungodliness of such passages, as while men pretend
to such special grace, and to such jealousy for Gods glory, in the mean while
to give the honor of his truth and grace to humane Sciences, and heathenish
Philosophy, and cast such disparagements upon the Scriptures, and Divine
Revelations, which are the weapons of our spiritual warfare, mighty through God
to pull down those (...), strong holds, and reasonings, which Philosophy, and
vain deceits of men build up against it, provoked me hereunto. The word (...)
there may have some reference to (...), as well as to (...); to the word
Mystery, as well as to Christ.
The Students should do far better to study the Scriptures well, and especially
that second to the Colossians, and held for true and certain, That in the
Mystery of God, Father, and Christ, as preached in the Gospel, are hid up all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and that in Christ we are completely
furnished as well for wisdom, and for profiting one another, as for
righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. So as that as we need not to turn aside to the Law
of Moses to make us righteous, so neither need we to turn aside to Philosophy,
and vain deceits of men, after the rudiments of the world, and traditions of
men, and not after Christ, (however by men highly commended as necessary for
us, to be profitable, and to be made and kept upright in the faith of Christ)
to make us wise unto salvation. Nay, they had need to take these counsels, to
take heed of being spoiled with Philosophy, for there is more danger of being
spoiled by it from Christ, then being built up in him; while men are led away
rashly to pry into things they have not seen, being vainly puffed up with a
fleshly mind, not holding the head, Ver. 17.18.
etc. as follows in that Chapter. And indeed, who sees not that Philosophy
leads men so to do, as to pry into the Essence of God, John 1.18. Prove. 30.3, 4.
his nature and manner of willing, knowing, acting, and yet no man has seen
him at any time, or climb up into Heaven to him by his Metaphysical Scales to
bring us down an infallible discovery of him; nay, rather soaring aloft into
those speculations, they have but burnt their wings, and in the issue have had
Icanus his fortune, fallen into a Sea of errors; as indeed most of the
Heretics of old, Menander, Manes, Ebion, Cerinchus, Arius, (and who not) have
been led into their errors by occasion of their curiosity, and Philosophical
speculations. They being good for nothing when unsoberly used to measure out
God, and his truth by, but to corrupt men's minds from the simplicity of Christ,
and from giving the obedience of faith to the Heavenly Doctrine, and fill the
world with jangling disputes, in stead of hearty, sober believing. For what
truth or certainty we have of them, but the certainty of our purblind reason;
which is not able to give us good satisfaction about the consistency of their
principles with themselves; as that Deus est actus purus simplicissimus: Chap.
4. Page 168.
and there is not aliud and aliud, Diversity in God, and yet that he erected
his will from, or in Eternity, as Master Kendal tells us, but his power not but
in time, as if his power lay still while his will acted it self, and yet both
power and will in him are himself, and so but one thing. That both his power
and will are simply one thing in himself, yet he erects his will but once,
there can be but one immanent act of God, but his power he may erect very
often; but if both be himself, why may he not erect one as often or seldom as
the other? To say nothing, Chap. 4. Page 154. Et saepe alibi.
how evidently false it is, That the act or action is all one with the thing
acted, as Gods creating Heaven and Earth, all one with the Heaven and Earth,
and so as the Heavens and Earth are yet, so God is still creating them, and
has not ceased, Genesis 2.1.
as his word tells us, from making them. Just as if I should say, my action of
writing is all one with these lines and letters, and so long as these remain my
action of writing remains also, though evident it is that they remain long
after I have done writing. Sure he that makes Philosophy his foundation, as
Master Kendal says, shall never stand sure from erring and perishing, shall
never believe or know Gods word aright, yea, shall incur Gods displeasure
against himself for throwing by Gods foundation, 1 Cor. 3.11. with Ephesians. 2
19, 20.
(which is not Election, as he vainly interprets, 2 Timothy 2.19. by a private
interpretation that is not attested by any other Scripture, but the Apostles
Doctrine, and Jesus Christ himself, as laid therein) and cornerstone, for
Christ only in the bosom of the Father knows, and has revealed him, but no man
receives his testimony, but gives more heed by much to his vain reasonings, and
to Philosophy the Deceits of man; And surely for this, viz. the throwing by the
word of God, and subordinating it to Philosophical Dictates, more then for any
thing, will the Wrath of God come upon the Universities, and Students therein,
if they persist in so doing.

Migh I advise them, I would wish them to study the Word of God more, and learn
to give the obedience of faith to it, and subject all their studies and
conversations thereto, and captivate all their Philosophy and Metaphysical
Notions to the obedience thereof, and not measure and snip it by them, so shall
they find the sufficiency of the Scriptures, and the blessing of God, and bring
more souls to Heaven then now they are like to do; yea, such as now they hinder
from entering by rejecting the word of the Lord, and exalting their
Philosophical Actions above his Revelations; so should they also avoid those
heavy judgments threatened, Isai. 29 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Jer. 8.5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 13. etc. 1 Cor. 1.18, 19.20. and 3.17, 19, 20.

And were I a Secretis with Master Goodwin, I would desire him to let go his
Metaphysical weapons, and keep him closer to the smooth stones of the Brooks,
the sure testimonies of Gods word, so would these Goliah's fall before him, and
he should have less trouble from them. They might happily do with him, as
Master Owen with me, who (and I am well pleased with it) either like that great
Goliath looks upon me, and my small furniture, as (an Impar congressus) too
little and despicable for his greatness, or else has got some stone in his
forehead, some conviction from some of the Scripture Arguments and Answers
produced, and is willing to say nothing. But I have done, desiring pardon for
this too long Digression, I shall here put a period to this Disquisition about
Infants Baptism. And I heartily desire that God will please to cause his truth
in this point to shine out more clearly to the dispelling of all mists and
clouds, that darken any of our understandings there-about, and subdue our
hearts to the through cleaving thereto; And that such pious and judicious
Readers, as this my Disquisition shall come unto, would seriously weigh it: And
if God have given more full light, (as I question not but he may) to any of
them in these matters, I desire that they would neither put it under a Bed of
sloth, nor under a Bushel, to scant its appearance to those only of their own
Family, Society, or Congregation, but set it on a Candlestick, (whither it
justify or reprove any thing there written) that it may give light to all that
come into the House, even to Gods whole Church, and Congregation.

Ten Arguments modestly propounded, tending to prove, That the study of
Philosophy (though lawful to be known, and in some points useful for, yet) is
not necessary to the Preachers and preaching of the Gospel; not the key of
Knowledge, without which men cannot understand or profitably hold forth the
Truths of Christ to others.
Kendal says neither he nor his Apostles ever preached us any Metaphysical
Lectures about the simplicity of God, etc. Ergo.

Arg. 2. If they had been necessary as above, then would Christ have chosen the
wise and prudent, Scribes and Pharisees, Philosophers and Princes of the world
for knowledge in such Sciences to have been the Gospel-Preachers, or else have
furnished those he did choose with such knowledge in them; but he did neither:
Not the first, Mat. 11.25, 26. 1 Cor. 1.26. Nor the second, for he only gave
them his Spirit to open to them the mysteries of Salvation contained in the
Scriptures. Ergo.

Arg. 3. They are of diverse nature from the Gospel; that being a Revelation of
a Redemption, and way to Salvation for fallen man, Philosophy but a purblind
speculation about the nature of creatures, their qualities and conditions as
creatures, and of God as he stands in relation of a Creator or Governor to
them: and therefore can be no more necessary to the understanding or preaching
of the Gospel in its simplicity, then a candlelight to show the Sun.

Arg. 4. The Law or Doctrine of the Lord is perfect both for converting Souls
to God, and building up the converted to the inheritance, Psalm. 19.7. Acts
29.32. which is the whole business of the Gospel Ministry: Therefore there is
not need of Philosophical Sciences, which are but the Observations of a
purblind mind, and the Inferences and Deductions of a corrupted perverted
Reason.

Arg. 5. If the said Heathenish or Humane Sciences be necessary as before, then
are we not complete in Christ, nor are all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, necessary for our Salvation, and the carrying on of his Work, hid or
couched in him and his mystery: but the contrary is affirmed, Col. 2, 2, 3, 10.
Christ must be beholden to humane Philosophy to complete him, and the mystery
of him, if they be necessary; but that is false, and derogatory to the glory of
Christ, the one thing needful, and leads to distraction about many things.

Arg. 6. If we are to beware of Philosophy, lest we be spoiled by it, then is
it not necessary to teach and preserve us: But the former is true, for the
Apostle bids us beware lest any spoil us with Philosophy, calling it the vain
deceit of man, though man usually counts and calls it wisdom, Col. 2.8. Nor may
we think that the Apostle calls such Sophistry only by that name as the wisest
Philosophers called Sophistry and not Philosophy, but that which those wisest
Philosophers called and accounted Philosophy; it being the Apostles drift to
assert the fullness of Christ and the mystery of the Gospel, and to debase all
other things that were of highest esteem with men.

Arg. 7. The Apostle implies that the setting up such wisdom in the Church of
God, is to defile the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17, 18. diligently compared,
which is all one as to say, To exalt it as needful and necessary to the work of
Christ, is to make it an Idol, it being but part of the name of a man, which is
upon the Beast. Ergo.

Arg 8. If the coming with the Gospel in such a Philosophical way, that is, a
holding it forth with and in the exercise of wisdom of words and Arguments
after the manner of the wise Philosophers of the world, be your way to obscure
the power of the Cross of Christ, which is the main thing of the Gospel, and to
make men's faith of the Gospel but to stand on a humane bottom, then is it not
necessary to be furnished therewith for preaching the Gospel: but the premises
are held forth by Paul, 1 Cor. 1.17. and 2.4, 5. and therefore Christ gave him
no commission, but a prohibition rather of so coming to preach the Truth, and
he forbore both excellency of speech, such as that that Lactantius calls
Rational or wordy Philosophy, that part that consists in teaching men to speak
eloquently, and excellency of wisdom, such as the higher kinds of Philosophy,
as their Metaphysics teaches, Cor. 2.1.

Arg. 9. Paul writing two Epistles to Timothy and one to Titus about their
profitable carriage in the Church of God, and giving Instructions about the
choice and qualities of Bishops, never mentions that for one, that they should
be well learned in Philosophical Sciences, but rather warns them of them as
unnecessary, and too often, as they are apt to be, used dangerous, 1 Timothy 6.20,
21.

Arg. 10. Nay the same Apostle in those directions asserts the sufficiency of
the Scriptures, being studied, believed and minded, not only to Salvation, but
to all the works of a Minister or man of God in his Ministry, 2 Timothy 3.14, 15,
16, 17. nor intimates he that other Sciences were needful to give them
understanding into them, but if they be sufficient to perfect a man of God,
then other writings not necessary; the best way to understand the Scripture is
by the Scripture.

Some lesser usefulness and curiosities some Sciences may afford, as the
Mathematics to find out the bigness of the Ark, the measures of the Temple,
etc. Astronomy to tell us what Arcturus, and Orion, and Pleiades are; History
and Chronology may seem to help to understand the passages of the Monarchies
and Visions of Daniel, etc. and yet there is so great incertainty in them too
as to what is Heathen, that they rather trouble then help; therefore Mr Cushion
was fain to throw those Calculations by in his late Clavis Rediviva. The
Tongues have their more usefulness, because the Scripture was writ in other
Languages, but they are distinct things from Philosophy.

FINIS.

