Die Mercurii, 17 Maii, 1648.

A TRUE CONFIRMATION Of the Great Victory in Wales: SENT In a LETTER to the
Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons, From Colonel Thomas Horton From
Bridge-end, May 13. 1648.

With a LIST of the Officers and others taken Prisoners at the Fight, and
brought up by Captain Nicholets, who was engaged in the whole Service;

Which Letter and List were read in the said House, and Ordered to be forthwith
printed and published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
May 18. 1648.

For the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons.
SIR,
I Shall give you a Narration (according to my own observation, and the help of
some of the Officers with me) both of the manner and success of our late
engagement with the enemy near Saint Fagons. The enemy having drawn off from
Saint Nicholas to Lankarven, Penmark and Fulmun Castle, Friday the fifth of
May. On the Lords day at night they advanced toward us again to Saint
Nicholas; by which, we did presently apprehend, That they intended to fight
with us, and were induced to such a belief the rather, because they knew two
days before, that Lieutenant General Cromwell was coming toward us. This made
us draw in all our horse close that night, as we had done diverse nights before,
and prepare for the work in the morning; and about seven in the morning our
Scouts discovered their Body about a mile and half from our quarters, upon
which, we drew out, and took the best ground we could; Major Bethel commanded
the horse on the right Wing, Major Barton on the left, and Colonel Okey and his
Major with the Dragoons on both Wings with the horse; the enemy advanced fast
with a strong forlorn of foot, and about six Pickering horse; Lieutenant
Godfrey with a forlorn of thirty Horse and twenty Dragoons, charged and routed
them, doing good execution, which gave us the advantage of a new ground; so we
advanced with horse and foot upon them, Captain Garland with two hundred
firelocks on foot, and Captain Nicholets (this Bearer) with Colonel Okeys own
Troop of Dragoons mounted, with some horse on the right Wing, disputed the
first encounter very hotly, where he showed much resolution, and beat the enemy
out of two Closes, and over a little Brook, and there maintained their ground
under command of the enemies shot, until the forlorn of foot, commanded by
Captain Lieutenant Fan, and some horse from the left Wing, came to their
relief, and then they beat the enemy from hedge to hedge before them, until they
came to a Bridge, where the enemies greatest body of foot were placed: The horse
all this while and Dragoons following this first success with much vigor, were
constrained to stand the enemies shot for sometime, before the foot (though
they made great have) could come up to them; and presently the first Division
of foot commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Read fell close up to the enemies
Front, Major Wade with the second Division got over the little Brook on the
left Flank of the enemy, Major Barton likewise with the left Wing of horse,
with much celerity, past over a Boggy place and the little Brook, to second
those foot; and some of the enemies horse coming on to charge the foot, were
gallantly resisted and beaten back by Captain Hughs: By this time the horse and
Dragoons on the right Wing were gotten over likewise, the enemies foot standing
very stoutly to it, until our horse began to surround them, and then they
presently all ran, and we cleared the field, our horse and Dragoons pursuing
them for eight or ten miles. The enemies horse, which they say were five
hundred, were employed in their Rear, to keep up their foot, and we never saw
after we were engaged, above sixty horse in a Body, all the fight: Their whole
number of horse and foot is confirmed to be about eight thousand; they had
about two thousand and five hundred Musketeers, by their own confession,
besides Bills, Pikes and Clubs; we took up the day we fought above two thousand
fire Arms, with Pikes, Welsh Bills, and other weapons great store; ten Barrels
of Powder, and all the rest of their Ammunition in the field, and most, if not
all their Colors. The number of prisoners that are taken are about three
thousand, I have here enclosed a List of the Officers as they gave in
themselves to the Marshal; some hundreds of them were disarmed four or eight
miles from the place we fought, which were let go. Captain Wogan a Member of
the House of Commons, sent down by them into these parts, carried himself from
the first to the last, with great resolution, encouraging the soldiers, and
engaging himself in the heat of the service: Captain Jones who came off from
the enemy to me long since, with a Troop of sixty horse, behaved himself
likewise very well; as also all other Officers and Soldiers, I can truly say,
kept their order in the performance of this service, to the admiration of the
enemy, as some of them confessed.

And that Gods mercy may be the more magnified in this late happy suecess over
our enemies, I think it now seasonable to make known unto you the straights we
were in, and difficulties which compassed us about, we having a potent enemy,
lying within two miles upon much advantage of ground, before us the high
Mountains close to us, on the righthand the Sea near unto us, on the left
Chepstow taken and Monmouthshire beginning to rise in our Rear, besides our
great want of provisions and long and hard duty; all which seemed to threaten
our sudden ruin, That God should please in this condition, so to own us, as to
make a way for us through the midst of our enemies, and to scatter them every
way, is a mercy not to be forgotten, especially by those who have more
immediately tasted of it, witnessing the truth of these things as they are
herein expressed by

Your faithful and most humble Servant Tho. Horton.
Bridge-end, May 13. 1648.
A List of the Names of the Officers taken by Col: Horton, May 8. 1648.
MAjor General Stradling. Colonel Harris. Lieut. Col: Matthews. Major Hopkins.
Major Philips. Major Stedman. Major Gwyn. Major Adis. Major Hopkin Daukins.
Quartermaster Genesis Harris. Field-Officers 10.
Captains,
Rowland Lewis. Edmond Price. William Cradock. William Matthews. Jo: Floyd.
William Williams. Hugh Floyd. Charles Abway. Richard Hopkins. Richard Hopkins.
Robert Matthews. Jo: Owins. Rowland Matthews. Richard Jones. James Matthews.
William Purve. Tho: Bowin. Jo: Thomas. Jo: Rice. James Lewis. Richard Esmond.
Griffin Bowin. Captain Lieut: Bartlet. 24
Captain Lieut: Hewit.
Lieutenants,
Button. Valentine Swale. Jeremy Wise. William Richard. Owen Prichard. Prother.
John Thomas. Tho: Talbut. Pew. Jo: Jenkins. Jo: Morgan. David Loyd. Jo:
Griffith. Williams. Tho: Powel. William Griffith. Lewcas. Will: Suttleworth.
Walter Floyd. Griffen Thomas. Jo: Graver. Jo: Griffith. Walter Jones. Hugh
Tailor. Tho: Molson. Lewis Jones. Tho: Morgan. William Peregrine. Tho: Jenkens.
Tho: Jones. 30

Ensigns,
Jo: Harris. Tho: Hopkins. David Walter. Rowland Predrow. Jo: Williams. Morris
Vprichard. Jo: Keys. Not: Gee. Tho: Richard. Gabriel Harbert. William Fluellen
Griffeth. Ariam Morfew. Walter Williams. John Barrison. Griffen Thomas.
Barthol: Rutter. Rice John. Owen Bowin. Morgan Roberts. Rice Howel. James
Annis. Tho: Williams. James Harman. Lewis Christopher. Matt: Stace. Hewin
Richard. John Backster. Ed: Thomas. 28.

Reforma. Gent.
Samuel Howel. Harbert Jefferies Parson Owen. Hump. Matthews. David Perre.
Rich: Floyd. Robert David. Rob: Nicoll. William Button. Geo: Davis. Roll:
Filips. Mr. Ryley. Morgan Prist. Bar. Davey. Jos: Hance. Edw. Thomas. Hugh
Conyer. Jo: Thomas. Mr. Thomas. Hugh Sawyer. 20

Chyrurgions.
Robert Williams. Richard Maren.
Peter Niccoles
Drum-major.
With 2900 Common Soldiers, and non-Commissioned Officers.

FINIS

