A Proposal for a Fund for Greenwich-Hospital and Registered Seamen.
WHereas a great many Persons, Inhabitants in and about the Cities of London
and Westminster, Southwark and parts adjacent, and in other Cities and Towns in
England, make use of the Ground fronting their Houses, and adjoining thereunto,
which they have no Right to, or Property in; and have made Vaults and Cellers
under the Streets, Lanes, Yards, Passages, Alleys and Courts, which prove of
great Use and Advantage to them, and dangerous to Carriages, Horses and Men, by
often falling in. Wherefore it is humbly Proposed to the Wisdom of the
Honorable House, that there be a Tax of One Penny for every Foot Square in the
length and breadth yearly upon all Vaults and Cellars that are not directly
under the Houses, And that the Chief Officers of ever Parish and Precinct do
take an Account of all such Vaults and Cellars aforesaid, and cause the same to
be truly measured, and to return a true Account of the same under their Hands
with the Names of the Persons that pretend to own them or use them, that there
may be regular Books made for that purpose. And to save the Charges of
Collecting the Money Arising from every Vault and Cellar. That all the Persons
be oblidged to bring their Money half yearly to such Place or Places, and to
such Person or Persons as shall be appointed by Act of Parliament, under a
penalty therein mentioned, to be Levied by Distress or Attachment against the
Person offending. And if any Person shall make any new Vaults or Cellars, that
he shall give notice to the Receiver, that it may be measured and entered in the
Book kept for that purpose aforesaid on a penalty by the said Act.

Proposed by Tho. Hoskins Gent.

