A CAVEAT TO All True Christians, Against the spreadings of the Spirit of
Antichrist, and his subtle endeavors to draw men from JESUS CHRIST.

Propounded to them by J. Horn, one of the unworthiest of Christ's servants in
his Gospel, a Preacher thereof in South Lin, Norfolk. Together with some brief
Directions for their orderly wa^ings.

Prove. 19.27. Cease my son to hear the instruction that causes to err from the
words of knowledge.

Prove 7.25,26,27. Let not thine heart decline to her ways, go not astray in her
paths; For she has cast down many wounded; yea many strong men have been slain
by her. Her house is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death.

1 John 2.24,25. Let that therefore which ye have heard from the beginning,
abide in you; if that which ye have heard from the beginning abide in you, ye
shall continue in the Father, and in the Son. And this is the promise which he
promised us, even eternal life.

London, Printed by R.W. for T. Brewster, and G. Moule, and are to be sold at
the three Bibles at the West End of Paul's. 1651.

TO The Virtuous and Religious Gentlewomen, Mrs. Jane Desborow, wife to the
Honorable, Major General John Desborow; Mrs. Alice Toll, wife to the Right
Worshipful, Mr. Thomas Toll, Esquire; and Mrs. Judith Cook, wife to the Right
Worshipful Col. Thomas Cook of Bebmarsh in Essex, Esquire, Grace, Mercy, and
Peace in Jesus Christ.
Much beloved in the Lord,
IT is the Council of the Apostle John, not to believe every spirit, but to try
the Spirits whether they are of God. And sure there is now as much need of this
counsel as ever, because there are diversity of Spirits and Prophets gone out
into the world, and all pretend to God; but all confess not (that is, magnify
not, or lead not to exalt) Jesus Christ come in the flesh; but diverse of them
deny, or undervalue that; by which it is manifest that they are not of God to
those that duly try them, but that they are of that spirit of Antichrist, of
which we have heard, that it should come into the world: And truly, though it
be an heavy judgment of God to order such a spirit of error to enter into, and
amongst men, and men to be possessed and acted by him; yet if the matter be
well and duly considered, it will appear a just and righteous judgment, and
may afford us much matter of warning: For wherein has, or could God have
testified or commended his love more to the world, then in giving forth his
only begotten Son to be believed on; and to that end to be delivered to death
for our offenses, and become the propitiation for our sins, and being raised
again and glorified to hold forth in and through him unto us an immeasurable
fullness of glory and salvation? And what might God look for, and challenge at
our hands for so great goodness, less then all possible thankfulness, and most
cheerful ready receipt of, and submission to him? but alas, how contrary are the
returns that he finds from men? What is there that is so little regarded, and
so much neglected as this his Son? what so little received and fed upon by men?
Is not the preaching of the Cross of Christ become foolishness, again, not
only to the rude and profane, or to the Pharasaical, that establish to
themselves a righteousness of their own; but which i^ the most to be lamented,
to such as have tasted of his goodness, and had him livelily set ^orth to them:
even many such have crucified ^im to themselves afresh, and have not obeyed the
truth, so far as to cleave with steadfast purpose of heart unto him. Many that
have received the ^tdings of Christ's Death and Resurrection for them, as
sometimes the Israelites the Manna with joy and admiration, have with them also
after a while grown weary thereof, as if it was a light bread: and their souls
have loathed him, and lusted after some other thing to feed upon, that might
more puff them up in themselves, and give more sensual satisfaction. And alas,
how few are there who are not more or less tainted with this infection, as if
there was not an enoughness in Christ, and his Death, Sacrifice, and Mediation
for them to feed upon: Now what more just with God, then that his so great love
being so abrogated, and so nothing set by, should turn to jealousy, and that
he revenge the injury done unto his Son, and to himself with the heat of
indignation, by sending to them (as to the Israelites for their offense, fiery
Serpents, Numb. 21.) spirits of error, and of delusion; that because they
received not the love of the Truth that they might be saved, but had pleasure
in their unrighteousness, in disesteeming so great a witness of love, and not
in the truth; therefore the efficacy of error should infatuate them, and carry
them headlong into destruction; the abuse and contempt of greatest love
deserving to be revenged with the severest condemnation: But alas, where the
spirit of Error has gotten rooting, how many are there so strongly giddified
therewith, that they make but a mock of these things, and think there is no
other hell but what here befalls them; throwing up the whole Christian Faith by
the very foundation! A piteous, and much to be bewailed mischief, which calls
for not only our best endeavors, by Prayers and Supplications, and faithful
Instruction to prevent its spreading; but might also challenge in many the
Magistrates inspection; that as of late they have worthily made an Act to
prevent and punish Blasphemy against God, so they might endeavor to stop the
over-free spreading of Blasphemy against Christ by the like provision. But for
that, its our business to pray God rightly to direct them, and that none of
them that should discountenance such evil, be either tainted therewith
themselves, or so far destitute of that spiritual Eye Salve, as not to have
thereof a right discerning.

As for your parts, Worthy Friends, I hope you have received so much of that
holy Unction as has helped you to understand the wiles of Satan; so that I may
say to you, as the Apostle in 1 John 2.21. I write not to you because ye know
not the Truth, but because ye know it, and that no lie is of the Truth; both
blessing God that he does keep you in so evil a day; and praying for you, that
yet ye may be filled with the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, and so more
abundantly anointed with that spiritual Eye Salve, that ye may be further able
to discern things that differ, and so be kept for even. And indeed I know no
better thing that I can wish for you then that; for where that is not, I know
not what else can preserve men: For Satan coming not in his own colors, but
disguised as an Angel of Light, not as an enemy but (as of old the Serpent) as
a friend that will show the way to a more happy and glorious condition, its an
easy thing to be circumvented by him; such high expressions, such glorious
speeches, such enticing and swelling words (though full of vanity to a
spiritual discerning) because they have not the bread of Life, the foundation
of our hope in them, with whom are they not taking?

The consideration of which having pressed me forward to the writing and
publishing of this small Treatise (in which though I be but weak, I have
endeavored according as by Covenant I am bound for the rooting out of Error
and heresy in my place and calling (though not primely upon that
consideration) to prevent the spreading of this grand infection; that though I
have little hopes of reducing those that are corrupted, yet I might be a means
to stablish some that are wavering and prevent their falling) I have chosen, as
to the Saints in general, so to you in particular, to Dedicate and present it,
out of that respect I bear to you; and the good that's in you, and sense of
obligation upon me toward you. Desirng God ever to guide and preserve you; And
you yet to account me,

Ladies, Your Servant in the Gospel, JOHN HORN.
Lin, November. 2. 1650.
To the Congregation of the first born, yet warring on earth, whose names are
written in heaven; and particularly to those of them that I minister unto at
Lin, etc. grace, mercy, and peace from God our Father, and from Jesus Christ
our Lord.
Brethren,
YOu cannot but know that the Church of God is in Scripture resembled to a
natural body, wherein are many members united to each other, and to one head,
and by one Spirit growing up in exact unity; now as in the natural body there
may be many infirmities, and many things are liable to offend and hurt it, so
also is it in this mystical: sometimes it may be subject to distempers by
nauseous, crude, undigested humors the want of through closing with, and
drinking in divine truths, or the drinking in untruths, may occasion a surfeit,
and aversation from truth; sometimes flatuous and windy humors of pride,
high-mindedness, and lying spirits getting into some of its members, may
distemper it; sometimes feavourish heats of violent headiness instead of
wel-tempered zeal for God and godliness may inflame it; and sometimes the cold
aguish, or palsy humors of deadness in, and benummedness to Spiritual motions
in its tendency to its spiritual and supreme end, may so seize upon it, as much
to impair its strength, and to appearance bring it nigh to death; But God,
whose Temple it is, has provided for it against such distempers and dangers
both meat and medicine to feed and cure it: As Christ himself is the prime and
great tree of life, in whom the word is so united to the humanity, that the
humanity was ever in all times of Winter blasts, and Summer droughts refreshed
and upheld thereby, and made glorious, fruitful, and his fruits are good and
prosperous, fit to feed, and his Leaves full of virtue to heal the Nations: So
is every one that through grace is brought to believe in Christ, and gathered
up into unity with Christ, and lives upon the word of Christ, Psalm. 1.3. as a
tree planted by the waters side. Jer. 17.7,8. Even one of those trees of life
that grow upon the banks of that great river of the knowledge of God in Christ,
that proceeds from out his sanctuary, and runs from beside the Altar (or
sacrifice of Christ) and under the threshold, (the Gospel and its Ordinances
holding forth Christ) Ezekiel. 47.1.2.12. whose fruit is for meat, and its leaf
for medicine: The lips of the righteous feed many; and their fruit is as a tree
of life, Prove. 10,21. and 11.30. the doctrine they receive from Christ is a
wholesome doctrine, 1 Timothy 6 3.4. and full of healing, by which they are more
and more rooted into, and united with Christ, till they all grow up into such a
close and full union with him, that the many trees on the banks of that river.
Rev. 22.2. be made perfectly but one on both sides of that river, Ephesians. 4.13.
Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and acknowledgement of the Son of
God unto a perfect man. Now I knowing that in this body there are at present
(as at other times) not only many inward weaknesses, but also many things from
without indangering it; yea, that many parts of it are sorely laid open to
infections from diverse that seem to be of it, or converse with it; though I be
less then the least of all Saints, yet according to the measure of the gift of
Christ given me, I have endeavored to administer that that I have from the
head, which may make for its strength and nourishment; yea, and to hold forth
such of his Leaves supplied to me by his good hand, as may either prevent or
cure the infections feared; desiring that we may all so press after further
knowledge of, and growth in Christ, as that yet we may be kept from embracing
false Christ's, and from being snared by the poison of those false Prophets, who
instead of hastening men's growth up into Christ, which they pretend, do
secretly and subtilely corrupt men from the simplicity that is in Christ; as if
a man by stretching of a twig to make it grow longer, should pull and sever it
from the body of the tree upon which it grows. As for the mind to be without
knowledge is not good; so he that hastes with his feet sins, Prove 19.2. I
desire that what I present to you in love, and for your good, may be taken in
good part, and soberly considered by you, and that what you see to suit with,
and proceed from that good spirit of God, that is but one and the same in all
ages, and gives unity to the body in all its memberly differences, may be
received and held fast by you; and if in any thing you see either further or
better then I, impart of your measure also to me, that we may grow up together
by that which every joint supplieth, all holding fast, and not letting go the
head from whence we receive the right and true spirit that will give us to
increase: So shall our feet abide within the gates of Jerusalem, and the Lord
himself shall dwell amongst us, shall judge, rule and teach us, and in his
teaching we shall not be vainly puffed up with a carnal mind, like those bodies
that are puffed up with unwholesome humors, but grow solidly fat and well-liking,
and show that he is gracious, and that there is no deceit or unrighteousness in
him. To him, and the word of his grace, which is able to build you up and give
you the inheritance, I commit you, with my self, being

The meanest of your Brethren and companions in the way of Salvation, J. HORN.

The Contents.
Chap. 1.
A Description of real Saints. Page 1 Sect. 1. Who are not such. ibid. 2. Who
are. p. 7
Chap. 2.
Of the estate of Saints. p. 11 Sect. 1. More generally their similitude to,
and dissimilitude from Christ in some few particulars. ibid. Sect. 2. More
particularly; and 1. After the flesh. p. 14 Sect. 3. 2. After the Spirit. p. 17
Sect. 4. 3. In a mixed consideration, with reference to Christ. p. 20 Sect. 5.
4. In the same consideration, with reference to enemies. p. 28.
Chap. 3.
Of the Saints Temptations: and, Sect. 1. That God orders temptations to
them, and why? p. 36 Sect. 2. Of Satan and his subtilty in tempting. p. 41
Sect. 3. Some instances in his tempting Christ, Matthew. 4. p. 44 Sect. 4. Of
Satan's main drift in all his temptations. p. 56 Sect. 5. Of the messengers of
Satan. p. 65 Sect. 6. Of their way and subtilty in temping. p. 71 Sect. 7. Of
the dangerous issue of those that fall into their snares. p. 78 Sect. 8. Who
are in danger to be snared by them. p. 81 Sect. 9. Of temptations to distrust.
p. 91
Chap. 4.
Of the remedies and helps against temptations; and, Sect. 1. That God has
provided helps. p. 94 Sect. 2. Of the five former pieces of the spiritual
armor, Ephesians. 6. p. 97 Sect. 3. Of the sixth, the Word of God. p. 107 Sect. 4. Of
the Scriptures. p. 115 Sect. 5. Some objections against them answered. p. 120
Sect. 6. A caveat against men's wresting them. p. 141 Sect. 7. Of the seventh
piece, viz. Prayer. p. 153 Sect. 8. Of Brotherly Communion. p. 164. Sect. 9. Of
Sobermindedness or Humility. p. 184
Chap. 5.
Of the Reward of the Saints; and, Sect. 1. That there is a reward. p. 190
Sect. 2. Of the Promise, and the heirs of it. p. 193 Sect. 3. Of the time of
the receipt of the reward. p. 195 Sect. 4. Of the Resurrection. p. 200 Sect. 5.
Of Heaven, and Glory. p. 209 Sect. 6. Encouragements to expect that glory. p.
213 Sect. 7. Of knowing Christ after the flesh, and after the Spirit. p. 219
Chap. 6.
The Conclusion, with Exhortations. p. 234 Sect. 1. The usefulness of
Exhortations to Saints. ibid. Sect. 2. Exhortations to walk worthy of God. p.
244 Sect. 3. Exhortations to walk worthily to brethren. p. 253 Sect. 4. How to
walk toward Deceivers, and Deceived. p. 257 Sect. 5. How to walk toward the
world. p. 275 Sect. 6. The Doctrine to be held forth to them, and therein
somewhat of the Trinity. p. 281 Sect. 7. A Discovery of the preposterousness of
some in their holding forth to the world, as they do, Election, and
Reprobation. p. 300
REader, It will somewhat conduce to thy right understanding what is in this
Treatise presented to thee, to take notice of, and Correct these following
mistakes, which through my absence from the Press, and the Printers oversight
have happened, viz.

Page 4. line 5. read religious actions. p. 5. l. 29. r. that. p. 6. l. 1. r.
never so great. and l. 16. r. too. p. 11. l. 9. r. fleshly. p. 19. l. 29. r.
life. p. 28. l. 9. r. your. p. 42. l. 29. r. visors. p 45. l. 3. r. where. p.
47. l. 26. r. then p. 48. l. 18. r. preserve. p. 59. l. 9. r. by not. p. 61. l.
17. r. persuade. l. 19. r. nothing less. p. 78. l. 10. r. with those. p. 8^. l.
3. r. all that have. p. 108. l. 26. r. so bemisted. p. 124. l 11. r. three. p.
146. l. 10 r. they. p. 144. l. 19. put out and. p. 152. l. 23. put out to. p.
154. l. 3. r. unless. p. 163. l. 1. put out too. l. 9. r. with. p. 166. l. 22.
put out will. p. 172. l. 2. r. food. p. 175. l. 16. r. lo. p. 186. l. 18. r.
crutches. p. 194. l. 29. r. any. p. 194. l. 4. r. both. p. 208. l. 9. blot out
and. p. 217. l. 2. blot out so. p. 226. l. 1. r. one and other. p. 235. l. 19.
r. though. p. 240. l. 19. blot out that. p. 245. l 26. r. specially. p. 254. l.
4. r. and. p. 256. l. 26. r. walking. p. 259. l. 11. blot out us. p. 260. l.
20. r. or. p. 266. l. 25: r. destruction: p. 274. l. 9. r. 2 Timothy p. 280. l.
19. r. and. p. 284. l. 8. r. (...) p. 292. l 16. r. illustrate p. 294 l. 2. r.
intercepted. p. 297. l. 2. r. be. p. 298 l. 11 r. to. p. 305. l. 20 r. we love
him. p. 310. l. 16. r. mediation. In the Postscript. p. 2. l. 15. r. drawing
back p. 4. l. 15. r. confessions.

CHAP. I. A Description of Saints.
BEcause there are many lay claim to the name of Saints, who yet are not
rightly such, and so apply to themselves the privileges of, and instructions
proper to them, when they appertain not to them: I shall in the first place say
something by way of Description of ^he true Saints of God to whom that title
pro^erly may be given, and therein show both First, What and who they are not;
And then Secondly, What, and who they are.

Sect. 1. Who are not Saints.
They are not

Profane loose persons that live as they list, and follow their lusts, whether
they ^e such as never knew or walked better, or such as having known and walked
better, are relapsed again to their former or worse corruptions; this is so
known a thing, and so generally granted that I shall not need to insist upon
it: The Scripture calls such sons of Belial, ungodly, unholy sinners, and
opposes them (and chiefly the latter sort) unto the Saints.

2. They are not men that have nothing more then civil education and moral
honesty, let them be accompanied with never so good natural parts and
abilities; moral honesty in a just dealing in things pertaining to men (though
a thing found in Saints and to be practiced) makes no^ men Saints; for there
have been many such before any sanctifying force has passed upon them; yea
many such have been not only without the knowledge of God, but also opposite in
their hearts unto it; Paul had such a carriage while a Pharisee, and so the
young man spoken of in Matthew. 19.20. Yea many such there may be found that have
no savor of Piety, but and professed worshippers of Mahomet or Paganis^
Idolators; even such must have another birth, birth from heaven before they can
enter God Kingdom, Joh. 3.3.5.

3. They are not every one that is of this o^ that Opinion or Judgment in
matters of Religion; not every one that opines, conceives, o^ joins with a
right profession or form of Doctrine, seeing many such may be loose in hear and
conversation, And many have a form of godliness that deny the power of it. 2 Timothy 3.5. Many may be gilded over with a fair profession, that yet are rotten
underneath; true doctrines do much conduce to the making and leading on Saints,
if minded and submitted to, and some points are useful as means to direct men
to, and facilitate their Piety and Saintship more then others (perhaps more
commonly received for true) which yet are not accompanied with true Piety, or
Saintship in all that profess them. Romans 1.18. 2 Cor. 6.1. Some hold the truth
in unrighteousness, and receive good doctrines in vain, because not deep enough
into the heart, or because not singly so as to be acted by them. Not every one
that says unto Christ, Lord, Lord, shall inherit the Kingdom, etc. Matthew.
7.21. of the same judgment or opinion many times some may be Saints in light,
others devils and walk in darkness, Joh. 6.70. Christ has Chaff and Wheat in
the same floor of profession; a Judas that was a Professor and Teacher of the
same Doctrine with the other Apostles.

4. They are not the sons of Hagar, born of the bond woman, Gal. 4.22,23,24.
etc. not every one that has a zeal of God, for some have a zeal of God, but
not according to knowledge, Romans 10.2. are zealously affected in a wrong way,
and think themselves to be knowing people too, as the Pharisees that took it in
great scorn that they should be accounted blind and unknowing. Joh. 9.40. Its
not every one then in whom much knowledge in their own and others apprehensions
with much zeal and strictness for Ordinances, Worship, Religions, Actions and
Practices meet together that is a Saint of God; The old Pharisees had all this
according to the Church State then openly owned and judged true and right, and
yet not Saints but Hypocrites, whited walls, and painted Sepulchers. There are
that have been trained up in religious duties from their youth, or that having
been profane and loose, and meeting with the Doctrine of the Law, consisting
of Precepts, Promises, Prohibitions, and Threatenings, have been convinced of
their ways that they were sinful and tended to destruction, and so for fear of
hell, and out of a desire to be saved have reformed their courses and
conversations, let go evil company and practices, and set upon zealous and
religious performances, yea and perhaps espying some defects in the way of
worship they have walked in, have left society in such a way, and put
themselves into a purer as they have perceived, and attaining to something in
these ways do from their betterness of way and walking from others judge
themselves alive to God, and call themselves the Saints and holy ones, apply to
themselves all the promises in Christ: who yet are deceived herein, the bottom
of all this being not Grace or Love from God apprehended by them, and springing
up life in them, but their own convictions, sorrows, changes, reformations, and
alterations from the Law of God, or the Precepts and promises of the Gospel in
a Law way understood and minded, is the ground of their hope, though yet they
will (as also did the Pharisee, Luke 18.10,11.) put all these their convictions
and conversion upon the grace of God, and thank God for it. Now these in as
much as their Conversion and Religion is the product of a Doctrine of Works,
the Covenant given in Sinai answering to the bond maid Hagar; and inasmuch as
from their changes so wrought their hope is sprung up, and their conclusion of
Saintship is made, they must endure the sentence that the Scripture gave upon
the son of the Bondwoman; Cast out the Bondwoman and her son, for the son of
the Bondwoman shall not inherit with the Freewoman and her son. Gal. 4.30. As
Hagar was to have been a servant to Abraham and Sarah, but not for the
generation of children; so also did God appoint the Law for convincement of sin
till the Seed came, but not to beget sons to God, or such Changes and
Reformations as should be the ground for their judging themselves Saints and
confident expectation of the Kingdom. They then that are of the works of the
Law, Gal. 3.10. (that hold by the title, and lay claim upon that ground to
Saintship, be their knowledge never so much, their zeal never great, their
profession never so accurate according to the Rule, as pertaining to the
appearance of their works yea, be they of what name or profession so ever) they
are all under the curse, and are to be separated from this Saintship, and those
to whom it is to be applied. Saints they may perhaps judge themselves, and be
judged by others but none of Gods Saints they are, according to the prime sense
of the Word; nor shall they be owned by him for such, but judged thieves and
robbers that have climbed over the wall, and stok^ the privileges and pasture
of Christ's sheep unto themselves, which shall therefore be taken from them,
Joh. 10. To all such of what society or profession soever is that to be applied
to, that was spoken to Nicodemus, Joh. 3.3.5. They must be bo^ of water and
Spirit, or else they cannot see or enter the Kingdom of God, but have their
portion with unbelievers.

5. Its not every one that has been in Trance, or seen Visions and Apparitions
of Glory and excellent things, though from God himself; for such was Balaam and
yet no Saint (...) God, but a false Prophet, Numb. 24.4. Or the has power to
work some miracles, or cast o^ a devil, Matthew. 10.1.4. for so had Judas, an^
those in Matthew. 7.22. Some such also may hen^ be discharged; and yet its to be
feared that many of those that in these times call themselves Saints, have no
better foundation then one or other, or at most all of these last forementioned
false grounds, in whom is fulfilled what in former times the true Churches of
Christ met with, they are such as say they are Jews (men interested in the
Covenant of God, and of Christ) but are not, but do lie, and are (many of them)
of the Synagogue of Satan, Rev. 2. Take heed my friends, that none of you that
read these things, lean upon so weak foundations, as that you are of such or
such an opinion, either really, or in your apprehension right, that you are are
zealous, reformed, of such a Church or Congregation, having all Christ's
Ordinances purely, have had such visions of glorious things concerning Gods
Church and people, etc. thence concluding your selves to be Saints. But I shall
come to the Description of a Saint affirmatively.

Sect. 2. Who are Saints.
A Saint has his name from Sanctification; Now to sanctify is to separate or
set apart from common and profane to holy use, from being a man's own, and for
himself, to be Gods, and for God, which in real Saints is done by God, and
according to his Will. Heb. 10.10. And God does it by his Spirit, and in the
Name of his Son, who has fore-offered up himself to God for men. 1 Cor.
6.9.11. The Spirit of God in the Word, or Name of Christ preached, or unfoulded
to them, discovering the Grace or good will of God toward men, in the Gift,
Death and Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, and thereby killing and crucifying them to
the flesh (all fleshly birth, parts, wisdom, righteousness, goodness,
affections and lusts of their own) and in drawing them to Christ to believe in
him and his blood, and so to communicate with his Sacrifice, sanctifies men
and makes them Saints or holy unto God; it being the anointed one Christ
himself that is their sanctification; by being in him they become separared
from the world, and are made Gods lot, part and portion, a people holy to him.
Saints then are a people created in Christ Jesus (or begotten and born to God
in the Knowledge and faith of his Son) by the power of the Spirit; a people
born of the Promise of God, or word of Promise, that is, the Gospel concerning
Christ raised from the dead, and the salvation that is in him, Gal. 4.24,25.
Acts 13.32.33.1 Pet. 1.3. and 3.31. The manifestation of God, his Mind, Love,
Grace and Goodness therein being that water in the Word, flowing from beside
the Altar of God, of which it behooves that men be born through the power of
the Spirit, working therein, or else they cannot inherit the Kingdom of God.
Ezeck. 4.7. That's the Freewoman, the Jerusalem that is above, the mother of us
all; by this a man drawn to Christ, quickened up and devoted to God in him, is
made a Saint of God. So that in this Saintship there are these two things to be
minded.

1. That God in the word of the Gospel concerning Jesus Christ and his Death,
Resurrection and Mediation has shined in his love to the soul, and thereby
has begot and in some measure quickened up a man to a lively hope, a hope in
God, and that founded upon nothing of his own, nor any fruit of the Law in him,
whether sorrow, humiliation, reformation, legal conversion work, endeavor,
frame or virtue found in him, but only the grace and love of God as manifested
in Christ; Christ dead for him, and risen for him, and glorified of God for and
to him, received into his heart by faith, is there become the hope of glory to
him; the sight or belief of Christ crucified for him drew him in to believe,
not his conceited act or fruits of believing made him judge Christ crucified
for him.

2. That the love and grace in Christ thus apprehended by him and giving him
hope, changes him into the likeness of Christ, principles him Godward, puts a
law of love into his heart and carries him after God, and so devotes him unto
God to Christ, to be his, and for his praise. So that in a Saint of God there
is neither a hope bottomed upon his changing and endeavors; nor yet a dead hope
without a change, but a change and renovation springing from his hope, and that
hope from grace discovered in God by Jesus Christ in the power of the spirit;
he has his life in love, and lives to the God of Love. And every such soul as
from the grace of God in Christ is quickened up to hope in God, and in that
hope given up to be God's and Christ's (whatever difference may be found
otherwise in the flesh, or in some opinions not essential to the faith) is a
Saint of God whether (for the Scripture makes this difference)

1. Children, weak, and as it were but embrio's, Christ not yet formed in them,
Gal. 4.19. their apprehensions of Gods love in his Son but weak and small, and
so their hope and faith but little, and weak, wavering, staggering, not as yet
settled and confirmed and made strong in Christ, who therefore are to be tendered
and more warily walked toward, and as it were nursed up with wholesome words
like milk, and not roughly dealt with, lest they be broken, and lest by any
abuse of our liberties or any other way they be scandalized and offended. or

2. Young men, such as are strong and have overcome the wicked one, have
endured temptations, and have the word of God somewhat settled and abiding in
them, and therefore ablet to bear, and not so soon stumbled nor in so great
danger of miscarrying. or

3. Farhers, men well grown and long experienced and so more useful for
begetting and training up others in the knowledge of Christ, 1 John 2.14.15.

And to all such as thus by the word of the Gospel and the grace or love of God
therein discovered to them in the Death and resurrection of Christ, have been
emptied of themselves and their filthy confidences and rejoycings, and are
begot to hope in God and framed to the love and likeness of God in some
beginnings, or in further growth, do I bend my following words with the
several counsels and instructions therein given.

CHAP. II.
Sect. 1. Of the estate of the Saints.
ANd first of all, I desire you to mind the state in which you are, which
admits of diverse distinct considerations. For a Saint is in a measure
proportioned to Christ, and there is a great deal of likeness between them,
though also mixed with much unlikeness.

Christ had a twofold nature and descent, each of which had its distinct
properties, of God and of man; the Son of God, and the Son of man; according to
the flesh, and according to the Spirit; according to the flesh of the seed of
David, according to the Spirit the Son of God, and so declared to be with power
in the resurrection from the dead. Romans 1.2.3. According to the flesh the Jews
knew whence he was, and stumbled at him; according to the Spirit they knew him
not whence he was, nor did acknowledge him; according to the flesh he was put
to Death and died according to the Spirit or in the power thereof he was raised
again. He was a man, a man anointed of God with the holy Ghost and power: So is
every real Saint or Christian, he is to be considered as a man and as a Saint;
as of Adam, as in Christ of God; according to the humane nature that he has by
generation in the flesh, and according to the divine nature which he partakes
of in the Spirit: He is neither all flesh, nor all Spirit, but has something
of both; though yet neither in the same way had Christ his flesh as he has;
neither has he the Spirit in the same immeasurable fullness as Christ had; so
that in that regard there is also disproportion between them; the very flesh or
body of Christ was so of God that it was not by immeditate humane generation;
and he was so the Son of God in the Spirit that he also was and is God; and all
the fullness of gifts and grace was, and is in him: not so the Saint; he has
his flesh by humane generation as other men, and he has a measure of the gift
of Christ in one way or other, but no one has all, nor can communicate to
others as Christ can. The man Jesus Christ was the Son of God by union with the
word, so are the Saints; but not in the same manner: there the word was made
flesh, and the person so made is yet called the word: here the word is united
to the soul by faith, yet so as its not made to be flesh or man; nor the person
in whom it is, is made the word: there he was the word before he was made
flesh; here the person neither was, nor is the word. There was Death according
to the flesh: so there is in the Saint; but not so here as there; for Christ
died to take away Sin and was made an offering for sin: but not so the Saint:
the Saint dies because of sin in him, according to the flesh, that being
quickened in the Spirit he might more gloriously live to God, but his Death in
the flesh makes no expiation for sin, nor is he the propitiation for any others
therein. He also rises again with Christ, but not for such end as Christ; he
rose for our Justification, but not we for any others, but to enjoy the benefit
of that that we have in him; yea in this also there is another vast difference
between Christ and the Saints, that in the Saints are these three things, 1.
The substance of man consisting of body and soul, 2. The flesh, old man, or
sinful disposition in them; and 3. The Spirit or new man that lusts against
that flesh; but now in Christ though there was flesh of Adam and that subjected
to infirmity because of our sins, and Spirit or divine nature as the word of
God; yet in him there was no sinful disposition, no guile was found in his
mouth, nor was sin (in that regard of inherency) ever known to him: in that he
died, it was for our sin; the chastisement of our peace was laid upon him, and
through his stripes we are healed. Isa. 53.5. To say nothing that he is the
Head also, and the Saints his members and not the head; He the Advocate for
them, the Great high priest above them and over them, they his house and
people: in which there is evident distinction between him and them, and
dissimilitude, which as well as the similitude is to be minded diligently that
we err^ not. But to return to the estate of the Saints according to that
twofold consideration in which there is resemblance. viz. as of Adam, and as in
Christ.

Sect. 2. Of the state of Saints as in the flesh.
COnsider my Brethren, that though ye be Saints, yet ye have still a relation
in your persons to the first Adam; you have yet a fleshly earthly substance
made of the dust, and that must go to the dust again; an humane soul also
breathed in of God to animate that earthly substance, and this in your natural
and animal being, which is neither of the essence of your Saintship, nor yet
annihilated by it; you are Saints not by carnal earthly generation, but by
divine and heavenly Calling of God, and by your insition into Christ the holy
one, who unto us is made of God wisdom, righteousness, holiness and redemption.
And you that are thus called, and thus made Saints, are yet according to your
visible and natural substance and subsistence sons of Adam, mortal men and
women; and according to this view and consideration acknowledge your selves in
the flesh yet, in a state of great weakness and imperfection, both in regard of
mortality and Death reigning in your members, filling you with aches, pains,
faintness, weariness, sicknesses, till you be brought down to the dust of
Death, to which you also are appointed with other men; it being the portion and
lot of men, as men, and so of the Saints also as they are men; as also in
regard of sin the corrupt and cursed principle of flesh within you not wholly
as yet outed by grace, though conquered, and put under and fastened to the
cross that it might be destroyed; it has yet such an existence in your flesh
and nature, that it much clouds the mind in seeing the things of the Spirit;
much dulls the heart in, and withdraws the affections from the cleaving to, and
eager pursuit after them, yea subjects you to uncomly, unsaintly practices and
behaviors in your walkings, mingling your prayers with mistakes, diffidence,
impatience, dullness; your minds with worldly, earthly affections; your walkings
one to another with uncharitableness, passions, offenses, rashness, etc. though
this flesh is in some more mortified, in some less; in some shows it self more
one way, in some another; some are more covetous then others, some more
uncharitable, some more passionate, etc. and this is found in Saints as they
are sons of Adam, they inherit from him by Nature their earthly substance with
its infirmities, weaknesses, corruption, and sinfulness. Not to mention that
according to this consideration there are among Saints many external
differences, as of male, female, young, old, rich, poor, Ruler, Subject,
Master, Servant, Jew, Gentile, English, Scotch, Dutch, French, etc. all which,
with many other like distinctions and differences in the flesh, their grace or
saintship does not annihilate, nor are they therewith to be confounded; nor are
they or their infirmities of sin or frailty to be wholly disregarded, as if
there were no such things in them, or incident to them* Such their state after
the flesh, is a state of imperfection.

Sect. 3. Of their state after the Spirit.
BUt then according to their spiritual Being, as born of God, and as in Christ,
and so as Saints, there their condition is far otherwise. In Christ they are
complete, Col. 2.10. He their Head; and the root of their Saintship is
altogether perfect and absolute in him; no death, no sorrow, no crying, no
infirmity, pain, sickness, mortality; no sin, corruption, or corrupt weakness;
Old things are passed away, behold all things are become new. 2 Cor. 5.17. He
is altogether holy righteous, wise, spiritual, divine, immortal, the Elect of
God, the Son and Heir of God, in whom dwells all the fullness of God, yea of the
Godhead bodily. So that there is no defect or want in him for them, either of
life, wisdom, righteousness, holiness, glory, or of any thing good for them.
He is a place of broad Rivers and Streams in which they may swimm, and their
estate as in him is a state of great glory and perfection; coming unto him, ye
are come to sonship, to life, to immortality, to righteousness, to redemption,
and whatever may conduce to, or advance your happiness; and being in him ye are
all this: A new creature, partakers of Christ, a chosen generation, a Royal
Priesthood, an holy Nation, Kings and Priests unto God, members of Christ, and
in and with him called Christ because anointed with the same holy Unction, and
to the same glory and dignity, only in subordination to him as the members to
the head the younger brethren to the firstborn among many brethren; for in all
things he is the first and has the pre-eminence. And as thus looked upon and
considered in the Spirit, ye are above sickness, weakness, sin, etc. they have
no room o^ place in this new state or condition. Nor is the^ herein any
distinction of male, female, master servant, bond, free, rich or poor, but all
in Chri^ are one new man, according to this spiritual being; righteousness,
sonship, holiness, with a^ the privileges of Christ are alike their portion
they are all one in him according to the Spirit however different according to
the flesh: yea, a^cording to the Spirit they are Sion, the belove City, the
Kingdom and Temple of God; and b^ and his glory appertains to them, and is
the^ portion. O Israel, happy thou, a people saved (...) the Lord! Glorious
things are spoken of thee the City of God; the most high in the midst of thee,
(...) shall exalt and establish thee, and delight in the for ever; for this is
Sion whom no man regards, the place and habitation that God has chosen, in
which he will dwell and rest for ever, because he has loved and desired it.
Consider this O ye Saints, and let your hearts rejoice in his that made you, in
him that called you and made you in Christ Jesus, and blessed you in him with
all spiritual blessings in heavenly things, according as in him he chose you
before the worlds foundations; and be joyful in your King, in Jesus the King of
Saints that dwells and rules amongst you, and in whom ye are exalted to all this
high condition. This state of glory and perfection in Christ Jesus given you,
should be minded by you, to out balance and cheer you up against the state of
frailty and imperfection experimented in your selves: for this like the stone
cut out of the Mountains without hands, shall dash in pieces, and swallow up
the other into victory. When that state of weakness and mortality shall have
overcome you in the flesh, yet shall it again be overcome and abolished by this
state of glory, and shall never more return upon you. Surely friends, did we
more mind this high state to which we are called and in which in Christ Jesus
we are interessed, it would make us bear cheerfully the present sufferings of
this life, and love him heartily that has hitherto advanced us: It would lead
us to contemn things seen and sensible, neither to run out in affecting the
good, or fearing the evil that in the outwward state is met with by us. So have
the Saints in other times walked, trampling upon Death through the hope of
Life, and the like of hope in them, contemning the pleasures of sin for a
season, for the enjoyment of this eten happy condition, and for the love they
bear him that thereto called them. But I fear we^ often so taken up, with the
view of what we (...) according to the flesh, that we forget what (...) are in,
and according to Christ Jesus; whi^ springs from what we come to view in the n^
Consideration.

Sect. 4. Of the state of Saints in a joint consideration as sons of Adam in
Christ.
FOr though such is the Christians state as Christ and as a Saint, yet in a
complex joint consideration as he is a man in Christ, the^ appears yet a double
imperfection beside what named.

1. An imperfection of his Union with Chri^ or in the manner and measure of his
being him, in his rootedness into Christ, in whom (...) high estate is. A
branch of a wild Olive then^ taken out, and graffed into a true, is by ver^ of
that insition interessed in the juice, sap, a^ virtue of the true Olive; yet
the manner of Union with it may for some time be imperfec^ It is not at first
so fast rooted, and so firmly un^ted with it as afterward it may be: Thence the
Apostle prayed for more rootedness of believ^ into Christ; and Christ himself
for further Union of believers in him Ephesians. 3.17,18. Joh. 17.21. Saints
perfect in Christ, may not be perfectly in Christ; their condition admits of
growth in this matter; they may come to see further into Christ, and to attain
to greater riches of assurance of understanding, and so grow stronger in faith
and love, and have their roots deeplier struck into him, cleave to him with
fuller purpose and resolution. The more they know his Name, the more they trust
in him, and their calling to him, and election in him made firmer, and they
further out of danger of falling from him, 2 Pet. 1.5.10. Yea, as they grow
more one with him, so they have a more wide and abundant entrance administered
into his Kingdom; his fullness flows more out into them, and they become more
comprehensive of him. In this regard is that difference amongst Saints that was
^oted in the beginning; Some babes in understanding, and weak in faith,
easilier shaken and perverted from the simplicity in him, more unstable, being
less united with the root, and so not so much receiving in its sap; and these
as they are more tenderly to be dealt with, and nursed up, so they are also to
be exhorted to diligence in attending to the Word of Grace, and to let go such
evil humors brought with, and yet retained by them as might clog them, and
hinder their further growing in, and faster uniting unto Jesus; such as those
things named 1 Pet 2.1. Malice, Envy, Guile, Hypocrisy etc. that so coveting
after the sincere milk of the Word they may grow up thereby, be more rooted and
built up in Christ, abound in his Work, and be kept from falling. Others are
more firm, grown more empty of themselves, and fuller of faith and confidence
in him and singleness of heart toward him, for whom there is greater cause of
rejoicing, as being in the less danger of m^ssing the full enjoyment of their
spiritual estate to which they are called; yet even they also may, and are
still to be growing up into Christ, and to faster union with him; for which
cause also the Saints are compacted into a body, that they by what every joint
supplies from the head, may grow up more into the head, they being not as yet
so perfect as that they can grow no more. In this regard it was (partly) that
Paul judged himself not perfect, nor to have attained, but pressed on* counting
all things loss and dung that he might win Christ, and be found in him. Phil. 3
8,9,13,14. He had him not enough yet; nor was yet so fast in him, that nothing
in that regard could be added to him; as also ^n another sense which follows,
he with other Saints acknowledged their imperfection viz.

2. In regard of attainment to an enjoyment of the fullness of Christ, and their
estate in Christ, through union with him, in regard of the possession or
comprehension of it, and the effects and fruits of it; And there are two
Branches in that.

1. Their enjoyment of the fullness into which they are estated, their
possession of it; they have not yet all that joy and happiness, that sight of
God, that vast possession of life in themselves to which they are called; they
have not yet attained the resurrection of the dead as it is to be enjoyed; the
greatest part of the possession of this estate is reserved till their race be
run, their fight accomplished, the prize obtained 2 Timothy 4.8. Here we have a
time of suffering with Christ; the glory is (for the main of it) reserved (as
to possession) till hereafter; Its laid up for the Saints to be given out when
they shall all be come together in the unity of Faith, and acknowledgement of
the Son of God unto a perfect man; in the mean time Christ is in them the hope
of glory: There is yet an aliquid ultra, yea a maximum ultra in the Saints
enjoyments; the best is kept till the last, as it was with the wine in the
Wedding. Joh 2.10. in regard of full enjoyment; Abraham and the Fathers died,
not having received the Promises. Heb. 11.13. and in that regard one Saint
shall not prevent another, but all together possess their fullness fully; God in
wisdom gives out here but a glimpse of that glory, or a transfiguration only
that the Saints might always have a Loadstone before them still the stronglier
to draw them after him; a prize in their eye, the thoughts and hopes of which
may whet on, and hearten them in all their deepest sufferings; they neither
have the fullness of possession here in their bodies, which are vile and weak,
and exposed to sufferings; nor in their spirits, which are yet too narrow to
contain all their happiness.

Saints, think not your selves yet perfect in your seize, or enjoyments
of your portion, lest you grow proud and sloathful, but press yet further on;
there is more before you then yet you are aware on; you must go over Jordan
before you can possess the whole land of Canaan you may have tasted some of the
Grapes, and first fruits of that pleasant promised possession^ yea, perhaps
some have set foot in some borders of it (for in this matter also there is
difference between Saints, some have enjoyment of more then others) but on this
side death think not to have all you are called to inherit; though you have
right to all, yet not possession yet of all nor does your right extend to a
present full possession; Here you have, and shall have enough dispensed to you
to whet you on further, and prepare you for the fuller enjoyment; bless God in
Christ for that, and in his strength pass on yet to what is laid up for you, to
be enjoyed by you in the full revelation of himself unto you. Heb. 4.3. you are
entering happily, but have not as yet entered or set down in your full rest: your
bodies are yet exposed to infirmities and sufferings, your Spirits too are
subject sometimes to ebb as well as flow: if they be awake and undeluded, they
have their further reachings and pressings after God: in this regard then your
state is yet imperfect; as

2. Again in regard of the effects of your being in Christ; in conformity to
him in holiness as well as in the fruition of your happiness. Union begets
assimilation; as ye come to know him that's true, and to be in him that's true,
so ye come to like him and be made like to him: but as your knowledge of him is
not in the fullest degree of its perfection, so neither is your likeness to
him. Its indeed the property of true real faith and union with Christ, that as
there-through we behold him, we are changed into his likeness from glory to
glory. 2 Cor. 3.18. and in that Saints differ from other men; other men change
themselves by looking into the Law of works, and endeavoring to conform
themselves thereto; or else rest in a notion and are not changed, or not
changed into his likeness; nay many from their changes think to behold his
glory; but the Saints having first a true sight of his glory, his glorious
grace and love in the glass of the Gospel or Law of liberty, are thereby
changed into his likeness; but not all at one, but gradatim, by steps, from
glory to glory: when Saints shall see him fully, they shall be fully like him,
but not till then. And that you are not in this respect as yet perfect, I
suppose there are none of you in a right mind but will confess, seeing you
cannot but see the witnesses thereof in you; for whence else arise delights in
earthly riches, honors, apparellings, approbation? whence passions, and
contentions? whence high thoughts of your selves, and secret distrusts of God
when tried by him (or the like) yea whence diseases and distempers of body, but
because ye are not yet perfectly like him? there may be and are differences
here too, according to your different measures of knowing him and rootedness in
him and eying of him, but none of you but may yet go on to more perfection. Its
true the Apostle says, so many as are perfect, let us to be thus minded. Phil.
3.15. that is (as verse. 13.14.) not to judge our selves perfect or to have
attained, but to press on still forward. Asa was perfect in his heart all his
days, and yet he imprisoned the Prophet of God, and did not trust as he should
have done in God, but sought unto the Physicians, and not unto God. 2 Chro.
15.17. with 16.10.12. his perfection was in that he judged him the only true
God, and turned not in his heart after another God, after Baal or any other, as
some before him had done; but in this his perfection he walked not perfectly as
to his seeking to, and walking with that God, but sinned greatly against him as
is forementioned.

A man is said to be perfect when upright in that measure he has, not
guilefull, double, halting between two opinions; owning no other God then the
Lord. So Asa was perfect, and so the Apostle in the place quoted mentions
perfection; so many as are perfect, be we thus minded. Phil. 3 15. and many are
in that sense perfect, whole-hearted for God and Christ; but in that sense I
mean it not when I speak here of imperfection: but as of that to which nothing
can be further added: a perfection in degrees: in that sense I say the Saints
are here in a state of imperfection, they have not yet that perfect conformity
to Christ in holiness as they may and shall attain to when they perfectly
apprehend him and the glory in him; not only if we say we have not sinned, but
also if we say we are so perfectly renewed that we have no sin (for Christ to
purge out and further cleanse us from) we deceive our selves, and the truth is
not in us. 1 John 1.8.10. However perfect our state is in Christ Jesus the
head, and as reckoned after him, though righteous as he is righteous, yet we
that are so reckoned, have in our own persons yet sin abiding in us: though we
be not in it, nor so looked upon; yet it is in us; and if it be sown unto, it
occasions chastisements too unto us that we might deny and be purged from it;
oh ye that are in Christ Jesus, deceive not your selves, as if because perfect
in him, ye were perfect in your selves too, and had nothing more in which to be
conformed unto him.

Sect. 5. Of the state of Saints with reference to enemies against them.
I Have minded you of the state both as men and as Saints; in the head, and in
your selves: consider yet a little further with me that as in your selves you
are yet imperfect and subject to weakness, so it would be minded that in
respect of some others you are in a state of enmity and hatred too: though
beloved of God and Christ, yet hated and rejected of men and Angels that love
not God and Christ: and so you are in a state of warfare here: you have enemies
to encounter with, and that will be sure to encounter with you within and
without: and they will set upon you because ye are Saints; though ye be called
to glory and virtue, ye must not think to have that glory, or walk out in that
virtue but with some sufferings; you must fight for what is given you, or else
you cannot enjoy it: you shall meet with Canaanites that will encounter you
before you can sit down in rest in the good land promised you; and if you yield
to them or be overcome of them (as indeed you shall not be overcome but by
yielding) they will dispossess you: here is the faith and patience of the
Saints and of them that keep the commandments of Jesus; Revel. 14.12. Here you
are as a Lily among Thorns; as a ship in the midst of the swelling waves; as a
partridge hunted by the ravenous birds: hence the difficulty of obtaining what
is given you; the straitness of the gate and narrowness of the way to life
herein consists; ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake, says the
Lord your head; Mat. 10.22. other men may hate one another, but all will hate
you: Manasseh against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasseh but both against
Judah; Isa. 9.21. one sect against another, profane against zealous, and
zealous against profane; Edomites against the Ishmaelites, and Ishmaelites
against the Edomites, but both against Israel; all against you that are Saints
indeed: and that not for injury done by you, but because of his name that is in
and upon you: because of the holy unction, and because of the sincerity of your
profession: some because ye will not do as they in all excess of riot; some
because ye condemn their works of Religion and evidences for heaven, and tell
them they must not inherit upon those terms with you; 1 Pet. 4.4. Gal. 4.2.
some because their works are evil, and yours good, and you reprove their evil
by your good. 1 John 3.12. John 7.7. All that will live godly in Christ must
suffer persecution. 2. Tim. 3.12. yea the wise and zealous, potent and chief
Commanders will set against you: yea under pretense of the law and Temple even
out of misguided zeal for God they will brand you, and speak all manner of evil
against you, for his names sake that is believed in and confessed by you: for
your good will they will reward you evil, and hatred for your love; while you
seek to save them they will seek to destroy you, and root you out of the land
of the living: the Herodians that seek to establish their greatness, and usurp
the power of the Kingdom of Israel to themselves, will seek to slay you: the
Scribes and Pharisees that arrogate to themselves the chair of Moses and to be
the only Rabbis in Religion, and pillars of the Church, will seek to crucify
you; they that deny your Lord and master, will go about to undermine and pervert
you: many will fight against your Liberties and outward welfare because of your
faith; many against your faith it self, seeking to poison you there by
corrupting you from the simplicity of the truth believed by you. So that you
are in no small danger in your journey toward Sion to be beaten off before you
there appear in its glory: especially seeing also you have an enemy within you
strong and subtle, and that so much the more dangerous because so near you and
as it were a part of you: mortify your Members that are on the earth. Col. 3
5. They are as the very members of your body: lust in your hearts, the flesh
with its wisdom, will, affections, appeties, these will be often soliciting
you to close with present earthly objects, and neglect the better things to
which God has called you: many strong men have fallen by her, and many though
not quite deprived, yet have been so maimed by her counsels that they have gone
halting to their inheritance ever after: this kept back many of the old Church
in the wilderness from the earthly Canaan; this keeps back many of the Church
in the wilderness now from the everlasting Kingdom; this is an enemy within
ready to open the gates of the soul to any that shall conspire against it from
without, and it minds nothing else but to betray the Saints to them; its life
is in the world and in self, and its as death to it that the soul be pulled
from the world, and from it self: therefore it loves and prompts the soul to go
back to the fleshpots and provisions of the world, or to confidence in its
self. If the world and its authority frown and threaten, it bids yield and by
no means hold up arms against so potent an adversary: whispering in our bosoms,
master save thy self, let not these sad things befall thee: it suggests
weakness in us, power in it, the harshness of persecution, the inability of the
flesh to endure under them, not at all regarding God or savouring the things of
him: If the the world smile, it counsels by all means to listen to it, and
embrace friendship with it; and thi^ proves no small disadvantage to the Saints
in their spiritual travel, that they have such a clog to retard them, such a
spy to betray them, such (...) bosom-Traytor to conspire with the world against
them: O ye that love the Lord, hate thi^ flesh, Psalm, 97.10. shake it off, and
all its subtle inticements: Abstain from fleshly lusts (after profits, honors,
pleasures, promotions, etc.) which war against the soul. 1 Pet. 2.11. He that
sows t^ the flesh, shall of it reap corruption, but he that sows to the Spirit,
shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. 6.7,8.

But yet neither is here all you have to war against; there are other enemies
still of another nature, that in, and with these improve all their subtilty and
skill (of which they have no want) with all their force and power to supplant
you. For we fight not only with flesh and blood, but also with principalities
and powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this world, and against
Spiritual wickednesses in heavenly things. Ephesians 6.12. There are invisible
essences which are more subtle and forcible then those that are visible; such
as are Angels and Spirits, which by how much they are the purer in essence then
any bodily being, by so much the more forcible are they and able to penetrate,
having not that earthly grossness in them that dulls and abates the force of
other creatures; besides that they not being the objects of sense, are the less
feared or discerned, and can the more easily mingle themselves with, or
insinuate themselves into our spirits, which are somewhat of like nature with
them; that such essences were created by Christ, is affirmed in Col. 1.16.
Things visible and invisible, etc, and that some of these leaving their first
habitation, or principality fell from God, and are reserved in chains of
darkness unto the Judgment of the great Day (which they also tremble at the
thoughts of) is affirmed by the Apostle Jude 6. Nor need I go about to prove to
you, that there are such; for I speak to you that are Saints, and therefore I
hope not easily gulled into the error of the Sadduces, to deny that there are
Angels or Spirits, or any thing that cannot be seen or discerned with bodily
senses: you cannot be Saints if ye believe no more then your senses perceive;
for then neither can ye believe that there is a God, forasmuch as with mortal
eyes you cannot see him, and Saints they are not that believe not in him; much
less that believe him not to be because they cannot see him. The Scriptures
everywhere plentifully testify to this, that there are both Angels and
Spirits, good and evil; and such as I speak to, are born of that Word of Faith
that is held forth in the Scriptures; else have they nothing to do to conceive
that they have any interest in the glorious privileges there spoken of: I
shall leave others to believe what there is said, or to take the^ course till
they experiment the truth thereof i^ their own smart. There is an evil spirit I
sa^ (whereof the Saints have experience) with many emissaries or Angels
(unclean and evil spirit too) that works in the children of disobed^ence,
bewitching the minds of men with false i^lusions, and stirring up that
corruption tha^ is in them to their own and others perjudi^ He blows and stirs
men up to opposition again God, and his Truth, and kindles up anger a^ wrath
against the Saints because of the truth deceiving the world, and suggesting to
them the the Saints are an evil people, not fit to be pe^mitted amongst men,
suiting himself to me^ several dispositions, ways, and principles. T^ the
profane and men bent upon their lusts a^ pleasures, he insinuates that the
Truth of Go^ and the Saints that profess it are opposite (...) them, and seek
to cross them of their enterp^ses, and therefore that it cannot go well wit^
them while they are permitted. To those the are potent and powerful in the
world, he su^gests that these people are refractory to the^ and under pretense
of worshipping God (...) Christ, deny subjection to them, and therefo^ not to
be tolerated. To them that are world wise, he presents their way as foolish,
an^ therefore to be despised. To them that are fal^ly and ignorantly zealous,
he represents the^ as Sectaries, and perilous to their way of Religion; and
so fitting his suggestions to their several tempers, stirs them all up to
war against them Sometimes also he works in some of more seeming ingenuous
tempers, to flatter and entice them with worldly proffers from their way of
Piety and Religion: Yea, he can insinuate into the Saints themselves, and
suggest such things to their hearts as tend to supplant them, and set one to
play the adversary to another, either by flattering speeches to persuade one
another to turn aside from the way of Christ, to avoid the Cross and
persecution; or else by raising up emulations, divisions, or the like, to
weaken them. He Proteus like, can transform himself into any shape, and put
into the world, and into the flesh an addition of his own power and policy to
make them more dangerous enemies unto the Saints to harm them. The Beast, the
worldly power setting it self in the House of God: and the false Prophet, the
pretended spiritual, but really corrupt power, worldlified into a way of
secular pride and pomp, are both strengthened by him, the great red Dragon to
persecute the woman clothed with the Sun, and the Off^spring that she brings
forth in the earth; and happy is he that is not overcome by one wile or other
of him.

Great need deer fellow-Travellers to look about us, and to take to our selves
Armor of Proof, and to stand upon our Watch, that none of these potent enemies
do circumvent us, and turn back from the possession of the eternal inher^tance;
to prevent which, before I come to she^ you the way to escape their force, I
shall say little about the Temptations that God orders (...) his people by
them, chiefly some of the mo^ dangerous of them.

CHAP. III. Of Temptations.
Sect. 1. That God suffers his Saints to be tempted, and why.
YOur estate being such as I ha^ described, you may see that yo^ have ground to
expect temp^tions, and cause neither to b^ secure considering your
imperfections, nor yet diffident considering what perfection you have in Christ
Jesus: Your ground to expect them may be fu^ther seen in this, that God pleases
to order the^ to his people, permitting them to be tempted (...) Satan, who of
his own nature is most read thereto, as may be seen in the head of the Saint
even the Lord Christ Jesus. We read the when He was Baptized, and the heavens
open^ upon him, and God had declared him to be his well-beloved Son, and the
Spirit was poured out upon him, designing him to be the Minister and servant of
God to the world in the revelation of the knowledge of God to them, Matthew. 4.1.
though God had testified his welpleasedness in him, yet even him Satan set
upon, and thrust sorely at, that he might try his strength; and God also by his
Spirit led him into this way into the Wilderness to be tempted of Satan, sure
to let us see what we are to expect and look for; viz, a portion too in
temptation, as of old he led his Israel also into the Wilderness, and suffered
a day of temptation to fall upon them before he led them into Canaan. And
that is Gods trying men in this way, that he leads them into such occasions, and
into such a way as wherefrom Satan take advantages to tempt them. And though
Satan do herein evilly, like himself: yet God does it for good, as to the
Israelites of old, because (as there, so here) much mixed people comes out of
Egypt with the Saints: Many come out of the worldly Societies and Fellowships,
ways and professions, upon the hearsay of the Gospel, and through the light
and truth that they see therein, who yet are not so principled as the Saints;
not of their spirit and disposition, though amongst them, drawn by the hope of
the inheritance, but not so molded into holy confidence, and that those might
be made manifest, and either healed or turned quite out; therefore God does
order temptations to them; and then many such depart from amongst the Saints,
because they were not of them, of the same spirit and inward principle with
them; yea, they depart that they might be manifest that they were not of them:
Yea some of understanding may fall too, to try the rest, and to purge them; yea
of the Princes of the Congregation and renowned of the Assembly some are
sometimes perverted, not having had the Word mixed in their heart^ with Faith,
nor living upon the Word, but upon sensible feelings and experiments, as many
such the Rebels of the Israelites had had. Such are in likelihood then to be
discovered, that they being purged out by some way or other, they that live by
Faith, and are sound in the Word, might be approved the more, and the less by
such endangered.

Besides, That all is not gold that glisters in the Saints, even they whose
hearts are right and bottomed on the Word, have flesh mixing it self with
Spirit, and polluting the things of their spirits, even their faith, hope,
confidence, love, etc. all in which that proceeds from, and is generated by the
flesh, is but flesh; all that that springs not from the Word and Spirit, and
is not of the infusion and operation of the Spirit, is but flesh; and amongst a
great heap of Oat there is many times much dross; in a great deal of joy, and
peace, and faith appearing there is much flesh: Now God orders temptations to
his, that the fire thereof might purify them, that that which is flesh might
be purged out, and that that is good and spiritual might be the more approved,
and shine the brighter, be made the more solid and compacted, and better able
to endure after-encounters: Yea, herein also he gives them the larger
experiences of his power and faithfulness, and makes them instruments of his
greater glory, and fitter for the receipt of their inheritance. Thence that of
James Chap. 1. Verse. 2, 3. My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into
diverse temptations, knowing that the trying of your faith works patience; and
let patience have its perfect work, that ye may be entire, and wanting in no
good thing. And that in 1 Pet. 1.7,8. That the trial of your faith much more
precious then that of gold, may be found to praise, honor, and glory at the
appearance of Christ Jesus. Let us not therefore beloved think strange of any
fiery trial (whether of fiery persecutions from men, or of fiery darts of
temptations from Satan) that comes to try us, as if some strange thing had
happened to us, 1 Pet. 4.12. Its Gods way with all his precious metals, with all
his Saints; he brings them not into his Treasury before he have tried them, and
purified them; he gathers not his Corn into his Granary till he has fanned it.
Indeed the proper Son of God, Christ Jesus, had no^ dross in him, but he was
tried and tempted for our encouragement, while we know that w^ have a merciful
high Priest for us that has broken the power of the adversary in his personal
incounters, and was in all things tempted as we, (except that he had no sin)
and so is meet to succor us in our temptations for him, and to give us victory
over them. Heb. 2.17,18. and 4.15.16. Yea, he was tempted, that it might be
manifest that there was no dross in him, and that he might show us the way of
overcomming: but if He was tempted that needed not any trial or purgation as
pertaining to himself; and if all the Saints have used to pass through
temptation, and God has good ends in it; sure then it behooves us to be
circumspect, and expect it, prepare and arm our selves against it, watching and
praying that we not fall into it. Matt. 26.41. The rather considering what an
adversary we have to encounter with; Satan that is full of diligence and
malicious vig^lancy to harm us, of whom and whose subtilty, and wily industry,
I shall shall say a little to you.

Sect. 2. Of Satan and his subtilty.
SAtan is the more perilous adversary to us because of his extreme subtilty,
force and vigilance; the two former from the nobleness of his first created
being, which by how much the more high and spiritual it was, by so much the
wi^keder it is become being fallen: for wickedness is never so dangerous as
when it meets with power and knowledge to improve it: his vigilance to harm us
proceeds from his degeneration and inward wickedness and hatred against God and
us. His subtilty is noted in his name of Serpent, and by those phrases that
tell us of his wiles and methods, as his malice in that he is called the old
red Dragon, full of wrathful poison; his strength by the name of Lion; and his
diligence to improve all these against us in that he is said to go about like a
roaring Lion: as if he should say, like as a Lion hungry and roaring after his
prey uses all diligence to catch it: so this grand adversary of the Saints
goes about compassing the earth and prying into all occasions, dispositions,
and ways, for opportunities to do them mischief. He seeks and he walks about
seeking whom he may devour, making it his business, and trying all one by one
as it were: sifting men as wheat is sifted in a seive; if he cannot catch this
man, he will try another, and if not this way, then another: there is his eager
and violent diligence in this his mischievous way; and of his subtilty to try
all ways and conclusions, and to wind us in, and ensnare us, there is no room
to doubt seeing (as we said before) he is a Spirit, and so has the more
insight into us: bodies can discern but bodies with their animal senses; but
Spirits, especially when not impeded with bodies, can pierce deeper, and see
something far into dispositions and Spirits. Men of a subtle Spirit can
discern much into others tempers and dispositions; how much more Satan that is
a Spirit and can come nearer to our Spirits; he can discern very much of men's
dispositions, and suit his temptations unto them. He is an Artist in his way,
and can lay a long train of temptations so deeply and politickly, that none can
espy him scarcely. If he see men not wholly taken off of the world, but that
the flesh with its affections and appetites after carnal objects are somewhat
stirring in them, he can find out ways enough to enslave them if God permit
him; yea, and so he catches many in his snares, inveigling them to give
themselves to seek after the promotions, ease, liberty, applause, and pleasures
of the world: and so by degrees he deads them to, or withdraws them from the
mark of the price of the high calling of God; and he can tell how to put on
notable visions and pretenses, as of necessity, betterness, and more fitness to
serve and glorify God, more advantage to the word and way of God, and many
such fine devices to circumvent men, so as they suspect little harm in what he
leads their Spirits out to, till they see themselves in the snare and ready to
be devoured by him; yea perhaps he so lulls them asleep, that they scarce see
or feel it then; under pretense of doing more good he inveigles many men's minds
to love and seek after more goods; and under pretense of crediting the Gospel
he leads many to seek to credit themselves in the world and advance their own
honor, and set their hearts upon earthly dignities and preferments; yea, and
sometimes under pretense of spiritual union and better helpfulness, he
provokes some men to lust and wantonness: oh the subtilty of this wicked one!
But yet in these things, though somewhat sublimated, he appears but as a Ruler
of the darkness of this world, and as the God thereof seeking to glorify it,
and snare the Saints by it, which also too usually he does. But he is yet more
admirably subtle in transforming himself into another guise; coming full
fraught with spiritual wickednesses in heavenly things. He as a subtle Spirit
can insinuate pollutions into our Spirits in the things of heaven, and where he
sees souls taken with such things, can meet them in a disguise in the things
they are taken with, changing his shape, and clothing himself with an
appearance of light, and present himself as a messenger, bringer, or Angel of
light, and in this way even at this time also, my Brethren he is most busy,
and does most hurt unto the Churches and Saints of God; when Satan comes to
divert Saints from spiritual things, he is somewhat more discernable (though
so sleightfull: juggler is he, that even there oftentimes he ge^ beyond them)
but when he comes and wraps himself in these things, and pretends to help them
forward in them, then he gets the easier attention and entertainment. Here then
that counsel of the Apostle John is needful to be taken by us. Beloved,
believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they are of God. I Joh.
4.1. Mind this that Satan is a Spirit, and can be a lying Spirit in the mouth
of false prophets, yea has many Spirits as his Angels to send out and do
mischief; and he can fly up and aspire to heavenly things, to be a Teacher and
revealer pretendedly of them also: so that here the path of the Saints is made
very intricate; and they have great need of the Spirit of wisdom and
understanding to discern their way, that they be not cheated.

Sect. 3. Some observations upon Satan's tempting Christ. Mat. 4.
LEt us view the members by the head, and see what Satan will do to the Saints
in this matter by his setting upon Christ the Lord of the Saints. Mat. 4.

1. When he saw him an hungry and were there was no bread, he tempts him to
impatiency of it, and to an unusual way to put an end to his hunger by turning
stones into bread, as if God that led him to a condition wherein he denied him
the ordinary means of refreshing, was not able to (or would not) preserve him
by his word without those means: or as if he could not be content as well to
live upon Gods word without the means when not afforded, as upon the means
extraordinarily procured. And surely Satan is often busy with the Saints to
make them impatient in their wilderness of waiting upon God, and carries many
inordinately after those and those means where they cannot in an ordinary way
enjoy them, as if their life consisted in them, and not chiefly in the word of
God believed by them, and united to them; many a Saint he draws down to a
discontentedness for want of visible means in outward things; or because he
injoys not such an ordinance or means in the time while he is the wilderness,
as he thirsts or hungers for, but God in his providentiall way affords not:
yea by that means sometimes he stirs them up to many irregularities and
combustions: yea and often when they have, though irregularly gotten what their
souls thirsted for, by assuming power as the Sons of God to make what they have
not, they take up their rest too much in such enjoyments, as if they lived by
them and not by the word of God that proceeds from him. But yet behold a more
subtle temptation, in which is discovered more spiritual wickedness. For
Christ no sooner had resisted that temptation, being steadfast in faith and in
the word of God as having it written in his heart; but then,

2. He sets upon him in another way; in which he plays the Angel of light
indeed, and fight against him with his own weapons: tempts him to confidence in
God, and brings the promise to him (which he knew must needs appertain to him,
he being the Son of God) to animate him to step out of the way of God. He takes
him and carries him upon the top of an high pinac^ of the Temple, and bids him
thence to cast down himself, for he being the Son of God, nothing could harm
him, and it is written that God had given his Angels charge over him to keep
him, and to bear him up by their power that he should not dash his foot against
a stone. Oh subtle temptation? whom would not this deceive, but him that holds
fast the word, and has it dwelling in him in all wisdom teaching and
admonishing him? how many souls lifted up on high have been precipated with
this suggestion? When the Devil turns a preacher and presents Gods promises to
further his inticements, whom will not his subtilty overthrow from Gods Temple?
this is a temptation fitted to persons that mind spiritual things; persons
that look for promises to be given in to them may be easily thus snared. How
many when they have met in some measure with a baptism unto Christ, and some
spiritual communication from Christ, in which they have tasted of his heavenly
gift, and the power of the world to come, and have rejoiced and made their
boast of him, and looked upon themselves as called by him, and made sons in
him, and have thought the promises belonged to them; yet by such a temptation
to confidence with the promises set before them, have been perverted from the
right way to salvation? a temptation taking with high minded pesons, filling
them with a careless fearlesness of their condition: how many does Satan teach
to reason after this manner? am not I acquainted with the goodness of God? have
not I met with such light and knowledge of God? am not J^a child of God? did
not God at such a time and in such a way make me feel and taste of such
heavenly virtue, eat his spiritual Manna, drink his comforts, taste of the
heavenly gift? are not all the promises of God my portion there? can I ever
fall away or miss of my portion? what if I neglect such ordinances and
assemblings of our selves together? I am above them all: and my not waiting on
God in them can do me no harm at all: all his promises for keeping, guiding,
preservation and everlasting glory are mine, and am sure to attain them. He
has promised t^ give his Angels charge over me, and they sha^ keep me that I
get no harm; therefore I wi^ not be tied up any longer to such and such means
to use them though God afford them; let other cry I am of Paul, and I am of
Apollo, I wi^ neither regard one nor the other, I will on^ immediately betake
my self to Christ: Scriptures, exhortations, prayer, ordinances and are fit for
novices and such as have not so gre^ seize as I have, I have no need of
the^ nor of any Brethren in such ways. I wi^ hear whom I please; let them be
what they wi^ and say what they will, they cannot harm me for ^o I am a child
of God, and God is ingage^ to preserved me: thus this subtle serpent buzz^
into the members (as well as he did into the head) hurtful conceptions, which
many drin^ down the more fearlesly because they s^em to b^ the workings of
faith and confidence in them and think fear too low a thing for them; no^
considering what the Holy Ghost has said, tha^ the wise man fears and
departs from evil, b^ the fool is confident and rages: Prove. 14.16. [(...)
passes on:] those that think themselves to stan^ and to be of the stronger
part, and to have reached to high seize, are oftentimes here snared. And
what is the issue of these, but neglecting, yea contemning Gods appointed way of
preservation; some venture upon evil Companies, and fall into horrid wickedness
and scandalous courses; some slight the Scriptures, despise their brethren,
follow their fancies; for having turned the back upon Gods way, Satan as an
Angel of Light meets with them, and persuades them he is the Angel of God sent
to bear them up from falling; and having gotten the credit of a good Teacher,
leads many of them to think the Gospel of Christ an empty low Doctrine, Christ
a fleshly Christ, the Doctrine of the Resurrection, and of his personal
appearance meet deceits, yea and rushes them into all the height and strength
of delusion; that whereas they received not the love of the truth that they
might be saved, they might be overwhelmed in unrighteous delusions till they be
damned; 2 These. 2.10.11. being cheated with tempting God in stead of trusting
him, and separating the Promises of God from the way of God, being herein also
strengthened through some mistakes of some men that preach the absoluteness of
Gods Covenant, and the in^allibility of salvation, and mind not rightly to whom
such doctrines appertain, viz. to those that with honest hearts believe and
have the Word of God so mixed with faith in them, that they are thereby kept
from such presumption, in (...) awful fear of trusting themselves, or departing
from Gods way: thence also the subtle d^vil lef out that word, in all thy
ways, the w^ that he suggested being none of the ways the God prescribed to
him.

Saints, whoever you are, take heed of this deceit; separate not Gods Promises
from his waye^ and prescriptions. The Jews had a promise (...) entering into
Canaan, but they understood n^ Gods Language, but erred in their hearts, an^
therefore they not walking in his way of faith they entered not into his rest:
Believe not ever spirit, no though it come with pretense (...) Scripture, and
lead to confidence and bold fea^ lesness, and to a certain floating joy, as
assure^ of your happiness; if it lead to neglect God^ ways, and draw from his
Commandment know there is something of Satan in it; thoug^ the thing held forth
may happily be true, y^ then there is, as so used, a perverting Truth to (...)
wrong end. Mark that of David, Psalm. 37.34 Wait on the Lord and keep his way,
and he shall exalt thee to inherit the Land; Separate not tho^ two; in the way
of the Lord, is strength, and in h^ fear is sure confidence: but though God
should say unto thee, thou shall surely live; yet if tho^ be drawn to trust
in thine own righteousnes^ and commit iniquity, all thy righteousness shall not
be remembered, but in the iniquity that tho^ committest thou shall die, for the
mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Ezeck 33.13. He only is in a sure standing
that has the Word of God so abiding in him that it keeps him from presuming to
depart from him.

Take heed of Satan in this temptation. As the common people use to say, He may
always be discerned when he appears in a humane shape by his cloven foot; so
its true in this matter, in the foot, the issue and tendency of his temptation
he may ever be discerned, if thou have the Word and Spirit of Wisdom to guide
thee in it; he ever comes to divide from God; even while he tempts to lean upon
him, his temptation tends to separation from him; to leave his way, and yet
expect his Promise made to those that walk in his way; so he prevailed with the
ancient Jews, Mica 3.10.11. When they built up Sion with blood, and Jerusalem
with iniquity, yet they would lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord
amongst us? no evil can come upon us. Take heed yet again I say of this
spiritual wickedness in heavenly things. If a Spirit should come with a great
deal of light and force, and whisper to thee that thou must cease from man; and
in this persuade thee (not only not to build thy faith upon the parts, wisdom,
holiness of this or that, or any man, but also) not to attend to the Gospel
ministered by men, because they that minister it are men, but neglecting such
Ministration to wait only upon Christ immediately; or to put no difference
between men preaching the Truth or Error; much more to take thee off thy
confidence from the man Christ, who is appointed to be the hiding place for
men, know its a delusion, the Word o^ God in the mouth of Satan, because in
these end^ and intimations its contrary to the Word o^ God; for God has both
appointed the Man Christ Jesus to be our Mediator, and to be ou^ way unto the
Father; and men also to be instruments of proclaiming his Truth, and as member
of Christ, and partakers of his spiritual riches t^ help forward the growth of
one another; an^ so they are to be owned and acknowledged i^ love as helpers of
our joy, though not as maste^ of our faith; and God is to be attended upon i^
the ministration of their gifts: And so if the come to thee, Ye need not that
any teach you, (...) as that Unction teaches you, with this intima^on in the
foot of it, that ye need not any furth^ exhortation or watching over by any
brethren or you need no information out of the Scriptures, because that Unction
ye have receive^ shall teach you all things without those medium^ and so that
come to divide you from Brethr^ and Fellowship in the Gospel and its Ordinanc^
in which ye have met with him: Know its st^ the tempter, bidding thee throw thy
self dow^ headlong: for, God says not, Ye need no mi^stration or instruction
by any men because of the unction in you (for then it had been needless for the
Apostle to have writ to them; he might as well have spared that pains in regard
of them) but he says they needed not that any teach them but as that anointingt
taught them: that that suited not with it, but was besides it and ^ew to it,
another doctrine and light then that ^hey had received from the beginning, not
agree^ng with that, such teaching they had no need of; ^n abiding in what they
had received and been ^aught, they should be saved.

I have instanced these two places, that none might mistake them and abuse
them, as I know some do; and to prevent your falling into the ^emptation of
Satan when coming to any in such a way. Surely my friends, if you think
whatever spirit comes unto your hearts, and hints in ^ otions and doctrines, or
conceptions, or brings any Scripture or Promise, its the Spirit of God, ^e are
much mistaken, and may quickly be led unto a delusion, as many that attend to
such mo^ions and flashes of joy and light, and have not ^he Word of God abiding
in them with under^tanding, usually are. I wish there be not too ^any of you
that have had some gracious ope^ations upon your hearts, and of you that
ac^ount your selves Saints, and in a sure conditi^n, taken in this snare of
Satan; learn so to lean on God as not to live upon means, and run out
inordinately after them where God afford^ them not; nor yet to despise his
ways and means when afforded, presuming that God wi^ keep you safe, and leave
you right without them; believe in God, but do not tempt him^ And where both of
these are escaped, beware o^ the third; in which

3. He set upon Christ to worship him, that (...) might have the glory and
dignity of the worl^ given him; a strong and impetuous temptation^ and
oftentimes taking where the other two ar^ avoided, as they that are like the
seed in Thorn^ ground go further then the other two ground^ A temptation to
Coveteousness, Vainglory an^ Ambition to be great amongst men; and this being
suited to our sense and natural inclinations, takes often with those that have
attained to much, Satan knowing how to make all seize contribute
something to pride and high^ mindedness, which the more its fed, the more (...)
sets open the soul to entertain such advant^ges as suit therewith: Against
this the Apost^ John, writing to children, young men and f^thers opposes this
advice and counsel; Love n^ the world, nor the things of this world; for the
lo^ of the world and of the Father stand not together 1 John 2.16,17. But
because this is not so subt^ (though oftentimes more catching then the fo^mer
from its pleasingness to flesh) as also because I touched upon it before in the
preceding Chapter, I shall not enlarge so much upon it; this being not fallen
into so much for want of discerning as by love of carnal worldly enjoyment of
earthy satisfaction or excellency, and so needs ^ot so many words to discover
it, as to per^wade men not to listen to, but avoid it.

Sect. 4. Of the main drift of Satan in all his Temptations.
THe subtilty and sedulity of Satan may appear by what is said, as also some of
h^ wiles and methods: but now what is his dri^ and design in tempting, would be
a little furthe^ considered; its far otherwise then the mind an^ end of God in
suffering him to tempt; God aim^ at the trial and purging of us, and so at our
benefit; but Satan at nothing less then to devo^ us by alienating our souls
from God, in the knowledge and enjoyment of whom consis^ our happiness. And
because he knows that Go^ is not to be known and enjoyed but only in, an^
through Christ (even that Jesus of Nazare^ who was made of the seed of David
according to the flesh, though the Lord of David, as being the Son of God
according to the Spirit) because he is the only maker up of the breach between
God and man, the only propitiation for our sins, by, and in the virtue of his
Death an^ Sacrifice, the only Mediator of God and man the only way unto the
Father; by whom as b^ has offered up himself through the eternal Spirit a
spotless Sacrifice, we may have access unto, and acceptance with him, the only
bread of Life that God has given us from heaven to feed upon; the great
Witness and Evidence of Gods Love and Goodness to us; the express Character,
and lively Image of his Person; in a word, the only Savior appointed of God to
us, in the virtues of his once offered Sacrifice, able not only to justify us
at the first, but also perfectly to save us; therefore he makes it his main
business in order to the alienating men from God, and depriving them of eternal
happiness, to turn, or keep men out from believing on him; even as the Serpent
beguiled Eve, so does this wicked one endeavor to beguil souls now, corrupting
their minds or thoughts ((...)) from the simplicity that is in him, from their
single looking to God in and through him. Now how did the Serpent beguil Eve,
but by persuading her that their living by faith in the Word of God, and in
observance of the way of God, was a blind low kind of living; but would she be
ruled by him, and listen to his counsel, they should attain to a much better
condition, live a life of Knowledge like to God, and not in such a subjection
to, and dependence on God; even so (as the Apostle intimates, 2 Cor. 11.2,3.)
Satan now seeks to deceive, by insinuating into men's thoughts, that the Death,
Sacrifice, and Mediation of Christ are but low, simple things, fit only for
Novices, and new beginners to live upon, and the living by faith in him, and in
submission to his Doctrine and Ordinances, a poor despicable way of living that
keeps men in blindness, and subjects them to many exercises and temptations,
from which would they listen to his counsels, he would soon free them, and
bring them to a more godlike condition.

Thus withdraws he men's souls from Christ, and leads them, either wholly to
slight and trample upon him, to loath the feeding constantly upon him, as if
he was (as the murmuring Israelites said of their Manna) but a light bread, and
to account the blood of the Covenant but a common poor thing, and so to itch
and covet after some more sensual satisfaction, or else to join something else
with him as the matter of their souls feeding and bottom of their confidence
toward God, and way of approaching to him, as if there was not the fullness of
God in him; or as if he was not complete, nor had done so much in and by his
one once offered Sacrifice, as that in and with the virtues of it he is
perfectly furnished for leading up his sanctified ones unto perfection; but
that however he and the Doctrine of him are meet to bring in souls to God at
the first: yet after men are once brought in, they must look after some other
more excellent thing, (even as the Israelites dusted in the Wilderness for
flesh) to bring them to perfection. Thence the spirit of Antichrist (which is
the very spirit and inspiration of Satan) is Charactarized and described by his
denying Jesus to be the Christ, 1 John 2.22. and 4.2,3. making but a Type or
Figure or Fancy of him, or not by confessing him come in the flesh; that is, he
magnifieth not, or commends not to men, but as much as in him lies
suppresseth, slighteth, speaks overly, and makes nothing of the Abasement,
Humiliation, Death, Sufferings, and Sacrifice of the Lord Jesus, and so the
whole business of his coming in the flesh, either more directly and openly, or
else more closely and by consequence; whereas God and his Spirit takes the
things of Christ, and shows them to men, leading them there to have their
constant and continual feeeding, encouragement to Hope, and matter of
Consolation.

And indeed did not Satan some way or other prevail with men, either to keep
them from Christ, or to withdraw them when they have begun to look toward him,
he should nothing avail in all his attempts against them, seeing life is so
intailed upon him, and put into, him that he cannot miss it possibly that
misses not of him. But alas his design is accomplished in too many men, though
all are not in the same way deceived by him. Some he so hoodwinks, and keeps in
darkness, that they not seeing Christ the Righteousness of God freely given to
them, go about to establish to themselves a righteousness of their own, and
submit not to him, trust not in his Grace but in their own works, thinking that
for the goodness thereof, or as it were thereby Christ will save them.

Others he perswads to rest in a Notion and profession of the truths of Christ,
though they discern not, nor embrace not Christ himself, and his Sacrifice in
their hearts, nor the love of God commended therein to them.

Others he more subtly snares with a conceit of faith, the rise and spring
whereof is not Jesus Christ and his Sacrifice, and the love of God therein
manifested to them, while sinners and ungodly, and nothing better then others,
but some disposition, frame, work, or some Word or Promise applied to them by
their own reasonings, or brought to their minds, in which yet the Lord Jesus
was not discovered to, or set before them.

But yet more subtly and speciously he plays the Serpent indeed, when by
pretending to bring them to a better condition then what they have by the faith
of Jesus, he secretly undermines them, and draws them from him; of which I
desire we may especially beware, because he often comes with great artifice and
cunning. He can suck poison out of Honey, and usher in some way of darkness with
words of light, as we have already seen, wrest some Scripture-saying to turn
the eye and heart from Jesus whom they all speak on.

He will come and tell men that the Death and Resurrection of Christ, and so
his Sacrifice and Mediation are things without men; and what good will they do
to the soul if lived and fed on? Men must have Christ in them the hope of
glory; and so does some times subtly draw men from what he propounds from the
Scripture to them. For that Christ must be in men the hope of glory, is a very
precious truth, the thing that above all other I would prefer thee to, and wish
thee to take heed of being beguiled of; but Satan means not so; less when he
brings that saying: For whereas Christ is indeed in the Believer (that is in
his heart, knowledge, confidence, consideration, affection, etc. (for after
that manner objects are said to be in the hearts of men) as he was made flesh
See the truth of this in Romans 8.32,33,34. and 1 Pet. 1.3.
and offered up himself in Sacrifice for us, and is in the virtues thereof at
the right hand of God mediating in our behalf, and authorized to save us, etc.)
the hope (not the present possession or enjoyme^ of glory, as this view,
consideration, knowled^ and judgment of him is spirituous and powerf^ beget
and nourish in the soul a lively hope (...) expectation of the glory possessed
by him for and in him set before us: Satan in his temp^ons sometimes takes hold
of that, and such (...) sayings to another purpose, for making use men's
unlearnedness or want of stability in t^ Apostles Doctrine; he uncloths Christ
of (...) those considerations of his Death and Sacrif^ etc. yea, makes it his
business to withdraw t^ soul from him as such a one; and so indeed from the
true Christ to look for another thing, a ligh^ frame, power, or operation in
them, not of Chri^ as crucified for them, and fed on by them though as so
considered, and fed on, he is in the Believer the hope of glory, according to
the Apostles aim and intention, as is said before, an^ not as divested and
unclothed of that consideration; Nay, which is worse, Satan sometime prevails
so far with men, that having stolen the true form of Christ from men, and
having persuaded them to let go him and their confidence in him as a fleshly
Christ, and fleshly confidence which they must sacrifice, as once Abraham did
his Isaac (though not with his success, for they scarce ever receive him again
they part so fully from him) and persuading them that Christ is nothing but a
certain force, power, light or operation in the heart; he himself cloths
himself with the Name of Christ, transforms himself into ^n Angel of light, and
insinuates himself with all the strength and efficacy of delusion into their
hearts as the true Christ, and his strong deceits and operations as the very
inspirations and operations of God and Christ of far more excellency then what
the Gospel holds forth as recorded in the Scriptures, and so leads them on
headlong to their ruin; for then no marvel if they run into strange and
monstrous conceptions and practices; deny the Scriptures, make themselves God
or a part of him; say they have no sin in them; that there is no such thing as
sin, or devil, or heaven, or hell, at least more then is now in men; cast off
all religious exercises, and live like Heathens, persuading others to the same
things also with them: If Satan once have got such credit with men, as to be
entertained for their Teacher in stead of Christ and his Spirit, into what
principles or practices may not he lead them? though it stand not with his
policy to lead all that entertain him into such gross ways, but to act some, as
if they were Angels or Messengers of Christ, that so others might be the better
drawn away after them, and so they be but withdrawn from Christ, so he and his
Death and Mediation be but as a dead thing to them, he greatly cares not how
speciously they walk and talk, they are the fit^ instruments for him. I would
to God there w^ not too many, yea and Teachers of others to^ to whom he has
made Christ come in the fle^ as worth nothing, to whom a piece of Pla^
Philosophy, or some dream of their own is (...) more worth and use then the
Apostles Doctrine.

Sect. 5. Of the Messengers of Satan.
NOw though I have hitherto spoken of Satan and his subtilty, yet think not
that I conceive that he always comes alone, or in his own person immediately
to tempt; but know this, that as Gods Spirit has built himself an House in
man, even his people, Christ and his members, by whom he speaks and works to
the drawing in others to God, and edifying themselves in whom he dwells,
employing them to be his mouth in the opening of his counsel and truths to
those purposes: So also Satan insinuating himself into men, has his dwelling
in them, and becomes a lying evil spirit in them that he prevails over, and
makes use of them to be his mouth to deceive one another, and to draw in others
into unity with them making them his messengers; and these imitate him in
transforming themselves into Ministers of righteousness, 2 Cor. 11.13.15. These
are the Dragons Tail with which he draws down the stars of heaven; having
seduced these out of the way, he makes them instruments to seduce others after
him; as having seduced Eve, he used her as an instrument to lead Adam also into
the transgression: So some of the Spies of Canaan bringing an evil report upon
that good Land, caused many to mutiny: and so in Numb. 16. Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram, men of renown, and famous in the Congregation, falling off from the
Word of God, and rebelling against Moses and Aaron (the types of Jesus Christ
the Son of God, the Prince and high Priest of the Congregation) occasioned many
to rebel for company with them. Concerning such, its needful (as the Apostle
Jude says) to warn you, and wish you to contend earnestly against them for the
faith once delivered to the Saints; for the^ are now (as was then foretold)
false Teachers ungodly men, forewritten to this judgment (to be for exercise
unto the Saints of God) men the have departed from Christ, denying the Lord
that bought them (even the only Lord God an^ our Savior Jesus Christ) and
turning his Gra^ into wantonness, who by their pernicious doctrines and
practices draw many souls into perdition. And though there be others too that
(...) from the faith, and do great disservice to Chr^ in limiting the tenor of
the Gospel, and puttin^ in their Buts and Onelies, like the believers (...) the
Sect of the Pharisees that would not have the Gospel preached but to
Proselytes, and m^ of the Circumcision, that they had some ground to think were
of the Elect people: yet my pu^pose is now rather to warn you of that other
sort of people, because you that are Saints i^ Christ, and live upon his grace,
are in more danger (as I conceive) of these then of those.

Of these I say that have forsaken the paths of uprightness to walk in the
ways of darkness: men that have let go the Doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles to walk in their own speculations; making the Apostles to have been
devisers of Apologues and fables in which there was no truth or verity, but
only a shadow and parable of another thing: people that indeed deny the Lord
Jesus Christ: some, that there was never such a one; others, that he was no
more then a bare man, a pattern, an example; not the Savior of the world
indeed, but only a type and figure of the true Savior, so evacuating him, and
denying him to be their Lord, Ruler, and Commander, or Mediator between God and
men, turning all into an Allegory or vain fancy; undermining and subverting the
faith of Christ; as if he were but a fleshly Christ, and the faith in him
though begotten by Gods Spirit, but a carnal faith, which must die and be
crucified in us before we come indeed to that that saves us: and so they teach
men to cast away their confidence in him, and trample upon him, and count his
blood and sacrifice a common, carnal, fleshly thing (though it has formerly
sanctified them) and to say of him whom God has sanctified and sent into the
world, yea in whom it has pleased him that all fullness should dwell, as the
sons of Belial sometimes of Saul, how can this man save us? cr^cifying the Son
of God to themselves, and blotting out (as much as in them lies) his
remembrance from amongst men; putting in the place of him some frame or fancy
that they conceive they have in themselves, and investing themselves or it with
his name: these are indeed the Antichrists the deny directly that Jesus is the
Christ; for, who (...) a liar but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ (...)
that say of themselves, I am Christ, we are the holy one of God; and Christ is
nothing else with them but themselves and who ever are of their temper, in
union (as they conceive) with God^ deriding the man Jesus Christ the Lord and
hea^ of all, and so making the faith of Christ a very scorn and derision with
all that believe it: these are of those very persons in whom (while they slight
the Scriptures) the Scriptures are verified; the mockers that should say in the
last days, where is the promise of his coming; for what was, is, and there is
no new thing under the Sun; all things continue in like state ever since the
Fathers fell asleep; as He came then, so now and so shall do; but no other
coming is to be expected: yea these are of them that say the Resurrection
(...), is now done, or is already past: they have it or expect to have in this
life (even on this side their bodily Death) all they shall have, denying the
Resurrection of the personal body of Christ the same that was crucified (such
of them as confess there was such a man) or at least, that it was taken up into
heaven and glorified, or shall ever come again to be made manifest in glory
with them that have believed on him and suffered for him: the resurrection of
whose bodies is denied by them also. These are the Antitypes to those Rebels in
the wilderness, that pleading that all the Lords people were holy, denied the
superiority of Moses and Aaron: for these also being seduced from the head, and
not holding it fast, plead that all that are of them are holy and anointed, and
so the Christ, and deny superiority over them to the Lord Christ, and refuse to
have him exalted above them: yea, though they have been baptized into him, both
in the doctrine of him and otherwise, and have tasted of his sweetness, yet
they rebel against him, endeavoring to draw off others from the faith and
knowledge of him, pretending it to be but a fleshly carnal thing. These indeed
are the great destroyers of the faith: and though so evidently pointed at by
the Apostles, that almost any that runs may read them to be the persons
forespoken of by them, yet being strongly deluded they do not see it; for how
then should the Scripture be fulfilled? these threaten the falling away that is
to precede the great day of the Lord and of his glorious coming, and to make
way for the revelation of the man of sin. One might think there is no need to
decipher them, and warn you of them: but their coming being in all
deceivableness of unrighteousness, and they transformed into ministers of
Christ and righteousness, and creeping in so subtly as to deceive if possible
the elect, there is great need to warn you of them, and to exhort you to
contend for the faith against them, that it be not wholly subverted by means of
them; for these indeed subvert and pull it up by the very root and foundation:
promising men liberty and freedom from temptation, they become their greatest
temptation, and lead them into bondage with themselves, who also are the
servants of corruption: yea some there are that being yet further bewitched,
think and say that God is all things, and all things God, and so themselves are
at least a part of him; that sin is nothing but only a conceit or imagination,
that, that is evil and to be avoided which indeed is not evil, all things being
alike pleasing unto God. He the very being in all things that does all things;
the soul and will of man are nothing distinct from him, etc. Doctrine so
destructive to the very being of Saints, that I hope none that are Saints
indeed will endure to hear them: And but that I see those that have attained
much and gone very far, yet shaken, inclined to, and perverted by such as
maintain them, and so (at least) dangerously exposed to them, I should have
judged it needless once to have mentioned them. Of these and of whatever else
is contrary to sound doctrine, be ye warned that ye be not snared by them:
knowing there were such foretold of, marvail not that such there are; but
remember his admonition that has said, Go not ye after them. Luke 15.27. to
which end I shall further mind you of the way by which they draw in souls to
them, and what principles lay open people to be deluded by them.

Sect. 6 Of their way and subtilty in tempting.
THe Spirit of Error is in the Proverbs compared to a whorish foolish woman (as
the Spirit of truth is compared to a wise woman, and called wisdom) and the way
of those that are possessed with it and that walk out in it, is there set forth
to the life. Her lips drop like an honey comb: they come with fair and enticing
speeches to beguile simple souls. She catches the simple man, and kisses him,
and speaks pleasant language to him. Pro. 7. They pretend much love and
friendship to them they meet with, whom they find in a staggering unsettled
condition, through an itching ear straying toward them, and going near the
corner of her house: such as have some light and have met with some spiritual
tastes and shines of goodness, and seek after spiritual things; but yet have
not attained to be settled and grounded in it: they meddle not so much with mere
worldly carnal men because they savor not such temptations, nor yet will they
much trouble themselves with such as they find settled and able to descry their
way and decline it resolutely, but such as are in the twilight between both:
that are double-minded and unstable in their ways, and are ready (as they
find) to halt and stagger upon their onsets: these they come with kisses to, as
desiring to be familiar with them and to help them to understand choice
mysteries: they tell them stolen waters are sweet^ and bread eaten in secret is
pleasant: in diverting from the right way in which they are walking and in
which the Saints generally have walked, and relinguishing or despising the
things of Jesus Christ, the dainties in the house or Church builded by him, the
consolations openly in the wo^ held forth to men; they shall meet with other
more mysterious and secret things which have more sweetness and pleasantness in
them: she tells of her bed prepared and adorned with Tapestry, the sacrifices of
peace offered, and her bed perfumed with most precious Spices: they tell them
what peace and joy they have in their way, what a pleasant resting place they
have found, what precious operations they meet withal; that they have attained
to a more full and perfect condition, and are better fitted to entertain them
with their gifts and experiences then while they had their hope springing from
the knowledge and belief of Christ Jesus as one that without them died, rose,
and ascended to mediate in behalf of them; and while as thus known he was the
hope of glory in them, that then they could not meet with that peace and joy,
and those satisfactions that now they meet with; that he was but a fleshly
Christ and he is gone, but now they have a spiritual Christ always with them,
yea that they are He; that they speak to them out of love and desire that they
may solace themselves together with them in their liberty and rejoicing, and
take their fill of love on the bed, or in the state and way that they have
found rest in: in a word they do as Satan at the first in the Serpent to Eve;
he came and told her of a higher and a better condition then what God made them
in, ye shall be as Gods knowing good and evil; and as those deceivers in 2 Pet.
2.19. They promise them liberty, and greater glory: come say they, you think to
have life in another, and that by the death, Resurrection and mediation of
Christ without you, ye believing on him shall be saved; you trust in a person
that was born of a woman, a man, etc. You think to live by faith in him, but
alas, you live low and carnally; that was but a fleshly Christ that you think
of, and lean on; he is dead long since (if such a one there ever was) and the
faith of his disciples in him died with him (so some have not shamed to write)
but we have Christ in the Spirit and mystery: you know him but after the flesh,
we after the Spirit; yea, the Christ are we; for Christ is nothing else but God
with us, that is, the divine nature in us; we are the humanity; and other body
or humanity we know or believe not: you also look for your happiness and glory
hereafter, that Christ shall visibly come again and then ye shall inherit glory
with him, your bodies being raised by him. But we have our glory here already;
we are already risen and have heaven within us, and other we expect and wait
not for: come, come, and let go that your fleshly knowledge of, and faith and
hope in that Jesus Christ, the man that was born without you according to the
letter, and you shall enter into the love with us and shall find all these
things that ye there read of done within you: you are now exposed to trials,
and walk sometime sadly, and you are tied to this and that ordinance, but we
are past all those things and quite beyond them; and we are come to inform you
of this our perfect condition in which there is nothing that God reckons sin
to us, nor are we in any bondage, but peace and liberty is all our portion. You
are in hell, in darkness, but we in heaven, in light, into which we are come to
draw you: these and such like are the honey combs that drop from their lips, the
flatteries with which they entice and lay in wait to deceive the young and
unstable ones, boasting of their own peace, liberty and high seize of
infallibility, and promises of the like betterness to others that will follow
them, with an undervaluing of others seize and simplicity of faith that
they have in Christ Jesus till they corrupt them from it. And indeed whom would
not such fair speeches catch and carry away? Who would not long to lick at such
honey drops, and kiss the lips that are so delicious? who would not believe
such fair flourishes, when they tell them also they are their experiences?
especially when they that hear are unsettled and impatient to follow their Jesus
through trials, and wait upon him for his glorious happiness: many strong men
have fallen by her says Wisdom, and few or none that turn in to her are able
to get out again, but are so in wrapped in her snares, and find so much
pleasantness in her deceits: have such strong fancies and delusions of joy,
peace, liberty, heaven, happiness here already (God giving them up thereto)
with such a free run to serve the flesh too, that they follow on still as an
ox to the slaughter, and as a fool to the stocks, till a dart strike through
their liver; for though this strange woman's guests are in the depths of hell,
yet they are not sensible of it, they know it not, till Christ by the
brightness of his coming and breath of his mouth shall awake them, and fill
their souls with horror.

This is the way by which they beguile the simple and unstable souls; coloring
over their words with here and there a snatch from the Scriptures (as Satan
also did in his temptations, and confessed Christ for his own ends and
purposes) though in their hearts they slight the Scriptures in general,
picking out here and there a line, which they wrest and pervert to their own
destruction: as they will allege, that there is no new thing under the Sun, to
prove that Christ shall never come otherwise then as he does come daily, and
was never otherwise, (...) child and weak, but as he is at present: they will
tell you that Paul says, henceforth know we Christ no more after the flesh, to
prove that the believing on Christ as he was made flesh, dyed, rose and
ascended, etc. is but a fleshly faith and knowledge of him, and to justify
themselves for their not so believing: they will allege, that Flesh and blood
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, to prove that Christ's body was not taken
up into heaven, that body which he bade his disciples handle, and see that he
had flesh and bone in: and to prove that our bodies shall not rise again and be
made glorious and immortal; as also to the same purpose they allege, that the
body returns again to the dust, and the Spirit to God that gave it: they will
bring that, Christ in you the hope of glory, not as the Apostle preached it, but
to prove that there is no being of Christ without and distinct from men, and
that Christ is nothing else then some spiritual frame within, and many such
like abuses of the Scripture they do make to persuade to the belief of their
assertions such as yet bear some reverence to the authority of Scripture; and
indeed some of them in their Writings and discourses, begin with very taking
considerations, and some true speeches, arguing that they have met with
spiritual light, but have been led away from, or perverted in it through Satan's
subtilty; they will speak against a notional Faith, and against idle
speculations of Christ without power, and urge that Christ must be in men, and
they conformed to Christ, and partake of the holy Unction, etc. and all this
way fair and good; but then with them, or at the close of them they usher in
these perverted strains of slighting Scriptures, Ordinances, Faith in Christ
crucified, etc. yet with such subtilty, that there needs a good measure of
spiritual understanding, and good vigilance to descry them: for by reason of
those preceding Truths they begin withal, many are unaware caught and taken,
yea, they would deceive if possible the very Elect.

Such is the way of the whorish woman, such her Panders, the messengers of
Satan transforming themselves into Minsters of Righteousness, to pervert the
Passengers toward Wisdoms House into their deceptions; but now, what is the
danger of being snared by them, and of falling in to this temptation, is nextly
to be spoken.

Sect. 7. Of the danger that attends men's falling into this Temptation.
THe danger that attends the being taken i^ these snares, or rather the end and
issue (...) such men as are overcome thereby, is altogethe^ inexpressible: but
those expressions of it that the holy Ghost has left us upon Record, are such
a^ may well affright us from once listening thereto^ and fill the hearts and
spirits of with those inutt^rable horror that are guilty thereof. The rewar^ or
Wages of sin in general is death, Romans 6.23. and the ruin of all that know not
God, and tha^ disobey the Gospel, is exceeding horrible, viz. to be punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory
of his power, 2 These. 1.9. to be debarred for ever from the enjoyment of the
presence of God, in which is fullness of joy, and where are rivers of pleasure
for evermore. Psalm. 16,11. and to be shut up in perpetual misery and darkness:
but yet the expressions of their ruin and misery that run into these snares of
Satan are such as evidently assign to them a first portion: the holy Ghost
being very full and frequent in setting forth the nature and consequents of
these kind of sinnings with answerable aggravations of their punishments; for
he tells us that these persons that run into these snares, do not only neglect
a greater salvation then any formerly in the Law propounded, Heb. 6.2,3. but
also they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open
shame, Heb. 6.5,6. He was once crucified for them, and bought them, and that he
willingly condescended to out of his love to them; but now these crucify him
again to themselves, and put him to more grief, as it were by their wicked and
wilful departings from him, and so in the most heinous sort ill requite and
deny him; Nay, they are said to trample him under foot, and count the precious
blood of the Covenant by which they Were sanctified a common thing, and to do
despite to the Spirit of Grace. Heb. 10.2.9. That blood that was the blood of
God, precious blood, not to be reckoned amongst corruptible things, as silver
and gold, Acts 20.28. 1 Pet. 1.18,19 that they account as profane or common
ordinary blood, nothing better then the blood and sufferings of an ordinary
man; and whatever the Spirit speaks therethrough, they despightfully and
reproachfully blaspheam, so great is their sin; and he tells us their
punishment is like to equalize it, for they in so sinning put themselves
besides the benefit of Christ's sacrifice; there remains no longer any sacrifice
for them that can make in their behalf any expiation. Heb. 10.26. thy have
neither Father nor Son to be their protection, or to afford any safety to them,
2 John 9. Whatever they may dream of taking Satan for their glorious God and
King, and his delusions for ligh^ and consolation; and however they may boa^ of
God, yet God they have not; he is no way engaged by any Covenant or Promise now
t^ them, they having trod Christ under foot, an^ wickedly departed from his
blood, and from hi^ Doctrine; they bring upon themselves swift distraction. 2
Pet. 2.1. and the very blackness of darkness is reserved for them for ever.
Jude 12. though now they talk of greater light, and Satan make them as Wandering
Comets, Jude 13. having (...) fixed abiding station in the Son of God, nor
filled with the divine beams of his Light; yet they must go out in darkness,
yea into the blackness of it, the most horrid darkness; the worst and depth of
misery must be their portion: this is the end, and will be the issue of their
delusion; thither tend the steps of this whorish woman, or spirit of error; her
house inclines unto death, and her paths unto the dead. Pro. 2.20. Yea, the
dead are there, and her guests are in the depth of hell. Pre. 9.18. I will not
here run into any curious search o^ discourse about hell what it is, it is
sufficient to know, that it is and will be a state of unspeakable horror,
torment, misery, and confusion, in which men shall partake with the wicked one
and his Angels in the weight, heaviness, and everlastingness of their
destruction; in the depth of which the Spirit of God ^ells us are the guests of
the foolish woman, the spirit of Error opposed to the Spirit of Truth, called
Wisdom. I will not say, nor do I think that all have been ^ibling at these
baits of Satan, and parlying with him in these temptations; nor that all that
have through weakness been overtaken, and catched in some degree of them, are
irrecoverably gone into this condition; no, some such may be pulled, either by
compassion or by fear and dread as brands out of the sire, Jude 22,23. and God
may be merciful unto them because they did it in weakness, and through violence
of temptation: but all that willingly yield up themselves hereunto, and persist
therein till they be one with Satan and his Instruments, are like to partake
with them in the blackness of their portion, and to have their latter end Worse
then their beginning. 2 Pet. 2.20,21.

Sect. 8. Who are in danger to be snared herewith, and by What steps.
THere are diverse sorts of people in more special danger to be snared with
these deceits, and they that are snared are carried to the height of it by
diverse steps worthy our noting. Its good indeed for every one to be cautelous
and not secure; yet there are some in greater danger then others, and that are
more usually taken in it. In general, all such as have not the Word of God
abiding in them, or so rooted and deeply entered with understanding into them,
as to dwell in, and keep them through temptations, as is noted, Matthew 13.19.
such (...) the Word had not root in fall away in a time (...) temptation; for
indeed its the power of Go^ that keeps men, and that keeps us by Faith, a^
Faith is not but of the Word of God; so the letting go the Word, is the
departing fr^ Faith; and the departing from that, is the bei^ loosed from that
saving Power of the Spirit (...) God. Now all they in whose hearts the VVor^
has but a little superficial place, their hearts being stony, so as they give
not through and inti^ credit to it, are soon loosed from it, and so (...) great
danger of falling; and this Peter implie^ 2 Pet. 3.16. when he says, They that
are unlearned and unstable, (unlearned, he means not (...) Arts, Sciences, and
Languages, which suffice no^ to this business, but that are but smatterers, d^
of hearing, not of understanding in the Mysteri^ of God, or in the Word of his
Truth, and who^ hearts are unstable and unsettled, not through^ persuaded, but
halting between two opinion^ easily blown away and removed, these) w^ the
Scriptures to their own destruction, and fi^ away into the error of the wicked,
and so in^ perdition. More particularly,

1. Such as are slothful in the Word of Go^ that cry not for wisdom, that give
not diligent ^ eed to understanding, that follow not after God with
earnestness, but neglect that great ^alvation set before them, and of which
they have ^ad some views and nigh drawings to them; such ^s take not up well
pleasedness in Jesus Christ, that way of Gods appointing, nor have pleasure
(...) the Truth; Knowledge is not sweet unto them, and so not heartily cleaved
to by them, ^or fruitful in them, they receive the Grace of God in vain in that
regard; rest in the form, and in some illuminations and tastes, but give not
^iligence to atrain the power of it; they add ^ot in their Faith, Virtue, force
or efficacy; and (...) that Knowledge, or a further growing up into ^he
Knowledge of Christ and his Truth, and to that Temperance, and sobriety, etc.
but abiding ^arren and unfruitful in that Knowledge and ^rofession of Christ
that they have in a time of ^emptation, they fall off and wither; are lopt off
from the Vine, and men gather them into their ^ocieties, and perverse ways and
doctrines, strong delusions take with them, that they might be damned that had
pleasure in unrighteousness, and not in the Truth, the righteous Truth of God,
that they might be saved.

2. Such as believe not upon the Word, and its faithfulness, but upon their
sensible feelings and visits, whose faith is built upon sense, more then upon
the Authority and Power of Gods Word: thus the Israelites of old, who had man
sensible experiences of Gods goodness, an^ through them believed sometime, fell
aw^ when tempted in the withdrawings of the^ though they see the same mighty
works the others did that abide faithful; the reason of was, because the Word
was not mixed with fai^ in them; they believed when and because they (...) so
great things, but blessed is he that believes (...) sees not, as our Savior
said to Thomas; (...) when they that believed because of their sigh^ came to
want sights, their faith failed, and the^ were easily drawn aside into
rebellion, a co^ trary sense begat contrary thoughts in the^ they being led by
Sense, and not by the Wor^ which abide the same without alteration: on the
otherside, Abraham who believed not according to what was in his sense (for
there all thing went contrary to what he believed for) but a^ cording to what
was spoken, gave glory to Go^ and abid steadfast, knowing that however Go^
dealings altered as to his sense, yet the Word (...) God altered not, and so
his faith being bu^ upon that, abid steadfast, and he obtained (...) honor to
be called the friend of God. And tru^ its to be minded, that diverse who have
turne^ aside from the Faith of Christ, were such as h^ not their faith and joy
springing from what the Word recorded, but from their sense, and setting; yea
sometimes fancies and conceits; when they have seen and felt or fancied
something of of God, then they have believed; but when God ^hath withdrawn
again, then they have been All ^mort, and not having the Word within them to
support them, and lead them to a patient waiting for his counsels, they have
readily ^istened to any doctrine that promises less trials, and more sensible
satisfaction, and so into such as ^ve have spoken of; whence they are called
Sensual, as not having, exercising, and living by Faith, ^ut rejoicing, and
living upon, and impatiently ^oveting after matters of sense.

3. Such also as are high minded, and puffed ^p with conceits of their own
seize. These thinking themselves out of the reach of all danger, presume
to neglect the way of God, to ^eight Ordinances, and Fellowships of the
Bre^hren, praying and watchfulness, and matter not ^o hear any doctrine,
accompany themselves with any people, throwing themselves from the ^inacle of
the Temple, in confidence that the Angels of God shall keep them, and so they
are ^or their tempting God justly punished of God ^y false Angels, hurrying
them into strong de^sions, as was before noted.

4. They that are curious, and unsober in their ^esire of Knowledge, and
trusting to their own ^apacities and abilities, undertake to pry into all
^ecrets, looking into things which they have ^ot seen, rashly puffed up with a
carnal mind; hese soaring up above their bounds, and goi^ tbeyond the
proportion and measure given the^ are often met withal, and mounted up (...)
Satan till they fall into his 3 Tim. 3.6. The word there is (...), which sign^
as well fault as punishment.
fault and comdemnation.

5. Others not unlike the former, through stability have itching ears, and are
desirous novelties, and not abiding in, and cleaving what they have heard and
received of God, (...) to try conclusions, and rather to taste some^ of every
way, then to drink well of any, tho^ what they have met with God and his
Spirit^.

6. Others through leaning upon the wisd^ parts, holiness, professions of men,
having so^ in admiration, and judging them as infallibili^ when they see such
persons holy, humble, ^rent, and well gifted in the eye of man, or (...) make
great boasts of themselves and their att^ments, speaking great swelling words,
to be g^ in such ways, then they leaning upon them (...) with them; being
built more (whatever the pretend of ceasing from man) upon their pro^sions,
holiness, parts, seize, then upon^ Word of God it self held forth to
them, Korah Dathan, and Abiram, being men of nown, famous in the Congregation,
drew them company into Rebellion with them, because likely many admired and
leant upon them; So these, such a one, say they, of such parts, gifts,
abilities, experience, are of this or that mind; sure they cannot be deceived,
but they regard not whether it be according to the Word of God, and held forth
in, and suitable to the Scriptures: but seeing such embrace it, they follow
with them, and will stand and fall with them, though into destruction,
forgetting that the Apostle Paul advises, that though He himself an Apostle,
or Angel from heaven should preach beside the Gospel already delivered, they
should be held as execrable and accursed, Gal. 1.8,9. Alas, though these see
many things in those they lean on, below either Paul or an heavenly Angel, yet
their parts, gifts, profession of experience, etc. is such as they will venture
soul and body upon them. And no marvel, if when the Stars fall that they steer
their course by, they split upon the Shelves of Temptation and Delusion that
are steered by them.

7. Ambitious persons, that desire to be, or to be thought to be above others,
and to attain to the highest steps that any boast of; these reaching out after
greatness, sometimes make more haste then good speed, and so swell beyond the
due bounds of Truth, that they fall into gross error.

8. Some also through Coveteousness, and such like evil affections nourished by
them, easily embrace such things (and God justly leave them thereunto) as may
least cross their getting or keeping worldly principles; and so if they can
meet with a profession that will promise as large or larglier then any, and yet
will ba^ them all attendance in Ordinances, and spar^ them more time for their
earthly employments, and not endanger them to sufferings, be cause they may
suit with any thing; they will not be hardly persuaded thereunto, but presently
strike hands with it what ere it co^ them as to their utmost happiness. These
an^ such like are in danger to be snared; A^ also,

9. All that love to live as they list, and to follow their own ungodly lusts;
such as these are oftentimes with those temptations turned asid^ and taken: but
yet not all at once, they go us^ally gradatim, as it were by steps to the depth
of Satan.

1. At first its but this, that ordinances an^ poor carnal things, and not
only to be live^ above, but without also; and its a state of mo^ pefection to
sit loose to them and disregar^ them.

2. Then from that, the Scriptures are po^ low things, an inky Divinity, a dead
letter full of fallacies and uncertainties, and contradictions, not much to be
heeded, especially according to what they say in the letter; every li^ must
have another meaning then the letter holds forth to us.

3. Then they go yet higher, and say and believe, that the doctrine of Christ's
death and Resurrection, ascension, priesthood and mediation as things done
without us, is but a beginning fit for novices, not to be dwelt in, but to be
left again and forsaken, or to be understood in a quite other sense then as if
we should live by faith in any such person as the Scripture seems to speak of
in such expressions, and then (for indeed if Satan get a man once to question
the Word of God, has God in saying said thus, he will soon bring him to
believe contrary to what is said. Ye shall not surely die) then I say,

4. They come to this, that there is no such person glorified; nor to be
expected to come personally to judge the world as the Scripture literally
speaks of, and that its a poor low thing, if not a piece of Idolatry too, to
worship God in a Mediator.

5. Then they grow with that to deny the Resurrection of the body; and tell us
the Resurrection is already past, all that's to be met with.

6. Then to this, that there never was any such man or person as Jesus Christ,
but that all is an Allegory, and it signifies nothing but light and love, and
such good frames born in men, and there crucified by corruption, and then again
reviving and prevailing.

7. Then they go a step higher (some of them) and know no difference between
good and evil; those actions that they did before, and judged evil according to
the Scripture, are now no sin in them what ever they be: and now they are as
high (they think) as Adam in his first state (if ever there was such a one)
they know neither good nor evil, though they do much evil and no good: and then
they can ascend little higher: but,

8. To think God is all things, and all things God, and then they are high
enough above all Religion, and can step no higher or no lower rather then to
Atheism.

And thus by many steps they go (or tumble rather) down into the chambers of
Death, from whence there is no returning: But this they see not at first, nor
do all that turn from the truth go down alike. Some stay longer in one step,
and some in another; some get to the lowest step more suddenly, some more
leasurely, etc. But all of them are in great danger to go down to ruin.

These and such like, oh ye Saints, are you dangers in this state of
imperfection; to be encountered and set upon with such deceits, as unless your
election be firm, and the Word of God well rooted in you, will vilely shake
you, and p^ you to some grief and trouble to crowd through them. To say nothing
of the hot persecution that these are likely to raise, that the ancient
prophecies may be fulfilled, of slaying the witnesses, even all that will
faithfully bear witness to Christ Jesus, making them as contemptible as dead
carkases, and rejoicing over them, if God shall permit them power and
authority, especially if also they come to that (as is foretold) to work lying
signs and wonders: which will make such a shaking in the Churches of God as
will indeed hasten Christ to his coming, but pervert so many too, and so dead
the hearts of others, that when he comes he shall scarce find faith in the
earth, as himself has foretold us.

Sect. 9. Of other Temptations.
THere are also besides these forementioned, many other temptations that ye
have to encounter with, which I shall not insist upon, least I grow voluminous,
as Temptations to distrust and desperation. To distrust and sadness because of
outward trials, wants and chastisements, which out of a fatherly care God will
exercise you with in this life, some in one way, some in another, that ye might
not settle upon the world and forget your resting place; and that he might
purify and purge you from your corruptions, that ye might be made partakers of
his holiness: concerning which the Holy Ghost instructs us in the Epistle to
the Hebrews, that God speaks to us as to children, saying, My son despise not
the chastisement of the Lord, neither faint thou when thou art corrected of
him, for whom he loves, he corrects, and chasteneth every son that he receives;
so that if any be without chastisement or nurture whereof all are partakers, he
is a bastard and not a son. Heb. 12.6,7, etc. Those corrections then are
fatherly nurturements for our good and salvation, and so to be accepted by us.

But whatever they be as from God: yet Satan having a foolish sensual heart,
or principles in the heart to work upon, will be playing the part of an evil
slave, and suggest hard thoughts into our hearts, as if they proceeded from
Gods hatred of us.

And so from sense of corruption yet remaining in us, he often assaulteth to
cast away the confidence we have in Gods goodness, and persuades us that He
loves us not, or is not faithful, etc. Which thoughts listened to, surely
oppress some in their way, and makes their Spirits utterly faint within them.
Yea, to desperation he often hence endeavors to thrust some, from the
consideration of their sinful failings, and backslidings, the hidings of Gods
face, want of visits from him, want of fruitfulness in themselves, etc. And
might he have his will He would here surely devour and undo many: some he
sets on more violently this way, and some in the other ways, but all in one
way or other must expect temptation; and therefore had need girt up their
loins, prepare themselves for the encounter, and therein quit themselves like
men, that they may overcome, and the crown of righteousness be given them.

And indeed the promises of enjoying the glory of that state to which they are
called in the eternal Kingdom are pronounced by Christ upon such as shall
endure temptation, and overcome (and not be overcome of) them. Now that Saints
may as well stand fast in the day of their oppositions and wilderness walkings,
as be minded of their condition and dangers thereunto belonging, I shall
proceed in the next place to lay down the helps afforded of God for their
overcoming; and oh that God may so overcome all our hearts thoroughly to close
with them, and faithfully to make use of them, and walk in them, that we may be
able to withstand and put to flight the wicked one, working out (though not
working for) finishing (though not by our own strength fetching in) our own
salvation.

CHAP. IIII. Showing the Remedies against Temptations.
Sect. I. That God has provided us Remedies.
THe consideration of your present weaknesses, with the sharp warfare in which
your state stands here in the flesh, if looked upon alone, might breed
discouragement in your hearts, and make you say as sometime the unbelieving
Israelites, though the Land that's given, the state we are called to of grace be
never so good in it self, yet its too difficult to be attained by us: the
Cities are walled up to Heaven, the enemies Giants in power, number and
subtilty, too many for us. Therefore my Brethren I must entreat you to come on
a little further with me, or rather to look back to what I minded you of in the
beginning concerning your estate as in Christ, and therein mind what
encouragements there are prepared and given us, to keep on still our way, not
letting our hands hang down, or our hearts fail us. Its true, the warfare is
sharp, the enemies many, cruel, powerful, subtle, and we in our selves but
as grasshoppers in compare of them; yet Rebel not we against the Lord our God,
who has out of Egypt (the darkness of this world) called us, has led us
through a Sea of wrath and trials, and hitherto conducted us; and given to some
of us of the first fruits of the Land to taste on: look unto Jesus the Author
(or leader in) and finisher of our faith, and then behold there are yet more
with us in this our pilgrimage, then there are aguinst us, the shout of a King
is amongst us, and Greater is he that is in and among us, then He that is in
the world against us. There we have the Lord God for a Sun and shield, and He
will give grace and favor to support, strengthen and guide us, and glory to
reward and crown us, and no good thing, if we walk uprightly before him, will
he withhold from us. Psalm. 84.11. He has said He will stand by us and be
shield and buckler to us: he will watch his vineyard to defend and keep it, by
day and by night. Isa. 27.2,3. Therefore fear we not, only follow after him,
and he will order all well for us, and show us his goodness and salvation. Only
Rebel not we against the Lord, nor willingly withdraw our selves from him, and
he will secure us. Be strong in his might and power which he gives unto us in
Christ, and we shall not need to fear what flesh can do unto us, or what
principallities and powers can do against us. For if God be for us (as he is)
who shall be against us? Romans 8.31. Provoke we not him against us by departing
from him through an unbelieving heart, and then his alone presence with us will
drive out our adversaries before us, and bring us to the possession of our
heavenly inheritance, even of all the blessing to which he has called us: we
have in Christ as well provision for our way, as possession at our journeys
end. It is God that justifies us in him, and owns us as his Saints, who is it
then that shall lay any thing against us? Romans 8.33. Who is he that condemns
us in comparison of him that takes part with us to clear us? what are our own
corruptions within us, and Satan and all the world against us to oppose us, so
long as God is on our side to uphold us? There is no condemnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. and 7.20,21,23. Though Sin dwell in them and
often carry them captive to what they would not, and impede and hinder them in
the good they would, so long as they sow not to that Sin, yield not up
themselves to the flesh to walk after it, but after the Spirit, Christ that
has died, and rose again is at the right hand of God and makes intercession
for them for help and succor, yea, he is mediating the new Testament for them,
that they might not fail of the promised inheritance, Heb. 9.15.

In the strength of God then, and of his Love in Christ Jesus already testified
to us, let us go on in his way, putting his (...), his whole Armor upon us; so
shall we be able to stand against the brunt of these temptations, and get
victory over all that do encounter us. God has not called us to this warfare
at our own charges; he will maintain us; nor sends he us naked against so
potent powers, or leaves us to our weakness to provide our selves weapons to
defend us; His Name shall be Protection to us: In Christ he has therein also
completed us; only put we on what he has prepared for us; and in his
preparation we shall find sure strength and victory, and none shall harm us. It
was a great evil in Ephraim, that being harnassed, they turned their backs in
the day of battle, Psalm. 78. having Gods Promises to them, and Presence with
them for their safety, yet not to cloth themselves with such salvation, not to
go on in so good harness to the portion given them.

O let it not be any of our follies (as it would be so much, the greater in us,
by how much we are the better accomplished) after the same example to be foiled
and baffled out from the promised Rest, which yet remains for us, and by
believing shall be possessed by us.

Sect. 2. Of the Spiritual Armor, Ephesians. 6.
THat we might be induced not to desist, but go on vigorously against our
spiritual enemies I shall briefly propound the consideration of the Armor of
Light and Righteousness that God has made ready for us in Christ, in putting
on, and resisting in which, no evil shall reach us; the Apostle has laid down
the several pieces of it to our hands, with an exhortation to make use of them.
Ephesians. 6.13. Put on therefore the whole armor of God, the girdle of Truth, the
Breast Plate of Righteousness, etc.

1. The girdle of Truth: Let the Truth of God cleave close unto us as girdle
about our loyn^ let not it, or what it brings unto us to gird up the loins of
our minds, and to make our hear^ true, sincere, and upright be neglected by us
Drink we in the love of it, that we may deligh^ in it, and it may strengthen
and preserve us* where the Truth of God is slighted, and no^ prized, men will
easily part with it, and imbra^ error though they perish for it; yea God (a^
has been noted) often punishes the not receiveing in the lone of the Truth so
as to be saved by is with giving them up to strong delusions that they might be
damned, 2 These. 2.10,11. The Hypocrit^ in heart will surely be snared; that
very secre^ evil that makes him not downright for the Truth, will betray him
to Satan and delusio^ when he presents baits suitable to it. Buy the Truth
therefore, and sell it not, Prove. 23.23. wh^ we see once to be truth, that keep
fast, and it will keep us; Let it be in our inward parts and it will preserve
us. The Spirit of truth will insinuate it self into us, and lead us into all
Truth; and Error and Delusion shall have no power over us. He will present that
in the truth (even in Christ truly declared to us) that will tie and bind us
up unto God, and set us free from the power of Satan and his seducements; and
that's freedom indeed: put we away guil and hypocrisy then, that we may the more
earnestly covet after, and drink in the Word of Truth, the sincere milk of the
Word that we may grow therein. The promise of defense is to the
upright-hearted, that inwardly and sincerely love the Truth; yea the Truth it
self shall be their defense: we cannot defend the Truth so much as it will
defend us; His Truth shall be thy Shield and Buckler, Psalm. 91.3. etc.

2. Put on also the Breast Plate of Righteousness, to guard your hearts that
Satan's temptations pierce them not. Let the comfort, consolation and strength
that righteousness affords be in your hearts and consciences; O how cheerful
will that make us! how useful will that be to us in the worst trials and
bickerings, when our consciences guarded with the Breast Plate Faith and Love,
1 These. 5.8. give a good answer to God, and do not reprove us. When the Son of
God made to us of God Righteousness, imboldens us toward God, and stands
between us and all Lawcharges, when the beholding him as dead for our sins, and
risen again for our justification, and mediating the new Covenant for us (as
the truth declares to us) gives us good hope, and makes us triumph over all
accusations that would affright us.

By him we have access to God with confidence, and are preserved that the sight
of our own evils does not overwhelm us, especially while we walk in his Spirit,
and are led by his grace to do the thing that is well pleasing in his sight,
and whereof our hearts shall not reproach us: for if our hearts condemn us not,
then have we boldness; 1 John 3.21. And that inward boldness is an
undauntedness of Spirit, by which we are carried to overlook and rejoice
against all those things by which our adversaries either outward or inward
would discourage us.

A good heart or conscience, made such by Christ's blood washing it, and Christ
himself made of God righteousness unto it, and leading it in paths of
righteousness, is a continual feast, and will bear a man up under all other
infirmities. Let this therefore be put on by us, that it may cloth and fence
us; as also,

3. Shod we our feet with the readiness or preparation of the Gospel of peace,
that so we may not be offended in our walkings; the hardships we meet with may
not make us go on lamely: the scratching thorns of cares and griefs may not
rent and tear us, the Gospel of peace having effected peace within us, and
prepared and fitted us to bear with patience all adversities and trials from
without us.

Let the operations of it in you by which it prepares and fitteth you for God,
and for his way, making you ready for his work and service, and steeling you
with patience, fortitude, and courage against all oppositions and sufferings,
be as shoes to your feet in all your goings: with that Gospel also be ye
prepared and furnished, yea and made steadfast and settled for the spiritual
conflict: count it not an empty thing, but in the firmness and preparedness it
has in it, and that it being minded, effects, let your steps be strengthened
that you slide not, and your ways both in judgment and practice be directed
that you err not: in the knowledge and minding of this, your feet shall be
guided through all assaults and temptations unto peace and quietness. Let the
firmness brought thereby keep you from unsetledness. It is the power of God
unto salvation to every one that believes, Romans 1.16. That believes I say;
for without faith we cannot receive the benefit thereof and therefore,

4. In all (or above all) take to your selves the shield of faith by which ye
shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked one: whether ye
understand this shield for faith it self, or for God in Christ as the shield
that faith uses, they both come to one, for faith is not the faith, except it
believe God and rest in on him as declared in Christ: so that its God in Christ
closed with and rested on, that makes faith as a shield: thence the works of
Christ are often attributed to faith, because Christ does them in and by this
faith, which has God in Christ enclosed in it.

Now this faith is in all things useful, yea in all the other pieces of the
spiritual armor, its that by which they are taken and put on by us; for
neither can truth be as a girdle to us, not our consciences be made good, nor
Christ be as a brestplate thereupon, or the Gospel of peace firm strengthen and
prepare us without faith receive them and thereby close us with God in Christ
Jesus; nor can we put on the helmet of salvation, wield the sword of the
Spirit, or make an acceptable prayer except faith be in us: so that in all
these things we are to put on or exercise faith.

Believe the truth and Gospel of God, and give glory to him, and therein let
the heart stay and rest on him; minding, viewing and considering what a one God
is, yea is become to us i^ Christ: what strength, power, mercy, goodness, and
faithfulness and truth are in him; how he is love and has showed forth his
power and wisdom toward us and for us in acts of love and mercy to us, and all
this in his Christ, his salvation, his anointed, who has born our sin^ for us
and offered up himself a spotless sacrifice unto God, and is become the
propitiation for our sins, the Mediator between God and men, the high priest
over his house, full of mercy and grace, ability and faithfulness for saving to
the utmost those that come to God by him; one that mediates the new Testament
for his called ones that they may receive the promise of the eternal
inheritance; in him it is that God is a shield to us and shines forth his
grace and glory upon us.

Let not Christ and God in Christ then be heedlesly disregarded by you, but
consider him and hold fast to him; believe in God and believe in Jesus Christ:
take to you the shield of faith: Joh. 14.1. What good will a shield do a man if
he throw it on the ground and use it not? but if he take it to him, it will
profit him, it will defend him; therefore take to you the shield of faith; for
thereby ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of temptation that come
from Satan, whether more immediately by his own suggestions, or more mediately
by his messengers: though their words be filled with never so much spiritual
force and fiery burning, ready to overturn men into delusions, hold fast: God
in Christ as revealed and named to us in the truth, by faith cleaved to, will
put them all to flight, and certainly safeguard us. Resist Satan with this, and
stand steadfast here in the use and exercise of faith (as weapons are made for
use in a day of battle and not to lie and rust by us) and though he be never
so diligent, vigilant, malicious, subtle, yet he will be foiled. Resist the
Devil, and he will fly from you.

5. Have upon your head also the helmet of salvation: or as in 1 These. 5.8. for
an helmet the hope of Salvation: that your minds be not corrupted from the
faith, nor you struck down from your resolution of following after Christ;
remember Gods salvation, look to Christ himself the Author and finisher of your
faith, appointed of the Father to be his salvation to the ends of the earth.

He himself is complete armor, girdle, brestplate, shoes, shield, helmet, etc.
Truth, Righteousness, Peace, Salvation; Heart piece and Head-peece too; fit to
guard the mind as well as the conscience. Remember his love, and what therein
he has done for you; what contradictions of sinners, what fights and
temptations, what trials and agonies he passed through before he entered into
his glory, all which he endured for us, that overcoming the world, sin, Death,
Devil and hell, he might give us the victory over them* and we might be
encouraged to lean upon him (remembering that he was raised again the thir^ day
from the dead) 2 Timothy 2.8. for full and glorious deliverance from them.

Let the Salvation wrought by him for us both in his Death and Resurrection,
and in Gods gracious calling us out of Egyptian darkness, delivering us from
our fears and bondage into his light and conduct, be minded by us; so shall our
faith be strengthened and our hearts quickened up to a more lively hope of his
further saving us, both by way of preservation here from the evil of
temptations, and full and final freedom from them hereafter to the full
possession of eternal happiness.

Consider what a great salvation, what an exceeding g glorious reward is
promised to us in Christ as the upshot of our conquest: what joy, what
satisfaction, what conformity to Christ in soul and body: what an infinite
portion and inheritance, when we have finished our course, and fought the good
fight of faith, the righteous Judge will give unto us in the day of his
appearance, to be like him, to see as we are seen, to reign upon the earth, to
be with him on his throne in his glory, joy and felicity: a glory that eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, nor can enter into the heart of man to conceive, yea,
though we have the Spirit of wisdom and Revelation in the first fruits given
us, and so are helped in some measure to apprehend the riches of that glory:
yet it appears not what we shall be, nor can it be fully here comprehended by us.
The lively hope of this if it abide and remain in us will be as an helmet and
defense unto us: it will make us lift up our heads with boldness, and not fear
to pass through sufferings and difficulties: it will preserve us also from the
temptations to worldliness, and to the worshipping of Satan in the Beast, and
from those too that lead to distrust and desperatness. If by any means we
should be corrupted from this hope, and be drawn to think there is no other
life but this present, no greater happiness and perfection, then is here
attained, no other heaven but our present enjoyment, that when this life is
done all is done with us, or all shall be alike to all; the Spirit shall return
to God as every other man's, and the body to the dust there to be consumed, and
from thence never more to be raised, we must needs then stagger and be
dazzeled, yea quite knocked off from our cleaving unto Christ; such are in the
snare of Satan already, and will be overthrown by it.

If the hope of the resurrection and following glory be let go, a man will be
unstable and not regard the work of the Lord, forasmuch as he will judge it in
vain and profitless: yea if the hope of Salvation be neglected and parted with
by us any other way, that we walk not in it, or that it be as a thing
disregarded by us, if we fear that God will not assist and help us in what he
leads us to meet with, nor save us by his power from the evils set before us,
our hands will hang down, and our heads also and our hearts will fail us; and we
shall rather as the Israelites of old, talk of going back again to the world,
or sit us down in a sullen desperate neglect of our selves and of God, then
hold on our resolution to go forward in the call of God, and in the way in
which he would lead us. Hold fast then your hope in God, that good hope begot
in you through the knowledge of his grace, both of preservation here, and full
deliverance in Gods season, and it will be to you a Helmet of salvation.

Sect. 3. Of the Word of God.
BUt to all this it might be demanded: ay but where is that truth to be met
with, with which we are to be girt, and where shall we be instructed into that
righteousness that will afford such comfort to us, and be as a brestplate on
our hearts to keep us? what or where is that Gospel of peace in which such
furniture and firmness is to be had as will prepare us for these spiritual
incounters? what is the rule of our faith, and according to what should our
hope be acted that they may be a shield and Helmet to us? Every man will tell
us, that what he says to us is the truth to be believed by us, and that in
cleaving to it we shall do righteousness: they that slight the doctrines of the
death and Resurrection of Christ as but low and carnal instructions, will also
tell us that they have the everlasting Gospel to Preach to us which indeed will
satisfy us and gi^ us peace, and so will best of all shoo and prepare us for
our walkings: they will say, that's Faith to believe what they tell us; and
some, that Faith is but a low thing, and we must be beyond it: yea, they that
tell us thus, give us hopes of greater things here then you propound to us, to
be here as perfect as ever, and to have our full happiness; how shall we then
discern our way in these matters?

Answ. To this, seeing I speak to Saints, the Answer is not difficult; for they
that are such indeed, do in some measure know the Truth and are born of it, do
know the Righteousness of God and have believed in it, have been begotten by
the Gospel of Peace, and quickened by it, have faith in God and Christ, and the
hope of salvation through it: And the Exhortation is to hold fast, and put on
what they have already known and met with; that Truth that has begun to free
them, that Righteousness of God in which he has justified them, that Gospel
that has begotten them, that Faith there through wrought in them, and that
hope of salvation that is therein set before them; only because they that are
weak in a day of temptation, are oftentimes through the cunning and policy of
Satan to be misled, that they call in question what they have known and met
with; and that's one main work of Satan, to lead to question them, either by
presenting other things as more specious, or the same but corrupted; therefore
its needful that we mind what the Apostle further adds as useful for our
direction herein in that sixth of the Ephesians. viz.

6. Take unto you also the Sword of the Spirit which is the Word of God. To the
Law and to the Testament; that that speaks not according to that word has no
morning light in it, Isai. 8.20. there is no divine Truth in it; That will
discover and drive back all assailants. The Word of God, that's the immortal
seed that the Believer is born of; and this is he still to covet after, that he
may grow by it: This David his in his heart, that he might not sin against God;
and indeed that is the best preservative from sin, and direction in
Righteousness, when its so hidden: This is the Truth, and discovers the true
Righteousness of God, is preached in and declares the Gospel, is the Mother and
Nurse of right Faith, the word of Faith and of Salvation; yea, this is a
Lanthorn to our feet, and a light unto our paths. In this the Spirit works,
and in the belief thereof preserves the soul unto eternal life; yea, this is
Spirit and Life (as its full of divine and living operations) unto Faith.

But what is this Word of God? I Answer; in one sense, Christ himself is the
Word, (...), the Word, or Reason that was in the beginning with God, and by
which all things were made of God, the essential Word, or Word of power and
Wisdom of God, which also was made flesh and dwelt amongst us: And its no doubt
but with this Word the Spirit fights as he does glorify and lift him up; but
that's not done but by the Word in another sense; (...), that's the Word there in
Ephesians. 6. (...), not (...); the Word spoken, the declaration of the Mind and
Truth of God, that which God has uttered by the mouth of Christ, and of All
his holy Prophets and Apostles; this Word as it was originally from, and by the
Spirit, so is that the Sword that he leads his to make use of, and by which he
drives back the subtle and violent adversaries of our souls, and defends us
that believe, and believingly make use of it in the Spirit.

Take to you selves then this Word of God, this Sword of the Spirit; believe
it, mind it, meditate on it, cleave to it, bring all Motions, Doctrines, and
Practices to the Light of it; let it dwell richly in you in all wisdom; it will
teach and admonish you; it will show you the right way, and how to behave your
selves in every condition; it will admonish you of the danger that is in
by-ways, and in temptations: so that it be, I say, hid in your hearts and
dwell there, so as that you know, love, believe, understand and mind it in what
it speaks, as it was in the heart of the Lord Jesus: being so kept it will
keep you, instruct, teach, and guide you aright; for his words do good to the
upright-hearted, Mic. 2.7. that believe, and obey them in sincerity. And indeed
this (as Cha. 3. Sect. 6. was before hinted) is worthy to be minded, that that's
the acceptable and right believing, which purely and singly closes with God
and Christ, not for or according to our sensible experiments and feelings so
much as for and according to the Sovereign authority of God, and his infallible
and most pure sayings, that believes the Word, though it see not any
probability as to Sense or Reason of the things there declared; That Faith
that's built upon Sense (as we have showed) alters and varies often according to
the alterations in sense, as we showed in the Israelites, who so long as some
great work was in their eye, and some satisfaction apprehended in their sense
believed the Word, and sang his Praise: but when those great things were
withdrawn, and danger and death surrounded them, they distrusted, murmured and
rebelled; the Word of God was of no account or force with them, because it was
not the bottom of their faith, nor abode in them; So fares it now also with
many souls that receive the Word as the stony ground does the Seed with joy for
a time, so long as there is no trial, but all seems to go along with, and
demonstrate the thing that is spoken to, and believed by them; but when such
sensible feelings or satisfactions to Reason fail, and trials come, then in a
day of temptation they fall away; they wither in a year of drought, as it were
not having moisture enough from the Word within to cause them to abide in a
patient waiting upon God for his gracious returns to them; the Gospel of Peace
has not prepared them for a long travel or trial, because not heartily and
thoroughly received and cleaved to by them in the love of it, nor well digested
in them; therefore they have no patience, but fall to murmuring, repining, and
inordinate lusting after sensible feelings of comfort: and God deferring them,
they either run back to the world again, resolving to have its consolations
rather then none: or else, if any Doctrine or Spirit under pretense of Gods
come unto them and promise them feedom from such sad conditions and long
waitings, though it be from Satan, and lead them quite from the faith of Jesus
to some strong delusion, they embrace and run after it to their own
destruction; preferring sensible feelings and flashes of joy and comfort, and
raptures, etc. though from false and failing delusions of Satan, withdrawing
them from the Word, before a patient hoping in a dark exercised condition in
the Word for its unspeakable and eternal consolations.

Surely from this sometimes souls are misled, and given over to believe or
rejoice in a lie, as if they were now at prefect freedom, and as fully
possessed of heaven as ever any shall be, had attained the Resurrection already
as much as any shall or can attain to; yea were Godhead with God, and made
parts of his indivisible Essence, Satan mounting them up aloft, and causing
them to speak great swelling words of vanity, and shine as Comets to the
admiration of others; he transforming himself into an Angel of light, and
persuading them it is the true Light that they see and glory in, though in the
issue they go out in darkness, and have the blackness of it reserved for them;
whereas on the other side where the Word of God is in the heart, and the
meditation thereon day and night, and the hope in the Lord Jehovah,
there-through and according thereto it will preserve and perfect that man to
the inheritance, being the power of God unto salvation to every one that
believes, Acts 20.32. a pure, infallible, and sure Word that will not fail or
deceive any. Happy is he that though he see not, or prove little or nothing in
his own sense, yet believes according to what is said in that; that will give
comfort, strength, greenness, growth, fruitfulness, and preserve the soul in
patience to everlasting happiness; and the fruits that spring up in the soul
from that, are very good and acceptable: Thus Abraham believed and saw not, and
his faith grounded on the Word was steadfast; the sensible deadness of his own
body, and decay of natural strength, nor the known and proved barrenness of
Sarahs womb, caused him not to stagger, but the Word wrought effectually in him
to keep him in a patient waiting upon God for the accomplishment of the thing
that was spoken; and accordingly, when he had patiently waited he received the
Promise, Heb 6.15. (the first fruits, or some particulars in it; for he died in
Faith, not having received much of it; Heb. 11.13.) in a better way then Sarahs
hasty counsel of turning in to Hagar could have brought about.

The Word of God, the Gospel of the Kingdom, being received in a good, single,
honest heart, brings forth fruit with patience, persuades the heart to wait
upon God in his way, keeps it from carefulness in a year of drought, when sense
is not satisfied by more flowing feelings of consolation from the pourings out
of Spirit, but as faith comfort in looking to the Word, and yet it leads the
heart to long and thirst after those flowing consolations promised in the Word,
in the way of the Word; the desires after which, and rejoicing in the
enjoyments of which, I would not be mistook as if I dashed against them, or at
all faulted; It were better for me that my right hand should be withered, then
write a word to take the heart off from pressing after them in the way of
believing; but only from the botoming our faith upon the sensible feelings of
them, and not upon the Word, that leads to wait for them in Gods way, and
firms the soul against hast-making, and against the ready listening to other
doctrines promising greater liberty and freedom (or otherwise) then the Word
of God declares to us, or can there be found for our instruction.

Take you therefore heed, beloved, to the Word of God, to believe what he has
said by the mouth of all his holy Apostles and Prophets; meditate ye in his Law
night and day, and try the doctrines, yea and the Spirits too that come unto
you, by their consonancy with those divine sayings, and count accursed what
swerveth, or leads you therefrom, from, or besides the Gospel, Gal. 1.8.9. (I
mean) as declared therein, so shall you be able to quit your selves as men,
defending your selves against, and driving back from you Satan and his
instruments in their Temptations.

Sect. 4. Of the Scriptures.
I Know some will grant all this, and yet undermine all again by this saying;
Ay, but what is this Word of God, and where to be found? Is not Christ the
Word, and what he says in and by his? and so he being in us, speaks to us:
and what we say, he says by us, and its his Word and to be heeded by men. And
thus even those that come to deceive, will put that title upon their own
conceptions and sayings, and so catch and cheat men.

For avoiding which snare, we are to Know further, That as Christ is the Word
(...), so of him properly, and as in his own person merely considered the
Apostle here speaks not, but of that that declares and unfolds him; (...),
which is indeed that that God has spoken by the mouth of his Servants; which
(that none might cheat us) he has ordered, and caused to be also written and
recorded (so much as his wisdom has seen meet and sufficient for our
helpfulness) in the holy Scriptures, which cease not to be his Word because
written down, but becomes of greater usefulness to us, for whose sakes they
were so written; though the letters and syllables as written, are but humane
instruments of making over what was by God spoken; yet those divine verities,
the Oracles of God by, and in those mediums made over and recorded, are in
themselves spiritual, and full of divine operations abstractedly taken from the
visible Characters or outward sound, which are only mediums of conveying them
unto men.

By these then heeded and minded, shall you see what is Truth, viz. that that
agrees with, and is contained in these divine Revelations; as also what is the
righteousness to be put on, and walked in; what the Gospel of Peace, and its
preparation; for that Gospel is there recorded, as in 1 Cor. 15.3. That Christ
died for our sins, and was buried and rose again the third day according to the
Scriptures, and the publishing of repentance and remission of sins in his Name
amongst all Nations, etc. Luke 24.47. that also is the right and lasting faith
that is grounded upon Christ and God in him, according to the Scripture
declaration of him; to that the Promise is made, as in Joh. 7.37,38. He that
believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers
of living waters; as also therein witness is born to the salvation to be hoped
for. By this Word of God so written and recorded, did Jesus Christ himself in
the days of his flesh and of his temptations beat back Satan, saying, It is
written thus and thus; showing us, that while we cleave in faith, and obedience
to that that's written in the Scriptures of Truth, we shall not be overcome of
Satan. Beware ye then of those that impugn the authority of them, and by crafty
juggling insinuations endeavor to draw you to a slight esteem of them, and to
take you off from giving heed to them, and so to God and his Word in them;
Know that they are the Scriptures of Truth, a sure Word, yea, more sure and
safe for you to look to then any dreams, visions, or sights, be they what they
will, that any shall suggest to you; The Apostle Peter preferred them before
his own Vision of the glory of Christ, and his hearing of the lively Voice that
came from God to Christ for others faith in him, 2 Pet. 1.16,19. And our
Savior instructs us that God would have us mind them, and not wander in our
desires after other things to bottom our faith on, as miracles, etc. and tells
us that they that will not believe them, will not believe though one should
arise from the dead, and declare Doctrines to them, Luke 16.31. They are the
inspirations of God into his servants, the Prophets and Apostles, whom for this
cause Christ being ascended gave unto his Church (with Evangelists, Pastors and
Teachers) that we might not be as children tossed to and fro with every wind
of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.11,12,13. but taking heed to their words, the words of
the Prophets, and commandments of the Apostles of our Lord and Savior, 2 Pet.
3.2. we might be preserved from Satan and his Instruments (that shall mock at
the coming of Christ, and other sound doctrines according to godliness) and
that we might grow up in the unity of the Faith and Knowledge of the Son of God
unto a perfect man. Know that the Scriptures came not by the wlll of man, nor
did the Penmen of them write as they pleased, and as their own fancies led
them, but as the holy Ghost inspired and acted them, 2 Pet. 1.20,21. and the
things therein written, were written for our learning, Romans 15.4. that we might
believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and in believing might
through patience, and the comfort of them have hope; yea, and life in his Name,
Joh. 20.31. In them is laid down a form of wholesome words, which we are to take
diligent heed unto, and not to depart therefrom, because they are profitable
(as says the Apostle) to instruct, correct, reprove, etc. yea, to ma^e us wise
unto salvation through faith in Christ, 2 Timothy 3.15,16. both to discern truth
from error, light from darkness, yea when it glisters like light: and to lead
to avoid the darkness, and walk in the light: yea, in a word, they are
sufficient to perfect a man of God to every good work of the ministry or
service required of him.

Let that Word then, and the Gospel there recorded be held fast by you: and the
Doctrine that according thereto ye have heard from the beginning, even the
first principles and foundation, the Death and Resurrection of Christ as
therein declared, that believe and depart not from it, nor from viewing and
beholding the grace and love of God, and all those glorious and mysterious
depths contained therein, nor from the secret voices and speakings thereof to
you in its teaching you, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts ye should
live soberly, righteously and godly: yea, give diligence in Reading, Hearing,
and minding the Scriptures in every truth, exercising faith in Christ; so will
he by his Spirit mind you so of his truths, and put such Scriptum est's, such
sayings of divine Record into your memories and mouths, as shall discover the
subtilest workings of Satan and his instuments, and lead you to avoid them, yea
to oppose and baffle them.

Sect. 5. Some objectiont against the Scriptures Answered.
LEt not vain spirits, who make it their business to deceive, withdraw you from
cleaving to them as the true and faithful record of the Truth of God. I know
their wiles, and what pretenses they come withal to withdraw you from them;
some that they have got from their Father, who made it his way to overthrow us
at the first to withdraw us from the Word of God; See his first coming to Eve,
Genesis 3.1. He does not at the first deny the saying of God, but only puts a
question: Has God indeed said, or has he in saying said, ye shall not eat?
Genesis 3.1,2. Just like a generation now that knowing they shall not lead men
into their errors, unless they be first poisoned in their judgments about the
Scriptures, and withdrawn from credit giving to them, first amuse people, and
try them with this, not in a sober but a captious way.

How do you know that the Scriptures are the Word of God, and that they are
true? what have you more to say for them then the Turk for his Alcoran, the
Papists for their golden Legend, etc?

To whom I could wish people to give them this Answer, that as by faith they
understand that the world was made by the Word of God: so by faith they know
the Scriptures to be of God and of the inspiration of his Spirit, and that they
will hold to and not listen to any vain reasonings to the contrary: but I hope
you have a proof of God speaking in them, you behold there such impressions of
holiness, purity, truth, goodness, Majesty and see such a light in them as
evidences them to be of him: yea and you see their truth both in some
experiences of them in your hearts and by the fulfilling of many prophesies in
them: as they spoke long ago of the calling of the Gentiles when they lay all
in Egyptian and gross darkness, and we see it after so many hundreds of
generations fulfilled: they speak of the ruin of many then famous places which
now answerably are ruined: they foretell of such perverse Spirits and Doctrines
of Devils in which men would deny the Lord that bought them, and mock at
(saying where is the promise of) his coming, and bring in heresies of
destruction, as we may see accomplished even in many of them that make this
questioning; and therefore we need not go far for arguments to enduce us to
believe the truth of the Scriptures which is questioned by them: they suggest
the Differences of some Greek copies of the new Testament, and variety of
readings, which as it cannot be denied, so is it not of any material weight
for what they subtilty use it: those varieties being generally except in two or
three places in things of lesser moment; and such as either reading in the most
Authentic Copies is no whit dangerous or destructive to the faith of Jesus:
yea usually the different readings do sound so much to the same purpose, as
they scarce deserve the name of differences: as that in Mat. 1.22. we read,
This is that that that was said of the Lord by the Prophet saying, etc, Others
add the name of the Prophet, by the Prophet Isaiah saying. So Mat. 2.11. When
they came into the house and saw the child; some, and found the child, so
others. So Chap. 3.9, Bring forth therefore fruit, or fruits meet for
repentance: and verse. 12. He shall gather the wheat into his garner, or his
wheat into the garner: and in verse. 11. He shall baptize with the Holy Ghost
and fire; some omit the word fire; there is no danger in either reading, but
ours is confirmed (and that defect in the other of the word fire is made up) in
Luke 3 16. Where all copies agree that the word fire is added: and yet the
other reading is in a manner repeated and so owned by our Savior in applying
that saying to his Apostles in Acts 1.5. Many of those readings stand but in a
diversity of word to the same sense, and differ no more then God wills and God
wills, or God commands, and God requires; as in Mat. 2.13. some read (...)
others (...), which differ no more then these two English words, kill, and
slay: so in verse. 6. some read Bethlehem of Judah; others Bethlehem in the Land
of Judah: so in Chap. 4.18. (...) as some read; and (...) as others, differ no
more then walking about and going or travailing about: and such are those in
the 19. and 23. verses: some read I will make you fishers of men, others, I
will make you to be fishers of men. He healed them, so we verse, 22. He healed
them all, say others: so in Chap. 5.11. some read for my sake; some for
righteousness sake; either of them right and both come to one and the same
thing: many such like differences I might instance, which do but manifest that
while men have copied out these sacred writings they have sometimes either
through heedlesness or through difficulty of right discerning or reading some
word overslipt or altered some particles or words, sometimes setting down some
other of a like or near signification agreeable to the sense and scope of the
Text: and sometimes perhaps something being noted in the margin by way of
conference of like places in the several Evangelists, some word or saying has
thence been afterward looked upon as pertaining to the Text, and has been by
others inserted thereinto; for so sometimes some word or sentence in some
copies inserted in some History in Matthew, or Mark more then other copies
have, is found in the same History in Luke or John by consent of all copies.

And this is clear that there is nothing of faith about which there are
diversities of readings, but what other places in which all copies agree, will
guide us to discern what is consonant to truth of them, and which of them is
corrupted and does disagree; nor any passage of weight in our received copies
out of which our Bibles are translated, which other places in which all copies
agree, will not confirm; as in that most weighty place about which there are
diverse readings, 1 John 5.7. there are three that bear record in Heaven, etc.
which some copies have not, but most have; the Scripture else where attests it
to be according to truth; for we have the same there in Joh. 1.1.33. clearly
spoken of, and all agreeing (...) into one, as some read it: and again in Mat.
29.19. with diverse other places, which there is no difference or variety of
reading in.

Nay we find the Holy Ghost sometimes varying a word in the Scripture; and
while the same truth is held forth, though with some variety of expression, its
still divine truth and not for that variety in expression to be rejected: as
where Moses said, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and shall serve him: our
Savior repeats it against Satan thus, thou shall worship the Lord thy God and
him only shall thou serve: which being both the sense of that place and the scope
of diverse other Scriptures: it was no untruth to say it was so written: this
objection then is only a frivolous rub put in the way and not to be regarded;
these varieties of readings being found either in matters not essential to the
faith; or if in such, yet then they are either so small that they no way alter
the truth propounded, or are in other places cleared, and the right reading
attested.

I know some object against the translating of them that we have them not in
their proper language, and there is great difference in translations, and one
Minister corrects one place, and another another: etc.

A sorry objection too; for 1. we have them in their Original languages,
though all understand them not there. 2. That languages or words are
signarerum, the expressions of things and not the things themselves expressed,
and that the alteration of the sound, or name of a thing in several languages
alters not the thing so differently named is clear; and that interpretation is
needful in languages not understood to make them understandible is as evident:
and that there are certain Idioms and properties of speech in every language
which are scarce so fully to be expressed in other languages as in their own,
is confessed too by all that understand languages; besides that there is variety
of signification of some words in most (especially the Hebrew and Greek)
languages, which sometimes render sentences somewhat dubious as well in the
Original as to the translators; and sometime one translator takes a word in one
signification, sometimes in another; which are not cases often obvious, but
that the scope of the place and matter evidence what the use of the word there
is, though sometimes it does not so clearly but that there may be diversity of
conceptions about it: yet this being usually in things less essential to the
faith, no divine truth essential to our believing in God and walking aright
with him, is thereby left uncertain; only some instruction or relation of
things for our learning and further helpfulness or consolation (in the things
otherwhere many times more clearly and without all doubt asserted) is not so
fully made out in some translations as in others: which does but show an
usefulness in giving diligence to understand and make out the properties of the
Original languages by men of learning, not at all that we are to slight the
divine truths made out to us by the good hand of God upon those who have done
their endeavors herein by translating them for us: especially seeing we have
almost generally left to us in the margin of some editions the diversity of the
significations in which such dubious places may be taken, that we might
consider them both, and take either of them as God shall present instructions
to us from them: and yet the rather too, seeing the great mysteries of God and
Jesus Christ are in clear and undoubted expressions in all translations amongst
us so unanimously represented, as that nothing but sloth or unbelief or
wickedness can be the hinderance of our attaining to so much of them as may
lead us to and preserve us in the way of salvation.

But yet neither is this all: there is yet another wile of Satan that prevails
much with many, viz. that the Scriptures have another meaning then what the
words import; a spiritual, mystical, or Allegorical sense which is the true
sense: and therefore they are not indeed to be rejected but studied: yet not to
stick to the literal expression, but to find out the spiritual that is the
allegorical sense: and this comes most up to the old Serpent, who did not at
the first say, God never said ye shall not eat, but has God indeed said, or in
saying said ye shall not eat, etc. as if he should say, though them words ye
heard, yet do you think that was the meaning of them? there was some other
thing in that saying then you think of, and not that which the words seem to
import: this is a very specious temptation and takes with many, and the other
forementioned are often made of use to usher in this.

In answering which, this I shall say, that 1. All Scripture in one sense has
a spiritual sense, as by spiritual sense we mean the sense of the Spirit, or
that the Spirit holds forth; but then that is most usually no other but what
the words hold forth and express, as there is one god, one Mediator between God
and man, the man Christ Jesus who gave himself a ransom for all: the sense of
the Spirit in that is as is expressed in the words, and so usually in other
places. 2. Many Scriptures are indeed parabolically and figuratively expressed,
and there the Spirit had a further aim then at what the letter of the parable
speaks: but usually in such places too the holy Ghost discovers himself to
speak by way of parable or similitude; as when its said, the Kingdom of heaven
is like leaven, and like mustard. seed etc. in which kind of expressions the
Letter tells us that the sayings are parabolicall: spiritual things are spoken
of and set forth under earthly similitudes: of which sort also are the
descriptions of God oftentimes under bodily notions, as of hands, feet, wings,
etc. and of Christ under the Metaphorical terms of a door, a vine, a Shepherd,
etc. which say in effect that what those things are in their several relations
to the earthy things they pertain to, that is Christ to his people; and these
also are easy enough to any easy understanding, to be figurative and
parabolicall; yea 3. I deny not but there may often be an allusive use made of
many Scriptures to illustrate other things by, then what they properly and
directly speak to: which is indeed an Allegorical use: as Paul make use of the
History of Abraham's having two sons to represent the several conditions of two
sorts of people that claim acquaintance with God, and that by those two
Doctrines of Law and Gospel, are begot to worship him: and so many things that
befell the people in the wilderness may be alluded to as resemblances and
representations of what does often befall men in their passage from the
darkness of this world and Satan, to the enjoyment of the eternal inheritance:
as Gods leading them with a cloud may instruct us into Gods guiding his people
that follow him in the faith of Christ, and his so protecting them by that
faith, that no spiritual temptation, or outward persecution shall scorch or harm
them: and his leading them by a pillar of fire we may allude to, in setting
forth his giving light and hope unto his people in times of their darkness and
afflictions: so we may allude to the story of Orpahs being persuaded to leave
her mother in law Naomi, Ruth 1. in setting forth the slightly cleaving of
hypocrites unto Christ: and to Ruths steadfast cleaving to her in setting forth
the affection of sincere and honest-hearted believers unto Christ; many such
apt allusions there may be to things done and said in former times and recorded
in the Scriptures; even as Christ sets forth the way and usefulness of his
exaltation by comparing it to the lifting up of the brazen Serpent in the
wilderness; and is set forth as our spiritual passover with allusion to the
typical of the Israelites: but yet in these cases we are to mind, that neither
the Histories that we so allude to are fables, and things composed only to that
very purpose to set forth some such other spiritual things without any reality
or truth in themselves as Historical narrations; for that would be all one as
to say there is no such creature as the sun, nor other use of it but to be a
representation of the Sun of righteousness in the things written and spoken of
it, because he in Scripture is set forth by it; or such a weapon as a shield,
but only something is spoken of under such a name to set forth God and Christ
unto us; which would be evident falsehoods.

Nor much less is that another fable, shadow, or feined figure that is
illustrated and set forth by way of allusion to them: as if the Passover was a
type of a type, a figure of Christ which is nothing according to the History
penned of him, but a pretty devised representation of another thing; sure that
that has a shadow has in it self some substance that is pointed to and
represented in that shadow.

Its one thing to set forth one by another in way of similitude or allusion (in
which also sobriety and understanding are to be used, least we make similitudes
where there is none, or strain similitudes made by the Holy Ghost beyond what
he makes use of them or intends in them) and the taking away the being of
the things to which we allude, and allowing them no other being but by way of
representation as too many that so allude to the Creation of the world in the
new creation, that they evacuate the truth delivered concerning the first
Creation, and strain the similitude fondly, playing in the curiosity and pride
of their wits to the detriment and obscuring of the faith; such wantonness we
are to beware of: but much more I say when not only the shadow but the
substance too is annihilated: for

4. The Scripture in the Doctrine of Christ Jesus and all things needful to be
believed to salvation, does not only use similitudes to represent and set them
forth, but also is plain, full and more evident, so as that in some places or
other the mysteries are declared in the very Scripture sayings; as about the
person and natures of Christ, his incarnation, growing up, teaching, working
miracles, dying, rising, ascending, the end of all this, the obligation that
lies upon us to God thereby with the whole way of salvation, what we are to do
that we may live, and what that life is that we shall have in so doing, so far
as can be made out to our apprehensions by word and Doctrine, or is needful so
to be, to make the expressions about which also to be but shadows of other
things, when as the Scripture tells us they are the things that were
foreshadowed out, is horrible mistake and very dangerous; what Christ spoke in
the dark, he has commanded the Apostles to speak in the light, and to proclaim
more openly to the world the mysteries and secrets that he more hiddenly
propounded to them, which they also did revealing the mystery of God, and not
yet hiding it in parabolical and shadowy words; as is plain by what the Apostle
Peter says. 2 Peter 1.16. We have not followed cunningly devised fables when
we made known to you the power and coming of the Lord Jesus. Now what is that
(...), or fable, but properly a hidden mystical kind of speaking such as the
heathen used in their mysteries and to represent some secret Doctrines; yea
sometimes the servants of God have used such speakings too; as Jotham when he
reproved the men of Shechem for choosing Abimelech King, and Abimelech for his
usurpation and Tyranny, by telling them of the trees going to choose a King.
Judge. 9. in which its evident that he meant not that ever there was such a
thing as trees choosing a King, or that the olive and vine could make such
answers: but in that parabolical and mysterious way of speaking ((...)) wisely
invented and devised he plainly taxed the folly of the people, and Abimelechs
wickedness and ambition; and that was the only truth that he aimed at in his so
speaking to them; so Aesop a subtle deviser of parabolical speakings or
fables, when he would insinuate good counsels, or reprove bad men's folly, he
tells many pretty stories; as that a cock scratching up a dunghill found a
Jewel, and finding it wished rather that he had found a kernel of Barley; in
which he intended not to tell a real story of any Dunghill Cock, but under that
devised ((...) or) Fable, to set forth the folly of vain men, who, if they
light of some precious Truth, or means of understanding, prize it not, but
prefer some small worldly commodities or pleasures before it, as better suiting
their principles and dispositions; and so under a Tale of a Frog and a Mouse
fighting, till the Kite catch them both up and devoured them, he sets forth the
way and issue of civil dissentions, in which while both parties fight against
each other, they both become a prey to some third common and more potent enemy;
And under the Tale of a Dog passing over the water with a piece of meat in his
mouth, catching at the shadow of it, and loosing the substance, he declares how
foolish vain men having some substantial Truth, and catching at some vain
shadow of Truth, as if it were another or a more substantial truth, loose, and
fall from that substantial Truth that before they were possessed of: Such is the
nature of (...), a devised Fable. Now the Apostle Peter tells us that they did
not so declare the coming of Christ, as if what they declared of Christ as born
of a Virgin, the Word made flesh, and as opposed by Herod and other enemies,
working Miracles, dying, rising, and ascending, was but a witty representation
of something done within them; as of Truth born in an honest and innocent
heart, and there opposed by Corruption and Lust, yet after some strength
attained, teaching many good Lessons to the soul, and doing great works in it,
curing its blindness, healing its lameness, inlivening it from its deadness;
sometimes again stifled as it were by corruption and darkness, but yet after a
while getting the upper hand again, and obtaining a more glorious conquest,
ravishing the soul, and carrying it up into heavenly joys and consolations.
Verily if this had been the thing the Apostles meant in speaking of Christ, his
Incarnation, Sufferings, Teachings, etc. and all the History of Christ, but
deviled to set this forth, they have declared as plain and manifest, and yet as
wisely a devised Fable as ever Aesop devised to represent his moral
instructions: But the Apostle tells us lest we should be beguiled and led into
such a fancy, that they did not follow any such thing when they preached
Christ, but told us a true History, and that that was the true Grace into which
they have instructed us, 1 Pet. 5.12.. Its a truth indeed, and that plainly
asserted too in the Scriptures, that while w^ behold the glory of the Lord with
open face, as in a Glass we are transformed into the same image, etc. that
there is a great resemblance between the word of essence, or Word that is God
made flesh in the person of Christ, and the Word or revelation of the grace of
God in Christ united to our hearts by faith; this conforms us unto Christ in
Death and Resurrection: It is opposed by corruption; and growing up, getting
root, or dwelling richly in us, teaches and admonishes us and keeps us safe in
the midst of corruption from being overcome of it; yea, inasmuch as the Spirit
of Christ is in it, it gives the soul understanding, and fills it with life,
power, and salvation; or rather, Christ does all this by it, through his
Spirit's working effectually in it; possibly to corruption at some time may
cloud and dead its operations in some hour of temptation and day of desertion;
and it may break forth again, and shine more gloriously in the soul after such
a condition by the power of the Spirit quickening it in us, and it may then
raise us up in our spirits more gloriously, and lead us up to heavenly
consolations; and all these things may be found attested in the Scriptures; but
yet this is not that coming of Christ in the flesh, the Death, and Resurrection
of him declared in the Gospel; but in some things the fruit of our sinnings
against God, or of his hiding his face by way of trial of our faith, and in
other things the fruit and operation of the Spirit of God sent unto us in
Christ Name, who suffered, and rose for us: We are to distinguish between the
sufferings of the Humanity in the person of Jesus of Nazareth with its
Resurrection, and Glory, his being made Lord and Christ, etc. and the
conformity of the Humanity to him in his members by the working of his divine
Spirit in them through the faith of him; and not make the things affirmed of
the head meet devised things to set forth Truth in the members: nay, deny the
head and make him but a fained type of the members, as they that hold not the
head, Col. 2.19. or ascribe not to the Humanity that suffered, rose, and
ascended, or to Christ as in it, the true nature of a head.

I am the larger in this, because it having a show of wisdom, beguiles many
from the head of all principality and power the Lord Jesus, Col. 2.8.10. and as
was foretold by the Apostle, causes them to turn asideto Fables, or rather to
turn the Gospel into a Fable. This turning all into an Allegory is as notable a
bait as any Satan can fish with; for if a man be once brought to that, that he
thinks the Scriptures hold not forth the mind of the Spirit in, and according
to its expressions, but speak of other things: then it will follow that the
literal expressions will not be much heeded, but some spiritual pretended
mystery looked for to resemble the things spoken of; and then Satan himself
transforming himself into an Angel of light, may pretend to declare or suggest
that true spiritual meaning, and the soul has nothing in the Word left certain
by taking heed to which it may dicover him; the Scriptures being now made to
it, like to the Philosophers first matter, Omnium formarum capax, fit to be
interpreted by any new devise or figment that has a show of wit and subtilty
in it, as the spiritual sense of it; yea, the devil will lead men inevitably by
this to deny the plainest affirmations of God in the Scripture, as he was bold
to tell Eve, that in dying she should not dye: the dying spoke of, was not what
she thought of; it should be but a dying to her present dark state of faith,
and she should be as God, and live a more divine life of Knowledge and sense:
so will he (nay he does) lead men upon this principle to deny Christ the Lord
that bought them, suggesting to them, that though the Scripture speak of one
Jesus born of a woman at Bethlehem, and dying near Jerusalem for our sins, and
that we ought to believe in him; yet the truth is, that is but a Fable, a
shadow, and type of some spiritual thing in us, which is the true Savior
indeed of us. Nay, he upon this ground, teaches men peremptorily to deny that
there was ever such a one as that Jesus, and that he is to be believed in; and
though men believe not in him, yet shall they not be damned, whatever the
Scripture seems to say to the contrary: And so for the Resurrection of the
body, it leads to turn that into an Allegory; and to say, however the Scripture
seems to speak of such a thing, yet it but seems so; for its to be understood
only of a resurrection of the Spirit out of a sad and dark condition into a
state of light and gladness: Nay, the very Being of God and our walking toward
him, the instructions, reproofs, and precepts of Grace must at length be so
looked upon too as but figurative: for I have met with such as have not sticked
rashly to affirm, that no line in Scripture but has its spiritual meaning
distinct from what the letter speaks; which is the way to deny the true God and
his Worship; yea, to make nothing of corporal adultery, fornication, theft,
drunkenness, and whatever evil the letter of Scripture reproves: so that this
will lead a man to be like a wild horse in a fenceless Pasture, to run whither
Satan shall delude his fancy, and stir up his lust to lead him.

Therefore beware my Brethren of this temptation, and of those that shall
entice you to fall thereinto by sleighting the open sense of Scriptures
themselves, and indeavoring to draw you from it too: Take the Apostles
directions; Remember the words of the Prophets and the Commandments of the
Apostles of our Lord and Savior, 2 Pet. 3.2. so look for the Spirits opening
the mind of God, as to hold to the words which he has declared himself in, and
think not that he will declare himself to thee in any such new form, as to
evacuate and make a fable of what he has fore-declared. God raised up, and
gave to his Church Prophets and Apostles (as was noted above) to declare his
mind, and leave his Doctrine so to the Church, as that we might not be tossed
too and fro with every wind of doctrine: But how should their Dispensations of
their Knowledge of Christ as left to us by them, be useful to keep us from
such tossings, if they have given an uncertain found, and left their Writings
like a Weathercock, to be turned this way or that with every wind; if they
have given us h^dden expressions and left them at liberty to be interpreted by
whatever other spirit can declare to us another mystery then what they seem
therein to have delivered?

Dear souls, let us take heed to what is written for our instruction: If the
touchstone given us be made uncertain, what are we better in trying metals? if
the Compass given us to say by fail or be uncertain, how shall we steer aright
by it to our desired Haven? Suffer not we our selves then to be baffled out and
spoiled by Satan and his instruments in this matter; remember it was the
written Word; and in the sense that the words seem to hold forth withour
wresting, straining or allegorizing with which Christ opposed Satan in his
temptations, learn we to do so also if we will go on safely and not be cheated
of the inheritance. As for that objection of some (as of T. C.) that the
Scriptures have come through the hands of Papists, and therefore probably they
may be corrupted; its a very weak one as concerning the Original Languages in
which they were first written; for neither have they only had the keeping of
them, but those of the Prophets and old Testament the Jews have also, and both
them and those of the New Testament the Witnesses against them and their evils
have had in all Ages, as also the Greek Churches not all subject to the Pope
and his Faction; and yet those Copies they have, in nothing of weight, if at
all, differ from the Copies in the Latin Churches: nor is there any
probability, that the Roman Church has corrupted them; not only because they
could not do it, but others of other Churches, yea, so many as were faithful
Witnesses against its errors within it self, must needs detect her falsehood and
cry shame of her, but also because then they would have corrupted them in those
places which reprove and detect her own errors: Verily, if they ever dared to
corrupt them, they were very fools to leave untouched the places that make
against their own errors; yea, and yet more, if they would corrupt them to
speak against their errors, if ever they spoke otherwise more conformably to
them; for there as they keep them (in their original languages) we find
testimony born against all their errors, as against the Lordly dominion assumed
by the Pope, against their adoration of Images, Invocation of Saints and
Angels, Purgatory, Justification by Works, and what not? so that the
preservation of the Scriptures to witness against their corruptions, is a
notable argument of Gods care of them, and that they are not corrupted by them;
for if they had corrupted them, they would undoubtedly have done it in those
things in which they make against them: But no more to that.

Let none of those vain assaults of Satan prevail with you, to let go the Sword
of the Spirit, the Record of God in the Scriptures, with which ye should oppose
him; but the more he endeavors it, the more fast hold it, and the more closely
cleave unto them; mind we that of David, Thy Word is very pure, therefore thy
servant loves it, Psalm. 119.140. and that ver. 126, 127. It is time for thee
Lord to work. for they have made void thy Law; therefore I love thy
Commandments above gold, yea above fine gold; the more men slight the
Scriptures, the more mind we them, and cleave we to them: there can be no
greater folly then for a man to throw away his weapon, because his enemy
desires to have it wrested away, that he might the better harm him.

Sect. 6. A Caveat against their abuses of Scriptures by wresting them beside
their meanings.
I Know its an ordinary objection against heeding the Scriptures, that all
Heretics too will allege Scriptures to maintain their Heresies; which as its
true in it self, so is it rather an i^gagement to mind the Scriptures more
diligently, and stick to them more closely, then therefore to neglect them; it
being certain that no Scripture contains in it any error; but men do err in
their collections from it; and that is certainly an error that contradicts the
sayings of the Scripture. So we find that when Satan himself, the father of
Heresies, set upon Christ with Scripture, It is written, He shall give his
Angels charge, etc. Christ did not thereupon betake him to some other weapons,
and let go the Scripture, but by cleaving to it repelled his temptation from
the abuse of Scripture: indeed here it becomes us to have our senses more
exercised, that we may descry their deceits, and discover their pervertings of
the Scriptures; of which thing also I desire you to be careful, that they may
not seem to beat you with your own weapons; for even they that make no account
of the Scriptures, will catch at here and there a saying, and wrest it against
the truth delivered in Scripture: so I have met with some (to give thee some
instances hereof, and endeavor thy help herein) who against that in 1 Timothy
2.6. that Christ gave himself a ransom for All, have alleged that in Isai.
51.10.11. That the ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Sion with
singing; and thence argued that Christ gave not himself a ransom for All,
because all shall not do so; insinuating a conclusion directly contradictory to
the Apostles Doctrine: now in such cases thou art to hold fast the Divine
Testimony for truth; and though thou art not able to detect the way of their
sophistical arguing, no more then the way of a Serpent upon a rock, Prove. 30 19
yet thou art certainly to hold fast that its a fallacious way of reasoning that
men use in such conclusions drawing, as in which they set Scriptures together
by the ears that are not cross to each other in their plain sayings, as its
evident, there is no more opposition between those two Scriptures before
mentioned, then between these two, God is the Savior of all men, 1 Timothy 4.10.
and that, The Nations of the saved shall walk in the light of the new
Jerusalem, Rev. 21.24. Or that, Happy ^t thou O Israel, a people saved by the
Lord: or then is between these two, All that are in their graves shall come
forth, some to the resurrection of life, and some to the resurrection of
condemnation, Joh. 5.29. and that Luke 20.35. They that are accounted worthy to
obtain the Resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in
marriage, neither can they die any more, but are equal to the Angels, and are
the children of God, etc. And such places are to be cleared to be both true by
distinguishing betwixt the things spoken of in them; for they speak not (ad
idem) or to the same thing, though they use the same kind of word in either of
them: as for example, That phrase, The Redeemed of the Lord in Isai. 51.11. is
not so general as that in 1 Timothy 2 6. nor does it reach to all that at any
time, or in any way are redeemed by him; for he redeemed Israel out of Egypt,
and yet all thence redeemed or ransomed went not to Sion, nor shall have
everlasting joy and gladness; for many of them were unbelievers. The ransomed
of the Lord in Isai. 51. are the stock of Abraham and Sarah. ver. 2. that are
gone into great bondage, and shall be brought out again by the hand of the Lord
awakned and putting forth its strength and power, as in the days of old when
he brought them out of Egypt: it speaks of a redeeming by power and strong
hand, and a setting free from the yoke of oppression that lay upon them from
men; and it may be applied further to those that by the like putting forth of
glorious power and spirit are brought out from under thraldom to corruption and
Satan, and from Antichristian slavery, as in Rev. 14.1.4. That are redeemed
from the earth (freed by the efficacy of the Blood and Spirit of Christ in
their consciences from earthly affections) and from men, (that is from their
tyrannizing over them, or they being tied and bound up to men for something in
them as men, to admire, serve, and take up their faith and worship by the wills
of them;) such shall go to Sion and sing the song of the Lamb too; but that in
1 Timothy 2.6. where its said, Christ gave himself a ransom for all, is spoken of
as a thing done in Christ, and not upon, or in men, a thing to be declared to
men, even to the Declaration of which to all Nations (to the utmost of his
power) Paul was ordained, that in hearing and believing the goodness of God in
Christ so declared to them, they might submit to God and Christ, and receive
that further opening of his Love and Truth to them, in and by which he might
set them free; and in that fore mentioned way of power redeem them: This speaks
of a ransoming by price, and bringing them into such a freedom from the
sentence of condemnation fore-past upon all in Adam. that Christ (that
notwithstanding) may show what favor he sees good to them, afford his bounty,
patience, and Gospel to them as he pleases, to lead them to repentance, and
upon their turning further love them. In like manner others deal with the
precedent verse of 1 Timothy 2. viz. There is one Mediator between God and man,
the man Christ Jesus; for endeavoring to disprove that we are to look to God
by Christ as a Mediator; or that the Man Christ is Mediator of God and men,
they produce and oppose to it, that in Gal. 3.20. That a Mediator is not of
one, but God is one; therefore, say they, Christ is not a Mediator of God, as
is affirmed, 1 Timothy 2.5. and if not of God, then not of God and man, as is
there affirmed also.

But in the same manner, as before, art thou to defend thy self against this
arguing also, viz. hold fast the Divine testimony, though thou know not how
to answer them, and know that they deal fallaciously with thee, though thou
can not perhaps so plainly tell wherein the fallacy lies with which he would
ensnare thee; that they oppose as contradictory those things that are not so,
but very consistent; for whereas. the Apostle in the Galathians says, That a
Mediator is not of one, but God is one; that is, of one mind in both
administrations of Law and Gospel, and needs none to reconcile himself to
himself in his giving of them; That of the same Apostle in Timothy rather
confirms it then denies it; for there is a mediation propounded not of one
alone (as is the force of the Word One in Gal. 3.) but of two distinct parties,
not as yet fully and completely reconciled to each other, God and man, in which
the Man Christ Jesus is affirmed to be employed as Meditor of them; so that
these two are both true in their very express sayings, and neither of them
contradicent to other.

Again, Others to prove that Christ was never otherwise born, crucified, dead,
or raised, then he is now daily in the hearts of men, and as he was ever from
the beginning; as also that there shall be no other Resurrection or coming of
Christ, then is now in, and to men in their spirits, and always has been, they
bring that of Solomon, Eccles. 1.9. That which has been, that also shall be,
and what has been done, that shall be done, and there is not any new thing
under the Sun. And that in Chap. 3. What has been, the same is now, and what
shall be now, has been, and God will require that which is driven away. Their
mistake and abuse of which is easily discerned, if we hold fast to the
testimony of the holy Ghost in other places, which contradict their inferences
from it; and if we also mind the scope of the Preacher, and whereabout he
speaks, viz. that his speech is about the vanity and vexation of spirit, that
is in (and accrues to men from) worldly natural things and actions, things (sub
sole) under the Sun, or under the Government of it; and then his meaning is
plain, that there is a constant tenor in the nature of natural things at all
times; the same species and properties in those species, not the same
individuals, except they will affirm that they themselves have been men and
women, born, nursed up, and lived in the world in times past, even in Solomon's
time, or in the beginning of the world as well as now: and if so, I would they
would call to mind what they saw done then, and help to perfect the History of
the world; but that's evidently false; David and Solomon are not now living
under the Sun, but the same kinds of things there are, men now as then, and sin
and vanity in them now as then, trees and plants, etc. and the same common
affections of creatures now as then; the same weakness, vanity, wickedness, and
vexatiousness now as before; and in that regard there is nothing new, no
alteration of the nature of things under the Sun in their natural actions and
conditions. But this is horribly besides the business of Solomon's discourse, to
say the earth upon which the trees and plants now grow, is as well void and
without form now as it was in the first day of its creation; and yet more, to
say Christ has come no otherwise in the flesh then he did in Solomon's time,
nor suffered otherwise then there he had done; or that there shall be no other
rising from the dead then was then, or visible coming of Christ in Glory and to
Judgment: and indeed these are things super solemn, above the ordering of the
Sun. Beside, neither says he, there shall be no new thing; but he speaks in the
present time in which he lived, there is no new thing. The Prophet Jeremy that
lived after him, says, The Lord will create a new thing in the earth, a woman
shall compass a man, Jer. 31.22. and sure that was in its time a new thing,
that a Virgin conceived and brought forth without knowledge of any man; yea God
has said that He will make all things new; and therefore its evident that
their enlarging of the Scripture beyond its scope and expression is very false
and gross; yea, that they are of the number of those men that Peter speaks of,
The mockers that should say, Where is the promise of his coming? (that is in
effect, He shall never come again) for since the Fathers fell asleep all things
continue in like state. Yea, yet further, we may retort this Scripture upon
themselves as to their denial of the glorious coming of Christ, and his raising
up the dead bodies of men departed, that being rather here affirmed; for if
that that is shall be, and God requires that that is past or driven away, then
that body of theirs that is shall be; and that Christ that was on the earth
shall be again; and though their bodies that are dead, and are, as it were,
driven away, yet God will require them again, and judge them for what is past,
and what men have violently thrust or driven away. But this is a safe Rule for
thee to go by, that no Scripture is rightly interpreted, when its interpreted
point blank contradictory to the sayings of other Scriptures about those things
whereunto they are interpreted. Like to their abuses of these and other places,
is that, that they quote, Col. 2.20. Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ to the
rudiments of the world, why then as living in the world are ye subject to
Ordinances? to show that they are above the Ordinances of God, and need not
regard them; whereas the Apostle after explains himself to speak of the
Ordinances or Documents of the world (for he adds, according to the
Commandments and Documents of men, and that they have a show of wisdom in
wilworship) and not of the Ordinances of God, which who so is not subject to,
is not subject unto God by whom and whose authority they are appointed: yea,
the Apostle himself commends that very people for their Order as well as for
their stedfastness in faith, ver. 5. and exhorts them to admonish one another;
and that in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, and to continue in prayer
and thanksgiving, Chap. 3.16. and 4.2. etc. which are Ordinances of God; and
therefore sure he cannot rightly be understood in the other place, to tax them
for being subject to them; nay, if that was a fault in them, then should they
not be subject to the Apostles teaching and admonition, they being also
Ordinances of Gods appointing, 1 Timothy 2.7. And to give but one instance more,
They in like manner, some of them abuse that saying in Col. 1.28. Christ in you
the hope of glory; the meaning whereof is this, that Christ, as he was made of
a woman, and made under the Law, and as he died, rose, ascended, is glorified,
and appears in the presence of God for us eyed, minded, believed on, and
understood, is that that springs up in the believing soul, hope of future
glory; whereas other men, either have no hope of glory, or have their hope in
other things; the believers hope is in and from Christ, as he has done such
great things for him, and is made of God such a Savior to him; that I say, as
its known, believed, and minded, begets and maintains that hope in him. In
which regard also ( viz. as he is in his Knowledge, Faith, Love, etc.) he is
said to be in him; as also in regard of his Spirit or Divine Virtue and Power
in, and through that knowledge and faith working in him. But this, I say, some
abuse to this end, to persuade men that Christ is no otherwise existent but in
the hearts of men, has no real spiritual glorified body in the heavens, which
is a mere strained and erroneous collection; for if that were so, he should be
rather the fruition of glory in them, then the hope of it only; for the
fruition of glory is in the believers having Christ really and personally
existent with him, 1 These. 4.17. And surely when Christ shall descend from
heaven, and take up the dead Saints, being first raised, to be ever with him,
he shall not descend or come out of his peoples hearts, and leave them in
regard of his nhabitation of them; nor needed Stephen so steadfastly to have
looked up into heaven, to have seen him in his heart, Acts 7.55. nor would
there have been any such glorious appearance of him unto Paul, as caused a
bright shining, visible to the standers by, if he had had no other being or
existence then in the hearts of men, Acts 9.7. and 22.9.

Such inferences then are mere abuses of Scripture, not asserted in, but
contradictory to the Scriptures: by keeping close to which (as was before
noted) thou may descry them to be vain, as Christ holding close to the
Scriptures, detected Satan's abuse of Scripture to him. Beware I say then of
their false Collections, and strained inferences against the stream of the
Scriptures, and contrary to their plain sayings; and their errings from the
faith once delivered to the Saints, as they are by the Scriptures made evident
to be errings therefrom, contend against; but yet this their practice
notwithstanding, or their allegation of Heretics in general abusing and
diversely wresting them, do not thou slight them, but the more to mind them,
they being as the Apostle tells us, sufficient to make the man of God perfect,
even fully able also to detect and reprove such abusive perversions of them;
yea and in, and through faith in Christ, to guide and keep thee, and make thee
useful to others also for salvation.

Sect. 7. Of Prayer.
ANd yet because they are the Sword of the Spirit, a sword that cannot be
weilded by every arm, or to purpose by any but by, and in the hand of the
Spirit, thou will need skill and strength from God rightly to use and weild
them; for though they are the glorious things of God and Christ uttered by the
mouth of his servants the Apostles and Prophets that are contained therein; yet
as they are written, so that writing is but a medium to make over those divine
revelations by; and the writing it self is not the thing that has life in it;
but the things witnessed to, and spoken of in them; which things are not the
object of the natural eye that looks upon the outward writing; nor is the glory
and certainty of those things discernable to the natural understanding, unless
the Understanding be opened; though Truth in true expressions be presented to
it, yet it will not see them in the luster, beauty, certainty, glory,
heavenliness of them; nor will it mind the love, grace, wisdom, and glory of
God therein shining; and so the heart will not be rightly affected to them, nor
able to hold them fast, so as nothing separate or withdraw it from them; nor
can, or shall we so make use of them, as not to be overreached by Satan, or
have them in readiness when we should have most use of them, uness they be put
into us by the finger of God engraven in our hearts, and dwell in us, being
understood, believed, loved, delighted in by us; though the word therein
declared be a spiritual Sword, fit to fight the Lords battle with, yet we have
need of God to teach our hands to war, and our fingers to fight with, and to
make it powerful and effectual against our spiritual enemies, against whom we
draw it. Now the Lord has promised to send his Spirit, to the end to bring his
Words to our remembrance, to teach us, lead us into all truth, help our
infimities, etc. And he is a Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, a Spirit of
Might and Power, and of the fear of the Lord, a spirit of Truth and
Consolation, in whose might and wisdom, and not in our own, if we encounter
Satan and his messengers, we shall overcome them; but as he is in the hand of
the Lord to send forth, yea, is his hand; so has he told us, that he would be
sought to by us, to perform for us the things that he promises us; and so for
this his Spirit to give wisdom and understanding to us. Thence we are to look
to him also in prayer and supplications, with thansgivings for what he gives
us; according to that Phil. 4.6,7. In nothing be careful or thoughtful (as to
say and reason with our selves, how shall we find out truth, how shall we
escape the wiles of Satan?) but in all things or cases make known your requests
unto God by supplications and prayers with thanks givings, and then the peace
of God that passes understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds in safe
custody [(...)] in the knowledge of Christ; as if he should say, if you
thanking him for what he has done for you, call upon him for further grace and
mercy, then shall he give down (or so mind you of) the knowledge of his Son, as
shall safeguard the heart in peace and quietness: and this too agrees with that
in Prove. 2.3. If thou call for wisdom, and liftest up thy voice for
understanding: if thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her as for
hidden treasure, then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God; for the Lord gives wisdom, and from his mouth proceeds
knowledge and understanding; which (ver. 10, 11.) if it enter into the heart
and become pleasant to the soul, will preserve thee from the evil man that
speaks perverse things, and from the woman (or spirit of error) that flatters
with her lips. Seeing this so precious wisdom comes from God, it is but meet
and requisite that we go for it to God, that we desire and pray to him for it,
and that without ceasing our desire and suit, till he do give it to us, yea,
and has brought us by it to the haven of rest, and set us past all further
difficulties, trials, and temptations, in which we cannot but need wisdom to
direct and guide us, which (says the Apostle James also Chap. 1.5.) if any man
want, let him ask it of God, who gives liberally to all, and upbraideth not;
that's far the better course, then to lean to our own understanding, and take
the thoughts and dictates of our own hearts for sure guides, in which Satan
oftentimes may come in and deceive us.

It is true, that God does often prevent us with his goodness, and is found of
them that seek him not; yea, that also is necessary to our seeking him; for if
he did not first give to us a knowledge of our wants, and of his goodness, how
should we call upon him? but its as true, that he having so prevented us, and
freely made known himself to us, he expects this fruit again from us, that we
be thankful to him, and follow on to know him, seeking for further help, and
mercy of him. So he could have given us blessing, spirit, knowledge, etc.
immediately into our selves; but having found us unfaithful in Adam, and to have
played the Prodigals, he has in his wisdom, chosen rather to depositate them in
Jesus Christ, willing us to repair to him, and to God by him for them, to be
given us out according to our needs, which he also has promised we shall
receive, so coming to him: but if we turn our backs upon him, and shall stoutly
and proudly lift up our selves, and say, Tush, we are Lords, we will come no
more at thee, Jer. 2.31. we need not call upon God for any thing, for all
things are ours, and what profit is it if we pray to him, (as wicked men are
noted to say, Job 21.15.) seeing God is engaged to us by his Promise, or we
shall have what is appointed for us? If I say we shall thus reason, however we
may (as others guilty of the like pride before us, Mal. 3.16) be called happy
by others; yet surely God will resist us, and we are in danger to be given up
to Satan, and to our own hearts, till they have brought us to confusion: The
Apostle James plainly tells some, that they received not, because they asked
not, or because they asked amiss, to consume it on their own lusts, James 4.3.
And our Savior has as plainly on the other side, bid us ask that we may
receive, and our joy shall be full, Joh. 15.

Restrain not your prayers therefore my brethren, but pour out your hearts
before the Lord, not listening to vain Philosophy and Speculations about Gods
Will and Way, nor prying into his Essence, and things not seen, so as to
contemn and slight his Counsels, and then think to defend your selves by
saying, our prayers cannot alter his Will and Decrees, we shall neither have
the more for praying, nor the less, if we pray not, for he cannot be wrought
upon by any thing in us; for this is contrary to all piety and godliness. The
Prophet Isaiah has otherwise instructed us, that God has not said to the
house of Jacob, seek my face in vain, Isai. 45.19. Do not thou justify the
counsel of the wicked, but pray with all manner of prayer and supplication in
the Spirit, in every season or opportunity; and watch thereunto in all
perseverance or strength, or fervency, and pray for all Saints, and for me,
etc. as the Apostle exhorts, Ephesians. 6.18,19. Pray with all prayer and
supplication for every favor, and against every evil, acknowledging your
follies, beseeching for forgiveness entreating for help: in all prayer, in
private, and in public, by your selves, and with others, praying in the
Spirit, not with the lips only, but with the heart and spirit also; according
to that, I will pray in the Spirit, and I will pray with understanding also, 1
Cor. 14. Its not saying a prayer that will suffice, or is regarded, but the
heart and spirit exercised in prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, and
that in Gods Spirit too, or in the holy Ghost, as in Jude 20. in his leadings,
power, wisdom, teaching; as he shows you your wants, or the wants of others,
and the goodness of God for supply, fills you with faith confidence, boldness,
earnestness: for prayer (...) indeed essentially an exercise of the heart,
(...) and by the Grace and Spirit of God, breathing after God, and desiring and
craving help or favor of him; and this may be either with vocal words or
without; and yet with words usually, either in the heart only, the heart
speaking to God when no sound is heard, as Hannah did, 1 Samuel 1. or with the
mouth also, as David and Christ, and the Saints of God in their several ages
used most commonly to do. Its true, that God looks at the heart more then at
the words in prayer; but yet he regards those petitions that are poured out in
the Spirit, and in the name of Christ in a single heart that are vocally
expressed; and they are not to be heard or regarded that contemn praying with
words, and make a tush thereof, though in the mean time they pretend that they
pray always, in that they are content with what God does to them, or now and
then wish this or that to be done to themselves or others: I fear such, under
pretense of praying always, pray not at all, or very seldom, and are rather of
those despisers of Ordinances in Mal. 3.14. that say, It is in vain to serve
God, and what profit is it that we have kept his Ordinances? etc. surely Christ
taught his Disciples to utter words, though he told them too, that he would not
have them vain, in thinking to be heard for their much speaking; yea verily,
not only David, Solomon, Moses, Samuel, Daniel, and all the ancient Worthies
uttered words solemnly in prayer unto God, but the Lord Jesus Christ also at
several seasons: surely he needed not to have separated himself into a solitary
place apart to pray, Matthew. 14.23. if to pray had been no other business then
many make of it; or if he had thought it needless to pray. When he was to leave
his Disciples, he prayed with his voice too, and uttered many sweet and
precious words, which are recorded, Joh. 17. And so the Disciples after the
Ascension of Christ, continued together in an upper Chamber in prayer, Acts 1.
And after the Holy Ghost was poured upon them, they were not of this Opinion of
these proud spirits, that think they need pray no more, they have all already:
but they continued in prayer still, and uttered words too therein, Acts 2.42.
and 4.24. and 6.4. We will give our selves, say they, continually to prayer,
etc. So when Peter was in prison they were met to pray, Acts 12. they could not
pass away their time so jovially as some that pretend to know Christ as well or
better, in laughing and sporting, carding and gaming, etc. but they spent their
time (when they met) in prayer, and God heard them too. Yea Peter himself, one
of the prime pillars amongst them, when he wa^ at the house of Simon the Tanner
went up into an upper Chamber to pray; and Paul when b^ was to part with the
Church of Ephesus, kneeled down and prayed with them, Acts 20.36. to which also
sometimes they added Fasting. Surely then they that despise this Ordinance, or
that think they do it sufficiently by now and then perhaps an ejaculation of a
desire, despising to pray together solemnly as occasion is offered, are
scarcely led by the same spirit that led the Apostles and ancient Saints of
God; and they neglect one part of the spiritual armor provided for them, and in
that plat lay themselves open to Satan's temptations: yea sure, they that are
above Ordinances, are also above this spiritual armor, at least in some parts
of it; and when Satan has got them thither, he has advantage enough against
them; for now he finds them naked, and can as he lists captivate and wound
them. To be sure, they pray not with all prayer and supplication: but by the
Prophets verdict of such, they are proud and high-conceited, speaking great
swelling words of vanity; and because they are sensual, they judge of Gods Word
and Ordinances according to sense, counting Gods Ordinances low and foolish
things, and preferring their own wisdom and ways before them, Mal. 3.15. I wish
there be not too great an increase of this proud and sensual generation; and
that it were not too common for people to count such happy, though they have
despised the simplicity of Gods Ways appointed for their salvation. But, ye
beloved, beware of such conceits as such are led with; and keep ye close to
God, in making known your requests daily and (as the Apostle exhorts) in every
season, watching thereunto, that ye may find the leadings of the Spirit and
Grace of God with you therein, and know what to ask of him, and that ye may
hear what answers God will again return to you, not giving over your requests
because ye are not presently supplied, or helped in the things ye ask; but
herein exercise Faith and Patience, and be strong, and persevere till God has
blessed you. Remember Jacob who wrestled with God, weeping, and making
supplications unto him, and prevailed: Remember also that Christ our Lord has
left us many instructions to importunity in prayer, with many encouragements
thereunto, that we might not ((...), Luke 18.1.) be out-evilled, and made to
faint by his seeming delays and denials of us; though he may try us* yet
calling upon him in his way, and according to his Will, he will not deceive us.
Indeed if we regard iniquity in our hearts, if we set up an Idol in his Temple,
and pollute his Name, he will not hear our prayers; he will have us lift up ^
u^e hands, and clean, single, true hearts, and then he will be found of us: Its
true, in many things we sin all, and he is of purer eyes then to behold
iniquity; and we are in our selves too unworthy to have audience by him and too
unable to do any thing fit to be presented to him; but in that he has also
provided encouragement too for us; we have an Advocate, and a high Priest with
him, who has prevented us with his Love, in offering up himself for us an
offering of a sweet smelling savor unto God; and its his work to intercede to
God for us; for us I say in special that come to God by him, to take away our
sins, and perfume our prayers with the odours of his Sacrifice, and so make
them acceptable unto God; yea he mediateth the New Covenant for the called
Ones, that the holy Spirit may be given to them to work their works in them,
and that they may receive the inheritance promised them. Having then such
invitations, faithful promises, and every way great encouragements, let us not
put off this business to some pretended illuminate Elders, but let us go with
boldness, true hearts, and full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled
with the blond of Jesus from an evil conscience, and bodies (or whole
conversations) washed with pure water, (the pure water of his Word, and the
grace held forth to us therein) and call upon God in and by Christ for our
selves, and one another, that he may help and save us. Had we an al sufficiency
in our selves, we should not need to go for help to God; but we are not God,
nor has God put the disposal of himself and fullness into our hand, but
reserves it with himself in Christ, ready to give it forth to us, in submission
and supplication to him for it; so that we have need also as well as
encouragement to call upon him: Pray then for help for your selves, and pray
for one another, and for all the Saints; and in special, that they may be
enabled to stand, and for me also the meanest of all Saints, that I may so
declare and walk on in the Mysteries of the Gospel as I ought; God will not
only hear you for your selves, but for one another; and without his hearing
and helping, the other parts of his spiritual Armor will be too heavy for you;
you will be as unable to buckle them all on, and go forth in them, as David was
to go forth in Saul's armor; but call upon him and he will help you, yea and be
armor of proof to you.

Sect. 8. Of Brotherly Communion.
YEa yet further, my brethren, that we might yet be better enabled to resist
Satan and his temptations, and to go on with patience and cheerfulness in the
race set before us; let us go on together in love and unity, not forsaking the
assembling of our selves as the manner of some (yea of too many) is. God has
called us together unto Christ as to a head, and in him has compacted us
together as a body, giving us a common interest in the privileges of Christ,
and useful gifts, differing according to his goodness, that we might both have
need of, and be useful one to another, each supplying to other, out of that
measure given to it from the Head, in the faithful loving exercise of
themselves, in which God gives forth his blessing; even as the body natural
thrives while the members compacted together do minister to each other
nourishment and spirits, without stop or interruption; but when the blood and
spirits have not free access and recess to the several parts and members, it
decays, grows diseased and ill-affected, and often falls into sickness and
death; so is it here; while the unity of the Spirit is held fast in the bond of
peace, and brotherly love abides, and each in love seeks the love and profit of
other, all grow up together to a perfect man; yea, and all together become as a
City compacted, and at unity within it self, and so more strong and able for
offense and defense, against all that would annoy; but being disunited, either
through Factions and Divisions, or through a willing careless neglect of each
other, and the administrations of the Lord to all by every each one, they
become weak and feeble, and Satan gets great advantage against them to infect
them one by one, and to devour them; for in loose sitting one from another ^or
divisions each member contents it self with that measure given to it self, or
to a few, and deprives it self of that strength, life, nourishment and spirits
that might be administered by many. Now though God be al sufficient to preserve
and strengthen one alone, where he by his Providence necessitates it to be so,
or in a hidden day, such as that of Elias, when the Saints appear not to, or
know not one another; yet where he has given opportunities of communion, and
mutual edification, and that through pride, negligence, envy, or arrogance is
despised and slighted, there souls receive not that measure of his fullness and
sufficiency that otherwise they might; for he that so sleights and despises,
sleights and despises the way that God has appointed and ordained for us to
wait upon him in; and he that despises his Way, despises him that appointed
it; and out of his way, in a man's own way will he will not meet with blessing:
nay, out of Gods way and in their own, seem it never so right to men in their
own eyes, they may, and usually do meet with delusion, it being a just
judgment of God upon the pride and folly of men, that seeing they refuse the
simplicity of his, they should perish in the smoothness of their own, Psalm.
81.10,11,12. 2 These. 2.10,11. The Serpent deceived Eve parling with him alone,
she listening to him, and eating of the Tree before any mention made of advising
with Adam; and being her self deceived, she became an instrument, under
pretense of her experience or knowledge of its goodness, to lead Adam also into
the transgression: and verily the Apostle intimates, that the forsaking the
Assemblies of each other is the leading way to that wilful sinning that
excludes from all further benefit of Christ's Sacrifice and mediation, and lays
open to devouring judgment: And Jude exhorting earnestly to contend for the
faith once delivered to the Saints against ungodly men that deny the only Lord
God, and our Lord Jesus: after many Badges and Characters of them, he gives
this as the last, verse. 19. these are they that separate themselves, sensual,
not having the Spirit: these are withdrawers of themselves from the Gospel and
its Ordinances, and the Assemblies of faithful men, and are sensual, that is,
judge of Gods Ways by sense, and not by faith, the spirit of which they want,
and so give not God the glory of his Wisdom and Truth: they see no form or
beauty in the Gospel, in prayer, in breaking bread, in mutual helping, and
provoking one another; what is in these things, say they? we have used them so,
and so long, and we feel no good in them; like those in Mal. 3.15. What profit
is it that we have observed his Ordinances, and walked mourfully before the
Lord? So stout are their words against the Lord; though they will not see it,
but run from the simplicity of Gods appointments, and so deprive themselves
both of that preservation and growth in the faith, that in patience,
continuance, and holding fast their profession and confidence they should meet
with, and also of that future reward that God gives to those that fear his
Name, whose often speakings to one another he hearkens to, and hears and sets
down in his book of Remembrance; according to that of Solomon, Eccles. 4 9. Two
are better then one, because they have a good reward for their labor; and if
they fall, the one will lift up his fellow; but woe to him that is alone when he
falls; for he has not another to lift him; Such a one is both more easily
overturned and thrown down, and being gone, is the less recoverable. Again, If
two lie together they may have heat; but how can one be warm alone? In
Christian Communion and abiding together in the fellowship of the Gospel, there
is spiritual heat and fervor; one whets up and provokes another to love and
good works, of which the forsakeing of the Assembly depriveth a man: yea, if
one prevail against him, two shall withstand him. One may watch over another in
Christian Communion, yea and a threefold cord is not easily broken: where two
or three are gathered together in the Name of Christ, there he comes in and
twists them faster in his Spirit, so that unless by untwining them they are not
easily broken.

Take we heed then to watch over one another, and frequent Gods Ordinances
together. And indeed God has appointed such Ordinances as will put us upon
mutual walking together, as exhorting one another, joint prayers in the Name of
Christ, breaking of bread, etc. so that we must despise and kick against Gods
Authority if we will not walk in the faith together: yea he has so measured
out his Gifts and Grace amongst his Saints that none might say to other, I have
no need of thee, and that we may not attain to comprehend the depth, length,
height, and breadth, and know the love of God that passes knowledge but in
unity with all Saints, Ephesians. 3.17,18. Despise not Prophesying then, nor
forsake not the assemblies of your selves, but build up your selves in your
most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost, walking in, and provoking one
another to love and good works, firmly believing his Promise of blessing, who
has said, In every place where I record my Name, I will come to thee, and I
will bless thee, Exodus 20.24.: And again, Blessed is he that hears my words,
and watches daily at the posts of my gates; for he that finds me finds
life, etc. Prove. 8.33. And where brethren dwell together in unity, there God
commands his blessing, even life for evermore, Psalm. 133.1.4.

Sect. 9. That the Ordinances of Christ are yet in force; and none ought to
slight or exempt themselves from subjection to them.
BUT forasmuch as here thou art in danger to be incountred with many specious
words tending to withdraw thee from the fellowship of the Gospel, and with
brethren in the Ordinances of Christ; needful it is that something more be
spoken thereabout to warn thee of some dangerous principles that do great
service herein to Satan; for thou may meet with them that will not only
deride at the simplicity and seeming weakness of the Ordinances of Christ (not
considering that it is the usual way of God to make choice and use of the weak
things of the world to be the mediums of glorifying his power, and of
confounding the things that be mighty, that so the power might be known to be
of God, and not of the medium or outward ordinance, and so consequently, that
they that contemn the Ordinances of God for their weakness and sorriness, do
therein despise and condemn the wisdom of God and deprive themselves of the
blessing that he holds forth by and and in them:) But also will tell thee that
they for their parts are got into a higher Form, or to be under a more glorious
dispensation above all Forms or Ordinances, so as that they are of nouse or
profit to them; so that God is throwing them down, or has cast them by; and
its a far happier and higher state to be, and live above them then under them:
so intising thee from attendance to God in them, and to aspire, Eve-like to
that better and higher condition; but therein they play the Serpent with thee,
and therefore beware of them. Indeed there are Ordinances that believers are
not under, viz. the ordinances of man's invention in the worship of God (for
otherwise we are to be subject to the civil Ordinances of man for the Lords
sake, 1 Pet. 2.13.) such as Touch not, taste not, handle not, etc. according to
the traditions and commandments of men, Col. 2.22. as also the Ordinances of
the Law of Moses, and Jewish observations Christ has freed us from; but of
these is not the question; but of the Ordinances of the Lord, even of the Lord
Jesus, such as Preaching, Hearing, Prayer, Baptism, the Supper of the Lord,
etc. Concerning which also that's not to be denied, that they are not the matter
we are to live upon, the meat we are to feed on: The Lord Jesus himself, as he
is the great Witness of the love of God to us, and the Revealer of his mind,
is the true Lord of heaven, and those Ordinances are but as dishes in which
that food is presented, or the way in which we are to seek and look for it: for
men to live upon their acts about, and attendence to them then, is to idolize
them, or lift them into an higher place then God has appointed them, and to
make a Christ of them, neglecting and missing Christ himself, the life and
fullness of them. And such an abuse of them, or of our selves in them, is as far
from pleasing God, as the setting up devices of our own, as is to be seen Iai.
66.3,4. from resting in the form of godliness without, or with denial of the
power of it men are to be taken: and did these men say no more, they were to be
commended therein; but when they take advantage from this truth, under pretense
of taking men off from resting in Forms, to withdraw them from the Ordinances
themselves, as if they are to look after a power without a form therein, they
do foolishly, being deceived, and deceiving; therein they set themselves
against the Lord Jesus, who commanded them; yea exalt themselves above him, and
above God in him: Even as they that throw by the Acts and Ordinances of
Parliament, though never so lawfully convened, and pretend themselves to be
above them, do therein throw by their Authority, and set themselves above it:
and sure they that do so with Christ, do deny the Lord that bought them, and
exalt themselves with the man of Sin, above all that's called God, or that is
worshipped; as if God and Christ had no authority or power to bind them.
Perhaps they will tell thee, that as some persons may not be concerned in some
Acts of Parliament, and so they may be above it, because it does not reach
them; and all Laws or Acts, though of that authority, yet when repealed, men
are not under them, and yet no lifting up men's selves against, or above the
power that made them; so there are some persons who are above those Ordinances
of Christ, because he did not intend them for them, or to be of any binding
force to them; or, that though they have been in force, yet now their date is
expited, he has disannulled them. To the former part of this objection agree
those sayings of some, that they are under a higher administration; time was
when they were under them, and found use of them; but now they are so no
longer; they are useful for Novices: but when Christ has given his Spirit unto
men, and so they have him, they have no more need or use of them. To the former
agrees that conceit, that as the Laws of Moses were in force some time till the
coming of Christ in the flesh, but after that, gave place to him, and God then
changed his administration; so the Ordinances of Christ were in force so long
as Christ was in the flesh; but when the Spirit of Christ was given, or Christ
laid aside his flesh, and came in Spirit, then no more use or need of them. The
latter of which contains notable deceits and falsehoods; for neither did the
Law of Moses cease to be of force when Christ came in the flesh, but was in
force till after his Resurrection, until the pouring out of the Spirit, or his
coming in Spirit, as they call it, though the Ordinances of Christ were
instituted before that time also; nor did Christ put off, or lay away his
flesh, but raised it again, that the word of Prophecy might be fulfilled, that
said, Thou will not suffer thine holy one to see corruption, which the Apostle
Petrr tells us was fulfilled in that That the flesh of Christ saw no
corruption, Acts 2.31. Though he laid aside his weakness and form of a servant,
yet not the substance of his body, which he showed to his Disciples to have
flesh and bones in it after his Resurrection, and in which he ascended, filling
it with the glory of God, as before it had the experience of man's low
condition. Besides, Christ poured out his Spirit upon his Disciples, to that
end that they might teach and subject the Nations to his Institutions; and they
were so far from expiring then, that then was the beginning of their impouring.
Plain it is that our Saviors Commission (in which he injoyns, and authorizes
his Disciples to disciple the Gentiles (or Nations) Baptising them, and
teaching them to observe all things that he had commanded them,) Matthew. 28.19.
did both begin then to take place, when the flesh or body of Christ being
taking up from them, the Spirit was poured out upon them (for till then they
were to (and did) tarry at Jerusalem in expectation of the promise of the
Spirit to fit them for the works of their Commission, Acts 1.4.) and the
Ordinances therein spoken of were ordered to be in force to the worlds end; for
so long as he expressly tells them they should have his assistance, and spiritual
presence in the work of their Commission; And so I am with you (says he) to
the end of the world: And the Supper of the Lord is said to be for showing
forth of the Lords Death till be come, 1 Cor. 11.29. for which coming the
Church prays; and therefore surely is so to pray till ^e come. But here some
have another glorious, but deceitful evasion; for granting that they are of
force till the end of the world, and till the coming of Christ; they reply, To
us he is come, and with us the world is at an end; we are already in possession
of him, raised, judged, and in heaven: And here seems to be the height, and
strength of delusion: and this is that with which they strengthen the former
part of the abovementioned objection, namely, That they are attained to a
heigher administration then to be under them.

To discover their delusion in which, let this first be premised, that these
expressions are capable of a double understanding: the one more inward and
spiritual, and as a first fruits of or earnest of the other: a coming of Christ
in the power of the Spirit to the soul, raising it up in the knowledge of
himself, and God in him, from its spiritual death in sin to a spiritual life,
the life of God, justifying of it, and giving it an escape from condemnation,
taking it out of the state of the world, and deading it in its principles and
affections to the world, and the world to it. And here Christ is to and in the
soul its life and hope of glory, and sets it in heavenly state with himself in
regard of hope, and some experience of the powers of heaven: And this is a
thing that comes now to one soul, now to another as men are brought in to
depend on him. But now there is another sense of those phrases, and that most
usual in Scripture, namely to denote the great Day of the Lord, the coming of
Christ in glory and power, bringing all his Saints with him, executing
vengeance upon all that have done ungodlily, and fully freeing not only the
spirits of the Saints from thraldom in a first fruits, but their bodies also
from death and corruption, which is called the redemption of our bodies, Rom
8.23. When every eye shall see him, etc. Rev. 1.7. When all that are in their
graves shall come forth, some to the resurrection of life, others to the
resurrection of condemnation, etc. Joh. 5.29. When all the Saints together
shall be caught up to meet the Lord in the air, and be for ever with him, 1
These. 4.16,17.

Now as these men deny this his glorious personal coming, turning all, so well
as their wits will serve them and their Father help them, into an Allegory; so
in these two things they grossly err.

1. In thinking that persons to whom Christ has come by his Spirit, and whom
he has raised and quickened up to a lively hope, as in the first sense, are
thereby above Ordinances, and not bound to attend them; for indeed then are
they fittest to use them, and will be most profitable or profited in attending
on God in them. Besides, we find the Apostles and other Primitive Believers of
another way and judgment: when the Spirit was poured upon Cornelins and his
household, that exempted them not from the outward Baptism, Acts 10.48. nor were
the Apostles themselves exempted from solemn prayers and fasting, breaking of
bread, Preaching the Word, etc. even after the holy Ghost was poured upon
them, and Christ by his Spirit dwelt with them, as is plain in Acts 4.24,31.
and 6.4,6. and 13.1,3. and 14.23. yea, Woe to me, says Paul (even after the
holy Ghost was shed abundantly upon him, Tit. 3 6.) if I preach not the Gospel,
1 Cor. 9.16. and the Bread (says he) that we break, is it not the communion of
the body of Christ? and the Cup that we bless, is it not the communion of the
blood of Christ? 1 Cor. 10.16. yea, in 1 Cor. 12.13. We are all baptized (says
he) by (or in) one spirit, into one body, and have been made to drink into one
Spirit: and Chap. 6.11. they were washed, justified, sanctified, in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of God; but what, were they all above
Ordinances therefore, and no matter for observing them? No such matter, but
they are yet ordered about their eating the Lords Supper; yea, and such as
whose election in the sanctification of the Spirit is affirmed, are exhorted by
the Apostles to Prayer, to attend on Prophesying, to stand fast, and hold the
tradition^ (such as the Supper of the Lord is called, 1 Cor. 11.25.) received
from them, either by word or writing, 2 These. 2.13,14,15. Many other like
passages thou may find in the Apostles Writings, which they writ to preserve
the Churches from sin and error, which may discover the falseness of that
conception. Yet,

2. They err much worse in that, confounding the coming of Christ in Spirit to
the spirits (...) men in particular, with the great Day of the Lord, when he
shall come to the destruction of ungodly men, and the utmost salvation of all
that have believed on him; the Kingdom of God in the hearts of men in this Day,
of which Christ spoke to the Pharisees, Luke 17.20,21. (that it comes not with
observation, and that it is in men, yea in the Pharisees, working and tendering
it self to their hearts, though rejected by them; but filling those that
receive it with righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost) with the
glorious Kingdom of Christ, which he ^s gone to receive, and which shall be set
up, or made manifest in the world at his great coming, when he shall judge the
quick and dead, 2 Timothy ^.1. of which he spoke to his Disciples, Luke
17.21,22,23. they apply to themselves as already ^ne in and upon them, those
things that are proper to that great Day of his, destroying the ^eat hope and
expectation of the Saints, which (...) that great and glorious appearing, Tit.
2.13. denying and mocking at that his visible and glorious coming: yea, and
where their principle (...) somewhat thoroughly improved, denying the
Resurrection or Redemption of the body, and ^ying, the Resurrection all that's
to be hoped ^or, or met with, is here accomplished, which we ^all speak more
fully to in the proper place and ^casion. Only now I would have thee mind,
that they are strongly deluded herein, and that they are of those that our
Savior there does warn us of, that say, Lo here, lo there, see here in us, and
to us Christ is come, and the day of the Lord is revealed; with us, or with
such and such persons the Judgment is over, the mystery is fulfilled, the
world is at an end, and we are i^ possession of our glory, though others yet
are not. Believe them not (says our Savior) neither go after them, for that
coming of the So^ of man shall be as visible and evident in a moment as the
lightning that shines from one en^ of the heavens unto the other end thereof;
i^ shall be open and manifest to all, Luke 17.22 23. Every eye shall see him,
even those that have pierced him, and all the families of the eart^ shall wail
over him, Rev. 1.7. As the bringing in and alteration of former dispensations,
or administrations of his Kingdom have been witnessed and evidenced by
notorious Demonstrations o^ Gods Authority and presence, so shall this last al^
teration be more visible and notorious then the rest. When God gave the Law of
Moses, he did i^ in a solemn manner, with the voices of thunderings and
lightnings, the shaking of the earth, etc. by which he owned and confirmed it
as of him and when he took away that administration, and brought in his only
Son, and the Ordinance of the Kingdom in its present external administration,
he owned and attested his altering the former, and bringing this in by the gift
of tongues, and by many wonders and signs, and diverse powerful works, and
distributions of the Holy Ghost, Heb. 2.3. And when the time of the restitution
of all things which God has spoken of by the mouth of his Prophets shall come,
and when he shall send his Son Jesus Christ again, Acts 7.21,22. (whom the
heavens till then must contain) to take an account of all men, how they have
submitted to him in the former administrations of his Truth and Grace amongst
them, and to render to every man according to his works; shall that be hidden
and done now to this man, and then to that, no man sees how, without any
poblike evidence to the world? No, no, that shall be most powerfully, and to
the world with greatest solemnity declared, so as none shall be thereof
ignorant, but all flesh shall see his salvation unto is people together; and
those that have rebelled shall be with wondrous terror delivered over to their
eternal destruction. The heavens shall be on a flame, or the elements melt with
fervent heat, 2 Pet. 3.7,10,12. (even these heavens and elements, and the host
of them that now are,) and the earth shall be burnt up with the works thereon,
even the earth that now is; and that answers to the earth drowned with the
flood in the days of Noah; the graves shall give up their dead, and they that
sleep in Christ in bodily death, shall be, together with such as live to that
day, caught up into the air to meet him, and be ever with him, whom now in this
body they are (though Saints) absent from, 1 These. 4.15,16. with 2 Cor. 5.6.
and one shall not prevent another in possessing that Kingdom, or the Kingdom in
that administration. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are not made perfect without us,
nor shall any then living prevent those that have died in the faith long since,
and received not the promises at their dying, Heb. 11.13,39,40. They are liars
and Antichrists then that tell thee they have those things already, when as
many of the Saints, or such as shall be so, are yet dead in their spirits; yea
dead in sin. Its true, at that great appearing of the Lord, Gifts shall cease,
and Tongues, and Prophesying, nor shall any man need in that Kingdom to say to
one another know the Lord, for all the subjects of it shall then know him, when
we are all come together, in the unity of the faith, and in the acknowledgement
of the Son of God unto a perfect man; but till that time, as we have clay
tabernacles, bodies of flesh for our spirits to inhabit in, so shall we need
outward mediums for our helpfulness, suited to our condition; and Christ being
ascended, has also given gifts unto men, and appointed the ministration of his
holy Apostles and Prophets, with the Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers to teach
his Saints by, for the work of the Ministry, for the perfecting of the Saints,
and edifying of the body of Christ, and to preserve us from being blown away
from Christ by every Wind and blast of Doctrine, even until that time that we
all come together, as is said before, unto a perfect man.

Hold thou these things fast then, and be not shaken in mind by any man's words
or writing, or by spirit, as if that Day of the Lord was always to some or
other come; come in the Apostles time to them, or in this time to these, as it
must be, if there were any morning light in these men's doctrine: Its to be
feared rather, that these are introducing a more notable Apostasy from Christ,
that must precede, or go before that his coming: See I pray thee, 2 These.
2.1,2,3,4, etc.

I might insist upon that saying here, That the worlds at an end in, and with
them; for such like expressions drop from some; but I hope that's so evidently
false to any in their right minds, in that they yet live in the world, eat and
drink, marry, and are given in marriage as other men, yea follow the fashions
of the world too, in trimming up themselves, and seeking the riches, pleasures,
and fullness of the world, so as that Religion rather seems at an end with some
of them, that little credit will be given them therein.

Sect. 10. Of Sobermindedness, and Humility.
TAke heed also my Brethren, of those evils before spoken of, that lay open the
soul to the power of Satan, and especially of spiritual pride, highmindedness
and curiosity: think not of your selves, because of your parts, strength,
wisdom, visits, seize, above that is meet; nor lift up your selves by
those things that are given you. There is an insobriety, and spiritual pride,
that many times men of parts, yea believers are prone to fall into, to
over-wean their own abilities: Did not Peter err that ways, when he was
confident, that though all denied Christ, yet he would not? and we see what
became of that thought; it made him presume to put himself into the temptation
more then the rest; and when he was tried, he proved as weak, or weaker then
the rest. A haughty mind often goes before a fall, Pro. 16.18. Men proud of
their abilities, and puffed up, as if they were some body in their seize,
are nigh to falling; for he that lifts up himself shall be abased, but he
that humbles himself shall be exalted, Luke 14.11. God resists the proud,
and gives grace to the humble, 1 Pet. 5.5. And yet how prone men of parts, or
such as attain to much favor with God, are to be puffed up, we may note in this,
that when God had rapt up Paul into the third heavens, he presently after sent
him a prick in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet him, that he might not
swell, in a fleshly doting upon himself, for the abundance of visions and
revelations given him, 2 Cor. 12.7. Flesh has an inclination in it to swell,
even by occasion of those things that God privileges a man in by his Spirit,
therefore it needs to be sometime taken down: Paul was not without some feeling
of it, and therefore could the better warn others of it, Not to be highminded,
but to fear, Romans 11.20. especially seeing our standing is by faith, and faith
receives all from, and lives upon another, and not upon astock in a man's self:
Its a virtue carrying the soul to lean wholly upon God in Christ, his Wisdom,
Strength, Mercy, Truth, Faithfulness, and not upon its own sufficiency, parts,
seize in it self, etc. Now as he that lives upon God, must needs live
surely; so he that lives upon his own fullness, though he think it is God in
himself he lives upon, must needs live dangerously, because upon an empty
broken Cistern; there are no persons in greater danger to fall into the
temptations of Satan then such; for they that live on high in themselves, are
like the drunkard on the top of a mast; being drunken with a conceit of their
own sufficiency, they reel and stagger too and fro, and fall down into the gulf
of error and wickedness; for by how much the more the heart exalts and prides
it self in its fullness, so much the less it mattereth to lean upon Gods Word,
and mind his Directions; and the less it minds Gods Word, the more empty it
is of the Strength and Wisdom of the Spirit that therein works, and so the
more apt it is to close with delusions, especially with such swelling words of
vanity and deceit as best suit with, and nourish such conceits of self-fulness,
pride and high thoughts of self, putting men upon bold presumptuous adventures,
as if they could fly up into the heavens, and as if they had now no further
need of Churches, or Gods spiritual weapons; no further need of Praying,
Hearing, Scriptures, Conference, any thing; they are ready to dare the devil to
tempt them, and sit loose from Christ, as able to go on alone without his
mediation; but alas, this is their folly; for leaving him, they are soon
over-reacht by Satan, who can easily hold them fast, especially when he has
persuaded them there is no such thing as a Devil, or Satan.

Take heed therefore of this, and of that other branch of insobriety that
usually accompanies it, viz. curiosity in our searchings and inquisitions after
knowledge, an overreaching of our selves to see into secrets, a peeping into
the Ark, a prying into things not seen, being vainly puffed up with a fleshly
mind, Col. 2.18. a thing that has ever proved very dangerous and hurtful to
them that have been addicted thereto: what caught Eve at the first, but a
desire to be as God, knowing good and evil? and what makes men more to turn out
from Christ, then a not being content with his simplicity, but affecting vain
Philosophy, or a desire to know, and by reason to dive into things that are
above our comprehensions? whence else proceed those questions about the secret
purposes, thoughts, and hidden counsels of God, the curious inquisitions into
his Essence, and about heaven, hell, the state of souls departed, and many
other curiosities beyond what the Word declares of them; questions which we
may comprehend under those that the Apostle says tend not to profit, but to
pervert men, and undo them: he that walks humbly, as knowing nothing but
infirmity and evil in himself, and contents himself with things revealed,
receiving such Truths, so as to walk in them, and keep close unto them,
avoiding nice and hidden speculations, he walks surely, and shall be preserved
from falling; when others that climb aloft, tumble down again: Take we
therefore the counsel of the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 5.8. Be sober, be vigilant,
for your adversary the devil goes about like a roaring lion, seeking daily
Whom to devour, Whom resist steadfast in the faith. Keep close to the Faith, and
so to the Word of God, the proper object of man's Faith; but take heed of an
insober prying into things besides it. Be not drunk (as not with pleasures,
cares, fears, sorrows from things below, so neither) with conceits of our
selves, desires of God-likeness beyond what is held forth in the faith; nor
with desires to know things that God has reserved to himself; neither yet be
secure and careless through conceit of thine own strength and standing, nor
rash in closing with every hint, doctrine, or spirit that is presented to thee,
but be sober and vigilant; sober in not out-running Gods Word and Spirit;
vigilant in watching and examining every doctrine and spirit, by comparing it
with the holy Spirit, and his Testimony and Law in his written Word, and the
holy Unction already through the Gospel of Christ received, lest Satan
overreach thee, and finding thee out of the bounds of Gods way, in which he
has engaged his protection, devour thee. Verily in these last times, its sad
to see how men stagger to and fro, and reel up and down, wavering between this
and that opinion like drunken men, their hearts being surfeited, and their
heads made giddy with conceits of their own excellencies and abilities, so that
they think themselves able to swallow up all the most secret knowledge of God
himself into their fancies; but alas, with the Dog in the Fable, while they
catch at shadows, under desire of having all knowledge, in stead of attaining
their desires, they let go and lose all that has substance in it; not
comprehending things, they deny them; not comprehending heaven and hell, the
glory of Christ's Humanity, etc. they grow into Antichristianism and Atheism,
and lose themselves in vanity.

Of these things therefore be thou warned to avoid them, that they snare thee
not, and thou perish in them: Take heed also of slothfulness in seeking after,
and unto God; formality, in contenting thy self with speculations of Truth
without the power of it renewing the heart; and so of presumpcion,
earthly-mindedness, and the rest of the evils hinted at before, that lay men
open to temptations; cleave thou close to God, and to the Word and Spirit of
Grace, and fight the good fight of Faith, quitting thy self with courage in all
encounters, and thou shall prove it a good fight indeed, both for that its
lawful, honest, and warranted by God, and also for that thou shall therein
find help from God to enable thee to it, and carry thee through it: yea, and
lastly, thou shall in striving lawfully, be crowned; after thou have overcome,
thou shall receive a large reward, even a Crown of Righteousness; concerning
which promised reward, and Gods faithfulness to give it in his season, I shall
nextly hint something to thee for thy further encouragement.

Chap. 5. Of the Reward of the Saints overcoming.
Sect. 1. That there is a Reward promised
AS the faith of the Saints leans upon the Word of God in general, and so upon
God himself, as the original of that Word, and the things declared therein; so
their hope leans on, and has for its object the promises of God, which hold
forth the marrow and fatness of the feast of good things made in Christ; and
the consideration of them is very requisite for their patient encountering with
temptations, and enduring to the issue, they being partly the things fought
for, and partly helps in fighting; for they are of two sorts, things to be
given to, and enjoyed by us in the combat; and things to be met with in the
issue of it; according to that, Fear not Abraham, I will be thy shield (to
protect and defend thee in the way) and thy exceeding great Reward, Genesis 15.1.
(when thou have overcome.)

Under the first head are comprehended the promises of this life in the outward
man; and for the life of the Spirit in the inner man, the promises of provision
and maintenance; such as this, Fear the Lord ye Saints, or holy ones, for they
that fear the Lord shall want no good thing, Psalm. 34.9. And that, Seek the
Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all other things shall be added to
you, Mat. 6.33. Whence that, Let your conversation be without covetousness,
Heb. 13,5,6. (Be not reaching in your desires after the world, either in
provision for sustenance or safety, as if you were left to shift for your
selves therein; or as if your happiness consisted partly in having much
thereof, or as if God would not provide for necessaries or conveniences herein
for your warfare here) but be content with such things as ye have; for he has
said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. So that we may be bold and say,
the Lord is on my side, I will not fear what flesh can do unto me, Heb. 13.5,6.
And for protection from enemies, so as that they shall not harm or devour us;
such as that, All the hairs of your head are numbered, and the Lord will save
them from the wicked; and he will help them, because they trust in him, Matthew.
10. Psalm. 37.41. the promises for their helpfulness in Spirit are such as
these; That he will sanctify and cleanse them, 1 These. 5.23,24. Write his
Laws, and put his fear in them, Ezekiel. 36.25,26, Fer. 31.32. etc. that he will
send the Spirit of Truth, and put it into them as a Comforter, and to lead them
into all truth, Heb. 8.9,10,11. That he will pardon their sins, accept them,
watch over them, gather them in his arms, lead, and feed them, etc. Isai.
27.2,3. and 40.11,12.

Of the other sort are the full and final deliverances of them from all
adversity, temptation, opposition, and evil; giving them full, firm, and free
peace, and the possessing them of all the fullness of his glory in Jesus Christ,
the full and open knowledge of God in everlasting life, to see as they are
seen, and be like to Jesus Christ in the enjoyment of fellowship with God, and
the consolations and satisfactions of God, etc. Concerning which, consider a
little, first, who are the proper heirs of them, to whom they are made; and
secondly, what the time of their fulfilling.

Sect. 2. Of the Heirs or Object to whom the Promises are made.
THe heirs of the Promises of God, (even as the subjects of the Election to the
enjoyment of them) is primarily Christ; and then secondarily, in and through
him Saints by calling, or Believers in him. That Christ is firstly the Heir of
the Promise, is clear from Gal. 3.16,17. The Promise was to Abraham and his
seed (to Abraham by virtue of his seed) he says not unto seeds as of many, but
as of one, and to thy seed, which is Christ: And again, the Promise was
fore-confirmed of God unto Christ. He is the heir of all things, and
principally of the Promises of God, especially those of eternal Life; as he is
the Elect of God, chosen to be his holy One without blame before him for ever,
and the Son of his Love, the receptacle of the fullness of his Blessing.
Secondly, As any are of God called, and by the grace discovered and working in
the Call brought unto, and into Christ; so they become to be heirs in and with
Christ, reckoned after Christ, as in Gal. 3.27,28,29. So many as have been
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ; and if ye be Christ's, then are ye
Abraham's seed, and ^irs according to Promise. Abraham's seed, not another, but
one seed still, as in unity with Christ; for ye (says he) are all one in
Christ Jesus, there is neither male nor female, bond nor free, etc. The sons of
the flesh, either of Adam or of Abraham, are not as such the sons of God, nor
inheritors of the Promises; but they that are born of the Spirit, and are in
Christ Jesus: they, and they only (not the Law neither, and its seed) are the
chosen of God to this great dignity, to be heirs of his Promises. Whence also
it follows that men come to partake of, and to enjoy the Promises by Faith in
Jesus Christ; In him all the Promises of God are yea and amen, to the praise
and glory of God, 2 Cor. 1.20. A man abiding and continuing in him and his
Word, shall meet with supply and provision here, so far as God sees good and
needful for this life; support also, and spirit from God to enable him to the
encounter, and to give him the victory, and shall inherit eternal glory. On the
contrary, If any draw back, his soul shall have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10.38.
He deprives himself thereby of his own mercy: if any man throw down his weapons
and yield to Satan, neglecting himself of, or renouncing the Son of God to whom
he was called, and through whose blood he was sanctified, he puts himself out
of the way of the Promises: they are not to any Yea and Amen out of Christ, but
in him; nor to nay simply as men, but as men in Christ, or as believing men. In
which believing we meet with the power of God to salvation, 1 Pet 1.5. and not
beside it.

The consideration of which, is but a motive to draw us to eye Christ, and to
fight the good fight of Faith, while we look upon it as the condition to which
the Promises appertain, and as men are therein the heirs of them; and also a
terror to drive, or curb rather, and bridle to keep in aw from listening to
Flesh and Satan to depart from Christ, and from the Faith, seeing that is the
way to deprive our selves of his Promises: no room for diffidence here in this
way of eying Christ, nor yet for carelessness and presumption, as if no need to
eye him. The promise of the Spirit runs thus, If ye love me, keep my
Commandments, and I will pray the Father, and he shall send you another
Comforter, even the Spirit of Truth, etc.

Sect. 3. Of the time of the full fulfilling of the Promises.
THe time of the performance of the Promises is various: Some, as we have
noted, are performed, and to be met with here in our warfare, viz. those of
Provision and Protection, etc. but other promises are reserved till the victory
be completed, till we have fought our fight, and finished our course; and even
then also it may be, and is as yet reserved, or laid up for a further day.
Henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Righteous
Judge shall give me at that day, 2 Timothy 4.8. That great Day, the Day of his
appearance with all his holy Ones, that's the day of the full reward. In the
mean time it is true, and we may find it so, that upon particular combats, and
victories, there may be, and sometimes are particular rewards, visitations,
confirmations, inlargements of the Spirit to men, upon abiding, and holding
fast the Faith in particular exercises; but these are but a first fruits and
earnest of the inheritance in comparison of the whole reward that is promised
to be enjoyed after all incounters are over and past. Now beware that ye
confound not these days of the Lords spiritual appearance in some particular
visit to the soul, with the time of his full, personal and glorious appearance,
when every eye shall see him, and all the kindreds of the earth shall wail
because of him; when he shall descend from heaven with the sound of a Trump,
and the Archangel of God, and the dead in Christ shall be raised, 1 These. 4.16.
as some unwarily do, running themselves into much error, taking the first
fruits for the full income, and cuting off the hope of the Harvest, that should
carry them on, and keep them from by-turning, to the troubling of the brethren
also, and subversion of many of them, 2 Timothy 2.15,16,17. Neither entertain ye
such a conceit as some have vented, That there shall be no personal appearance
of Christ any more, but only a spiritual manifestation of himself in his
people; for that also is a doctrine and opinion cross at least (if not
destructive) to the Faith. The Angels told the Disciples when they saw him
taken up, that as they see him taken up from them, so they should see him even
so coming again, Acts 1.10,11. But they saw him going up personally, as the
Scripture makes it evident; for as a distinct person from them, and not as by
spirit in them was he then conversing with them, and instructing them; and as
he was so doing, he was taken up out of their sight into heaven, and they stood
gazing up after him, Luke 24.51. Acts 1.9. which things are not applicable to
Christ within them. Again, its said, He shall come (not in, but) with his
Saints, Jude 14. accompanied with them, and they shall be all caught up to meet
him together in the air, 1 These 4.16,17. But in the spiritual coming of Christ
in the Saints, there is no such being caught up into the air there to meet him:
besides, that thought denies and destroys the Humanity of Christ and all its
unspeakable glory upon its ^nexpressible sufferings; for it springs from such
a conceit that there is no spiritual glorified body of Christ for him to come
in, but only the mystical, his people; and it leads to the denial of all
that glory that the Saints shall have in their bodies by, and after the
resurrection of them; yea then we destroy the faith, which witnesses that even
that that is gone up to heaven from the earth, and is no longer in the world
with his Disciples, but is contained in heaven, shall at the time of the
Restitution of all things descend from thence and come again, even Christ in
that his sometime dead, but now raised and glorified body, to judge the world
in righteousness, and that then they that have here suffered, and been put to
death for righteousness sake, and for their testimony to Christ, shall be
raised up again out of all their death, and be by his glorious and divine power
presented alive, set free from all their mortality and corruption that now
cleaves to them, and receive the great and full reward of all that patient
waiting upon God, and warring against the Beast, the World, Satan, and Sin,
which until then is laid up and reserved in heaven for them, Acts 3.13,14,21.
Then shall it be that they shall have no more pain, sorrow, crying, or death,
but shall be completely like him, even to Christ whom they have honored, and
whom then they shall see as he is, and not only have glory, but appear in
glory to all with him, but not till then, as some wrongfully understand or
apply the things so spoken; Thence need of Patience and Faith throughout all
the days of warfare, and therein to follow the steps of the Fathers who all
died in Faith, not having received the Promises: for indeed God has so ordered
for the full performance, harvest, and full possession of these great Promises,
that one Saint of Christ shall not prevent another. Abraham and Isaac shall not
be perfect without us, nor we without them; the then living shall not prevent
or be before them that long since are fallen asleep, and as to their bodies are
dead, Heb. 11.40. 1 These. 4.15. Therefore also they are grossly erroneous, and
to be avoided as destroyers of the faith, who say that the Resurrection is now
made, or is already past, and the day of the Lord, even of that his descent
from, and coming in the clouds of heaven so much spoken of in the Scriptures is
already come to them, 2 Timothy 2.17. and they are in glory, and have already as
much fullness of it, as is ever to be had by any. These are the mockers
fore-spoken of, that contradict the tenor of the Apostles Doctrine; These are
of them that say they are Apostles, but are not, but are found to be liars,
Revel. 2.2.

And therefore thou, who ever thou art that art called to, and believ^st in
Christ, fly thou from them, and gird up the loins of thy mind to wait with
long-suffering and patience for the great Harvest, the salvation to be revealed
at the great appearance of the Lord Jesus, and the resurrection of the just;
knowing that those that deny these things, are of the same strain with the
ancient Heretics long since condemned by the Apostles, and given over by them
to Satan for blaspheming; but mind thou the faithful and true sayings of God,
and wait for them, offering up thy very body also a sacrifice to God, holy and
acceptable by Jesus Christ to do and suffer his Will, knowing that thy labor
shall not be vain in the Lord; thou shall receive it in a far better state then
thou layst it down in for him; and therein also the reward of all those things
here wrought and suffered for his Name.

Sect. 4. Of the Resurrection.
BUt because it has been the old trick of Satan, and a masterpiece of his
subtilties, to stagger and subvert men as much as he is able about the
Resurrection: And because it is so fundamental a point, and so properly
Christian, that the denial thereof overthrows the whole Christian Faith and
Rel^ion, and makes it worth nothing; therefore I shall yet add something
further for thy help against the cunning sleights of those instruments of the
wicked One, which are now as busy as ever to pervert thee herein. That the
dead shall rise, the Scriptures are so full and plain, and particularly the
confutation of the Sadduces by our Savior himself; and the Apostle Paul's
discourse about it to the Corinthians, that there seems to be no possibility of
denying it by any that pretend credit to the Scriptures; and yet some such do
it by eluding and perverting those Scriptures to other senses, or other
Scriptures that they conceive make against it, as others do it upon grounds of
Reason, as they conceive, against the Scripture. I shall say something to
either of them. The Scriptures they pervert are such as that of Solomon, The
body goes to the dust, and the spirit to God that gave it, Eccles. 12.7. which
is nothing it all so much as in appearance or show against the Resurrection of
the body; all those that plead for, and believe the Resurrection of the body,
manimously affirming that the body must go to the dust, the spirit or breath be
gathered up again to God, which is all that the Text says; but we believe too
that they that sleep in the dust of the earth, even the dead bodies shall arise
again out of the dust, and both bodies and spirits united, be presented before
the Judgment Seat of Christ, to receive the things done in the body, whether
good or evil, Joh. 5.29. Isai. 26.19. 2 Cor. 5.10. which that Scripture has no
show of a denial of; nor that, that one thing befalls a man and a beast, as
the one dies so dies the other, etc. Eccless. 3.19. for besides, that Solomon
there does but tell us what he said in his heart, not what God said to him: we
deny not, that as to the bodily death, men and beasts are both subject thereto;
but we say that they are not alike as to Resurrection; nor does Solomon either
speak of, or deny the Resurrection in that saying, he only speaking of what
befalls men in the flesh here, not of what their state shall be for ever
hereafter. That which they most insist on, is that in 1 Cor. 15.50 That flesh
and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven, neither does corruption inherit
incorruption, which they endeavor to wrest and abuse, to the denial and
overthrowing the whole business of his discourse in that Chapter, professedly
to prove the Resurrection of the body; not considering that

1. The Apostle says not thus, Neither flesh nor blood shall inherit the
Kingdom of God, but flesh and blood copulatively together: now flesh and blood
is used in Scripture to signify a natural man in his corruptible unrenewed
estate; and sometimes a body subjected to weakness and infirmity. Heb. 2.14.
whose natural life is in the blood, and so nourished by a constant supply of
blood from food received from without; and indeed men shall not be such in the
Resurrection, to have their life in their blood as now, and so corruptible and
weak. But this we expressly find, that the Body of Christ after the
Resurrection by his own affirmation was flesh and bones, though spiritualized,
Luke 24.39. his blood was before shed for remission of our sins as the blood of
expiation; and surely to a raised body, and immortalized blood, is no more
essential then our hairs are of the essence of a body mortal. I would say
rather that as the corruptible body in this state of corruption may be and
subsist without hair, or the like excrements; so is it very conceivable that a
spiritualized body shall subsist without blood; its life not being then
therein, nor to be maintained by a continual supply and course thereof, but
immediately by the divine Spirit and Power of God: Therefore its a very
inconsequent Argument, to say, because flesh and blood shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God, therefore the body of Christ had no flesh in it upon its
Resurrection, directly contrary to his own assertion, Luke 24.39. or that his
body in which was flesh and bones, was not assumed up into heaven; or that men's
bodies which now are flesh and blood, shall not be raised, and in their raised
state be glorified: or thus; A natural body, while such, shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God; therefore this natural body shall not be raised, and in its
rising made spiritual, and so be a subject of his Kingdom: That speech then
does but point to the condition of the body when raised, that it shall not be
such as now it is, a body of infirmity, flesh and blood; but it denies not that
the body shall rise; even as the foregoing similitude of the grain of Corn,
does demonstrate that he meant; for there he says, Thou sowest not that body
that shall be; and yet we know its the same in another form; or rather that
that springs up; namely, the blade, and ear, and corn in it springs from that
very body or bare grain that was sown; or that bare grain that is sown, by
dying, revives again in another and better form; so also is the Resurrection;
the same dead body that was sown rises, yet not the same in regard of its form
and manner of being; Its sown in corruption, its raised in incorruption; the
same it that was sown rises again though in a better manner, more glorious,
powerful, spiritual, then when it was sown.

2. The Apostle plainly expounds himself, ver. 51, 52, 53. when he says, we
shall not all sleep, (that is, rest, or lie in death) but we shall be all
changed; Now there is a great difference between a being changed in our bodies,
and having them annihilated, or for ever lost; for that the change shall be in
the body, is plain in Phil. 3.31. He shall change our vile body, and make it
like to his own most glorious body; and that this change shall not be the
creating a new body that is totally distinct and another from this in which we
now live and die, is also plain in this, that if the Resurrection was the
living again of the Spirit in another body, then this body that dies should, or
might yet lie in the grave, notwithstanding that resurrection in another body;
and so the body of Christ in which he died, should have been sound in the grave
still, when the Disciples went to the sepulcher to imbalm him; but the
Scripture plainly tells us, that they found it not there, and of that the
Angels said, He is risen, he it not here, Matthew 28.6. He might have been risen,
and his body there too, if what was put off, and laid down in the grave, was
never reassumed (...) raised again out of it, but some other body given in
stead thereof. Nay, indeed that conception is inconsistent with the term of
Resurrection; for Resurrection is not a creation of a ^ew or another body, but
the rising again of ^at that was dead or fallen, as all know that understand the
force of the word Resurrection: Yea, that also would be point blank cross to
what the Apostle yet adds further, the dead shall ^e raised incorruptible, and
this mortal shall prit (...) immortality, and this corruptible must put on
incorruption; he said not that the spirit that lives and goes to God, shall
appear again in a new body that never was in being before, an incorruptible
body made of nothing, or of some other materials; but the dead shall rise
incorruptible; yea, this mortal, this that now is subject to death, this very
body shall put on immortality; and this corruptible, not another that never was
corruptible or corrupted but this body that's now corruptible, that now has its
life in its blood, and dies and corrupts, shall put on immortality, and so
shall triumph over the grave; O grave where is thy victory? which they could
never have ground for, if the conquest of the grave should be perpetual, and
never restore the dead bodies that it had swallowed. So that its clear by the
Apostles own words, and by what we read of Christ raised, to which ours are to
be conformed, that this Scripture also is abused. As for the liftings up of
their understandings otherwise, they are partly conceptions of impossibilities
of such a thing; as if the bodies were so torn and corrupted, and the ashes or
relics of them dispersed, that its impossible it should be raised; which is
an impious conception, for it charge God with weakness and impotency, as if
any word was impossible to him; well therefore did our Lord tax the Sadduces
with erring upon these principles, that they knew not the Scripture, nor the
power of God.

Vain Earthworms! who are we that we will undertake to measure and put bounds
to his omnipotency, and make that an impossibility with him, that we cannot
fathom in our narrow apprehensions? Of the like nature is that foolish
conception, that the world will not afford room enough for so many millions of
men that should be raised up, as if he that made all things by his Power, when
as there was yet nothing, could not either reduce all the dispersed parcels of
his dead creatures into one body again, or find room sufficient to contain all
those bodies in. These are the shallow objections of vain brains, that think
God can do nothing that they cannot reach to in their reasonings; against which
for your defense against them, let me say but with Paul, Why should it seem a
thing incredible to you, that God should raise the dead? Acts 26.8.

Another way in which they lift up their understandings to deny this truth, is
by inventing, and devising how to turn all the Scriptures that speak of the
Resurrection, to a more spiritual sense; namely, to speak of the Resurrection
of the Spirit with Christ; or as they understand from some sad or corrupt
frames, to Joy, and Love, and Light, and I know not what they please to talk
of; whence many of them say, they have here attained the Resurrection, its now
made in his life, and they have experimented it all that is to be enjoyed. But
this error (as it cannot consist with many places treating of the Resurrection,
as when its said, There shall be a Resurrection both of just and unjust, Acts
24.15. and those who are affirmed to be risen with Christ in their spirits, are
yet minded of a further Resurrection, yea, even those who are now dead, while
they were putting to death by their cruel persecutors, and refused deliverance,
in expectation of a better Resurrection, Heb. 11.45. so) the Apostle Paul has
directly noted in Hymeneus and Philetus as an error destructive to the Faith of
many, 2 Timothy 2.17,18. So that we cannot without open and manifest discarding
and revolting from the Doctrine of Christ delivered to us by him, intertain, or
embrace such an evil conception.

Press on therefore, my Brethren, in minding the Love of God, in delivering of
his Son to Death for our offenses, and raising him again for our Justification,
so to experiment his Divine Power and Spirit, quickening up your spirits to him,
to hope in, and depend on him, and to live to him, as that you may therein
prove a conformity to him in Resurrection in Spirit here, and be filled with a
lively hope of the Redemption of your bodies too from the bondage of corruption
in the Resurrection of them hereafter; and let not the faith thereof go; for
then you will also ^corrupted from the hope of the reward that's ^omised, and is
then to be received (the time of ^unerating the services of our faith and love
^e toward God and his Name, being at the ^e of the justs Resurrection, Luke
14.14.) and (...) ye be corrupted there, you will also grow ^less and negligent
in those services, yea, and ^ll into all licentiousness.

Know that what ever evil and mischief may ^e befall you in your bodies for the
Name of Christ; and however you may and must yield up ^bodily death: yet he
that raised up Jesus our and, will also raise us up, and bring us with him,
(...) Cor. 4.14. If we abide in the Faith of him, ^oted and stablished, and be
not perverted ^om the Gospel, and the hope of it that has ^een preached
therein to us; and if this Know^dge abide in you, and the hope thereof be
^inded by you, it will make you that you shall ^ot be barren and unfruitful,
but to be steadfast, and to abound in the Work of the Lord, know^ng that your
labor shall not be in vain in the lord.

Sect. 5. Of Heaven and Glory.
BUt now to say what that great Reward and Glory is, and shall be, is above my
ability; is not yet manifest what we shall be: but a great reward in heaven it
is; an heavenly, not (...) earthly reward; a reward of and from God, no^ of and
by men, not worldly: The new Jerusalem, or the glory of God coming down from
heaven upon men, and taking men up into heaven, where now also they that are
Saints indeed and walk as such, have their conversation.

What heaven is, I shall not curiously inquire Its that place and state where
Christ in his Humanity is; for as its the subject of bodies, I ca^ and account
it a place, though as of the Spirit more properly its a State: as when its
said, The Christ is gone into heaven, its therein signified both that his body
or humanity was taken up from the earth above the visible heavens, where also
he is contained, and from whence also he shall again descend, and be met by the
Saints in the air; as also that he is there in a glorious state of Sovereignty,
Power, Majesty, Fullness far above all creature earthy glories, yea and fa^
above all heavenly creatures glory; out of which glory he shall not descend at
his coming for he shall come in it, but from that place of his body he shall: I
know Mr. Collier makes heaven to be God only and Glory: but as in some other
things, so in that he slipped not a little into errors; for in God he was while
he was on the earth; Know thou not that the Father is in me, and I am in the
Fathe^r says he to Philip, Joh. 14. while he was not yet ascended: Neither had
there needed any visible translocation or change of place for going up into
heaven, if it had been ^ely to be in God: nor does that phrase, far above all
heavens, signify far above all gods, but far above all these aerie, starry,
visible heavens: To say nothing that Mr. Collier handsomely slips ^ver the
speaking to the heaven that Christ a^ended to, and which is to contain him, and
^ys not one word to that Text in his Answer; (...) if he knew not how to elude
it. But to pass from that; I grant that heaven does not only signify place,
but also a state of glory, or of di^e spiritual influence, operation,
government, and advancement: and this we are specially to and in it, and look
after, and not spend our thoughts vainly or curiously about inquiring of (...)
as a place merely; as I might also say of hell; ^ough the bodies and substances
of men condemned shall be in place, yet the condition of ^o and torment is in
that word rather pointed (...), in which such shall be; and as in a taste or
first fruits (as it were) may now be.

But to return to what I was saying about heaven and the glory thereof: while
we are withdrawn in our hearts from base and earthy walkings, designs,
affections, etc. and are in our hearts a^ed by the Word that was revealed by,
and comes unto us from God, and by the Spirit of God, and of Christ the
heavenly one, and are minding and looking after the privileges and
excellencies, thereby witnessed and led to, we are said to converse in heaven;
and so we read of an army warring in heaven, Rev. 19. which is nothing else but
the Saints of God in the heavenly and divine Power and Spirit, in which
spiritually they live and breath, making opposition against Satan and his
instruments; and so in like manner the high surpassing, pure, spiritual
consolations, streamings forth, and abiding rivers of satisfaction that the
Spirit of God, yea God himself in his Spirit shall pour out into men, glorify
them with, and possess them of hereafter fully, is called heavenly glory, and
the reward in heaven, as the latter it is also, because it is yet in, and with
God and Christ, and not in its fullness come forth into and manifested in men;
but a state it is of such fullness of peace, joy, power, happiness, satisfaction
and glory, in and through the presence of God and Christ, with soul and body as
neither eye can see, nor ear hear, nor can enter into the heart of man to
conceive; an immeasurable, unfathomable, inexpressible, perfect, immixt,
entire, and eternal joy and glory: so immense, high, deep, broad, large, and
full in it self, that no words can reach it, nor heart conceive or contain it,
but be wholly satisfied, yea swallowed up into delight and joy with it; and
that that infinitely adds to it, is its infinite duration, Eternal life, a
mighty, inexhaustible river of eternal satisfactions, flowing from, fed and
maintained by the fountain of li^ ing waters, even God himself, his Presence
and fellowship for ever. O infinite, incomprchensible portion and inheritance,
yea God himself, and his glory to be inherited by us! But I shall ^ather press
on toward it, and to the experimental tastes and feelings of it in some earnest
of (...) in my spirit, then strive by words to darken ^nowledge, in indeavoring
to express it; what it (...), is only known in the enjoyment; till when, it
^sseth knowledge, much, more expression to declare it.

Sect. 6. Some encouragements for the Saints in expectation of this glory
promised.
O Let our eyes be to that Prize, that Glory, that Paradise, that Rest, Safety,
Satisfaction, Enjoyment of God and Christ, complete freedom from evil, complete
and eternal fruition of all happiness, that we may run with patience the race
set before us, enduring the Cross, despising the shame, for this joy and
recompense propounded to us; withal considering what good grounds we have to
expect the enjoyment of so glorious and precious Promises: As to Instance.

1. Its God that has promised; and what cannot he do? Is not his arm Almighty?
his Power invincible? cannot he make us happy beyond expression, when he
himself is our Reward? Its God; is not he faithful? has he spoken it, and
shall not he do it? is there any unrighteousness in him? Faithful is he that
promises, who also will do it; he will not leave thee nor forsake thee, 1
These. 5.24. Heb. 13.5. He has never yet failed any that have cleaved to, and
depended on him; and verily he will not now begin. Its God that has promised,
and he is Love and Goodness, and has testified such and so great love to us as
may encourage us to judge well of him in what ever he further says or does
unto us. If thou think his Promises are of too great gifts to be bestowed on
thee or such as thou art: consider what he has bestowed on thee already; has
he not given thee life and breath, and all things? yea he has given his only
begotten Son to death for thee, to ransom thee from thy thraldom to sin and
misery, and that too when thou wast ungodly, and an enemy against him, and
neither soughtest it of him, nor could thank him for it; and he has filled
him with his fullness to that purpose, that he might now sill thee; yea has he
not also called thee to his Son? looked upon thee when thou layedst in darkness
and ignorance of him? has he not born with thy follies, refusals and ill
requitals? and long waited that he might be gracious, yea and at length begun
to prevail with thee, and brought thee to believe, that of his fullness thou
^ightst receive grace for grace, etc. And is all ^is nothing to thee, to
persuade thee of his faithfulness and further love? Sure the consideration of
this may lead us to be confident in ^im, and rest upon him for performance of
his Promises to us, and to persuade our selves that ^e has not gone about to
deceive us; he that ^ath performed his Word so punctually in the gift and
abasement of his Son, may challenge ^edit of us in what he further says unto
us; If ^n we were enemies he has reconciled us (or ^de us friends) to himself
by the death of his ^on: how much more when we are therethrough ^conciled, will
he save us by his life? Romans 5.10. He that spared not his own Son, but gave him
to the death for us all, how shall he not with him also ^ive us all things?
Romans 8.32 Us, that are now in Christ Jesus, and walk after the Spirit, his
called, justified ones.

2. Again, consider Jesus Christ the great high Priest and Apostle of our
profession, the great gift of God for and to us: Its he that God ^ath appointed
to give us this eternal life: Its the Will of God his Father concerning him,
the every one that sees the Son, and believes on him, should not perish but
have eternal life, Joh. 6.40. and he is mighty to save, being the only proper
Son of God, his Word, and Wisdom, yea, God over all blessed for ever; according
to the Spirit^ he was in the beginning with God, and was God, and all things
that are were made by him, and without him was nothing made that i^ made,
whether Thrones or Dominions, Principalities or Powers, all things were made by
him and in him all things consist; yea according to the humanity also he is
exalted to the throne o^ Majesty, and all the fullness of the Godhead dwells
bodily in him; God doing all by him, and he all in and from God, and in the
might and power of God: So that of his sufficiency we have no cause to doubt,
seeing also he has done so great things for us, as the spoiling of
Principalities and Powers, conquering the world, taking away Sin, abolishing
Death, and destroying the authority and power of the devil. In which things
also he has given such undeniable proofs of his Love and Faithfulness (in that
being in the form of God, and thinking it no robbery to be equal with God; yet
he abased himself, and came in the form of a servant, being made flesh, the son
of man, and therein subject to infirmities, yea suffered, and bare the burden
of our iniquities, and the curse due to us for our sins, to accomplish those
things on our behalf) so that (...) exceeding unbelief and ingratitude to
question his love and faithfulness for perfecting for us that further concerns
us: especially seeing he also ever lives now to make intercession for us ^t
come to God by him, and appears in the presence of God for us to present us in
the invaluable virtue of his sacrifice holy and acceptable before him; and to
mediate for us the performance of the New Testament to us, by continually
removing our sins, follies, weaknesses and evils against God and his goodness
to us, our defects and failings in Faith, that the convents of the new Covenant
may notwithstanding be performed to us, his Law be writ in our hearts, and his
Fear put within us, his holy Spirit given to us to sanctify, teach, lead,
strengthen and comfort us; and in a word, that we may be carried up to the
enjoyment of the eternal inheritance. Consider him then; its Christ that died
for us, yea rather that is risen again, and is at the right hand of God making
intercession for us; the Captain of salvation, the Author, yea, and the
Finisher too of our Faith. Consider his Love, Faithfulness, Office, Goodness
that we faint not, nor be weary through any temptation. Fear not but he that
conquered all our enemies by himself for us, will also in our following after
him give us the victory over them, and the reward that he has abundantly
promised: Its his Word of encouragement, who has gone before us, and is in the
head of the battle; To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the tree of
Life that is in the midst of the Paradise of God, and that he shall not be hurt
of the second death; yea, the white stone, and new name, the hidden Manna; and
in a word, his everlasting Kingdom, Rev. 2. and 3.

3 Yea, and thirdly, has not God also given us of his holy Spirit, his Power,
and strength to to be in us, and to fight our battles for us, to lead, teach,
uphold, and comfort us? and he is a spirit of Wisdom and Knowledge, a spirit of
strength and courage, and of the fear of the Lord. The holy Unction that gives
discerning, witnessing of Christ, and glorifying him, and more powerful then
any thing that comes to withstand him, according to that, Greater is he that is
in us, then he that is in the world, 1 John 4.4. Abide but in him, and follow
after his lustings and instructions in the ways that our Lord has prescribed
to us, and he will work all our works in us, and our works shall be wrought in
him: we need not any other teaching or spirit, but as and according to that
which that holy Unction teaches us: what swerves from his testimony, is not to
be heeded by us; and that that swerves is to be discerned by this, that it
makes little or no account of Christ come in the flesh, 1 John 4.1,2,3. of the
things done and suffered by him therein; it skips over, or lets go that, and
makes but a light matter or nullity of it; whereas the holy Unction, or Spirit
of Truth confesses, holds forth,, and glorifieth Christ come in the flesh;
he says not in our flesh; for many deceivers talk of that who would lead us to
exalt themselves, though they be Antichrists; as also the holy Spirit is the
same that was in the Prophets and Apostles, and leads us to hear them, and to
abide in unity of Faith with them, Ephesians. 1.4,5. 1 John 4.5,6. whereas the
false spirits slight them, and lead not to hear, or matter Unity of faith, and
confession with them. If we have received this earnest, why should we fear that
God will fail us of the inheritance? in this might and power of the Lord if we
be strong, nothing shall overcome us.

Sect. 7. Of Knowing Christ after the flesh, and after the Spirit.
I Know they that lie in wait to deceive you, will suggest that this that I
have said of Christ his Death, Resurrection, and mediation, is at best but a
carnal knowledge of him according to the flesh, and not according to the
Spirit; and that the Spirit in evidencing him will witness a more divine and
spiritual knowledge, and draw off the heart from this fleshly consideration, or
looking upon him as he was made flesh, and therein suffered and died for us. To
persuade you to which, they quote that in 2 Cor. 5.16. Henceforth know we no
man after the flesh; yea though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet
henceforth we know him so no more; as if the Apostle meant that he minded him
no more as one that was born of a woman, and died in the flesh, and was raised
again, and in that very body glorified; they had sometimes such carnal
apprehensions of him, and looked at him as the Savior in and by that his death
and suffering indeed; but now they have a more spiritual allegorical knowledge
of him. Against which interpretation of the Apostles words, though that might
suffice to preserve us, that I have newly before noted from the Apostle John,
that every spirit that confesses not, that is, glorifies not, nor sets not
forth Jesus Christ come in the flesh, is not of God; yet I shall for further
satisfaction look more fully into that place.

And first it may hence appear evidently, that that is not the Apostles meaning
in that passage, because such an interpretation of him is cross to himself and
his fellow brethren and Apostles in other places; for its evident, that both
Paul and the rest preached him as of the seed of David according to the flesh,
the Son of God, made of a woman, made under the Law, made sin and a curse for
us, crucified and raised again, and now mediating for us with God, the
Advocate, High Priest and Prince of the Congregation; and to this Doctrine and
this Christ thus preached and set forth, they frequently exhort believers to
take heed, to cleave, adhere, and listen, and by no means under what pretext or
pretense soever to depart therefrom, Heb. 3.1. 6.14. Acts 11.23,24. 1 John 2.28.
Gal. 1.8,9. yea to hold as execrable and accursed all that would persuade them
thereto, or that preach my other Gospel then that of Christ so preached by
them, Col. 1.22,23. in holding fast to whom, and to the Gospel of him, they
promise safety and an abiding happy condition; but in the letting him, and that
go by any means, they pronounce certain danger and unavoydable destruction,
Heb. 2.3. and 10.25,29. yea Christ as so in the flesh abased for us and now
risen, ascended, and advocating for us at the right hand of God, they
themselves, and in especial that very Apostle Paul rejoices in, and places the
foundation of all his hope and confidence in, as is plain in that of Romans 8.32.
as the very thing which being known, apprehended and received by him, was the
great manifestation of Gods Love to him, and the great argument of his further
favor and good will; yea the spring of his hope of glory, confidence, boldness,
access to God, and renovation into his likeness; yea Christ as thus he was
abased, and is risen, and mediates for us, being known, believed, and
entertained into the heart, is in the believer the very hope (or that which
springs up and nourishes in him an expectation) of future glory, as is evident
from the fore-quoted place, and that in Romans 5.10. where from the consideration
of Christ as delivered to death for us, while sinners, and of our being
reconciled to him thereby, he infers an expectation much more of salvation and
glory: So that the knowledge and mindfulness of Jesus Christ as made flesh, and
therein dying for us, rising and mediating, as in the letter of the Scripture
is declared, is not the knowledge of him after the flesh, in which the Apostle
Paul says they knew him no more; they that say it is, are of the number of them
that understand not the Apostle there; and in that particular fulfill the truth
of Peter's saying, that in Paul's Writings (as some read it (...)) some things
are hard to be understood which some pervert to their own destruction.

2. Again, the Apostle in that passage does no more deny that he believed that
there was such a Christ, and that he had real flesh, or that he has now a
humane body of flesh glorified, then in the phrase before, where he says that
he knew no man henceforth after the flesh, he denies that he belives any man to
have a body of flesh, or to be naturally a man; nor does he there more deny
that we are to consider Christ in his abasement for our sins, and his glory in
the humane nature, then in the said former expression he denies that we are to
consider or know any of our brethren in their poverty, sickness, oppression,
etc. to pity and help them, because those things happen to them in and after
the flesh, and not in or from the Spirit, the phrase being the same for knowing
other men as about knowing Christ.

But what then does the Apostle mean?

I answer, to understand his meaning, we must mind the drift and scope he aims
at in the place; which is this: To show their uprightness and faithfulness in
their ministration, which was traduced by the false Apostles, who by accusing
theirs, insinuated their own more strongly into the Corinthians affections; to
this purpose he had before told them that they preached the Gospel as in the
sight of God without mixing or maring it as the false Apostles did, Chap. 2.17.
who made a hotch potch of Law and Gospel together, preaching neither rightly,
while they thought to mix both; he had showed them the difference between the
Law and Gospel, old Testament and new (rather) Chap. 3. and their
ministrations; the excellency of the New above the old, whence he says, they
used great plainness and boldness of speech, not putting a vail over their
faces as Moses did, Chap. 3.12,13. which things could not be truly said, if
they had indeed talked (as its evident they did speak) of a Christ in the
flesh, dead, raised, etc. but aimed at, and meant some other thing typified out
by it (which we deny they did.) He had told them, that for the manner of
preaching, Chap. 4.2. they did it simply and plainly, without craft and
dishonesty, wit or eloquence of man's wisdoms framing; and that by their plain
preaching they exposed themselves to sufferings, not only from the world, but
the false Apostles too, who gloried in appearance, in seeming zeal and
diligence, in and for the Law, and in fleshly carnal circumcision, verse. 17,
18. that they respected the recompense of reward, and so preached and walked as
those that aimed at the receipt of it, knowing the account they were to give to
Christ, and the terror of the Lord in that day. Chap. 1.5 9.10,11. thence
neither did they preach as the false Apostles to please the Jews by
appropriating the Gospel to them; or by pressing upon the Gentiles a necessity
of Circumcision, either to make them fit subjects for the Gospel preaching, or
after the Gospel preaching to ^elp on the virtue of Christ's Sacrifice and
mediation for their eternal salvation.

Now here he shows the further ground of this their more upright preaching,
verse. 13, 14. etc. ^iz. the love of Christ constraining them, and that upon
this ground, because they judged that Christ died for All, Jews and Gentiles,
one and another without exception: whence they inferred, that (...), ( Jew and
Gentile, circumcised, or uncircumcised) were dead in themselves, and no
privilege they had in the flesh made them acceptable unto God: Or (as we may
read the words rather) that ^ll dyed, that is, in him the representative that
dyed for All, and so that the power, spirit, and ^erpetuity of the first
judgment and Death ^eing over and past, and the inevitableness of ^he
destruction therein removed, there is good News for All, Gentile and Jew,
profane and ^ ealous; there is life in Christ for them All, and ^way opened in
and by him through which any of them all might be made partakers of it; yea, in
that judgment he further judged, that the mind of Christ in dying for them
All, was that they that live, should no longer live to themselves, ^ut to him
that dyed for them and rose again; and therefore it behoved him, and all that
were entrusted by Christ in that Embassage, to endeavor to let all one another
know the obligation that lies upon them, and that they might see that love of
God that should quicken and enliven them in which respect it is that he says
wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh, etc. We must take him in
the same matter he is speaking about, or else we shall grossly err. He means
not, that in their civil converse with, and demeanor toward men, they knew or
considered not one to be a Magistrate, another a Subject, because men are not
these in or after the Spirit but in and according to the flesh; nor would he
teach other men in that respect, to cast off their knowledge of one another
according to their differences in the flesh, as if they should put no
difference between male and female, their own wives and others, the Magistrates
and other men, as pertaining to their civil converse with o^ toward them; as
that believing servants should not look upon any man as their Master according
to the flesh, especially not upon believing Masters so, but as their brethren
according to the Spirit, and so refuse to own themselves a^ their servants, or
bound to serve them, 1 Timothy 6*1,2. for this would be an evil doctrine, and i^
quite contrary to the Apostles own teaching des^ructive to all humane Society,
honesty, and good government. But in regard of their applying the Gospel, and
Gospel-priviledges to there he means that he knew no man after the flesh, that
is, he minded not, or judged any more or less under the Gospel-right by their
riches, or poverty, wisdom or folly, in respect of natural parts or education,
nobility, or ignobleness, bleness, sex, country, nation etc. or (which will
come to the same) he knew or minded them not in that respect, as the wisdom of
the flesh would have led him, but according as the Spirit of God in the
Doctrine of the Gospel represented them, viz as sinners, and dead in
themselves, all alike, one and other; and all as under the free grace of God
that had given Christ to dye for them, and opened in him a way to life for
them, and had given to them (the Apostles) a ministry of Reconciliation toward
them already upon the same Gospel-terms to admit and receive to favor any of
them. And so in applying the Promises and Privileges of the Gospel, and owning
as brethren, they knew no man according to the flesh, either according to the
judgment and guidance of the wisdom of the flesh in themselves, or according
to the fleshly differences in them; as if because Jews, therefore brethren and
heirs of the Promises; but the Gentiles, though believers, yet not heirs or
brethren, unless, or until circumcised; or as if this Nation, or Sex, or
Kindred were more advanced in Christ then that, according to the advantages or
greater dignity after the flesh. Now it being evident that that's the meaning of
the Apostle in that phrase (according to that, Gal. 3.20. There is neither Jew
nor Gentile, male, nor female, bond or free, but ye are all one in Christ
Jesus;) it follows thence, that the other phrase of knowing Christ after the
flesh, is after the same way to be understood, viz. that though they had
thought of, or looked upon Christ according as the fleshly understanding or
wisdom presented him as a mean despicable man, or as more engaged to the Jews
then to the Gentiles for his flesh sake to be readier to save them, etc. and
though they had minded him, and judged of him according to what he was after
the flesh, judging of his Person Worth, Office, and work of Saving according to
his flesh: yet now henceforth they judged no more of him but as the Spirit
represented him and witnessed of him, and according as the Gospel declared and
revealed him, and according to the Spirit or Divine Nature in him; not but that
they considered him as dignified or glorified In the flesh, and after the
flesh, are two distinct things, as is evident in 2 Cor. 10.3. for though we
walk in the flesh, ye we do not war after the flesh.
in the flesh or Humane Nature, but they looked not upon him, as if that
dignity he has stands in any fleshly privilege, though they had thought his
person the more excellent and honorable, because his flesh was of the Jews, and
he therein circumcised; yet now they prized him not according to that, but as
the Spirit evidenced him to be the Word made flesh, the Son of God which
suffered, which would have put the same dignity into him as man, of whomsoever
he had taken flesh, and according to that they now esteemed and valued him, and
hoped in, trusted and believed on him. They that knew him so after the flesh
(as the false Apostles) they also considered the kindred and relation in the
flesh between Christ and the Jews, as having his flesh of them; and the want of
that kindred and relation between him and the Gentiles; and so they thought of
him as one that would honor and lift up the Nation of the Jews for kindred and
relation sake, but less advance or honor the Gentile believers; and therefore
that it was needful for them to become Jews in the profession of their way of
Worship and Observation; and therefore they preached the Gospel rather to the
Jews as such; and embraced and applied the Promises rather to them as more
interested in Christ, because of their affinity in the flesh; which was the
error of the false Apostles reproved and spoken against here by the Apostle
Paul: besides which there is also another way of knowing him after the flesh;
and another effect of some men's so knowing him: namely, an estimating, valuing,
and judging of him according to the flesh in his Sufferings, Sacrifice, and
mediation; a measuring their virtue and excellency by that, as if but the
Sufferings, Sacrifice, and mediation of a meet man; and so of a finite sorry
creature, whence they also stumble at him, and count it foolishness to believe
in him. And in this way most of those that turn the Truth of God into a Fable,
or the History of Christ into a meet Allegory, and depart from the faith of
him, do know him, and consider him: Yea, and that is the ground of that their
denying and turning from him. What (say they) should we trust and put
confidence in a man? Can a man be able to save us? Shall we think, because such
a lump of flesh was put to death, and spilt its blood, therefore we shall have
foregiveness? In which, and many like speeches they speak like the obstinate
Jews, and bewray, that according as he is declared in the History, they know
him after the flesh, after the wisdom and judgment of their flesh, and not as
glorified by the Spirit to them, and so value his person, sufferings, and
mediation as but the sufferings and mediation of a man; and judging it foolish
to trust in a finite creature, they know him at all no more, nor will believe
in him any longer, or approach to God by him, or have any thing to do with him,
or the story about him, as they call it, but only look upon it as a Fable or
Parable, at the best to represent some other thing by, which they call the
mystery. Thus Paul, with the Jews and Pharisees, knew him, and stumbled at him
in the time of his ignorance; and its good that men would cease to know him
thus any longer, and know him, even the man Christ Jesus, who was of the seed
of David after the flesh, in all his Doctrine, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection
and Mediation, according to the Spirit, as the Son of God, though made man; and
his Sufferings, Death, and Resurrection as the Sufferings, Death, and
Resurrection of such a man as is the Son of God, the Word made flesh, the
anointed one, the sanctified and holy one of God; yea of him that was in the
form of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal with God: so would they not
deride him, and faith in him, and them that hold it fast; blaspheming the
Tabernacle of God, and them that dwell and worship therein; nor would they so
backslide and appostatize from him, denying him that bought them, so bringing
upon themselves swift destruction. Which that thou may avoid, keep thou close
to Christ, as declared and set forth in the Scriptures of the Prophets and
Apostles; for the same Apostle whom they misunderstand and abuse in his saying,
that they knew Christ no more after the flesh, writing to the same people in
his first Epistle, Chap. 15. minds them of the Gospel which he had preached,
and which they had received, in which they stood; and he tells them thereby
they should be saved, if they kept in memory how he had preached it to them;
namely how in the first place (or (...) amongst the first doctrines) he had
declared to them, that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures,
and that he was buried, and rose again the third day according to the
Scriptures; not according to some other more mystical way that the Scriptures
had not declared: if the testimony of Paul be valid, as they seem to make it in
the other place which they wrest to their harm, then listen to him, explaining
himself in that place; and the rather, because he tells us in holding those
things fast (not according to some more spiritual understanding as is
pretended, but according to his preaching and declaration of them) we shall be
saved; to wit, from running into erroneous conceptions (such as that of the
denial of the Resurrection there by him faulted) and by consequence from loose
and evil practices, and which is the issue of both from eternally perishing;
for indeed it is an undeniable truth, that according to the judgment men make
of Christ, so is their judgment of other things; they that believe not the
first fruits of our nature really to have died, and to be raised again, and
glorified in the person of Christ, they deny the resurrection of the rest of
the lump or body of Christ, and of mankind in general; and they that deny that,
must needs deny the judgment, with its rewards and punishments following and
then what will hinder that piece of Epicurism, Let us eat and ^rink, for to
morrow we shall die? for take away the Resurrection, and the judgment (as we
have said before) and you take away the life of all Religion.

If then thou should ever be so far corrupted as under pretense of not
knowing Christ after the flesh, to make nothing of, and to be waved from the
Doctrine of Christ as in the flesh, dying for us, and by the power of the
Spirit raised again in that his body from the dead, thou art in the way to fall
from all Christian Religion, and into all profaneness and Atheism, there being
so great a connection between the foundation Doctrines (as those concerning the
person of Christ and the things suffered by, and done to him of God, are) and
the superstructures (as the things that are to be done to, and in us are) and
so great a dependency of these latter upon the former, that if the former (the
fundamental) be shaken, the latter will soon fall; but if the former stand
firm, the latter will be upheld by them, or we rather in the faith, and
practice of them; his Death, being the foundation of all our hope, his
Resurrection a certain pledge of ours, and an argument of the judgment in
which all shall be judged by him, and his glory the forerunner and pledge of
that that shall be manifested on all that love and wait for his appearing.
Acts 17.31.

Chap. 6. Concluding with exhortation for the Saints walking worthy of their
calling.
Sect. 1. That exhortations are useful and needful to Believers.
TO all this that's before said, I shall add only some exhortations and
directions to you to walk as becomes Saints, that you may glorify God, who
hat hitherto called you; preserve your selves in his Love, and be useful unto
others; which I beseech you to suffer, and think not that in exhorting you
hereunto I put a burden upon you that you are not fit to bear, or that I put
you under the Law: Christianity consists not only in Speculation, but also
(and that rather too) in divine virtue and action; wherein God deals not with
his Saints with Herbs and Plants that have no sense nor ^ason: as they are
intelligent reasonable crea^res, so he governs them by his Word and Spi^t, and
puts them upon an exercise of those fa^lties given them, that they might not
appear to ^eidle and to no purpose in them. He does not ^ take all upon himself
to do in them, that they ^re thereby left without all action; nor does he ^act
them by force and violence, transporting ^em beyond themselves, that they need
no ad^ce, counsel, or exhortation. Its true. they are ^ot under the Law of
Moses, either the types ^ad shadows, to be instructed to wait for Christ (...)
come: nor under the precepts and injuncti^ns as ministered by Moses to be shut
up under (...) and curse, much less to be left to seek to ob^in righteousness
by endeavoring after them: ^ot yet neither are they without Law to God; ^ey
have a royal thought^ not a rigid Law; a Law ^f Liberty and Freedom of spirit
to serve God, though not a Law of bondage under sin and death; (...) law of
grace they have in them, and the sove^gnty and government of God over them;
they have the Spirit to guide them, and the Law of the Spirit which is to be
obeyed by them, that which the Grace of God received by them requires again of
them, and leads them to both toward God and man. Grace and Love from God, as
well teaching and obliging to duty, as Mosaical precepts; and indeed the
believer has no other Law but such as springs from Grace, and leads to answer
Grace; The Law of Christ, which is a Law of Love, even of Gods Love in him, and
that's a Royal Law indeed; for it gives first what it requires again of us. It
gives power and spirit for acting, as well as puts an obligation and engagement
upon us so and so to act. The Spirit writes it, and prompts to walk as we
receive, to work out as he works in us; and to yield up our members and powers
to him, that he may write in us, and act forth by us his whole pleasure, and
confirm us to his mind; and yet we are not to put a fancy upon his writing the
Law in us, as some do, that strain their wits to show how God writes all the
Bible over in man, the Books of Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, and so on, the
Creation of the world, of heaven, earth, light, firmament, herbs, plants,
fishes, fowls, beasts, and man himself; and so of the Paradise, woman, tempter,
etc. which yet they cannot strain cleaverly to their purpose in all matters,
but are fain to catch at here and there a picce, as their wits serve them, and
let the rest alone: This is to turn the Truth of God into a fancy, and secretly
to withdraw the heart from giving, glory to God in the belief of the Truth of
the sacred story. But this writing the Law in man, is his framing the heart
unto his own Heart and Will, putting into it heavenly principles and
dispositions of love and holiness, and whatsoever the Law requires; That
denying ungodliness and wordly lusts, we may live godly, soberly, and
righteously in this present world, Tit. 2.11,12. nor yet because God writes
thus in man, do they put too much upon man that exhort to these things; for we
may the better exhort to them, because men have principles to act them; no man
would exhort a dead man to walk, because he wants a principle to enable him;
but to living men such an exhortation is agrecable, though it be God that makes
themwalk, or that has printipled or enabled them thereunto; no man would blow
upon wood without fire put to it, thinking by his blowing to make it burn,
because there wants a principle; but when fire is put to it, the blast of the
Bellows is and may be profitable; so is it here: As the Apostle John in giving
instructions, says to the Churches, I write not these things to you because ye
know not the truth, but because ye know it, and that no lie is of the Truth, 1 John 2.21. So I may say, I give the following (with the foregoing) exhortations
to you; not because ye have no ability to discern of them, or principles to
lead you to them; but because ye have, because the Spirit, of God has begun to
write his Law within you.

Object. But what need for man to exhort, when God himself works and writes hi^
mind?

Answ. I answer, man therefore exhorts, because God works; for he works in one
to exhort another, and he writes by Exhortations o^ Declarations made by men to
one another; for God is in his people of a truth, 1 Cor. 14.25. Ephe^ 4.6. In
all the Saints, and through all the Saints. In every of them, working,
inlightning supporting, gifting them, and through them all speaking and acting
through his gifts given t^ one to and in another, so as that the body make an
increase to it self in love through the Spirit divine power, and working of God
that dwell therein; though the Saints are Christ's Epistl^ written by the Spirit
or Finger of God; yet that Spirit is ministered by the Saints, that is, in the
exercise of their divive gifts to one another Ministered by us, written by God,
2 Cor 3.2.3. W^ are as the Pens with which God writes upon the heart, though
the Spirit of God is the hand that guides us, and his Word and divine gifts the
ink that fills us, and makes us capable of leaving Characters and Impressions
upon one another in our Ministrations: we can indeed minister thi^ writing no
further then that hand of the Spirit uses and impowers us; and that divine Ink
fills us but so far we may: therefore let no man despis^ Prophesying, 1 These.
5.20. or slight Exhortation presuming that God immediately without the
ministrations of his gifts in and by others, will do all in him: God has not
dispensed all his fullness to any one member (except the Head) but to all
together in union with the Head, that through each he might supply other.
Therefore let no one member swell against, and despise other, much less God in
his brother; nor let him that is to administer (as particularly that exhorts)
be negligent therein, as if his administration or exhortation could add nothing
to his brother, or as if his brother had no need thereof, Romans 12.8. for God is
in and with his divine gifts and administrations; and as God in me may make his
operations through me profitable to my brother; so does my brother need that
addition of helpfulness from God that be tendreth him by me; both because he is
not full of himself without me, and therefore cannot say He has no need of me,
1 Cor. 12.21. and also because he has a principle in him that resists and
fights against that of God that works in himself; and that principle so
strong and subtle, and he so apt to yield to it, that he needs anaddition of
watchfulness and helpfulness from God through others, as though the fire be apt
and fit to set the wood put to it on a flame, yet if there be much moisture in
the wood to damp the fire, the fire will need help from the blast of the
Bellows to strengthen and excite it against that moisture, or an increase of
fire to be put to it, that the strength of it multiplied may operate more
strongly: Saints are not all Spirit, though in a degree they be spiritual, they
have a law in their members as well as in their minds; a law of sin opposing
grace, as well a law of grace opposing sin. Now the law of sin is more natural
to them, and is much excited and stirred up by many outward occasions,
solicitations, provocations, examples, threats, etc. from without; so that
ostentimes the Saints listen to it rather then to the Law of Grace in them:
therefore also an addition of spiritual Grace by, and through the communication
of the gifts and measure of grace given to other Saints is needful; that spirit
in its forces uniting it self together in the Saints, as well as the flesh
unites its forces together that it may be able to resist and overcome it; the
charmings of the flesh backed with its outward objects, motives, and
provocations are often ready to lull the soul asleep, and make it deaf to the
teachings of Grace, and then the operations in and through a waking Brother may
be of use by way of Doctrine, Admonition, Exhortation, and Council, to awaken
it, and make it give better attention to the whisperings of Grace within it
self; though the Apostle told the Philippians, that God wrought in them to will
and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. yet he neither ceased to exhort
them, nor intimates that its needless for them to work out their own salvation
with fear and trembling; but indeed upon that ground exhorts them thereunto.
Its God that works in you to will and to do of his good pleasure. O stand in aw
then and fear to smother those ^nward operations of grace within you; fear to
grieve and resist him, yield you up your members ^n that strength of his that
works in you, to ^ffect, finish, or work out what he there work^th you to:
nor is it for any to say, God is Almighty, and if he works in us we will take
no are; we cannot fail to work out; his workings ^re Almighty and cannot be
resisted and frustrated; for though in himself he be Almighty, and can, and
often does work so almightily, that ^one can or shall resist him; yet his way
of working in the soul, in the excitings and moveings of his Grace, are neither
always nor ordina^ly in that Almighty way. He is Almighty that works, but he
works not always so Almightily as that his workings may not be resisted. He is
Almighty in all his works, and its his Almighty power that effects them: the
very growing of the corn or grass is the Product of his Almighty power; but yet
he does not work so almightily therein, but that man by substracting, or
removing some secondary cause, or instrumental medium through which that power
is put forth, may usually hinder the growing of this or that particular grass
or corn, as by drying up, and hindering the moisture from it, or enclosing it
from the Air and heat of the Sun, etc. and yet man is not therefore stronger
then God; for God could (maugre all that man can do) make it grow; but he
dispenses his Power usually according to the capacity of the medium, through
which, and subject unto which he conveys it; and he does not usually alter the
course of his ordinary way to show forth what almightiness is in himself.
though therefore Gods Power in it self, and he in himself be Almighty that
works, yet his woking is not so Almightily put forth, but that a man turning
his eye from what he sets before him, and listening to the Law in his members,
may deprive or hinder himself of the efficacy and operations of it: and
therefore great need also of exhortations to incite and stir up the heart to
listen and take heed to the Grace of God, in and with which Gods Power works in
the soul; that through that heeded and minded, it may experiment and receive
the working of that mighty power to its own preservation unto life eternal. For
though its the power of God that keeps us unto salvation, yet that power keeps
us not but through faith, 1 Pet. 1.5. and is not to be felt and received by us
but in believing; and men's unwary separating of these two from one another, as
if they should certainly find the power of God to save them, though they sit
loose from the Word of Faith, in which believed and minded, God conveyes it
over to men, is the very ground and bottom of much presumption, and brings many
fool-hardily to throw themselves out of Gods ways into their own destruction.

But, yebeloved, as ye are before warned, separate not those things that God
has joined together; Wait on the Lord and keep his way. Listen to brotherly
instructions, councels, and exhortations, ^ying all things (because Satan
sometimes insi^ates his operation in stead of Gods, into, and ^y Brethren (as
he spoke in Peter when he ^ounselled Christ from his sufferings) and hold ^st
that that is good. And so I shall address my ^f to what I have to say further
by way of Ex^ortation; and that which I have to say, is for our walking as
Saints in these four Considerations: viz. 1. As to God. 2. As to one another.
3. As to Seducers. And 4. As to the unfilled, or residue of the world.

Sect. 2. Exhortations to holy walking toward God.
WAlk worthy of the call wherewith God has called you, Ephesians. 4.1. God has
called you to be Saints; walk then as Saints, that is; 1. Holily toward Him,
and that in

1. Giving thanks unto him who has called you out of darkness into his
mavelous light, delivered you from the power of darkness, and translated you
into the Kingdom of his dear Son, Col. 1.13,14. and given you wisdom,
righreousness, holiness, and redemption in him: Yea, thankfully rejoice in him
the Father who has done this for you; and thereby made you meet to partake of
the inheritance of the Saints in light, by not only giving his Son for you,
when sinners, but also propounding him to you in, and calling you to him by the
Gospel, when ignorant and out of the way; who also has enriched and blessed
you with all spiritual blessings in Christ; even with whatever makes either for
defense and safety; or for fruitfulness, or eternal satisfaction. Rejoice also
in Christ Jesus, and count him worthy to receive praise, and glory, and
thanksgiving: seeing he has loved and given himself for you, yea and washed you
in his blond, Gal. 2.20. through the force and power of it, cleansing your
consciences, and redeeming you from the earth and men, Rev. 1.5. Heb. 9.14.
Rev. 14.4. Seeing also he as the great High Priest mediateth the New Covenant
for you, that ye might be saved to the utmost through him, be presented
blameless to the Father by, and in him, and receive the promised possession;
and do this in the Spirit of Truth and holiness sent forth from the Father in
the name of the Lord Jesus unto you, and working in you to sanctify you to be
a pure offering unto God and the Father in him. Be glad I say in this
thankfulness, and sing forth his Fraises. Joy is comely for the Saints and
righteous, for, and unto whom God in Christ has done so much; there is cause
of joy in Christ for all people, but chiefly for the Saints that are
particularly his people; Let Israel rojoyce in him that made him, Psalm. 149.2.
(the Saints in God who has given them not only a natural being, but also new
created them in Christ Jesus to good works, that he might be glorified in them)
And let the children of Sion (the sons of Grace that have their birth of the
Gospel and Promise held forth therein) be joyful in (Jesus Christ) their King;
Let his praises be in your mouth, and the high acts of God in your songs, as
those that are spiritually favored by him. Cast down your crowns before him;
let no mention be made of any acts or worth of yours; any righteousness or
salvation of your working; but remember his continually, and his only; verily
so much as we take to our selves, and lift up our selves, so much we detract
from, and are unthankful unto him; no part of his grace is, or was due desert
to any of us; for then it should not have been grace but debt to us; what ever
we have done that's good, we are beholding to him for it: for he first prevented
us, enabled us, and incited us thereunto; and yet what we have so done,
deserved not in any way what he has done for, and to us; you have heard him:
but can you glory in your selves for it? his Word prevented you, or else you
had not heard; his Word drew forth attention, or else it had been otherwise
with you; and alas, how much have ye refused to hear him in? and yet what ye
have heard from him he has made effectual to your believing; what praise is
due to a Beggar from a Prince for hearing him direct him to some large
treasure? what thanks rather is due to that Prince from such a beggar for
speaking such things to him? and how much more for bringing him to what he by
speaking of to him, persuaded him to look after, and accept of from him? Our
hearing of the Word as it has been defective in us, so had it been never so
perfect, could be no meriting cause of Gods enriching or saving of us. All our
whole inheritance and portion, is of him and his free grace; and so is the
bringing and intitling to it; let the praise thereof then be wholly given to
him; and in so doing we shall walk in lowliness of mind, as we are exhorted,
Ephe. 4.1. and not proudly lift up our selves, as having some worth of our own
in us, to commend us by before him.

2. Love the Lord ye Saints, Psalm. 31.23. for what now does the Lord our God
require of us? but to love and cleave to him for his love to us: and this is a
genuine expression of real thankfulness, and comprehends in it all expressions
of (...), and produces all that's returnable to God by us; My Son, give me thy
heart, Pro. 23.26 (says he) thy heart, that is, thy love, affection, delight.
He that loves another, gives him so much of his ^eart as he has real love to
him; not love in lord and tongue, but heart love does God require; and where
that is, the eye will follow, as ^he look thereof may be also both a mean to
produce it, and to nourish it; and therefore he adds, And let thine eye observe
my ways. Its a vain thing to give thine eye without thine heart; they see
little or nothing when the heart is busied another way, and not intentive to
mind what thou beholdest with thine eye; and where the eye is withdrawn from
Gods ways, and espyes beauty in some other things, the heart will be soon
corrupted also; therefore God calls for both: for the heart first as the
principal, and then for the eye as the consequent of the hearts love, and as a
means to bring on, and nourish it in love. He has given thee his Son, and in
him received by thee thou have his heart; for the Father himself loves you
because ye have loved me (says Christ) and have believed that I came out from
him, Joh 16, 27. thou art beloved by him in his beloved one: and what a good
exchange is this to have Gods heart for thine^ to give him thy heart, and
receive his? what a low requital is this for Gods heart, that man give up to
God his heart? and yet this is the greatest man can give, and the greatest that
God requires: And this is no other thing but what his love and heart discovered
to us draws back again from us, and leads us to return: but because He sees
that there are other suitors for it, he is the more watchful over us, and
promps us in that his Grace requires by his written Word too, and calls us to a
more wist and earnest view and consideration or him in all his ways toward
us; and of all his ways prescribed by him for our walking before him. Looking,
we say, begets loving, and love begets looking again, and so there is a mutual
intercourse of heart and eye, give him thine heart, and then thine eye will the
readilier follow; give him thine eye, and let that observe his Paths, and so
shall thine heart be preserved chaste with him too: Consider and mind his love
to thee in Christ in his gift of him, and cost he was at there for thee; the
way he took to buy and sanctify thee to himself; and that will break thy
heart, and make thee willing that he should have it, that gave so much of his
to thee for it. Its men's being taken with other beauties, and so looking off
from his, that makes them slack in their love toward him. Remember how thou
have heard and learnt, and repent, and do thy first works, says he therefore to
some who had lost their first love, Rev. 2.3. that's the way to recover their
love again; to call to mind how they have heard and learnt of him; and if that
be the way to recover love when lost; then sure its the way too, to preserve it
before it be lost, that it may not be lost.

Cleave then to him and his ways with full purpose of heart, and take heed
that thou never deniest him that bought thee: for that would be a most unloving
and ungrateful part of thee: Worship none but God in Christ, in whom he has
loved thee, and in the Spirit he has given thee: own no other name or object
of confidence, delight, and satisfaction. Follow not after other lovers; and
especially if thou would have thine heart entire with him, beware of two
Corrivals especially that will solicit thee. 1. The world in its objects of
profit, honor, pleasure, etc. let not thine eye look too wistly on its beauty,
lest thou lust after it, for it will deceive thee. And 2. The spirit of error
presenting another name and doctrine then that once delivered to the Saints,
and promising greater liberties and advantages and spiritual glory to thee; for
(as) both of them (so especially this latter) may be, and are in Scripture
compared to a whorish woman, James 4 4. Rev. 17.5. And a whore is a deep ditch,
and a strange woman is as a narrow pit, Prove. 23.27. If thou fallest into her,
she will surely drown thee. They that will be rich, and that make themselves
friends to the world in its pleasures, and satisfactions here, engage God
against themselves, 1 Timothy 6 9. and plunge themselves into snares and
temptations, and so drown themselves in destruction and perdition; and they
that have itching ears after Fables, and doctrines of devils, and take not heed
to the Apostolical Doctrine, lose themselves in them, being so infatuated
through the strength of them, that they arrive at last too at damnation, by
denying the Lord that bought them, 2 These. 2.10,11,12. 2 Pet. 2.1. For few or
none that go into her return again, neither take they hold of the paths of
life, Prove. 2.19.

Take heed therefore to your selves, and beware of this spiritual adultery; let
not thine heart desire to eat their dainties; for though they may say stolen
waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant, yet know thou, that
the dead are there and their ghests in the depth of hell, Prove. 9 17,18. Look
thou then right forward to the things that God sets before thee in Christ, and
let not thine heart depart from him. Desire more to know him, and to enjoy his
presence and fellowship with him, and seek it not in thine own way but in his;
and when thou find him, ^old him fast, and delight thy self in him, and
^ever let his Truth depart from thee, but let ^hy meditation ^t all times be
sweet concerning ^im, and thy desight day and night in his Law and Doctrine.

3. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and ^an not to thine own
understanding, Pro. 3 5. He ^s worthy to bedepended on, and trusted in at ^ll
times, and in all things for this life, and that ^o come, for teaching,
strengthening, directing, ^pporting, supplying, comforting, saving, For (...)
him the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, ^i. 26.4. So that there is
nothing too hard or ^fficult for him to do that may concern thy welfare; nor is
there any unrighteousness, or unfaithfulness in him, Psalm. 92.15. He has so
richly and abundantly already prevented us with his love and mercy, and given
us so to behold his righteousness displayed in his Gospel, as may challenge our
most steadfast confidence in him, and dependence on him for the performance of
^ll that further favor and mercy that is needful and good for us, and is
promised by him. Has ^e not given his Son for us according to his an^ient
saying, by the mouth of his holy Prophets; ye a, has he not also called and
brought us to his Son, and given us him to be ours, our lot, our portion, our
Prince, and Captain of salvation, our High Priest and Advocate, etc. and shall
we not trust in him then for other things? shall he not with him give us all
things else that he has spoken of and provided in him?

O hope we then in him at all times, and in this hope pour out our hearts
before him; for he is a refuge for us, and will not fail us. He that has made
us Saints, will not be wanting to give us a Saints portion. But lean we not to
our understandings; for he that trusts his heart is a fool, Prove. 28.26. for
its so deceitful and desperately wicked that it will deceive him, Jer. 17.9.
His Word is sure, and worthy to be taken; but our own wisdom, with the
conceptions thereof are foolishness, and tend to ruin; and who so trusts in
any thing else below God, a curse will befall him. Jer. 17 5,6.

4. In this love of him, and trusting in him, yield up thy self also unto him
to be his to do his work; mind his Name and Glory, that he may be known, loved,
and his Kingdom enlarged: give up thy heart to him to be the habitation of his
Holiness by his Spirit, not the habitation of sin, lust, pride, vanity, Satan
etc. but the temple of the holy Ghost, that he may dwell there, and subdue, and
mortify thy lusts and corruptions in and for thee, and quicken thee up to God
to ^alk before him holily, and yield up all thy members also to be instruments
of working righteousness unto his glory. Whatsoever thou ^ost in word or in
deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, with an eye to him, and as thereto
warranted by him, and to the praise of the grace of God in him. This is love
that we keep ^is Commandments, and his Commandments are ^ot grievous, 1 John
5.3. I might enlarge unto many particulars, which for brevities sake I shall
^ss over, and leave thee for further direction to the word of Gods Grace, and
to the Apostles writings.

Sect. 3. The Saints worthy walking toward each other.
2. IN regard of one another, I have no other Commandment, but that that ye
have received, viz. That ye love one another; that ye love as brethren, sons of
the same Father, even God, and of the same Mother, the new Jerusalem, and
Covenant of Grace; and that he let brotherly love be exercised, and in its
exercise continue: that ye love one another as members of the same body, not
every man minding his own things, and aiming at his own particular good only,
but each minding the good of other, in that that may be for profit and
edification; communicating of the grace given, and abilities afforded to each
other in the Lord, as may make for the edification add good of all, watching
over, instructing, exhorting, reproving, helping, and comforting one another as
need is, and opportunity is afforded, receiving, owning, and delighting in the
fellowships and helpfulness of the mutual exercises of your graces and gifts in
the Lord, as receiving, owning, and delighting in the Lord, who is in all his
holy Ones and Saints; and this without hypocrisy and simulation, without
partiality or faction, not preferring one before another for outward worldly
respects, of riches, honors, places, learning, parts, etc. nor despising one
another for poverty, reproaches, infamy in the world, weakness in faith and
spiritual gifts; or for difference in judgment about doubtful questions, Romans
14.1. but each receiving other for the foundation sake held fast, and for the
grace discerned and professed, cheerfully serving one another in love. Indeed
its meet that Saints put difference between themselver as such, and such as
have erred and departed from the foundation of Faith, and deny the Lord that
bought them, as we shall see by and by: but where men are all believers through
grace, and have the love of God in the gift of Christ and his mediation for
their bottom and foundation, their lesser difference in other things should not
make them unsaint one another, and fight against one another, but such ought to
own one another, and with sobriety and singleness, not for love of victory or
factiously to up^old a party to discuss things in which they differ, and so far
as they can to agree; and if in any thing any be otherwise minded then the
rest, there with patience, to wait and forbear one another; and yet in
communion and communication of graces to own and walk as brethren one with
another, not judging and despising one another for what they differ in; those
things they ^ffer in, not being of that nature and weight as ^o disunite from
fellowship with the same Lord. And this is further to be noted, that the
brotherly love that is to be exercised, stands not in an ^differency and
neutrality, to let every man be ^f what way he will, and do what he will with
reproving, or showing them the evil thereof, no more then natural love amongst
brethren (...) the flesh consists in letting ones brethren sink (...) swim, be
sick or well, wounded or whole, ^odigals or thrifty, without looking after
them, (...) taking any care of remedies, reproofs, or any ^ay of help for them;
that's by God himself ^counted hatred, to see our brethren sin and not ^prove
them, Levit 9.17. it argues little love (...) the souls of one another so to
do: It was not ^om love in Cain to say, Am I my brothers ^per? Genesis 4.9. Love
leads to watchfulness o^ one another; or in case of straying or of danger to
stray, to warn another; which yet is to be done with wisdom, so as it may best
tend to prevent evil, or withdraw therefrom; for we are to put difference
between those that sin of weakness, and through temptation, whom we are to
handle gently and tenderly, forbearing and waiting for them, yea, bearing their
burdens, and those that are more wilful and resolute in their strayings, and
evil walkings, whom we are to save with fear, and rebuke more sharply and
openly; yea, in all things we ought so to order our selves as we see may best
conduce to their good with whom we have to do; having a special care of, and
regard to those that are weak in faith, helping, and furthering them: and no
wise, if possible, offending them, so as to turn them aside through their
weakness from the way of the Lord, but endeavoring that they may be preserved
in the faith, and grow up therein, till they with the rest of the body attain
the inheritance promised in Christ Jesus. Were this love more practiced and
walked out in, and the exercise thereof accepted, it would prove very
advantageous to the Saints: and Satan would not so much prevail upon them to
weaken and divide them: yea, this waking together in love, and wherein we have
attained, walking by the same rule, and speaking the same thing, would much
conduce to the glorifying of God, and we should therein meet with much
blessing; We are brethren, why should we fall out by the way to our heavenly
Canaan, quarrelling and contending about place, pre-eminence, and diffe^ences
in doubtful Disputations, not clearly de^ermined in Scriptures, is a good
consideration for all agreeing in the same foundation. And O that we all might
willingly be exhorted to this, ^s not to bear with them that are evil, and
would pervert souls from Christ; so neither to fall out and make rents from
those that are built upon, and sincerely and peaceably seek the glory of Christ.

Sect. 4. How to walk toward Seducers, and the Secuced.
3. BUt now for those that have not Christ for their foundation, but are
bottomed upon their own works, yea, and would bottom Christ upon them too,
hindering souls from coming ^ghtly to Christ, and that bring another Gospel then
that of Christ, tending to deny and overthrow the Gospel of Christ; but chiefly
those that have apostatized from him, the case is otherwise. They that divide
from Christ the elder Brother, are not to be owned as brethren, but divided
from, yea and looked upon in their endeavors to draw others to themselves as
enemies to our souls, Wolves that come to devour, deceitful workers, and so we
are to avoid them: The Apostles looked not upon the zealous Jews and Pharisees,
opposers of the grace of Christ, as their brethren in Christ; nor upon the
false Apostles that perverted the Gospel of Christ, mixing it with the Law, and
withdrawing men from the sincerity of the Gospel of Christ; much less those
Apostates and Blasphemers, Hymeneus, and Alexander, and Philetus, men that
denied the Resurrection, and affirmed it to be now made or past, denying the
Lord that bought them, and subverting the faith of diverse, 2 Timothy 2.16,17. If
such as these plead for a brothers portion of love from the Saints in those
their ways, they are much mistaken; brotherly love with them, would be as bad
as Jehosophats familiarity and correspondency with Ahab, which the Lord
reproved and punished in him, 2 Chronicles. 19 2. And as the Churches tolerating the
Baalamites and Nicolaitans which he hated, Rev. 2.14 20. Men are much out in
thinking that those that are evidently and upon due trial false Apostles, and
of the Synagogue of Satan, ought not to be so reputed, but walked toward, and
loved as dissenting Brethren. How shall the members of the body hold unity with
the head, that are at one with members separated from the head, and disclaim
all influence of spirits from it? Who ever come unto us we are to try them, yea
though they come as Angels of Light, and Messengers of Righteousness, and
finding them deceitful workers, to beware of them, 1 These. 5.21. Phil. 3.2. So
the Wisdom of God speaking of ^he spirit of error, under the notion of a
foolish and whoorish woman, opposed to the Spirit of Truth under the notion of
Wisdom or the wise ^oman, bids us beware of her, and come not near ^he corner
of her house, Prove. 5.8.3. nor give ear ^o her sweet and specious enchantments;
not to ^ut our selves ^shly into her way and company, (...); presuming on our
own strength to pre^rve us, much less entertaining her as a friend and
companion meet for us: and our Savior while on earth in the flesh, left it as
a Ca^at to us, to beware of false Prophets, who though ^hey come in Sheeps
clothing to us, yet inwardly are ^vening Wolves, and seek to devour us, Matthew.
^.15. He would not have us out of charity to ^dge all sheep, and correspond
with them that ^ome to us in the appearance of sheep, but wari^ try them; and
discerning Wolves in that ha^it, to flee from them; as we are not rashly to
account and walk toward all as Wolves that men account so, so neither to
embrace all that profess themselves sheep. I know the Wolves will plead for
charity toward them; but what foolish Shepherd would out of charity listen to
the Wolves so pleading? or what silliness would it be in real sheep to join
themselves with them, because they pretend as sheep a desire to graze with
them? that's bad charity to another, that lays me open to destruction my self.
The Jews of old regarded not such a pretended charity in Sanballat and Tobiah,
desirous to build with them the Temple of the Lord, because they discerned them
to be no friends to their work, but sought by subtilty to hinder it and destroy
them, Ezra 4.1. Its indeed the common plea of such, and of some weak sheep of
Christ, who are in danger that way to be worried by them, what ever a man's
principles be, yet we ought to permit them, and not speak harshly, or at all
against them, but let every man enjoy his own mind; which is a notorious gross
and false position. Indeed as we have said, where men build, and are built upon
the same foundation, even Jesus Christ, there we may, and are to tolerate
difference in doubtful disputations, where the matters of difference are not
evident and plain in Scripture, and but matters of mere indifferency and lesser
moment. But that all should be tolerated in the Church of God, of what ever
opinion and doctrine, though destructive to the fundamentals of the faith, and
no sharp reproof may be given them, is as bad a principle as to tolerate the
Devil in his possession of men, o^ to tolerate all vice and wickedness without
(...) punishment of them: yea in ^o^e cas^s (...) worse; for there are some
p^nciples (...) doctrine, as bad or worse then any evil of practice amongst
men, because some doctrines may naturally lead to all evil practices; As "that
there is no difference to be put between good and evil, sin and righteousness,
that all actions are alike approveable to God; the opinion of good and evil is
to be destroyed out of men; that sin is nothing but an imagination that this or
that is sin; that all men, live or believe how they will, shall have eternal
salvation; that there shall be no resurrection, etc." Beside that evil
doctrines may poison more secretly, and are less dreaded oftentimes then gross
actions, because they have ^ot so horrid an appearance many times to the eye of
men: We find Christ commending some Churches for their patience, when yet he
presently subjoyns by way of praise too, that they ^ould not bear evil persons,
Rev. 2.2. such as seduced the people from him, faulting them that bare with and
permitted them, Revel. 3.15,16. yea that were but lukewarm for him and against
them, as those that mattered not what men hold or teach, how destructive to
Christ and Christianity, so they would think well of them, and let them alone;
such Christ threatens to spue out of his mouth, so far is he from allowing and
approving them: Yea he tells us he hates such ways himself, Rev. 2.6. and sure
he leads his people to be like him. How can thou say Christ is in thee, when
what he declares himself to hate, is patiently tolerated and not reproved by
thee? The Apostles not only bid us hold them as execrable, and account them
accursed that preach beside what they have preached, or that introduce another
Gospel, though they come like Angels: but they have also themselves given them
over to Satan, 1 Timothy 1.20. and as well writ earnestly against them, as they
have exhorted us to contend earnestly with them, Jude 3, 11,12,13. And yet thou
that call thy self a Saint, do rather bless them, and walk with them as
brethren.

But thou will say, But are we as infallible as the Apostles? can we be so sure
what is error as they?

To this I answer, That its true, we have not so full a dispensation of Spirit
from Christ to us as they had that were to lay the foundation; they had greater
work to do, and their talents were proportioned to their work; but yet through
their infallible doctrine, and by the good Spirit of God given us, Romans 8.9.
(or else we are not Saints, or Christ's peculiar people) we may certainly and
infallibly know the foundamental and essential Truths and Principles of
Christian Religion, which none can be ignorant of, and yet be good Christians.
The infallibility and certainty in Christ and his Apostles which thou pleadest,
is an argument against unity with all that thou pleadest for; for they having
been infallibly guided, that that is cross to their infallible doctrine, is
thereby detected to be false and fallible: and thou can not be one with them,
and yet not dislike and shun that that is contrary to them. Sure if we know and
love God, we shall have some discerning and derestation of such doctrines as
blaspheme or dishonor God, and beware of those that bring them: If we be
Christ's sheep, we have some discerning of his voice from the voice of
strangers, John 10.5. so much as may render their voice a strange voice to us,
and such as is not to be approved of us. If a man shall come and tell us there
was never any such man as Jesus Christ, or that if there was, he was only a
type and figure of the true Christ, in us and not the very Savior: that he
rose not, nor ascended, nor shall come again in glory; that he is not the
Mediator between God and us; that our dead bodies shall not arise; that the
Scriptures are not to be heeded in their sayings, and yet we cannot tell
whether these men say truth or not, we are plainly blinded, and are not sheep
of Christ, if we cannot discern these voices to be the voices of a stranger.
Those infallible Writings of the Prophets and Apostles, as they tell us, that
there are and shall be false Prophets and Antichrists, Wolves in sheeps
clothing, deniers of the Lord that bought them, and such as bring in heresies
of destruction; And 2. That such persons and their Doctrines ought not to be
heeded and listened to, but avoided by us, not received to house, or bid God
speed, but held as execrable and accursed, 2 John 10,11. Gal. 8.9. Yea 3. That
such we are to contend against with earnestness, Jude 3. reprove them, stop
their mouths, give warning of them to others that they may not be snared by
them. Tit. 1.9.11. So they tell us further 4. That real believers have received
an holy Unction by which to discern them, 1 John 2.20,27. and so have ability
of discerning them; and indeed that's intimated too in their precepts and
counsels given us to try and avoid them, which otherwise were in vain if they
were beyond our discerning. Nay, 5. They have also notably fore described them,
foretelling us that they would say they are Christ, and deceive many, Matthew.
24.5. that they deny Jesus to be the Christ, 1 John 2.22. make a cipher of him,
call him execrable, 1 Cor. 12. deny the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 2.1.
confess him not come in the flesh, 1 John 4.3. Will mock at the promise of his
coming, 2 Pet. 3.4. pretending that there neither is, nor shall be any
alteration; no other coming but that that is and always has been to all the
Prophets and Patriarks in all times; deny the resurrection of the body, 1 Cor.
15. and say that the resurrection is now made, or is already past 2 Timothy 2.18.
hear not the Apostles in their doctrines and sayings, 1 John 4.6. Speak high
swelling words of vanity, promising men liberty while themselves are servants
of corruption, 2 Pet. 2.18.19. exalt themselves above all that is called God,
or that is wor^ipped, 2 These. 2.4. above Magistrates and Governors, if not
suitable to their humors, yea against Jesus Christ, and above him, and God in
him, unthroning him, and despising his Ordinances as light and foolish things;
lawless men that worship not God, pray not to him, nor call upon him; yea in a
word, by their fruits we may know them, Matthew. 7.16. for they lead from Jesus
Christ the only begotten of God, in whom only we may meet with salvation,
either to rest in their own works joined with, or preferred before Christ; or
else to looseness in principles and practices to walk after their own ungodly
lusts, self-lovers, covetous, boasters of their abilities, knowledge,
seize, proud, so as to lift up themselves, as is aforesaid blasphemers,
that is, speakers evil of Gods Ways, Temple, Ordinances, and them that worship
therein, disobedient to parents, either natural or spiritual in Christ,
unthankful (to God especially for his love in Christ, and for his appointments
for their good) unholy, (not living to God and Christ, not calling upon him,
giving thanks to him etc.) without natural affection to their own relations,
truce breakers, that keep not Covenants or engagements to God or men, false
accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of them that are good, 2 Timothy
3.1.2,3,4 etc. A mavelous thing it is that a man should be a Saint, and yet
not know the essentials of that Word that sanctifies him; should be begotten by
the Gospel, and yet know not that Gospel by which God has begot him, so as to
discern it from other doctrines; that God has writ to us by his servants so
plainly of these things, and we have the benefit and help of those gifts given
by Christ to them, that we might be se^led, and not tossed to and fro like
children: and yet we know not who say right, and who say wrong: sure we know
nothing then, and so know not what charity is, or what love we should walk in,
and toward whom, if we know not the Gospel in its first and bottom doctrines,
and cannot discern whether men preach with or besides that doctrine taught or
recorded by the Apostles, when we hear them, speak they never so fully for, or
against it; we have lost our eyes sure and understanding.

Obj. But must we not do to them as we would they should do to us? though we do
discern them, must we not still love them?

Answ. I answer, yes, them that are not given over to destraction, them that we
see not to have sinned to death, and to have trampled under foot the Son of
God, counting the blond of the Covenant after it has been sanctifying them an
unholy or common thing, and have done despire to the Spirit of Grace: which
things, as they may be discerned by us, so are we to be very wary of rash and
unadvised judging. But what love is that that we are to walk in to them that we
discern not so far gone? is it to hear them blaspheme, deny, undervalue, and
trample upon the Lord Jesus the Mediator between God and men, and yet own them
as brethren? is it to love them more then Jesus Christ's Surely, this is love
that we keep Gods Commandments; and this is his Commandment, that as we have
heard from the beginning, so we should Walk in it, 2 John 6. This is not love
in a man to see his neighbor drowning or hanging himself, and not hinder him:
or killing and poisoning others, and yet not reprove them, or endeavor to
preserve the lives of such as he is harming; or to know of men committing
Incest or Adultery, and yet own them as brethren, and not withdraw from them,
and reprove them; much less to see or hear them deny or vilify the Lord Jesus
Christ, and yet judge them precious people, and Gods dear children. That Rule,
what thou would that men should do unto thee, do thou also unto them, Matt. 7
12. is not to be applied to men as vitiously affected, or distempered, but to
men walking orderly and upon well-grounded principles, and so in things that
tend to men's good, or else we shall abuse it. A Drunkard, or Adulterer would
have others make him drunk, or commit adultery with him: shall we abuse that
wholesome Scripture to warrant his doing such wicked acts to, or with others? as
unreasonable is it to apply it thus; We would not be let or hindered in our
endeavoring to bring men to Christ and salvation; therefore neither ought we
to hinder others in drawing men from Christ to their destruction.

Object. But they think to lead men to salvation as well as you.

Answ. But we know they think amiss, when we see them go contrary to the word
of salvation: we know their thought but a strong delusion, when we see in our
cleaving to, and trying them by the Apostolical and Prophetical Doctrine, that
they go in the very steps of those that they have forewarned us of. Its true, a
frantic man may be, and often is, as confident of his way as a sober discreet
man; but yet a sober man will not think himself as well bound to be ruled and
led by him, as the frantic man to be ordered by him: both may be alike
confident as to the height of persuasion, but both have not the same well
groundedness for, nor ability to judge of their confidence. This is no right
judgment of things, to say, this is truth as well as that, because I see this
man as confident of this as that man is of that. We are not to judge of truth
by our own or others confidence of them but by the verdict of God in the
Scriptures. That Rule, what I would that another do to me, I should do the same
to them, is to be applied to men in things for their good, I say, and upon well
grounded principles; I would that men should endeavor to preserve my life, I
should therefore do the like to them. I would in case I be destracted, have
others keep me from hurting my self or others; I would so now in my sober mind;
therefore let me do so to others that are destracted; so it will hold: but not
thus, I in a fit of distraction (suppose) would have others that are sober, let
me run into the river and drown my self, therefore I being in a sober mind
ought to let another that is distracted do so, and not hinder him: Yet such is
their application of that Rule, that would have us not to judge them in an
error, that we know deny the Lord Jesus Christ, nor reprove them for it, and
endeavor to preserve others from so doing, because we would not have others
judge the Truth to be Error, and reprove us for it, and endeavor to keep back
others from receiving it. Indeed as I would not have others in case I should
fall into distraction, to do me any real harm, or to deal evilly with me, to
make me worse, and keep me from returning to a sober mind; yet if their
witholding me from self-murder or mischief to others, should vex and make me
worse, though they therein deal as well and fairly with me as my destraction
would permit them, therein they would not be faultworthy: So we are to deal
righteously, and lovingly as their condition may permit, to those that are
deceived, and deceivers, and not by any unjust accusations of them, or violent
carriages toward them to harden and strengthen them from returning, especially
seeing the zeal and wrath of men will not accomplish the righteousness of God;
only so far we must use plainness and sharpness toward them as we see
necessary and requisite, either for detecting their evil, and pulling them out
of it; or however for the preserving others from being snared by them; and so
far as that will require it, I am not to matter their offence-taking, and
enmity against me for the same: love to particulars must give way to love to
the general; and love to evil men, must give way to love to God and good men
when they come in competition; as love to a rotten member must give way to love
to the found, and to the whole body. I shall do well if my leg or foot be
wounded, to apply healing medicines to it; but if it putrify, I must apply
things to it that will eat out the dead flesh, though they will bring some
smart and pain to it that will make it fell and angry; yea, and rather then my
whole body should perish by its incorrigibleness, I should do well to cut it
off and sever it from the body before it be too far infected: and I suppose no
man would fault me for want of love and charity, either to it, or to my body in
so doing. The like is to be done to those that being corrupt themselves
endanger the corrupting others too from the faith of Christ; only by cutting
off, I would not be understood to mean a banishing them the Country, or putting
them to death. I would not have Saints in the way of their spiritual warfare,
and for their faith, to make use of such weapons, God having given them others
to make use of, viz. the Sword of the Spirit, Prayers, Warnings, Admonitions,
Reproofs, withdrawings from them, casting them out of fellowship, and looking
upon them as accursed to them; which are Christ's spiritual weapons, and to be
used as the ^ase may require; however some deceived, or not rightly guided
spirits boggle at it; but as for them when without, let God there judge them:
in the mean while Saints should by all means out of love to the sound members,
not cease to warn, admonish, and watch over them as opportunity is given them,
opening to them the evil of those false ways, in which others would snare
them, as we find to have been the frequent course of the Apostles in their
Writings. I fear men that rightly understand not, will abuse this that's here
said, even as they do the very Scriptures also: yea, not only they that are
not believers, but even some weaker or rasher believers also will be too often
ready to take up these practices which they ought to walk in against the Wolves
and Seducers, upon due proof and knowledge that they are such against their
brethren for some smaller differences; but the abuse of truth by some must not
hinder the use and practice of it in a due way by others. Its likely too, that
the Scribes and Pharisees and Hypocrites of the Jewish Church, would be ready to
justify their own practices against the Apostles and Christians, in condemning
and speaking evil of them, by the Apostles practices and so sharp writings
against the false Apostles and Apostates: though in this they differed, that
the one made use of carnal weapons upon unjust grounds against the truth; and
the other of spiritual weapons, upon good and warrantable grounds for the
truth; the one fought against men with violence to the death for holding to the
Scriptures, and asserting that Jesus is the Christ; and the other spoke against
and warned men of the Apostates and perverters of the Gospel for what they knew
they acted and preached against the Scriptures and the faith of Christ; and
probably some of the like spirit may think to justify and strengthen
themselves in their desired way of persecuting Gospel and Scripture assertions,
by what is here writ against such as lead men from the Scriptures into heresies
of destruction: yet that notwithstanding be we wary of our own, and one
another souls, and take the Apostles counsel in walking toward those that
upon due grounds from the Scripture we see would pervert them: I say upon due
Scripture-grounds, that we may not mistake in our application of the counsels
they give us to these or those persons, left we condemn such as are not
condemned by them. Its needful that we try things and persons before we receive
them, or reject them; and in this trial, as its needful to mind the Apostle
John's notes of discerning men, viz. to mind whether they confess (that is hold
forth, exalt, and lead to faith in) Christ come in the flesh; that is, as he
was made of a woman, made under the Law, died for us, and is risen again, etc.
and to mind whether they hear, hold forth, consent, and come up unto the
Apostles Doctrine, and wholesome Sayings: So do I approve, that it be with the
joint advice and helpfulness of brethren, chiefly such as are of more stability
and greater understanding; not but that weaker believers, in case God by his
Providence cast them upon such alone, in taking heed to the word of Grace, and
looking to God for help, may be able to discern them: but God loves unity of
brethren, and likes not of men's despising the help he therein affords, but
punishes such despisings of them and self-presumption; to brotherly union God
has promised his blessing, and Christ his presence to his, agreeing together
to act in his Name; a sheep straying from the fold, and going alone, is often
caught up, when they that abide with the flock sustain no harm. To this trial
also we may give credit to the testimonies of approved understanding and
faithful brethren, as to matters of fact, or speech of their own knowledge
declared by them; for so we find even the Apostles to have practiced, 1 Cor.
1.11. and 11.18. and 5.1. in believing the testimonies of approved brethren
against men, and to have given warning to others of men whom they proved
unfaithful or evil themselves, 1 Timothy 4.14,15. yea, and it is an argument of
some defect and want of charity toward such brethren, not to give due credit
to their testimonies and brotherly warnings; such a thing we find upbraided in
the Disciples by our Savior, in Mark 16.14. Because they believed not them
that had seen him after the Resurrection.

Again, when it is evident that men are departed from the faith; ye are to put
difference between some and others in your carriage toward them, as the Apostle
Jude has given direction, as toward those that through temptation, and simple
heartednedness are overreached and turned aside, but as yet not made one with,
and confirmed in the deceits by which men or Satan has beguiled them; ye are
to walk with more tenderness in the spirit of meekness and love, seeking to
recover them, till ye see there is no further hope of them. But for others that
begin to grow stiff, reprove and rebuke them more sharply, and by fear, and the
terrors of the Lord, endeavor if possible to scare them from their evil ways;
but if after twice or ^ice admonishing, they yet choose their own ^y, and depart
from the Apostolical Doctrine, ^one of their own devising, then as the Apostle
^ul advises, reject them, Tit. 3.11. yea, such as (...) perceive upon good and
due proof to be of (...) Synagogue of Satan, membred into him, and ^come a seed
of his begetting, sworn enemies ^s it were) to the Lord Jesus, doing the devils
^ork for him; we may not only count as accursed, and give them up to Satan,
but also pray against them, as diverse passages will warrant us (...) the
Apostles Doctrine; only ye are to be ^y wary in this case of doing nothing
rashly, (...) upon mature deliberation, and a clear ^cerning.

Sect. 5. Exhortations to worthy walking toward the world, or residue of men
yet uncalled.
FOr your walking toward the world; Let it be such as becoms the Gospel, and
such as may ^orn and commend it to men, such as in which ^en may see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven, Matt. 5.16. an
unreproveable and faultless walking, as the Sons of God in the midst of a
crooked and perverse generation, ^il. 2.15,16. having for the end of it the
glorifying of God in Christ, and the good of the world viz that the yet
uncalled or unsubdued ones, may be convinced and drawn to believe, if it may be
at least, have their mouths stopped, and their ignorance silenced, that they may
have no excuse for their folly, nor any just cause in you of stumbling them and
keeping them out from God, to whom ye seek to draw them. And indeed the grace
(...) God, and what ye have therein heard and seen, wi^ teach you how to walk
toward all; only I sha^ briefly put you in mind of its teachings; it w^ lead
you to sobriety in your selves amongst them not to walk in coveteousness, but
to show for^ moderation and contentedness in the lot of yo^ condition; not to
drunkenness, riotousne^ chambering and wantonness, as if ye had your happiness
in the enjoyment of fullness in the creatures, or in satisfying the flesh, in
its lusts and afflictions, but in mortification of your earthly members, as
those that are called to better and mo^ lasting pleasures, and enduring
substance; it w^ teach you also to walk toward others with (...) righteousness
and equity in your several places a^ and relations; if men in authority, then
to execu^ Justice and Judgment, to show mercy to the ^fl^ cted and oppressed,
to govern them under you^ the fear of the Lord, and according to the good
laudible and just Statutes and Laws agreed up^ in the Land; hating
covetousness, extortion, (...) pression and bribery, not respecting person
(...) taking rewards, nor lifting up your selves ^oudly above your brethren,
despising and seeking to enslave them, but exercising the power (...) have for
the good of all men, and special protection and encouragement of those that are
^ceable and righteous amongst them. If ye be ^rsons under Authority, then be ye
subject to ^se set over you for the Lords sake, whether worthy or unworthy,
good or froward, looking ^ on them as ordered by the just hand of the ^rd to
those places above you, either for your ^rtties or chastisement and trial: Thus
the Apostle exhorts to be subject to the higher ^ers, paying tribute to them,
and custom to ^m custom, honor to whom honor is due etc. ^m. 13.1,2.7. Due,
that is, by their places, ^ugh they themselves may be unworthy per^s, as those
Roman Magistrates many of them ^re at that time when those things were writ^ by
the Apostle; not stirring up disobedience (...) rebellion against them, but
leave them to ^d in case of oppression and injustice to order them, knowing he
can alter them, either by ^al ways of superior or coordinate powers ^sed up by
him to that purpose, or by making (...) of wicked men to pleasure his Church,
by in^ding judgment from God upon them, according to that saying, Wickedness
proceeds ^m the Wicked, but my hand shall not be upon (...), 1 Samuel 24.14.
And if Authorities clash one against another, or one part of it with another
keep thee to the utmost of thy endeavor to peace and righteousness, and look
to the hand of God in determining their controversies, and be subject to them
whom God impowreth looking at that, during his impowring it as God Ordinance;
for the powers that are, are of God Romans 13.1. And so if thou be a servant
obey thy Masters in the flesh, 1 Timothy 6.1,2. and bear the yoke patiently, and
serve them faith fully, whether they be good or frowar^ that God has set over
thee, doing what (...) good and lawful in the Lord at their commandment; and
for what is otherwise, patiently enduring their wrath and punishment (...) they
will injustly inflict it; for so is the w^ of God, to put to silence the
ignorance of the follish, 1 Pet. 2.15. walking, as Christ has give example
when he was wrongfully judged an^ punished, though he could have raised legions
(...) Angels for his rescuing: If married, walking (...) that relation with
love and chastity, accordin^ to the Apostles Doctrine; yea to all men wal^ in
all gentleness, meekness, love, forbearanc^ apt to put up injuries; So much as
in you lie^ have peace with all men, Romans 12.18. and as a^ are in need of help,
counsel, succor or suppor^ be ready to help, counsel and relieve them to the
ability; in all these things looking after, an^ walking in holiness, without
which no man can s^ (or enjoy fellowship with) God, Heb. 12.14. Seek not peace
with them then by denying thy God and Savior, thy Faith, and the Doctrine of
the Gospel, or by consenting to them, and approving them (and much less walking
with them) in their unjust, unmerciful, wanton, coverous riotous and licentious
practices; in things indifferent become all things to all to win them; but be
not so indifferent in thy walking with God as to become sinful also with them,
and to conform thy self in their vanities, excesses, delights, fashions to
them: "He that sells peace with God, to buy peace with men, makes an exceeding
silly bargain;" Have no fellowship then with the unfruitful works of darkness,
but rather reprove them, Ephesians. 5.11. To sin with men, is the way to strengthen
them in sin, and not to save them. Take heed then of those loose principles and
practices, that some monsters of men under pretense of higher knowledge of God,
have run into, as to deny all difference of good and evil in actions, to make a
sport of sin, and to account it nothing but a vain opinion, endeavoring to
destroy the habits of Virtue, with the contrary vicious habits; yea accounting
it the top of perfection to be shameless in sinning, and to blot out of
themselves all sense or conscience of sin, tunning headlong into all
lasciviousness and filthiness with greediness, Ephesians. 4.19. to whom it is
happened according to the true Proverb, The Dog is returned to his vomit again,
and the Sow that was washed, to Wallow in the mire, 2 Pet. 2.22. Such persons
with their gross and wicked opinions, and all tendencies thereto (as liberty
taking to carding, dicing, drinking, riotousness, ranting etc. instead of
fasting, praying, confering and reading of the Scriptures) avoid and flee from;
that ye crucify not the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame,
making Him, and the Worship, and Name of God to be despised amongst men; for
indeed that (as was said before) is one main end that ye are to aim at in all
your walking, viz. that ye might glorify God unto the world, and make his name
honorable amongst them, that they might be convinced of the truth and goodness
of your faith professed by you, according to that in our Lords Prayer, that the
World may know that thou have sent me, as that thou have loved them, as thou
have loved me, Joh. 17.21,23. Therefore also the Word of God is to be held
forth to the world, together with your just and good conversation, that they
may see what principles it springs from, that ye walk so well and honestly
amongst them, that so also they may thereby be won in to the same. In both
which respects, of doctrine professed, and conversation becoming it, Believers
are termed the salt of the earth, and the light of the world, a light to be set
up in a Candlestick that it may not be hid, Matthew. 5.13,14.

Sect. 6. The Doctrine to be held forth to the world, and therein of the
Trinity, by way of Digression.
BUt now what that Doctrine is that believers are to hold forth to the world,
would require more words to declare fully, then this inrended Treatise will
afford room for; yet something I shall with Gods assistance hint about it. Its
in a word, the Gospel or word of God, in which he has declared his mind and
will to men, according to that, Phil. 2.16. holding forth the word of life: and
that Mark 16.15. Go Preach the Gospel to every creature: Which is such a
setting forth of the way of life to men, as in which they are called upon to
turn from all other things as vain and dumb Idols, and to turn to the living
and true God by his Son Jesus Christ, Acts 14.15. as the fountain of, and the
proper way to that life and salvation. See the sum of it in 1 Timothy 2.5,6. That
there is one God, and one mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus.
Who has given himself a ransom for All, as an evidence of Gods good will to
All, that he would have all men to be saved and to come to know the truth. This
ye are to hold forth unto men, that there is a God to be adored, worshipped,
submitted t^, trusted in, and served; the author of our life, and breath, and
all things; the fountain of bliss and happiness; and that this God is one in
Essence, mind, purpose, faithfulness; and so that All other powers that the
Heathens have fancied and adored are Idols, vanities and confusion; all things
empty and too weak to save or satisfy besides him; that eternal life and
happiness consists in the true knowledge and enjoyment of him. And yet this
unity of the Godhead is so to be held forth, that the Trinity therein also may
be acknowledged; otherwise men shall not rightly apprehend or worship him
according to the Christian Faith and Doctrine. Concerning which, let me a
little declare my mind to you (though it may seem a Digression) because men's
error hereabout, I find to be often an inlet to many other evil and false
conceptions: I know some make that Trinity or threefoldness in the Divine being
but only a threefold denomination of the same personal subsistence, and that
there is no other distinction between Father, Word and Spirit, but only in that
diversity of denomination; which appears to be an evident falsehood in this,
that by the same rule that God, the Father, Word, and Spirit is called three
because they are three denominations, He might be called seven, or ten, or
more; there being many other denominations in the Scripture given to him, as
Jehovah, Lord of Hosts, Jah, Elohim, Ehjeh, Eloah, Adona^ the Almighty, and
diverse others; but yet he is not said to be so many as he has denominations
given him in any part of Scripture. Besides, different denominations of the
same person or personal subsistence may be convertibly predicated of one
another; as where the same man is Father, and Son and Husband, and Master, and
Magistrate, in diverse respects, there it may be said the Master is the Father,
and the Father is Governor, etc. but so it cannot be said of these three, the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. The Scripture never says, the Father is
the Son, or the Father is the holy Ghost, or the holy Ghost is the Father, or
the Word or Son is the Father, though God is a Spirit, and Christ an
everlasting Father in regard of us; yet not the Father of the only begotten
Son; nor is the Father the Spirit sent by the Father, and yet these three are
but one and the same God. A great mystery it is I confess, and such as passes
expression fully to declare and open; yet a truth it is that the Scriptures
many ways attest, both in the Prophetical and Apostolical writings: Moses hints
it in speaking of God plurally, and yet joining that plural word with a
singular verb, as when he says Elohim Bara, the Gods, or the Mighties; he
created Heaven and Earth, etc. And again, Nahashu, let us make man in our
Image, plurally; and yet by and by he changes the phrase and speaks in the
singular number, God (or the Mighties) made man in his Image: with which agrees
diverse other phrases, as that in Psalm. 149.2. (...) let Israel rejoice in his
makers: and that in Eccles. 12.1. (...) Remember thy Creators in the days of
thy youth: and the like in Job 35.10. and yet more fully in 2 Samuel 7.23. what
one people in the earth is like to thy people Israel, whom (...) verbatim, The
Gods went to redeem to himself. The words that we translate God and went, being
both of the plural number; and yet the pr^noun relative that is added, is
singular, to himself, not to themselves. The two former words plainly
intimating the plurality in way of subsistence; and the singular pronoun, the
unity in Essence; which also is held forth in Gods appearing unto Abraham; in
which he appeared as three men, and Abraham sometimes speaks to him as one; and
sometime in the plural number as to more. Genesis 18. Whence some Hebrew Doctors
have also written thus upon the word Elohim, which is usually translated God;
See Ainsw. in Genesis 1.
Come and see the mystery of the word Elohim; there are three degrees, and
every degree by it self alone; and yet notwithstanding they are all one, and
joined together in one, and are not divided one from another: These places,
with diverse others, (as to instance one more, that in Deuteronomy. 6.5. Hear O Israel,
the Lord thy Almighties is one Lord) intimate a plurality in unity: but other
places express that plurality to be a Trinity or threefoldness in unity, as
that in Psalm 33.6. By the Word of the Lord were the heavens, made, and all the
host thereof by the breath of his mouth, or by the Spirit of his mouth; for the
word (...) signifies both: So that there we have mentioned, the Lord Jehovah,
his Word, and Spirit: as the like we may see also in Isa. 42.1,2. Behold my
servant whom I uphold (which is spoken of the word made Flesh, Jesus Christ;
Mat. 12. who though he was in the form of God, and counted it no robbery to be
equal with him; yet emptyed himself and came in the form of a servant Phil.
2.6,7, etc.) Mine elect in whom my soul delights, I have pat my spirit upon
him, etc. there is the Father held forth under that word, I and my; he whose
servant Christ became, and whose elected and delightful Son he is; and there is
the Son as before was noted, and the Spirit of the Father put upon him. The
like expressions of the Trinity, sce again Isa. 11.1,2. and 61.1. The Spirit of
the Lord is upon me; there is the Lord Jehovah, the Father, and Me, that is the
Word as incarnate and made flesh: and the Spirit or holy Ghost put upon Christ;
which things are yet more clearly opened in the writings of the Evangelists and
Apostles, as is to be seen in Mat. 3.17. where we have this Trinity distinctly
named, Christ baptized, the holy Ghost descending upon him visibly in the
appearance of a Dove; and the Father speaking out of heaven and owning him for
his beloved Son. Here was more then a threefold denomination of one personal
subsistence; the Father and Son here are plainly distinguished; for he says not
of himself I am the beloved Son, but of Christ, this is my beloved Son, etc. In
2 John 3. he is distinguished plainly from him; Grace and peace from God the
Father, and from Jesus Christ the Son of the Father, etc. See the like in Col.
2.2. God, the Father, and Christ; as also the distinct applications of those
words, Begetting, and Begotten, Sending, and being Sent, with diverse others,
argue the sending forth of Christ, as the begetting him is always attributed to
the Father; the Father sent the Son the Savior of the world, and God have his
only begotten Son; its never said, nor were it proper to say, the Father sent
himself, or the Son sent himself, much less that God sent the Father, or the
like; where there is distinction of sending and being sent, begetting and being
begotten, there is more then difference in denomination; for though the same
may be denominated in diverse respects, Father, and Son, and Husband, and
Master, as we said before; yet its improper to say that the Father begat the
Son, speaking but of the same in diverse respects, both Father and Son; or that
the Father sent the Master or Son, when he that is all these in diverse respects
comes himself, being sent of none other then himself. Beside, its never said
the Father was made flesh, or the Father suffered for our sins, or delivered up
himself for our offenses; but its often said the Father made his Son an
offering for our sins: God delivered up Christ for our offenses, raised him,
exalted him, etc. which argues plainly that there is more then a nominal
distinction between them; as also that Christ is said not to have thought it
robbery to be equal with God: Now where there is equality, there is distinction
too; for its improper to say of the same indistinct thing, that its equal to
its self; yea, Christ himself though he says his Father and he are one, John
10.30. [(...), Vnum, one Essence or thing, not Vnus, one personal subsistence,
or one in way of subsisting) yet he speaks of himself and Father as of two
witnesses. I am one that bear witness of my self, and my Father that sent me
bears witness of me, John 8.18. And to say no more, its evident in this, that
the word was made flesh, and so is become man too: There is one God, and one
Mediator of God and men, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. And God will judge
the world by that man whom he has appointed, Acts 17.31. But the Father is
never affirmed to be man, nor could Christ be Mediator of God and man, if not
in something distinct from either, as well as in something one with either. And
so for the Spirit it is clearly in that of Mat. 3. and the other places of
Isaiah before mentioned, distinguished from both Father and Son, and is further
proved to be so by that of our Savior, John 14.16,17. I will pray the Father,
and he shall send you another Comforter the Spirit of Truth, where all the
three are again mentioned, and clear distinctions between each of them from
other hinted. I will pray the Father, there is Father and Son: between whom were
there no Distinction, that phrase were very improper: If the Son be the Father,
he should rather only have said, I will send another Comforter, then I will
pray the Father and he shall send, etc. and there is the Spirit distinct from
both, both from him that said he would pray, and him to whom he would pray;
from the Father, for he is to send him and is prayed to for him; from the Son
who prays the Father to send him, for he expressly calls him another Comforter,
that is, another from or besides himself that was then with them. The Spirit of
Truth, that is, of the Son, for the Son is the Truth, and is to be glorified by
him, as in Chap. 16.13,14. When the Spirit is come, he shall not speak of
himself, but he shall glorify me. How shall not he speak of himself it he be
Christ of whom he should speak, and whom he should glorify? where note by the
way, that the Spirit that speaks of himself, and not of Christ, leading the
soul to understand the things of Christ, and to glorify him, is not ^he true
and right Spirit sent forth by Christ. ^ut not to enlarge further in this
matter, what ^ore plain then that commission, ^o Disciple all Nations, (...).
or all the Gentiles, Baptizing them into the ^ame of the Father, and of the
Son, ^all of the holy Ghost? The Name, not names and denominations, but one
Name, Power, Au^ority and Jurisdiction of Father, Son and Spirit; now what
needs this Distinct repeating of ^ather, Son and holy Ghost, if no distinction
^nt in denomination be put between them? ^how can it be said as in 1 John 5.7.
that they ^re three witnesses? There are three that bear ^itness in heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the ^oly Ghost, and these three are one: Where the lord
again is not (...), as if they were one in way ^f subsisting, or personality,
as they use to ^eak, but (...) unum, (...), hi tres ^mum sunt, these three are
one thing; one being (...) Essence; one God, but yet three in regard of
^ersonality, so as the notes of persons, I and ^hou, and He, may distinctly,
and frequently ^re in Scripture applied to them. I shall not ^ention that in
Rev. 1.4,5. with diverse other ^laces to this business: but shall a little
further ^pen my conceptions about this so high a busi^ess. And so I understand
that the Father is the fountain of the Deity as it is in the Son, but is not
the Son, but has begotten him, and give^ to him to have life in himself; and
has spoken by him; and so the Godhead is in the Father a^ the fountain of
Divine power. The Son is the Word, the essential, eternal Word of the Father,
and so God, as flowing from, and manifesting the Father, who in himself, and
otherwise then by the Son or Word is not to be known o^ seen into: The divine
out-streaming wisdom by whom the Father, that fountain of Divine glory, put
forth his Divine virtue, and Created all things, and upholds them, and has
revealed and declared himself to men; who also in due time, for the sake of man
turned away and fallen from him, was Incarnate by the power of God, and
incorporated in the seed of David according to the flesh, and so became also a
man* and in the nature of man by the heavenly flowing forth of his Divine
doctrine, and by the things undergon by, and accomplished in him, he opened,
represented, and declared to us the Father; and so the Son is as the flowing,
or out speaking of the Father; and the Spirit is the same divine being, but as
in both, and proceeding from both; the power, virtue and force that is in, and
works or acts forth it self from both, from the fountain by the stream; so
as that the Father works all things through the Son, by the Spirit. We may
somewhat illustrate it by this comparison, as I humbly con^eive of it.. The
Light that God made to rule day is but one, and its the Sun; and yet that light
is after one manner in the body of the Sun, and after another in the glorious
ray and beam, the (...), or shining forth of the Sun: and in another manner yet
in the air illuminated by the beam from the body of the Sun, and yet all these
but one light, not three lights; yet that one light has a threefold manner of
subsisting; the Sun is not one light, and the ray or beam of the Sun another,
and the clearness or bright shining in the air illuminated through the beam a
third, but one day light, or light of the Sun. The Sun is the fountain, and
generateth or begets its ^ray or beam, and works by it whatever it does by
way of illumination, heating, quickening, etc. yet is not the body of the Sun
its ray or beam. Again, the ray is begotten and generated, in a sort, by the
Sun, and yet its cotemporary with it: It evidences the Sun, lives by its
dependence on the Sun, is in the Sun, and the Sun in it, after a sort; so as
that it does nothing of it self without the Sun, nor the Sun without it; which
comes down from the Sun, and is not the body of the Sun, nor subsists of it
self without the Sun. Again, the clearness or light dif^used into the air,
proceeds from the Sun the fountain of light, by, with, in and through the ray
or beam: yet is it neither the body of the Sun nor its ray; for it is and may
be where the ray is not, but is intercepted as to the proper substance of it;
as in a cloudy day, or in a room where the Sun beam comes not, and yet these
cannot be divided one from the other; for this clearness cannot be but from and
by virtue of the ray, and of the Sun; So that if either of them were taken away
and removed from the Horizon, the luster or illumination in the air cease,
and they cannot be, but this is and follows too: Here is an unity of light in a
threefold way of subsistence, by which we may darkly see into the glorious
mystery of Trinity in Unity, which no similitude can fully illuminate; the
Father is as the fountain of the Deity, and to the Son or Word as the body of
the Sun to its beam, not to be separated from each other, or divided, so as the
one can be without the other; though the Father is first in order of nature, he
of whom are all things, and does all by, and nothing without the Son or Word,
as the Sun does nothing without its beam. The Word or Son in the (...), Heb.
1.2. The brightness or off^ shining of the Fathers glory; Lumen de lumine,
light shining for discovering and leading up to the fountain of light; always
with the Father, and yet came down from the Father, and does all from him, and
yet is not the Father but the Son; yea and forther, as the beam of the Sun may
be contracted, and as it were so incorporated in a burning glass, or the like,
so as the glass by virtue of the beam, and the beam by the glass works
otherwise then either glass or beam by themselves could have done; and yet
neither the light nor the body of the Sun is to be so contracted, but only the
beam; so was it with the Son or Word, he was imbodied or incarnate in the
nature of man, and the man Christ Jesus by virtue of the Word so contracted, as
it were, or incorporated in him, did such glorious things, and got such a
glorious conquest over sin, death and hell, as man of himself ^ould never
otherwise have done or gotten, nor was the Word in and by it self perfected
for; and yet neither the Father nor the holy Spirit was so incarnate, or made
man: and yet further, the Son had all his virtue in himself from the Father,
and in the Spirit, without which he ^ould do nothing; as the ray contracted,
derives all its virtue that it shows forth in and through the glass from the
body of the Sun, without which it could neither be nor do any thing. The holy
Spirit is the power, vigor, and divine ver^e proceeding from the Father, that
fountain of divine glory, from and through the Word, by which we have and enjoy
the benefit of the Sun and its beam, when both of them are otherwise
interpreted, and clouded out of our sight; I mean the Father and the Son, even
in a day of temptation, and spiritual hiding of himself in his more glorious
shinings.

But these things I bring only to show that there may be such a thing
evidenced, even to reason and sense, as a threefold way of subsistence of the
same created being, that so we might not stumble at that which the Scripture
hints to us so abundantly about the Trinity in the Unity of the divine Being:
Concerning which I needed not to have multiplied so many words, were it not
that the old Serpent, not abiding in the truth, is so prevalent in blinding
men, and corrupting them from the unerring Oracles of Divine truth, to listen
rather to the shallowness of their own purblind reason: For the Saints are not
without experience in themselves (did they well mind it) of this distinction,
in the glorious workings and operations of God in and upon themselves in their
believing: they prove the Father calling them to himself, by the Son, in the
power of his Spirit; they have believed the love of the Father in sending forth
his Son, and in the word of his Gospel they have felt his power and Spirit
drawing and inabling them to believe in Christ, and to approach by and through
him unto the Father, according to that Ephesians. 2.18. We both (that is Jew and
Gentile) have access through him (to wit Christ) by one Spirit unto the Father,
namely, to call upon him, trust in him, and have fellowship with him. Indeed
they that depart from the Son, they both lose the operations of his divine
Spirit, and fall from the right worship of the Father into Heathenism, or such
philosophical speculations of God and of his Being, as were found with the
ancient Heathens that had not the light of the Gospel to instruct them; and no
marvel then if they fall from, or deny the mystery of the Trinity as in the
Apostolical doctrine is held forth, with those divine operations that should
evidence the truth thereof unto them. But now to return again to the matter
whereto I was exhorting, viz. the doctrine of the Gospel to be held forth to
men, as it supposes the Being of God, and he but one, though thus
distinguished; so is it not only the bare affirming him to be but one, or in
that Unity so as before to be distinguished, that is to be delared, but his Name
according to that Unity and distinction; the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost, viz. how God has manifested himself, and is to be
believed in in each of these; as that this one God by his Word and Spirit,
having made and created all things for man, and man in his own Image deserved
and required to be obeyed and honored by man; but man sinning, and therefore
falling under his displeasure, and making himself thereby unable to please him,
and unfit for fellowship with him by reason of that unspeakable pollution that
has overspread him, God was yet pleased in the greatness of his mercy and
freeness of his love to find out a way to recover us again, and a way by which
we might return back again unto him: So as that both his justice and
displeasure against sin might clearly be demonstrated, and yet his goodness and
love too toward sinful mankind be magnified; which was by appointing and
sending forth his Son made of a woman, made under the Law, so being found in
shape as a man, a real man, to bear in his body the punishment of our sin, the
sin of the world; and so to give himself a ransom for all. That this his Son,
the Word made flesh (as was long before, even from the beginning of the world,
fore-prophecied of him) is now come already, and has taken upon him in the
body that was prepared for him, the burden and cause of man; and as a public
man given himself a ransom for All; enduring the Death, and undergoing that
sentence of curse and condemnation, that by the offense of one came upon All
men, and that for All: and has in grapling with that death and sin overcome
them; so that God has raised and justified him in the behalf of all; so as he
may also see the justificatian of all that do and shall believe on him.

To which purpose also, viz. that men might in believing on him, have him for
their justification, the Father has glorified him in the nature and behalf of
mankind, making him Lord of all, and his salvation to the end of the earth;
giving him all fullness of Authority and Power, and filling him with all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily, even the fullness of Divine Spirit, Power and
Virtue; yea also appointing and ordaining him as Mediator to stand in the
Virtue of his Death and Sacrifice between God and men as the propitiation for
them, even for our sins that believe, and not ours only, but also of the whole
world, 1 John. 2.1,2. So as that with respect to him, and what he has done and
suffered for sin, he is good and patient, and bountiful to the whole world, not
withstanding they sin; yea, and has sent out his Gospel to be published to
them all, without limitation or restriction, viz. that though this his Son
there is forgiveness for them, and he would have them saved, and to that
purpose come to the acknowledgement of the truth: yea He, to wit Christ, is He
in whom all the world, or any of them may find favor, and come into favor with
God again, so as to be at one with him; namely, by acknowledging his Truth, and
believing on him; who also is appointed by his teaching them as a Prophet, by
his ruling them in righteousness, and writing his Law in them, and subduing
their enemies as a King and Lawgiver and Judge over them; and by mediating the
new Covenant or Advocating and making intercession as the great High Priest to
the utmost to save all them of the sons of men, that see and believe on him;
and so judge his and their enemies that that hate his Light, and reject his
^endred mercy to condemnation; to which end he shall at the time appointed of
the Father come again, and raise and judge both the one and the other, as they
have here behaved themselves toward him. That as the Father has put his
Spirit upon Christ, so they are to submit unto Christ in his Word and
Ordinances, and look unto, and wait therein for this his Spirit upon him, as he
that is Power of God, that is, to bring down, or effect in man that salvation
that is in Christ Jesus set forth to them the Renewer, Sanctifier, Teacher,
Comforter, and therefore to be heard, sought after, received, and obeyed by
men: in the power of which they are to worship the Father through the Son, and
in the receipt and indwelling of whom they shall find, and experiment the
streams of that Fountain of Life that flows from the Father, or rather that the
Father is in and through the Son; yea God himself by his Spirit to dwell in
them, and to set up his Kingdom in them in Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the
holy Ghost, to the full possession and revelation of which in and upon them
this Divine Spirit in such their listening to, following after, and obeying him,
will not fail to bring them,

Sect. 7. A Caveat against some men's preposterous mistakes about the Doctrines
of Election and Reprobation.
THis then is the brief sum of the Doctrine to be held forth to the world, in
which we may hopefully expect and look for the assistance and operation of the
Spirit to convince them of the good will of God toward them, and therein of
their sin for not believing on him, Joh. 6.11. that has done so much for them,
and is so appointed and fitted of God for saving them; And of Righteousness,
both that all the righteousness they have of their own is empty, and will not
avail them; otherwise no need for Christ to have died for them, and also that
in him is everlasting righteousness, worthy to be looked after, and certain in
that their looking to him for it to be met with by them; And of Judgment, that
their own self-justifications will not serve them, nor their own
self-condemnations so valid as remedilesly to cast them; but to his doom they
must stand by whom the Prince of the world is judged, and they must receive
their final sentence from him, who is able, in case of their believing on him,
to absolve them from all self-condemnings; and in case of their disobedience
against him, and the Will of his Father to destroy them, however their own
thoughts and other men have hitherto justified them.

Yea, in this Doctrine we may hopefully expect the holy Spirit to draw in, and
allure the convinced to hope in him, and believe on him; and therefore this
hold ye forth to them; and to the furtherance of this, let all your
conversations and walkings be directed, as becoms the children of such a
Father, the members of such a Head as the Lord Jesus, and as the Temples of the
holy Ghost, that they that are apt to slight the Word, may yet be won to
glorify it by the goodness of your conversation.

And beware, I pray, of that preposterous way that some run into, who through
mistake or unbelief of the Gospel delivered to us by the holy Apostles,
according to the commandment of the everlasting God, and through the exercise
of their own reason with the mistaking of some Scriptures, do hold forth to the
world another manner of doctrine, telling them that some few are and were
Elected from Eternity, and others the most part of men (even where the Gospel
is sent too) were from Eternity reprobated, and must inevitably be damned,
because God has so appointed to them; and has not appointed or sent forth any
Mediator for them to approach to him by; nor that Mediator done any thing for
them in his Death and suffering; only those few he has elected he would have
saved, and for them only Christ has given himself a ransom, and is a
Mediator; all the rest God has no good will to, nor has provided any remedy
for, but has left them in their fall, that they might there sink and perish:
thus mistaking and preposterously holding forth those decrees of Election and
Reprobation which they rightly understand not, making of them dangerous and
unprofitable doctrines which otherwise in due place and manner propounded, are
very wholesome; for herein they go beside their Commission, preaching an
uncertain sound to men which the world can have no good use of; for when they
hear it, what use have they of it, but to trouble or harden them? for what
other consequence can they naturally draw from thence then this? Either I am
elected or not; if I be, then I am well enough, no sin can, or shall hurt me;
Christ has wholly taken if off, and will not suffer it to condemn me; no
matter whether I hear or not; nay, though I swear and drink, or whore, or do
what I please; if there be any Christ for me, I shall and must have him, and in
due time be brought to him, and to life by him, do what I can; if otherwise, I
shall but here torment my self with a melancholy and religious life in vain;
what profit is it to pray to him, and seek him, seeing if I may obtain life, I
shall have it thrust upon me? yea, and if I be Elect, I shall be made religious
too when Gods time is; and till then no evil shall harm me, otherwise no duties
will profit me; Till I be compelled then, and constrained to do otherwise, I
will take my pleasure and do what I pleas no actions of mine, can either help
or hinder me. Now if it work not thus with all in the world, yet then they are
busied to know their Election, which being indeed in Christ, cannot rightly be
known but in him, nor till men be in him; and in the mean time the Gospel is
withheld from, or made doubtful to them by which they should be drawn in to
him, and in which they might see good ground for them to believe in him; for
how shall any know that there is good news from God for them, while they know
not that Christ was sent of God for their sakes; or has given himself a ransom
for them, seeing God makes out his Love to men only through him, in whom and
none else there is salvation? And how shall these things be known by any,
according to that way of doctrine, but by knowing first of all their Election,
though yet according to the Gospel and Scripture-tenor delivered by the
Apostles, this is a thing not precedent but consequent to their being in Christ
and believing on him? Now what is it to believe in Christ, but through the
hearing and receipt of what God has done for them in him, and he suffered and
done by the appointment of God for them, and the fullness in him, to trust in
him, and through him for all their future saving, the working all their works
in them, preservation of them here, and bringing them to glory hereafter?
according to that Romans 5.9,10. God has commended his love to us in this, that
while we were sinners, yet Christ died for us, whence (as follows) springs up
that believing exercise and reasoning of the heart for his future saving them;
if while enemies God has reconciled us through the death of his Son, how much
more shall he not save us by his life, we being through what he has done
reconciled to him? The hearing and belief then of what God has done for men in
Christ is the medium of drawing men in to believe on Christ, and thence faith
is called a faith in the blood of 01 Christ, Rom 3 25, but now in that way of
doctrinating men, that medium to this believing is made a consequent of it;
that that should draw them in to him, made to follow their being in him; and so
in stead of believing through Grace, as the phrase is, Acts 18.27. that is,
through the good will of God held forth in the Gospel, and there made to appear
to them, they are required first to believe in Christ, that they might be
persuaded that there is grace and good will with God toward them; they are
required to trust in his Name, that they may know there is something in it that
they may trust in, and not first taught to know his Name as meet to be trusted
in by them, that so they might trust in it; whereas right trusting in him
springs from the very power of the Spirit working in the opening and
declaration of his Name unto them, Pal. 9.10. And only such a faith, a faith
of the right stamp, a faith that springs from, and works by Love, is
sufficient to evidence men's Election; but such a faith (I say) none can have
till the goodness of God is first discovered to them, and they see and believe
his love to them; for our love to him, and so by consequent the faith that
works by love, springs from the appearance of his love to us, according to that
We love because he loved us first. That faith is dead which the Word of the
Gospel, declaring the goodwill of God in Christ, and so the appearance of his
Love therein, inlivens and quickens not, such a faith can never evidence a man's
Election; and yet such a faith they must build the thoughts of their Election
upon, that that should produce a living faith in them, being not to be
apprehended by them as true for them till that be first known, except they will
run themselves and their hearers upon a gross (...), of producing the fruit
before the tree, the effect before the cause, a living faith before they
receive that that should make it living; rest in the blood of Christ for
remission, before they can tell whether that blood was shed for them, that in
resting in it, or in God through it, they might have their sins remitted: one
of these they necessarily put men upon; they knowing it to be unsafe to pry
immediately into the secrets of God, and endeavor a priori to find out that
their Election, as a way that leads to delusion, and destraction; and yet such
an inconvenience many so doctrinated are ready to run upon. Besides that, while
they endeavor to bring men to apply the Gospel to themselves only upon some
conceived fruits of Election, they turn preachers of the Law to them in stead
of the Gospel to bring them to some such fruits, as legal repentance, sorrow,
reformation, and upon such things found in them (as what else but fruits of
Law, and a legal conscience can be produced by them before the grace and love
of God be held forth to them as testified in Christ toward them?) they are bold
to apply the Gospel to them, as if they were the undoubted signs of Election;
for so much is intimately employed, by comparing this their practice with their
other Assertions of the Grace of God, and Death of Christ limited to the
Election; from which practice of their legal preaching it comes to pass that
some working and striving for this and that frame, and attaining to some legal
qualifications or workings, with the Pharisee, presume that they are righteous,
and have part in Christ, and bless God as if his Grace had wrought those frames
in them, when as his Grace (that is, his love and goodwill in Christ) they
never apprehended or believed; nor was that the ground and rise of those frames
and changes in them, but only is inferred and concluded to themselves upon
those frames by them.

Others spend their days in sadness, and in laboring, as the Israelies under
their Egyptian Taskmasters, to get to themselves those frames which only the
belief of Gods Grace would kindly effect in them, falling short of what they
seek in themselves to build their title to the Gospel Doctrine of the Death of
Christ upon, they pine away in a servile slavery, and are always near unto
desperation, unless mercy otherwise breaking forth unto them seasonably relieve
them.

Take heed therefore of this preposterous preaching of Election and Reprobation
to the world, and limiting the Gospel and death of Christ to the Election which
no Scripture does; and declare that to the world that Christ has instructed us
that his servants are to declare to them, viz. tell them of the feast prepared
in Christ, forgiveness with him, his death for them; all things ready for their
entertainment, God willing that they be saved, and Christ perfected for their
saving; and thereupon invite all, and call upon them to go to the wedding, to
believe and submit unto him. And where it pleases God to work so powerfully as
to prevail with some, so as that they are persuaded to let go all for him, to
receive him, believe in him, and cleave unto him, we may comfortably mind them
of the doctrine of Election, as the Apostles have used to apply it to
believers, minding them it was Gods goodness and free mercy and grace to them,
that they are preserved, or plucked out from the same unbelief and wickedness
that is found with others, or not given over for their follies against him;
when as many others (perhaps as little or less rebellious) have been more
severely dealt with by him; and that in Christ, in whom they believe, they are
made complete; being by Gods order, from before the foundation of the world,
chosen in him to be holy (that is a peculiar devoted portion for God) and
blameless in love before him; and when we see men neglect and slight the
goodness of God propounded, we may tell them how God rejected such and such for
their folly against him, and warn them, lest for the like follies the same
should befall them; as Jer. 6 30. and 7.4,5. yea when we see men resting in
their birth, works, privileges, etc. we may well mind men that God has not
chosen the flesh and seed thereof as such, to inherit with him; not Adam and
his seed as such, nor Abraham and his seed as in the flesh, nor the Law and its
seed, but Christ and his seed or members to inherit glory with him; the rest
(otherwise then as they may be born again, and become the seed of God in
Christ) are rejected from part and portion in his kingdom, not from Gods good
will toward them, and the death of Christ for them; for that was for sinners,
ungodly, enemies; yea as considered in such an evil condition; but from
fellowship with God etc inheriting with Christ, which none shall partake of
that abide but in that state of nature (yea though advantaged by more
honorable birth, or more zealous frame) in which Christ extended his pity to
them in dying for them; that so they may be pressed to let all go for Christ,
in whom there is both sure and certain ground for their repenting and
believing, and out of whom there is nothing to be found but perishing.

Now if ye do thus, walking answerably thereto, not measuring the outward
court, Rev. 11.1,2. given to the Gentiles, as if we appropriated it to our
selves only, but worshipping God in his Temple (in fellowship with Christ and
his people that are in union with him) and at his Altar (or in the sacrifice
and meditation of Christ) laboring both by word and conversation, to bring up
the Gentiles from their Gentilism and resting in the outward Court of external
profession to the circumcision of the Spirit, and worship of God in the same,
in the inward man, and in his Temple and Altar (as before) Then shall ye find
his blessing upon you, making you a blessing to them and filling you with his
own spiritual blessings in grace and peace, till he bring you safely to the
full enjoyment of the glorious promises. Even so Amen.

FINIS.
Postscript.
ONe word more I would commend to you, viz. That of our Savior, John 6.56,57.
He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, abides in me, and I in him, etc. a
most excellent and choice direction for our preservation from the errors here
in the Treatise mentioned, and from all other that may endanger our
miscarrying: Would we abide in Christ, that is, in his faith, Spirit, low (
John 15.10.) and so in the experiment and enjoyment of the fruits and virtues
of his mediation for us; and would we have him abide in us (as surely he will
if we abide in him) that is, have his love, Spirit, and divine power abide in
our spirits, making us fruitful, and filling us with divine and eternal life;
and by consequence would we be preserved from the error of the wicked, and
from drawing unto perdition: This is the choice and most sure and excellent way
to eat the flesh of Christ (the flesh given by him for the life of the world, (
ver. 51.) and drink his blood, the blood of the covenant shed for the remission
of our sins, that is to mind, view, diligently look upon, consider, meditate
on, and keep in believing remembrance, the abasement of the Son of God for us,
his obedience and sufferings in the flesh to the death, the death of the Cross
for us, the satisfaction given by him for our sins; the victory obtained over
death; the pretiousness of the blood and sacrifice of Christ; the peace thereby
made; redemption obtained; the prevalency of it with God for us; the covenant
and promises thereby sealed; the performance whereof he mediates in the virtue
of it to his called, etc. and verily we shall be preserved, we shall prove it
the power of God to save us. Romans 1.16. 1 Cor. 15.1,2,3. 1 John 2.24,25. Heb.
3.1.6.14. Gal. 2.20. Search these Scriptures, and see how they fitly explicate
the business; live we then by the faith of Jesus, and forget we not the stripes
by which he heals us. But alas, as many taste not the sweetness of this
heavenly Manna, but abide ignorant of the Cross of Christ, feeding and living
upon their actings, sorrows, good desires, confusions, performances, changes,
zeal, self-acted and conceited believing (as indeed I know not how many should
do otherwise, because the Testimony of God holding forth the Death of Christ
for all, which should let them see good and undeniable ground for minding it,
and feeding upon it, forsaking all other things for it, is by the guids
generally denied and condemned as an error, so as they durst not believe it:
and therefore they having no divine evidence in the Word of God that Christ
died for them, they are put upon it to reason it out by their acts and changes
forementioned, and to make them the evidences to themselves of it, so as they
must needs be the bottom matter of their feeding and consolation;) so many do
but taste it, and abide not there to eat of it, Heb. 6.4,5. but after they have
found some sweetness in it, fall a lusting after evil things, counting this
heavenly food but a dry bread; and so they either feed upon their past acts of
believing, their rejoicing, the operations of it in them (which are often soon
dried up for want of supply from this Fountain, Christ crucified) or else they
reach after some more seemingly glorious matter of their feeding, as is before
spoken to, Chap. 3. Sect 4. and so forget that they were purged from their old
sins, or the means rather of their purging, the true bread that should have
nourished them; and either turn to the world and their corruptions again, or
are carried away with some strong delusion to their ruin, from which the
eating or feeding upon the flesh and blood of Christ (those despised low things
in the eyes of proud men) would have preserved them.

Note also that when in some passages, I fault men for hearing any whom they
will; my meaning is not that I would have men tied up to this or that man, as
if it were unlawful to go from any to another, or to hear any for trial-sake,
or the like; but my meaning is, that men are. faulty in having an itching ear,
that when they have found Truth, yet they will be (out of curiosity or
self-confidence) diving into, and trying what good they can get in some other
doctrines; Such an hearing of them as our Savior says his sheep will not
afford to strangers from him, John. 10.

FINIS.

