THE DECLARATION Of the Right Honorable, RALPH LORD HOPTON, Liftenant General
of all His Majesty's Forces designed for the West of ENGLAND. TO All His
MAJESTY'S loving SUBJECTS Inhabiting in the several Counties of Cornwall,
Devonshire, Summerset, Wilts, Bristoll, Bath and Wells, and the Counties
adjacent. From Plymouth, May. 20, 1650.

Printed in the Year. 1650.

THE DECLARATION Of the Right Honorable, RALPH LORD HOPTON, Liftenant General
of all His Majesty's Forces designed for the West of ENGLAND.
GENTLEMEN,
WHen I consider (but not without astonishment) with what Serpentine Policy,
simulated Piety, sly delusions, grand Impostorisms, and palpable juglings the
Rebels have cloaked over their unparalleled Treasons, casting before you the
sweet delicious bayts of Reformation, Liberty, Freedom, etc. till they have
smote a hook through your jaws, entangled you in their nets, and new-chained
you to perpetual bondage, more then kinging it over your Lives, Laws and
Estates, I cannot only grive, but much pity the deplorable condition your two
much credulity, and greedy listening after these State- Sirens has betrayed you
unto.

I hope (after all this time) when you are so feelingly sensible of the heavy
pressures that lie upon you; I need not seek to unblinde you; nor discover unto
you by what nefarious, wicked, and desperate Designs they have prosecuted the
very quintiscense of all Impiety, and skrewed themselves up to the height of
all Wickeddesse.

As under a specious Pretense of Reforming ^^ligion, they have quite Abolished
the same, killed, plundered and imprisoned, sequestered and outed the most
zealous Professors thereof; and taken to themselves the Maintenance belonging
thereto, altogether disheartning not only the Professors, but all true Lovers,
Cherishers and Maintainers thereof.

When they Covenanted and swore to maintain the Kings Majesty's Person, they
not only shot Bullets of Iron and Lead in his face, but laid violent hands
thereon, and barbarously and inhumanly murdered Him, even before the gate of
H^s own R^yall Manor, contrary to Christian Religion, the laws of God, Nature,
Reason, or any former warrantable President whatsoev^r.

Neither did their Malice anchor here, but they have above all thought of
wickedness dissinherited his right Heir (now our most gracious King CHARLES
the Second) against their former Oaths, keeping Him from his Birthright, and
lawf^ll Inheritance, and ^ll that hopeful and kingly Progi^y by these
Miscreants d^barred from possessing their Hereditary Revenues, and having
^^olished Kingly Government have usurped all Power to themselves, and shared
their Princely Revenues amongst themselves and their Confederates, exposed
those Royal Branches to the mercy of Strangers, which none but the veryest
Miscreants Nature ever yet produced, but would have shamed to do.

Neith^r has their arrogance stopped here, but their blushlesse Ambition has
elevated them to that pitch of Pride, that they have set themselves down in
his own Princely Throne, where they more then king it over their fellow
Subjects, Tyrannizing over them more then ever King of England did before or
since the Conquest; and not only over part, but over all His M^iesties Kingdoms.

Yet h^ve they persuaded the too credulous People into an expectation of their
maintaining the Laws of the Land and the Liberty of the Subject, whilst they
perfidiously have deprived them of both, in murd^ring some, and Plundering
others, till at last they had involv^d all in more then Egyptian slavery to
the Arbitrary Wills, and lawl^sse swords of a merciless gener^tion of
Athiests, Sectaries, and desperate Rebels; that fear no God, nor acknowl^dge
no King.

What they have done under color of maintaining the Privilege of Parliament,
I know you cannot be ^gnot^nt; but must acknowl^dge, that they have apparently
and vilely against all Faith, Covenants, Oaths, Attestations, made before G^d
and his Angels, violated the some, by murd^ring the king, Den^ing the House of
Lords to sit, and by p^uc^ing diverse of their own Members out of the House, and
Imprisoning them, ^ill the remainder of their Desp^r^te R^bells in the remnant
of their J^ncto had Voted and Unvoted the pleasurs of the Grand^es, or Leading
Reb^lls of the Faction; All these are so undeniable Truths, that they are able
to si^^nce the most brazen-faced Impostor of them all, even Cromwell hims^^f.

Under such like specious Pretenses, and flowe^s of Pretend^d^d Reformation
have these pestiferous Snakes (or rather S^^ak^) hid their poisonous stings,
yet have so bewitchingly Charmed the deluded People (by the Name and power of
Parliament, though they retain nothing of the true essence, but the mere
App^llation thereof) to become their Slaves and V^ssalls: by which fallacious
Jugglings, prosecuted by Cromwell and such d^sperate Rebels, have they
Reformed Three flourishing kingdoms into Three Languishing and distracted
Nations, and have raised a Factious and brorken crew of Mechannicks, men of
wicked lives, evil m^nners, and very desperate Principles to bear sw^y over
you, calling themselves a Parliament, a Counsel of State; a High Court of
Justice, etc. when ind^ed they appear at best but VVoolves in Lions skins, an^
those that have wad^d so far in Rebellious courses, that they cannot return;
and therefore (as the Devil drives them) must on, though to their own
Destruction.

Countrymen, I hope you retain still the hearts and Courage of true-bred
English, that had rather bow to the Head, the worship the h^^l, yield obedience
to one King, then many Tyrants.

His most gracious Majesty, out of a tender and Fatherly affection to all his
good People and Subjects of His Kingdom of England, is not only willing, and
ready to pardon, and grant an Act of Oblivion to all and every one (excepting
such who shall be found guilty of that most horrible murder committed on the
sacred Person of his Dear Father) that upon sight or knowledge of this my
Declaration, do immediately, at the appoach of his Majesty's Army into any of
their Counties, abandon those wicked Parricides, and rise, and join with me,
and those Forces already raised, (by Commission from his Majesty) for this so
necessary service;

His Majesty promises, by the word of a King (which He hops all true
subjects will believe) that so soon as God shall enable him to recover his
Rights, that he will summon a Parliament, by which he will ratify and confirm
what ever has been done formerly by his Royal Father, and free Parliaments, or
what ever else shall be Judged necessary for the welbeing of his People, and
establishing this Kingdom on the true and lasting foundation of a long and
happy Peace; assuring you, that nothing under heaven shall be more pleasing
unto Him then the Prosperity of his Subjects, in as full an assurance of the
enioyments of their Laws, Liberties, Freedoms, and Birthrights, as ever were
granted by any of his Predecessors to this day.

Neither does His Majesty require or demand of any of his good Subjects, but
that they (abandoning Rebels return to that dutiful obedience, for which they
have Warrant from Gods holy Word; and assist Him in their faithful service,
not only to free themselves from the yoke of slavery, but assist him in
bringing to Justice those most horrid murderers of his Royal Father, to
reestablish him in his just right of Government, to vindicate the Privilege of
Parliament, and so by Gods blessing, bring Peace and Righteousness to kiss
each other; so that by it both Prince and People may be made alike happy; and
this lately Famous Island wash off those deep died stains of blood in the
Fountains of affection to each other; knowing that he that commanded us not to
kill, commanded us to love one another, not to heap Burdens, but to bear one
another burdens.

Wherefore (Dear Countrymen) if there yet remains any spark of Loyalty, any
sense of duty to God, obedience to your King, affection to your Country, love
to your Friends, pity to your Wives, Children, or Houses, or to your own
souls, shake off this servile yoke of base Tyranny; and see what a happy
exchange it will be, when in stead of the sword, oppression and Violence of
every Rebel or Rakeshame, you are Governed by a Hopeful, Just, and prudent
Prince.

I have hitherto found both your Love and Valor firm to God, your King and
Country; and am persuaded in so little time I cannot loose the principal,
because I have not desired the Interest; but since Time has ripened His
Majesty's occasions to maturity, I am persuaded you will deny neither, but
undauntedly draw your swords with me to revenge the horrible and execrable
murder of your King, redeem your Nation from infamy, and your selves from
slavery, restore your King, and make your selves famous to all Posterity.

Therefore (Countrymen) I desire you, not only as Christians, but
Fellow Soldiers, Subjects, Brethren and Friends (at the approach of the Army
committed to my charge, and designed for the West of England) to Join your
selves with us, in His Majesty's service, which is so necessary, and full of
all Conscience, Duty, Honor, and all other just Interests.

And for my self, or the Army under my Conduct, I do promise by the word of a
Soldier, that to the utmost of my power, I will use all fair means possible
for reducement of these Western Counties to his Majesty's Obedience, without
any spoil, Forage, Fyring of Houses, Plunder or the like, or uncivil or
unchristian dealing with any; and when engaged, not to shed more blood then
what I shall be necessitated to do for preservation of my self, and those
committed to my charge.

Therefore let none who shall engage with me, fear or apprehend any dangers
that may ensue so much as abhor the present evils under which you groan; no
parallel being found either in Sacred Writ, or Modern History, of any People
besides your selves, so free as you under a late gracious King, and so soon
enslaved, vassallaged, and brought to so vile and unjust servitude and
Oppressions, laid on you by the worst of men.

Therefore (Gentlemen) for the better encouragement of all you that shall any
ways suffer, or be damnified in ayding o^ assisting us in the o^pposition,
suppessing, or subduing of these execrable Rebels; I do by His Majesty's
special command Declare.

That so soon as God shall restore His Majesty to his Rights, all such losses,
or sufferings (of any that shall be aiding or assisting unto us in His
Majesty's service shall be taken into special consideration, and repaired out
of the Estates of those in actual Rebellion against His Majesty; and their so
acceptable Service be rewarded, according as they shall be found to deserve;
And likewise have safe Protection for themselves and Families, and safe conduct
for any their shipping from any sea-Port-Town that shall be brought to yield
Obedience to His Majesty, to what coast they shall desire.

And in this my so Just, reasonable and Pious request, and dutiful
undertakings for His sacred Majesty, and the good of my Country in general; I
hope not only to be backed with the Blessing of God, but the aid and
assistance of all honest men; which is the desire of

Your Affectionate Friend, and Servant. HOPTON.

FINIS.

