THYPA ANEOGEN.

THE OPEN DOOR For MAN'S Appoach to GOD. OR, A VINDICATION of the Record of GOD
Concerning the Extent of the Death of CHRIST in its Object.

In Answer to a Treatise of Master John Owen, of Cogshall in Essex, about that
Subject.

By John Horn, a Servant of God in the Gospel of his Son, and Preacher thereof
at Lyn in Norffolk.

The Grace of God that brings Salvation to All Men, has appeared, teaching
us to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously,
and godly in this present world, etc. Tit. 2.11, 12, 13. God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him
should not perish, but have eternal life. John 3.16. And he is the propitiation
for our Sins, and not for ours only, but also for the whole world's. 1 John
2.2. Mysticus sol ille justitiae omnibus ortus est, omnibus venit, omnibus
passus est, and omnibus resurrexit, ideo autem passus est ut tolleret peccatum
mundi: Si quis autem non credit in Christum, generali beneficio ipse se
fraudat. Ambros. Ut si quis clausis fenestris radios solis excludat; non ideo
sol non ortus est omnibus, quia color ejus se ipse fraudavit, nam quod solis
est praerogativam suam servat: quod autem imprudent is, communis a se gratiam
lucis excludit. Ambros. in Psalm. 118. secund. vulg. Lat. Octon. Octavo Omnia
probate, quod bonum est tenete. London, Printed by Robert White, and are to be
sold by Giles Calvert, at his Shop, at the Sign of the Black-Spred. Eagle at
the West End of Paul's. 1650.

REader, My necessitated absence from the Press has occasioned some mistakes
both of words and pointings in the printing, which (least envy take occasion by
them to traduce me with the simple, and ingenuity it self be at a loss) I have
here showed thee how thou should correct, Viz.

In the Epistle to the Reader.

PAge 14 Line 6 read 2, for 1. p. 18 l. 18 r. them. p.26 l. 15 r. that rule.
p.28 l. 29 r. lately. In the Answer. Pa. 12 Lin 22 r. (...). p. 15 l. 18r.
call. p 23 l. 10 r. too. p.24 marg. r. ver. 18. p.27 l. 11 r. as are then not
so. p. 28 l. 1, 2 r. Psalm.78. Mat. 18. p.45 l.36 t John 5. p 48 l. 6 r. dawne.
p 49. l. 25 r. they would not. p. 54 l 2 put the stop after second. p. 56 l. 15
r. oppose. p. 67 l. 20 r. but as an example. p. 75 l. 38 r. rather without
marks. p. 80 l. 35 r. third. p 84 l. 29 r. liked not to have. p. 85 l. 8 r.
talents, alike open. p. 87 l. 30 r. not that some. p. 95 l. 1 r. then. p. 118
l. 17 r. Job 5. p. 125 l. 26 r. conferrer. p. 131 l. 21 r. having given. p. 132
l. 29 r. distinguished. p. 141 l. 6, 11 r. if we. p. 142 l. 38 r. had. p. 143
l. 38 r. nor. p. 148 l. 38 r. quia post omnia. p. 156 l. 6 r. yet. p. 161 l. 20
r. pact. p 173 l. 3 r. Grecians. p. 176 l. 29 r. City. l 30 r. 2 Chronicles. 28. p.
177 l. 39 r. that. p. 178 l. 24 r. that that declares. l. 35 r. Savior having.
p. 182 l. 3 r. them. p. 184 l. 7 r. denies. l. 9 r. 1 will. p. 185 l. 3 r. is
as. l. 25 r. these words. p. 191 l. 8 r. that it does not. l. 33 r. contain. p.
195 l. 2 r. stung. p. 200 l. 14 r. them or without. p. 203 l. 36 r. nor had
they any. p. 204 l. 29 r. ^lts. p 207 l. 11 r. of. l. 20 r. warn. l. ibid. r.
any. p. 223 l.2 r Luc. 19. p. 229 l. 4 r. mistate. p. 235 l. 32 r. its. p 236
l. 35. r. reference. p. 238 l. 22 r. to all which we. p. 255 l. 13 l. delivered
from. p. 259 l. 16 blot out we. p. 262 l. 17 r. would. p 263 l. 8 r. to whom
they. p. 265 l. 14 put the comma after here. p. 268 l. 18 r. also. p. 271 l. 38
r. as frothy. p. 279 l. 17 r. that. p. 297 l. 17 r. because. l. 28 r.
righteousness of the Law. p. 299 l. 21, 26 put a parenthests before (As, and
after So) p. 300 l. 22 take away the stop at name, and read name for. p. 305 l.
25 r. mea, p. 306 l. 26 r. something. p. 319 l. 4 r. Repro(...)

To the Honorable, Colonel Valentine Walton, One of the Members of the Supreme
Authority of this Commonwealth, and of the Council of State, and Governor of
the Garrisons of Lyn, Yarmouth, Crowland, and the I Will of Ely, etc. AND ALSO To
the Right Worshipful, Mr. Thomas Toll, Burgess for the Town of Lyn Regis, and
Mr. Miles Corbet, Burgess for the Town of Yarmouth in Norfolk. Esquires, both
Members of the said Supreme Authority, etc. Grace, and Mercy, and Peace in the
knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ our LORD.
Honorable, and Right Worshipful,
IT was the saying of Socrates, as Zenoph. de dictis and factis, Socratis.
Xenophon relates, By (...).
That ungrateful persons are to be numbered amongst the unjust, and that (...).
by how much the more and greater favors any have received, so much the
unjuster he is, if he be unthankeful. Yea, and so hateful was the crime of
Ingratitude to the Persians (as the same Xenophon tells us) that they used to
teach their children to abhor and condemn it, and Zenoph. de Cyri paedia lib.
1. (...), etc.
severely to punish those that were guilty of it, as conceiving (and that not
amiss) That Ingratitude is that cursed Principle (and a compendium of Vices)
that leads those in whom its planted, and by whom its nourished, to be
injurious to, and neglective of both God and man, and to be attended with a
shameless impudency, which is the very Ringleader unto all filthiness and
abomination. And verily Sir, as they guessed not amiss (for the Ingratum si
dixeris, omnia dixeris.
holy Scriptures couples e 2 Timothy 3.2, 3.
unthankefulness with unholiness, yea, puts it before it, as the inlet to
profaneness, and follows it with want of natural affections, Deuteronomy. 32.14, 15.
truce breaking, false accusing, etc. and elsewhere speaks of it as the
beginning of Apostasy) so are their sayings, especially considerable with
reference unto God, the supreme fountain and sovereign Author of all good,
toward whom unthankefulness is so much the greater injustice, as he exceeds
and excels all others in favors toward us. If we should go about to number up
his kindnesses, Psalm. 40.7.
they would arise to such a reckoning as is far beyond us. Great and many are
his kindnesses to us in this life, as his giving us life, breath, limbs,
strength, health, food and raiment, the shining of the Sun, the falling of the
rain, with fruitful Seasons, peace, liberty and gladness, victories over
enemies, and good successes, Day to day utters speech, and night to night
utters knowledge, and they all are Evidences and Witnesses of his goodness.
But whence all these to sinful unworthy creatures, Romans 2.14. and 1.32.
whose consciences daily accuse us of evils, and tell us death and vengeance is
due unto us? Surely as the Scriptures say they are the beamings of his bright
goodness, the issues, or out-flowings of the life in Christ, which is the light
of men, which life was and is in him through his sufferings for us. Joh. 1.4, 5.
For verily Adam forfeited for himself and us, what ever might evidence
goodness toward us, even life it self, and all other mercies thereof, so as
had God dealt with us after the demerit of his sin, nothing but wrath and
misery had been upon us. But verily Christ stepping in, upholds all things, and
makes them consist and stand together for our use and service. Yea,
there-through also have we in these latter days, that which is yet more
precious, the Publishing of the Word and Gospel of God, ordered unto all
Nations the end and tendency of all, which too is to lead us to repentance,
that repenting of our evils against one so good to us, he might show us greater
things still, even the blessings of a better life, prepared and made ready in
Christ Jesus for us, pardon, and peace, and spirit, and eternal happiness. And
surely the gift of Christ, and his death and sufferings for us, must needs it
self be an inestimable favor, and deserve at our hands unutterable thanks,
which is the way and inlet, yea, in a manner, the only procuring cause under
the good Will of God of all these mercies. How then are men in general bound
unto thankefulness, but especially we in this Nation, that enjoy the
Scriptures, and publishing of the Gospel therein, which many other Nations have
wickedly put away from themselves and their posterities? their supreme powers
yielding up themselves to the power of darkness, and neither embracing the Word
of Truth themselves, nor permitting it to others. Yea, what cause of thanks
have we to God, that has broken yokes of Tyranny and Oppression from off us,
that formerly hindered men's receipt, and free confession of his goodness? What
salvations has God wrought for us in the midst of this earth? What plots has
he discovered? What designs of the enemies of Sion has he defeated? How has
he guided Counsels, and strengthened Armies to deliver us from the Power and
Oppressions of those who being ungrateful to God themselves for his goodness,
could not endure that others should acknowledge it aright, and be truly
thankeful? And, O that we also after such an addition of favors above what all
have in common, may not run into that horrid sin of unthankfulness, nor reject
the tidings of his great goodness, and by observing lying vanities, forsake our
own mercies, much less abuse and turn it into wantonness. (...). Ephesians. 5.3, 4.
Surely for these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of
unperswasibleness. Yea, not only destructions, and desolations of Persons,
Families, Cities, Countries, and Nations here, but also hereafter eternal
vengeance.

Now of the evil of unthankefulness, dear Sirs, how greatly guilty are they,
who though they confess men faulty for it, and can aggravate the evil of it
above my Rhetoric, yet make it a part of their business and Religion, with
zeal and earnestness, to persuade the most of men, that they have cause to
doubt whether they have any thing in good will from God, and so by consequence,
whether any real ground and cause to be thankeful to him, while they hold forth
to them, that Christ died but for a few, and the rest are the objects of his
hatred from everlasting, and all they have, even the Gospel it self, they have
in hatred and displeasure from him; and so only to this end, that they may
work out, and increase their own misery by them? Against which their evil
Doctrine I have written this ensuing Treatise, in which I have endeavored to
remove that froth of wit, and humane reason, and high thoughts of error, which
are with so great noise of Orthodoxness (equivalent to the Romanists cry of
Catholic) lifted up against the Apostles Doctrine: and to show that God is
good, really good to All, but especially to those that his goodness makes good,
and thankefully through faith to live unto him. And so also that all have real
cause of believing, and living thankefully, doing good after his example to
All, but especially to the good, and the believing; and that the unbelief of
his goodness, and unthankefulness to him for it, is the true cause of
multitudes perishing. And now, Dear Sirs, that I might not run into that odious
evil of ingratitude toward you, from whom as instruments in the good hand of
God, I acknowledge I have received very much favor and kindness, and under whom
I enjoy my Place and Liberty of Gospel-preaching, (and many others with me have
received many engagements of thanks for and to you) having finished this
Treatise, I am imboldened to thrust it out into the world, under your
Protection and Patronages, under God and the Lord Jesus, to whom supreamly I
have devoted my self and service. I hope your Honors will not expect it should
exceed its Author, in whom you know weakness, but I hope you will take it in
good part, as a Testimony of my thankefulness. I expect it will meet with
oppositions good store against it, as is always the Lot of Truth in an
unthankeful world, especially from those it argues guilty of men's
unthankefulness; may it but find with you, that entertainment Truth should
have with the Saints, so far as you shall see Truth held forth in it, I shall
rejoice therein concerning you. For whom (with your beloved Consorts, and all
yours) My desire is, That God would please so to order, guide, and keep you,
that walking righteously in the earth, and serving your generation with
faithfulness in the Work of God, you may receive the reward of the righteous in
eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord, in whom I remain,

From my House in South-Lyn, June 20th. 1650. SIR, Your Honor, and Worships,
faithfully to serve you in the Gospel, JOHN HORN.

A Brief Revise of some few Passages.
THere is a passage, good Reader, in the Epistle to the Reader, Page 14. viz.
where I say, That none, till brought into Christ, can make any profitable use
of, or rightly understand the Doctrines of Election and Reprobation, of which I
desire thy candid and favorable construction, as spoken of (as they are most
usually looked upon) as secret Decrees and Counsels of God about the future
estates of men, and not as acts or executions of decrees passing upon men in
time: for indeed in this latter sense the Scripture (and we answerably may)
does speak of them more intelligibly and profitably. As when it says, The Lord
has set apart for himself the man that is godly, Psalm. 4.3. Such a choosing, or
setting apart for himself as is there spoken of, is, and may be profitably
propounded as an inducement unto godliness: Also when its said, That God, for
such wilful refusings of him, and his Word, Truth, and Grace, cast off,
reprobated or gave over such and such men, as in Psalm. 81.9, 10, 11, 14. Jer.
6.16, 30. Romans 1.28. Such a propounding of Reprobation may both be apprehended,
and good use may be made of it to, and by men yet unrenewed, to deter them from
their obstinacy in evil, and warn them to give diligent heed to God, lest they
should be so dealt with; but in such a manner of speaking of, and propounding
these things, I would not be understood there, but as under those terms men
understand hidden, abstruse acts of the Counsel and Will of God in himself
from everlasting.

In Page 21. of the same Epistle, there is lapsus memoriae; a mistake of
Hubberdine for Dr. Buckneham, through the defect of my memory, I not then
having the Martyrology by me.

In Page 74. lin. 15, 16, 17, etc. some interlined passages of Mr. Owens
Inferences were mistaken, and misplaced by the Printer. It should have been
printed thus, All that Christ dyed for: 1. He gives (that is, compels) to
believe (an inference wholly groundless from that Text, it speaking of actual
believers, and not of faith, as a thing yet to be given them.) 2. All that he
dyed for, he justifies, makes righteous, and brings them to glory. 3. All he
dyed for, he makes Intercession for, for collating on them all the choice
benefits of his death.

In Page 75. Where I say, The ascribing an antecedent will, Whose fulfilling
depends on any free contingent act of ours, falls not upon us; my meaning is, it
falls not upon what I said in the beginning of that Chapter, about Impretration
and Application: That that follows, viz. But I conceive, etc. should have been
(yet I conceive that without injury to God, that may be called an Antecedent
will, which respects some Antecedent condition in us, in respect of some will
of God, respecting us as its proper object in a consequent condition) in which
I hope the ingenuous Reader will conceive that I speak of the Actings or
determinations of Gods will, which are called sometime (...), and not that I
assert, that there are in God diverse Wills, or Principia volendi; for that
would be all one, as to assert diverse Gods, or diverse Essences of the same God.

What I say in Page 58. About Christ's meriting his own exaltation in the humane
nature, is so clear, that I hope none will deny it; and yet I find that Zanchy
was somewhat questioned about it by some in his time; the learned Reader may
see his defense of himself, and his confirmation of the Orthodoxness of that
assertion, by the Testimony of diverse of the Ancient Fathers, as Augustine,
Jerome, Ambrose, Beda, etc. in Epist ad Lectorem, tractatui de Fide Christiana
(five Confessioni suae) praefixa; amongst the rest, that of Augustine is curt
and pithy, in Phil. 2.10. Wherefore God has highly exalted him. Humilitas
claritatis meritum, olaritas humilitireis praemium sed hoc factum est in forma
servi, etc. And by Humility he merited his glory, and his glory was the reward
of his humility, but this was not in the form of God, but in the form of a
servant, or as he was made man, etc. Zanchies Assertion that occasioned that
defense is thus. De Relig. Christ. Cap. 11. Apho. 15. Credimus Christum sua
perfecta obedientia, non solum sibi, sed etiam nobis vitam aeternam
promeruisse, etc.

What I say, Page 125 to that place in Phil. 1.29. That the phrase (...)should
rather be translated, As pertaining to Christ, is the judgment of diverse
Learned men as well as mine. Zanchi renders it, Pro Christi, id est, In Christi
negotio, vid. Zanch. in loc. Beza: In negotio Christo, ad verbum, in eo quod
pro Christo suscipitur, alioqui (inquit) redundaret articulus (...). bez.
Annot. in loc. Camerarius in loc. thus, (...), quod attinet ad Christum, ea
vobis contigit gratia, etc.

In Page 173. That of [every herb] I think (upon further con^^deration) may be
numbered amongst those places which speak (...) the species or sorts of things,
and so the sense is, they took the tenth individual of every species of herbs:
but yet that will make nothing to prove the word All to be taken so in the
places in question.

To the Reader.
Reader,
WHosoever thou art, quaedam tecum vellem in limine; I have a word or two to
say to thee before thou go any further. I desire thee to peruse this
Treatise thoroughly, for it cannot harm thee, but if thou be not thine own
hindrance it may profit thee. Though it be hostile, its only against that that
would hinder thee of good, or obstruct those passages by which thou might be
led out to do good. It pleads for God and thy good, yea the common good of all
that do not wilfully deprive themselves thereof for vanity. It pleads for Love:
to defend and maintain that God loves thee, and to let thee see that there is
good ground and cause for thy loving him; And its the nature of love to stand
enemy to nothing but that that hinders its course, and keeps the parties loved
from the good it wishes them. It pleads for a truth, a part of that Doctrine of
truth, which the Apostle and Teacher of the Gentiles in faith and truth, both
instructed our Fathers in, 1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6, 7.
and left upon record for us their posterity; namely, that God wills that men
be saved, and come to the knowledge of truth; and that evidenced in this, that
as there is but one God, so there is one Mediator between God and men, the Man
Christ Jesus (by whom God dispenses his goodness, and makes known his good will
to us, and by whom we may have access to him, and he is ready to accept of and
embrace us) He having given himself a Ransom for all. (...).
A truth to be testified to men in due (or proper, or in their own) times. A
truth it is though in these days covered over with reproachful terms of error
and heresy, and (as from the beginning the way of Christ has been) every
where ill spoken of, and exploded as little better then blasphemy. Such force
has Satan, (Gods and man's adversary) in the hearts of many, that they love
not, nor believe that that speaks good of God to them, and that which might do
them good. But marvel not at that, good Reader, for this beam of truth finds
no worse entertainment herein then the body of Truth it self, then the word of
God made flesh and manifested in the flesh met with in the days of his flesh.
Came not He from the bosom of the Father to open his name unto men, and to
show to them the way of their salvation? was not he truly Jesus, the salvation
of God, and Savior of the world? one that came to teach men the knowledge of
God, and lead them unto life? But O what course usage did He find? Did not the
world abominate him, as if he had been a Devil incarnate, filled with Satan,
the great deceiver of mankind, leading them to Destruction! how often did they
cry out against him, and offer to lay violent hands upon him, as if he was
unworthy to live amongst them? What evil laws enacted they against him, casting
out of their Synagogues (meetings and fellowships) those that would own him?
Did they not call a council about him and condemn^ him, therein and crave, yea
almost force it upon the Secular power, to deliver him up to be crucified by
them, till they got their wills in that matter on him? how did they after his
condemnation all-to revile, mock and taunt him, yea dispitefully entreat and
kill him? And as if they would leave no stone unremoved for effecting their
designs upon him, they seal him up in his Sepulcher, and set a guard to keep
him therein. And who I pray were the persons that thus used him? Were they not
the generality of the people, but principally the Priests and Rulers, the
zealous and devout, the seeming godly party, that were so strict for tithing
mint and rue, for keeping Sabbaths, keeping out errors and blasphemies, as that
a man that judged by the outside, would have sworn they were the holiest people
and best beloved of God, that the world contained. The wise, the prudent, the
powerful, the Scribes, Pharisees, and Rulers of the people? But I pray was
Christ less the Son of God or the great Truth of truths, because he found so
bad entertainment by these prudent zealots? because they condemned him and put
him to Death, was he therefore really guilty of that deceit and blasphemy with
which they charged him? was it not indeed (as himself told them) because he
spoke the truth to them, and they could not endure to hear it from him? Because
he testified of them that their deeds were evil, and their doctrine vicious
which they set so high a price upon? many good deeds have I done (says He) for
which of them do ye stone me? And truly, friend, so have men dealt with this
truth in hand, Its cried out upon as a Doctrine of Satan, as error and
blasphemy, as the most pernicious Doctrine that can be taught almost, they sit
upon it in council and condemn it, they have reviled it, railed on it, mocked,
taunted it, yea have they not crucified it and almost killed it, and all this
too has been acted by the Learned. Prudent, Rabbis, Scribes and Rulers, but
what evil has it done? Why, disturb the Churches peace? so they said Christ
and the Gospel did their Synagogues. Deprives believers of their comfort? nay
it is but them that believe it not (as Christ did them that believed not in him)
not any right believers, as we shall show, they can prove it guilty of no evil,
and therefore let not their charges of it move thee, Veritas magna est and
praevalebit: let them bury it, and set a guard upon it, banish it their cities,
countries, kingdoms, strike hands with Satan himself, and combine with the
gates and powers of hell to under it; out it will and shall, and shall be
received. As Moses lift up the Serpent in the wilderness, so shall the son of
man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him may not perish but have
eternal life. For truth is truth though hated and reproached; its cause is
just, their accusations groundless, their opposite positions Antichristian, but
it self divine, no nicety or fancy, but of great concernment, it being a truth
that glorifies God and brings good news or tidings to men: which with thy
patience, I shall a little demonstrate, with the differences of their
Anti-position of Christ's dying only for an elect number in these following
particulars.

1. Its a doctrine that gives glory to God, and magnifies his mercy or goodness
and justice toward the sons of men in his dealings with them, whereas the
opinion it opposes detracts from his glory in those particulars. First, I say
it commends and magnifies the goodness of God in the exercise of his mercy,
while it speaks of him as love it self; one that is good, and therefore does
good, good to All, a lover and Savior of mankind, and of the world in
general; one that delights not in the death of the wicked, nor would that any
should perish and run themselves into destruction, but rather come to
repentance and live; to which end it shows that he has provided a means for
banished mankind to be brought back by to him again from that estate of misery
unto which they were banished, yea that to that end he enlightens, manifests
his truth, calls to look to him, lades with benefits, waytes with patience upon
sinners, chastens them in mercy, to keep their souls from the pit, and to
inlighten them with the light of the living: and all this not bounded up to a
few, the far fewer part of men, but in some degree or other enlarged generally
to all. And is not this a commendation of him as good and loving? is it not the
nature of love to diffuse it self abroad? to extend it self to all, as well as
to burn intensively to any? And

2. Does not that that speaks of God as so merciful, illustrate also his
justice the more brightly; when it shows his wrath and vengeance to come upon
men for abusing love, undervaluing goodness, and for not accepting his grace?
can any thing be thought more just then to punish him that transgresses a
command of an Authority, in it self not only lawful, but also good and
Fatherly? that not only by its sovereignty might exact, but also by its
clemency and goodness did deserve obedience to its injunctions from all under
it? such as this doctrine declares Gods dealings with men by way of justice to
be, not only in respect of Adam our first parent, and all in him, but also in
respect of us in our particulars: and yet we ascribe his Sovereignty to him in
all things too; while we say all these his dispensations are not necessitated
to him, but free and voluntary; so as that his giving Christ and the streams of
goodness, that come to us through Christ, were all of his good will, not of our
works; yea his extending these or those means, longer or shorter time, with
less or greater power, are all free dispensations according to his will; the
Law he gives to men, and the rewards he propounds, all according to his own
will, only we say he acts forth this his Sovereignty toward all in a most
equal dispensation, in which he justifies himself to all that plead with him to
be good and holy. And yet this doctrine leaves him at liberty too, to do to any
one more or less, to make one more exemplary and singular in mercy, and another
in severity, as he pleases.

But now the doctrine opposed by us, derogates from God in these things; for it
speaks of him in respect of most, as an Abaddon, not a Savior, an (...) not,
(...); not a friend and lover of men, but a hater and destroyer of them; for
what else I pray you speaks that language that they preach as a truth
concerning the greatest part of men, that God hates them from eternity, and so
in hatred made them, and necessitated their sinning and perishing? Is this to
represent God lovely and gracious, or dreadful, and one that delights in man's
misery and ruin? I know they say his love is but velle bonum creaturis, to
will that that is good to creatures, and so that he may be said to love them in
that he gives them outward good things; in which I conceive they either give
too scant a definition of his love, or call that good in it, that upon second
thoughts, if made their own portion, they would scarcely deem so. I conceive
his love is rather to be thus defined, A velle bonum creaturis, quo iis been
esse possit: a willing good things to creatures for their good, for otherwise
the willing of a good thing is not good, if it have in it a destructive
intention, as for a man to will another a massy Wedge of Gold that he might
cast him into the Sea and drown him with it; and yet such is their doctrine of
Gods willing good things to most, for they make his first or eternal thoughts
of them as to themselves to be their misery, and so all the bounty, patience,
and whatsoever they have from him, to be to that end that they might by them
arrive at it, as some have said; Gods dealings with some men are as if one
should hang a man in a Goldchain, or tie a wedg of Gold about his neck to sink
him. Quis talia fando temperet a lachrymis? Now while they thus deny the extent
of his mercy and goodness, and give such direful representations of him, they
also by consequence obscure his justice; for whereas his justice is illustrated
by mercy, they that obscure this must needs obscure the other also. Justice is
then seen in acts Retributive, when voluntary unnecessitated transgressions are
severely punished, and by how much the more have been the advantages,
encouragements, and liberty afforded for doing what is required, so much the
cleerer is the equity of punishing the fault committed; How do they then clear
or magnify Gods justice that make him to punish only necessitated wickedness?
Yea that make the Decree of eternal vengeance upon such and such persons to be
in order of nature, Antecedaneous to any consideration of sin deserving it? for
these to be some of their conceptions and the sum of their expressions too,
they well know that are acquainted with any thing in this controversy. Now I
propound to any rational understanding, whether of these two most declare and
glorify justice for a master to punish his servant for not doing something
that he could not do, or doing what he could not but do, yea what he himself
necessitates him to do? or for a master to punish his servant for that he gave
him command and ability; yea also encouragement, and promised assistance for
doing, and he voluntarily and slothfully neglected or refused to do it? Sure
any man that has his wits about him, will say this latter. But now against
this particular I know what they object, and its Mr. Owens in his preface; They
say the earthworms of the world must not prescribe to God, what way to glorify
himself in: its rather for us to ascribe that glory to him that he makes his
own, then devise ways for his glory by our inventions, and speak lies in his
behalf; which things are in themselves rightly spoken, only they therein
intimate that those things which we have said of God, are of our devising and
ascribing to him, which he neither ascribes to himself nor owneth at our hands,
to take off which we shall come to another particular, viz. That

2. The persuasion I have defended, is a truth of Gods own revealing, and not
of our devising, but on the contrary, theirs a falsehood, not revealed by him,
but devised by them; in which they as well give God the lie, as deny him to be
love. What I here defend is grounded on the Scripture-expressions, in
maintaining which I endeavor to keep close to them, and subject reason to
faith, theirs have no Scripture expression to maintain it, but leans upon
reason, exalting it self against faith. They are the plain Scripture
expressions, that God is love, has loved the world, is good to all, the
Savior of all men, especially of them that believe, that he delights in mercy,
but delights not that the wicked should die, but rather turn and live, that he
is not willing that any should perish, but that all come to Repentance; that
his goodness, forbearance and long-suffering, is not to be despised, it leading
to repentance, even such, as not repenting, treasure up wrath to themselves
against the day of wrath, etc. So also that Christ dyed for all and every one,
that he gave himself a ransom for all, and is the propitiation for the sins of
the whole world; if any hear him and believe not, he does not judge him, because
he came not to judge the world, but to save the world. That those whom he shall
judge to death, he will so judge for their not believing in the light he gave
them, for not hearing his voice, not receiving the truth, but imprisoning it in
unrighteousness, etc. these and many such like are the revelations and
expressions of the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures, upon which we ground our
persuasion, desiring simply to believe and hold them for true, yea though all
things therein held forth, we knew not how by reason to comprehend, judging him
true, and his word pure and perfect, but our reasons and wisdom against it, and
where it Judges it absurd, to be folly, and bruitishness. We believe and
receive also all those places that they produce to us, as that he came to save
his people, gave himself for his Church. Sheep, etc. that the Saints and
faithful were elected in Christ Jesus before the foundation of the world; that
God said to Rebecca concerning Jacob and Esau before they were born, or had
done good or evil, that the elder of them (with his posterity) should serve the
younger (with his) and that God said by Malachy, that he loved the one and
hated the other, and that God chooses not either according to birth or works in
us, which is the thing the Apostle brings it to prove, but that he hated either
of them from Eternity, and before they had done either good or evil, or that he
so hated the greater part of mankind, that God loved only his elect and
chosen, that he is only their Savior; that Christ died only for them, and gave
himself a ransom only for his sheep and Church, and did not die for the
greatest part of men, nor has any fitness or sufficiency as a mediator for
them to save them; that God did make the greatest part of men with intention to
destroy them, and never bare any good will to them, that they perish for ever
for the sin of Adam, and that their condemnation is aggravated by their after
sins, for their neglecting that that was never for them, and for not repenting
and believing on him, though there was neither object meet for them to believe
on, nor any power vouchsafed to them from God, by which in attending to God in
the means propounded, they might have been brought to repent and believe, that
all that Christ died for, shall be saved eternally, and none of them shall
perish; these and the like positions maintained by them, we find no Scripture
asserting, and so have no divine ground of believing: but to maintain them they
rely on their reasons, adding to, and detracting from the Scripture-expressions
as they please, yea, plainly contradicting them, making particular affirmative
propositions in Scripture equipollent to universal affirmatives, as, We, or the
Church are sanctified by his Death, ergo All that he died for: and particular
Affirmatives, to be repugnant and contradictory to universal Affirmatives, as,
He gave himself for us, ergo, Not for all; gave his life as a shepherd for his
sheep, ergo, he gave not himself a ransom for all men: and many such inept and
unscholarlike inferences their wisdoms make to maintain and strengthen their
devised Assertions, drawing conclusions by them openly contradictory to the
Scripture-expressions; as ergo He died not for all and every one: God would not
that all men should be saved, etc. I would Master Owen, and the rest of his
mind, would be content that God should be true, and reason be judged absurd
and vain where it opposes him; that he may have but that glory of his mercy,
goodness, truth and Justice, that he in the Scriptures asserts to himself, we
should willingly hold us to that bargain with them. But alas how injurious they
are to the truth of God too, and how unbelieving of, and contradictory to the
Scriptures, thou may see by this little taste here given, and more fully I hope
by the treatise itself here presented to thee as an answer to him; but yet I
have not set before thee all the good and usefulness of the truth here
defended, nor all the evil of theirs opposed. For

3. This truth is profitable too for men, both in respect of themselves and
others, in both which regards too their counter-positions are injurious: First,
In respect of men's selves to whom its propounded, and who are to believe and
receive it, its profitable for them to hear and receive it, because it presents
to them an object for their faith, a motive to repent, believe, serve, and love
God, and matter of comfort to them that lie in sadness and distress, for want
of seeing ground to hope in him; for this presents God as loving and gracious
to them; and what can be a greater motive to a man to listen to God, then that
his Doctrine comes in love and good will, and brings good to him? or what so
powerful as love to break a man off from evils against him? a loving carriage
in David toward Saul, melts him into tears, and brings him from seeking to harm
him, to confess his evil and give good language to him; how much more shall the
love of God preached to men, and believed by them, work upon them, Romans 2.4, 5.
Psalm. 36.7, 8.
or else they shall be left the more excuseless, and God shall be the more
glorified in their destruction? It is not commands to repent, but love and
goodness in him that is offended, that indeed leads and brings in the heart to
true repentance. So what will so effectually draw a soul to trust in God, as
when it hears and believes the goodness of God? Mansheart is so conscious of
its own evil, that neither commands or promises (especially being so uncertain
whether they appertain to us or no) will draw us in to betrust our selves with
God, 1 John 4.19.
except we perceive some real Testimonies of his love first toward us. And
what so strong a cord to love and service of him, as to see his love preventing
us? Love seen and believed in him, Tit. 3.4, 5.
begets love and service in us to him. We love him because he loved us first.
Such our contrariety to God in our selves, and such our apprehensions of his
contrariety to us, that till our hearts be purged from both by the
demonstrations of his love and goodness, we will not love and serve him, not
serve him in love, without which our service is not acceptable and delightful
to him, so that from this love of God preached and believed, springs true
obedience, and the hearty keeping of Gods Comandmments. Yea herein it is that
men see their sins most exactly odious, and are abased in the sight of them.
True, the Law says what is good and evil, righteous and sinful, but the Gospel
shows most lively the hainousness of that sin, while it presents it not
otherwise to be expiated then by the blood of Gods own Son, and shows otherway
no remission, yea this love and goodness at once both humbles for sin against
God, and leads to hope in, and expect good from God; yea and while it speaks
not of an absolute certainty of life and happiness for all, for whom Christ
died, but these things to be certainly obtained in submission to him, believing
on him, and yielding up to his Spirit, it leads the soul to serve the Lord with
an holy fear, and to rejoice in him with trembling, through which holy fear the
heart is preserved from departing from him. So that this doctrine from the very
word and Oracle of God, discovers to thee or any man (while yet not sinning
that great sin to death) an object meet to look upon and admire, God meet to be
turned to, sought after, hoped in, and served; yea, is a motive to, and a
ground, foundation and spring of true comfort and godliness, of all which the
contrary position deprives a man; No man by that being able as from the word
of God to see good and right ground of loving, hoping in, and serving God, till
he see that he do love, hope in, and serve him; there being nothing that bears
witness of God to any particular soul (in their doctrine) that he loves and
has good will toward it, until it see the discriminating, and
distinguishing, electing love of God toward it, which is not to be seen by
climbing up into heaven to search into Gods secrets, but by finding in
themselves faith and sanctification (they say) and those too, such as are so
and so qualified, as may evidence them to be fruits of election, and so men
must have the effects before and without their proper cause, which is love
discovered to men. Tit. 3.4, 5, 6. they must have all these, Repentance, Faith,
Love to God and men, Justification, Sanctification, yea and perhaps too eternal
Glory before they shall see any solid ground or motive to repent, believe in
him, serve and love him, or that Christ has done any thing for them, by virtue
of which he can justify and sanctify them, and bring them to glory with him.
And so they are not lead to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live
soberly, righteously, and godlily, by Gods grace appearing in the Gospel to
them, but deny ungodliness, and live godlily (or rather pretend and seem to do
so) that so grace might appear to them, and that they might see the gospel
declaration to belong to them. The Gospel doctrine is to them but like the law,
that is, a doctrine that consists of duties commanded, with promises and
threatenings annexed, without Gospel motives of Gods love propounded; the
viewing of which things the Spirit of Love breaths in, to lead, and to produce
the things required; and so their endeavors after those works and duties are
looked upon as the fruits of grace and goodness, yea as the arguments of their
Election past, and future happiness, when they may be as far from both as the
Pharisee that denied Gods free Grace to Publicans and sinners, and yet judged
himself a partaker of Gods Grace by his works of righteousness, magnifying
grace against free will, and thanking God as giving such grace in those things
which were but the products of his will, neglecting and abiding ignorant of
that grace in Christ, which would have truly corrected both his Judgment and
will; such the effect of this limiting, restraining doctrine as theirs also
was. Men are led hereby to bottom the Gospel it self, with all arguments of
love and goodness therein leading to faith and repentance, upon their faith and
repentance, which they pretend they may have, before they know whether they
have any solid ground for them or no, as if they could wind in themselves into
the perception of Gods love by their frames and endeavors, and not first be
wrought up to them by the love and goodness of God perceived by them; and as if
men should look to themselves and their endeavors, as the glass through which
they shall see Gods love as for them; and not rather upon God and Christ as
declared in the Gospel to love them, as the glass in which they may see their
obligation to God in Christ, and be moved to, and strengthened in their seeking
after him and hoping in him. In that their way thou may see that God commands
thee to repent or change thy mind, to Judge him good and to love him, and that
he threatens thee if thou do not, and promises great things to thee if thou
do, but whether thou be one of them that he intends any good in his
promises to, or that art in a possibility of attaining them, or only have them
propounded to thy hearing, without good will toward thee (but that thou
might thereby have the greater destruction) that by it thou know not; for
it presents no act of love from him that (according to it) thou can say
respects thee, or takes thee in as the object of it; only do all those things
first, repent, believe, love, serve him, and then it shall be true for thee to
believe that he has good will to thee: a most preposterous way, that does to
men as Pharaoh to the Israelites, takes away their straw, and bids them get it
themselves, and yet exacts their number of brick; takes away that declaration
of Gods love and good will to men that should properly move them to repent,
believe, etc. and sets men upon seeking arguments and demonstrations of these
to themselves, and yet not fail to perform those duties required of them. A
doctrine it is that presents less love to this or that man, then the Law it
self did (whereas the Apostle magnifies the true Gospel as more excellent and
more un veiled) for it set some certain demonstrations of Gods goodness to the
Israelites before them, as his bringing them out of Egypt, choosing them in
their Fathers to be a peculiar people to him, and many typical sacrifices
representing Christ's death for them, upon which they were commanded to love and
serve him, but for ought this tells thee, thou were hated by him from all
eternity, yea this suggests to thee that all he does to thee, may be but to
bring thee to misery. Nay I might safely say, Gods dealings with the Gentiles
represented more goodness as to their particulars, without suggestions of
eternal hatred of them, then this kind of Gospell-preaching ascertains any one
man of (as yet unregenerate) as truly goodness, and out of good will to him in
particular. And O how injurious is that doctrine to men that withholds the most
absolute and perfect motive to their duties, and way to meet with consolation.
Whence it comes to pass, that first many are led by it into presumption, to
lean upon themselves, and their own works, as evidences of that distinguishing
love of God, that makes them sure of salvation (as the Pharisee Luke. 18.9,
10.) and so of their being pure and righteous, when as yet they have never
believed, and through faith received that love of God into their hearts that's
preached in the Gospel, to wash and purify them, yea to bring them out of
themselves into Christ, that they might be reckoned after him, and conformed to
him, to salvation. These are of those that justify themselves, and labor to
establish a righteousness of their own, and are ignorant of, and fight against
the righteousness of God; despising others, and hindering them of that Gospel of
grace that should be opened to them; stumbling as much that the Death of Jesus
Christ should be preached to all, to ungodly and sinners not so qualified as
they, as ever did the presumptuous proud Pharisees, that Christ should eat and
drink with Publicans and sinners, and that his Apostles should preach the
Gospel to the uncircumcised Gentiles.

2. Others again are held in bondage all their days, and are ever ready to
fall into desperation, while not having the Love of God, and his goodness and
grace propounded to them, as for them, that should beget faith, hope,
fruitfulness, etc. or being hindered from believing it, as so propounded by
occasion of this limiting doctrine, and yet being pressed on to believe,
repent, be humble and broken, that so they may know that God has good will to
them, and has given his Son for them, they labor and strive, and find nothing
which they can attain to, sufficient to demonstrate their election, and so that
there is any thing in Christ's mediation for their wearied souls to rest on; but
on the contrary, the more they look into themselves, the worse they find
themselves, and the less ground to think God loves them, and so by consequence,
to hope in, believe on, love and serve him. The former throw by the corner
stone, the sure foundation, Gods good will in Christ held forth to them in the
Gospel, making that but a superstructure built upon their frames, endeavors
and conceptions. The latter are Wholly without any foundation, but slote up and
down without any settling: yea, and

3. Others go between both these, halting sometimes the one way, and sometimes
the other: as they find good frames (as they conceive) so they grow confident
of their righteousness, and like the Pharisee, dare go to God and thank him:
and as they find flaws again in their works and performances, so they sink
down again, and are ready to conclude that God never loved them, in the mean
time how Hagarish, selfish, pharisaicall, and slavish are all their services to
him! So that God is deprived of that service and affection that he should have
from them, and themselves of that good, encouragement, and comfort that they
might have from him.

And yet this is not all the evil that this doctrine does to men, for it also
in the very bowels of it holds forth an undeniable liberty to men, as yet
unregenerate, to reason after this manner. Either they are such as Christ died
for, or not: if the first, then they are well enough, for all their sins are
satisfied for that they either have done or shall do, they may sin freely, it
cannot hurt them, for Christ has drunk up every drop of wrath due to them, and
shall not shed one drop of blood more, or suffer any pain more then he has for
any thing they shall do against him; nor yet can God in Justice damn them, his
Son having dyed for them; and therefore they will take no care, but follow
their own ways. If it be said, ah but this will dishonor God, and hurt
others. What care unregenerate persons for God or others, if they know not that
God cares for them? its themselves they most look at, and they can easily
answer, his grace will be commended by forgiving them; and when they know he
loves them, and gives them the grace, then they shall glorify him: And for
others, if Christ died for them, it cannot hurt them, all is paid for that they
shall commit, by occasion of their walking, and they cannot miss of eternal
Salvation; otherwise, no matter what becomes of them, God cares not for them,
and why should they? If the latter (that Christ died not for them) then they
cannot avoid suffering to the utmost what Gods hatred of them will lead him to
inflict upon them: he hates them, and what cause have they then to love and
serve Him? Why should they deprive themselves of certain present satisfactions
to their minds, to avoid what they no way can, or get that which no way is
possible, or which they must have notwithstanding if Christ has died for them?
So that be I one of these or those (may such a one say) its best for me to take
my pleasure here, at least till God make me do otherwise, for if Christ died
for me, I shall have the pleasure of such sins here, and happiness hereafter
too; if not, then I had better have my pleasure here, then not at all. This
kind of reasoning, I say, that directly tends to looseness and neglect of the
means of Salvation, springs from the bowels of this Doctrine; whereas from the
truth that I have endeavored to defend, no such bad consequence follows, but
it sets before men sure ground of hoping in, and loving God, and yet cause of
watchfulness and diligence to seek him, least by neglecting him they deprive
their Souls of that good he set before them. Its true, many in that way perhaps
may not yield up to such reasoning as I have said, but yet the Doctrine gives
them ground for it, nor can the defenders of it be able to disprove it. Its
true again, some that believe the truth may abuse it, but it gives no fair
ground for it, as may easily be seen: we are not to judge of doctrines by men's
practices that hold them, because their consciences and practick principles may
contradict their erroneous speculations; or their wills and affections cause
them to warp from their true principles of judgment. A Pharisaical Saul may
walk more strictly then a Christian Corinth, but by their natural undeniable
influences into men's practices we may judge that to be erroneous, that leaves
men to, and upholds them in a loose practice, not that that is turned from,
into a loose practice, which it does discountenance.

I know it is sometime objected against what I plead for, that by it a man may
be led to take liberty to sin, and do what he pleases, for he may repent when
he pleases, its in his own power. But to that I say, its a slander cast falsely
upon our doctrine. For we deny that its in a man's power to repent and believe,
as, and when he will, but only as, and when God gives it him, when God works
upon him, and affords ability to him, and that he gives also in such means as
he has pitched on, and when he pleases: so that its needful that men neglect no
opportunities that he presents to them, nor presume upon their power or Gods
patience; for though we affirm that God gives them his help in his seasons, and
succors them in the day of salvation, yet if that be neglected or received in
vain, God may justly cut it short with them, and therefore it stands men in
hand to take his times and seasons, and lay hold on his strength when he
reaches it forth to them, for (as one says well) qui promisit poenitenti
veniam, non promisit procrastinanti poenitentiam. But to pass from this
particular. Of their doctrine its further observable, That

1. Its injurious also in respect of men's doing good to others, while it takes
away those motives of doing good, that the truth propounds unto them; For first
as it obscures the apprehensions of Gods goodness in men's selves, which are
most effectual motives to do good to others. If he so loved us, we ought also
to love one another. So also, Secondly, It takes away Gods example of being
good to all, and rather presents him as an example of pretending one thing, and
intending another, as if we might hate, and seek to harm some men in our
hearts, so we do but speak them kindly, and that's to love and be merciful as
God is. Yea, and it puts us upon a straight, whom really to love and pity,
because we cannot be certain whom God loves and pitties, and so that we do not
love whom God hates. And thirdly, It takes away that doctrine that we should
hold forth, that word of life by which we should win men, for it makes it
uncertain to them that undertake to preach, whom they should hold forth Gospel
motives of Repentance and Faith to, I mean, any good will in God toward them to
be testified to them, to draw them to repent and believe in him; whence many
Ministers are put to it about Gospel preaching, yea in stead thereof become
teachers of the Law, and jumble Law and Gospel together, so that they confound
them, that they neither preach Law or Gospel, but a mingle mangle of both, not
knowing what they say, nor whereof they affirm; talking of duties to them that
want principles to perform them rightly, and not declaring to them that
doctrine of Gods goodness that should, by declaring his love to them rightly
principle them: telling men of believing, and of the fruits and privileges of
faith, but not holding forth Christ to men as one that dyed for them, and so is
become a sure foundation for their faith: Yea, telling men that are yet in
unregeneracy, of election and reprobation, though none can understand them
aright, or make use of them profitably, till brought into Christ, in whom
Election is, and for rejecting whom God rejects and reprobateth: an
unprofitable doctrine to them, and good for little, as many teach it to such,
but either to lead men to a careless presumption or drive them into
desperation. Nay, in stead of preaching Gospel to every creature, they cannot
preach Gospel in a certain sound (so as they or the hearer may say its Gospel
to him) to any creature, except they presume they first see in him some fruits
of Election. And so I conceive its a doctrine very serviceable to Satan's design
of hindering men from seeing that glorious grace of God in Christ, in and by
which they should be turned into him, the contrary to all which is evidently
affirmable of the Doctrine there pleaded for.

Upon these, and such like differences (good Reader) as also to stop the
clamors of some, and herein give answer to them that deny me liberty thereof
otherwise, was I moved to undertake this task of grapling with Mr. Owen in this
controversy; not for any hopes I have to find preferment and advantage in
this world, the hopes of which I have thrown behind me, and desire further so
to do for Christ, being well acquainted with the worlds temper in this matter.
I know its ever an enemy to the truth of God, and to its own good, through the
subtle working of Satan, with the craftiness of the seeming prudent men, high
in esteem with it. I know (for I sometimes hear) how suporbous, supercilious
men deride the simplicity of the words and Gospel of Christ, how generally they
fling against it, and cast dirt upon it; so that we may truly say, the visage
and form of Christ is marred more then any form, and the truth of God in this
matter rendered more contemptible then any doctrine; they that will not abide an
argument or two to their faces, yet if they get into a Pulpit where none may
interrupt them, or elsewhere, where there are none to answer them (like the
hypocritical mockers at feasts spoken of Psalm. 35.16.) then they will gird and
argue strenuously against it, or deride and vilify those that preach it, and
more ingenuous men, and confident of their cause appear in print against it. I
know the most odious names of Pelagianism, Semipelagianism, and Arminianism are
cast upon it, as Samaratinism, and Sathanism too were often cast on Christ to
make him odious and fear people from him: on the other side, their device is
clothed with the names of sound and Orthodox doctrine, and shows its pedigree
as high as Prosper, and Saint Austin. The world deals with these two doctrines,
as some would have the Kingdom deal with Presbytery, and Independency (as they
call them) as Tamars Midwise dealt with her two children. It says concerning
their doctrine as she of Zarah, this came out first, it is the eldest brother,
and they would have a Scarlet thread upon it, establish it by a civil bloody
Sanction, and so authorize it to suppress the truth that is opposed by them; of
which they say, as she of the supposed younger, but indeed the Elder (for Christ
was in his bowels and he came out first) its name shall be Pharez, its a maker
of Schism, upon it and its Preachers be charged our breaches and divisions; and
so they vilify and reproach Christ whose it is, and who is in it, and who for
all the others forwardness will give it the dominion. I know the truth of the
old adage, Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit, flattery is befriended, and
conformity to men's determinations is esteemed, but the truth is hated. I look
for my cleaving in this to the word of God, to be ranked with the worst of
Heretics, and to meet with no better name with this generation then Christ and
his former servants have met with in theirs. I look to have my name cast out as
odious, and made to stink in the nostrils of men (or else Satan and his
instruments will want of their will) while they that oppose the truth of God
grow famous: but I much matter not, its but the reward with men that Christ
has appointed for his followers: Its his saying to his servants, ye shall be
hated of all men for my names sake; and its properly the name of Christ, viz.
That he is (...). The Savior of the World, that is defended by us, and its his
consolation too, that the servant is not greater then his Lord; If they call
the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more them of his household? and
again, Blessed are ye when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate
you from their companies (as some have endeavored) and shall reproach you, and
cast out your names as evil for the Son of man's sake; rejoice ye in that day,
and leap for joy, for great is your reward in Heaven, for in the like manner
did their Fathers unto the Prophets. We have in our days too, them that can
(...), scoff and deride my weakness in such an undertaking, that will say in
their puff-pride (swelling in conceits of their learning and abilities) as
sometimes the Athenians did of poor Paul, (...); What will this illiterate
babbler say? Our age will afford those that read and preach the commendations of
the Prophets and Apostles, garnishing their writings (though they believe them
not) as their fathers did their Sepulchers, but yet will oppose and hate those
that follow their footsteps, and cleave close to the word of God that they have
published. Non ignota loquor. I have the experience of some things of this
nature, and know that truth cannot be sincerely professed at easier rate then
such course usage; the glimmerings of it in inferior streams, when stuck to
amongst the Heathens, found such usage, and it is nothing better amongst us
called Christians; if an Bona conscientia fiduciam mihi dat. Honesti amore
illud sine l^ge and poena colo: caeteri parietibus, januis, velis teguntur: ego
sub dio in propatulo ago: omnium oculis and inqui sitioni expositus Deo me
probo. Epict.
Epictetus approve himself to God, sufferings will follow, as he expresses it.
Cum haec facio, evenit ut male audiam, imo ut vapulem; at quid mirum a pueris
et fatuis, et qui ulcera sua tangi nolunt? Truth will gall some men's
consciences, and then they will kick against it, so he found it, so may I too,
idque etiam a prudentibus and populi senioribus qui sibi sapientiae titulum
quasi proprium arrogant. O let the Gospel produce its fruits in me parallel in
this matter to his following expressions ( ut affectum nec mutem, nec mittam,
ut eos ipsos qui me verberant diligam, tanquam pater omnium, tanquam frater,
that my love may overflow their ignorance or envy, and I may overcome their
evil with goodness, as the Apostle counsels, seeking their good as if they were
my friends and Lovers; yea though they shall (as some perhaps will) do by my
good will as too many do by Gods, render me hatred for it, at least despise and
scorn it. As I look not for much better from the most, so shall I not be much
troubled if I ^o find it. May but God accept and uphold me, and good men
approve me, though not for the worth of my performance yet for the readiness of
my endeavors, and any be thereby benefited, I shall be contented.

But stay, I must speak to one or two objections, I know some honest hearts,
(for I would not be conceived to think that none such may dissent from me may
be snared with the other persuasion, and be filled full of scruples about this
doctrine, as conceiving it cross to what the Scripture says of Eelction and to
go too far in extending it to the Heathen that never heard of him, and as
ascribing to man too much in his salvation, establishing his free will more
then gods free grace. Which things though they be spoken to in the Treatise,
Yet give me leave to say a word or two about them here too for thy further
satisfaction if it may be, premising first, That in the matters of God, we are
to exalt faith above reason, admit his word for our sure guide, not our
wisdom, 2 Pet. 1.19. 1 Cor. 3.18.
knowing that our wisdom in the things of God is but foolishness, his word the
truth, and his Gospel, the wisdom of God unto Salvation to them that believe
it. Thence if any man seem to be wise in this world, let him become a fool,
that he may be wise, let him be so much a fool as to judge God true and wise
not making his own blind reason, the measure of Gods unsearchable wisdom, and
of the truth of his holy words, as if all we can fathom and conceive ground
for, is true and no more, and so all the rest to be cut off that is above our
reach, or crosses our reasonings; least that befall us, that befell both Jew and
Gentile in the like case, pretending to be wise we become fools thinking to
mend Gods words, and carve them into a better fashion for our instruction in
the knowledge of him by our additions, detractions, limitations, and
contradictions, as we think good (as they did his works by their inventions) we
(as they) turn the truth of God into a lie, Romans 1.25.
and change the Glory of the incorruptible God, into an Image made to the
capacity of corruptible men. I cannot but commend to thee therefore that of
Erasmus, Desine disceptare, incipe credere ita citius intelliges; only I would
have thee apply it to Gods words (not to mine or any man's else, but as they
evidently agree with Gods) and so its one in meaning with what himself says.
Isa. 7.9.
If thou will not believe, thou shall not understand or be established, thou will either mistake or be waved up and down with specious arguments; but in
minding his sayings and doing his will, in yielding up to him in the light and
power he affords thee, thou shall understand doctrines, John 7.17.
whether they be of God or of men.

Of this also be thou admonished, to prefer Gods sayings before man's
traditions, the Apostles expressions before men's glosses and lame deductions:
for when men leave Gods word, to lean upon men, and have the fear of God taught
them by their Traditions because of their Authority, learning or seeming
Sanctity, God justly leaves them, and then they lean on to run into delusion,
infatuating their understandings, because they refused to give glory to Him.
But to speak a word to those particulars.

1. For the matter of Election, I no whit deny it, nor does it rightly looked
on as the Scripture expresses it, any whit contradict the extent of Christ's
Death. I confess, that it was made either in Massa pura, or in Massa corrupta
simply (as they speak) I find no where asserted, but in Christ, which I
conceive holds forth a view of Christ, as mediator in the act of Election, as
in him as mediator we are blessed, and so that the Election of believers was
made in him, tanquam in Radice; as in Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, God chose
their seed the Israelites, so in Christ Jesus in choosing him in the manhood
into unity with God, and to be the storehouse and treasure of all divine
blessings, he is said to have chosen to the same privileges (I mean by way of
participation of his fullness) those that after are brought into him, and
believe on him. As he is in the humane nature, chosen to be the holy one of
Israel (as united to the Divine) so we are chosen in him to be holy, a dedicate
people, and select portion for his inhabitation (as the Temple in that sense
with the Land and People of Israel were called holy) and to be blameless before
him in love, that is, as presented without blame and reproof in Christ, and to
be made blameless by Christ, and so those that are believers in Christ, are
blessed, and were so chosen to blessing, holiness and blamelesness in him from
eternity; (as the present Freemen of Lynn might be said to have been by
foregoing Kings, chosen to such privileges as they have now, in the first
choosing it to be a Corporation, and in those that were then made members of it,
though many of these present members (perhaps all of them) were then in their
progenitors other Countrymen) so I say those that are now belivers, were in
Christ before the Worlds foundation, chosen to the privileges they have in and
by him, being also foreknown of God, both that they should be in Christ, and as
owned in Christ, and predestinuted in that his foreknowledge and owning to be
made like his Son, whom in order of nature he had foreordained as their pattern
to dye, rise, and be glorified, in all which he ordained his foreknown ones,
even them that believe in him should be conformed to him, and unto which he
called them, and in that conformity in sufferings, justifies and maintains
them, and (as he has done, so yet) he does bring them to glory with him. Yea
in his calling men, we deny not his liberty of pulling in more powerfully,
preserving from general Apostacies, actual choosing and ordaining in his Son
glorified to their hearts, whom he pleases, and as he pleases: but that either
any company of men, as in themselves, and as of the world, uncaled, are ever
called (or signified by the word) Elect; much lose that any were chosen to be
the object of Christ's death, and the others left out (Election being ever
coupled with (or respecting) men's calling to Christ, and right to his
privileges, not Christ's dying) I can no where find in Scripture. Besides that
which is more secret and mysterious in his decree or dealings, we neither
confound with what he has done in the death of Christ for us and declares in
the Gospel to us as the object of our faith, or motive to believe, and that in
which he so calls, pulls in, and saves according to his good pleasure. Nor dare
we make them to run cross to the Scriptures, that more plainly declare his good
will and love to men, acknowledging rather our want of capacity to comprehend
those more abstruse things, then daring to call in question the extent of the
truth of his other expressions that are more fitted to our understanding, and
speak to the more intelligible principles of Christian Religion. Nor find we
warrant for making our narrow conceptions of those more abstruse things of God
(which are ever delivered in Scripture without any opposition to, or limitation
of the things we treat of) to be the measure of, and to give limits to them:
they that so do, both contradicting the Scripture expressions in the things we
speak to, and swarving also from them and their method in propounding and
speaking of those things of Election and Reprobation by which they measure them.

2. For the Heathens that have not had the Gospel opened to them, they put us
needlessly upon that, to stumble men about the truth of our doctrine: for we
could content our selves with the Scripture expressions of all and every one,
and the whole world, unlimitedly, without running into any nice speculations;
but when men propound that to us, I know not upon what ground we should say,
Christ died not for them, except the Scripture did in some place exclude them
from being of that all, for which he dyed: if any man can find an exception as
to them, I shall listen to it, but for my part I have not yet met with it. And
to make exceptions without warrant in the word of God about the matters of the
Gospels doctrine, I judge very dangerous. I know there are many cavils of reason
which have some specious color for it, but they all amount to no more then
those admirations of its ignorance and enmity in other cases, 2 Cor. 10.4.
How can this thing be? they are but high imaginations and thoughts, exalting
themselves against obedience to the faith of Jesus, Math. 16.24.
which are to be captivated to faith, not faith to them. Reason being a part of
that self of ours, which he that will be Christ's Disciple must deny, in what it
would stop us from receiving the doctrines he propounds to us. So that this is
but a trick of Satan, to stir up men to cast such stumbling considerations in
their own and others way, that they might not believe and have the benefit of
the truth declared to them: to whom its best to say, Get thee behind me Satan,
to leave disputing and inquiring into things more secret, and say either
produce me some Scripture that says, he dyed not for them, or else be silent.
Its good in such cases to take what Christ said to Peter, curiously inquisitive
after John, for a satisfactory answer. How God deals with them (further then
the Scripture says) what is that to thee? they shall be found excuseless when
Christ shall Judge them, and therefore follow thou Christ in the receipt of his
word and let not any seeming absurdities, to thy reason, prevail to impede
thee. And so we might say to Mr. Owens Cui bono quaeso? about them that perish,
what good does the death of Christ to them? which reasonings are but of the
spawn of the Serpents wisdom pretending to teach our reason the knowledge of
good and evil from the beginning. Such a question might have been as well made
by many Israelites in the wilderness: might not reason thus have led them to
argue, either God absolutely willed to possess us all of Canaan, or only some
few of us; if the first, how come so many of us to perish short of it, if the
latter, then I pray, Cui bono? to what end, or what good was in the deliverance
of the rest from Egypt, seeing they had as good have dyed there, as have been
consumed in the Wilderness? Nay if our corrupt and blind reason shall be
umpire, then what Satan and unbelief suggests, is righter then what God himself
says, for did not the Israelites perish in the Wilderness many of them (as
their reason and unbelief suggested) and did they attain to Canaan, though that
was the promise set before them? but as we said before, Let God be true, and
every man in his best wisdom but a blind fool and liar. We durst not believe
our carnal reasonings against Gods word, nor exclude, enlarge, or limit his
word by our own hearts dictates, but as we see God in other places instruct us
to it. Not but that we can give reasonable answers to their reasons against
Christ's dying for the Heathen; they being all fallen in Adam, and the sentence
being executable upon them, and all men in him in the day that he sinned, so
that what life and mercies of life, with goodness leading to seek after God,
and to repent, they do enjoy, may well and necessarily be conceived to spring
from Christ's interposing himself as mediator and ransom; But yet if any can
show that Christ died but for all in these latter times, or that the Gospel is
preached to, and show it by Scripture proofs, we will be willing so to
interpret those general expressions, till when we cannot admit of that
interpretation.

O, etc. there are in the Scriptures many figurative expressions.

To which I answer, Latimer gave to Hubberdine. That in some places we are to
take the Scripture as it lies, none that are sober doubt. Now if this objection
suit not to the Scriptures in general, but only to some places, then who shall
tell us what they are in which it suits not? Sure the Apostles speak plainly in
laying the foundation truths that are propounded to bring men to believe, for
if the language there be strange, who shall understand what it is that is said?
if the trumpet there give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to
battle? Now this point we speak of, namely the death of Christ, and for whom it
is, is fundamental, and the propositions that the Apostle, the Teacher of the
Gentiles lays down as the Testimony he Preached in the other parts of them, are
very plain and perspicuous; And that this only, that he gave himself a ransom
for all, should be obscure, is a groundless evasion of them that do not believe
the truth; seeing in their preachings of the Gospel he himself tells us they put
no veil over their faces in their ministration, but manifested the truth to
every ones conscience, which sure they did not, if they spoke so figuratively,
that many might mistake, and few could perceive their meaning, as is pretended.
Its true, the Gospel is a mystery, but yet a mystery now revealed; many things
hard to be understood, says Peter, speaking of Paul's writings, but that's spoken
particularly in the things of Christ's second coming, the word is in the
Original (...), not (...), in which things, not in which writings. Again the
speeches that are figurative, are generally conspicuous by the manner of
speaking, as plain as Latimers Fox preaching in a Monks Cowle, and sometimes
expressly called parables, but no such thing is conspicuous in those places,
except in the allusive words of ransom and propitiation, nor will the places
bear such limitations as they speak of, as the following Treatise proves. As
for that inference of transubstantiation, we deny it (or the rest) proveable
upon that supposal; No one Scripture saying, that either Christ called the
bread his body, or the cup he took in his hand his blood, more then that he
said to the Jews, destroy the Temple that he was walking in, John 2. but by
this he might mean and indeed point to his present body, and by this Cup his
present instant sufferings that he was about to undergo, which the Scripture
and himself also calls a Cup, and the Cup that his Father gave him, much less
say they that the one or other was turned into his natural body or blood, nor
is the parallel fair between the doctrines of the Gospel preached, as the first
principles of faith, and these Sacramental and more mysterious speeches. Genesis
17.14, 15. with ver. 2, 3, 21.
As inept it is almost as to make the Every fowl and beast that entered into
the Ark, to be a fit exposition of the Every man that Christ dyed for; whereas
the Scripture there expressly limits them to seavens, and to two and two of
every kind, and excludes the rest, and there is no such limitation to any
sums, numbers, qualities or conditions about Christ's death; they would hiss at
men that should produce such places to parallel, and limit the All and Every
that shall arise, or give an account of themselves to God by: which shows them
to be (...) absurd and foolish men in these their reasonings for want of faith.
These and such like rubs are sorry Remoraes to any that are capable of
understanding reason, and will Judge impartially in this controversy.

3. For free will, we say that God deals not with men as with stocks and
stones, and so much all generally grant us. But what other I pray are men, if
their wills have no power or freedom given it of God to act this or that, but
as external powers carry them? if they can only go quo fata trahunt, whether
they are necessitated, can avoid no evil that they commit, or do no good that
they neglect? And yet (good reader) mistake me not, I believe man has no power
but what is given him of God, either in naturalls or in spiritualls: nor any
power or liberty to spiritual acts till some spiritual force or power come to
him from God. That men are naturally dead in sins and trespasses, and wholly
strangers to the life of God, cannot come to Christ except God draw them; and
when they are brought to him they cannot of themselves, as of themselves, think
any good thought, that's right and approveable, without the grace of God. But I
believe that God in naturals has given men (as more understanding, so also)
more liberty of choice then the bruit beasts, and to them more then to
insensitive creatures, and in reference to spiritual life, he has and does
afford means to the natural man suited to his liberty and power, to make choice
or refuse to make use of, as to read the Scriptures, hear the word, look upon
and view his works, etc. and we conceive, that though those things have no
natural ability in them to to save or spirituallize such as use them, nor the
acts of men in using them, can do any more thereto, then the blind man's
washing in cold water to open his eyes. Yet in as much as God uses to work in
them as mediums: and sends forth his Spirit with them to inlighten and draw
men, they are justly guilty of their own destruction that neglect those things
when God affords them. Yea further, I understand and believe, that God by his
goodness, and with and in those means prevents men, and wroks in them,
manifesting his truth in them, and giving them a discerning apprehension of it,
with convincing or drawing power; and that he then gives them ability to do
what they could not before, as to acknowledge the folly he shows them, confess
the truth and goodness he makes evident to them, strive against the ways they
see harm them, etc. though yet these are not spiritual acts of divine and
Christ like life, they springing from self-love, and desire of their own proper
good, not out of love to God. But they, that when they are so prevented, and in
such preventions reproved, called, allured to listen further to God in the
means afforded, do stop their ears, close their eyes, harden their hearts,
imprison the truth they see, and neglect to use the power given them in these
strivings of Gods truth with them, are justly guilty of their own destruction,
should God there leave them, and strive no longer with them: and they that turn
at such reproofs, and listen yet to the truth, that speaks to them, and do not
slothfully neglect the power and liberty therein given them, may meet (yea are
in the way to meet) with further operations of the truth to convert and heal
them, to give life, yea divine principles of life, hope in God, and faith in
God to them; he having said, that such as turn at his reproofs shall have the
Spirit poured upon them, and his words made known to them, and they that listen
to him (though dead) shall live, etc. and that merely out of his grace and good
will toward them, not out of either merits of Congruity or Condignity found in
them. Though that God passes by many rebellions in such cases, and out of more
abundant love, where he pleases, draws more prevailingly even those that have
more rebelled, and many times passes by those that have less, may be easily
proved And wherein this, or any thing in this, either contradicts or jarreth
with the Scriptures, I as yet see not. That men may exercise or use their
inatural faculties in the things in which God uses to shine in light to men as
well as in others, as to hear the word, as well as to hear other discourses, I
see no ground of denying, though they cannot hear with such pleasure and
delight as they do other things, till something there heard does take them, yet
hear they may; and men's negligence in such things is called slothfulness (which
stands not in a man's not doing what he cannot, but in not assaying to do
according to liberty and might) and rebellion, when joined with wilfulness. Now
whereas its said, that should men do to the utmost what they can, by that light
and power given, yet that their doing would not save them. To that I answer,
that its not material, for first, as to the business in hand, its enough that
they have power and liberty from God to do more then they do. 2. Its granted,
that no act that God gives any man power to do, can save him by its self. Its
not of him that wills, or of him that runs, Romans 9.6.
but of God that shows mercy: but is not he that bids them listen to him, and
gives them light to see and discern such truths, and motion to own and follow
them, able to save them? or does he any where give any intimation, that upon
their acting forth in these his workings in and with them, according to the
power and liberty he gives, he will refuse to do any thing more for them, by
which they should be brought nearer to him, so as they might be saved? If they
have, then indeed they may well be slothful, and say, I had as good stay where
I am, and stifle what I see, for yielding up to it will not save me, nor will
God do any thing to that purpose further for me, and so their slothfulness and
rebellion may find some excuse; If not, then it appertains to them to hear
his voice, and (as Caleb said in another case) only not to rebel, nor be
slothful, and let God alone with what pertains further to their eternal
welfare; which if they refuse to do, they have no excuse, in as much as for
ought they know, and that God has said to the contrary (nay rather by what he
says he would have done for others, had they harkened to his voice, they might
hopefully conceive that) he would have revealed greater things to them, Psalm.
^1.14, 15. Isa. 48.17, 18.
and put forth greater acts of power about them, and so have saved them. So
that they cannot excuse themselves with pleading, as the evil slothful servant
(and as many teach men to plead) that God is a hard Master, gathering where he
strawed not, and reaping where he sowed not, they cannot say he refused to give
them faith, and further grace or knowledge of himself, requisite to save them;
seeing they were unfaithful in that talent he gave them, which had they
improved as he willed and enabled them, they might have had more for ought they
or any know, given them. That such are Gods dealings with men, as are above
declared, many Scriptures intimate, as that he manifests his truth in them, and
they say to him, Depart from us, etc. His goodness leads men to repentance,
they shut their eyes, and close their ears, least they should see, hear,
understand, and be converted, and so God should heal them, for which things God
also many times in just judgment blindes, deafs and hardens them too, and seals
them up to their destruction, but he first strives with men, and reproves them,
bids them turn at his reproofs, and he will pour out his spirit upon them, and
tells them when he gives them up, it was because they would none of him, would
not hear him, would not choose his fear, liked not to have the knowledge of him,
and says, had they hearkened to him, their peace had been as the Rivers, and
their righteousness as the waves of the sea, and he would have done thus and
thus for them with many such like expressions: but that any Scripture says,
that as men are naturally dead in sins and trespasses, so he manifests no truth
to them, or gives no power with that truth manifested by which they might grope
after him, would not, did they walk out in what he gives them, give any more
knowledge of Himself or Son unto them, and would not bring them to believe, etc.
We are yet to learn: or that ever any did so, and were there left by him
notwithstanding, and were condemned by him. These things I say we neither find
plainly expressed in Scripture, nor darklier intimated.

And that this derogates at all from Gods glory, or liberty to show more mercy,
as, and where he pleases, I would fain have any man to demonstrate to me. Yea,
I appeal to any equal Judge, whether this clears not the equity of Gods way far
more, and suits not better with the Scripture expressions, then to say, he
gives them no such power or liberty, and yet condemns them for not doing what
they no ways might have done, and doing what was no ways to be avoided by
them, requiring of men to act out all that strength that in Adam was given, and
punishing them as they fail in that. Surely by the rule Jew and Gentile should
both alike be punished (they both equally by nature being destitute of that
righteousness and strength) and not one more then another, according to more or
less now vouchsafed to them. So that this Objection about free will is a mere
rub cast in thy way too; no such conclusion being provable by Scripture, as
that God gives to many men no power or liberty to do any thing that he requiers
of them, or that did they constantly act forth according to what he gives them,
yet he would do nothing more to them, that would lead them to salvation; or
that Christ dyed only for such as he gives liberty to, so as to bring them in
actually and effectually to believe on him, and be saved by him, as shall be
seen in the ensuing Answers to Master Owen. As for other questions [as whether
any be brought to salvation by God, that improve that liberty he gives them? or
any that are not more extraordinarily over-powred by him?] as they are matters
of curiosity, by which many men detain themselves from doing that that God sets
before them, and from striving to enter the strait gate for their particulars,
so I shall wave them, and draw to a conclusion.

Only whereas by mentioning the strait gate, I am minded of another stumble
that some hit on, viz. That this doctrine makes the way to heaven broader then
God has made it, and the gate wider, and tends to daube up men with untempered
mortar, and to heal their hurts slightly; Objections that I hear sometimes
urged with that pretense and confidence of strength in them, that a man would
judge them to have some weight indeed, though I rather pity, and could lament
their mistakes, then admire their acuteness in such charges: I shall briefly
say a word or two thereto. Understand therefore I pray thee, that the
straitness of a gate stands not in this, that its opened but for a few, nor the
wideness of it, in that its opened for many; a narrow gate or passage may be
exposed to, and open for all, or for any that will go through it, and a wider
passage may stand open but for few: besides its not here as in other doors or
gates, that the throng of passengers presses men, and makes them find hard
entrance: No, in this spiritual gate the more enterers the easier, the number
of believers rather facilitates the passage, then makes it difficult; but the
narrowness of the gate stands in this, that this grace exposed to all, has
such operations upon them that enter it, to empty and abase them in themselves,
and for denying their wisdom, righteousness, reason, confidence in works; and
the enterers of it meet with such calumnies, reproaches, sufferings, etc. that
its difficult to be entered, few can find in their hearts to stoop to such
abasement and sufferings as it leads to; Christ is a strait gate, as rubbing so
much of man off in their listening to him and walking after him, not in his
being given for but a few of men, for if that was the straitness of it, he
might be wide enough for them that he died for, and they might find no
difficulty in entering into God by him. As for daubing up souls with untempered
mortar, and healing their hurts slightly, there might indeed be some color of
charging us with it, if we taught men as they do, That all that Christ died
for, shall certainly be saved, and no sin imputed to them, or if we only told
men that Christ died for them all; but we deliver no such doctrine as the
first, nor find just ground for it by any Scripture-expression, and besides
the latter, we in preaching the Gospel endeavor to bring men to see their need
of having Christ, in that they cannot have life but in having him, and in being
emptied of themselves, and found in him, and so we endeavor to bring men to
that self-emptiness of wisdom, strength and righteousness of their own, which
they who thus object are many of them afraid to be brought to, which is the
wounding work of the Gospel, which when they are brought to, we apply no other
plaster to them, then Christ's sufferings, Zech. 13.10. Gal. 2.20, 21. Romans 3.3.
by those we endeavor both to wound men in discovering the hainousness of
their sins thereby, and their emptiness of true righteousness and wisdom, which
things are best to be seen in his cross; and again, to heal them, in setting
before them the greatness of Gods love therein toward them, and the
encouragement it affords to wait on him for giving forth his Spirit to them,
to unite them to his Son, and so to impart his Sons privileges to them, which
when they are brought to, their sores are truly healed; for if this be to heal
them slightly, and the blood and grace of Christ be but untempered mortar, then
I know not wherewith truly to heal them; for my part, I desire healing to my
soul by no other Medicine: Their daubings that tell souls they may know that
Christ loves them by their good desires and endeavors, strifts and labors,
from hope in, and by which, souls should rather be taken, my soul abhors;
they being indeed but untempered mortar that God appointed not for men's rest
and healing. They are those dawbings that make many believe that they are in
Christ already, who have no more then what the Pharisee (Luke 18.11.) and the
false Apostles (2 Cor. 10.7.) boasted of, who trusted in themselves, that they
were Christ's, The direct way which) by nursing up souls in self confidence that
they are in Christ) keeps many a soul from coming unto Christ, and seeking
thoroughly after Christ, for which such daubers shall one day answer.

But I have exceeded the bounds of an Epistle. I shall say no more as to the
doctrine, only why I rather answered to Master Owen, then any other, I give
thee these reasons. The good report I heard of him for ingenuity and learning,
and the high esteems this his book had with many, the freeness of it from
engaging any one particular, more then some others lightly published, and the
desire of a worshipful, and loving friend or two, that I would peruse it, made
me rather give it these ensuing Answers; the substance of others being also in
it, so that in Answering him, little of them can be said to be unanswered. I
confess, at first I thought only to overthrow his main pillars upon which his
discourse leans, and leave his Arguments to fall with them; but finding it
his desire, that the answer would not only vellicare, speak but to here and
there a passage; to avoid that imputation, I armed my self with a little more
patience, and went through with it Chapter by Chapter, as thou see, only
omitting that occasional discourse against some Socinians that in his third
book he inserteth, it having nothing in it against me, but rather on my side.

I know that I am no whit worthy to be compared with him in learning, so
called, in which both time, opportunities, and his own diligence have given him
much superiority and advantage over me. But I hope I am not behind hand with
him in fair dealing with, and pertinent speaking to an argument. What I have
done in this Answer, and whether I have refelled his Arguments or not, I must
leave to thy judgment.

If thou find it unsatisfactory (as I hope to intelligent and impartial men
it will not be) judge it rather my weakness in handling the matter, then the
causes wrongness; accept my endeavors, and pass by my infirmities. In fairness
of language I conceive I am not short of him, though I may be in elegancy of
expression. If upon reading this Treatise, thou be persuaded of the truth of
what it defends, rest not in the bare belief of it, as if that was enough for
thee, but follow on to inquire and seek after God, that has such good will
toward thee; and walk out in what he discovers of himself to thee, that so he
may be pleased to discover himself more to thee, and draw thee by his Spirit
into union with, and conformity to his Son, that thou may have the utmost
healing that the death of Christ brings to the believer, even salvation, with
eternal glory. The right use of truth is in being lead from the world and thy
own self to God by it, and so attaining the end propounded to thee in it.

If thou, not liking what is writ wilt, reply upon me, I desire thee to do it
soberly, and as a seeker of truth rather then of victory, bate pride and
passion, which will but darken thine understanding, and nothing advantage thee
in thy answering; and take heed lest for fear of losing thine honor, or for
desire to get any, thou robbest God of the honor of his truth, and shuttest
thine eyes against those flashes of his light that he darts into thee. Better
lose thine honor, then engage against Gods truth for it.

If thou likest the truth pleaded for, but find defect or wriness in any of
my expressions in asserting it, I shall be willing to be helped to see better by
thy spectacles, if thou please to lend them me. In a word, I say to thee with
the Poet, -- Si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti; Si non, his utere mecum.
And so committing thee, with my self, and this ensuing Treatise to Gods
protection, I remain

Thy friend and servant in the Gospel of Christ Jesus, John Horn.

THYPA ANEOGEN., OR A VINDICATION OF THE RECORD of GOD, Concerning The extent
of the Death of Christ, in Answer to Mr. John Owen of Cogshall in Essex.
The Preface.
WHereas God (who is love it self) beholding mankind fallen, and through the
subtlety of the Serpent plunged into death and misery, was pleased out of pity
toward him, to find out a way for his recovery, even to send forth his own
proper Son, his Word and Wisdom, to take upon him the nature of man so fallen,
with the infirmities, weaknesses, death and misery attending it (yea the whole
punishment that the sin of man had in that fall contracted to it) that so he
dying for man, man might be delivered out of that death; and life and
immortality might be again brought to light; yea, whereas the Son of God having
accordingly given himself a ransom for all, it has pleased the Father (out of
the same love he bare to man in sending him) further to provide for his good,
in exalting this his Son that suffered, and making him Lord and Christ, a
Prince and Savior, one that should have (and answerably has) power and
authority over all things, and Salvation in him; authority and fitness to save
and deliver out of evil, and to bring to life and glory, whoever of the persons
of men listen and look to him for Salvation; whoever obey his Word, submit to
his Spirit, and give up themselves to be ordered by him; and to that end has
in these last days given forth a commission, to certain Elected and chosen
persons, appointed for that purpose by him, to be his Witnesses and Ambassadors
to the whole world in general, to proclaim, publish, and declare this that God
has done, in, and by Christ Jesus for them, and to let them know his good will
toward them, that he would not that any of them should perish, but all come to
Repentance, and to the knowledge, or acknowledgment of his truth, that they
might be saved (to which end he has also given and constituted his Son to be a
witness, and a Leader to conduct them to Salvation) and upon these grounds has
willed them to exhort, command, entreat, and urge all and every man (as they
have opportunity to it) to accept this grace, believe the Gospel, repent and
turn to God from their dead works, and from their follies, and to Jesus as the
only one constituted by him to be his Salvation, even to the ends of the earth.
So it is, that since these holy men of God, to whom the tenor of the Gospel and
doctrine of truth was first committed, have fallen asleep, the vigilant and
wicked enemy of mankind has not only through his subtlety prevailed with
multitudes of those men to whom this proclamation has been made, to reject,
persecute, and put away this Embassage, both from themselves and peoples under
them, and posterities succeeding them, and with many others to be slothful, and
not to take care to propagate this Doctrine of their Lord and Master, but also
by occasion of this wickedness, and slothfulness of men, many that pretend
themselves to be understanding men, and servants of God unto their brethren,
have come with a counter-doctrine pretending to have better insight into the
mind of God, then the letter of the Apostolical preaching does hold forth
(even as at first Satan pretended to the woman to have a more sublime knowledge
of the mind of God and to teach her better understanding of it then in the
simple belief of Gods words to them, they had attained) telling men that God
sent not his Son for all of them, but only for here and there one, they nor any
man else not knowing who they be, and that Christ gave himself only for them,
and for no others: and this they pretend to have from a more Seraphical
understanding of a more secret will of God, by which means they both contradict
the tenor of the holy Commission delivered out to his Saints, and left by them
upon record for us, by the instinct of his spirit; and take away those certain
and more excellent grounds, motives, and inducements to believe, repent, seek
after, and love God, which that Commission affords, making the Gospel to give
such an uncertain sound, that none can by it be induced to prepare himself to
battle, as is more largely showed in the Epistle to the Reader. In which doing
they greatly deny, at least disserve the Lord that bought them, in that in
stead of making him lovely to all, and an object meet for all to commit
themselves to, and forsake all for the worshipping and confessing of, they
render it doubtful what one has cause so to do, and not rather to hate him as
a fore (yea eternal) hater of them, that had such desire to their misery, as
therefore to create them, yea therefore to do all that he does about them, that
they might at last for ever be more heavily tormented by him. So that they do
herein as a company of slaves or persidious Traitors should do to a King, who
having made open proclamation of satisfaction received by the hand of some
Prince, for the mischief done him by a company of rebels, and of his good will
toward them all, that he would have them to lay down their weapons, upon which
they should be received into his favor; and that for assurance thereof and
encouragement to the submission required, he grants them pardon and an act of
oblivion for all past; they should come with an after-pretended proclamation
and declaration; pretending that they are of the Kings privy Council, and know
his mind, better then in that proclamation, to which he had set his hand and
seal, was declared, and telling those Rebels that they know his meaning in
those general expressions to be, that only here and there a man of them are
included in the Princes satisfaction, and toward them only the King bears good
will, the greatest part of them he so hates, that he excluded them the
satisfaction and act of oblivion for that that's past, by which means they
should strengthen them in their rebellion, it being evident to none of them,
who are of the one or of the other, and so who has cause to rely upon the
satisfaction given, and act of oblivion granted. Now for the honor of God and
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, I here defend the Apostical against their
counter Commission, accusing their innovation of it as false and fained, and of
evil consequence, and all the pretenders in it to be therein guilty of high
Treason against the Crown, Royalty, love, goodness and sovereignty of the Son
of God; in altering, changing and contradicting his proclamation, putting in
another in stead thereof, of their own devising, to the great obscuring and
dishonouring of his name, and prejudice to the sons of men, as is before
hinted. And whereas one Master Owen amongst the rest has lately put out a
Treatise impleading the true Commission and proclamation of the Gospel, and
pleading for this other of man's devising; my intention is here in this ensuing
Treatise, to defend and bear witness to the old Apostolical Gospel against him,
and to that end to examine and bring to Trial all his arguments that he
pretends against it, and for his opinion, according to the good hand of God
with me, refelling and laying open the vanity and falsehood of them, and their
ground lesness from those Scriptures that he abuses to countenance them. Now
the God and Father of lights, and fountain of spirits, be pleased to show forth
his strength in my weakness, vindicate his truth denied and darkened, guiding
me so to examine and answer his Arguments and Assertions, as glory may be
brought to his holy name, and nothing but his truth may be maintained by me. In
His name and strength go I forth in this business, beginning orderly with his
First book and Chapter.

On Master Owens first Book.
CHAP. I.
A view of, and answer to his first Chapter, with part of the third Chapter of
his second Book.

MAster Owen in his first Chapter propounds a consideration of the end of the
Death of Christ (though in his prosecution of it, he takes in the whole
business of his coming as well in ministration as in meditation as the
Scriptures quoted by him, if duly considered, make it to appear) in which he
looks upon it generally, both as Intended by the Father and Christ, and also as
that which was effectually fulfilled and accomplished by it.

As intended by God and Christ, so he shows out of the Scriptures that it was
to save that which was lost; to save sinners, etc. in which he speaks the
truth, though not the whole truth; that Scripture (in other places also taken
in) speaks about this matter, as after we shall see. But to proceed: upon
inquiry who these sinners are, he tells us from Math. 20.28. that they are
many, he came to give his life a ransom for, which in other places he tells us,
are Called, Us, Believers, distinguished from the world, Gal. 1.4. His Church.
Ephesians. 5.25.26. etc. But herein Master Owen deals not fairly, in that he tells
us not (at least by Scripture proves not) that those Many for whom he gave
himself a ransom, be bounded up in those other expressions of Us, Believers,
the Church, so as that Many comprehends no more then in those other expressions
are included. Sure I am, the Apostles no where tell us that those their
expressions are interpretations of the full latitude of that Many spoken of by
our Savior; nor have they any where put a restrictive to those expressions, as
Us only (I find the contrary, not for ours only 1 John 2.2.) or for Believers
only (for I find also that he died for the unjust and ungodly, and bought the
false Teachers, Romans 5.6. 1 Pet. 3.18. and 2 Pet. 2.1.) or for his Church only
(but also for all men, 1 Timothy 2.5.6.) therefore Master Owen has not dealt
heartily, in that he has not given us a full expression of those sinners for
whom Christ is said to give himself, or to come to save. I think Christ himself
intimates that he came to save the World both of believers, and not believers:
else I see not the clear reason of that in John 12.47, If any man hear my
words, and believe not, I Judge him not: for I came not to Judge the world, but
to save the world. How his coming not to Judge the world but save it, if by
World he mean only believers, should be given as the reason of his not Judging
him that believes not, passes my reason to conceive; therefore sure that word
World there, must be of a larger capacity. He has not then given a full answer
to his query, in that he limits the Many spoken of, to narrower bounds then the
Scripture ever limits it to. If he does not interpret that many by those
expressions of Us and Believers, exclusively, as to others, he says nothing.
But its evident he does both by his expression Distinguished from the World
(and yet Christ says He came to save the World, not a part distinct from it
only) as also by what he says to this word Many, in lib. 2. cap. 3. p. 77.
where he tells us that though the Word Many is not in it self sufficient to
restrain the Object of Christ's Death unto some, because its placed absolutely
for All, Romans 5.19. yet those Many being described in other places to be such
as its certain All are not, so its a full and evident restriction of it. But
good Sir, where are those places that so describe the Many, that Christ gave
himself a ransom for, and dyed for? I hope you think not the words unjust,
ungodly, sinners, etc. are such restrictive words, and yet these are the most
usual descriptions of those for whom he dyed. No, but he says those Many are
the sheep of Christ, the Children of God scattered abroad, the children that
God gave him, the sheep whereof he was shepherd, his Elect, his People, his
Church, those with whom he made a Covenant, etc. but as I said before, Does any
Scripture say, that this is the full and adaequate description of those Many,
or does Scripture restrain it unto such? I see no one place that proves that.
His answer then is still as unsatisfactory, as if to this, who shall rise
again? I should answer, they are many that sleep in the dust of the earth, Dan.
12.3. and then quote that in 1 Cor. 15.27. first Christ, then they that are
Christ's at his coming, and that Romans 8.11. if the spirit of Christ dwell in
you, he that raised up Jesus, will also quicken our mortal bodies, and 1 Cor.
6.14. He has raised up the Lord, and will also raise Us up by his power, and
then say, that these are a description of those many that shall rise again:
should I be thought substantially to prove that Many limited only to them? And
yet if such an answer would not be fair, then neither is his. If it be
Objected. That other Scriptures say, that some shall rise to condemnation, I
answer that other scriptures suppose a possibility of his perishing for whom
Christ died, 1 Cor. 8.11. and say that the false Teachers were bought by the
Lord, and yet pull upon themselves swift destruction for denying him that
bought them, 2 Pet. 2.1. so that the arguments are alike; as is evident to any
judicious impartial reader. We have nothing but Master Owens word, that those
forecited epithites and sentences, are the full description of that Many, for
whom Christ gave himself a ransom; and that's too weak a ground to build our
faith upon. That they are included in that Many, we grant, that they are all
that Many that he died for, we deny and he has not proved.

Now (not to recriminate and fling back upon himself that froth of wit, which
in his coming to answer what is objected to his argument from the word Many, he
casts upon a godly, though less learned writer) I shall view his confirmations
of his argument, or evasions from objections made against it. The Objection
mainly insisted on, is, that the word Many is used for All, and aequivalently
to All, as in Dan. 12.3. compared with John 5.29. and Romans 5.19. To which he
says. 1. That if the proof was taken from the word Many merely, and not from
the description of those Many annexed, with a presupposed distinction of all
men into several sorts, by the purpose of God, that exception would bear some
color. So that he leans more upon his description then upon the word Many; but
now that description, being a partial description, and no where in Scripture
averred to be the adaequate description of those Many for whom Christ dyed,
this argument will ex confesso fall to nothing, with a following simile, which
runs not parallel with the argument: for that distinction of men into several
sorts, that he mentions here, we shall view it hereafter. 2. To Dan. 12.3. he
says that there a distribution of the word to the several parts of it must be
allowed, as thus, the dead shall rise, Many to life, and Many to shame, which
is a mere evasion crossing the text, for the word Many is the Totum
congregatum, and there are distributive particles of that whole following in
the Text, (...) these to life, and those to shame, or some to life, and some to
shame: besides which he adds a gross mistake of the Apostle, as if it might be
said Many shall rise, because the Apostle says, All shall not dye. Whereas the
Apostle no where has such a saying. Its not, all shall not dye, but, all shall
not sleep, which signifies a resting in death, not a dying simply: in that
sudden change opposed to sleeping, there is a death and resurrection, though
not a sleeping in death, and resurrection from the grave. Besides though that
were granted that All dye not, yet I hope the Many that sleep in the grave that
shall thence rise, John. 5.29.
are the same with, All that are in their graves shall come forth. All that are
in their graves have dyed, and all them are called, Dan. 12.2. Many that sleep
in the dust. 3 To that in Romans 5.19. he says Many seems there to be all, but
not spoken with an intent to denote all with an amplification, because no
comparison there instituted between the numbers, etc. But neither is there any
strength in that, for 1. though here he mince the matter with (seems to be All)
yet p. 77. he confesses the word Many to be placed absolutely for All, and
instances this place, and that's enough to my purpose. 2. Its plain that a
comparison is there instituted between Number and Number, thus far that both
numbers are Many, yea and verse. 18. the Apostle is as strict in the words of
number as in any thing else, As by one offense (...), so by one obedience (...)
All men to all men. and so in verse 19. Many to many, the comparison is in this
that both have their effects upon many, as well as in the effects themselves.
Yea, and the word Many is clearly a word of amplification of both parts. The
All made sinners are truly Many, exceeding Many, and that Many All: for
producing other places, in which the word Many is All, though it be a trivial
business, in which only the Author that he bends himself against is challenged,
yet because he is confident that there is no other, I shall with the Authors
leave and his, propound one or two to consideration; as that in Numb. 6.36.
Return O Lord to the many thousands in Israel, is to All the thousands of
Israel, and not to many of those thousands only: so Mic. 4.4. He shall Judge
among many Nations, is among all Nations, for other Scriptures say, The Lord
shall be one and his name one in All the earth, and he shall judge the World in
Righteousness, and All Nation shall glorify him: But to return to the first
Chapter, in which those expressions of the end of Christ's coming, that is, to
save sinners, etc. are good and approved by us as the word of God. But how he
understands this word Saved, or how this phrase of Coming to save, he does not
fully express: to supply which defect I shall consider them a little, And

1. For the word Save, its of a large signification in Scripture when its
attributed to God and Christ, as,

1. It signifies to preserve or keep life, yea, when it is forfeited by our
sin, and God might justly deprive us of it, to keep out of perishing, as in
Luke 9.56. The Son of Man came not to destroy men's lives ((...)) but to save
them. Truly I conceive that in the day that Adam sinned, he forfeited his soul
or life, and in his own ours also, who were vertually in him, and had God
strictly taken the forfeiture of him, He, and we all in him, had in that very
day forthwith perished: but Christ who was fore ordained to this business,
stepped in between God and man, and by way of engagement became the dead Man, the
Lamb slain for us, and so preserved his soul and ours also; and so he yet as
Mediator between God and us, preserves us from many deaths, being patient
toward us, when our follies deserve them to come upon us, 2 Pet. 3.15.
in which regard his forbearance is to be accounted Salvation by us. And so
when the Samaritans brutishly rejecting him, had deserved such a destruction as
the Disciples would have called for upon them, Christ tells them No, he came to
Save men's lives even from such deserved destructions also, not to destory them
in them.

2. To Save is sometime further to pull and deliver out of the state of
ignorance, blindness, and corruption that men naturally lie in, and so its used
in Tit. 3.5. saved us by the washing of regeneration.

3. Sometimes to preserve a man in that Saved estate, or in that grace of God,
to which the soul through the call of God is brought, as in 1 Cor. 15.2, 3. by
which ye are saved, if ye keep in mind how I have declared them to you: and so
in 1 Timothy 4.16. in continuing in them (in the words of Christ, thou shall Save,
that is, preserve (from falling) thy self and them that hear thee. Again
sometimes,

4. To Save, is ultimately to deliver from, and out of all dangers, fears and
miseries, and to bring to everlasting Glory. And that's the utmost and highest
act of saving, the obtaining the Salvation that is in Christ with eternal
Glory, 2 Timothy 2.10.

Now in which of these senses Christ came to save the lost and sinners, or
whether he came to save each of them, that he came for, in All of them, he
declares not, but so far as I perceive he takes it as including all together;
and intends this proposition for a truth, that whosoever Christ came to dye
for, them he came to save in all these acts of saving, but then he neither
proves that proposition so universally propounded, but only brings some
scriptures which say, he came to save sinners, to wash and purge his Church,
Us, believers, etc. not proving them to be the whole adaequate object of his
Death, as was before noted: nor does he tell us how we may understand the
phrase of Coming to save, which in the second place, we shall briefly speak to:
for thereby we are to understand,

1. Either that God sent him, and he came forth to bring absolutely and
effectually, all and every sinner, for and to whom he came, and for whom he
dyed, to Salvation in its highest acts, or to the utmost Salvation.

2. Or else that he came from God with the authority and Office of a Savior,
to reveal that to men, and do that in dying for men, by which they listening to
him should be saved, but rejecting him they may miss of that exercise of his
office, and work of saving, which they otherwise might have from him. Indeed in
the first sense, the series and drift of his discource argues that he takes it;
but the latter sense seems to be as agreeable to Scripture, which says that
he would have gathered them, and they would not. They would not come unto him,
that they might have life, that he is the bread of God, that came down from
heaven, and gives life to the world, the true bread that God gave to the
murmuring Jews, who yet not eating him, have not life in them. All which
expressions argue an authority and office given to Christ, to save and give
life to men, and his readiness to give it; though they also show that the
execution of that office, or rather its fulfilling in men is suspended, and
takes not its effect toward those that refuse to come to him and submit to his
order, prescribed for executing it on them. Such a phrase we have in Exodus 3.8.
I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring
them up out of the land into a good land and a large, etc. in which his meaning
cannot be, that he came with an absolute intent and purpose to bring all that
his people certainly and effectually out of Egypt into Canaan; but there was
an implicit condition couched in it, of their harkening to him and following
him, otherwise though he came down to bring them into Canaan, many might never
come into as the event also proved it. Now if thus we take those Scriptures of
his coming to save sinners, and that that was lost; then though we understand
the word Save, to comprehend all those forementioned acts, it will be little to
the Authors advantage. But I pass from this part of his consideration to the
next, viz.

2 The effect and actual product of the work it self, the thing effected and
accomplished by the Death, Oblation and bloodshedding of Jesus Christ, which
he expresses more distinctly to be Reconciliation, Justification,
Sanctification, Adoption, Glory and Immortality; for which he produces diverse
Scriptures, some pertinent, some not. Now to this part we shall grant, that by
the death of Jesus Christ some men attain to all these things, which is as much
as those Scriptures produced by him prove. But I shall briefly declare how they
are by his Death.

1. His Death and bloudshedding was that way through which God went to effect
these things, and so (...) may be translated [through his Death] as Gods
dividing the red sea was part of that way by which he brought Israel into
Canaan, and the ordering Joseph to prison, was the way through which God
brought him to his preferment in Pharaohs Court, and made provision for the
people of those countries in the 7 years of famine. David's fight with Goliath,
was the way through which the Israelites were victorious over the Philistines,
etc. Had not Christ died we had not been reconciled, justified, sanctified,
received the adoption of sons, and so not glorified: by that our sin was
expiated the way between God and us cleared and made open, Redemption obtained:
salvation is in Christ for us, so as that by believing in his Name any may be
saved. Acts 4.11, 12.

2. By his Death we are Reconciled, Justified, Sanctified, made Sons, etc. as
its the way through which discovered to us, and believed in by us, we are
brought to union with Christ, and to receive that salvation and redemption that
is in him: not that Christ in the act of his dying, made us at one with God,
and so reconciled us to God in our selves, or justified, or sanctified us, made
us sons and glorified us in our persons. But this death of his made known to us
in the Gospel, is that by which God draws us to his Son, and to himself, and so
its it by which he reconciles us. Thence the Colossians are said Now to be
reconciled, since the enmity in their minds was slain by him: and so,
reconciled by his death, is a phrase like those in 1 Pet. 1.3. and 3.20.
begotten to a lively hope by the resurrection of Christ, from the dead, and so
the conscience gives a good answer by his resurrection, that is, by it as not
only acted in Christ, but as discovered to us in the word, and as its that
medium by which we behold Gods goodness toward us. Romans 3.25. and 5.1.
And so the blood of Christ Justifies us by faith in it, as by virtue of the
satisfaction made by it Christ presents us righteous, being brought into him
through the faith of it: and so for sanctification, it is by his blood sprinkled
on us, and through the power of the spirit working powerfully in us. That place
in Heb. 9.14. quoted by him p. 64. to prove sanctification to be an immediate
product of his death, is horribly mistake; for it speaks not of his Death
simply assuffered, or his blood as presented by him to God, but as sprinkled
upon the conscience, and therefore its brought to answer the type of the red
heifer Numb. 19. which not by its death and oblation immediately sanctified the
people, but the ashes of it being reserved, and after mixed with clean water,
and sprinkled on the unclean, then Sanctified, to the purifying of the flesh;
and not otherwise: so also he has misapplyed, 2 Cor. 5.19. in his first
chapter, p. 2. bringing it to prove Reconciliation accomplished in the Death of
Christ. When the Apostle speaks but of it in fieri not in facto, its (...),
Reconciling, to the accomplishment of which in them, he exhorts them in ver.
20. Be ye reconciled unto God: so in page 3. he has to wrong purpose quoted
Heb. 9.12. and 1 Pet. 2.24. as speaking of redemption or justification as
accomplished upon men, when they (so far as he quotes them) speak but of
Christ's finding or obtaining it of the father in himself or into his hand, nor
is it there expressed for whom, or for how many he obtained it, the words, for
us, being not in the Text. Again he there misquotes Romans 3.25. rendering it We
have all sinned, and are justified, as if it were (...), whereas it is indeed
(...), All have sinned, being justified, etc. But I pass from these things. His
drift in all this he afterward in page 4. and more plainly chap. 3. lib. 2.
discovers to us: Its to beat down a spreading persuasion (as he calls it) of
Christ's giving himself aransome for all, and every one; a persuasion which the
Teacher of the Gentiles in truth and verity broached in those very expressions.
1. Tim. 2.5, 6, 7. Heb. 2.9. a sad time when men of parts study to oppose his
doctrine totidem verbis in the very terms that he delivered it in. But Hic
labor, hoc opus est. To this purpose the aforesaid considerations were laid
down, to be the foundation and Basis of an argument or two; as to that purpose
he has enlarged them also, lib. 2, cap. 3. producing more scriptures tending
to the same thing, to which those above mentioned were produced; as That he
shall save his people from their sins, shall see his seed, and carry on the
pleasure of the Lord: Sanctified himself, that they may be Sanctified through
the truth, gave himself for us that he might deliver us from this present evil
world, was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him (most or all of which we shall after meet with, and speak more particularly
to) from all which he draws this argument.

That which the Father and Son intend to accomplish, in and toward all those
for whom Christ died, by his death that is most certainly effected. But the
Father and Son intended by the Death of Christ to redeem, purge, sanctify,
purify, deliver from Death, Satan, the curse of the Law, to quit of all sin,
to make righteousness in Christ all those for whom he dyed. Therefore He dyed
for all, and only those in and toward whom, all those things recounted are
effected, and so not for All. This is a main pillar of his edifice: let us by
Gods assistance assay to shake and evert it.

And first (not to speak to the form, how the conclusion should have been
inferred) for the major, if taken in this sense, What the Father and Son did
intend, purpose, and wholly take upon themselves, absolutely to do by his
death, that was and shall be thereby effected, His determinate purpose shall
not fail; so its granted. But if by intended, we understand what he propounds
as an end intended in which there may be something suspended in the proposition
upon some condition, in that way I say what ever is propounded as his intent,
may not be fulfilled and accomplished in All for whom he dyed. But I know he
intends it in the former sense: and therefore (2. I shall deny the Minor, and
desire his proof for it, namely that the Father and Son intended, that is,
absolutely purposed, and wholly took upon themselves, without condition, to
redeem, purge, sanctify etc. all for whom Christ died. For

1. This is beside the scripture, that says, He dyed for all, but never that
he so intended to purge, sanctify, set free, and save All.

2. Its against that intimation in Romans 14.15. and 2 Cor. 8.11. that one for
whom Christ dyed may possibly perish, and makes a mere Scarecrow of the
Apostles reasoning, as if he would deter them from evils, by propounding
impossible consequences of it, and suppositions quite contrary to the faith: to
say nothing that it thwarteth that too in 2 Pet. 2.1.

3. None of all the Places quoted, prove what is affirmed: for either they say
not that the object named is all that Christ died for, but some specially
distinguished from others, by the intervention of faith either, in the eye of
God, or in real existence in them, as his people, 1 Pet. 2.10.
them that believe on him, the Church, that is, a people called out of the
world, Us, who were then actually believers; them that were given him out of
the World, had received his words, believed, were sent into the world by him to
preach the Gospel (to say nothing of his begging the question, that by
sanctifying himself he means his dying, or setting himself apart to dye, in
Joh. 17.19.) so that that Minor is peccant in that it wants proof, none of
those Scriptures saying, that those things he aimed at in all he dyed for. To
illustrate the business, the proof is like this. It pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe; and he called you by the
Gospel to the obtaining of the Glory of the Lord Jesus; Ergo All to whom it
pleased God that the Gospel should be preached, shall be saved and obtain
eternal Glory. To propound as a truth that God intended to redeem, purge, and
save All for whom Christ dyed, and then to prove it by telling us he intended
to do so to Us that believe, to his Church and people; is as lame a proof as if
I should propound for truth, that God intended to bring into Canaan all that he
brought out of Egypt, and then prove it by showing that he so intended to all
that believed and followed him. Or else

2. Those places show not that those things so mentioned, were the absolute
intentions of God and Christ, taken upon themselves to be effected by them,
without suspending them upon condition in us, and if the Minor take not the
word intended in that sense, it suits not with the Major, but contains a
quartus terminus: and the major not so taken is untrue. If it be said the words
are, I came to save that that is lost, he gave himself that he might purge Us,
and suffered for the unjust, to bring us to God, etc. and where things are so
spoken of, as the ends and aims of God in acting; there, though we have not
the expressions, He intended this and that; yet we are to understand that God,
absolutely intended to accomplish and bring about those things, and so that all
those that are the object of those acts which were acted to such an end,
obtained or shall obtain that end. Then I deny it and will prove it, that in
such speeches where two acts are mentioned as end and means, and God the agent
in the act directed to such an end, it is not safe to say, that always that
act propounded as the end, in his acting, was absolutely intended to be, and
answerably is brought about by him, in all those upon whom or for whom he acted
that act that's mentioned as the means: as to instance. Act. 17, 26, 27. He made
of one blood all the kind of men to inhabit all the face of the earth, and
has determined the times appointed, and the bounds of their habitation, that
they might seek the Lord, etc. Here is end and means propounded, the making all
of one blood, bounding their times and habitations, the means directed to this
end, that they might seek the Lord. Will any man hence say, that God absolutely
intended that he would cause all that he made, and whose times and habitations
he bounded, to seek him, and who ever seek him not, and so call those in Romans
3.11. were not made by him? So John 1.6, 7. John was sent to bear witness to
the light, that all through him might believe. Does it follow that because that
was the end propounded, therefore God absolutely purposed to make all believe,
to whom he bare witness, and so its true that he bare witness to none else? is
not that contrary to Mat. 11.16, 17, 18. and 21.32. So John 5.34. Christ tells
the cavilling Jews that he spoke those things to them that they might be saved;
will it follow that it was his absolute intent that they should all be saved,
hear him or not? or to make all hear him and be saved, even those that would
not come to him that they might live? verse. 40. Christ came to save that which
was lost: Does it follow that he absolutely determined to bring all them to
eternal life to whom he came? even those also to whom he came, and they
received him not? John 1.11. So Psalm. 105.33, 34. He brought his chosen into
Canaan, that they might observe his Statutes and keep his Laws. Therefore he
intended to make them all do so, and all that he brought into that land did so,
contrary to Psalm. 106.34, 35, 36. And to say no more, God came down to bring
Israel out of Egypt, to bring them into Canaan. Exodus 3.7. and he brought them
out thence that he might bring them into, and give them that land. Deuteronomy. 6.23.
Ergo he absolutely purposed it concerning all that came out of Egypt, and no
more were brought out thence, then were brought into Canaan. Such his Argument.

Like to which he has another taken from the effects of Christ's Death, Lib. 2.
cap. 3. page 66.
the Minor of which Affrmes that his Death sanctifies and and purges all them
for whom he dyed, redeems them from Law, Curse, Death, etc. none of all which
he proves, none of all those Scriptures alleged for proof, This argument he
has again in lib. 3. cap. 4 where we shall speak further to it.
having such a clause in it, as, All, for whomsoever he dyed, or any thing
sounding that way, they being but applicative speeches not universal
assertions. Its such an argument as this. The Lord brought us out of Egypt, and
brought us into this place viz. Canaan, Deuteronomy. 26.8, 9. And the Lord made you to
go up out of Egypt, and has brought you into this Land. Judge. 2.1. Therefore
all that God brought out of Egypt, he brought into Canaan. Besides he has for
the bottom of this Argument this proposition in p. 4 line. 71. and again in
page 66. that the things before recounted are the immediate fruits and products
of Christ's Death, namely Reconciliation, Justification, Sanctification,
Adoption, Glorification: which is as true as that the dispossessing the
Canaanites, and the giving their Land to the Israelites, was the immediate
fruit and product of their bringing out of Egypt over the red Sea; as may be
seen by what we said to them p. 10. No one of those things as accomplished in
men, is the immediate fruit and product of his Death. Not Reconciliation,
though that be by the Death of Christ, yet not immediately, there is requisite
to it beside Christ's death the word of Reconciliation to declare it, and that
heard and submitted to, as is plain, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. We beseech you be ye
reconciled to God; yea and all these things come between the death of Christ
and Reconciliation, and are mediums of it. Justification is not the immediate
fruit and product of his death, but mediante fide, We are justified by faith,
Romans 5.1. thence, we have believed that we might be Justified. Gal. 2.16. and
that presupposes the word and spirit opening the death of Christ, and shedding
abroad the love of God; and sprinkling the blood of Christ upon the soul, as in
Tit. 3.5, 6, 7. He shed on us the Spirit abundantly, that being justified by
his Grace we might be made heirs, etc so 1 Cor. 6.11. ye are Justified by the
Name of the Lord, and by the Spirit of our God. Sanctification is not the
immediate fruit and product of Christ's Death but mediante fide too; Sanctified
by faith that is in Christ Jesus, Acts. 26.18. and so there intervenes the
being called out of the world and Church't, Ephesians. 5.26, 27. Adoption is not
the immediate fruit and product of Christ's death, but has Faith and
Justification intervening, John 1.12. To them that received him, he gave this
privilege to be the sons of God, to them that believed on his Name, Gal.
3.26, 27. Ye are all the Sons of God by faith in Jesus Christ. Tit. 3.7. That
being Justified by his grace, ye might be made heirs, etc. And I am sure glory
and immortality follows all these, except we will have the inheritance go
before the heirship, and right to it. But of this enough, and to this Chapter.

CHAP. II.
Animadversions upon some passages in the second and third Chapters of his
First Book.

THe second Chapter being only speculation about the nature of end and means,
To Chap. 2.
and not at all applied there to the question, I shall pass over; only noting a
mistake in that expression about the nature of Moral means, which he has page
6. line 15, 16. that in a moral sense, when the action and the end are to be
considered in reference to a Moral rule or law prescribed to the agent, then
the means are the Deserving or Meritorious cause of the end. Which I conceive
to be false, looking upon Moral as contradistinct to Physical or natural, as
there he does, for it would then follow that Faith as a means considered in
reference to the Law of Faith, should be the Meritorious cause of its end, that
is, Justification and Salvation, and so good works: which I think All Orthodox
and Protestant Divines do utterly disclaim. Though Faith be the way to
justification and eternal life, yet its no ways the meritorious cause;
otherwise we should be justified not only per fidem, but propter fidem too, not
ex gratia but ex debito and merito; and so that distinction of the Apostle in
Romans 4.2, 3, 4. is quite overthrown, but no more to that, it being but by the
by.

His third chapter is spent about the consideration of God as the agent in the
work of Redemption; To his 3. Chap.
about which there is no express difference between us as to the main, only a
few expressions drop by the by, that are considerable, as That 1 Timothy 4.10.
[who is the Savior of all men, chiefly of them that believe] calls not God a
Savior with reference to his Redeeming us by Christ, but his saving and
preserving all by his providence: A strange conceit, in which opponit non
opponenda; for though its true he says Us by his providence, yet that that
providence of his is saving to sinners, yea so much as in this life, without
respect had to the mediation of Christ, much less that its so saving, specially
to believers, as that it becomes the motive and ground to them, of such trust
in God, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. and 5.1.13, 14. Phil. 3.20, 1.
as carries them out to suffer and labor in his Gospel (as there its affirmed
to be) is unreasonable to conceive; and it disagrees with what he says to this
business in other places, where he tells us, it was eying God as one that had
prepared things not seen, eternal in the heavens for them, and eying Christ's
death for All that they might live to him, and glorifying his love therein, to
his and his brethrens hearts; expecting a savior from heaven to change their
vile bodies, that made them despise their lives and liberties, preach the
Gospel through sufferings, reproaches, crosses, how ever little esteemed as
beside themselves. Now here to think the Apostle cuts off all that
consideration of his saving, and only pitches upon him as a providential
Savior in a salvation out of Christ, or without the consideration of Christ
intervening, as the lovely object of Trust and Confidence in all their labor
and afflictions, is too jejune and erroneous: but we shall meet with this again
in his eighth chapter.

Again in considering the obligation and Covenant between God and Christ, he
promises something that will utterly overthrow the Universal Redemption, but
defers it to another after-place in lib. 3. chap. 1. where we shall meet with,
it and give it its answer: only whereas he tells us p. 16. that the promise in
Isa. 53.11. is inconsistent with their persuasion who in terms have affirmed,
That the Death of Christ might have had its full and utmost effect, and yet
none be saved. To that I shall say how I conceive that may be affirmed and how
not (not standing here upon it that that in Isa. 53.11. is a prophecy of, but
not a promise uttered to Christ)

1. It might have been so, supposito quod Deus eam aliter ordinasset; as it
might have been undertaken and endured, and as God might have decreed, it might
have been so.

2. To look upon it as it was endured, and take it by it self, simply as Death;
though to such and such ends without Resurrection from which it is distinct,
then also it might have been so: had he not risen too, all its effect would not
have saved any man: So the Apostle intimates, 1 Cor. 15.14, 16, 17.

3. It might have had its full effect as only offered to God without
application to men, and none saved; had it been its end intended, it had been
contrary to that in Isai. 53.11. but the effect and end of a thing differs
much; The Carpenter builds a house, the effect of his work is the house it
self, the end of its building, habitation: the end of Christ's Death is, that
men might be saved by him, the effect of it as a thing simply done by him,
between God and him, is not the salvation of any one without application of it,
or dispensation of spirit to men through it; so that had Christ died, and rose
too, and done no more, none had been saved to the utmost, except the business
of his Priesthood be in vain, and a thing that might have been spared'; so that
its effect it might have had as a thing endured by him, and none saved, as they
take saving in that high.

4. But to say the thing that God aimed at, and that was covenanted to be
granted to Christ upon, or as a reward of his Death, might have been effected
or performed, and yet none saved; is indeed clearly false, nor did the speech
opposed affirm so much; but that's as much, I suppose, as upon (second thoughts)
he aimed at. est act.

Whereas he says, page 17. That the pleasure of the Lord that was to prosper
in the hand of Christ, was the bringing of many sons to glory; that's a truth
but whether it be all the truth or no he tells us not, and so deals not so
fully and plainly as he should; whether the glorifying of God in the
convincing, and just and righteous judging of the rest be not the pleasure of
the Lord too, he says nothing, much less disproves it, and yet I think he
shall do that, and the pleasure of the Lord too in that matter shall prosper in
his hand.

In the same page he tells us the request of our Savior, John 17. was neither
for more nor less then God had engaged himself to him for, and that was for a
full confluence of the love of God, and the fruits of that love upon all his
Elect, in Faith, Sanctification and Glory: But of that he gives us no proof,
neither that there he asked no less (for as for more I will not question) nor
that he requested Faith for all his Elect, or any of them. To the first. I
propound to him, Whether the salvation of Abraham and Isaac, etc. was not in
the Covenant made between God and Christ? if not, then some more are saved then
were included in that Covenant: If yes, then I demand, what passage in that
Prayer requests that they might believe and be sanctified? if none, then he
asked less in that Prayer then God had engaged himself to him for. To the
second, I desire him to show in what passage he prays for the faith of the
Elect in all that Prayer: not from the sixth to the twentieth, for he tells his
Father they had it already, and I suppose he will not be able to prove that he
prayed to his Father there to give them that which they had before that prayer,
at least in that degree in which they had it; nor in ver. 20. for them he
supposes as future believers, as he makes them the suppositum of his prayer;
his prayer is not, that they might believe, but that believing, which he
supposes they should, they might be one, viz in body, privilege, and enjoyment
of the grace of God in Christ; except he will say Faith is prayed for in ver.
21. and 23. when he says, that the world might believe; but first, that is for
the world, not for the Elect; secondly, that he himself denies to be the faith
of the Elect, and so the fruit of that love here said to appertain to the
Elect, but only a conviction, not for any good of the world, but only for the
vindication of his people, cha 7. page 47. therefore I desire him to show me in
what place of that prayer, that Faith he here speaks of, as a fruit of Gods
electing love, is prayed for.

In page 19. He tells us, That it seems strange to him that Christ should
undergo the pains of hell in their stead, who lay in the pains of hell before
he underwent those pains, and shall continue in them to eternity: To which I
need not say (with many of the Ancients) that he emptied hell by his death,
Bishop Usher in his Answer to the Irish Jesuit upon Limbus Patrum, etc.
and descent into those pains, as Bishop Usher relates: nor will I put him to
prove that any were as then, or yet are undergoing those pains before the
judgment of the great Day, when they shall be sentenced thither, which will be
somewhat hard for him to do, except he take that in Luke 16. to be a Narration,
or History of things really done, and think that the rich man see Lazarus in
Abraham's bosom, and could call from hell to heaven to him; but I say, it will
not follow from our saying, That Christ gave himself a ransom for All, that he
must undergo those torments for All, which were properly inflicted upon men for
their abuse of that liberty which he virtually gave them to enjoy by his
after-death. His enduring the sentence of the death he found them under, as in
Adam, was enough to pay for that dispensation of life, liberty, grace and mercy
to them, which they in their several times enjoyed upon the engagement of his
future dying, See more to this in cha. 3. li. 3.
without enduring those torments for them, to which they stood by the word
adjudged for their not receiving him, who was the Author of such liberty and
mercy to them in those hints of truth, and reproofs, and counsels, in his
Spirits strivings despised by them. Hence we may fall into an Answer of a
Dilemma there propounded to us, and again repeated chap. 3. lib. 3. viz. That
God imposed his wrath due unto, and Christ underwent the pains of hell for,
either all the sins of all men, or all the sins of some men, or some sins of
all men: If the last, then all have some sins to answer for, and so no man
shall be saved; if the second, then that is it he affirms; if the first, then
all should be saved, or why not? This may seem at the first view such a
three-headed Monster as that there is no conquering it; but through Gods
assistance we shall grapple with it. About his suffering the pains of hell, I
shall not question with him; its an ambiguous word, and variously used; And as
no Scripture uses his expressions, perhaps in his intention, so as the
Scripture uses the word hell, I have no ground from Scripture to deny the
expression: therefore to the thing it self,

I may say, that in several respects, all those three branches of the Dilemma
are true, and yet his consequences will not follow. As,

1. He underwent the wrath of God for some fins of all men, 1 Timothy 2.6. Romans
5.18.
else he could not give himself a ransom for them all, nor his righteousness
come to All men to justification of life, nor any favor of God be extended to
them, except he interposed between God and that sin that in its desert, and by
Gods sentence of death, stopped the passage of all good flowing upon them, unless
hindered by mediation. But then he says, All have some sins to answer for, Nego
consequentiam, that follows not for he that bears some sins of all, may yet
bear also all of some, those two are not inconsistent: had he said, But some
sins of any, that had excluded All of any; but some of All does not: those that
may be but some of one man's sins may be All of another; as suppose he bare all
sins in genere, but the sin against the Holy Ghost, he then bare all some men's
sins, Heb. 10.26.
for some men are not guilty of that, but are kept from it: but yet in respect
of their sins that run into that, he bare but some of their sins, not all as so
considered.

2. He underwent the wrath of God for all the sins of some, that is, gave such
satisfaction to his justice, that no sin they have shall be their condemnation,
namely of those that believe and walk in the light with him, as it is 1 John
1.7. Romans 8.1. otherwise the phrase as he expresses it, the Scripture has not:
But then that's it he faith. No sure, for he says he bare only All the sins of
some men, and dyed for none else but those some, but so neither the Scriptures
nor we say: He might bear the punishment of all the sins of some men, and yet
not them only.

3. He underwent the wrath of God for all the sins of All men in some sense
considered, That is, as they were sinners in his first stepping in to undertake
for men, as sin was upon them through the fall of Adam, and bound them to curse
and death, and so they needed a mediator, or else they must presently be cut
off and perish; and so in a consideration and view of them as previous to his
steping in to mediate. And his bearing all of them was enough to ransom them
all from that first condemning sentence: and yet neither follows it so that all
must then be eternally saved, because there are other sins against his
mediation, and the fruits of it extended to them, as considered in a condition
consequent thereto: as refusing the light, and abusing the power and liberty
given them in the strivings and operations of his grace and spirit, a turning
away from him that did so much for them, a denying him that bought them, not
believing on his name, etc. But then he says further, If this unbelief be a
sin, then Christ underwent the punishment of it or not, if he did, then why
must that hinder more then other sins? etc. To which I answer, that though
properly and most directly those sins and evils came upon him, into which the
fall of Adam plunged us, sins not against him as Mediator, or God as giving a
Mediator and dealing with us there-through, which was consequent to the fall
and to man's sinning: yet inasmuch as God knew that which they would do against
his Mediating for them, he not only laid upon him that sin previous to it with
its proper operations in that way, but also provided in that his Death against
other sins that would follow, so as that he might be perfectly able to save to
the utmost any that should come to God by him. And so he did so much in that
one Death and offering, as by virtue thereof, patience and forbearance might be
afforded for some space to the Rebellious, while God is striving with them by
his Spirit, and leading them to Repentance. (...)
And its said, there is forgiveness with the Lord, that he might be feared, and
with him is plenteous Redemption, Psalm. 130.4, 6. with him before it be with
us, or before we have it made ours; before we fear him, for its provided with
him, and he exercises patience answerably with Declarations of it, that he
might be feared, and this held forth to such, as yet are supposed, may despise
and perish, Acts 13.37.40.41. And thence in urging the wicked to Repentance,
its added as the motive, for he is gracious, and will multiply pardon. He has
received so much satisfaction for any wicked man whoever, short of that
unpardonable sin, that he has power and readiness of forgiveness for them with
him, Matthew. 22.3, 4, 7.
and desires not their ruin, but that they might turn and live: such a Caution
has Christ put in with his Father for them, and not only so, but also he so
far fore-provided, that upon submission of any of them to him, all their sins
against his light, goodness and Mediation, during the time of Gods calling,
finds Remission from him: Isa. 55.7.
and the after-follies to that his own Called-Ones run into are provided
against; 1 John 1.9.
remission is in him for them, and upon their confession and returning they
have it dispensed to them; and for them he has provided, that they shall not
fail of seasonable operations of Spirit, with due chastisements, Ephesians 5.26, 27.
whereby they may be sanctified and made pure in his sight; and for the
sanctified, he has provided for their utmost perfection, and all this in one
sacrifice. But all this power of pardoning, obtained by his Death, is deposited
in his hand, and the pardon not immediately passed over from God to us, or any
he died for; as if Christ bare all the Curse and Death, and then for his sake
we have Remission, blessing and life presently conferred upon us: but as Christ
bare all our evil Godward, so he has received, and is the treasury of Gods
fullness of blessing Man-ward, and men receive it from him and with him, it
being Gods Ordinance that he and life go together: so as that we have not life
till we have him, nor Redemption till translated into his Kingdom; who then
sets us free by revealing his Truth to and in us, John 8.32, 36. Col. 1.13, 14.
1 Corinthians. 1.30. But the persisting in obstinacy and Rebellion till the space
of Grace be expired, deprives men of that Mercy and Salvation they might have
found in submission to him, Jon. 2.8. Psalm 81.10, 11, 12. Luke 19.41, 42, etc.
And so unbelief Condemns, not only as it deserves Condemnation, for in that
regard he has power to forgive it, but as its necessary operation is the
keeping a soul at a distance from him, in whom is all Salvation and Remission,
and without whom we cannot have whatever of that nature is given to us, all
being intailed upon and bound up in him, 1 John 5.11.

So that in a word, he has born all the sins of all men, as in their first
transgression, and as considered precedaneous to his mediation; and has
obtained such power against all other sins of all, or any man, that he has
made them all pardonable, except that blasphemy against the Holy Ghost; that
upon repentance he can and will pardon any of them; though yet we say not that
he bare upon himself all the sins of all men as considered sinning against his
mediation.

CHAP. III.
A Veiw of his fourth Chapter, with Answer thereto.

IN his fourth Chapter he tells us how Christ was Agent in the work of
Redemption by voluntary susception of the office imposed on him, and so was
incarnate, and offered up himself a sacrifice to God, which we affirm also;
only some of the Scriptures that he quotes for this (though they intimate his
suffering and offering) yet speak to a further business, as the washing us in
his blood, Rev. 1.5. is in the sprinkling his blood upon our consciences,
compare it with Heb. 10.22. 1 Cor. 6.11. Ephesians. 5.26. so the sanctifying
himself, Joh. 17.19. is not his yielding up himself to death fure (or not that
only) that they might be yielded up to death by his death: but the devoting
himself to God, to receive and make known the knowledge of God to them, that
they might be sanctified, and set apart through the truth to that ministration
to which he sent them; for neither speaks he there of all the Elect (except Mr.
Owen think that all the Elect are sent to minister to the world, Psalm. 18.
as Christ was) but of those actual believers whom he sent into the world;
verse 4.
for he makes this prayer, as one that had finished the work that God gave him
to do on earth, and as one committing the business of the Father toward the
world, in point of ministration unto others fitted for it; even as Paul prayed
for the Elders of Ephesus, when he was leaving them and the flock of God to
them, Asts. 20. but to pass that: Besides those other two acts of his
undertaking, Incarnation and Oblation, he mentions also a third, viz.
Intercession, which we grant also; but whereas he says, Its for all and every
one of those for whom he gave himself as an oblation, he did not suffer, and
then refuse to intercede for them, do the greater, and omit the less; that
position, though I will not peremptorily deny it, yet as Mr. Owen by
Intercession means and takes in his Intercession as the (...) or Advocate in
this assertion, so I believe he will not prove it by Scripture. And yet no need
of saying he refused to do it for them, it will be difficult I suppose for him
to prove, that the wisdom of God did see it meet to impose that upon him, so to
intercede for all that he dyed for. And if it was not propounded to him, though
he do it not, yet may he not be said either to refuse or omit it. It becomes us
to believe what God has declared, not to deliver for truths or impositions of
God, what our fancies conceive he must have imposed, where he has declared no
such imposition: he has said Christ dyed for all; but where he says, he makes
intercession for all, or for all he dyed for, I leave to Mr. Owen to find, and
I would he would remember his own language in the Preface. To honor God and
Christ in his own language, or else be for ever silent, and that our
inventions, be they never so splendid (and I add rational too) in our eyes, yet
to him they are abomination. God does not act always according to our rules,
do the lesser where he has done the greater, but may suspend the lesser upon
condition, if it so please him; as he does not always supply with bread, and
keep from perishing by famine him that he has given life to, though the life
be more then food; and a man that believes and walks in Gods ways, may reason
affirmatively, as our Savior instructs us, Math. 6.25. but let us view his
pretended proofs of it from Scripture.

The first is Psalm. 2.8. Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine
inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for thy possession, etc. But
does that say, That Christ should make intercession for all he died for? no
such matter; nor is there a word about inerceding for any, but that they should
be given him as his inheritance and possession; and if that be his intercession
there, then its extended to all elect and others, the Nations and the utmost
parts of the earth; not an elect people only, but even those that he should
rule with an iron rod, and break in pieces as a Potters vessel. I hope Mr. Owen
thinks not (at least will not prove) that God rules his Church, Tam duro
imperio, so as to break them in pieces as a Potters vessel, and make them
unprofitable, or that he rules them only so; nor I suppose upon second
thoughts, will he say, that the next place that "he quotes, viz. Joh. 14.2. I
go to prepare a place for you, is either a good exposition of that in Psalm. 2.8
as if his going to prepare a place for his Disciples, was asking them for his
inheritance, to rule them with an iron rod, or proves that he went to entercede
for all he "died for: nor does Heb. 9.7. say any thing to that purpose, but
that the high Priest went into the second Tabernacle once a year with the blood
that he offered for the ignorances of the people; nor says, " ver. 24. That
Christ appears in the presence of God, to intercede for All that he died for,
much less as an Advocate, and as the Apostles speak of his intercession with
reference to believers. "The 1 John 2.1, 2. (which he nextly quotes) extends
his Propitiation beyond his Advocation, and does not speak of the one as
largely as the other; Mind the words, We have an advocate, and he is the
propitiation for our sins; I hope the Our there is as large as the We, of whom
he had said, We have an advocate, that [Our] being a repetition of, and so the
same with the former [We] but now see his Propitiation expressly extended
further, And not for our sins only, but also for the whole worlds: so that
that makes more against his Assertion then for it. Its true, that his
Advocation (as he says) is founded upon his propitiation, and may be found in
exercise for the same persons as there is proved, We have an Advocate who is
the propitiation for our sins; but that the Advocation must therefore extend to
all the same persons that the propitiation reaches to, is a fond inference,
like this, A Prince by his favor with a King, and by his own great cost and
charge, mediating for twenty men condemned forfelony, gets a pardon for them
all; therefore when afterward ten of them love and honor him, yet have their
failings, and the other ten openly rebel against him still, and reject his
love; he must keep them all still in the Kings special favor if he keep any of
them therein. The roof of the house and every particular Chamber of it, is
built upon and upheld by the foundation, therefore every Chamber must be every
way as large as it, so that hitherto this Assertion wants proof of Scripture.

"That of John 17.9. proves it not neither, for that says, I pray not for the
world, but the Scripture says, God was in him reconciling the world, and that
he came to save the world; and indeed good reason, for his not praying as there
for the world, whether the Elect in purpose and fore-knowledg or not, for his
requests there are only for things consequent to faith, as Union, Preservation
in Faith, Sanctification, and Glorification, and therefore meet to be put up
for none but men called out, or viewed as called out, of the state and
fellowship of the world; that in ver. 20. though its for persons as then of the
world, yet as such they are not there the object of his prayer, but as supposed
in an after-believing state; even as when a King grants to the Mayor of a
Corporation the honor of having a Sword or the like born before him, and says,
neither give I this honor to thee only, but to all succeeding Mayors of this
Corporation also, and to none else; the subject of that Grant, is a Mayor as a
Mayor of that Corporation; though in saying such as shall be Mayors, its plain
the Grant reaches to persons as are then that not so, perhaps then not born,
and yet the expression is true, that its given to none but the Mayor of that
Corporation, for they that after shall be Mayors, and now are not, are not the
subject of that Grant, as now unborn or unfree, but as after they come to be
made Mayors; so here, they that are of the world now, may come to be such
persons as there are prayed for, and yet the world, as, and while the world,
wholly excluded from being the subject to whom those postulataes are desired to
be given. And to Mr. Owens saying, that the world there is opposite to the
Elect (except by Elect he mean, men (...), that is, gathered out of the world,
as the words (...)and (...)signify) is yet to prove, and his Assertion too
looses by the bargain: Though yet neither is that true that after follows in
"him, That if he should intercede for All, All should undoubtedly be saved,
meaning eternally, for he may intercede for some for other things, and not for
eternal salvation, as in Luke. 13.7, 8. Lord let it alone this year till I dig
about it, and dung it, and if it bring forth fruit, well, if not, then
afterward thou may cut it down; sure he was the prime Vinedresser, and that's
likely to be his intercession for the barren Nation of the Jews; or if it was
of subordinate Officers, yet sure their intercessions prevail not for patience
and continuance of the means of Grace (as that Parable compared with what went
before, v. 1.5. intimate they do) where he intercedes not, and carries not up
their prayers for that particular; so that how he should be there excluded, I
know not, and so he may pray, as Luke 23.34. Father forgive them, they know not
what they do, and yet they not be saved, for that's not, Father justify them,
and bring them to life eternal; there is forgiveness mentioned in the Scripture
short of what is attended with that, as, Lord lay not this sin to their charge,
Acts 7.61. and such as are mentioned in Numb. 14.19. Psalm. 73.37, 38. Amos
7.2.3, 5, 6. Math. 13.27, 34, 35. So that neither of these is proved. Either
that he intercedes for All he dyed for, or that if he do, they are all saved
eternally. Its true indeed (as he after says) He is able to save to the utmost
all that come to God by him, because he ever lives to to make intercession for
them; but neither proves that he makes intercession for all that he dyed for,
nor that whosoever he makes Intercession for, he makes it for them for ever,
and they shall be saved to the utmost. The Fig Tree notwithstanding that
intercession made for patience and means of grace, yet not coming to God by
him, might be cut down. It says not all that he goes to God for any thing, for
shall be saved to the utmost: but he is able to save to the utmost all that
come to God by him, because he ever lives to make intercession for them. He is
able to save them to the utmost by virtue of that powerful office, but if men
come not to God by him, or withdraw from him, he says not that he lives for
ever to execute his office for them, and to save them to the utmost. Indeed
from this his office and intercession founded on his oblation, believers (men
that come to God by him) have notable confidence as is expressed, Romans 8.33,
34, (another place quoted by him) even as Caleb and Joshuah whose spirits were
right with God, had notable confidence (from the great things God had done for
them and his presence amongst them) to possess the Land of Canaan and subdue
their enemies, Numb. 14.9. and yet it was not therefore a truth that all that
God had done those mighty things for, and was walking amongst, either had that
confidence, or their success; which being considered keeps alive the General
Ransom from that break neck with which Mr. Owen threatens it; for though its
true that those for whom he dyed, hearing and believing his love to them, have
no cause but to trust in him, and seek and hope for great things from him, as
all the Israelites that came over the red Sea and see Gods mighty works for for
them, had no cause but to have believed in God as well as the rest, Numb.
14.11. yet as there all that shared in those great things did not so believe as
some, nor had the like issue, but many through their unbelief sell short of
Canaan; so here many not believing the goodness of God to them (for which in
part many may thank their Ministers that leave them to seek whether they have a
mediator appointed of God for them or not) do not believe in Christ, and so for
not believing and by not believing, perish; for the Apostle says not that All
that Christ dyed and rose for, he intercedes for; nor that all that he
intercedes for shall be saved and have no condemnation; no more then Caleb said
All that God brought out of Egypt, and that he at that present was with, should
enter into Canaan: but as he, so the Apostle believingly feeding upon the
goodness of God, joys in it, and is raised up to exceeding confidence by it;
and shows that they who are in Christ and walk after the spirit (as they did)
have no condemnation, but are kept from it by the Death, Resurrection and
Intercession of Christ believed on by them; but he affirms not that, of all
that he dyed, rose and intercedes for.

Whereas a little after he says, That God only promised to Christ that he
should be Captain of all Salvation to all that believe, and effectually bring
many sons to glory; he says not truly: for he promised him also, Psa. 2.8, 9.
That he should rule the Nations with an Iron rod, and break them in pieces as a
potters vessel, as he tells us he has also received, Rev. 2.26, 27. And
therefore that Christ looked only and alone (as Mr. Owen also says) for the
accomplishment of those things that he there mentioned, is false also; He
looked for, and does and shall see the other made good to him too. But so much
to his deviations in this Chapter. The fifth only showing that the Holy Ghost
has his concurrence, and had his operation in the birth, death, and
resurrection of Jesus Christ, and no Argument being thence drawn to his
purpose, I shall pass it over and proceed to the following Chapters.

CHAP. IIII.
A further view of what he affirms of the equal latitude and extent of the
Oblation and Intercession of Christ in his sixth Chapter, and seventh.

HIs sixth Chapter goes over the same things again spoken of in the fourth,
only here they are considered as means conducing to an end; namely the
Incarnation, Oblation, and Intercession of Christ; the last of which
[Intercession] he says contains every act of his exaltation, even his
Resurrection; for which he brings no proof at all, nor any reason wherewith to
back it, only quotes Romans 4.25. which says no such thing, but that he rose
again for our justification: no nor appears it (as he says) that by his
Resurrection all his following dispensation and perpetual intercession is there
intended. Its but his conception without proof, it may rather he conceived that
in saying, For our justification; he means that he might do all those acts
conducing to our justification, and so include his Intercession there, then
that in the word Resurrection those acts are intended. Nor says Acts 3.26. any
such thing; and her falsifies it doubly in his quotation of it. For first, he
renders it thus, that God raised up his Son Jesus to bless us: Whereas the Text
is, having raised him up he has sent him to bless. I conceive he means it of
his sending him in the Gospel, which is a preaching of Christ and offering him
to men. And then, to bless us; as if he spoke of the believers, whereas he
says to bless you, in turning every one of you from your iniquities. Which
place duly weighed, shows the vanity of his arguing from such speeches that
mention the end of Christ's sending. For though there he is said to be sent to
bless them in turning every one of them there spoken to, from their iniquities,
by which he presses his exhortation to them for Repenting; yet it no where
appears nor can he prove it, that all them people were ever so blessed and
turned away from their iniquities; only there Christ was held forth to them as
authorized of God and ready to do it in their listening to him: the perception
of which perhaps made him so cleverly to change the words (...) and (...), into
us and us. But I leave that to his better consideration.

But the chief thing considerable in this Chapter, is what he propounds about
the Oblation and Intercession of Christ, Propos.
to the same purpose, as before in his fourth; as, That they are not in any
respect to be separated or divided, as if the one should have any respect to
any persons or any thing, that the other does not in its kind equally respect
also; 1. both alike intended, for the obtaining the same end proposed, 2. what
persons soever the one respects in the good things it obtains, the same and
none else does the other respect in applying the good things so obtained, 3.
The oblation being the foundation of the Intercession, etc. Which things are
before spoken to in the precedent Chapter: and being here again only
propounded, not proved, especially the main proposition with the first and
second reasons of it (that place Romans 4.25. which he brings for proof, neither
showing what or how many persons were the adaequate object of his Death, nor
expressing any thing of his Intercession, much less saying that it has the
same extent to persons and things as his Death, and that other place of Joh.
17.19. being but a begging the question, and impertinent as has been showed,
in that it extends but to those that Christ says he sent into the world) as
also the main proofs of it being reserved to the following Chapters, we shall
proceed to view them, only premising this; that,

1. Should we grant these things, they would not prejudice our Cause, as has
in part been showed on chapter fourth: He might offer himself to ransom men,
and to provide for means of grace and patience to be extended to them, in
attention to which they might meet with his power to Save them, Luke 13.7, 8.
and Intercede for those things too for them, and yet many abusing the grace
procured by both (as is supposed in the parable of the barren fig tree) they
might not be eternally saved. So that his after-conclusion in this Chapter
would not thence follow, viz. That every one for whom he died, must actually
have applied to him all the good things purchased by his Death: except he can
first prove, that whoever Christ Intercedes for, he Intercedes for all those
good things for them which he procured by his Death: Which I am confident he
cannot prove. For to speak in his own Dialect, He says, that the Death of
Christ purchased the Spirit, and the whole confluence of the grace of God. I
would ask him then, if it purchased not Apostleship and the gift of prophecy,
etc. If no, then are some good things conferred upon some that were not
purchased by his Death, contrary to his Assertion, page 33. line 5. If yea,
then I demand, whether every one for whom he dyed have the gift of Apostleship
and prophecy conferred upon them; if he say yes, then he contradicts the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.28. if no, then his Conclusion is proved false. If it be
replied, that he means but of things essentially necessary to every one for
eternal life, then yet

2. We desire his proof for this, That whoever Christ dyed for, or that he
intercedes for, them he intercedes for eternal life, or makes such
intercession for them, as the Apostle tells us he makes for them that come unto
God by him; which because he promises (in effect) in the next Chapter, I now
thither follow him to view his Arguments or Reasons which are as follows.

His first Argument is taken from a powerful Union that the Scripture makes of
both those, On Chap. 7. Arg.
almost always joining them together, and so manifesting those things to be
inseparable which are looked upon as the distinct fruits and effects of them.

Before I answer to his Arguments, I shall repeat again the main proposition
undertaken by him, which is this, that the Oblation and Intercession of Christ
have not only the same persons for their Object, but that they have also all
the same good things for each person, and all and only the same. Which I oppose
but as in the word Intercession he aims at the prime exercise of it; for that
he intercedes for the most special favors for persons for whom he dyed, I deny
not; but that he does it for all those for whom he dyed, that I desire to have
proved. His first Argument for which, put into a form runs thus.

What things the Scripture almost always couples together, they have the same
adequate objects, and their distinct fruits and effects are inseparable, and
extend to all the same persons jointly; but the Scripture almost always couples
Christ's Oblation, and Intercession together, Ergo, etc.

The major proposition here is false, as may be seen in many instances, as the
bringing the Israelites out of Egypt and possessing them of Canaan, are very
frequently joined together, as often at least as Christ's Death and
Intercession, and yet had not the same adequate object, though both means of
performing Gods Covenant and promise to Abraham and his seed. See for the proof
of this, Deuteronomy. 4.37, 38. Exodus 3.8, and 6.68. Deuteronomy. 6.33, and 26.7, 8. Psalm.
105.43, 44. cum multis aliis. Again the Scripture frequently mentions, Christ's
preaching to the people and healing their diseases together, as Math. 4, 27.
and 9.35. Acts 10.36, 38. Luke 5.15. and 6.17. and both tended to glorify his
Father and make known his name. But I suppose that none will say therefore that
both had the same adequate object, and that he preached to no more then were
healed by him. The like I might say for teaching or preaching and baptising,
both ordained to the same saving end, and often mentioned together, and yet not
both of equal latitude: the latter not done to All, for and to whom the other
was vouchsafed.

So that that Proposition has no truth and it, and therefore the Argument is
invalid. Nor does he prove the Minor, that Oblation and Intercession are almost
always joined together in the Scriptures. He has scarce any pertinent proofs
that they are so joined at all, not above one or two at most. He alleges
first, Isa. 53.11. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many,
for he shall bear their iniquities. Which proves, that many whose sins he bare,
shall by his knowledge be justified, and that those many that by his knowledge he
shall justify, had their sins born by him, and he having born their sins could
and should by his knowledge justify them; but that neither says he should
justify all whose sins he bare, nor should make Intercession to that purpose;
nor makes any mention of his Intercession. And whereas he says they are so put
together in the next verse, that surely none ought to separate them. Let us
consider how they are put together. The words are, He has born the sins of
many, and shall make intercession for the transgressors. Which proves, that
both Oblation and Intercession are the Works of Christ; which we deny not, nor
is that the thing to be proved, but that his Intercession is for all the same
persons for whom he died, and that too for all the good things that his Death
procured, that place says not: There are different words used to express the
objects; He shall bear the sins of multitudes or manies, there is his oblation,
but now he adds not, and he shall make Intercession for all them, no nor says
he for them, but (using another word) He shall intercede for Transgressors; how
many or who they be, or whether he intercede for all good things procured by
his Death for any or not, that says nothing. It mentions Oblation and
Intercession both, its true, but that is but once yet, and the Argument
concludes not from it, as is before showed. He quotes also Romans 4.25. which
mentions not his Intercession, but his Resurrection for our Justification, so
that that's impertinent as to the Minor.

Romans 8.33, 34. Mentions both, its true, but that is spoken to in chap. 4. and
the vanity of his collection from there showed. His inferences, That He died
only for the Elect, and that none shall be condemned for whom Christ died, and
that there is proved there an equal extent of his Oblation and Intercession,
are not the Apostles but his own, as we before noted on Chap. 4. The first of
them being contrary also to 1 Timothy 2.5 6. and 2 Pet. 2.1. The second of them
contrary to those suppositions of the Apostle in 1 Cor. 8.11. Romans 14.15. Heb.
2.3. and that affirmation in 2 Pet. 2.1. For the third, Its there asserted that
the Elect and Believers in Christ have his Death, Resurrection, and
Intercession, all for them, and that they are in a safe condition thereby, but
says not that all he died for had them all; as has been noted. For his giving
all things with Christ, we shall find it elsewhere, where we also shall answer
it. Now these two places, of Isai. 53.12. and Romans 8.33, 34. being the only
two places wherein Oblation and Intercession are coupled together, and they
scarce the tithe of the places where his Death is mentioned; his Minor is also
false, and so the whole Argument ineffectual. And the second is like it, viz.

2. Acts of the same Office of Priesthood. The Argument from thence runs thus.

The Acts that pertain essentially to the same Office, must be performed upon,
or for all the same persons, and the one for All things for which the other.
But Oblation and Intercession are acts of the same Office. Ergo, etc. The Major
of this too is denied: and proved false, thus. To Preach and to Baptize were
both acts of the Office of the Baptist, and of the Ministers of the Gospel sent
by Christ into the world, Matt. 28.19. and yet it follows not that whoever they
preached to, them also they baptized: nor can it be proved that the Priests
used to pray for whomsoever they offered up a Sacrifice for. That of 1 John 2,
1, 2. we have before scanned, That he is appointed to intercede for All that
come to God by him, and so an high Priest for that purpose over Gods House, he
proves well out of the Epistle to the Hebrews, but that all that Christ died
for, do go to God by Christ, or that he is appointed to make intercession for
all that he died for, that he proves not, nor does any Text in that Epistle or
elsewhere speak it.

His conclusion then, " That if he perform either of the acts of his Priesthood
for any, he must of necessity also perform the other for them, flows neither
from the strength of his premises in his Argument, nor from any of his proofs,
but is the issue fo his own misguided reason. His absurd, that else we make him
but an half Priest or unfaithful, is an absurdity it self: For was not John
Baptist a full Minister of the Gospel, and so the twelve Apostles, or shall
they be taxed with unfaithfulness in their Office if they baptized not all that
they preached to, because Baptizing and Preaching were both enjoined them in
their Commission, and pertained to them as Christ's Ministers? but no more to
that.

3. His third Argument is taken from the Nature of his Intercession, which, he
says, is only a presentation of himself, sprinkled with the blood of the
Covenant, before the throne of grace in our behalf, an appearing in the
presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24. and so is nothing else but an Oblation
continued in postulating those things which by it were procured. Thence he
argues, How can he be said to offer for them for whom he does not intercede,
when his Intercession is nothing else but a presenting his Oblation in behalf
of them for whom he suffered, and for the bestowing the the good things thereby
purchased?

To which I answer, that first, This seems to swallow up his Intercession
into his Oblation, and so to confound those things that he before
distinguished, having no Scripture to back it that his Intercession is but a
continuance of his Oblation; nay rather the Scripture goes against it; for it
speaks of his offering as a thing done and perfected, not continually doing,
Heb. 10.13. This man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat
down at the right hand of God: he first offered that before he sat down. And
were it not so, the difference between him and the Priests of the Law should
not be so clear. The Apostle opposes his offering and sitting down, to their
standing daily to minister and offering oftentimes the same sacrifice. Now if
his intercession be a presenting or a continuation of his oblation, then he
should stand to minister and offer daily too, for his intercession is a work in
doing and continually to be done, He ever lives to be make Intercession, Heb.
7.25. Again, though its true, He appears (or is manifested) in the presence of
God for us, yet whether that appearing there only to present his oblation for
the bestowing the good things thereby purchased, be all the matter of his
intercession, or all the matter there aimed at, is doubtful; as also whether he
so appear for all he dyed for, as is there expressed. For I suppose he so
appeared as Mr. Owen mentions, in his first entrance thither; so soon as he
entered and offered he appeared, and his continuance in his Fathers sight is
contained in his sitting down or being at the Fathers right hand; but the
Interceding is spoken of as a thing beyond that Romans 8.33, 34. He is at the
right hand of God and also makes intercession for us; that (...)[and also]
puts the business of his intercession a little further, every single expression
of some act of Christ in heaven may not hold forth all his business there, as
every single expression of his returning acts holds not forth all he shall do
at his return as in, Heb. 9.29. He shall appear without sin to salvation, does
not argue that his very appearing without any other act shall estate the Saints
into the full possession of salvation: sure he shall raise them and do other
acts also. Surely his Intercession has in it also a presentation of his will
to the Father concerning such or such particulars as indeed are founded upon
his offering; or he has liberty and privilege thereby to will or ask (for the
word (...), John 17.24. may signify a willing by desire, as it is otherwhere
used, as 1 Cor. 7.7. Mark. 12.38.) and sure it shall be granted to him whatever
he so wills of God. But suppose that that's also included in that phrase of the
Apostle, and that Mr. Owen means as much in saying he postulates those things
which by his oblation were procured; yet then that he does appear to will or
ask all those good things to be dispensed to All for whom he dyed, which his
Death for any procured (as his phrase with the whole tenor of his arguing
intimates that he means) or that Intercession and Advocation spoke of in Heb.
7.25. and 1 John 2.2. (which are there said to be for such as are actually
believers) is for any but believers, at least for all he dyed for, that I deny.
That Advocation or Intercession being a presentation of his will, for the
believers consolation; so as that he is Comforter therein, (...), he does
(...), entreat for comfort, and procure (...) a comforter to be sent unto them.
Now to argue thus, He presents his sacrifice (yea and his will) for some good
things which he has procured or obtained right to demand for all he dyed for:
Ergo he does as a (...) make good the case of all he dyed for: that's the thing
I say denied, and for which the argument is invalid; though that indeed is the
thing (as is before said, and as his expressions in the next argument do
declare) he chiefly aims at, the whole consideration otherwise making nothing
against us, or to his chief intended purpose.

4. His fourth argument is from the identity of the end; that if the Death of
Christ procured and obtained that every good thing should be bestowed which is
actually conferred by the intervening of his Intercession, then they have both
of them the same end and aim: his Minor should be, that the Death of Christ
procured and obtained that every good thing should be bestowed which is
actually conferred by his Intercession, etc. which he neither proves, nor (did
he) does it conclude the Concludendum, that is the same Object in all the
things his Death procured. So that his after inference, viz, That the promises
upon which his Intercession is founded, were an engagement to bestow and
actually collate upon them for whom he suffered, all those good things which
his Death and oblation did merit and purchase (if by them for whom he suffered,
he mean All them, which he must, or else he says nothing) neither springs from
his premises, nor is true in it self. For,

1. There is no such engagement on Gods part in Scripture, as that All whom
Christ should suffer for, should have all things collated on them which by his
suffering he obtained, that in Psalm. 2.8. mentioned by Mr. Owen, does but say
what should be collated on himself, not what should be collated upon All the
Nations there mentioned; that he should be the Anointed, the Christ, and King,
and all given him for a possession; not that All he dyed for should be Christ
and Lord. Nor do those places of Isa. 49. and 53. (forementioned in chap. 3.)
say any such thing, as that All he dyed or suffered for, should have collated
upon them all the good things procured by him; they engage that a people should
be glorified, but not all for whom he suffered.

2. The speech in strict sense is evidently false in matters of act; for then
All of them should be Apostles and Prophets: except we shall say that those
graces were not procured by his Death and sufferings.

3. The way of God in rewarding his Son, is in giving him All things into his
hands, glorifying him, and thereby drawing souls to him to stay upon him, and
then granting him all his desires in them of all the fullness of his glory as he
sees good to measure out amongst them; Not that he would make them all glorious
that he dyed for, but only all of them that in the day of grace are brought
into him to believe on him: So that neither will this Argument serve him up to
his intention.

5. His fifth proof is from Christ's putting them together in Joh. 17. John. 17.
before in answer to his fourth Chapter; his other proofs also of 1 Cor 15.17.
and Heb. 9.12. are impertinent too, neither of them speaking a word of
Intercession, much less for whom or how many.

6. His last Argument is, Death and Intercession of Christ in regard of the
objects, cuts off all that consolation which any soul might hope to attain by
an Assurance that Christ dyed for him. But that's false; for this doctrine of
Christ's dying for All men, though joined with this, that he makes Intercession
but for All that come to God by him, gives both ground and encouragement for
every man upon hearsay of it, to look to God and go to him by Christ, as one
that has testified such great love to him as to open such a way of access for
him through the blood of his Son; and also assures him of strong consolation
upon his going to him, and that's the Apostles phrase, Heb. 6.18. we might have
strong consolation that have fled for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before
us. So that here is never a whit the less censolation for them that do believe
then in their way; and there is more ground and encouragement for any man to
believe, then in their way; this doctrine showing more evidently testimonies of
Gods love to any man then the other does; That can assure none of Christ's
Intercession but upon believing, this doctrine assures such as believe of it
too. So that that Affirmation that the Doctrine of the General Ransom cuts in
pieces all the nerves and sinews of that strong consolation that God is so
abundantly willing we should receive, is a very gross mistake, as I hope by
this is evident and may afterward more appear. Mean while I would have Mr. Owen
mind, that his doctrine leaves men at an uncertain whether there be any
mediator for them or no till they can find fruits of Election in them; which
how any should do till he first know love in God toward him and the mediation
of Christ for him, so as that by the knowledge thereof he be brought to trust in
God by him, I would feign have any man to prove. Yea that doctrine lays open
men horribly to desperate courses, while the very proper result of it is, that
All men are under one of these two decrees, either Elect or Reprobate, either
he has a mediator or not: so that any man may say, Either Christ dyed for me
or not, If he did, I am sure enough what ever sin I commit Christ will follow
me into every Court, and I shall be safe enough in the issue; yea I am already
safe enough by his Death and Intercession though I know it not; therefore why
should I take care for any thing? If God will have me know it, he will reveal
it to me, bring me to the means, or the means to me, and I cannot perish, the
proper fountain of that Ergo agite juvenes mentioned by Mr. Owen in his
preface. If not, I shall perish let me do what I can; and I had as good save
the labor of afflicting my self in hearing and praying, etc. as to tire my self
out about needless businesses, to get that, which if I be excluded the Death of
Christ, can never be obtained, and which shall be thrust upon me and I cannot
miss what course soever I take if I be not. See, sir, if these do not
inevitably flow from your principles. As for our doctrine it lies not open to
these loose consequences, for if I know and believe that Christ dyed for me, I
know and believe also that he is ready and able to save me, and looking to him
and going to God by him he will assuredly save, being found in him and yielding
up to his spirit, this doctrine tells me that not any sin acted through
infirmity and temptation shall appear against me to condemn me; His Death,
Resurrection and Intercession shall have their fruit in me to eternal life; but
if I neglect so great salvation, or deny him that bought me, turn away from him
that speaks from heaven and has the blood of sprinkling to sprinkle upon me,
etc. then how shall I escape? then how shall not his love rise up into
jealousy and the greater condemnation fall upon me? and are not these
agreeable to the Apostles reasonings in his Doctrine? Romans 8.1.13.33, 34. Heb.
2.1, 2, 3, and 10.25, 26, 29. and 12.24, 25. 2 Pet. 2.1. But I have done with
that Chapter also.

CHAP. V.
A reply to his Answers of Objections made against his former doctrine in
Answer to his eight chapter.

IN his next Chapter he assays to remove Objections as a man removes dung till
it be all gone. I shall follow him in that too, and see if he remove not pearls
in stead of dung, and cast not dung upon that that is precious truth. I fear he
plucks up Wheat in stead of Tares.

He tells us some have undertaken to Answer an Argument like this proposed in
these words. had it so delivered to him in writing) propounded it foollishly,
the conclusion containing a quartus terminus, and having more in it then
follows from the premises. Indeed I have heard it thus propounded. The Offices
of Christ are of equal extent: But his Kingly and prophetical Offices pertain
but to his Church: Ergo, his Priestly pertains to them only. The Minor of
which I deny, and would invert it thus. His Offices are of equal extent in
regard of their Object, But his Kingly and Prophetical Offices extend to All;
Therefore also his Priestly. The Minor I prove thus. He is King of all the
earth, Psalm. 47.7. which speaks of God ascended who is the same that first
descended, as the Apostle speaks upon a like Scripture. So he is King upon the
holy hill of Sion, and all Nations given him, and the utmost parts of the
earth, Psalm. 2.7, 8. King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and therefore sure of
all under them, Kings and Lords too. And so he is a Prophet for them that hear
him, and them that refuse to hear him too, Acts 3.22, 23. and indeed if he was
not a Prophet sent of God to any but the Elect, then none but they should be in
danger for not hearing him; for God uses not to punish men for not attending
to Ordinances that were not for them; or not hearing a Prophet that prophecieth
nothing to them; so that there he is clearly held forth to be a Prophet to more
then his Church and chosen. Yea as it pertains to his Prophetical Office to
reveal the Truth of God, so (as the Wisdom of God) he cries in the streets to
the sons of men, and to those that are without, Pro. 1.20. and is the light
that lightneth every man that comes into the world. Joh. 1.9. and therefore so
far also his mediation must extend, for its the life in him is the light of
men, even that life that he has for men. ver. 4, 5, 6.

But let us see what he says to the Answerer of the Objection. First, He in
stead of removing dung, casts dung upon him, as if he was guilty of making a
distinction or division between the death of Christ and the ransom, as if he
might die for All, and not be the ransom of All. Whereas indeed the Answer
intimated that to be the Objectors conception. Its clear that he is every where
in his Book contrary to it, making the death of Christ as for All, to be "the
ransom. And whereas he thinks there is no man in his right wit will propose it;
I know not what wit they are in, but I believe men that have as good conceits
of their wit, as Mr. Owen has, have hinted, if not expressed such a
distinction: I can show him one (by name, Mr. How, who lately put out an Answer
to the Vniversalist, as he styles him) who in a writing to my self, grants that
all men had interest in the Act of Christ's Death, as buying or purchasing men
into his dispose, and yet stiffly denies him to be the ransom for all. Well, The
mediation of Christ is more general, or more special. More general as he
mediates between God and men, 1 Timothy 2.5. More special as Mediator of the New
Testament, Heb. 9.15. Which Answer, first, he Turkases, as if he had said, Tim.
4.10. is plain. Now to me this is plain, that the mediation of Christ as spoken
of in 1 Timothy 2.5. is of other and larger extent in respect of reference to its
Object, then as its spoken of in Heb. 9.15. In the former place its spoken of
as a demonstration of Gods good will to, and in some sense a ground for our
praying for All men, not for the Church and chosen only, but for All men, for
Kings and all in authority, which never any man yet affirmed to be all members
of Christ, and heirs of life. Now, that that demonstrates Gods good will to all
men, and is a ground of our Mediating, or Interceding for All ( ver. 1.) must
it self be something extending to All, or else the building should be greater
then may be supported by its foundation. So that there surely he is spoken of
as a Mediator, so appointed of God, and so acting as a Mediator, that thereupon
All, or (as Beza renders it) any one may be the Object of our prayers, and has
encouragement to seek to God to be saved by him, and so as a general Mediator,
or a Mediator that is set up for All men, and has accordingly given himself a
ransom for All men. But in Heb. 9.15. his Mediation is spoken of as exercised
about a peculiar Object, in a more special manner, for specal things, the
performance of the Legacies given to Sion, for the called of God, that they
might receive that to which they are called, and of which they are made heirs,
even the eternal inheritance. As a Prince may mediate between his Father
offended and rebellious subjects in general for many things: and in a special
manner for those that lay down Arms and come over to him; he may demand or urge
his Father to show more favor to them then to all the rest, and yet ask favor
for them too. But this is admired that Christ should be Mediator and not of a
New Testament. Whereas we affirm him Mediator of the New Testament, and deny it
not But that he mediates that for All, or that his mediation for men as spoken
of in 1 Timothy 2.5 6. is, that the New Testament, might be performed to them all
whose Mediator he is, will require some time for him to prove. He says a
Mediator is not of one (which we grant) and all mediation respects an agreement
of several parties, and every Mediator is the Mediator of a Covenant. All which
may be granted with reference to Christ; if by Covenant we understand the
Covenant made between God and Christ; but as otherwise its not always true (
Joab may mediate for Absalom, and yet no Covenant made between David and
Absalom; and the Vine-Dresser for the barren Fig Tree, and yet not mediate any
Covenant made with the Fig Tree, nor for any Legacies fore-given to the
Fig Tree) so neither follows it thence, that Christ mediates the New Testament
for all he mediates for. The word there in Heb. 9.15. (...), signifies a
Testament or Will, made and confirmed by Death, as ver. 16. shows; and the New
Testament is the promises of God, bequeathed to the believer, the called, the
chosen. Now though Christ mediates not the giving these to them that are
uncalled, yet he may notwithstanding mediate for Gods forbearance, patience,
dispensation of means, such as in which they may be invited, and have
opportunities to look to him for mercy to be afforded. I think not the
Assertor, so much as the Opposer of that passage needs further Consideration, I
will not say Catechizing, in this business, and I am persuaded the Assertor is
pretty able to answer for himself, were Mr. Owen his Catechiser. Nay, were Mr.
Owen asked this question, how he can prove that Jesus Christ mediates nothing
but the New Testament, nor for any but those that are made heirs of it, it
would put him to it to find proofs for it. I am confident he could produce no
better proofs then what he does produce here to disprove this general extent
of his mediation, viz. That it was his Church that he redeemed, loved, and gave
himself for, his sheep he laid down his life for, appears in heaven for us.
etc. And what then? who denies that? or how does that disprove the other? It
was Israel that God created, Ergo none else? they that have the Spirit of
Christ in them shall be raised, Ergo none else? God will raise us up by his
power, 1 Cor. 6.14. Ergo none else or not all? Again he says, Because the
children partooke of flesh and blood, therefore he also took part with them,
Heb. 2.14. Therefore he took part with none else in them; or mediated for none
but them. Like this, Because many undertook to write the Gospel of Christ,
therefore Luke wrote also, Luke 1.1. therefore he wrote for no man's cause but
theirs, as if the word Because always intimates or refers to the whole cause or
reason of a thing. So, for their sakes ( viz. whom I have sent into the world
as thou have sent me) I sanctify my self, John 17.18, 19. Ergo I mediate for
none but them. But then, I pray, to what purpose sent he them into the world,
if none in and of the world to which they were sent had and Oblation offered up
for them? So he rose for our Justification; but how far that us extends, he
tells us not, whether it reach to all the Object of his Death and Resurrection,
and if so, whether that be not as large an us as that in Act. 17.27. not far
from any one of us, for in him we live; or as that [our] in those expressions
Jesus Christ our Lord. "Again I go to my father to prepare a place for you.
Ergo to mediate for nothing for any but you only. So he ever lives to make
Intercession for all that come to God by him, therefore he mediates for nothing
for any else. Contrary to Isa. 53.12.
He excluded the world from his prayers for conferring such and such
privileges on believers, not desiring His Father to confer them on the world,
or any of it, while such, Therefore he never prayed for any of the world,
while, and considered as such, contrary to Luke 23.34. These are Mr. Owens
reasonings, which whether they be inconsequent yea or no, and whether the T.
Moore.
Answerer that he opposes, or himself that pretends to far more learning, be
more to be admired for their strange inferences, I leave to the impartial
Reader soberly to judge.

He Objects against his in consequent reasoning upon 1 Timothy 2 5. Between God
and man, Therefore for All men: Are not the Elect men? etc. But in this he
mistakes: we reason it not merely from that as barely so expressed; but from
that as laid down for a demonstration of Gods good will to All; his willing all
men to be saved, and as the foundation of our praying for All; and from that
(that the Apostle adds) he gave himself a Ransom for All, which I conceive to
be an act of mediation. Our reasoning then runs thus, That which argues the
good will of God to All, pertains to All: But Christ's being a Mediator between
God and men is an argument of his love and good will to All: Therefore it
pertains to all. The major leans upon this proposition, That which holds forth
love but to some, cannot be an Argument of love to All; That that argues love
to All must concern all. The minor is the coherence of the fourth and fifth
verses. Again thus, That which Christ has acted in for All, pertains to All,
but Christ has acted in his mediation for All, etc. This arises from the fifth
coupled with the sixth verse. Again thus, If the mediation of Christ be a good
foundation for our praying for All or any men, then it self must concern All:
But so it is, as its laid down by the Apostle in that place, compared with
verse. 1, 2, 3. Our prayers are groundless for any that he is not appointed as
mediator for, therefore to encourage us to pray for all, he shows us a mediator
that has acted for All.

"His conceit on 1 Timothy 4.10. we have seen and spoken to before, in Chap. 3.
and showed it to be a vain conceit, that God as the object of the Apostles
trust, in all his labor and sufferings should be considered but as a Savior
out of Christ: for the word Savior is but once used there, and if it signify
at all a Savior without Christ's mediation, then it does so to both branches,
besides that neither he nor any of them can prove God a Savior to sinners (as
all men are) without the interposition of a mediator. I would ask how he deals
with men in that saving them? whether according to the Covenant of works which
curses according to deserts? If so, then no room for saving them from the
death deserved by them, no not for a moment. If not, then I ask according to
what he saves? and what it is that procures that he deals not with them in that
severe way of their deserts? The case of beasts instanced in Psalm. 36. admits
of a twofold exception.

1. That they have not sinned, nor is there a law imposed upon them, the
transgression of which needs a mediator for their saving, as the case of man is.

2. That as they partook of vanity for man's sins sake, so why may not their
preservation for and to men be looked upon as a mercy safed to man by virtue of
Christ's mediation for the sin of man, which laid them open to destruction for
the punishment of man: "as far wide is his instancing 2 Cor. 1.9, 10. the
Apostles trusting in God that raises the dead; as if he would tells that God as
he acts in raising the dead, acts not through Christ's mediation, or through
Jesus Christ; and so that's false, that As by man came Death, so also by man
came the resurrection of the Dead; for he intimates that he raises the Dead,
without eyeing the interposition or mediation of man, the man Christ. As vain
is that, that the place forequoted speaks of God the Father; as if Christ was
excluded from being the object of the Apostles faith for preservation, and as
if God the Father wrought without Christ, contrary to John 5.20. and were a
Savior to sinners in any way out of Christ, and not through him; all which are
postulata's no way proveable. For his wonder, that Christ should be a Savior
of them that are not saved, its no greater then that God should purge some that
yet were not purged, and yet the Scripture plainly affirms that, Ezekiel. 24.13.
or made a Feast for them that never eat of it, Mat. 22.4. Luke 14.24. to say
nothing that in some acts of saving they are saved, and might in more, did they
not by observing lying vanities forsake their own mercies. But we shall say
more to this in Chap. 2. Lib. 2, where it is further urged. O but he never
gives grace to some to believe. I believe he gives to All more then they
improve or well like of, and would give them more did they not smother what he
gives them, and that's all I shall say to it here, for we shall meet with it in
fitter place, as also with that other absurdity (as he thinks) that he should
be a Savior to them that never hear one word of saving. If they have the thing
in any sense, its not material that they never hear of its name. God did gird
Cyrus though Cyrus knew him not, Isa. 45.5. and many may have real good by that
whose right name they never heard of. I hope Mr. Owen is so charitable, that if
one of his children should die in infancy, he would think it might be saved by
Christ, though it never heard or understood a syllable of Christ or of a
Savior. He things it absurd too, that Christ should be a Savior in a twofold
sense, for all, and for believers. But I hope he does what the Father does,
Josh. 5.19. but the Father is the Savior of All and especially of believers,
as himself grants, and Christ says he came to save the lives of men, Luk 9.56.
whether he do no more to believers then is there spoken of I leave to his
consideration; He is the Savior of the World, 1 John 4.14. and the Savior of
his body the Church, Ephesians. 5.25, 26. whether the world be his Church and body,
I leave to him also to show. Whether the condition of believing be procured by
him for All or for any, I leave to its place, and in the mean time desire him
to prove by Scripture his persuasion, that to whom Christ is in any sense a
Savior in the work of Redemption, them he saves to the uttermost from all
their sins of infidelity and disobedience, with the saving of grace here and
glory hereafter; and in particular that he so saved those, to whom in the
knowledge of himself as a Savior he gave an escape from the pollutions in the
world who afterward backslid from him, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21.

Whereas answer was further made to his Objection, T. M.
that he in some sort intercedes for transgressors, the sons of men yet in and
of the world, that they through Gods blessings on their ministration may be
convinced and be brought to acknowledge that Jesus is the Lord, etc. but more
especially for the called, believers etc. Here Mr. Owen first mistakes his
Answer, M. O.
as if he had said he prayed for them that they might be brought to faith in
God through Christ effectually saving to life eternal; and then opposes him in
that conception. Whereas he only said to believe the report of the Gospel
(according to that in Joh. 17.21, 23.) and to come to some perceptions of light
therein, whereto attending they might be brought further, or which refusing
they may be hardened for it. Then he asks,

1. "In what sort Christ intercedes for that for such, John 17? I answer for
him: in that sort as Christ expresses himself in John 17.21, 23. obliquely, as
we pray for the good of a Kingdom when we pray for a spirit of wisdom, and
government, on Kings and men in authority. Its true believers are the direct
Object of his intercession for those things conducing to this convincement and
to this knowledge and faith, even as Kings and Magistrates are in those prayers
instanced, 1 Timothy 2.2. though in other instances they may be the direct object
as the Fig Tree of that Intercession, Luke 13.7. and the persecutors of that in
Luke 23.34. But then he asks whether it be intended to be accomplished. I
suppose it is and shall be in due time according to the tenor of our Saviors
praying for it; but to me he seems to wrangle with our Savior himself about
his expressions, because he gives no fuller account of his petitions. Its
likely he would the same query about our Saviors praying for believers unity,
and say, Did Christ absolutely intend it or no? and if so, then why is it not
better effected but that there are so many divisions even amongst them? Christ's
prayers have I conceive in part their Answer here, but not fully till the
perfect day, when all the world shall see and say, This is Sion, the City of
the Lord, and this is the truth of God, etc.

2. "He demands if it be by virtue of his blood shed for them? I answer, I
conceive it is: had he not offered up himself a ransom, and removed their death
and condemnation, he had had no ground to ask any further favor for them; had
he not come with blood for sin that cried for vengeance, no hearing I conceive
of any supplication for them. But then he says, it follows that by his death
he procured faith for all. But that's a mistake. For first, Neither is this
asserted for All, though for others then the Elect only. Nor secondly, Follows
it that his death (if he mean simply and per se) procured it, nay rather the
contrary, for then what need of any further Mediation, or petition for it?
frustra fit per plura, etc. A man may with boldness go to request a new lone of
another for a man that played the bankrupt and had run far into his debt,
bringing pay with him for the former debt, that perhaps might have had no
admittance for his suit in that kind without that payment made, and yet that
payment merely procured not the second lone. That may be causa partialis and
sine qua non of a thing, that is not causa proprie and plene effectiva of it,
Its not the payment of the old debt that either obliges him that pays to borrow
anew, or him that lends to lend anew, but grace in both, from the Orgiver.
lender to the borrower, and from both to him for whom he borrows it. Christ
has such grace in his Fathers eyes, that he having paid our old score may ask
a new stock and obtain it, though his mere payment without that asking did not
oblige the Father to it.

3. He asks if he interceded for them with an intention and desire that they
should believe or not. I answer, Yes sure, for I suppose else he would not so
have prayed; and so they do and shall, though not so far as his question here
supposes. That which he desires to be granted conducing to that end, shall be
granted, but the end that he would have men attain to by those means afforded,
may by them not be so far obtained as he desires them to press to. He would
have them being convinced of the truth, cleave to it, follow after it,
acknowledge it, etc. but many do not grant him his desires, even as he would
have gathered Jerusalems children, and yet they would not; and as he rather
pleases that men would turn and live, and yet many do not, Matthew. 23.27. Ezekiel.
33.11. Yet that that he asks of his Father to that purpose as conducing to that
end, viz. a blessing with his means afforded so far as that they have light
drawn to them to attend on that they have, and shall acknowledge when their
mouths shall be stopped for abusing it. And in this is answered his two following
Queries: As first, Whether it be for all and every man in the world? That
neither was affirmed, nor in that place ( Joh. 17.21.) held forth; but men of
the world, others then the Church. Secondly, Whether absolutely or
conditionally? so that; absolutely, that his Disciples might be made fit means
for such an end: but for the worlds further believing and making good use of
what they have, that's left to them upon the means, and those convincements
whether to choose the good, and refuse the evil, or persist in evil, and not
^huse the good, and yet not without diverse exhortations, motions, end counsels,
to choose that that's good; and therefore for not choosing ahe fear of the Lord
they are after charged, Pro. 1.29. Whereas he to demands Whether Christ prays
that they may use well the means 'of grace or not? I Answer, I find no such
prayer, and yet it follows not, but that he prayed that they may believe those
things there mentioned, or rather that the Believers may walk so well as that
the world (did they not wilfully shut their eyes) might see and believe those
truths, viz. both that that Doctrine concerning Christ is the truth, and that
they are Gods people, God in them of a truth, which also will they nill they,
they shall at length see and confess: and these acts of believing are not (as
he says) the using well the means of grace, but rather the effects of the
means of grace well used by others, and the preventing operations of God,
putting men into a fit capacity of obeying those means. For when men are so far
convinced, then must they either yield to follow God in the way they are
convinced of (which indeed Christ by his servants prays them to do, 2 Cor.
5.20. no where prays his Father to make them do that I know of) or else
wilfully and inexcusably turn their backs of those means to their own
after-misery. So that all this reasoning has not shaken the truth of the
Answer.

He comes then to consider the other proofs, as Isa. 53.12. he made
intercession for transgressors, which he says, are either all he suffered for,
or those he suffered by. It may be both, and yet he gains nothing, those by
whom he suffered being also persons for whom he suffered, Isai. 53.3, 4. We
esteemed him not, we hid our faces from him, and yet he bare our sins, thence
also he prays, Luke 23.34. Father forgive them. From which Mr. Owen (nextly
considering it) first lays down a wrong inference as the Answerers, viz.
therefore there is a general intercession for All that they might believe;
which is far beyond what he affirmed; his words being but these, for
transgressors, the sons of men, yet in and of the world -- and that those
amongst whom believers converse and dwell, might be convinced and brought in to
believe the report, as Luke 23.34. M. Moore said not, that there he prayed for
all in and of the world, but for them there persecuting him, thence his after
reasonings against him fall to the ground; the extent of his mediation by way
of Intercession for All, we rather conceive proveable from 1 Timothy 2.5, 6.
forespoken to, and from the actual dispensation of goodness and bounty to all,
then from those other places: only we produce those places against that
position, that he intercedes in no wise for any but his Church and chosen ones,
such as are described, John. 17.6.9, 10, 20. Whereas he says, It appears not
that he prayed for them all, but them that did it out of ignorance, nor for all
that they should believe, not for the chief Priests, they were not there, etc.

I answer first, That they none of them knew what they did, Act. 3.17. with 1
Cor. 2.7. no not the Rulers, and whereas he says, Its certain some did it
ignorantly, but not all; that's his own, the Apostles except none, yea he says,
Had they known, they would have crucified the Lord of glory. Its true they knew
more then they walked after, knew so much as might have persuaded them
otherwise in reason; but yet they knew not what they did, they knew not what
and how glorious a one they put to death. Besides our Savior says not, Father
forgive those of them that do it ignorantly or know not what they do, as if he
prayed but for some of them; or as if some of them knew what they did, and
others not, but indefinitely, Father forgive them, they know not what they do,
(...).

2. We say he interceded for them, we say not he interceeded there for them or
All men that they should believe, but that God forgiving them that their act of
crucifying him, might yet spare them and continue with them yet the means of
believing.

3. Whether the chief Priests were there or no, its not material. He says not
Father forgive them that are here, and therefore that yet wants proof, that he
prayed only for those crucifiers that were there, he prayed for them that
crucified him using this argument, They know not what they do; and even those
there present were not his Church, believers, comers to God by him, given him
out of the world, such as had received his name, etc. as those in John 17.

Whereas he says, It cannot be supposed that Christ should pray for all and
every one of them supposing them to be finally impenitent, seeing he knew what
was in man, and its contrary to to the rule we have, to pray for them whom we
know to be finally impenitent.

I answer, first, That Christ does not use to condemn or withhold his goodness
from a man before he be actually guilty of final impenitency upon foresight
that he will be so: as God did not deny Adam communion with himself because he
foresaw he would sin, till he had actually sinned: so Christ does not withhold
his offices of love from men because he sees they will abuse them, for he knows
how to glorify himself and Father from his acts of love to them, though abused
by them, he does that that he sees may be for their welfare, though he knows
beforehand that they will turn it into a trap. He did not actually deny them
the virtue of his death, till they actually upon tenders of it did obstinately
and persistingly reject and slieght it, Luke 14.24. otherwise there should be
no difference between the time when he is risen up and has shut to the doors,
and the time of his keeping open house and exercise of his patience and bounty
toward them. Nay if he did not procure for them and afford unto them such
grace, they could not be guilty of abusing it and turning it into wantonness,
nor God so clearly and brightly glorious in his just condemning them. If he say
that by finally impenitent he means, them that then had persisted in
impenitency to the end even till the door of grace was shut upon them, then it
remains for him to prove, that any of them as then were in that condition:
surely this very prayer argues it was not then so shut against them. If he can
prove it of any of them (his crucifiers) them we might indeed exclude from the
patience and forgiveness here prayed for, and yet even so he gets nothing, it
being evident that there were men yet in and of the world for whom yet Christ
prayed, and that was the thing that was asserted; whereas he endeavors to prove
that those had faith and forgiveness given them, and his prayer was effectual.
For forgiveness in the sense I have opened it before on Chap. 4. I believe it
was vouchsafed to them, and I do not judge his prayer ineffectual, they had a
forgiveness, and letting them escape deserved punishment then for that sin,
patience extended, which is to be accounted salvation. The not falling upon
them, and taking speedy vengeance on them, but on the contrary, preaching peace
and mercy really to them was (...), a relaxation of that bond, and that was the
forgiveness, as I conceive, directly prayed for, such as God often vouchsafed
them in former ages, and like that in Matthew. 18.27. 34.35. as was before noted,
and they had it; but that they were all after converted and saved, that he
proves not. Many of them were, that he proves, but not all. He cannot prove one
Ruler of them converted. He brings Acts 6.7. to prove it, but that says but
the Priests, not the chief, or high Priests, much less Rulers, and yet much
less that those Priests were of the number of his Crucifiers. Priests and
Rulers in the Scriptures are spoken of as distinct parties. Luke 23.13. and
24.20. Besides, were any of the Priests Rulers, Its probable they were then
called the chief Priests, but its not said many, or any of them believed.
However, this yet concludes that Christ there interceded for men in, and of the
world, ut supra. But he has besides all these Objections, a pretty conceit,
not worth the answering, such a one as we might as well put upon the 17. of
John ( viz. of praying as a private man, not as Mediator) and so we might say,
he prayed there as a private man for his friends, not as the Savior of the
world, for he supposes, That Christ as a private man might intercede for things
that were never granted, but not as Mediator, as if as a private man subject to
the Law, he would act contrary to his Acts of Mediation, take in whom that
rejected, and that in an act of Mediation too. For its evident there he put
himself between God, and the people for forgiveness. Was it ever before heard,
that acts of Mediation were excluded the Office of Mediatorship, and looked
upon in a Mediator as no acts of his Office? Or can it be supposed that Christ
in any thing he (though but as subject to the Law) requested of God was not
heard of him? Did ever a righteous man, guided by the Spirit ask according to
the will of God and he denied him? and did Christ ask otherwise there? Or was
he denied what was so asked by him? I might use his own words, Apage has nugas.

He goes on to the instance of John 17.21, 23. In which he says nothing but
what we have spoken to before, except this, That a conviction of men, that
Christ is not what they formerly thought him, (and so that his people are a
people in whom God is, and whom God loves) is not for any good of the world.
Which is a very false saying. For its to the end that they might submit to him,
and love his, that they might choose the right way, that they might see their
light and glorify God. And is that no good to have the right way evidenced and
put into their reach? and to have means of glorifying of God afforded to them?
Yea, Suppose none but the compelled choose aright upon this discovery (which yet
cannot be proved) shall we say it was not for the others good, because they
abuse it to their harm? Shall Gods goodness and Christ's love be blasphemed, or
despised and vilified because men abuse it? Is not this it the Apostle faults,
Romans 2.4, 5. Despisest thou the riches of Gods goodness, forbearance, and
long-suffering, not knowing that his goodness leads thee to repentance? because
men are not led by it, but sin against it, hardening their hearts, and
treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath, shall we despise it too, and make
a tush of it, and say it was not afforded for any good to them? Is it not a
good to lead men to Repentance? O let not those that undertake to call men to
Repentance, so lightly speak of, nay, speak so evilly of that they should
commend to them; as if themselves too, and their calling them were not for
their good! speaking the very language of ungracious hearts, that say, if God
would have given me grace I would have done better, when they willingly
despised and smothered that which God gave them. Might not the Israelites by
this be justified in their saying, that God did little or nothing for them,
nay, he brought them out to destroy them, because that did actually befall them
for their refusing to follow him? The Lord set it home to men's consideration,
that they believe not Satan, nor nurse up in their hearts slighty esteems of
that goodness, that heeded by them would do infinite great good to them.
Whereas the Answerer also alleged, Matthew. 5.15, 16. and Joh. 1.9. as I
conceive, only to prove that Christ would have his people useful to the world
for convincement, (intimated in this expression, Ye are the salt of the earth)
and for drawing in convinced men (intimated in that experssion, Ye are the
light of the world) agreeable to the end of Christ's prayer for his called ones
in Joh. 17.21, 23. and to show that he does so intercede and put in for others
then Believers, that he does in some measure inlighten every man, etc. Mr. Owen
not perceiving his drift in the former proof, speaks impertinently about it,
and on the latter blusters a little too high and too causlesly, asking in what
measure? how far? into what degree? by whom, and by what means? etc, as if he
would be angry with the expression of Scripture; for that he inlightneth every
man that comes into the world is the Scripture saying (a more certain and full
expression then that which he suborns in the room of it, viz. He inlightneth
every man that is enlightened, which gives an uncertain sound, and may signify
All or Some or almost None) only T. Moore put in the words, in some sort, to
signify that all are not in the same measure enlightened by him, nor in the
same manner, which the Scripture also fully proves, Psalm. 147.19, 20. Now to
ask a man in what measure, degree, etc? is to put a man to search into the
secrets of God and of every man's heart, to see how far the word insinuates it
self into men; I mean Christ the word who was in the world, and it knew him
not, and came to his own (even before his being made flesh actually) and they
received him not. What understanding of God with motions to seek him in and by
his works and oracles, this word or divine light gave or gives to every man who
can disclose, but he whose all seeing eye knows all things, and he will
discover that it beamed in so much light by one means or other, as that all men
when they come to be judged by him shall be left without excuse; and they that
have submitted to him shall glorify his goodness toward them in the day of the
Lord Jesus.

The sum of what the Answerer further said to the fore-propounded Objection,
amounts to this, That as Priest, he offered up himself to death, and through
death as a sacrifice to God, in which he respected diverse things, and had
several nearer ends subordinate to the ultimate, Heb 9.9, 26. Joh. 1.29. and 1 John 2.2. Heb. 9.14 15. Matt. ^6.2^.
the glory of God, as he did it to ransom men fallen into Death from the power of
that sentence upon them, and to be the propitiation that God might deal in a
way of mercy with them: And he eyed further the Testament of promises made to
his called ones, that God would bring in to believe in him, and laid down his
life for confirmation of their faith in those promises, and also for
confirmation and ratification of the truth of his doctrine to those to whom he
preached it. Now in the first consideration he says, he took in All men; though
not all, but his called ones, and such as he should have for his seed. In the
second, against which Mr. Owen says, nothing worth the Answer, but faults the
things that he seems not well to understand, and quarrels with want of
smoothness in the expressions and unaptness of quotations, not rightly taking
them to the Authors meaning as I conceive. For I suppose Heb. 9.9, 26. He only
quoted to show that as a Priest he offered sacrifice, Joh. 1.29. and 1 John
2.2. to show that he was as a propitiation, and that extended to All, Heb.
9.14, 15. and Matt. 26.26. he quotes to prove his Death to be for Ratification
of his Testament; and so the Apostle made use of it in Romans 5.10. and 8.32.
none of them expressing his utmost end, that being known sufficiently and
granted on every hand. Now whereas Mr. Owen says, that his proofs for the
sealing the Testament hold out but the first end of the death of Christ; he
speaks not rightly, for neither of those places (viz. Mat. 26.26. and Heb.
9.15.) speaks only of procuring of remission of sins, or power and prerogative
of forgiving, but of sealing the Testament also, which bequeaths (not to all he
dyed for, but) to all that heartily believe in him (and such the Apostles were)
the receipt and enjoyment of forgiveness, and of the inheritance it self, which
remission the believers indeed confess that they experimentally receive from
him in his blood believed on by them ( Romans 3.25.) as in Ephesians. 1.7. and Col.
1.14. which Scriptures speak not of procuring Redemption (though that must
needs be supposed as a thing fore-done) but of the receipt and enjoyment of it,
that they being brought out of darkness into Christ's Government, met with, and
partook of, as the word (...) declares too.

"Whereas he calls his distinction of these ends mentioned his (...), that's only
his want of discerning, and so till he see better, may be forgiven him, as all
the rest of that following froth he has, not worth repeating or answering; for
whereas he says that "he may this way answer any thing, by saying its
otherwise in his opinion, it seems strange to me that he cannot see the places
above recited clearly proving what was affirmed by him. Does not his being a
Lamb to take away the sin of the world, and the propitiation for the sins of
the whole world, show that the work of his Priesthood had something in it
extending beyond the bounds and limits of the Church and chosen? except he can
first show that the world, the whole world, is the Church of God, and all of
them the chosen of God; and so confound the distinction so clearly held forth
in Scripture between the Church and the world, John 14.17, 22. and 15.18, 19.
and 16.20. and 17.9. 1 Cor. 6.2. and 11.32, etc. And does not Heb. 9.15. with
Mat. 26.26. plainly say that Christ also intended to confirm the faith of his
called ones, in expectation of the eternal inheritance, and to make that sure
to them? Is there not a plain difference between these two, the breaking in
pieces the bond of Death man was fallen into, and so delivering him out of that;
and the making a Covenant of promises with some of them so ransomed? Is it all
one for a Prince to ransom a thousand men out of prison, in which they were to
perish, and save them from hanging when the rope was about their necks, And his
entering into a bond and Covenant to prefer so many of them being ransomed as
will submit to, and serve him? Did not Christ undertake for both in his death?
both to ransom man fallen, and to confirm his Church in faith? But who can give
eyes? or who shall persuade wise men to be willing to be fools in themselves
that God may give them eyes? I shall leave the Reader to God, entreating
sobriety from him, and that he will not wink with his eye wilfully when light
is propounded to him. And so having through Gods assistance finished my answer
to his first book, In expectation and confidence of the same assistance, I
shall follow him to the second.

The Second Book.
CHAP. I.
A further view of his consideration of the ends of the death of Christ, as
further handled in his first and second Chapters of his second book.

COnsidering further the end of the Death of Christ, He tells us it was either,
1. Ultimate and supreme, viz. the glory of God the Father, Or, 2. Subservient
to that, viz. The bringing men to God, and in that, both 1. That men might have
means of coming to God, And 2. The end it self, coming to God, or Salvation.


Which I suppose not as so indefinitely propounded, though I think the ends of
it may be more fully and clearly assigned thus, viz.

1. Gods Glory, Phil. 2.11.

2. Nextly the glory of the Son of God, that he might have the pre-eminence,
and God be glorified in him, John. 17.1, 4. Phil. 2.9, 10. Romans 14.9. To this
end he both dyed, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord of quick and
dead. So John 5.22. The Father has given to the Son to have life in himself
(which I understand of the life communicable to men, for that is said to be in
him, 1 John 5.11. and so life in him through his death for men) that all men
should honor the Son even as they honor the Father; for that's the life indeed
for which he is so worthy to be honored of all men, in their looking to him,
and believing on him as on the Father; and that's the honoring him as the
Father, to give him all the honor of believing and staying on him, resting and
glorying in him, acknowledging his Lordship, etc, as to the Father.

3. To these purposes that all might be set free and ransomed from the sentence
of death under which they were fallen, that so God and Christ might be
glorified in them all, and an object of hope and faith be provided for them to
look to and believe in for salvation, and for God to glorify the riches of his
mercy in drawing men to according to his good pleasure, Matthew. 20.28. and 1 Timothy 2.6. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15.

4. That those that believe in him might have eternal life. So in John 3.16. be
brought to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. and to glory, Heb. 2.10 having Christ for a
witness and Covenant, ratifying and sealing an everlasting Covenant with them,
and being an example, and pattern, yea a Captain and leader to them, Isa. 49.6.
and 55.4. Heb. 9.15. Matthew. 26.26. 1 Pet. 2.21, 22.

But that that was his end that Mr. Owen propounds toward the conclusion of
his 1. Chap ( viz. That All and every one of them for whom Christ dyed, should
have All those things conferred upon him, that he procured for any; or that
they All should certainly be brought to God and to eternal glory) I deny, and
leave for him to prove, which there he does not. But let us see if he disprove
none of the ends laid down by me.

He tells us ( Chap. 2.) that it was not merely his own Good he aimed at in his
death. That it was not merely his own is without doubt, but that it was also
his own glory to be manifested is as evident, and therefore also he prays the
Father for that, John 17.4, 5. but he says further, "While he was in the way he
merited nothing for himself. Whereas the holy ones of God have deemed him
worthy to receive honor and glory, power and riches, Rev. 5.9.
wisdom and strength for that his suffering etc. and I think God judged him so
too, for as a reward of his sufferings he has given it him; and that Christ
had no eye at that in regard of his humanity (as he insinuates) is not to be
believed, seeing the Apostle expresses he had, Romans 14 9. Heb. 12.2. he
procured the exaltation of his humane nature (and the manifestation of his
glory as the word of God more brightly) by his sufferings, and that God
predestined it to that glory otherwise then by sufferings, I no where find,
nor I think he neither. Its true, that was not the only thing, nor perhaps the
main thing in his eye, He aimed more at the glorifying of his Father, and that
the world through him might be saved; but that That was not in his eye, nor
procured meritoriously by him, and so no end aimed at by him in making
satisfaction for sin, seem strange positions, and yet these are Mr. Owens
Conceptions and Conclusions, quite cross to that of Romans 14.9. before mentioned.

Sure if he procured any thing meritoriously of the Father, he procured his own
exaltation in the humane nature, especially that glory of it to be the
habitation and storehouse of that fullness that he has for us, which to me is
more plain then that it may be denied in that Psalm. 68.18. He led captivity
captive, and received gifts in the man; and in Rev. 5. its ((...)) he prevailed
to open the Book, and unloose the seals (which was his honor as well as our
commodity) ver. 4, 5. whence that after-confession ((...)) thou art worthy to
take the Book, and open the seals, etc. ver. 7, 8. He errs again, when he
says, The Dominion he has over All, is not founded on his Death, for the
Scripture says expressly to this end he died ((...)) that he might have
Dominion, and for this cause God highly exalted him, because he humbled
himself, and bare the sins of many, Isai. 53.12. Phil. 2.10, 11. But Mr. Owen
seems here to leap over hedge and ditch to his own purposes, not considering
how full the Scriptures are against him. And indeed how can we expect a
concurrence of Scripture to disprove a Scripture Assertion? But let us "see how
he confirms his opinion. He endeavors it from Heb. 1.3. He was appointed heir
of all things. But what then? In what nature was he so appointed? Sure he
needed no appointment or constitution for his Divine Nature, seeing Dominion
over all was essential to that. If in the Humane Nature united to the Divine,
then through what way was he appointed to become heir? was it not the same in
which he was begotten to be his Son? and is it not said of him upon his
Resurrection in that regard, Thou art my Son, "this day have I begotten thee?
then he was begotten in the Humane Nature, to possession of the Divine Glory.
Besides, may it not as well follow, that therefore he purchased no glory for
his Elect, for they were appointed, and preordained to it too, before the
foundation of the world. So that this is proofless to that particular. "His
next is, Heb. 2.7, 8. God has put all things under his feet. But does he not
speak of that as a consequent to his abasement; Thou made him little lower
then the Angels, thou crownedst him with glory and honor, etc? And expressly in
ver. 9. We see Jesus for the suffering of Death crowned with glory and honor. I
marvel what could make him quote this place of all the rest, it being rather
full against him.

"He asks if Christ died for all those things that are subject to him? Sed quid
hoc ad Rhombum? Its enough that he died that he might have such dominion over
them, which he has partly by dying for them (as in men) and partly by conquest
over them (as in the devils) and partly by gift, as a reward of his service
performed by him to his Father, as in all things, Phil. 2.10, 11. "Again, He
asks if he have not dominion over the Angels? (Yes, and what then?) "But he
died not for them. True, but what then? Did he not die, that through death his
Humane nature might be taken up into glory, transcending theirs? But he says,
All things "are rather given him out of the Immediate love of the Father? What
he means here by Immediate I well know not, if that without consideration of
his death and sufferings, the forecited Scriptures say enough against him. If
he mean only that that was the bottom-fountain of his giving all to him: Then
does he not see how by that manner of reasoning, he also overthrows the effect
of Christ's death that he pleads for, in procuring grace and glory for his
chosen, for by the same reason he purchased not that neither, nor eyed it, they
flowing from the (...), the good pleasure and love of God, as is declared at
large, Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6, 7. and 2.4, 5. etc. Certainly in all this Argument he
has horribly mistaken.

But yet at length he says. Suppose this be true, What proof follows from
thence of the general Ransom, seeing this Dominion is a power of condemning as
well as saving? and its not reasonable to assert, that Christ died to Redeem
them, that he might have power to condemn them; nay, if he died to Redeem them,
then he aimed not at any such power to condemn them. To this I only say. 1. We
ground not our Assertion of the generality of the Ransom upon this bottom
merely, but upon plainer testimonies also; only we assert this end. 2. We say,
at the power of saving or condemning them he aimed, though not at their
condemnation. And that Romans 14.9. proves. He had not power over them to save
them, nor were there any just ground for their looking to him for salvation (as
the case stood) he not dying to ransom them from the power of that condemnation
that was already passed upon them, therefore that he might be able to save
them, and he, and God in him be a fit object for them to look to for it, to
that end he died for them, John 3.17. though it is true, that by the same he is
able also to judge and condemn them for neglecting and rejecting him and his
salvation, which he could not reasonably be thought to have had, if there had
been no salvation in him, or way to salvation opened to them by him, and so his
power to condemn, yea his actual condemning of them had not been with so much
subserviency to the highest end of all, Gods glory manifested: Gods glory had
been less gloriously manifested in condemning men for their sin in another
merely, the sin of the public man, then for their personal abuses, neglects,
refusals, and wilful rebellions against grace afforded personally to them,
which they had no way to obtain but through his sufferings to ransom them from
destruction in their former sentence of condemnation.

2. Another end rejected by him is this. That Gods Justice being satisfied he
might save sinners. In which, in effect, He either denies that Christ died to
make satisfaction to Gods Justice (contrary to his after discourse against the
Socinians, and his Chapter about Satisfaction) or that that satisfaction was
any means of the salvation of sinners, Lib. 3. c. 7.8, 9.
or at best a needless means, for God might otherwise have saved them. None of
which he proves. Now whereas he adds that the Arminians say, that after the
satisfaction made by Christ, Deo integrum fuit, it was freely in Gods dispose
whether to save any or no: I shall pass it, as wholly impertinent, either to
what I have laid down as the ends of Christ's death, Chap. 1. or to the Position
here rejected by him, viz. That Christ died, that Gods Justice being satisfied
he might save sinners. For this adds also, he might, or might not save any one
sinner. Which that Position said not. But he further lays down this Position.
That it was not to procure any thing to God, but to obtain all good things to
us. But how agrees this with those Scriptures, that say. He bought us by his
blood to God, Rev. 5.9. Act. 20.28
and God purchased a Church by it to himself? Will M. Owen exclude these acts
from being in Gods intention in giving Christ to die; or does he think [Vs] the
Church to be nothing? Besides, what need, I pray, of obtaining any good to us,
if God was equally at liberty to dispense those good things to us without his
dying, as through it, notwithstanding his sentence of condemnation forepassed,
and that the supreme end aimed at was to be accomplished? (for we speak not of
satisfying Justice, or opening a way for Gods goodness to flow forth without
consideration, either of the sentence requiring satisfaction, or the end of God
in glorifying his Justice, for how then should we make it a subordinate end
thereto?) in which his first argument is answered. We say, if that sentence
being passed, He could otherwise have saved man, and given him all good things,
then is the Death of Christ evacuated, no need of him to have obtained any
thing of God, God from eternity loving them, and being free to give them all
good things, and his justice as well dispensing with sin unsatisfied for, as
requiring satisfaction; but this he declines the asserting of.

His second Argument being only against that clause, That God might save none
notwithstanding that satisfaction, I pass over, as nothing against our
Assertions. In his third, He says that then Christ should be said rather to
redeem a liberty to God then to us from evil, to enlarge God, etc. To that I
say, He has in a manner confessed himself, that he dyed supreamly to make way
for the breaking out of Gods glory, for what else is it to manifest his glory,
as if otherwise it would have lain more hid, and could not have so appeared,
had not Christ dyed? and then does not this absurdity lie as much upon himself
as us? We say, but (Posito Decreto) God having decreed to have no fellowship
with sinners, nor to dispense favor to their persons but through satisfaction
for their sins, he could not act forth the manifestations of his glorious grace
but through satisfaction; and he says the same, otherwise he will make it but a
needless means to the supreme end, the manifestation of his glory. And yet from
neither his saying nor ours, is it meet to say that Christ dyed to redeem a
liberty to God rather then to redeem us, for he was in no real bondage in
himself, nor ever a whit the less glorious in himself had he bound up himself
for ever from doing us good: but ours would have been the bondage and misery,
that thereby should have been debarred from experimenting his goodness upon us
to eternity, his love to us led him to think it as a strait (as it did to
Ephraim, Hos. 11.8.) but that was because his love made ours his. What he says
about the merit of Christ, we shall have occasion to speak to more fully
afterward, in answer to Chap. 10. lib. 3. and Chap. 1. lib. 4.

His next argument also (being against the assigning that as All the end of the
death of Christ, so as that being accomplished none might be saved) intrenches
not upon us, as is manifest by what I laid down in the beginning of this
Chapter.

"That Christ is given for a Covenant (as is afterward affirmed by him) I
believe, and that also as a Covenant, is propounded (in respect of future
benefit) conditionally to men upon submission and obedience, is as true. See
this latter in Isa. 55.3, 4, 5. Hear, and your souls shall live, and I will
make an everlasting Covenant with you: here is the promise of making that
Covenant (even the sure mercies of David, which is Christ dead and risen, etc.)
but its upon this condition; hear and then your souls shall live, and I will
make it with you; thence men that take hold on Christ by faith, take hold on
the Covenant, Isa. 56.6. the former is propounded, Isa. 49.6. I will give thee
for a Covenant to the people, etc. that is (as I understand) one through whom
believed on, the people shall be in Covenant with me; they accepting him (as I
accept him) we shall be agreed and made at one; but of this subject we shall
have occasion to speak more afterward.

"His after-denying that Christ's death effected a liberty to God of doing that,
which otherwise his justice by virtue of his sentence of punishing the sinner,
would have hindered him from doing, is as much as if he should say, That Christ
dyed in vain, and without any need, for he might have manifested his justice
and his mercy as much in his dealings with the sons of men, if Christ had never
dyed in stead of them; which if it be not to make the Death of Christ an
unnecessary, supervacaneous thing, I know not what is.

CHAP. II.
On the latter part of his third Chapter, lib. 2. in which he urges the phrases
For many, and for the sheep; and pretends to answer what T. Moore has observed
about them.

HE proceeds in the next place to application, and to demonstrate this
Assertion, That Jesus Christ according to the Council and will of his Father,
did offer himself on the cross, to the procurement of eternal salvation, with
all the branches and means of it, and makes continual Intercession with this
intent and purpose, that all the good things so procured by his death might be
actually and infallibly bestowed on, and applied to All and every one for whom
he dyed, according to the will and counsel of God. A position manifestly false,
for then we must all be Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers,
nay have a name above every name, etc. for these things Christ procured by his
death. But to pass that: He endeavors to make good this by a threefold
consideration.

1. From Scriptures holding out the intention and counsel of God.

2. From Scriptures laying down the actual accomplishment, or effect of his
oblation.

3. From those that point out the persons for whom Christ dyed. His
prevarications and weakness in the pointing out and arguing from each of which,
we sufficiently showed in our answer to the first Chapter of his first Book,
and therefore here shall add only this, That his arguments run but to this
purpose. Owen for his arguing. So again, Ergo, not All. Israel, Therefore he
made no body else, etc. but no more to them arguments, only there are diverse
passages in the latter part of this Chapter from p. 79. that we have not spoken
to, and therefore shall take them in here, As,

He denies that the death of Christ in any place of Scripture is said to be for
all men. For Answer to which, I desire the Reader to turn to 1 Timothy 2.5, 6.
Heb. 2.9. Romans 5.18. I know his objection is elsewhere, that the word Men is not
in the original. To which I answer first, That by the same reason he may say
that in Romans 5.12. Its not affirmed that All men sinned seeing its but (...),
the word Men is not expressed; and the like in 1 Cor. 15.22. that All men dyed
not in Adam. But, 2. The word Men is expressly in Romans 5.18. And 3. The word Men
is the substantive clearly to be supplied, because the whole precedent speech
was about men, All men to be prayed for, 1 Timothy 2.1. and expressly, verse 4.
that God would have All men to be saved (...), etc. and that demonstrated by
this, that there is but one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the Man
Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for All. For All what? must it not
needs be men, between whom and God he is a Mediator, and whom he tells us God
would have to be saved, All men; and so in Heb. 2.9. was not the Apostle
admiring Gods goodness to man? Lord what is man, and the Son of man? exalting
man above all his works, which is now verified in one Man Jesus that dyed for
every one; What can it be referred to as before spoken about, but man, or the
sons of men? But of this we shall have cause to speak further hereafter.

That there are more ends of the death of Jesus Christ then what is the
immediate fruit of it by way of ransom and propitiation before faith in it, we
have showed in the conclusion of the first Book, and upon his first Chapter of
the second. Some fruits there are of it from God toward men before faith, and
while in state of unbelief, as the opening the door for entrance, and for
exhortations to strive to enter, a feast prepared in Christ, and a way of
participating of it made, and invitations vouchsafed, as in Matthew. 22.4. Prove.
9.3, 4, 5. Luke 13.24. and those for and to more then enter and eat: other
fruits there are of it that flow in upon faith, as satisfaction, justification,
sanctification, the contents of the new Testament, etc. And he that cannot see
these to be distinct fruits, and produced for or upon diverse objects, and
objects diversely considered, is blind and cannot see afar off, nor into the
things evidently held forth in the Gospel; And what the ransom either
immediately with God and for men, or mediately upon and in men produces, were
subordinate ends and aims that Christ had in his eye upon his death, as Mr.
Owen himself also implies, when he makes the ends of Christ's death to be
coincident with its effects; His following observation objected against that,
that where the word many is used, there are more ends of Christ's death
mentioned; I shall pass it, being not material, and in some passages at least
doubtful.

But in page 80. To this exception of ours, Christ's death is not limited to
many, and to his sheep, etc. as the ransom and propitiation, as if he dyed for
them only; he tells us,

1. That Christ saying he dyed for his sheep and Church, and Scripture
witnessing that all are not his sheep, they conclude and argue by undeniable
consequence, that he dyed not for those that are not so. At which assertion I
can but wonder; when first I heard of Mr. Owens Book, he was so commended to me
for a disputant, that I could not expect any such lame arguments from him: If
we must take his saying of a thing to be an infallible proof, that its so, then
we have done with him; but sure no Logic rule or good reason that I have ever
met with can prove this assertion. Had he said, Christ saying he dyed for his
sheep, and the Scripture saying all are not his sheep, it argues that in that
saying he extended not the speech there about his Death to All, he had spoken
reason; but to argue, that because he mentions no more there as the object of
his Death, therefore he had no greater object of his death, is as great an
inconsequence as any can be. Let it be considered by this like reasoning, God
styles himself the Creator of Israel, and their King, Isa. 43.11.
Isa. 43.15. but many places of Scripture witness that All are not Israel,
therefore he did not Create all men, nor is King of all the earth, contrary to
Acts 17.24, 25, 26. and Psalm. 47.7. So again in Jer. 14.7. God is styled the
Savior of Israel in the time of trouble, but All are not Israel, Therefore he
is not the Savior of All men, contrary to 1 Timothy 4.10. Or like this, God
Created the Smith that blows in the fire, and that brings forth the instrument
for his work, and the waster to destroy: but all are not such, Ergo God created
not All Isa. 45.16. What rational man, much less a Scholar would call these
undeniable consequences? but let us observe what strong proofs he brings to
back it. He tells us that in that very place Christ presently adds, that some
are not of his sheep, which if it be not equivalent to his sheep only, he knows
not what is. Now that [presently] is in ver. 26. and the other ver. 15. so that
there are eleven verses distance between them, and in the interim there is a
Chafma, a breaking off that discourse in verse. 15. and the following verses,
See ver. 19, 20, 21. and a new occasion of the following discourse mentioned in
ver. 22, 23, 24. so that the latter in verse. 26. might be spoken at another
time, many hours or days after the former: but however, suppose them spoken
within two or three verses distance, what does that prove? that he dyed for his
sheep only? just as much as Gods mentioning the Babilonians and Caldeans in
Isa. 43.14. the verse next before his saying (I am the Creator of Israel)
proves that he created not the Babilonians; What wild reasoning is this? It
shows indeed that (which we deny not) there he speaks of no more then his
sheep, not that therefore he dyed for no more then his sheep, especially as the
propitiation, there he says not he died for all, not there he denies that he
dyed for All. As when Paul says, He loved me, and gave himself for me, he
speaks but of himself there, but it follows not from thence, that he denied his
loving any but him, etc. I might retort here his own language, in lin. 24.25.
of page 81. but I have enough to do beside, I pray God help him to see that the
beam is in his own eye while he cries out of the mote in his brothers. Let any
but rationally compare what is objected against him, page 81. and his answers
to it, page 82. and he may well admire the answers.

For whereas its objected, That our Savior did not in John 10. set forth any
difference between such as he died for, and such as he died not for. He
answers, that there is there an evident distinction, and that he called them he
died for, his Sheep (just as God calls them he created, Israel) those that he
would give eternal life to, etc. Now I would Mr. Owen would show us the other
part of the distinction, where Christ in any part of the Chapter says, But
some there are that I will not die for, and they are such and such. There Mr.
Owen fails. In the first discourse Christ only tells us how he loved his sheep
more then other Shepherds that are hirelings, and who are his sheep, but not a
word that he died only for them sheep, by way of ransom and propitiation. Nor
indeed speaks he there of dying (at least not merely) in that consideration,
but as a shepherd opposed to other shepherds that are hirelings, who will not
lay down their lives for the flocks committed to them, but flee. Were they
hired think we to ransom, or be a propitiation for the sheep, and are any
faulted for running away, and not doing that? Surely God never required that of
any but Christ, nor faulted any for declining it. But they were hired to teach,
lead, stand by, support and go before their flocks, in witnessing the truth
against ravenous Wolves, and Persecutors, not to run away in times of danger,
and leave their flocks to shift for themselves; for not dying for the sheep in
this sense he faults the hirelings, and in that properly he there opposes
himself to them in laying down his life for witnessing the Truth preached, and
strengthening them for sufferings. So that he not only limits not the ransom
here to his sheep, but speaks of his laying down his life also, to a quite
other purpose then Mr. Owen produces it to prove. What follows in him, is not
pertinent to prove, that either he speaks there of dying for them by way of
propitiation, or (much less) that he so died only for them. Indeed he tells us
intimately, that all those for whom he died, he died for them in the same
manner, and to the same end, and that he died for none but those that shall be
brought in by the Ministration of the Gospel. But these are things often
spoken, but never proved, and often disproved. He tells us also that the
Primary difference there, is not between believers, and not believers, but
between sheep and not sheep; in which he also mistaketh. For though in his
after discourse he puts a difference between sheep and not sheep, believers and
not believers; yet in that former discourse in which he speaks of laying down
his life, there is no difference aimed at between sheep and not sheep, but
between shepherd and shepherds, the good shepherd and the hireling, in their
entrance to the care of the flock, and deportment toward them. Let that be but
warily considered, and it will give further light to our understanding of the
place, and clearly cut off that exception. He says again, That "the question
is not at all to what end Christ mentions his Death. But there he is out too;
for it pertains much to the question; for if he mentions it as an example to
other shepherds under him, then he mentions it not as the propitiation, for in
that we are not to follow him, nor can we. But he says, His intention is to
declare his giving his life a ransom, ver. 18. but that says not any such
thing, but only that he laid down his life, and took it up again. And though
he should include the business of Ransom and propitiation in that 18 verse, yet
taking in the other thing too, viz. the Testimony-bearing to his Doctrine, and
so the preservation of his sheep in the faith, it makes the thing impertinent
to our purpose. For our controversy is not, whom he died to establish in the
faith, but whom he died for, to ransom them from the sentence upon them in
Adam. Again, Though he say not that he laid down his life to give us example,
yet speaking of it as done by him, as a shepherd over the flock, with
opposition to hirelings that leave the flock, he tacitly instructs us, what he
would have other good shepherds do, and so tacitly propounds himself as an
example to us, To which may be added this, That the sheep of another fold
(whether people seeking after God in other Nations not yet gathered into unity
with these believing Jews, or others yet to be called, its disputable) seem to
be spoken of as a distinct people from those for whom he says he laid down his
life, as not pertaining to his ministration as on the earth, and so not so
concerned in his Death, as a shepherd for confirmation and strengthening of
them by the view of his constancy in the faith believed, as these sheep were.
The phrase is remarkable, That so soon as he had said, I laid down my life for
the sheep, he adds, And other sheep also I have that are not of this Fold.
Others, from what? but those he had been speaking of that the Father had
immediately put under his charge, in point of his vocal and personal
Ministration. For whose encouragement also in the first place, he laid down his
life, witnessing a good confession before Pontius Pilate. But I leave that to
judicious considerations. Again, If by sheep not of this fold, be meant such
Gentiles as God had drawn to seek after him, by those means of his goodness
spread abroad amongst them, though not yet led so far as to know and
acknowledge, or walk with Christ and his Disciples of the Jews (such as
Cornelius and some of his family were, and others such might be) as I see
nothing to disprove it, Then Mr. Owens Allegation of that afterward to prove,
That the word sheep contains others, then those that are in some degree
believers or fearers of God, falls to the ground. But however, take it one way
or other, it nothing disproves the main controverted point. viz. That Christ
died not for his sheep only.

I pass other following contentions, not directly pertinent; only note, That
where (in page 85.) He says he knows not where its said, For All men, but is
sure that Christ is said to give his life a ransom, and that only mentioned,
when it is not said for All, as Matt. 20.28. and 10.45. (I suppose it should
be, and Mark 10.45.) his words are ambiguous, for either he means that its only
mentioned as a ransom, where the word [All] is not joined with it, or where its
not extended to All: and if so, then speaks he evidently false, for in 1 Timothy
2.6. its in express terms, He gave himself a ransom for All; or else that
Christ is said to give himself a ransom, and nothing mentioned, but that in
some places where its not said for All. But then he trifles too. For if it be
said but in one place [for All] its enough for our faith to close in with,
there being no one place that denies it of any; and many being neither a
limitation of, nor contradiction to All, as is evident. To say nothing that
there his Mediation and Ministration are joined together. To Minister and give
his life a ransom for many.

Whereas in the conclusion of that Chapter, he charges M. Moore, with framing
an objection like a man of clouts, to which none of his Adversaries did ever
contribute a penful of Ink. I shall say no more but this, That to my
remembrance, I saw a writing sent him, containing four Objections, the same in
matter and form as are there laid down in his book, in the beginnings of his
14, 15, 16, and 17. Chapters. And as I remember they were sent him by one
Edmund Scottin of Emmith near to Wisbitch. So that therein Mr. Owen does
falsely asperse him, being guilty himself of as weak Arguments as any one of
them, As may appear by this of dying for his sheep: to which I have been lastly
speaking.

CHAP. III.
Concerning Impetration and Application, with a view of, and answer to what Mr.
Owen says to them in his fourth Chapter.

HIs next Chapter is about Impetration and Application. About which I shall
first propound my understanding, and then consider what is said by him, Thus
then I conceive the Scripture to hold forth.

1. That Jesus Christ by his Death and Sacrifice impetrated, procured, and
obtained a release of all men from being dealt with according to that sentence
of condemnation that passed upon them for the transgression of Adam, so as that
they should not be cut off and destroyed properly for that: (As Moses by his
mediation for Israel procured a repeal, or reversion of that sentence
pronounced against them in Numb. 14.11, 12. of smiting them by Pestilence, and
disinheriting them, ver. 19, 20.) This I gather from Romans 5.18. 1 Timothy 2.6.

2. That Jesus Christ by his death and Sacrifice impetrated, procured, or
obtained power and Lordship to himself in the man, over them all, and all
things concerning them, Angels, Devils, and all creatures made for them, that
he should have power over them, to rule or order them, and make them, useful
and serviceable to all, or any man, or for chastisement and correction to them,
as he pleases. This I ground upon Romans 14.9. Acts 10.36. 1 Pet. 3.21.

3. That he procured and obtained thereby to have in himself in the Humane
Nature all fullness of gifts and grace, life and salvation, so as that it might
be dispensed unto all or any man in that way God and he should propound for
participation thereof, which (in regard of the eternal life and salvation) is
only by receipt of himself, so as that it should not pass from him dividedly
from himself, but men must come in to him, and receive him, to receive and
enjoy that fullness in him. And this I ground upon those Scriptures, Psalm.
68.18. Ascending up on high, and leading captivity captive, he received gifts
in the Man, 1 John 5.11. God has given us eternal life, and this life is in
his Son (whence also as thus filled, he is the Bread and Tree of life) He that
has him, has this life, and he that has not him, has not life, verse. 12. He
may impart and give other gifts to men that are apart from him and not in him,
but the main gift, the life in him, he gives enjoyment of only to men in him,
so that if men would have it, they must go to him for it; though the servants
are sent abroad, and he comes forth with them to call men to the feast, yet men
must go into him by Faith, and receive him into their hearts, else they have
not the efficacy of the feast prepared for them in him; but he has impetrated
to have life in himself and fullness fit for All or any to look to him for, and
communicable by him to all or any in looking to him.

4. He has also impetrated and obtained, that the engagement of God to him
should be fulfilled, he having performed his Fathers will, he has obliged God
(as we may so say) upon his promise to give him a seed, and to that end so to
glorify him with himself and to men, and so to exercise his power and goodness
amongst them, that Nations and people should run in to him, and so come to
enjoy the life that's in him, and glory with him, leaving that (so far as I
find) to his Fathers goodwill, whom and how many so to cause to run unto him,
not doubting but he will make good his word to his satisfaction. Thus for his
Impetration.

Now accordingly by way of Application (if we may so call it) He and God in him,

1. Deals with all men in a way of mercy, bounty, and goodness, and not
according to the Tenor of the first obligation, or the curse deserved by their
sin in Adam.

2. Has invested him with supreme Authority over All Creatures, giving all
things into his hands, and he rules the Nations with a rod of Iron, etc. and
dispenses to them as seems good to him. And,

3. Has life in himself, free for, and communicable to All or any, which he
makes over to his people brought into him, forgiving their sins, sanctifying
their souls, putting into them his spirit, laws, fear, etc. changing them into
his likeness, till he bring them into the full possession of all his glory. And,

4. The Father glorifies him amongst men, and so works in his word and
providence by his Spirit, that he has a Church and Spouse, a seed given him,
to whom he does impart that fullness that is in him; and executes his Lordly
office amongst the rest according to his and the Fathers will, so as that he
brings about the main end of his sufferings, the glory of God, in all his
dispensations even toward them also. And these are my thoughts about this
distinction.

Some make use of a Distinction of a Reconcilation wrought in Christ for men,
and in men by Christ; the first for all men, the second in all cordial and
through-believers. Which I make out and approve thus.

1. The nature of man was fully and perfectly reconciled to God in the person
of Christ by his death, for All men, or in the behalf of, and for the benefit
of all men. The nature of man (though the Word descended into it and was made
Flesh, yet) as it was given in the behalf of other men's persons (yea he in it
as the public sinner) to ransom all, so between it in Christ and God there was
a controversy, and that so great, that God fell upon it, wounded, bruised,
afflicted, yea cursed it, as I may say, or made it accursed, and his Son as in
it, pouring upon it the punishment of the sin of man before he took it up into
his glory: but having done so, to the utmost of his will not sparing him, he
then raised it, Acts 13.33.
took it up into Sonship with the Word, and filled it with all his fullness,
being at perfect unity with it, and it with him, never more to be at odds
again; here is a full, complete, and perfect reconciliation of the nature of
man in Christ's person, and this for All, as the punishment was suffered in
stead of the whole nature in its several individuals, and so as that God now
lets go all other from executing the fierceness of his wrath upon them for that
sin in which they formerly stood condemned, and calls for satisfaction to his
justice in that point from none of them, Romans 2.4, 5.
but extends such means and goodness to them as leads to Repentance. Yet in
their persons they are not reconciled, they all (except the man Christ) remain
in enmity against him, and the nature of man in all our persons is such, that
with no one of mankind can so holy a God have fellowship, till something be
done to them, that is (De adultis loquor) till there be wrought in them a
renouncing of themselves and sins, and a willingness to walk with God through
his love and goodness, which none have in them merely by Christ's dying for
them, and ascending to God, till something be wrought in them from heaven by
his Spirit: 2 Samuel 14.24, 28.
Till when, men are like Absalom, when David at Joabs mediation took of the
sentence of his banishment, but yet would not let him see his face. All yet in
that regard children of wrath, worthy of wrath, though God deal not with them
according to desert, nor goes about to execute the fierceness of wrath upon
them, but on the contrary affords them means of seeking him, etc. to some more,
to some less, as he pleases. But,

2. When the goodness of God, Psa. 36.7, 8. Ephesians. 1.13.
and the operations of his Word and Spirit, the insinuations of divine light
and love into the hearts of any is so received and yielded to, that they are
brought to Repentence and faith in God and Christ, and submission to his
Spirit, then they come in their own persons to be reconciled, to receive the
reconciliation and atonement; then God begins to own and walk with them, Romans
5.11.
and take them up into unity and fellowship with his Son: and this is the
reconciliation wrought in men by Christ, to which the Apostle exhorts in 2 Cor.
5.20.

How much my sense of these distinctions differ from the Arminians, Camero's,
Testardus and others (who as M. Owen tells us, all speak of an Impetration of
Reconciliation, Remission, Redemption, conditionally if they believe) I leave
to their Judgments that compare us. M. Owens arguments against that first
distinction, as used by them, make nothing against me, I affirming an
application or donation from the Father to be made to Christ, and through
Christ to men, according to the purpose of his Impetration: only some passages
in his arguments would be spoken to; as whereas in his second Argument p. 89.
he affirms, that whatsoever is obtained for any, is theirs by right for whom it
is obtained. I think that is not every way true. I may purchase a picee of land
intentionally for my child, and yet keep the right and title in my own hand so
that he may not have right in it, or title to it, till I actually instate him
in it. Whatever the thoughts of Christ were to any in dying for them, yet we
are not made heirs till brought into him; till then we have no right either to
claim, or to receive the promises, Ye are all the sons of God by faith in Jesus
Christ, and if Christ's, then Abraham's seed, and heirs according to promise,
Gal. 3.29. So Tit. 3.6. being justified by grace, we are made heirs according
to the hope of eternal life. Whether the condition of faith be purchased or no,
we shall view elsewhere,

Again, in his third Argument, he tells us that these two, Impetration and
Application, are always joined together in the Scriptures: in which he says
not truly, for I demand where is the Application in 1 Timothy 2.6. He gave himself
a ransom for All, or in Heb. 2.9. by the grace of God he might taste death for
every one? and where is the impetration in that, By him whosoever believes
shall receive the remission of sins? Acts 10.43. He has also diverse indirect
and vicious inferences, as when from Isa. 53.11. [ He shall justify many for
he shall bear their iniquities] he infers, All whose sins he bare, he also
justifies, whenas such a conclusion cannot fairly be drawn from those
premises, no more then if a man should say from that in 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. [The
Holy Ghost is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own, for ye are
bought with a price] that all that are bought with a price have the Holy Ghost
in them, and so those false Teachers in 2 Pet. 2.1. which bring upon themselves
swift destruction. That clause, For he bare their iniquities, shows the ground
upon which by his knowledge he might (and (so) did) justify them, that he
proceeded legally, not the adequate object of his act of bearing sins. Thence
also he adds by his knowledge, that is, by making known his truth, or doctrine,
or himself in it, he shall justify many; how comes that about, that he by his
knowledge should produce such an effect? the reason is rendered, for he bare
their iniquities. He shall make known himself to them, as one able to save
them, and so draw them in to him, and then by virtue of his sufferings for them
he shall justify them, for that was it by which he was perfected for
conferring such a favor on them that obey him, as in Heb. 5.9. He says not, he
justifies many by bearing their sins, as if that alone did it, but by his
knowledge, which knowledge, whosoever regard not, nor receive, they go without that
justification, or accounting righteous, there spoken of, yea though he dyed for
them (and had they received that knowledge of him, both could and would have
justified them) men stumbling at him, and not believing on him, may perish,
though Christ have dyed for them, 1 Cor. 8.11.

Again, his inference from that in Isa. 53.5. [ By his stripes we are healed,
Therefore All that he dyed for] has no more force, then if some Israelites
that were healed by looking to the brazen Serpent should say, By the brazen
Serpent we are healed, Therefore All that it was set up for were healed by it.
Of no more force are those other inferences from Romans 8.32, 33. He that spared
not his Son, but gave him up to the Death for us All, how shall he not with him
give us all things? Us, that are in Christ Jesus, that walk after the spirit,
that have received the first fruits of it, that are called, justified, etc. Its
like the confident reasoning of the believing Israelites, Exodus 13.13, 14, 16,
17. God that brought us out of Egypt by so mighty a hand, redeeming us, and
bringing us forth in his mercy. will guide us by his strength to his holy
habitation, Numb. 14.9, 10.
bring us in, and plant us, etc. that is, such as in this confidence follow his
conduct, and rebel not against him. Now as if one from thence should infer,
Ergo all that he brought out of Egypt he surely brought into Canaan: just such
are those three inferences of Mr. Owens from that Romans 8. viz. That all he gave
Christ for, 1. He gives to believe in him, (that is compels them to believe)
And 2. Brings them to glory, (an inference wholly groundless from that Text,
that speaking of actual believers, and not of faith, as a thing yet to be given
them) and All that he dyed for. 3. He makes intercession for (for the collating
all the choice benefits of his Death upon) (for that's the meaning of his third
inference, though not so in terminis expressed, otherwise I should not deny it)
but I have said enough before to these kind of inferences, and I shall speak
fullier to that place where he more fully urges it, lib. 3. chap. 11.

That which follows in him has something in it worthy the noting, viz. those
Assertions repeated and spoken to by him. As,

1. In that he denies Gods inclination to do us good to be natural and
necessary, he crosses that common maxim, Quicquid in Deo est, Deus est, every
thing in God, is God: and if that be true, then its necessary and natural to
God, for that which is God cannot but be, and so whatever love is in him to us,
must be necessary, it being something in him. Besides the Scripture defines him
by love. God is love, which sure has in it an inclination to do good, and what
he is, is natural to him, and as necessary as he; though what object to act
forth his love toward, and in what way, is not necessary but merely free to
him; and therefore when he says that every thing acted by him toward us is an
act of his free will, opponit non opponenda, seeing though his actings be
voluntary, yet his nature is essential and necessary, and these two cross not
each other.

Whereas he says, the ascribing an Antecedent will to God, whose fulfilling
depends on any free contingent act of ours, is injurious to God. This falls not
upon us. But I conceive that that may be called an Antecedent Will of God,
which respects some Antecedent condition in us, in respect of some Will of
God, respecting us as its proper object in a consequent condition. As (to
explain my meaning.) God viewing Adam as innocent, willed him Paradise, and
fellowship with himself (yet the enjoyment of this to be according to his
standing in that created condition) but viewing him as voluntarily fallen, he
willed to expel him from Paradise, etc. the former of these in respect of the
latter, may be called Antecedent, as it was a Will respecting an Antecedent, or
former condition of Adam, and the latter a consequent will to that fall from
his former condition beheld by him. So a Will to provide a Savior for men as
helpless and fallen, and to extend goodness to them through him, compared with
his Will to exclude them his Kingdom, and seal them up under wrath, as
obstinately, after light and power vouchsafed, rebelling against his Son, and
abusing his goodness, may be called an Antecedent will, and the latter a
Consequent, though that denomination of Antecedent and Consequent arises rather
from the priority and posteriority in the objects, then the will it self. For
that place, Who has resisted his will? as it makes nothing against what I have
here said, so I shall say nothing to it here, but refer what I have to say
about it to my Answer to cap. 4. lib. 4. where he urges it again, as also his
third Assertion, viz.

3. That a mere common Affection and Inclination to do good to all, sets not
out the freedom, fullness, and dimensions of the Love of God asserted in
Scripture, as the cause of sending Christ. To my Answer to his fourth Book, and
second Chapter, where he further urges it again.

4. Whereas he denies, that all mankind was the object of that love of God
that moved him to send Christ. We believe he denies it; but how does he
disprove it? why thus. He made some for the day of wrath, Prove. 16.4. but he
should have told us whom. The Scripture says, The wicked, such as persist in
wickedness (if by evil day, we mean a day of destruction to themselves;) for
otherwise in turning they shall live, and God swears he had rather they should
turn and live, then go on in sin and die, Ez. k 33.11.
which [rather] argues a Mediator for them to turn to God by, and such as
refuse to turn to God by him, God works them (as the word (...)signifies) to an
evil day, Omnia operatur Deus sibi, vel in causam suam, etiam improbum in Diem
mali. Drus.
like that in Romans 2.4, 5. If Mr. Owen think that them that are now wicked, God
made them at first for the day of destruction, and therefore left them to be
wicked, (for I hope he thinks not that God made any wicked) then he must say
his creating work was to most an act of hatred, and that God hated men, while
innocent and righteous, and while his own mere workmanship, for in that instant
he intimates that he made them unto wrath, which suits not with the Nature of
God, which is Love, nor with the Truth of God, that says, That God loves the
righteous, as all were when God created them. The truth is, the word [Made]
signifies also to order and frame providentially, and so the word (...) more
properly signifies, being never that I find applied to his creating things,
and so his disposing Israel to Mercy or Judgment in his providential government
of them, is compared to a Potter making a Vessel, Jer. 18.4, 5, 6. (...)
or making it another Vessel when marred, Jer. 18.4, 5, 6. The meaning of the
sentence then is this. That the Lord wrought as all things for himself (or for
its cause, as Drusius notes) so the wicked, those that are so, and persist to
be so, against the goodness and grace of God leading them to Repentance, them
he works (or by an Ellipsis they are) for the evil day, That is, to be his
rods, to afflict and exercise men withal, to make a day of affliction, and
trial, which in Scripture is called Ephesians. 6.13 (...)1 Samuel 24.13. Isa. 10.5.
an evil day, as the word is here*. As its said, Wickedness proceeds from the
wicked, and Ashur the rod of my wrath. And so its said, That ungodly men,
turners of the grace of God into wantonness, were (...).
fore-written to this condemnation, or judgment, viz. to be exercises to the
Saints of God, and put them to trial about their faith, Jude 4. (another place
quoted by him) but surely they had that grace vouchsafed to them which they
abused, or else how did they abuse it? Compare 2 Pet. 2. with this Epistle of
Jude.
These are the same men, with those in 2 Pet. 2.1. that are said to be bought
by the Lord, and that buying them, and his goodness toward them being bought,
was the grace they turned into wantonness: And surely, he that says that God
foreordained, that those that being bought by him, and having grace and favor
extended to them through Christ, leading them to Repentance, should deny the
Lord, and turn his grace into wantonness, and so persist in wickedness, should
be for exercises and rods to the Church (for so the words (to this judgment or
condemnation) seem to import) or (if ye will) that they should be condemned; He
say, that so says, does intimately say, that God ordained them first to be
bought by Christ, and to have such grace extended to them; and I think grace is
love and favor; and then he says nothing to deny that even those also, though
not looked upon as such (persisting in ungodliness and wickedness) but in an
Antecedent condition (as we noted before) were also the objects of Gods love in
sending his Son: no more then he that says, that God intended to throw fallen
Adam out of Paradise, and deny him communion with himself, denies that God made
Adam righteous, and showed him much favor in Paradise.

"But he says again, That some were hated before they were born, pointing to
Romans 9.12. But there is no such passage there. Only that before the children
were born, or had done good or evil, it was said to Rebeccah, The elder shall
serve the younger. And that we shall find indeed spoken before they were born;
Genesis 25.22, 23. but the other, [Esau have I hated] was spoken in Malachies
time, long after they were dead, and was spoken inclusively of Esaus posterity
too, as the other part of the speech of Jacobs, and its produced by the Apostle
to show the standing of Gods purpose for exalting the younger above the elder;
for this proves Gods purpose to stand, that Esau not submitting to serve Jacob
according to the Oracle (in which he might have met with blessing) God hated,
rejected, and cast him out, and destroyed his mountains. You may as well say,
that God laid his mountains wast before he was born too, and so before he had
any, as that he hated him before he was born. For they are put together, Mal.
1.2. yet I hated Esau, and made his mountains wast. But again,

From Romans 9.22. He tells us that some were fitted for destruction, but that's
impertinent. For its not He (that is, God) fitted them to destruction, much
less in his first creating them. But they being fitted for destruction, yet (he
says) God to show his power and wrath, to make known his Name for the good of
others, spares them. As when Pharaoh (to whom he seems there to allude) was
fitted and ripened for destruction, and might have been justly cut off. Yet
that he might make him more exemplary, he treated with him a long time before
he destroyed him; and what does this hinder but that he might send his Son to
dye for such, as considered in a precedent condition. A man for whom Christ
died, by stumbling and turning from Christ, may be fitted for destruction. So
the Apostle intimates 1 Cor. 8.11. 2 Pet. 2.1. Except a man may perish, and not
be fit for it, which I think none shall.

He produces also 2 Pet. 2.12. like bruit beasts made to be taken, etc. which
being spoken of such as deny the Lord that bought them, verse. 1. it cannot be
in reason conceived that Christ dyed not for them, except he bought them by
some other price then his death, which I find not affirmed. Beside, Mr. Owen
may abuse his reader, making him believe that the Apostle says that those men
were made to be taken and destroyed, when indeed the words are these, Like
bruit beasts made to be taken and destroyed, the words Made to be taken and
destroyed, agree with the word Beasts, not with the word Men, but the men being
as brutish as such creatures, speak evil of things they understand not; He
compares them to the beasts that are made for such ends, in regard of their
absurd irrational carriages, as by the parallel place in Jude 10. appears, and
Master Owen would make men believe contrary to the original (which is (...).)
That the Apostle applies those words, Made to be taken and destroyed, to the
men compared to them.

He tells us also that some are appointed to wrath, 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. the Apostle
says not some, as fallen in Adam, or muchless as created, were appointed to
condemnation, and that Christ should not die for them. We deny not that
believers are not appointed to wrath (and that's all the Apostle there says) nor
that unbelievers are appointed to condemnation, as they remain unbelievers, not
believing in him whom they had so good ground to have believed in, he having
done so much for them, and having such a name of salvation as is reported to
them, John 3.18. but this comes not up to Mr. Owens intention.

His last quotation is Act. 1.25. To go to his own place, which I conceive is
rather applicable to the Apostle to be chosen, and so the words to be read
thus, That he may take the lot of this ministration and Apostleship, Compare
Acts 1.20. with Psalm. 109.4, 5, 8.
to go to his own place, and the words [ From which Judas fell] are only put in
by a parenthesis: but take it as its usually understood, yet then it shows but
that such as requite Christ hatred for his love, and betray him after the
knowledge of the truth received, loose whatever honor in the Gospel they had
before attained, and have for their own place hell and destruction: and what
does this make against Christ's having loved and come forth to ransom him as
fallen in Adam, that he so highly abusing that love, had a place fell to him
amongst the Devil and his Angels?

What follows in his p. 93.94, 95. is party impertinent, and partly spoken to.
He tells of several ways that men go in to make out their conceptions in this
point, and I could also show such differences amongst those that oppose the
extent of Christ's death; some more fully opposing it then others, some denying
that there is any Gospel sent to any but to the Elect, as Doct. Laighton, Mr.
How, etc. some that the Gospel is sent indeed to All, and to be preached to
All: so the most of them. Some that Christ dyed to purchase all into his
dispose, but yet bare not any sin of theirs, nor did ransom them from any
foregoing sentence upon them. Some that he has not bought them or dyed for
them at all, only seemed to buy them; others that he dyed to buy many good
things for them, but not to buy them, etc. but to what purpose does he repeat
(or I recriminate) such things, which show but that we have not attained to
unity of faith in perfection, or that there are imperfections in our
apprehensions of truth? not that this, or that is the truth. I doubt not but
Veritas magna est, and praevalebit: As truth shines forth more brightly, so the
many oppositions against it by them, and the many swarvings from it in some
conceptions that may be amongst us, will all vanish and be scatterred, nor
shall its abettors need such distinctions as are not founded in the Scriptures,
nor such expressions as there find no footing, as many of Mr. Owens are, as we
shall see; as what he gives us as the sum of the truth in this matter, viz.
That god out of his infinite love to his Elect sent his dear Son in the fullness
of time, to die and pay a ransom of infinite value and dignity for the
purchasing eternal redemption, and bringing unto himself all and every one of
those whom he had before ordained to eternal life for the praise of his grace.
Not that we deny that God sent his Son to die and pay such a ransom, or that he
purchased eternal Redemption, or will bring to himself all those that he
foreordained to eternal life, etc. But that the Elect was the sole object of
Gods love, or that it was love to them only, and none but them, as he after
concludes, that moved God to send his Son. Our Savior himself expressed not
himself so. He says not, God so loved his Elect that he gave his only begotten
Son, that every one that believes should not perish, etc. but God so loved the
World: Mr. Owen confounds the Elect and the World together, and makes as if
Christ had said, that every one of the Elect that believes should not perish.
Besides, I would have Mr. Owen show me that any persons were considered as
Elect before the consideration of Christ's dying for men, and how they are said
then to be Elect in Christ, and not in Adam rather; if men looked upon either
as in Massa pura, or as in Massa corrupta, were the object of Election, and not
rather as Christ was eyed intervening between God and them.

What he says about the value and dignity of the ransom, and price which Christ
paid, viz. That it was infinite and fit for the accomplishing of any end, and
procuring any good for all and every one for whom it was intended, had they
been millions of men more then ever were created, we shall meet with it again
in li. 4. ca. 1. and therefore I shall only say this to it here, That it fairly
intimates, that Christ has merited more by it then ever shall be applied, the
desert or merit of it being immeasurable for extent, but the application of it
bounded, and so if strictly looked into, he grants such difference between the
meriting of it and its application, as he faults his adversaries for; nay and
makes a great, yea an infinite part of its merit to be to no purpose.

His following Assertions are things again and again affirmed, but never as yet
proved by Scripture, viz. Either that the whole adaequate intention of God in
giving Christ, was the bringing many sons to glory, or, that all the things
procured by Christ's death are to be bestowed on All that Christ dyed for. I
conceive my expressions laid down in the beginning of this Chapter, are
cleerer, and less cloudy, yea and more consonant to the Scripture expressions,
then what he has given us as the Sum of the Truth in this business.

CHAP. IIII.
A view of what is further said by Mr. Owen to this matter, in his fifth
Chapter.

HIs next Chapter is spent in Arguments against that Distinction of Impetration
and Application, as he had expressed it in the Arminian sense; which differing
from mine I might pass over, yet I shall speak to diverse passages in it, which
somewhat entrench upon what I have laid down in my second observation about
Impetration. As,

In the entrance he has an Assertion without proof, viz. That for whomsoever
Christ obtained good to them, it must be applied. To which I oppose this, That
Christ procured good things into himself in the humane nature, for those that
refusing him, go without them. He received gifts for the rebellious, as Psalm.
68.18. there are favors held forth by God to them, and in a sort given them (as
Christ tells the unbelieving Jews that his Father gave them the true bread) but
that all they for whom such gifts are received by Christ, must also necessarily
receive them, is as void of proof, as that all the unbelieving, murmuring Jews
received Christ as the bread of life, and fed upon him: sure the Holy Ghost
says, Joh. 6.32. Jon. 2.8. Psa. 81.13, 14. Luke 19.4, 42, etc. Isa. 55.2, 3
Prove. 1.21.22, 23, 24.
That some deprive themselves of their own mercies, miss what in oheying they
should have had, know not (and so miss of) the things pertaining to their
peace: Nor is it rational to think, or Christian so say, that God calls people
to Christ, that has received nothing into himself for them, and so has
nothing to dispense to them that will do them good; is so earnest to draw them
to that that cannot satisfy them, and condemns them for refusing that that had
nothing for them in it; as he has not any thing of what he calls them to as
communicable to men, but by his sufferings.

Whereas he says, That the blood of Christ in the virtue of it cannot be
looked upon as a Medicine in a Box, laid up for all that shall come to have any
of it, and so applied now to one, and then to another. That speech so far is
false, as to the good things pertaining to eternal life, and the virtue of that
blood for the enjoyment of them, for it is resembled to the ashes of an heifer
laid up in a clean place, and from thence to be sprinkled upon men, Number. 19.9.
Heb. 9.13, 14.
and so his name is compared to ointment poured forth, Cant. 1.3. what is his
name but his love, grace, virtues and excellencies declared and made known? the
pouring forth of which, intimates that they were all first included in him as
ointment in a Box. Now though the declaration of these be as ointment poured
forth, yet the things themselves, Remission, Sanctification, Spirit of Joy,
Glory, etc. are all contained in him, and pass not from him to any soul, till
it be first brought in to him; yea the whole tenor of Scriptures speak of these
things as laid up in him for men, one and other: thence those phrases, The
salvation that is in Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 2.10. Neither is there Salvation in
any other, Act. 4.11, 12. All fullness in him, Col. 1.19. All the fullness of God
dwells in him bodily, and in him we are complete, Col. 2.9, 10. In him we have
Redemption, Col. 1.14. the life that is given us in the Son, 1 John 5.11, 12.
in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3. Be strong in
the grace that is in Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.1. yea this grace is compared to a
feast made in a house, whitherto men are to come, etc. Matthew. 22.2, 3, etc. 1
Cor. 1.90. Act. 10.43 Rom 5.1^. Joh. 1.12.
Yea thence Christ himself is said to be made to the believer wisdom,
righteousness, etc. and we are said in believing to receive remission, to
receive the atonement, etc. because in believing we go to and receive him; yea
we are said to come to the blood of sprinkling, Heb. 12.24. Now that this also
is laid up in him for all that shall come to have any of it, and so applied now
to one, and then to another, as they come (or rather laid up for All that upon
his call they might come to him for it) is also the tenor of Scripture
Doctrine; thence Look to me and be ye saved all ye ends of the earth. Isa.
45.22.
Whoever will, let him come and take of the water of life freely. He says not
the Elect, or any shall have it given out from him without coming, or they only
have right to come for it, its only for them; but whoever will may, thence it
is a feast made for all people, Isa. 25 6. and all are inivted in the Gospel,
even whomsoever we meet with we may call, Matt. 22.8, 9. though all obey not
the call to come, yea and the blood is sprinkled upon, and the grace applied
now to one, then to another, as they come. Thence some obtain mercy and grace
before others, as an example and encouragement to others, 1 Timothy 1.15, 16. some
are in Christ before others (as Andronicus and Junia were in Christ before
Paul, Romans 16.7.) and so have fellowship with God and Christ before them, yea
before others be called to it, or born. And this also is given to All comers,
without difference, as is clear in Scriptures, to Jew and Gentile, bond and
free, for there is no difference, Romans 3.23, 24. Gal. 3.27, 28. its open to
All, and intended no more for one comer then another, as to the essentials of
it, though more to those that come, then others that come not; Yea though
Christ has purchased All good things into his humane nature, and they free for
all, and prohibited to none, till they be wickedly put away; yet its uncertain
to any before coming, whether it shall be theirs or no: and as to Scripture
Revelation, for them its left indifferent, the Scripture expressing them no
more then others, nor others, yet unbelievers, more then them.

His arguments to the contrary touch not to any purpose what has been said:
they are these. 1. Its against common sense that such a thing should be
obtained for one, and yet that not be his. To which we have given some answer
before, besides which, we say further, that its here inconcludent, for it
should have been [That a thing should be obtained for one, and yet he never
enjoy it] not [that it should not be his] The application answers not to right
and title, but to enjoyment of right. Men may have right to that in Christ,
which they refusing to accept or look after, have not the enjoyment of, so Jon.
2.8. they that observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercies: its (...)
their own mercy, and yet they deprive themselves of it. So Esau had a
birthright, the first portion was his by right, and yet he never had it applied
to him, he lost it or sold it willingly, and so went without it, and there are
too many profane, as Esau. Corn may be treasured up with Joseph for All Egypt,
yet with this Proviso, that men must go to Joseph before they can have it, Heb.
12.15
so that any Egyptian has right to go to him and receive it, yea good ground
to go to him too, and yet if any man refused to go to him and to take it at his
hand, he might perish for want, but (as I have propounded that distinction)
Christ is not wanting to apply what is impetrated, according to the will of God
for application, or compact made in Impetration; and therefore his second
Argument is vain too, viz. That

2. Its contrary to reason that the Death of Christ in Gods intention should be
applied to any one that shall have no share in the merits of that Death. None
of all his adversaries produced by him say any such thing, they rather deny the
application of it to many, then say that some to whom its to be applied, have
no share in his merits. "Whereas he says many know not of it; we have showed
before that a man may have a fruit of love from another that he knows not.
Cyrus was girded and strengthened by God, though he knew him not. So men have a
release from the dealing of God with them according to the merit of Adams sin,
which should else unavoidably have come upon them, and this by Christ though
many know not him; And all receive some fruits of Adams sin, though many knew
not that there was such a one, or what his sin was. Whereas he says, its
against reason, that a ransom should be paid for captives upon compact of
deliverance, and yet upon payment those captives not be made free and set at
liberty; that Christ should be a ransom upon compact of deliverance of
captives, and yet the greatest number of them never be released. That is falsely
bottomed, for God released All from that deadly destroying sentence, which has
God taken the forfeit of Adams sin in that very day, had ruined Adam and his
whole posterity. Justification of life is to all, so that they All have life
here, and shall (however) be released and brought out of the death that is
ordered to them by occasion of Adams sin, in the resurrection, so far are all
acquitted that if any perish its not in that but in a second Death. Yea all are
released also in this regard, that whereas all were cast out of Gods presence,
and might not approach to him, now through Christ all have free leave to
approach to him, all are commanded to repent and turn to him, to look to him
and be saved, whoever will may come and welcome; yea God is so far from keeping
them away, that he faults men for not coming to him, John 5.40. Now if a ransom
be paid for captives, and the prison doors opened, and means afforded for
leading them out, and prisoners willingly and stubbornly refuse, but will stay
in prison still (as in this later respect many do) shall that be imputed as a
defect of justice in him to whom the ransom was paid for them? Surely no,
except it could be proved that that was the compact, that he should in that
regard compel, and forcibly cause to come out of prison, all that the ransom
was paid for; which I am sure Mr. Owen will not be able to prove in this
matter. Christ no where says to any, God would not have you come to him, you
are not included in the ransom, nor that all that he dyed for shall be brought
in to him; but he often tells us, God would have them seek him and come to him,
and faults them that they will not.

"For that after-shift (as he calls it) of conditional and absolute obtaining of
things; it falls not upon me. I affirm that liberty from that first sentence's
execution upon us was absolutely obtained, Justification of life to All. And
that liberty is opened in the Gospel to All and men exhorted to enter, and for
not striving to enter now, the door comes to be shut upon many (that which they
have shall be taken from them, because they liked to have it) and then they
cannot enter. Also that all life, remission, and fullness, are absolutely put
into Christ's hands, only I say the will of God for his dispensation, and so to
his proposition of the things to be dispensed (not his obtaining them into his
dispose, nor the freeness, and openness of them for men to look after and come
to him for them) has a condition annexed. God wills Christ to dispense them to
men upon coming to him, and Christ holds them forth upon that condition to any,
Whoever will, let him come, etc. we deny that Christ is bound to make known to
all for whom he dyed, the fullness that is in him like evidently, or himself or
the way of salvation to all alike expressly, or expressly at all. That all are
bound to mind and embrace what he reveals to them, is clear, but that he is
bound to make known this or that to all he dyed for, I deny that Mr. Owen can
any where prove. He may bring infants to himself, and dispense his salvation to
them, and yet never give them capacity to hear the condition of salvation; and
yet we believe what the Scripture says, John 1.9.
that he is the true light that inlightens every man coming into the world. He
is not bound to give every man ten talents alike, open and plain declation of
himself and Father (no not for saving them) but every man is bound to improve
and submit to God in what he gives them, be it more or less; and if they do so,
he is able and ready to give more (being liberal and free) and can tell how to
save them: if not, he is just to take away what they have, and not bound to
save them, He being Lord of them. Nor yet say we that men have power of
themselves to improve what is given them, but he who gives them the talents,
gives them the power too, in which he requires them to improve them, and its
not inability, but slothfulness and obstinacy for which they are faulted and
condemned by him, because they rather choose to live idly in themselves, and die,
then stir abroad to seek God, John 8.31, 32, 34, 36.
or yield to what he brings home to them, and live. Christ, as he is the Truth
of God, is the great Physician of souls, and by revelations of truth both calls
to himself for healing, and by further revelations of it to those that come to
him, does heal. John 14.6.
The truth shall make you free, and this because He has given himself a ransom
for them in the first place (without which neither ground of calling, nor
fitness to heal them) Now this Great Truth of God does send abroad his beams of
divine light, and so some sparklings of himself as the Word of God and God, by
virtue of his relation to the humane nature (first virtually and then actually
united to him) to men in general; John 1 4, 5, 9,
though not so clearly nor so many beams at all times as in some, nor to All
men as to some. Yet to the generality some Beams of truth, Romans 1.18, 19,
21.28. Acts 17 27, and 28.27. Job 21.14
and those beams have their force in their leading them to know something of
God, and so to seek him groping after him if happily they may find him; yea
such power as that men are fain to suppress and keep them under, and bid them
be gone, and shut their eyes against them, lest they work too much upon them.
Now though they see not what a one, or who he it whence these beams come, and
those operations in their hearts, yet they knowing in their consciences that
they ought to obey them, and that it would be better for them so to do (though
what that betterness is, they comprehend not) and contrary to that knowledge
they have, wilfully rebelling; they cannot plead ignorance, total ignorance of
this great physician, but for not obeying what they know, shall be excuse less
before him. So that Mr. Owens comparison of Christ to a physician tendering
cure, and he wholly unknown, Romans 1.20.28.
is a mistake also, nor shall men be able to make good that plea when he comes
to judge them; though many shall say in respect of his person and fuller
appearances, when saw we thee thus and thus? as if they would plead ignorance
of him, yet he shall take away that plea from them, making it appear that in
such and such mediums (as his poor people), Matthew. 25.42, 43, 44, 55.
he was evidencing himself to them, and presenting himself before them, and
there they would not know him. Nor is he as one tendering a thousand pound to a
blind man on condition he will see, and yet giving no ability to see: but he
in tendering gives forth such light that men see some glimmerings, and bids them
look though but with their blind holes that they may see; which did they, the
light would make them see and see more clearly, yea it would turn them, Isa.
42.18.
and he would heal them, Act. 28.27. but many wilfully (loving their own ease
and wills) will not see, lest they should be turned and be healed by him; they
see they should listen to him, yea many see that in looking to him they might
have healing and yet refuse to look to him, they desire not his healing.
Whereas he says the condition of faith is procured for us by the death of
Christ or not, I shall here say but this, viz.

1. That Christ is become an object fit for us to believe on and hope in
through his death, which else he had not been for us sinners.

2. That God in Christ has done so much for All men, and does so much for them
through him, that he deserves highly at their hands to be trusted in by them; I
know this agrees not with Mr. Owens principles, yet I shall stand to it against
him, that all men have good cause and ground to believe in him, or to betrust
themselves to him; and so much we are in preaching Gospel to demonstrate to
them (not having sinned to death or blasphemed against the Holy Ghost) Its but
a righteous thing for any man to believe in God and in Christ; and its
unrighteousness and heinous sin not to believe in him being declared to them,
that is, not to commit souls and bodies to him, as to one ready to save them.

3. All the ways and means, with all the power that comes in and with them to
enable men to believe, are vouchsafed to men through the Death of Christ: none
of them had been afforded to us, had not Christ dyed for us.

4. Its the promise of God to Christ, so to exalt and glorify him, that some
should be brought in to him and be given him to believe, and be his seed.

5. Yea its by the discovery of Gods good will in the death and resurrection of
Christ, that God uses to overcome men to believe, and so his blood and death,
as so discovered and set home, redeems men out of their bondage to Satan, and
world, and corruption, Rev. 5.9, 10, and 14.4.

But that Christ obliged the Father to make all those men that he dyed for, to
walk out in the exercise of such power and liberty of acting, as he should in
his gracious dispensations afford them, for attendance to means, receipt of
light given, looking up to him in that light, yea to believe in him and rely on
him for salvation, this I desire him to prove. Its not proveable by Scripture
so far as I can find, nay I may use this argument against it (bottomed upon
Mr. Owens own maxim) viz. Whatever Christ procured or merited by his oblation,
that he intercedes to have collated or bestowed on men: But Scripture no where
shows that Christ intercedes for faith (saving faith) to be given to one or
other, Ergo Scripture no where proves that he procured that by his oblation.
The major is Mr. Owens own in cap. 4.6. and 7. lib. 1. The minor is easily
proved by Induction, no one place speaking of Christ's Intercession mentions his
interceding for saving faith; not that platform (as some say) of his
Intercession, in John 17. as we showed lib. 1. chap. 2. if not there, no where
else, for in Romans 8.33. he mentions his interceding for Us, men in Christ,
believers, but says not for what, much less for faith, that they had already.
In Heb. 7.25. Its for those that come unto God by him, that some might come to
God by him. I leave it for him to find any one place in which Christ prays
that God would make any to believe. Nor will this diminish at all the honor and
love due to him, for as Mr. Owen says, We are not to invent ways of honoring
him, but give him that that in the Scripture God gives to him. He produces Tit.
3.5, 6, and 2 Cor. 5.21. but neither of them say that Christ procured faith for
us, as obliging God to give it us; the former shows but how God wrought it in
discovering his love, and the latter, that Christ became sin for us; that we
might in him (that is in believing in him) be made the righteousness of God;
and so that he opened the way for our believing and making righteous, not that
he obliged God to make us, or all that he dyed for, righteously to believe; no
more then in verse. 15. where He says he dyed for all, that they that live might
not henceforth live to themselves, he shows that therefore he obliged God to
make all cease from thenceforth to live to themselves, and God performs not his
obligation to him, in that so many, even after believing, live so much to
themselves, and mind their own things, as Paul complains. That he shall
bring in a seed to him, I grant, but that he is obliged to bring in this or
that Individual to be of that seed, muchless all that he dyed for, I no where
find. That in Ephesians. 1.3. and Phil. 1.29. We shall meet with afterward, and with
the point it self also more fully urged, viz. in lib. 3. cap. 4. where we shall
speak to them; only this I shall say to them here, that neither of them say,
that Christ by his death obliged the Father to give to this or that, muchless
to all he dyed for, effectually to believe in him and to be saved, not a word
to that purpose. So that that piece of doctrine, viz. That for whom Christ
dyed, them he procured faith for, is none of those Scripture-truths that will
scatter the supposed clouds and mists. Nor yet follows it, that the whole
impetration of Redemption is made unprofitable. For,

1. God has engaged himself so to glorify his Son, that some shall be brought
in, though he no were say All he dyed for, nor (that I know of) any particular
persons, so as that this or that individual must, or else he should be unjust.

2. He shall have much glory from his good, bounteous, and merciful
dispensations to men through the Death of Christ, that yet he compels not to
believe on Christ; Matt. 22.2, 3, 4, 5. with Romans 11.36.
yea in the just and righteous condemnation of those that sinned against that
mercy, and refused to submit to him. For that condition upon which he supposes
we will say Christ is to bestow salvation, viz. so they do not refuse or resist
the means of grace; Its a mistake, we know no such imposition put upon him, for
men may receive the means, and yet rebel against the grace it self that comes
in them, have a form and deny the power of godliness, and for that perish;
Though that all Pagans and infidels are left destitute of all means leading
them to seek after God, or that any that have no outward means from Christ, nor
ever resist Gods workings in them, shall be condemned, as Mr. Owen would
persuade us, I leave for him to prove. Christ says to the Jews, that if he had
not come and spoken to them, they had not had sin; and for ought I know, If
Christ neither come in Word, Joh. 15.22
nor in any spiritual way (as he preached to the old world by his Spirit) if
any such he can find, they may not have sin charged on them to condemnation,
and destruction. Yet if Mr. Owen can show me otherwise, I will believe it. For
making Christ but a half Mediator, its frivolous, yet we shall speak to it,
lib. 3. c. 3. where it occurs again. That Christ did not dye for any on
condition of their believing, I believe; nor that he dyed only for the Elect of
God, that they should believe, nor find I any Scripture calling any man while
yet in and of the world, an Elect person. He dyed for All, that being Lord of
them, and presenting his light to them according to the good pleasure of the
Father, whosoever believes might not perish, but have eternal life. And here
ends this Second Book, and my Answers to it.

The Third Book.
His third Book contains Arguments (grounded for the most part upon his former
premises) against the universality of the Death of Christ, we shall (Favente
Deo) orderly view them.

CHAP. I.
An answer to his two first Arguments contained in his first Chapter of this
Book.

The first Chapter contains two Arguments,

FRom the nature of the Covenant of Grace, established, ratified, and confirmed
in and by the Death of Christ. His Argument runs thus.

The effects of the death of Christ cannot be extended beyond the compass of
the new Covenant (or Christ died only for those that are within the New
Covenant) But this Covenant was not made universally with all, but particularly
only with some. Therefore those alone were intended in the benefits of the
death of Christ. A very vicious Argument, whereof the Conclusion contains a
quartus terminus, for in stead of any effects, the term propounded in the
Major, He says the benefits therein (as is clear by what follows in him)
comprehending the choice benefits of the death of Christ applied. The Major
also is ambiguous and uncertain. For either it is universal, as No effect of
the death of Christ, etc. or else particular, as Some do not, etc. If the
latter, its impertinent, and concludes not against the death of Christ for All,
but only its having some effects in All, which is besides the thing in
question; if the former, as I suppose he intends it, then I deny it. I deny, I
say, that Christ died for none (or that none have any effect of his death
extended to them) but only such as with whom the New Testament is made. He
brings no other proof for it (which he perhaps therefore lisped in, because he
saw himself weak in the proof of it) but only from that title given to his
blood, that its called The blood of the New Testament. So that his Argument to
prove that, runs thus. Its called the blood of the New Testament, Therefore
shed only for them, that are heirs of the New Testament. Which is like this,
The Spirit is called the Spirit of Comfort, and the Comforter, Therefore
whoever it works upon, it comforts them; and so when it convinces the world of
sin, its their comforter too, and when it kindles the fire of Tophet, Isai.
30.33. it comforts them that are tormented with it. A wild Argument! and yet
such is his. The truth is, As its an office of the Spirit to comfort, and he is
a Comforter to all that obey him; so is it an office of the blood of Christ, or
rather one end of its shedding, to ratify the new Covenant, which it also does
to all that believe in it: But as that is not all the work, or business of the
Spirit, to comfort, so neither was that all the work or end of the blood of
Christ to establish the new Covenant; but first of all to ransom from the death
that was passed upon men; and then to confirm a Covenant to the house of Israel
and Judah, This blood where ever its tendered, the Covenant is tendered with it;
Hear and your souls shall live, and I will make an everlasting Covenant with
you, the sure mercies of David, and he that obeys this, is entered into Covenant
by it; but not All for whom it was shed, are in Covenant by its shedding; no
more then all for whom the water of Purification was made, were therefore
purified, because it was made for them, and called the water of Purification,
Numb. 19 9.20.

Mr. Owen also mistakes the parties with whom the Covenant is made. For he
understands them to be a certain number of persons yet lying in the world, and
that its one clause of the Covenant to give them faith, or make them to
believe; whereas indeed (especially as pertaining to the Gentiles) the proper
object with whom the Covenant is made, is the called of God, believers in
Christ Jesus, into those men's hearts God will put his fear (not to bring them
to him, but) to keep them from departing from him (which argues their being
brought to him before) these shall have the Law written in their hearts; an
allusion to the old Testament written in Tables of Stone, not before they were
brought out of Egypt, but after they were Baptized into Moses in the Cloud, and
in the Sea, and were come to Mount Sinai. The Apostle alluding to that, tells
the believing Hebrews, partakers of the heavenly Call ( Heb. 3.1.) that they
were not come to Mount Sinai, to have a Law of works and death put upon them,
but to Mount Sion Whence the Law of Grace goes forth. Isai. 2.3.
to hear him that speaks from heaven (and so intimately to have the Law writ in
their hearts) Heb. 12.18, 22, 24, 25. in which they came also to the blood of
sprinkling. He does not say, they were come to Mount Sion while they were yet
uncalled, but in obeying the Call, they came thither to meet with, and receive
the new Covenant opposed to the Covenant made with their Fathers at Mount
Sinai. That that confirms me in this belief, is this, that it is by faith that
we are made of one body with the Israel of God, and are no where called the
seed of Promise, or Israel of God, till brought to Christ: but then we are all
one with the believing Jews, Jews in the inner man, the Circumcision, the seed
of Abraham, and heirs according to Promise, Gal. 3.26. 29. Now the Covenant
spoken of, is made with the house of Israel and Judah. If Mr. Owen think men to
be faederates in that Covenant before faith, let him show me that any
unbelieving Gentiles or uncalled, are called by the name of Israel and Judah.

Besides, That the promises of God are made with Christ, Gal. 3.16. and are in
him, yea, and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. But if any yet out of Christ, should be
faederates while out of him, then they should have a larger object then Christ,
and a larger performance then in Christ Jesus. But I say this, ex abundanti, to
the Minor, it being sufficient to the overthrow of the Argument, that the Major
is proofless. Whereas Mr. Owen makes the difference between the Old and New
Testament to be, That this Covenants the giving of Faith, and that not, I deny
it, and say, The difference between them is in this, That was carnal, weak, and
afforded not such operation of Spirit; This spiritual, powerful, and full of
life, writing Gods teachings in the heart, whereas that writ them but without
in Books or Tables of Stones. That propounded Precepts and Promises, but gave
not the performance; This in Teaching conforms the heart to Gods Will, and
gives in the enjoyment, and accomplishment of the promises; whence, as the
Apostle says, The righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us that walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8.4. That this Covenant is
propounded conditionally too, to those that are not yet believers, we have
showed before in Isai. 55.3. So that no man short of believing can say (as Mr.
Owens Objection supposes;) The Lord has promised To write his Law in our
hearts, but if we listen to Christ, he will write them in our hearts; but to
the believer in Christ, to him that is Christ's, the Covenant is free, he being
the proper heir of it, as is before showed. He repeates his Argument again in
the winding up of the Argument. That the blood of Jesus Christ, was the blood
of the Covenant, and his Oblation was intended only for procuring the things
intended and promised thereby, and therefore it cannot have respect to All,
etc. That it procured the good things contained in the Covenant, or rather that
he ingages the performance of them to the called (for I think the word ((...)
sponsor) has rather that signification then of a procurer) we grant, and to
that the Quotation of Heb. 7.22. is pertinent, but his inference from thence is
yet unproved, as we have showed. And so we have seen the fallacy and weakness
of this Argument.

2. His second Argument is thus. That if the Lord intended, (and so Christ by
his death did) procure pardon of sin, and reconciliation with God, for all and
every one, to be actually enjoyed upon condition that they do believe, then
ought this good will and intention of God, with this purchase in their behalf
by Jesus Christ be made known to them by the Word, that they might believe, for
faith comes by hearing, etc. otherwise men may be saved without faith in, and
the knowledge of Christ, or else the purchase is plainly in vain; but all men
have not those things declared to them, in and by the Word, etc.

To this Argument many things may be answered,

1. That it concludes not against the Assertion that he undertook to oppose, in
lib. 1. cap. 1. page 4. viz. That Christ gave himself a ransom for all, and
every one. But against his intention of purchasing pardon and reconciliation
for All, to be enjoyed upon condition of believing, which is a fallacy that we
call Ignoratio elenchi.

2. Again, The Antecedent of the Major contains, and crowds together diverse
questions, which is another fallacy in arguing. As with this, Of Christ's dying
for All, it jumbles Gods intention of his procuring Reconciliation and Pardon,
and the intention of bestowing it, and upon what condition. Now these are three
distinct questions, viz. First, Whether Christ died for All? The thing he set
himself to oppose. Secondly, Whether in dying for them he procured
Reconciliation, and forgiveness for all? And Thirdly, Whether he procured it
for All, with intention that they all should enjoy it upon condition of
believing? The first of these, I absolutely affirm, and Mr. Owen denies. The
second, I thus affirm, That for the offense of Adam, and the condemnation that
came upon All therefore, he has procured justification or pardon for All; so
as that God deals with All after another manner, then according to its Merit,
and the Obligation to Death that came thereby. And for their other sins, there
is with him a treasury of Forgiveness and Redemption, full and free for All. So
as that (in answer to the third) All may have forgiveness of all their sins,
and Reconciliation upon believing in him; and it was his intention, that
whosoever of All (yea, were it All) believe in him, should have forgiveness of
sins, and be reconciled to God by him. Whence its propounded to men in general
upon that condition in the Gospel. But yet, neither is that condition upon
which God propounds it, to be confounded (as Mr. Owen here does) with the act
of purchasing it, and Gods intention therein; nor may we bind up God to that
condition in his dispensing it, nor his intention of forgiving and saving men,
in his giving Christ to dye for them: as if because All, or Any may have it
(according to the Gospel-tender) upon believing, therefore he intended that
none should have it that have not that believing condition. For I dare not say,
That God intended not that any Infant dying in its Cradle, or deaf man that
never heard any word at all, should have forgiveness or salvation by virtue of
Christ's purchase, because they have not that act of believing that comes by
hearing; whence also,

3. I deny the consequence of the major proposition, if by [ought to made
known] he means (as I suppose he does) that God ought or is bound so to have
done (for that word [ought] may be otherwise applied as we shall see anon) for
though its true that whosoever by hearing the word believes, shall have
remission, yet God nor tying himself in his dispensation thereof to that
condition (for them to die in infancy, and to be born and continue deaf to
death, should be necessary evidences of reprobation, which I think none is so
hardy as to affirm) it will follow that God is not bound to that making known
to every one the purchase and intention spoken of, lest he should be frustrate
of his intention. Besides that a man may possibly be brought to believe and
receive forgiveness, that never heard of that purchase and intention, and yet
their Faith may come by hearing too, a man may be brought to believe that God
is, and is a rewarder of them that seek him (which is as much as the Apostle
says is of necessity for coming to him, Heb. 11.6.) yea many have believed so
much that have not known of Christ's death, or that he should die, muchless of
the purchase and intention of God in his death. As the Disciples had faith, and
so had Cornelius too, such as in which they were accepted of God before they
understood that Christ should dye, and by dying purchase them forgiveness and
reconciliation, and doubtless many of the Ancients heard less then they of him,
as Rahab, Ruth, Naaman. and many others, so that at least a making known to all
(for so he intends) so much as he speaks of, would not necessarily appertain to
God, though the Antecedent were granted in the very form in which he puts it.
Indeed God binds us to preach and declare in these last days since the
ascension of Christ, this his purchase and intention, and men are bound to give
credit to it when preached, that so they might the better be brought to him,
and they that keep back that doctrine from men, if they perish, are guilty of
their blood: but God has not by any thing he has done, or by his intention
therein, bound himself to make known to every, one for whom he has so done,
that his intention and doing. A Prince may ransom from destruction a Nation
appoitned thereto for some default against their Sovereign, with intention that
every one that obeys his counsels shall enjoy the privileges of free subjects,
and so that they all shall have such privileges so obeying, and yet that may
put no engagement upon him, to cause every particular of them to know what he
has done for them, and what was his intention therein, especially too they
never knowing distinctly how they came to be liable to their ruin from which
he ransomed them; only he may propound (though at a distance from them, and as
to persons unknown to them) some advices and counsels, in obeying which he may
do to them as he intended, and in disobeying them frustrate them of the
otherwise intended benefits; yea and order punishment also to them without any
absurdity or crosness to his intention.

4. The words [ought to be made known] may signify, It ought to be made known
by men, such as are the messengers of Christ and preachers of the word, and
then indeed we grant it to be a truth, that All ought to have it made known to
them by us to the utmost of our opportunities and abilities; and so it reproves
Mr. Owen, and many other Ministers for their faultiness herein, because they
not only make not known to All without restrictions this good will and purchase
of Christ for them, but they on the contrary make it uncertain to men whether
Christ dyed for them or not, yea hinder and oppose the making known this good
will to All men; I would they would cease to do what they ought not, and do as
they ought.

5. But then, The minor of this Argument is faulty and contains a Quartus
terminus, for whereas he should have assumed thus, But this purchase, good will
and intention, ought not to be made known to All, he has assumed thus, All
have not these things made known to them in and by the word: But who sees not
that between what men have, and what they ought to have, there is a great
difference? God may have done what appertains to him, not only in giving to
Adam and Noah the knowledge of his truth, though less clearly, that it might be
propagated by one to another sucessively in all their generations, but also and
that more clearly, in giving it forth to his servants to be made known to All
Nations for the obedience of faith, willing all to come to the knowledge of it,
as indeed he has done Romans 16.25, 26. 1 Timothy 2.4. and yet those to whom this
charge of divulging it appertains, being slothful and negligent herein, and
others not coming to it, when, and as held forth to them, as in many divulgers
and others is too true, they may not have what they ought to have, and might
have had, had the will of God aforesaid been obeyed by them. So that this
argument the further we look into it, the less hurt it does us; But I shall say
no more to it, lest I be too tedious: many passages he has about it, are but
the same with what we had lib. 2. cap. ult. where I have answered them, and
shall not need here again further to repeat. Only whereas he says, The Spirit
forbad the Apostles to go to sundry places with the word, as if God would not
have some hear of his word, though they might have had it: the places he aims
at are, Acts 16.6, 7. where Paul assaying to go to Asia and Bithinia, were
forbidden; this is to be noted, that that was not because he would not have the
Gospel preached to them, but because the Apostle not being able to go two ways
at once, and there being others whom God pleased to prefer, sent them elsewhere
first, ordering others to preach at those places, or the same to preach there
when the other work was over: therefore the Holy Ghost as if he would give us
an account of this action, to prevent our rash misprisions particularly names
these places to have been peculiarly preached to; As concerning Asia we have a
fuller testimony then of any other place, Acts 19.10. All that dwelt in Asia
heard the word of the Lord; and for Bithinia, there were many believing people
scattered abroad in it, as appears in 1 Pet. 1.1. who were to shine as lights,
and show forth the praises of him that called them in the places where they
lived.

Again, whereas in the conclusion of this Argument he says, That Paul tells us
that by the works of creation they might be led to know his eternal power and
Godhead: but that they should know any thing of a Redemption and a Redeemer,
was utterly impossible.

I answer, first, That its not material. If Christ interposing himself between
them and the blow of justice, preserved and rescued them from that, and then
gave them no other hints of light and knowledge of God, but in his works, then
he required the less of them again, for where less is given less is looked for
again; he looked but that they should feel after him so discovered, and
glorify him with thankfulness as they came to know him, as in Act. 17.27. Romans
1.19, 21. come to him as believing that he is, and is a rewarder of them that
seek him. And its for not answering that little that he faults and condemns
them; he not judging them according to that they had not, nor according to the
sin of Adam that I can find, but according to their imprisoning, abusing and
not liking to retain and yield to what they had, as is plain, Romans 1.18, 19,
20, 21, 28. And its all one to give less and look for less, as to give a great
deal more, and look for more in point of Retributive justice: and then,

2. It was not impossible for them to come know a Redemption and a Redeemer,
because that God that was evidenced to them in the works of Creation and
Providence, being glorified according to those hints given, was able and
sufficient to have revealed the Mediator, as he did reveal him to Job and
Abraham and to many others. All the Scriptures cannot bring a soul to Sonship
in Christ or cause it to apprehend the glory of Gods Grace, so as to transform
it into his Image, by all a man's reading and searching into them, without God
add his Spirit: is that a good excuse for a man to slight the Scriptures? No,
let men attend to God in his means afforded, and do what he wills them, and
inables them to, and leave the success to God; if he cannot show men by his
Spirit, that that the means cannot without it, then the case is altered; but
being he can do what he will, they are guilty of depriving themselves of
greater mercies, that bury their talent in the earth, and improve not what they
have given them in mercy. He that is unfaithful in a little, would be so in
greater things, and he cannot plead against God for the insufficiency of those
means to reveal Christ, who yielded not to obey God in the means, who had all
sufficiency in himself beyond the means to do him good, and bring him to Christ.

CHAP. II.
An Answer to three other Arguments in his second Chapter.

HIs third Argument is thus. If Christ died for All that is purchased and
procured eternal redemption for All, then he either did it absolutely or
conditionally: but he did it neither absolutely nor conditionally. To which I
Answer, That he again jumbles together the purchase of Christ with his
intention of bestowing, and puts all this into the act of his dying for men,
which is fallacious. We say, That Christ died as a ransom for All, from what
was upon them, as binding them over to destruction (previous to his coming) and
obtained eternal Redemption in himself of the Humane Nature from all those
miseries that it was plunged into, with power of dispensing thereof to All or
Any; and this purchase of it into himself was absolutely, but the dispensing it
is conditional, viz, upon their coming to him for it. There is no condition in
his purchasing any thing on our part, but there is condition in the propounding
the things purchased. Now Mr. Owen confounds these together, and therein is
fallacious, as in the former Chapter we have noted. As for Christ's purchasing
faith, (that is, engaging God to give it to this or that particular) as we have
said something to it, in cap. 4. lib. 2. So the fuller speaking to it, we
reserve to its proper place in lib. 3. cap 4. The necessity of making known the
condition upon which he is to dispense life, we spoke to in the former Chapter,
as also of men's power in themselves to perform it, we have formerly spoken to.
I shall only add this here, That if God gives men means of faith, and
evidences to them that there they ought to seek him, and they put away those
means, they justly deprive themselves of that divine supernatural power for
working faith on God and Christ, which, had they yieleed to the means, and to
the light in them, he might probably have wrought. If Naaman refuse to wash in
Jordan, which God gave him power to do, God may justly deny to heal him, nay,
he deprives himself of that Almighty power that God was ready to give forth in
those waters to heal him. And so, If the Israelites refused to look to the
Brazen Serpent, etc. Such is the case here, Faith comes by hearing, and that is
of the Word of God. Now if God give men his Word, and opportunities of hearing
it, and they either refuse to hear, or when God gives them to discern something
in hearing, shut their eyes, and refuse to look upon it, they are justly
deprived of that faith, conversion, and healing, which would have followed. And
that by such doings men do often deprive themselves of such further favors that
God would have bestowed on them, is evident in Psalm. 81.11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
Isai. 48.17, 18. If they had hearkened to his voice, then he would have subdued
their enemies, and their peace should been as the rivers, and their
righteousness as the waves of the sea, etc. If men refuse to do that that God
gives them power to do, its just with God to withhold that that is the proper
work of his power to do. So that the case here is not with men, as in such
comparisons as Mr. Owen makes of conditions impossible in themselves, and in
which they with whom they are possible will not help. For in this matter God
both prevents with grace, and makes things possible, and requires obedience to
that possibility, and is also ready to help, and promises to help in the day of
that his grace, and therefore exhorts not to receive his grace in vain; only
he deals not with all in a compulsise or like powerful way. But as with Israel
in the Wilderness, He was with them, and went before them, and would have led
them safely to Rest, and they followed Him, but refusing to follow Him, as they
might have done, He gave them over; So God, in his preventing Operations, does
give men power and liberty to means propounded, and is at hand to make those
impossibilities possible, and attainable; but men (as the Israelites of old)
say, the walls are high, and we cannot enter, and will not walk out in what God
gives them, nor go in that way where they might experiment him, making rough
ways plain, and hard things easy, and so they miss of the experiments of his
Divine Power that are needful for them, and then they fault Him for it. As the
Proverb says, The foolishness of a man perverts his way, and then his heart
frets against the Lord, Prove. 19.2. And a sluggard refuses to put forth his
strength God gives him, and then says, to color over the matter, A Lion is in
the way. Just so is it here, men stifle, and refuse to walk in what they have
power and freedom from God to, and then they put it off with this, The business
is too hard for them, and God gave them not grace to it. And truly Mr. Owen,
and many other such Preachers do frame such excuses to their mouths, telling
them, That either God purposed to work faith in them or not, If not, its in
vain for them to wait, nay, he would that they should not believe: his not
willing it, is a willing it should not be. His calling upon them to believe, is
but as if the King should bid the Captives at Algiers free themselves from
their enemies, that they can in no wise do, and then he will pay a ransom for
them. If he did, then they must have it, they shall not need to take any care
about it, etc. which passages as they contain notable falsities and
dissimilitudes, as may appear by what is already said; so they serve to
justify the wicked in what ever they do, putting this plea into their mouths,
even as high as the sin of Adam it self, God willed not that it should be
otherwise, Therefore he would have it thus, and, God afforded no Grace for that
he called for, etc. contrary to his own sayings, I would have gathered, and ye
would not, yea I purged you, and ye were not purged, etc. But I pass it.

To that Position of some, That God bestows faith on some, and not on others,
He asks, Did Christ purchase that distinguishing love or not? To which I say,
That if by love he means the Will of God, that some should be effectually
brought in rather then others (as he, with others, defines it to be Velle bonum
creaturis) I do not see any such thing held forth in Scriptures. I find that
Christ came to do Gods Will toward men, not to purchase him to will more to
these then those men. If by Love he means the actings forth of his good will
upon men according to Gods purpose, then I say, by satisfying for, and removing
the sin that obstructed, and stood between us and good things, he opened a way
for God, according to his good will, to bestow things on men, and so may be
said to purchase their bestowing. Nor yet follows it (as Mr. Owen objects) That
those that are saved, have no more to thank Christ for, then those that are
damned, contrary to Rev. 1.5. For those that God peculiarly brings in to him,
those he taking as a special gift of him, washes in his blood (as in that
Scripture mentioned) and so sets them free, and actually brings them, or buys
them off from their pollutions, idols, bondages, and makes them clean, and so
presents them to his Father, as meet for his Fellowship and Delight, to them he
gives his Spirit, imparts his Mind, gives them the privileges and inheritance
of sons with himself, etc. And is this nothing worth the believers thanking
Christ for, more then they have that perish? Though for the bringing to Christ,
the Apostles manner is in especial to give thanks to the Father, Giving thanks
to the Father, who has made us meet to partake of the inheritance of the
Saints in light, who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and
translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son, Col. 1.13, 14. For Christ's
purchasing faith, which Mr. Owen repeates over and over, in almost every
Chapter, We shall meet with it more fully in Chap. 4. to which I refer it. And
to conclude the Answer to the Argument, Christ's dying conditionally, I
disclaim. His death was absolutely undertaken, and undergone for All, but the
life in him is on condition propounded in the Gospel unto All.

His fourth Argument is this. If God by his eternal purpose distinguished All
men into two sorts, and Christ is peculiarly affirmed to die for one of those
sorts, and no where for them of the other, then he did not die for All. But God
has so distinguished All men into two sorts, Loved and Hated, Elect and
Reprobate, Church and World, etc. and says, he died for the one, but never for
the other, Ergo. etc.

Both these Propositions are weak and erroneous, Major; for its possible that
God making such a distinction of men, might yet give his Son to die for both
sorts, especially if that distinction, though made in his purpose, be made upon
man as fore-considered, Ephesians. 1 4. Romans 8.29.30. Jer 6 30. 2 These. 2.10.11.
in a condition consequent to Christ's Death for them, as that of Election and
Reprobation is. Election beging in Christ, and Predestination to conformity to
him in his Death, etc. which presupposes him as interposing and dying, as the
Prototype, to which they are to be conformed; and Reprobation (though according
to Gods free Will) yet for rejecting Christ, or the mercies afforded through
him; for of no other to damnation do I read in Scripture. Its just such another
Argument as this. If God have distinguished All men into two sorts, good and
bad, godly and wicked, righteous and unrighteous, and says peculiarly of one
sort; He preserves and keeps them, and never says so of the other, then he does
not afford preservation to All; But he has so distinguished men; And he says,
The Lord preserves the righteous, and preserves all that put their trust in
him, etc. But never says, He preserves them that hate him, the unrighteous and
wicked, etc. Therefore he does not preserve any of them.

2. His Minor is false, That he no where says, He died for the other sort. For
first, He that says he died for All, and the whole world, includes both sorts,
and if he express his death in words, including both sorts, then its equivalent
to his distinct mentioning of both. As he that says, God made of one blood all
Nations that dwell on the earth, and that he is the Savior of All men, says as
much, as if he had said, He made, and is the Savior of good and bad, righteous
and sinners, godly and ungodly, elect and reprobate, etc. and yet the Scripture
never uses those expressions. Now the Scriptures use as general expressions
about Christ's death, as it does about the Creation, All, every one, the benefit
to All men, the propitiation for the whole world; and therefore having these
general expressions, comprehensive of both, it is as much as both distinctly.
2. This distinction is in part thus, The Church and the world, believers and
the unjust, godly and ungodly: now the Scripture uses these expressions that
are in the worser part of this distinction, as The ungodly, Romans 5.6, 8. The
unjust, 1 Pet. 3.18. The world, 2 Cor. 5, 19. 1 John 2.2. False teachers that
bring upon themselves swift destruction, 2 Pet. 2.1. So that his Minor is
evidently false.

If it be Objected, That its never said, He died for the Reprobate. I answer,
No more have we this expression, He died for the Elect. If that its never said
For the vessels of Wrath, so it is never said For the vessels of Mercy, etc. I
say these expressions are not in the Scriptures. And indeed there is good
reason it should not be said for Reprobates, Goats, vessels of Wrath, etc.
because God gave not Christ for them as such; no more then its said, He created
Reprobates, Devils, ungodly Men, because they were not such as created by him,
but they after declined from him, and were rejected by him. So we say Christ
dyed not for men as Reprobates, Goats, appointed to wrath, for they were the
objects of these Decrees as viewed in an after-condition, as neglecting,
refusing and rejecting, the goodness of God and grace afforded through Christ's
mediation; for that he says in answer to our exception, that its no where us
only, sheep only, etc. we have taken it off before. Creation and preservation
and resurrection and judgment, are also spoken of and applied to Israel and
believers, when they are spoken of with some distinction from, and opposition
to others, and yet in none of them are those expressions sufficient to prove
that they are applicable to them only. One instance for Creation we gave in,
Isa. 43.14, 15. there is another like it in Isa. 64.8. We are the clay and thou
art the potter, and yet the whole precedent part of the Chap. with the latter
end of the former, speaks in a distinguishing way between the people of God and
their adversaries. So for preservation, The Lord preserves the faithful Psalm.
31.23. and the Lord preserves all them that love him, and yet there are
oppositions between them and others, so for judgment, Deuteronomy. 32.36. The Lord
shall judge his people, and they distinguished from their enemies. So for
Resurrection, Romans 8.9, 11. there is an opposition of them that have not the
Spirit of Christ in them, and them that have; and its said, If the Spirit of
Christ dwell in you he shall quicken your mortal bodies: Whether from those and
the like expressions its safe to say, God created and preserves none but his
people Israel, the righteous, etc. will quicken the bodies of and judge none but
his people, and such as have Christ's spirit dwelling in them, I leave to any
rational man to judge. And whereas he says, By the same reason in other places
when its said Christ is the the way, the life, the resurrection, It pleased God
that in him should all fullness dwell, We might except too, and say, its not
said, Its he only and in him only. I answer the case is unlike, For if the
Scriptures say so in other places, or extend it not in any other place to
others, its boldness to extend it; but if the Scripture in other places affirms
it of others, we may then well speak against the putting in an only, to limit
other Scriptures. The first is the case of those places, the latter of this in
controversy, so that this exception is very answerable; as for his confidence,
that It may be further urged: when and where it is so, I hope I shall further
answer it. In the mean time I have said enough to show the vanity of this
Argument.

5. His fifth Argument is, That the Scripture no where says Christ dyed for all
men, which is vain and evidently false, as was showed lib. 2. chap. 3. The
expression is plain, the righteousness of one (which I think all must grant to
be his obedience to the Death) to All men to justification of life, (...). So
he is the propitiation for the whole Worlds sins, Joh. 2.2. So the expression
in 1 Timothy 2.6. and Heb. 2.9. and 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. are equivalent to an express
mention of All men, as has been showed; And its against reason to say (as Mr.
Owen intimates) that the Apostle there means all his Elect, his Church,
children; seeing in those places where those expressions are, there is no
mention of Election or Elect, Church, or Believers, to which the words may
rationally be joined, and its against reason to think that the Apostle in his
writing should more respect other writings, other Books or Chapters to refer
his Adjectives to some words in them, or to some following verses in the same
Chapters, then to such substantives as he in the scope and drift of those
Scriptures in which those Adjectives are, and in the preceding verses of it was
manifestly speaking about, which in those places, its manifest are Men. Besides
we might retort (and let Mr. Owen mind it) that no Scripture says in terminis,
Christ dyed for his Church, Children, Elect, no one such expression: that in
John 11.52. (which he points to) is not, He dyed for the children of God, but
that he might gather into one the children of God. In Ephesians. 5.26, 27. (his other
proof) its, He gave himself for his Church, which might be in exchange, thus,
He gave himself to her to be hers, that she might be his, holy to him. So Acts
20.28. He purchased the Church by his blood, that is by the preaching and
presentation of his blood, (foreshed) with the benefits thereby ratified to all
that believe, and so gathered in or acquired and obtained (as the word
(...)signifies properly) them to be his Church. So that we might as colourably
deny those sayings, as he That Christ dyed for All men, to be the Scriptures
expressions. But enough has been said to this fore-answered vain and false
Argument.

CHAP. III.
An Answer to his third Chapter containing two other Arguments.

HIs sixth Argument is, " That for whom Christ dyed, he dyed as a Sponsor in
their stead: But he dyed not so for all, etc. How much he puts into the word
Sponsor, I know not well, but in their stead he dyed I grant; though his proofs
might be questioned whether they will evince it. A man may die for another, that
is, for his sake to do him good, when the other man perhaps should not have
dyed had not he dyed, and so not in a way of commutation: and if he might in
any way dye for all, and not so for all, then his major is invalid; but yet I
say I will grant that and deny his minor, but then he says it will follow.
That, 1. He freed them all from the anger and wrath of God, and guilt of death
which he underwent for them. To which I say that will not follow, It will
follow then, that he freed them from the death they should have dyed, but not
from all the anger or displeasure that occasioned him to sentence to that death
as in this case. A malefactor of an evil disposition is condemned to dye for
some evil fact; the day determined, and way prescribed; another steps in and
entreats for his life, to see if clemency may win him, or however that he may
be more excuseless if he persist after this mercy showed in his wickedness to a
new condemnation, and whereas the sentence is to be executed, he tenders
sastisfaction, perhaps to die for him: upon this the others life is given him,
but that the other being ill disposed must needs be now made a favorite, or
all the Kings anger wholly turned from him, it follows not; he may testify yet
such displeasure against him, as ill-conditioned: as to let him live at a
distance from him, and not put all his anger or displeasure with him apart, so
as to bring him into his favor and fellowship, till this his accepting another
for him, and giving him conveniences for life though at a distance, with other
means for winning him to a better disposition, work upon him and make him
better. So when Joab had mediated for Absalom, and the King had reversed his
sentence of Banishment, yet he was not well pleased with him. Suppose Joab had
done it by exchange, become a banished man that Absalom might be called home,
it would not follow that therefore David must receive him into his Court and
make him a favorite, not being changed in his disposition: Indeed he could not
justly banish him and the other too, accepting that change for him, but he
might justly yet show displeasure toward him, and only receive him into favor
as he submits to him. So is the case here, Reconciliation (and Justification
with admission into favor) suppose more then only satisfaction by way of
commutation of punishment. It presupposes also the parties submission to, and
compliance with him that he is Reconciled to. Reconciliation is when two
parties agree, not when one accepts the punishment of a third for a seconds
fault, he still retaining his evil disposition. And when men are Reconciled,
that is, brought to Gods terms and into Gods favor, then he justifies them, so
as to pronounce them and accept them as righteous. Therefore let this be minded
that I lay down as a positive truth. That though Christ suffered by way of
commutation of penalty (and therein sustained acts of displeasure from God
against the sin of man) yet he did not suffer by way of commutation of
affection; that is, God was better pleased with his Son in all his suffering,
when his humane nature was under all its punishment, then with any man
unconverted, while unconverted, though Christ has dyed for him, and he be
exempted from that punishment. He was wel-pleased in his Son, in that he bare
all our sufferings, and he is angry with those for whom he suffered while not
submitted to him. And indeed if Mr. Owen thinks that Christ suffering for men's
sins, takes off all wrath and anger from those for whom he suffers, then I
would have him tell me, whether Christ suffered not for all the sins of the
Elect? I know he says Yes: Then I demand whether any anger of God comes or lies
upon any of them at any time? If he say No, then he speaks contrary to many
Scriptures, and to his own contests with the Socinians in chap. 8. and 9. If
Yes, then he overthrows his own inferences here, and shows that he goes too
far, when from the minor granted he infers, " Then they reconciled, justified,
and imputed righteous, etc. And in this also is answered that objection from
Joh. 3.36. The wrath of God abides on him. That is, God never comes to be at
one with and welpleased with him, nor he ever comes to see life. As if Joab
changing sentence of banishment with Absalom, and Absalom when called home
refusing by all loving Arguments to submit himself to David, David's
displeasedness with him abides, and some testimonies of it (as keeping him at a
distance) abide on him, he never admits him to see his face; yea for persisting
in Rebellion after this favor showed him, He takes away his life from him. In
which also his second inference with the several branches of it are answered,
as also they are before, lib. 1. chap. 2. for whereas he infers that 2. Then
Christ made satisfaction for the sin of all and every man; Its granted, as to
that or those sins that brought that sentence of death upon men, which
occasioned, and (as it were in the order revealed) required Christ's coming to
satisfy for them, that lire might be afforded to men and goodness extended to
their persons. See chap. 3. lib. 1. But his Assumption here ( viz. That he has
not satisfied for all the sin of All, contains a quartus terminus, as I appeal
to learned judgment. Joab might by commutation have satisfied to the penalty
upon Absalom, imposed for all his evil past, and yet it follows not from
thence, that in that commutation (supposed) he satisfied for whatever should
follow his return from banishment; and so his after-rebellion. His three
following reasons then brought to prove that Christ satisfied not for all the
sins of every man, fall as so many prevarications with his Assumption. As for
Christ's satisfying justice for them that were in hell before, we have answered
it in chap. 2. lib. 1. we might a little alter his simile and illustrate it
thus. A company of malefactors being condemned to die, one promises such a sum
of money for their lives and freedoms from that sentence, obtains it, the
sentence is reversed, they are provided for and preserved, and greater favor is
proffered to them upon terms of compliance with him against whom they had
sinned; many of them rebel a second time, and are taken and condemned anew and
executed, others of them are won and become obedient subjects, and all this
before the promised payment is performed. I ask now; seeing he that bought
their lives had his bargain for that he compacted for, shall it be thought
injustice for him who upon that promise spared their lives, to demand his
Covenants, because they being then spared, afterward rebelled, and were anew
condemned and executed? the case is like here: If God gave such and such favors
to men upon Christ's promise of payment, shall not he pay for it upon whose
score he gave them, what ere in the after estate become of them? His Dilemma is
the same verbatim which we had in Chap. 3. Lib. 1. Where we gave it its answer.

His seventh Argument is, For whom Christ dyed, I conceive that's true, for I
think his dying for them was an high act of Mediation or coming between God and
them. " But (says he) He is not Mediator for All, because then he must be
Priest too for them, which he brings no proof for. Joab mediated for Absalom,
yet was no Priest for him; neither proves he that he is not Priest for All, not
that he applies not that deliverance from the death that they should have dyed,
which by his dying he procured for them, to All. So that here we have a
groundless, proofeless Argument: though he says it neeeds no proof, yet I
think it needs more proof then he can bring for it in every particular. Object.
But this makes but Christ at most an half Mediator. Ans. But why so? If a man
undertake to mediate for another to have his life spared, and obtains what he
undertakes, shall that be imputed an injury in him, because in so doing he did
not also undertake he should never sustain any anger for any after-folly? If
Christ do his work he undertook in Mediation, and that to satisfaction to the
justice and will of God, who shall dare to call him but a half-Mediator;
because many a man refusing to make use of his Mediation in higher things, that
is, to come to God by him, deprive themselves of the further acts of it, which
he tells them they shall have if they will be ruled by him. A King and some
Subjects are at difference, they are attached, condemned, and must die. A third
between them comes and procures that the sentence shall be reversed, and favor
showed them from the King, and then goes to them and tells them, if they will
follow his counsel and be ruled by him, as he has procured their release from
that sentence, so he will also bring them to be favorites and familiars, some
listen to him and are ruled by him, and he performs his word to them to the
utmost; others reject all his counsels, will not be beholden either to him or
the King; being spared break out into new insolences against them both, and
for that are again condemned and executed. Shall their wickedness be cast as an
imputation upon him, and make him be styled but an half-Mediator, because they
refuse the better half of the benefit they might have had by him?

If this be rational, let rational men Judge. I might illustrate it by the case
of Moses mediating for the Israelites, and yet refusing to pray for, nay
praying against the Rebels in Numb. 16. But I leave it, the matter being so
evident.

CHAP. IIII.
An Answer to his eighth Argument, in which is considered whether Christ
purchased faith for those he dyed for.

HIs eight Argument is thus. If Christ's blood does wash, purge, Ergo He dyed
not for All.

The consequence of the major that he conceives undeniable, is undeniably
vicious, nor is it any way proved by him. The proposition being reduced is
thus. They whom Christ dyed for, are or shall be sanctified and purged by his
blood. And so it being indefinite, its to be construed Particularly or
Universally: if Particular, its peccant in this, that the major in the second
figure (in which this syllogism thus reduced, is) ought all to be Universal.
If construed Universally, as he must needs intend it (or else he says nothing)
then I deny it, and he no where proves it, that All that Christ dyed for, are
or shall be parged by his blood. The consequence is like this. If they that
came out of Egypt, entered into Canaan by the river Jordan, Then they only came
out of Egypt that passed over the river Jordan. But let us view the proofs of
his major, as Universally taken. He assays to do it, first by viewing the
types, and then secondly by plain expressions: but first he halts in laying
down his probandum, for in stead of this, That all that Christ dyed for are or
shall be so purged, he propounds to prove, that The blood of Christ is
effectual for all those things, washing purging, sanctifying; which I will
grant him, where it is received by faith, but I say that comes no more up to
the thing to be proved, then if a man should affirm, That all that God brought
out of Egypt were preserved and kept till they enjoyed Canaan, and then for
proof produce some Scriptures that show that those that followed God in his
leadings of them, and believed in him, were so preserved, etc. But let us see
his proofs. And first, From the types he says, That the Apostle says that the
expiation-sacrifice legally sanctified the unclean, as is expressed Heb. 9.13.
But by his leave the Apostle says not, It sanctified them all for whom it was
a sacrifice, but them whom it sprinkled, the words are, sprinkling the unclean
sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh; not, Being offered for the unclean,
sanctifies, etc. But Mr. Owen says, " These are never divided though
distinguished: but I see no word to disprove their being divided, though he
says he was about it. Let us see if we can find any thing for proof of it; we
will then appeal to the Law of the expiation-offering in Numb. 19. There we
first find a Commandment to take a red heifer and offer her up, and then
gather the ashes and keep them, and its said, they shall be for The
Congregation of the children Israel for a water of purification; the sacrifice
then was for a preparation of a purifying water for the Congregation; here is
no exception or exclusion of any in that: That pertained to the Congregation,
and then he tells them how they should purify themselves with it, and in what
cases; but now mark what he says in verse. 20. The man that shall be unclean,
and shall not purify himself with it, that sold shall be cut off from the
Congregation. It seems then God supposed the application divisible from the
preparation of it, and appoints a punishment for those that refuse its
application; Cutting off from the Congregation. It seems he was of it before,
and ought to have been sprinkled and sanctified with it, the refusal of which
and presuming to approach to God without it, was to be punished with cutting
off from the Congregation. To which the Apostle I conceive alludes in Heb.
12.24, 25. Ye are come to the blood of sprinkling, take heed that ye refuse not
him that speaks; 2 Pet. 1.2.
as in another place the believers are said to be chosen to the obedience and
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus. Now unbelievers are disobedient, and in what
but in not yielding up themselves to God and Christ to be sanctified and
cleansed by his blood? So that Mr. Owen has got nothing by that legal typical
expiation: his after exception about the Antitype to this, we shall speak to in
its due place. Let us now see the express sayings. His first is that in Rom
6.5, 6. If we have been planted together with him into the similitude of his
Death, we shall be also in the similitude of his resurrection, knowing that our
old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve sin. But quorsum haec? how does this prove that
all that Christ dyed for, are, and shall be sanctified by his blood? Why he
tells us, That the fifth verse says, That a participation in the death of
Christ, shall be accompanied with a conformity to him in his Resurrection. But
what mean you, Sir, by a participation in it? an having part in it, or being a
part of the object of it? If so, which word in ver. 5. says so? That says, He
that's planted into the likeness of it, not, he that Christ died for. Surely if
Mr. Owen had dealt fairly, he should have kept the same terms in both branches
of his Assertion, as the Apostle does, thus, Conformity to Christ in his death
shall be followed with a conformity to him in his Resurrection. Sure if
planting into the likeness of him, signify conformity to him in the latter
branch (as it does) it signifies so in the former too, it being the very same
manner of expression. But Mr. Owen has a little too much art of making
quidlibet de quolibet. But what follows? The words of the later verse yield a
reason of the former Assertion. Because our old man is crucified with him, that
the body of sin might be destroyed, etc. [What gathers he from that? why this]
That our sinful corruption and depravation of Nature, are by his Death and
crucifying, meritoriously slain and disabled from such a rule and dominion over
us, as that we should be servants to them. But suppose this was the Apostles
sense, That Christ merited, that such as are planted into the likeness of his
Death by Baptism, or conformed to him in his Death, should have their sins
subdued in them: will it therefore follow, That he says all that he died for
shall be so conformed to him, or shall have their sins subdued in them? Let
Reason judge of that Consequence. But which word in the Text signifies a
Meritorius slaying? I suppose he means the word (...). If so, I deny it. That
signifies there a real crucifying in us, according to that in Gal 5.24 They
that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, etc. That is, have nailed it upon
the Cross, (that is, the Grace and Spirit of God, which is cross to it, and
lusts against it, they have given it up to be mortified by the Spirit) that so
the body of Sin might be destroyed; It is not destroyed yet, nor does the
Apostle say so, as well he might, if he had spoken of a meritorious slaying;
for what concerns the matter of Merit, that is already accomplished, though the
thing merited be not. But when was this crucifying? I answer, when the soul was
brought to give up it self to Christ, and not before, Romans 6.4, 5.
when it was Baptized into his Death (not in the outward only, but chiefly in
the inward spiritual Baptism, 1 Pet. 3.21.) and so begun to be planted into the
likeness of it. But perhaps he will say, The word is, Crucified with Christ,
and therefore must be referred to what was done in his crucifying. I answer no,
It signifies but a companionship in being crucified as he was, or after his
similitude, not a thing done when he was crucified, as Col. 2.12. we are said
to be buried with him; but when was that? He says not, in his being buried, but
in Baptism, which is a thing not inwardly accomplished, no, nor begun before
believing. And so, You that were dead in sins and trespasses has he quickened
with him; the quickening men up to hope in God, and bringing them from their
dead condition, in which before believing they lay without hope, is said to be
with Christ. Yea, when we suffer for Christ, and dye for his Name, we are said
to suffer and dye with him, 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. Romans 8.17. which are not to be
referred to the time of his suffering and dying, as if we then suffered and
died meritoriously with him. So that first express saying, is pressed too
injuriously to speak for Mr. Owen besides its proper intention. Again, He
brings 2 Cor. 1.20. All the Promises of God are in Christ Yea, and in him Amen.
Which says nothing that God has promised that All that Christ died for, should
be sanctified and cleansed from all their sins, but that in him all the
promises are surely to be met with. The Covenant we have spoken to before.
That's made, or rather promised to be made with the House of Israel, and the
House of Judah, of which household, men are not accounted, till brought to
Christ to believe, as is plain, Ephe. 2.12, 17, 18, 19. After Christ has
preached peace to us, and given us access to the Father, then we are of the
household of God, and fellow Citizens with the "Saints. The promise of
circumcising the heart (which he mentions as most famous in the New Covenant)
follows after obeying the voice of God in listening to his Son. Deuteronomy. 30.1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6. and so the Apostle intimates, 2 Cor. 3.16. When the heart turns to
the Lord, the vail shall be taken away, which I conceive, answers to
Circumcising the heart. As impertinent to his purpose is that in Heb. 9.23. of
purging the heavenly things, (except he prove, that All that Christ died for,
are heavenly men, even before believing, and before their calling to God with a
heavenly call) And that in Col. 1.14. of the believer brought to Christ,
receiving, and having the Redemption in him: with which agrees the 1 Cor. 1.30.
which says not all that he died for are made wise, redeemed, righteous, etc. by
him, but they that are in him (by faith, as see Romans 16 7.) have him in the
virtue of his blood, and by his Spirit, for wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption. As impertinent is his allegation of Heb. 2.14.
To destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil, that he might
free those that by reason of death (or through the fear of death rather) were
all their life time subject to bondage. No more is his Probandum proved by
that, then that all that Christ spoke to are saved, can be proved by that in
Joh. 5.34. These things speak I to you (you that had neither heard the voice of
God, nor seen his face, And who will not come unto me that ye might have life,
ver. 38.40.) that ye might be saved. Or from this, That he brought us into
Egypt that he might bring us into Canaan, that all that came out of the one
entered into the other. Nor is there any more consequence from the other places,
mentioned in Ephesians. 5.25, 26. and Tit. 2.14. He gave himself for his Church
that he might sanctify it, provided in his death for the perfecting those that
should believe in him; Ergo All he died for shall be sanctified and saved. So
that the contrary to his Conclusion is true, that he has in no one place
proved what was by him undertaken.

But to take off this that we say, Many are not sanctified and purified by it,
because they believe not, and that's the reason why his death has not such
effects in them, not that Christ died not for them, therefore he undertakes to
prove, That Faith it self is a proper immediate fruit and procurement of the
death of Christ for all those for whom he died.

Quod si perficiat, fiet mihi magnus Apollo. But I fear it, for we see great
undertakings hitherto, but little performances; Parturientes montes, erepentes
vero mures. Before he come to perform his promise, He premises some things
which we must grant him, and shall as far as truth appears in them. He premises,

1. That what ever is freely bestowed upon us, in and through Christ, that is
wholly the procurement and merit of the death of Christ? But how proves he this?
why he says (but his sayings are no proofs) that nothing is bestowed through
him on those that are his which he has not purchased, the price whereby he
made his purchase being his blood. If this saying were as firm as Scripture,
and somewhat firmer, yet it would not reach his Assertion: for he limits it to
those that are his; now by those that are his, is sometime meant his
peculiarly, owned by him as his, so Romans 8.9. And so I conceive Mr. Owen means
it, and then he denies not here but that something granted to others (not yet
so his, that yet have not his Spirit in them) though through him may not be his
purchase. But because his words are no proof, and as to the main matter, its
but Idem per idem, a repetition of his first saying, Let us carry it to his
Scripture proofs, which are, (1.) 1 Cor. 6. I suppose he means ver. 19, 20.
Your bodies are the Temple of the holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of
God, and ye are not your own, for you are bought with a price, Here is mention
made of buying them with a price, but no mention made of his buying the holy
Ghost, and their glorifying of God; and yet the holy Ghost was a gift freely
given them through Christ, much less of all things given them freely in him; so
that that proof reaches not. But then he adds out of Isai. 53. That the
Covenant made between his Father and him, of making out all spiritual blessings
to them that were given him, was expressly founded on this condition, that He
should make his soul an offering for Sin. But in viewing the place, I find no
such expressions. It appears but a tradition that that is a Covenant made
between the Father and Christ. For its not the Fathers speech to Christ, or
Christ's to Him; but the Prophets of Christ to the Father, or of both Father or
Son. When thou shall make his soul [or when his soul shall make] an offering
for sin, he shall see a seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of
the Lord shall prosper in his hand. He says not, My pleasure, as speaking in
the person of the Father. Nor does he say, because his soul shall put a
guilt-offering, or make an offering for sin, therefore he shall see a seed,
etc. But if his soul shall be so, or when it is so, then that shall follow.
Much less says he, that there was before that a people given him, that should
for that have all spiritual blessings made out to them. Indeed, in the twelfth
verse, there is a promise, and that grounded upon his intercession and
sufferings, but then the contents of it are not all good things to be given to
men, but a glorious portion to be given to Christ. So that he is deficient here
too in his proofs.

And yet I will tell him how I will grant him this, though he prove it not;
viz. that we had had none of those things, had not Christ suffered (I speak
according to what is revealed, for secret things appertain not to us.) He
opened the way and passage for all good things to come unto us, by removing the
sin that did obstruct, and hinder us of them. The earth, and we all in it were
dissolved, he bare up the pillars of it, and in him all things now stand
together. (I know not whether M. Owen will except, or will also include
Election, and Predestination to Sonship, for they are said also to be in, and
by Christ, Ephesians. 1.4, 5. I shall leave that to his consideration) but if, by
procuring and meriting, he means that he engaged God, and procured his good
will, that such things should be bestowed on us (especially if by us he mean
(as he must) all that he died for) so as that what ever God bestows on any by
Christ, he bestows it out of debt to Christ, and should be unjust to him,
should he bestow less on (or deal any otherwise with) any particular in point
of favor then he does: that I cannot but question till I see it better proved.

2. He propounds, That faith in men of understanding is of such absolute
indispensible necessity to salvation, that what ever God or Christ has done in
his oblation and intercession for all or some, without this in us, is (in
regard of the event to us) of no value, worth, or profit, but serves only to
increase, and aggravate condemnation, it being certainly true, That he that
believes not shall be damned (all which I conceive true, and what may be
granted him with those limitations specified of [men of understanding] and (in
regard of the event to us) especially where the Gospel is plainly preached,
that being evidently the meaning of our Savior in that last clause, viz that
the Gospel being preached by them, He that believes not (the Gospel so
preached and thereby in himself) shall be damned; and yet I deny not but both
in former times, and other cases, he that by the light afforded, was or is not
prevailed with to believe on God, and seek after him, and glorify him as power
was, or is vouchsafed thereto, shall be condemned also. But what infers he
hence? It follows) So that if there be in our selves a power of believing, and
the act of it proceed from that power, then certainly it is in our power to
make the Love of God and death of Christ effectual toward us or not; To that I
say, that no man does at any time believe but he has power to believe first in
himself, and in that power he acts; for the act of believing being an
intrinsecal act of the soul, the power in which the souls acts in it, must
needs be inward too, but I suppose he means so in our selves, as to be (...),
of our selves too; but so I say not that we have power in our selves, as merely
natural, without Grace preventing, and inabling us: And yet were it so, it
would not follow that then its in our power to make Christ's Death effectual to
our selves but as its the preventing assisting Grace of God that impowers the
soul to believe. So the soul acting in that power, it still remains in Gods
Power only to give it the promised efficacy, the soul in believing only puts
it self into such a posture, as in which it becomes the object of Gods Promise,
to make the death of Christ effectual to it. As suppose I promise an alms to a
poor man if he will come to my house for it, though it be in his power to ^ome,
yet its not in his power to make my promise effectual, that appertains to me,
and is only in my power still. From this that's said, his following conclusion
(viz. That this being the absolute necessity of faith, the cause of that must
needs be the prime and principal cause of salvation, as being the cause of
that, without which the whole would not be, and by which the whole is, and is
effectual) nothing harms us, we making God the prime Cause our faith, and the
Will be its freedom what it will, but instumental, and no instrumental
subordinate cause (as the Will of man however considered, must needs be the
whole man, and his Will being the Workmanship of God) though a causa sine qua
non and per quam totum, can be said to be the prime cause. As to instance that
in Acts 27.31. Except the Shipmen abide in the ship, the passengers could not
have been preserved. Their abiding in the ship was a cause of their
preservation, such a one as without which they could not have been preserved,
and upon which they were preserved, and yet, I hope, no man will be so
graceless, as to conclude that they or the soldiers that caused them to stay,
were the prime and principal cause of their preservation. So a poor man's asking
an alms may be a cause of his receiving an alms, and yet when another bounty
propounding an alms to him upon that condition, incourageth him to ask, and
gives him when he asks, though his Will be never so free in asking, yet it
cannot be looked upon as the prime cause of his receiving. So that this premise
too as it tends to conclude the act of the Will (from the former premises) to
be the principal cause of our salvation, though specious, is but fallacious and
erronius.

3. After both these (...)(as one that forgot what he undertook to prove,
instead of performing his task) He puts it to our option, to choose whether we
will answer directly and Categorically, whether Christ by his Death and
Intercession merited and procured faith for us or no. To this I say, as before,
that except Christ had died for us, there had neither been a fit object for us
sinners to believe on, nor an instrument fit to beget it by, nor a power to
work with that instrument to enable us thereunto. So that in that sense he did
by his death procure it for us, that is, removed that which hindered us from
having any of those; yet there too that he obliged God to give Us individually
faith, that is, to make us act faith in that object according to the power
given us in the medium or instrument, so as that if God had not given Us that
in our individual persons, he must have dealt injuriously with Christ, that I
leave for him to prove. In the Interim, That he obliged him to give it to All
he dyed for, that is, to cause them All to believe unto life eternal, I
Categorically deny; and expect his proof of it; before which he seems to me to
contradict his first premise, while he denies, That the granting a way of
salvation (by bringing life and immortality to light by the Gospel) in Christ
(which passage he ascribes to T. More p. 35.) was procured for us by Christ.
(To say nothing that I find no such passage in the place pointed to) why may
we not say, this way was procured for us by Christ? Did not he procure the
bringing life and immortality to light by the Gospel? Sure then not all
benefits bestowed upon us (for that is one and none of the least, which the
Apostle also ascribes to him in 2 Timothy 2.10.) and then neither did he procure
faith for us; for he that procures a thing must procure all requisites to the
working of that thing, or else he does not procure that thing. Now if he
procure not the bringing life and immortality to light, then he procured not
that we should have that by which faith is effected, for that's it that begets
faith, the appearing of light and immortality in the Gospel; faith I say
according to the present plainness of the Gospel: and so he has overthrown the
thing he fights for. Ah, but its a strange Contradictory Assertion that he
should procure a way to life in himself. [But why so?] because he is the
chiefest part of this way, and sure procured not himself by his own Death, etc.
But by that reason, he procured few things freely bestowed on us in and by
Christ, for then neither did he procure us Wisdom, Righteousness, Holiness, nor
Redemption; for all these he is called himself as much as he is called the Way.
See 1 Cor. 1.30. then he procured not our peace, for he is our peace, Ephesians.
2.14. He procured not our life, for he is our life, Col 3.4. But is it such a
strange thing to say, such a man got or procured himself to be made protector
to such a people, or to have the favor of admitting to or keeping out any from
the Kings ear, by such and such services and carriages? Surely no, And why then
is it so to say that Christ procured himself to be the Way to life for sinners
by suffering for them? Was he the way to life to us without his sufferings and
death? I suppose not: and if not, then he obtained that power and title by his
sufferings, Heb. 5.9.
through that way he became our way to life, by sufferings he was perfected,
and so became the Author of salvation eternal to all that obey him. And is
this such a strange Assertion? Sure I cannot but think it a just hand of God
upon men (as is prophesied Zech. 11.13. Isa. 29.9, 10, 13, 14. Jer. 8.8, 9.)
that because they slight Gods Word, the plain testimonies of Scripture, God
smites their eye that they cannot see reason. But to return to our purpose. I
deny, I say, that Christ procured (that is, engaged or obliged God) that all
should be brought to believe on him for whom he dyed, though we deny not that
he opened a passage for the grace of God to display and glorify it self; so
that He presents himself to men as good and powerful an object meet to be
looked to, and stayed on, as in John 5.8, 9, 10, 11. especially in the Gospel
as now published since the Appearance of Christ in the Flesh, which
presentation of himself to men as good, grations, powerful, etc. is the medium
and instrument for begetting faith according to the degree and measure of the
Revelation (as Rahab believed to justification by a lesser revelation of God
then Paul had, Josh. 2.10, 11, 12. with Heb. 11.31. and so Cornelius before
Peter's coming to him believed in a lower act by less light then Peter brought
to him, and the Ninivites by far lesser then the Jews rebelled against) now
that power accompanies these mediums too in their lesser or greater
dispensations, is evident, in that the Spirit is said to have preached to and
striven with men, even those that yet obeyed it not, Genesis 6 3. 1 Pet. 3 19. the
hand of the Lord was stretched out with his reproofs and councels Prove 1.24.
and in the effects it produces, as that they attain to some knowledge of God,
convincements, illuminations, etc. against which they often wilfully rebel and
close their eyes, and I say further, that God does in many by these means
effect faith, and bring them actually to believe, and I conceive many more
might have faith, did they not wilfully turn away from God, for I conceive a
fore going act propounded or enjoined to men (you may call it a condition if
you please) upon which they might be brought to believe. Whereas Mr. Owen asks
what that is? I answer, it is to listen to the voice of God, not hardening the
heart. So Isa. 55.3. hearken diligently and your souls shall live: by diligent
attendance to the voice of God the soul is quickened up to a life of faith and
hope in God, so Isa. 49.1. Listen O Isles unto me, and hearken ye people from
far, and in Psalm 95. To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.
Lift not up your reasons and understandings against the authority of God, be
swift to hear, hear him out and make not haste to speak and cavil against him.
As also to mind those demonstrations of his Divine Power and Goodness that he
affords, not winking with the eye, and wilfully turning from the light when he
makes it appear, or from the means of light, which beheld, would give us to see
what he holds forth to us, according to that Call, Hear ye deaf, and look ye
blind, that ye may see, Isai. 42.18. So, Behold my servant whom I have chosen.
ver 1. And look to me, and be ye saved, Isai. 45.22. And consider the works of
God, Job 37.14. That that is to be known of God, is in them manifested, etc.
Romans 1.19.20. But then, " Is not this same hearing and listening, believing? I
answer, No, Its but a mean to it. We are to attend that we may believe; by this
hearing, Faith and the spirit of it are given unto us. But it will be objected,
" Its obeying, and obeying is believing. So M. Owen. But there is a fallacy in
that; for neither is every Act of hearing, obeying; nor every Act of obeying,
the believing spoken of. As obeying in some acts follows believing, so in some
it may be but a tendency to the meeting with that which will cause us to
believe, and so believingly to obey. Take this Simile. Two men are at
controversy, suppose a Master and a Servant, the Master would have him do such
things as the servant does not, nor will, The Master begins to expostulate with
him, and to show him reasons for his demands, the servant hears what he says,
this is not yet an act of obedience to his Master, for perhaps he may yet prove
refractory, and more obstinate then before, and perhaps in hearing he may be
persuaded, and become obedient to him, being convinced and changed in mind by
what he hears, till which change his act of hearing will not denominate him
obedient, or pass for an act of obedience. Mr. Owen says, If we can propound a
condition for Faith that is not Faith, he will hear it, And yet I suppose he
will not think his hearing us propound it, an act of obedience to us at all.
But then he says, This is procured by by Christ or not. In the sense before
explained, we grant it procured; otherwise not: and that to the power of
exercising it is absolute, but as to the act of exercising of it, its
voluntary, and to the most, uncompelled, or unnecessitated. Many have absolute
power and ability given them of hearing and seeing the hints of Light and Truth
that come from God, that yet have it in their choice, whether they will act so
or so; and therefore are faulted for not acting as they might, for not choosing
the fear of the Lord, Prove. 1.29.30. For shutting their eyes against his Light,
and stopping their ears, Matthew. 13.15. Acts 28.27. And yet the cause of Faith
is not resolved into our selves, but into him that gives the power to hear, and
that speaks such words when we do listen, as overcomes our reason and our
hearts. Our faith is justly still ascribed to him. For if he spoke not we could
not hear, yea, if he gave us not power to hear; yea, if when we hear, he spoke
not suitable words, and exercised not power with his words, we should not yet
believe in him. So that Inference is as absurd as these, That because the blind
man went and washed in the Pool of Siloam, Therefore he was the cause of his
own healing, or Not Christ so much as he; and The ten Lepers were the cause of
their own cleansing, because they went on their own legs to show themselves to
the Priests at his Commandment. We avoid also all his following Consequences.
If by procuring Faith, he means his meriting and obliging God to cause all to
believe in him for whom He died. For denying that, it follows not either,

1. That Faith is an act of our own wills, and so our own as not to be wrought
by Grace, and that its wholly sited in our own power to perform that spiritual
act. No such thing follows upon that Proposition denied. (1.) That Faith is an
act of the Will, no man can deny, for in it the Will closes with an Object
propounded as good to be relied on, but that its not wrought by Grace is
clearly false, from what is said above. Its our act to hear, and yet not that
without the Word of God, buts it is Gods Act, even the act of his Grace, to
persuade us by what he speaks to lean upon him, and believe in him. Besides,
(2.) God might freely work it in some without being obliged to it by the Death
of Christ, the same love that led him to give Christ, may (sin being removed,
and the enmity being slain by Christ) work as much as it pleases, without being
obliged and tied to work it. Besides, (3.) Christ might oblige him to work it
in some, and yet not in all He died for. So that every way this is
inconsequent. And we neither,

1. Contradict any Scripture, Nor 2. Speak contrary to the nature of the new
Covenant of Grace, which indeed is sealed by Christ's Death to believers, but
says not, that Christ's Death obliged God to make this and that man, much less
all he died for, to believe. Nor is it

"3. Destructive to free Grace, but leaves it still as free to some, as if the
Death of Christ obliged him to bestow such grace upon them. Grace bestowed
without an obligation to it, is as free as grace bestowed upon obligation. Nor
set we up the power of Free will to the sleighting or undervaluing of
Free Grace. For we say that its grace that gives men that freedom to good they
have, and its men's abusing the freedom given by grace, and turning grace into
wantonness, and not improving it, but receiving it in vain, that brings
destruction upon many. Therefore we exhort men so to magnify grace, as to
believe and receive it, and that not in vain, and fault men because they will
abuse the liberty that God gives them of his goodness and grace, choosing their
own ways and not his, refusing to come to Christ, etc. And I think in such
language the Scripture speaks. Nor do we

4. Contradict the received doctrine of our natural depravedness and inability
to good. We say, that what power men have to good, they have it in and by Gods
striving with them, light manifested in them, and grace preventing them, and
that otherwise they are wholly unable to any thing that is good. Nor say we

5. That a natural faculty is able to produce of it self without some spiritual
elevation an act purely spiritual, no more then the blind man's natural act of
washing, was able to produce a supernatural gift of sight to him, and so
neither are we guilty of contradicting right reason, Nor

2. Must we resolve almost the sole cause of our salvation ultimately into our
selves, as being able to make all that God and Christ do to that end,
effectual or ineffectuall. This we have before disproved, And here say again,
That we leave it in the Power and Will of God to use what means he pleases to
any man, and how long, and compel whom he will to come in and believe. And yet
it follows not, that either Christ obliged God to do it to this and that man,
or much less to All for whom he died, the thing he should have proved; which he
further endeavors (after these premises) by the following Arguments, viz. The
death of Jesus Christ purchased holiness and sanctification for us (as was
proved at large, Argument 8.) But faith is a part of our sanctification and
holiness. Ergo, he procured faith for us. If this Argument should be wholly
granted, yet his Assertion goes unproved, viz. That he has purchased faith for
All for whom he died. The word Us being applicative may be diversely expounded,
as Us that are of this Nation, Us that are of this mind, Us that believe, etc.
and so its ambiguous. But if by Us he means All for whom he died, then the
Major with the eight Argument brought to uphold it, is already disproved.
Beside the Minor is questionable, whether Faith be a part of our
sanctification. We are sanctified by Faith, its true, that's the instrument
that receives it, but that no more proves it a part thereof, then that the
Israelites were healed by looking to the brazen Serpent, proves their looking
to it a part of their healing. The Church, Ephesians. 5.26.27. as a Church, are a
people called and believing, and them he is to sanctify, and will sanctify,
but that rather proves Sanctification a consequent of Faith, then Faith a part
of that sanctification.

All the fruits of Election are purchased by Christ, etc. The Major is
proof-less, and deficient too, for it should have been general as to the object
of his Death, thus, All the fruits of Election were purchased by Christ for All
he died for, or it concludes not: if he mean it so, then I deny it, as he takes
the word purchase, and desire his proof for it. Nor yet is the Minor without
exception. Luke 8.17.
For faith is scarce a fruit of Election in all that believe, except such as
believe for a time were elected for a time too. His proofs as they reach not
that, so neither are they all pertinent to what he brings them. In Ephesians. 1.4.
the Us is the Saints and faithful, ver. 1. if not of a narrower signification,
as distinct from the persons spoken to, as the 12, and 13. verses seem to
import, as first speaking of their own experiences and privileges, and then of
theirs. At furthest the Text extends it but to Saints, and faithful in Christ,
blessed with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in him. And so it shows
that it was according to the eternal purpose and counsel of God, that men in
Christ should be holy in him, and that in choosing Christ before the world was,
they also were by consequent chosen. He chose not either in Adam, or in the
Law, or in men's selves, but in See further about this place in the Epistle to
the Reader.
Christ a holy people for himself, which holiness is a consequent of men's faith
and being in Christ as was said before, and as is proved, 1. Cor. 1.30. I
question too, whether Romans 8.29. says, that unbelievers, as so eyed was the
object of predestination, and not men fore-known as future believers, to which
in time they are called. So that though that Scripture in a manner couples
them, yet it says not Faith (at least in all that believe) is the fruit of
Predestination or Election. Much more is that in 1 Cor. 4.7. impertinent to
that its brought for, for (as Beza also expounds it, and as any man that
seriously minds the Apostles duft in the three foregoing Chapters, and in the
verse before may see) the Apostle is not speaking of men differenced from the
world by believing, in comparison with the world, but of believers differing
from one another in gifts, and crying up one above another, according to that
difference, or lifting up themselves for that one above another. Nor is the
difference he speaks of in the act of believing, as if one had believed, and
another not, (as if he had said, Who made thee to receive) but in the matter of
their receipts, who had all received something. What have thou that thou have
not received? The meaning is, Believers are not to lift up themselves, or one
another, one above another, for their gifts, in that one has more, or better
gifts then another, and so not to fault and disown them that have less, and
dote on them that have more. But they may fault and disown them that believe
not, and commend them that do, and they have good warrant so to do, which they
might not, if the want of Faith in men was because there was none for them. A
company of poor beggars receiving alms, some six pence, some a shilling, have
no cause to brag one over another, and fault one another, when the gift was
free to each, and not out of desert to any more then other, yet they may fault
other beggars, and glory over them that were slothful, and refused to go where
they went for the alms. So that that's impertinent. That in Acts 13.48. seems to
have the greatest force for proof, that Faith is in some the fruit of Election.
The words are, And they believed, so many as were ordained to life eternal. The
word that we Translate Ordained, is (...), which is properly to rank, and
order; and often in the Writings of the Apostles is used to signify an actual
appointing or ordering to a thing, as Romans 13.1. The Powers or Authorities that
are, are ordained [(...)] ordered, or ranked, of or under God, (...). Some
expound it by (...), from Acts 22.10.14. as if it were foreappoined or
ordained. But the word is not (...), foreappointed, as if it spoke of an act of
Gods purpose and counsel in himself only, But (...). Besides that word (...),
signifies too an actual setting apart, or separating in time unto a thing, a
transient act of God upon a creature, as is plain Acts 26.16. (...). etc. I
have appeared to thee to ordain, or foreappoint thee a Minister, and Witness of
those things that thou have seen. Where (...), to foreordain, is a thing not
precedent but consequent to Gods appearing to him; for he appeared to him, he
says not, because I had fore-appointed thee, but to fore-appoint thee; which
was an actual ordering him into such a place or office, before he should or
could act in it, and so Ch^^s. in loca^.
Chrysostom interprets (...) by (...), separated to God, and the Syriack
interpreter by [Positi,] put into such an order. The sense then is, So many as
in the call of God, and by the coming of his Word unto them were separated from
the world unto, and disposed, ordered, or set for eternal life, believed. And
then its further to be considered, That the word Believed, signifies here, as
sometimes else, a continuing or abiding in believing, as in Joh. 2.11. His
Disciples believed on him; They were Disciples and had faith before, but now
they believed, that is, went on believing in him, they were furthered in their
faith, confirmed in it, and so in verse 22. They believed the Scripture after
the Resurrection. They did so in part before, but They believed there, is all
one with, they were fastened, or confirmed in believing them, they believed
them stronglier. So Joh. 17.8. They have known and believed, in opposition to
those that believed for a time, and then fell away; these continued believing.
And so in Acts 17.34. Some clave to Paul and believed, that is, abid constant
in the Doctrine, and went on in it. Such, I conceive, may be the meaning of it
here too. The Gentiles glorified God, they were generally affected and taken
with it [Many were called.] And they believed, so many as was ordered or
ordained to life eternal, that is, they abode constant in the Doctrine, they
were not for a flash only as the others were; others thought the Word true and
rejoiced in it, and glorified it; but none abid in it but them that God more
especially pulled in to himself. These things we have noted on the Minor,
though the faultiness of the Major is sufficient to overthrow the Argument in
the thing that should have been concluded, viz. That Faith is the immediate
fruit and effect of Christ's death, which God is obliged by it to give to All
that Christ died for.

All the fruits of the New Covenant are procured and purchased by him: But
neither does this conclude. And we have showed before, cap. 1. lib. 3. that he
neither has proved Faith to be a fruit of the New Covenant, but a thing
presupposed: Nor that that Covenant is made with all them that Christ died for.

That without which its impossible that we should be saved, This may be granted
in the sense we have taken the word Procuring. And yet it concludes not
neither, except he could infer, But all that Christ died for are fully and
effectually saved: which he does not, nor can any where prove. Besides, his
proofs prove neither the Major nor the Minor, Matthew. 1.21. His people, Heb.
7.25. All that come to God by him. And intimately, Heb. 5.9. He is the Author
of eternal salvation. But to whom says the Apostle? To all that obey him. None
of which Scriptures takes in Faith as one of those things, which he is the
Author, Procurer, or Confirmer of. For the very Suppositum in them all is
Believers, his people, men called, and of no people made a people of God, as 1
Pet. 2.10. They have faith. Them that come to him, and obey him, they have
faith. So that Christ may be affirmed to be the Author of their eternal and
perfect salvation there mentioned, and yet not the procurer of their faith. As
David was a protector of all that fled to him, and stood by them to the utmost,
and yet it follows not, that he purchased it of any to make them come to him.
So that this also is impertinent.

The last Argument is that of Phil. 1.29. Its given to you to believe, (...).
He leaves out the Article (...), which may be read thus, Its given to you (as
pertaining to Christ) not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his
sake. This is given of grace. As if he should say, I speak not now of all
sufferings and faith, but of what pertains to Christ, and what is in his Cause.
As pertaining to Christ its given by Grace, (...), not only to believe, etc.
Or thus, (...), etc. To you that which pertains to Christ was given freely, not
only to believe on him, but also to suffer for him. But let the words be read
as they are (though, I conceive, not so rightly, because of the Article ((...))
omitted) yet it follows not, either that it was given them as his purchase. I
may give a man a thing for my child's sake, because I love him, and would have
him esteemed and loved, which yet is not by him bought of me for that man. Or
if so, yet it follows not that Christ did so for all that he died for. Christ
might procure that God should absolutely make some believe in him, and yet
leave him to glorify his Mercy or Justice on others as he pleases, leave them
to such grace as whereby they might have been brought to believe in walking out
in the means according to power given; yea, leave it wholly to the mere Will
of God, whom to cause to believe, both as to persons and their number. So that
no ways does this Argument conclude. Nor does Ephesians. 1.3. (another place urged
by him) speak of Faith, they being believers that were spoken of in that
Speech, as the Suppositum in it. And how it should be meant when he says, My
Dinner is prepared, and all things are ready, come ye to the Wedding, That the
peoples coming was one of the dishes prepared, I know not, or that God has put
faith into Christ for us. Yet suppose it mean that through him God has blessed
us with faith (which I grant he has, such as do believe) yet how either he
obliged God to bless such particulars so, or (much more) all that he died for,
I am sure no man can show me from that proof. So that Jesus is the Author and
Finisher of our faith, the beginning and the end of what we believe for, or (as
the word is) the (...), the prime Captain and Perfecter of our faith, or The
word Faith there signifies rather the profession, or matter of Faith believed,
then the act of Faith in us.
the way of our faith, and so greater then any of the cloud of witnesses I
believe; and so I desire to eye and look to him also, yea, as him without whose
sufferings I could neither have had object of faith for me, nor Word, or
Spirit to enable me to it, and as he that is the prime leader in it, and
finisher of it, bringing about to me the whole end of it, the salvation of my
soul: But yet, that therefore he so obliged God to make men look to him, as
that had God passed me by, and fastened upon some other, he should have been
unjust to him, or that he has procured that All he died for shall be brought
to believe to eternal life, that place shows not. And now to review his whole
Argument, it runs thus.

If the fruit and effect procured by the death of Christ absolutely, not
depending on any condition in man to be fulfilled, be not common to All, then
did not Christ die for All. But the supposal is true, as is seen in the Grace
of Faith, which was procured by the death of Christ to be absolutely bestowed
on them for whom he died is, but yet not common to All; Therefore Christ died
not for All. The whole Syllogism is in clouds, for either Proposition being
indefinite, may admit of truth or falsehood, as they may be interpreted. If the
Major be universal thus. That if no fruit or effect procured or wrought
absolutely by the death of Christ for All for whom he died be common to All,
then he died not for All: Then its granted; but then the Minor is too scanty:
for it should be universal too, taking in the whole Medius terminus, or else
the Argument concludes not negatively. If the Major be not so universal, then
we deny the Consequence. For we suppose Christ might procure some things not
for All, as the grace of Apostleship for Paul, and that's not common to all the
Church, yet it follows not from that that he died not for all the Church.
Again, The terms for whom he died are equivocal, for its either to be
interpreted, All for whom he died had the grace of Faith procured for them, to
be absolutely bestowed on them or not. If not, then it comes not up to the
intent of the Major, nor takes in the whole middle Term of it as it ought to
run. If so, we have seen no proof for it, and therefore (to say no more, that
the whole Minor remains unproved) the main thing opposed by him yet stands
firm, viz. That Christ died for All.

Having done with this long labyrinthed Argument, Those only are spiritually
redeemed by Christ, who were typed out by the people of Israel in their carnal
typical Redemption: But by the people of the Jews, in their deliverance out of
Egypt, bringing into Canaan with all their Ordinances, and Institutions, only
the Church of God, the Elect, were typed out (which he says was proved before,
but I never yet saw it proved from the beginning of the Book hitherto, and I am
confident never shall) Ergo, etc. Truly this is a very sorry Argument, and I
had thought such a man as Mr. Owen would not have mentioned such a one; but
sure he so much over-reasoned himself in the former, that he forgot himself
here. For first, to the Major, He has no proof for it at all, and this reason
may be given to deny it, that he can no where prove, that that was a type of
Christ's dying for us merely. But out of courtesy we will grant it him, and
fall upon his Minor, in which he both adds a Quartus terminus, in mentioning
the bringing them into Canaan, and all their Ordinances, etc. not mentioned in
the Major, and in saying, Only the Elect and Church of God was typed out by
them, says falsely, and so its denied by me upon these grounds. 1 The beasts
were all brought out to a hoof, of which some were clean and some were unclean
for Sacrifice, were all these types of the Elect and Church only? 2. The
Murmurers and Rebels that fell in the Wilderness were brought out of Egypt,
were they also types of the Elect? Sure then if Canaan be a type of heaven, and
heavenly Rest, and Egypt a type of the Kingdom of Death and Darkness, then it
will follow, That few of the Elect, scarce two of six hundred thousand shall
enter into Rest, and that many that Christ died for, and ransomed from death
and misery through unbelief, shall never come into heavenly glory. Was not Corah
and his company some of that people that was redeemed out of Egypt? Sure they
were. See Numb. 16. and yet the Apostle tells us they were types of them that
perish for rebellion against Christ. Jude 11. Were they, think you, the Elect
of God? And so the Apostle propounds those Murmurers and Fornicators, and
Idolators amongst them, as types of them that now murmr against Christ, and
commit Fornication and Idolatry against him, 1 Cor. 10.5, 11. So that this
Argument is notoriously erroneous. Let us turn it thus rather. All that were
typed out in the Redemption from Egypt, are ransomed spiritually by Jesus
Christ. But all men, good and bad, were typed out by them. Ergo, All so
ransomed, To make good the Minor (for the Major is Mr. Owens own.) The clean
beasts typified those of the Gentiles that are fit for sacrifices to God, being
sanctified by the holy Ghost, Romans 15.16. The unclean, those that remain in
unbelief, and so are not fit to be so offered up, Tit. 1.16. Likewise the good
and faithful people, and such as were chosen into Office, types of the Elect,
and faithful in Christ Jesus, 1 Pet. 2.5. And the Murmurers, Complainers, and
Unbelievers, types of the disobedient to, and backsliders from Christ.
Therefore all such people, though they come not all to heaven, yet Christ gave
himself a ransom for them. But enough to this most incongruous Argument.

CHAP. V.
An Answer to his fifth Chapter: In which is considered, How Christ gave
himself a ransom for All.

HAving done with those Arguments, we follow him now to Arguments taken from
words used in this matter, which he says, Disagree in their genuine
signification from the Opinion that extends to all the matter spoken of in
them. That Doctrine that will not by any means suit which, and be conformable
to the thing signified by it, but contradicts the expressions literal and
deductive, whereby in Scripture its held out to us, cannot possibly be sound
and sincere. But such is the persuasion of Universal Redemption, or General
Ransom. Ergo, Its unsound. And this strange Argument (that grants the Doctrine
held forth in Scripture expressions, Instance. 1.
and yet contradicts those Scriptures) he labors to prove by Induction, and
first from the word A (...), dransom or price of Redemption; He argues thus.
That the thing signified in it agrees not to all, therefore the word is not to
be so applied. Which is in substance, Paul spoke unadvisedly when he made so
general an expression: this is not to believe the Scripture, but to judge and
deny it to be right. Well, let us see what the word signifies. It signifies a
price for Redemption. Now (says Mr. Owen,) If Christ pay a price for
Redemption, his aim is their deliverance for whom its paid, to that end he
satisfies the Judge, and conquers the Jailer, but this agrees not to All, All
are not ransomed. Shall we believe Mr. Owen, or the Apostle here? who also
tells us in Romans 5.18. That by one man's Righteousness to all men to
Justification of life. And again, in 1 Cor. 15 22. As in Adam All die, so in
Christ all shall be made alive. But Mr. Owen says, Why are not all saved then?
I might say, Nay, but O man, who art thou that reply against God? But I have
answered before. From the first death they are, from the second they are not,
because many are disobedient against their Savior. As all Israel were saved
out of Egypt, Jude 5.
(Its the Apostle Judes expression) But why then not all preserved into Canaan?
He tells us, He afterward destroyed them that believed not. So here, he
afterward in a second death destroys all those that know (like, or approve)
not God, and all that disobey the Gospel of Christ, 2 These. 1.7, 8. All were in
thrall to the sentence of death, and so to the execution of vengeance from God
upon them all in Adam in an utter ruin; and again, for slighting and sinning
against Light and Goodness afforded, deserve destruction to come suddenly upon
them, in plagues, famines, etc. The bond that held them in the former was their
sin in Adam, and to the latter many sins against Gods goodness now exposes
them. What price pays Christ? Himself, to bear that blow for them, and be the
propitiation for their sin. Now in that the sentence passed not (or rather lies
not) upon men. Men are not debarred reaccess to God, for that folly the
sentence of banishment is reversed, and the banished called home again, here is
a Redemption made from that thraldom. And whereas many times they are liable to
destruction again in their persons, Christ Mediating, and Interposing himself
as the Propitiation, preserves them. And on this ground we are to pray for All,
and make Intercession with thanksgiving for All, as in 2 Timothy 1.2, 6. But, I
suppose, he thinks All not ransomed, because many remain thralled in their
corruption. To which I might say but as Prosper, Ad capit. Gallor. Sanguis
Christi est totius mundi pretium, pro omnium redemptione vere persolutum, (and
that's as much as 1 Timothy 2.6. says) sed illi homines ab eo pretio extranei sunt,
qui aut captivitate delectati redimi noluerunt, aut post redemptionem ad eandem
servitutem sunt reversi; and again, Omnes recte dicantur redempti, sed non
ownes a captivitate eruti. But to clear it, I shall propound these following
considerations.

1. That men in sinning fell under a double bondage. 1. To death to be
inflicted from God, according to his sentence, In the day thou eatest thereof
thou shall die the death, and death came on all, in that all sinned. 2. To
corruption, or sinfulness of Nature in themselves, and the delusions of Satan,
Ephe. 2.1. Dead in sins and trespasses, conceived in sin, and born in iniquity.

2. The latter of these thraldoms, was not the curse, or death inflicted as the
punishment of the fall, but the proper consequence of it. That it was not its
punishment, nor any essential part of it, appears in this, that every essential
part of the punishment of it Christ was to bear by way of satisfaction, and so
he bare anguish in body and soul, death of body, and separation from Gods
presence: but he bare not the inherency of sin for us, nor inability for
serving his Father, nor was he subject to the deceits of Satan, as if it had
been an essential part of that punishment he must have done, for it appertains
to, and spreads over the whole nature. But the first was the punishment to
which we were subjected, and which, had we abid never so pure in our natures,
must have been executed for the fault committed, because the word was not, If
thou becomest so polluted, but In the day thou eatest thou shall die, and
therefore Christ also suffered that, becoming a ransom for us though innocent.

3. In the latter the Justice of God did not detain us (but as man being
debarred from any new grace, without that could not do what he should) but we
ought (that notwithstanding) to do our best to serve him, we had his permission
to it; if such a thing might be supposed, that we might have lived under that
sentence unsuffered for us. He neither put sin into us, nor kept it in us. But
the former came directly from God upon us, and his Justice detained us in our
Mediator, in it, till his sentence was satisfied.

4. That first was the death of which Satan had power, and the fear of which
(though but now a carcass) detains men in their spirits in bondage, Heb. 2.14.
Men fear not, but love the other, their corruptions; now Christ conquered
Satan, when he brake his snare, and got victory over that death, that should
else have swallowed us up for ever. So that Satan could not, as else he would
have done, play the Executioner upon us.

5. God neither putting men into corruption, nor corruption into them, nor his
Justice standing against our doing better (he would that they should come out
of it, if they could) the price was not given to God properly as the price of
Redemption from that, but only as the ransoming them from the death inflicted,
makes a passage for means also to be afforded to them for their recovery and
setting free from that bondage too. Were it not for this Ransom, he would not
afford him any means to help him out of this, but his Justice required not any
positive influence upon him to hold him in, and hinder him from getting out of
it till he was satisfied in the other. Thence Christ given himself to bear the
blow, and deliver men from that proper punishment inflicted by God, and men
being thereby delivered out of that sentence, they may be said properly to be
ransomed, though still they are not brought out of the bondage to their
corruption; especially the prison door being opened, with help afforded for
their coming out of that too. To clear it by a Simile. A King makes a Law, That
he that shall eat such a fruit (suppose as in the eating of it, has a property
to make men leprous) should for so doing be forthwith adjudged to death, and
executed. A certain company of men notwithstanding, being overcome by some evil
inticement, transgress the Law and immediately become leprous. The Executioners
seize upon them, and are drawing them to punishment, in the interim one gives a
sum of money for their ransom. The intention of it is to ransom them from the
sentence to the execution of which they are going; the engagement or
performance of the payment being accepted, he that gave the price receives
power to rescue them from the Tormentors, and does it: still they remain
leprous, and lie exposed to the subtilty of former inticers: shall we say now,
these men are not ransomed, or that he that paid the price, ransomed them not,
because they remain leprous? Nay, we will go further, suppose the Ransomer
obtaining by the same price the best Surgeons, and skilful Physicians for their
healing too, and by all loving Arguments entreating them to be healed, and no
longer to hearken to the contrary suggestions of their inticers, some of them
trust him and are healed, others peremptorily listening to their inticers like
their leprous condition better, because they like not the Ransomers society,
and think they shall not be troubled with it so long as they are leprous,
having great suspicion also perhaps that the things he prescribes for them will
poison them, and so refuse to be healed, and abide lepers all their days, yea,
perhaps also for disobedience to their Ransomer and the King again, come to be
again condemned and executed; shall we say now that this man did not give a
price of Redemption for them all, because they through their folly, were never
freed and redeemed, as it were, from the power of their leprosy? Such is the
case in hand, I need not to apply it, the case is so clear. If it be objected,
That Similitudes prove nothing. I Answer, There is no need of proving a
Scripture saying, that is to be believed, and Similitudes may be apt to
illustrate how we may conceive the thing expressed sutably to the expression in
Scripture used. Let me this say further, that the word Redemption is sometime
applied to the effect of the believing application of the blood of Christ, for
healing men, in regard of their corruptions, and setting their minds free to
serve God, as in 1 Pet. 1.18. Rev. 5.9. and 14.3, 4. being the same in
substance with Heb 9.14. As also sometimes for a powerful freeing the body from
mortality, weakness, and death, Romans 8.23. In which further significations, it
is not to be confounded with the use of it here, but distinguishing from it.

CHAP. VI.
Concerning Reconciliation, in answer to his sixth Chapter.

HIs next Instance and Argument from thence is about Reconciliation. Instan. 2.
Which he (rightly) makes to be in the mutual joint turning of affections to
each other, and coming into amity, accord and friendship. His Argument from
that runs thus. All are reconciled to God for whom Christ died, But all are not
so, etc. We are to mind that he speaks here of reconciliation of men in their
own persons. For otherwise the definition, and the thing defined would
disagree, and he should prevaricate in his arguing. Now reconciliation so
considered, I deny his Major, viz. That all for whom Christ died are reconciled
to God. His proof for it is this; That Reconciliation is the immediate effect
and product of the death of Christ, which (though he is confident none can
deny) I have before disproved. Lib. 1. ca. 1.
Yea, that men's affections are not turned unto God immediately upon Christ's
death for them, as before the Call of God has overcome them, I appeal to Mr.
Owens own Doctrine against the Socinians, Chap. 8. But he thinks to help it by
distinguishing Reconciliation into meritorious and accomplished, and so through
all are not yet actually reconciled to God, yet he says, That Christ has
merited that they shall be, and so they all shall and must be. Which
distinction so applied I deny. Indeed that God has done so much for all in
dying for them (and God in giving him to die for them) that he has highly
deserved at their hands, that they should all love and live to him, I freely
grant, yea, and if we take Reconciliation for a making their peace so with God
for them, as to (...) are of the Greek words (...), and (...), to change.
change their condition into a far better then what it was before, so as that
whereas they were by sin debarred the Presence and Kingdom of God, now God is
ready to receive them, has opened the way for them, yea, calls and commands
them to come back again to him, in such a sense I will grant his Assertion; but
that Christ has obliged (or made it due debt to himself from) the Father, to
make all for whom he died affect and live to him, I deny, nor can he prove it.
He endeavors it from sundry Scriptures, which I shall view, and discover his
mistakes in.

His first is, 2 Cor 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself,
etc. Which we may understand in the sense even now yielded; or else also taking
the word World for the Gentiles, it holds forth, that God in Christ brake down
the partition wall, and slew the enmity, the Law of Commandments in Ordinances
that kept them at a distance from fellowship with the Jews, and so made way for
their coming in to him to be at one with him; not imputing their trespasses (or
contrary walkings to his Ordinances) to them, but so remitting them as no
longer to count them, or any of them common or unclean in that respect; but
all, or any of them may be welcome to his Church or Kingdom, notwithstanding
their uncircumcision, according to that Acts 10.22. God has showed me that I
should call (...), no one man common or unclean. But whether we take it only
in the former, or this sense also (as I think it comprehends both) yet it comes
far short of Mr. Owens Assertion. viz. That God was obliged by the death of
Christ to make them all affect him. It reaches but to a way-making and
foundation laying unto that. And indeed its to be minded, that Reconciliation
is neither there spoken of as the act of Christ toward God (as had it signified
an engagement, putting upon him, it should rather have been) but as the act of
God in Christ; God was in Christ reconciling: nor as of a thing accomplished
and done (as had it been of a meritorious reconciling, it might have been with
respect to the act of Merit so spoken of, the act of Meriting being a thing
already done) but only as of a thing then Its but (...), not (...).
in fieri, in the doing; and (as the following verse. ( ver. 20.) argues) not as
yet done, while that exhortation to be reconciled, is but yet a pressing. Its
as if he should have said, God has been doing that in Christ for the world,
that tends to, and makes for its reconciling, or being reconciled to him, he
has taken that out of the midway that stood against the showing himself
gracious to them, and receiving them into favor; nothing is wanting on his part
to their being at one with him, nay, he has done that in Christ that may
induce them thereto, as in Matthew. 22.4. His Oxen and Fatlings are killed, and
he has prepared a dinner, and all is ready for receiving them, upon which
ground also, as there the servants were sent out to the guests with that good
tidings, and thereupon to invite them to come to the wedding, so here the
Apostles were sent out former hints of his goodness in the Wisdom of God
afforded, Joh. 1 4, 5. 1 Cor. 1.21.
being not in the wisdom of the World understood or discerned) plainly to
declare this that God had done in Christ for them, and to entreat them to be at
one with him, which as it intimates (as I said before) that they were not yet
in their hearts reconciled to him, for why then needed any further beseeching
of them thereto? So does it no more prove, that they must be all so reconciled,
and that Christ had obliged God thereto, Mat. 22.4.
then that phrase, All things are ready, come ye to the Wedding, argues that
Christ had obliged God to make all those bidden guests to feast with him, and
the following Caveat in Chap. 6.1. warning them not to receive the Grace of God
in vain, both argues, that there is such a receiving it, and that there is
danger that some such as this grace is affirmed to concern, may so receive it,
and so by consequence not be reconciled in their hearts at all to him. So that
this place duly weighed, rather overthrows Mr. Owens Assertion, then
contributes any the least mite to its confirmation. He produces also Romans
11.15. The casting off of the Jews is the reconciling of the world, which
neither speaks a title of Christ's death; nor can be understood to make any
thing for a meritorious reconciling, Reconciliation there signifying only the
occasional way and means of reconciling; As Salvation, Acts 28.28. is the means
of saving. He quotes also Romans 5.10. If being enemies we were reconciled to God
by the Death of his Son, etc. and Col. 1.21. Now are ye reconciled in the body
of his flesh through death. But neither will they serve him up to his purpose.
For neither of them, either speak in that latitude as All for whom Christ died,
nor of a meritorious reconciling only; but of Reconciliation at least
inchoative accomplished in men's persons. In Romans 5. The Apostle having said,
Verse 1.
That the believer being justified by faith in Christ, is at peace with God
(which is all one with, Ver. 2, 3, 4, 5.
is reconciled) and is lead to rejoice in the hope of the glory of God even in
afflictions, shows how Faith nourishes and acts the soul in that hope, from
what principle, and by what considerations, viz. By minding the great love of
God in giving his Son to the Death for it, when in a miserable condition, Ver.
6, 7, 8.
and the great love of Christ in so dying for it, and the state to which God
has there-through already brought it, viz. Ver. 9, 10.
A justified and reconciled estate. Whence it leads the soul thus hopefully to
judge and reason. Has God shed his Sons blood for me, that I might have good
ground of believing in him, and overcoming me to believe therein: has he
justified me there-through? (Compare ver. 1.9. with Chap. 3.25.) how shall he
not much more now save me (me, or us that are thus justified) from wrath to
come? And again, Has God made me of an enemy his friend by such a way, and at
such cost as the death of his Son? how much more will he now that I am no more
his enemy but his friend, reconciled to him, save (preserve me in, and bring me
safely out of all afflictions and trials unto glory) by his life, seeing he
shall not need to die again to do that for me? Yea, not only so says he, but it
leads too to Glory in God himself through Jesus Christ, through (or by) whom it
has now (now that it believes and is justified,) received the atonement,
(...), by a Metonymy, the Grace of God that effected this reconciliation, and
brought it in to be the reconciled of God, as he had before ( ver. 10.)
affirmed. He says not, we were reconciled in the time of Christ's dying, that
would have been rather (...). But the reconciliation which we now have received
(in receiving him, to wit) and in which we are reconciled, we have it by his
Death. That phrase, By his Death that men so stumble at, I have explained
before, lib. 1. cap. 1. This then says nothing of Christ meriting of, or
obliging God to reconcile, that is, turn the affections of all to himself for
whom he died: nor says that in Col. 1.21, 22. any thing more for it, but that
the believing Colossians were of enemies to God become now his friends
reconciled to him, only the Apostle there tell us what was the bond or medium
of their agreement, viz. The body of Christ's flesh, through, or by means of
death, that is, he having in that his body suffered for our sins, and offered
up himself to God, God there takes up his delightful dwelling, and is
propitious toward us; now we also by Faith, closing with, and feeding on that
his body as it has (or he therein) died for us, God and we are at one, But
what is this to his meriting of God that he actually reconcile all for whom he
died?

His last proof is Ephesians. 2.15, 16, where the Apostle having said that the
Ephesians sometimes strangers to God and his Church, were now made near by the
blood of Christ; which we may either understand of that cleansing of the state
of the Gentiles in general, and opening a free access into his Kingdom to them,
of which we spoke above, or else more especially of the believing Gentiles,
such as the Ephesians written to, made of one body with the believing Jews, he
shows how that nighness was effected, viz. in Christ our peace, and how he is
our peace, viz. in that he has broken down the partition wall, and so slain
the enmity, the Law of Commandments in Ordinances in his cross or sufferings.
Which work of his he amplifies by his ends in it. viz. 1. That he might create
of two peoples, one new man in himself, which is done in their believing on
him. 2. That he might reconcile them in one body unto God, that is, in his own
body fed on by both, or in one mystical body consisting of both, by the Cross,
that is, the virtue of his sufferings, having slain the enmity there, as above,
ver. 15. Now note that he says not, he reconciled them to God in dying, (no
more then that he had new created them therein) but he slew the enmity there,
that is, the power of the Law upon us, which was the bond of enmity and
difference between us, that by it he might reconcile us, that is spoken of as a
further and future thing to his dying and slaying the enmities. Unto which also
it follows that he came and preached peace to them. So that this proves not
Reconciliation of man to God, an immediate fruit of his death, but through the
interposition of the Word and Spirit, and Faith, (as ver. 18.) bringing us to
feed on that one body of Christ, and into one body with the Saints of God. Much
less is there is any Scripture says, That Christ merited, that all for whom he
died, should be effectually brought in to be friends to God. He is indeed
worthy to be believed on by us, as I said before, but has no where obliged God
to cause us in so doing to become at one with him. So that that Argument also
is a gross mistake. And this takes off all the following Queries in that
Chapter, which need no other Answer. Only there is a touch in it needs a
little clearing. Its said, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the world
to himself, And I acknowledge he has done so much for the world. But then, are
not the world blessed and made righteous? seeing its said, The man is blessed
to whom God impuses not sin, Romans 4.5, 6, 7. To that I say, No, not in
themselves, Not imputing, there it is, He will not impute. He is not a blessed
man, (in the prime sense of the word Blessed) to whom God has not been
imputing sins, but preaching peace and forgiveness, and diverting his Wrath (in
regard of the Testimonies of it against the sins that brought condemnation on
us) to his Son: But he that is so far brought into favor, as that he will not
Impute sin. As he is blessed that shall not come into condemnation, but not
every one whom Christ now judges not, or condemns not; Except the man that
believes not is also blessed. For in Joh. 12.47. Its said, If any man hear my
words and believe not, I judge him not. Psalm 41.1.
So he that considers the poor, is blessed in this, That the Lord will deliver
him in the time of trouble. He is a blessed man whom God will deliver in all
times future, but its not true, that he is blessed, that God has in times
past, and perhaps hitherto does deliver in times of trouble, he being not yet
by all those deliverances brought to believe in him. Except we should take
blessedness in a lower sense then there, as its taken in Psalm. 144. the former
part of the last Verse. Israel into Canaan, that he was bringing them unto
Canaan, and yet many thousands not following him fell short of it, and yet that
of Moses is true, As for God his work is perfect, All his ways are Judgment,
Deuteronomy. 32.4. And let that suffice to that Chapter and Argument.

CHAP. VII.
About Satisfaction.

HIs next Chapter treats of Satisfaction, Instan. 3.
containing the same Argument in substance that we have answered before in lib.
1. cap. 3. and lib. 3. cap. 3. The main thing in it is, That for whom Christ
died, All their sins he satisfied for: And therefore being just he ought to
discharge them, etc. But first he fails in the proof of both. He proves not
that Christ undertook to satisfy for all the sins of All he died for, as well
Consectaneous as Antecedaneous to his Mediation, for such a proof would be to
some purpose, and make the Apostles caution, as well as our persuasion
ridiculous: it would be out of fear that any man should occasion one to perish
for whom Christ died, seeing whatever sin such a one can commit, is paid for
and discharged beforehand. So that I say, Those passages in Romans 14.15. and 1
Cor. 8.11. would be as vain, as if he had said, Take heed lest ye annihilate
Christ, or swallow him up through sorrow, in the mids of all his glory. Such
kind of vain intimations, are not to be fixed on the Apostles Doctrine. But if
it be true indeed, that there the Apostle supposes, viz. That a man for whom
Christ died, may by stumbling at Christ, and departing from him, perish: then
is it not true that Mr. Owen propounds, that for such sins as any do so
commit, Christ has so fully satisfied, that the forgiveness of them is due
debt, and God unjust in case they for them perish. We grant he has satisfied
to the utmost of that Obligation that he undertook, and so removed the sentence
of death from off all that the benefit of his righteousness is to All to
justification of life; but not that he has made the remission of all sins
past, present, and to come for all for whom he died due debt, so as that its
unjust that any perish for them. The only place he brings to prove it, is 1 John 1.7. which he seems not to understand; for that neither says The blood of
Christ has cleansed All them for whom he dyed, from all their sins, that they
have or shall commit; nor that it cleanses all us (absolutely) from all our
sins: but it says, If he walk in the light, as he is in the light, (that is
(in other Scripture phrase) If we walk in the Spirit, and continue rooted and
grounded in the Faith, and be not moved from it) then have we fellowship one
with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all our sins. He
forgot that [ If he walk in the light, etc.] Its the same in meaning with that
in Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus, that
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. He says not There is no
condemnation to any that Christ has died for, nor to all in Christ Jesus; for
some such may be unfruitful branches, and grieve and rebel against the Spirit,
and so be cut off. Joh. 15.4.
Its like that too in Col. 1.23. To present you blameless, and unreproveable in
his sight, if ye continue steadfast, etc. The meaning, in a word, is this, That
such is the force of the blood or sufferings of Jesus Christ with God, and such
Gods wel-pleasedness in that his obedience, and such the mutual consent of God
and Christ upon his sufferings, That whoever receives the light that comes
from God, and walks therein, as God is in it affording power and strength to
him there-through, with him God has fellowship, and him God admits into
communion with himself (or such have joint participation one with another) and
are presented spotless in the sight of God. So as that though they have sin in
them that hinders them from doing as they would, from attaining to walk in that
height and perfection that they desire, yet they not yielding to that sin but
siding with the light and Spirit of God against it, God imputes it not to them.
All such men's sins, being sins of weakness to which they are merely drawn, are
so covered, that there comes no condemnation upon them for any of them, no
rebuke from God, nor So (...) is used in Romans 14.23. Gal. 6.7.
self condemnation to burden the conscience. The blood of Jesus Christ
believed in, presenting the soul spotless to God, and speaking peace unto the
conscience. But now its neither so with all that Christ died for, nor with all
that are in Christ. Such as walk after the flesh, and sow to it (though
believers) do and shall of the flesh reap corruption. Its not the agreement
between God and Christ, that his blood or sufferings, should present men in
that condition unblameable before him, his blood speaks no such protection to
sin, or to men as walking after sin, but such, notwithstanding Christ's Death
for them, God rebukes and punishes. There are (...) that come upon them, as
appears 1 Cor. 11.29.30. Revel. 3.19. Its true, those judgments are not to
destruction, but that they might be brought to see, and confess their follies,
and turn to the Spirit and Light of God again, which if they do, they shall
find the blood of Christ then effectual for them to remission again, as it
follows in 1 John 1.9 Otherwise they shall perish also. 1 Cor. 8.11. And this
is the plain meaning and scope of that place; which by what is said, appears to
be notably misapplied by Mr. Owen. And indeed the not discerning of this, is
the ground of their error, whom they call Antinomians, who deny that God is
angry, or punishes any believer (or any Elect man though an unbeliever) for his
sin. Its grounded upon, and undeniably flows from this very conclusion of Mr.
Owens, That for whom Christ died, all their sins are satisfied for, past
present, and to come, and God ought not further to molest or trouble them for
them. Nor can Mr. Owen Maintain, what he says in Chap. 8. against the
Socinians, viz. That the state of those that Christ died for during their
unregeneracy, is all one with such as he died not for, that they are
unacceptable in all their services, in bondage to Death, yea, under the curse
and condemning power of the Law, obnoxious to judgment, and guilty of eternal
Death. I say, these things cannot be true of any of them, if Christ has made
for all their sin, such satisfaction, as that they ought to be discharged of
all suits, charges, and molestations, as here he says they ought. How can it
be conceived, That a man whose debts are all paid, that he has or shall
contract, is liable to the Law, and obnoxious to perpetual imprisonment still
for them. But we say, a man whose debt is paid, and he discharged, may run into
a new debt and become obnoxious again to Law, And that the case is so here,
appears, as by that intimation before noted, 1 Cor. 8.11. So also by many other
Scriptures. So the Israelites that were pardoned all their rebellions and
murmurings from Egypt, till they sent Spies to Canaan, and that rebellion too
that insued. Numb. 14.19, 20. yet were many of them cut off and consumed
without pardon for the Rebellion of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, that soon after
happened, Numb. 16. Nor would Moses intercede for them in that, though he has
for all the rest formerly. ver. 15. And accordingly those who are said to have
had their old sins cleansed, yet growing purblinde, and Apostatizing (for so
its clearly intimated by way of Antithesis, that they may fall, yea, are in the
way to it, 2 Pet. 1.9, 10.) yea, denying the Lord that bought them, and turning
his grace into wantonness, are said to perish in the gainsayings of Korah, no
pardon for so high rebellion, Jude 11. Again, as God is That Creditor to whom
(as Mr. Owen says) we owe a thousand talents, Matthew. 18. So our Savior there
tells us, That they who receive forgiveness of those talents from him, and yet
afterward walk not in the Spirit of God, in love and Christlike dispositions,
but forgetting their own purging from their old sins; are destitute of Virtue,
Knowledge, Temperance, Charity, etc. God will so deal with them, as he that
having forgiven his servant a thousand talents, afterward for his cruelty to
his fellow servants, threw him into Prison till he should pay the utmost
farthing. So says our Savior himself in that very place instanced by Mr. Owen,
Matthew. 18.32, 35. So that all Mr. Owens Inferences and Queries in that Chapter
built upon the former premise, are mere fallacies, and amount to just nothing.
The needs no Oedipus to resolve his Riddles, the Spirit of God in the
Scriptures has plainly enough resolved them to any that have understanding.

CHAP. VIII.
An Answer to his Arguments from the Word Merits, and the Phrases, (...).

HIs two following Chapters, scil. the eigth and ninth, being a digression, and
in some points (as is showed) a contradiction to his inferences of Gods being
bound to surcease all actions and molestations against those for whom Christ
died; and not concerning the Question debated, but opposing the Socinians, I
pass them, Instan. 4.
and come to his Chapter of Merit, in which he confesses, That no word is found
in the Scripture that may justly be so translated.

From which concession I might take advantage to tell him, That then he can
prove nothing against a plain saying of Scripture by any Argument drawn from
this Word which is not found in Scripture; but I pass it. Now will I say much
to these places quoted by him to hold forth the thing meant by the word Merit,
viz. Isai. 53.5. Heb. 9.12. Acts 20.28. save that they prove not any obligation
put upon God to do those things there mentioned to all that he died for, but
only that God was pleased to do such things upon such considerations, or by
such mediums. Only the latter place, of Acts 20.28. seems least to the
business, for it speaks not of Christ's meriting of God, but Gods procuring,
acquiring, or obtaining (as the (...) most usually signifies) a people to be a
Church, by that way of his blood, the sufferings of Christ. But to pass those
things. Let this be observed (which himself grants, lib 4. cap. 1.) That
however precious and valuable the sufferings of Christ be, yet they oblige and
bind God to nothing, but according to his own appointment and free engagement.
Having noted that, we come to his Argument, which is this. That Christ did
merit and purchase by his death for all those for whom he died, all those
things which in the Scriptures are assigned to be the fruits and effects of his
death. But all have not all those effects and fruits, Ergo, he died not for
All. Ans. If by his Major he means, He procured them into himself, as into Gods
Treasury to be free for them all, to look after, and come to him for, and to be
dispensed to all that do look after him and come to him; Then it nothing hurts
us: But then his Minor assumes not rightly (as it does not however) for it
should be thus, That Christ has not purchased all those things for All, and
not as it is, That all have them not. But if in his Major he means (as he seems
to do) that he obliged the Father to bestow upon All for whom he died, and
bring them to enjoy all those things which his Death (either as presented to
God, or as believed by us) is said to effect (as his after-enumeration of its
effects argue him to mean) then I deny it, and desire his proof of it, which
because he brings not, his Argument falls to the ground, and needs no further
answering. Only I shall mind the Reader, that the effects enumerated by him,
are such (for the most part) as it produces in us by believing on it, such as
the Delivering us from the hand and power of all our enemies [which we are not
till called, nay, till raised from the dead] " from wrath to come, [which we
are not, till justified by faith, as is evident by his own confession against
the " Socinians] The works of the Devil [which are overcome and destroyed by
him in being believed on, Ephesians. 6.13.16.] the curse of the Law [which he says
we are subject to till believers, Cap. 8. Sect. 6.] from our vain conversation,
the present evil world, the earth, and from men, all which he does by his blood
and sufferings, as being accepted of God they are made known to us, and
(withal the Covenant ratified by it) held forth to us. By letting us see such
love in God toward us, and such good will in Christ with such perfection to
save us, and so great promises ratified to believers, he moves and persuades us
to let go our vain conversations, renounce the world, its fellowships, vanities
and wickedness, to cease cleaving to the earth and earthy men, and having our
confidence in them, and reliance on them, for teaching, worship, satisfaction,
delight, etc. Thus God is said to have bought Israel to himself, Deuteronomy. 32.6. in
that he by so great things done for them, purchased or gained them in to own
and follow him. And so in Hos. 3.2. Gods buying Israel to be a people for
himself, is compared to Hoseahs buying an harlot off from other lovers to be
his wise for a certain consideration or Sum given her. So Christ buys men unto
God from other things, by setting before us his great sufferings for us, and
profering to us the great glory he will thereby bring us to if we will renounce
all for him. But this note is over and above what was needful for showing the
invalidity of the Argument. All his other quotations too are impertinent, and
none of them prove, either that God is obliged by the Death of Christ, and
ought to grant to, and possess all for whom he died of those good things that
he mentions: or that he was, or is bound thereby (otherwise then as he freely
engaged himself) to do them to any. They say, That by his Death we are
reconciled, as we may say By Joabs Mediation Absalom was recalled from
banishment and brought into David's favor. Which speech proves not that the
inward worth of his Mediation bound David to that. So, He is our Propitiatory
through Faith in his blood, and God has set him forth to be so, that proves
not that he obliged God to forgive the sins of All he died for. The like I
might say for Peacemaking and salvation. Believing on him we are at peace with
God, and shall be saved by him; but no place says, All that he died for shall
be saved, or that God ought to make them all believe, and so save them, as was
before showed.

For his next Instance from the Phrases, (...). Inst. 6.
For All, and for Many, and Interrogatory, " Whether Christ died in the stead
of All? Its answered in those Chapters that speak about Satisfaction, with all
the Queries he propounds upon it. Only I shall spoke to one of them. viz.
Whether Christ hung upon the Cross for Reprobates? I say, I conceive, as they
were men fallen in Adam he did, but not as besides that Reprobated also. Its like
that, The Gospel was preached to the dead, 1 Pet. 4.6.
and the Spirits in prison. Was the Gospel preached to dead men, and men in
hell? Yes, To them that are now dead and in hell, But not when, and as dead,
and in hell. Men were not Reprobates as they were the Objects of Christ's Death,
but as they are considered, and actually found guilty of sinning wilfully and
pertinaciously against the truth discovered, and benefits afforded to them
through his Death. If we will speak of things according to the Scripture. If
otherwise, Eadem facilitate rejicitur qua asseritur. The Scriptures say, men
that corrupt themselves, and notwithstanding the means of purging used to them
(which sure are all consequent in order of Nature to the death of Christ for
men, there being nothing affordable to men toward purging, according to the
demerit of Adams sin, but All were forthwith to have perished) stand out, and
remain in their corruptions, are the reprobate silver, men rejected of God,
Jer. 6.30. And for such obstinacy against God in lower or higher means, the
Scripture often tells us, that God reprobates or rejects men, as is to be seen
in Romans 1.19, 20, 21, 28. Genesis 6.3. Psa. 81.9, 10, 11, 12. Pro. 1.22, 23, 24,
25. Matthew. 13.15, 16. Acts 28.27. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. And no other ways do I
find Reprobation befalling any one. Now that that is done for the sinning
against a mercy afforded, and the fruits of it, presupposes that mercy to have
extended to them, and not the contrary.

CHAP. IX.
An Answer to his last General Argument drawn from sundry Texts of Scripture.

HIs last general Argument is from diverse Texts of Scripture, Scrip. 1.
But let us view those Scriptures.

The first is, Genesis 3.15. I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and
between her seed and thy seed; He shall break thy head, and thou shall bruise
his heel. I will not call this, as he does a better one, Argumentum a baculo ad
Angulum; but sure this place says not whom, and how many Christ died for, or
that he should die at all. It says, but that the seed of the woman, and them
that are born of Satan (granting that by the Serpent Satan is meant) shall have
enmity between themselves, and the woman's seed shall conquer Satan. How the
Elect should be the seed of the woman more then others, I find no reason, much
less proof for it, And how it follows, That if Christ brake the head of Satan,
then he died not for All, I see as little. Again, I find not that any man, as
he is born into the world, is called a child of Satan, one of the Serpents
seed. And we have showed, That Christ might die for All, as fallen in Adam, and
yet destroy all such as after that, and the goodness extended to them thereby,
should rebel against him, though the Verse speak not of destroying any but the
Serpent himself, He shall break thy head. So that this Argument concludes
nothing. He neither proving the Serpent to be the Devil (and so that the Devil
goes upon his belly and eats dust) nor the seed of the woman to be the Elect
only, nor that any till they rebel against Christ are the seed of the Serpent,
nor that Christ was promised to the seed of the woman, there is no such passage
in it, That I will give the woman's seed one to die for them. At the most, it
amounts but to this, That Christ in himself, and those that believe in him,
shall get the better of Satan, and all that do oppose them. Which we grant.

His second place is, Matthew. 7.23. Scrip. 2.
I profess unto you I never knew you. But Christ (says he) says expressly, he
knows his own whom he died for. Joh. 10.14, 17. Surely he knows whom, and what
he has bought, etc. This is fallacious reasoning, To show the vanity of which,
we are to mind, That to know in Scripture, is sometime to apprehend,
understand, or discern a thing, what it is, and of what nature. So Christ knew
what was in man, and knows all things. But oftentimes to know, is to own,
approve, and acquaint ones self with: so God is said to know the way of the
righteous. And in both these senses Christ (is in some measure known of his,
and he) knows his sheep. But in the latter sense we say, He knows not (that is,
approves not of) all he died for. Though buying them they are his own, yet he
skils not of many of them in their states and ways, so as to own them for his
friends, and acquaint himself with them, as the word here signifies. Its as
much as, You went without my Mission, however, without my liking in all your
ways. His Argument that He hints thus [ Christ knows them He died for. But he
knows not All, Ergo, Died not for All] is fallacious, The Minor is Negative in
the third Figure; and the Major a particular Affirmative or a falsity. For we
deny (take knowing for owning, approving and countenancing, as there it
signifies) that Christ so knows all that he died for, though he does his sheep.
Its like this. Israel that came out of Egypt was planted by God in Canaan, But
all Israel that passed over the red Sea was not so planted, Ergo, they all came
not out of Egypt. We grant that Christ knew, whom, and what he bought, even all
of them, Simplici cognitione, as knowledge signifies, in the former of the
senses above mentioned: But that he owns them all in their way and frame, we
deny. Its like this. A Prince ransoms an hundred slaves, some of them under
pretense of honoring him, do wicked acts to his dishonor, and then being
brought to an account, they plead what they have done to honor him, how they
have spoken for him, etc. He bids them be gone, for he approved none of their
actions, never owned them in what they say they did for him, they secretly
carrying on a Traiterous design against him: And as such people pleading his
ransoming of them, and the cost he was at for them, and the pains he took to do
them good, would but plead against themselves, and he could easily answer them,
that they were the more engaged to have loved him, sought his glory, and served
his designs, and not to have counterfeited with him, secretly seeking to betray
him, under pretenses of love: So will Christ Aug. Ser. 67. De ultimo Judicio
Christum, impios gratiae suae abusores ita redarguentem and judicantem inducit
Gravior (inquiet Christus) peccatorum tuorum crux est in qua invitus pende^,
quam illa, quam tui misertus mortem tuam occisurus ascendi. Impassibilis cum
essem, pro te pati dignatus sum; sed tu despexisti in homine Deum, in infirmo
salutem, in via reditum, in judice veniam, in cruce vitam, in supplici^s
medicinam: and quia omnia tua mala ad medicamenta poenitentiae confugere
noluisti, ab auditu male non mereberis liberari, etc.
say to those, that their Destruction shall be the greater, and the less excuse
there is for their wickedness, for that he having been at such cost to buy
them, and being so gracious a Lord to them, yet they would deny him and work
iniquity against him. Nor will that advantage them, to say (as Mr. Owen
suggests) Is it not because thou dyedst it for thine Elect that none can lay
any thing to their charge? and why should we be charged if thou dyedst for us?
he can easily say to them, My Death indeed was efficacious to them to salvation
from all such charges, for mine Elect were such as loved and served me, and
walked in my spirit, and if at any time they stepped away, Matthew. 25.35, 36. Heb.
10.29. 2 Pet. 2.1.
yet they returned again at my reproves unto me, and I improved the virtue of
my blood with my Father to the utmost for their good and protection. But so
has not your way been before me, you have sinned against my blood, and trodden
me under foot, and therefore it now requires vengeance on you. Mark by the way,
that its not said, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect, because
Christ dyed for them? but, God justifies them, and who is he that condemns
them? Not, who shall condemn them? but who is he (that is in comparison of God
that justifies them) that here reproaches and condemns them? Its Christ that
dyed, one who has infinite favor with God dyed for them being enemies and
shall not such a one (being now at his right hand) prevail for more strength
for God to uphold them (they being his choice ones, men in him, and believers
on him) then is in all their adversaries to overthrow them? But as for those
that neglect his salvation, he says, How shall they escape? Heb. 2 3. not, how
shall they but be owned and protected in their way by him?

His next Scripture Proof is Matthew. 11.25, 26. Scrip. 3.
Thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, etc. thence he gathers.
That from whom the Lord in his Sovereignty hides the Gospel, either in regard
of its outward preaching, or inward revelation in their hearts, Them Christ
dyed not for. But our Savior here affirms there are such, etc. Both these
propositions I deny. The first, for he reveals it not to children dying in
infancy by the outward preaching, yet we dare believe they are not all heirs of
hell, and he may justly hide the inward revelation from those that stop their
ears against, or attend not to the outward preaching, and yet Christ might die
for them to ransom them from the Death that they were adjudged to in Adam,
that so he might further glorify the Father in his dispensations toward them,
and dispose of them. Besides he has not one patch of Scripture to attest that
proposition. Again I deny the minor, for Christ says not there, that those
wise and prudent men never heard of the Gospel in its power. The words are not,
I thank thee that thou have hid the Gospel from them, much less, that thou will
never reveal it to them, But, These things, which may be understood they way of
his Judgments of which he had been speaking ver. 20.24. and also how men's names
are writ in Heaven, Luke 10.13-20.21. In Matthew. 13.11. Its the Mysteries of the
Kingdom, Secreta, abdita, the things only to be showed to those that are
Scholars to Christ, as there are certain mysteries in trades that are for none
but those that are bound prentices to know, and he there gives a reason in ver.
15. they had closed their eyes against the powerful convincements of the
Gospel, they refused to turn at Christ's reproofs, and therefore he would not
pour out his Spirit, Prove. 1.22, 23, 24. These things he has hid from the wise
and prudent, and revealed to babes: by babes he means men humbled and emptyed
of themselves, like infants that knowing nothing are docible, and dispute not
against what is taught them, but believe it though they comprehend not what is
in it, attending till growing up to perfecter capacity they be able to
comprehend the truth of it. By wise and prudent men he means them that being
strong-parted, men of reason and learning, do think by reason to find out
truth, or to be the measure of truth propounded, able to judge of what is said
to them, and therefore believe not upon the bare authority of the Master as
Children and babes do, but measuring what God says by their reason and
prudence, judge many things to be cross to reason and absurd, and so receive
them not. Now these men while they thus lift up their wisdom, and think to
comprehend truth in a way of reason, they find fault with truth, overlook,
despise and condemn it, and so come not to see into the mysterious things of
it, which God has put out of that way of reason in which they think to find
it: But men that think not themselves wise, but are willing to learn of, and to
be taught of God and his word, and therefore dare not but own and receive his
sayings, and cry to him for light about them, they find wisdom, and to them he
shows one thing after another, even the mysteries of the kingdom, Prove. 2.2, 6.
thence the necessity of men's becoming humble as little children, and that they
that are wise in this world become fools (that is deny their own reason and
wisdom, not leaning to it as it objects against, and finds absurdities in the
truth of God) that they may be made wise. Now though God does this according to
his mere good will, yet he does it also as a just judgment upon some for
exalting their reason against Gods word, as in Isa. 29.13, 15. and also to
abase flesh, that he that glories may glory in God, and that men might be
instructed to deny themselves and cease from their own and other men's wisdom,
becoming as babes in a simple belief of Gods sayings, so should they understand
what now by the just will of God is hidden from them. I might apply it by way
of Caution to these very men who exercise not babe-like simplicity in giving
credit to Gods word, but exalt and lift up their own understanding; they are
sick about questions, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4.
as the manner of unbelief is, and say with Nicodemus, How can these things be?
To what purposeshould Christ die for All, seeing all are not saved, and many
hear not of it, etc. who have the truth and usefulness of it hidden from them,
God having not ordained that men should know it by reason and wisdom, but by
faith and supplication. Thence that in Isa. 9.9. If ye will not believe, ye
shall not understand: and that in Jam. 1.19. Be swift to hear, slow to speak,
be more ready to hear what God says, then to exercise thy reason in objecting
against God. Yet I will not say that Christ dyed not for these men, that being
prudent and full of humane wisdom, and exalting that above faith, have the
things they dispute against hidden from them; that would be found (as too
harsh, so) too unjust a censure. Some of these wise and prudent, from whom
these things are hidden, may become babes, and then have them revealed to them.
Again we may apply that saying to the mysteries of Christ revealed to weak
despised men, to be published by them, and not to the Scribes and Pharisees and
wise men, that so the glory of God might not be obscured by their Wisdom, as if
that found out or helped forward the propagating of the Gospel: but even those
things though revealed to poor, weak, simple men, were not to be concealed by
them, but to be divulged to the wise and prudent also for their conversion or
just confusion if they (when revealed) would not accept or yield up to them,
for what he told them secretly in the ear, they were bidden to proclaim openly
upon the house tops. And then Gods choosing weak simple men to be the first
Teachers, and so by consequence the first understanders of the divine truth,
does neither prove that others that were wise and prudent, were left destitute
of the means of salvation or operation of the Spirit in them, or much less that
Christ dyed not for them, or for All men, but only, That these wise and
prudent, would they be saved, must stoop to God in embracing the knowledge of
his mind, by weak and sorry men; and that indeed is the Genuine meaning as I
conceive of that Scripture. Whenas God, had he pleased, might have opened his
mysteries to the Learned Rabbis, Scribes and Pharisees, to have been divulged
by them, he pleased to hide them from them, putting them beside their way, and
to reveal them to others, poor simple men, by whom they were to be preached to
them and to All Nations, and that merely out of his good will, that no flesh
might glory in his presence, etc.

His next alleged place is John 10.15, Scrip. 4. in cap. 3. lib 2.
16, 27, 28. which we have before considered, and showed the vanity of his
inferences from it, there is no new thing here to be spoken to, that is not
there answered, except that he tells us of Christ dying as a Shepherd spoken of
in that place, and Therefore he dyed only for his sheep; which indeed is a new
fallacious argument, Logicians call it fallacia a dicto secundum quid, ad
dictum simpliciter, as if I should argue thus, In 1 Pet. 2.21, 22. Christ is
spoken of as dying, as a pattern of patience to believers suffering unjustly
from men; Ergo he dyed for none but actual believers so suffering. Our
question is whether Christ dyed for All or no, not whether he dyed for All as a
Shepherd: though he laid not down his life for All as a Shepherd, for sheep
to preserve them in a life fore-given them, yet he might and did lay down his
life for All as a ransom to deliver them out of a Death come upon them for the
sin they fell into in Adam, and to be a propitiation for their sins, etc. To
Matthew. 20.28. a Ransom for Many, we have spoken in Chap. 1. Lib. 1. for John
11.52. He dyed for that Nation, and not for that Nation only, but to gather
together the children of God scattered abroad. That tells us he dyed for the
Nation which were not all Elect people to eternal life, there being in it
those Scribes and Pharisees whom he calls generation of vipers. 2. He says not,
For the Children of God, much less for the Children of God only; but shows that
that was one end of his Death reaching further then the Nation, namely to
gather the scattered Jews, or to bring all that should believe, into an unity
of faith and privileges by slaying the enmity (the Law of ordinances) between
them: this puts no limitation to the Death of Christ, nor says that any were
excluded it.

His next is Romans Scrip. 5.
8.32, 33, 34. which (indeed) is brought as a consolation to believers in
affliction, assuring them they have God to justify them, and he greater then
any against them to condemn them; and then they have Christ to intercede for
them, who had also dyed and risen, and he would not fail them, it being his
business to present believers and walkers in the Spirit perfect before him, as
we noted before: he that had given his Son for them, would surely supply them
with all strength, them that were the called of God and believers in him. Now
whereas Mr. Owen observes, that this act of giving Christ to die for them, was
the greatest expression of Gods love toward believers. I answer, That the
Apostle couples two acts together there. 1. His giving Christ for them, that
expressly. 2. His giving him to them, that's intimated in that repetition (...),
with him; for God gave not all things to be crucified with Christ, nor did he
give Christ to believers or to any in his beating him, but delivered him up to
Death and judgment, and Christ gave up himself to bear the wrath of God, but
as one dead and risen, God gives him with his excellencies to men. Yea this is
said to be done to the murmuring, unbelieving Jews, who not receiving him,
deprived themselves of that life, and all those glorious things in and with
him. But to go on with Mr. Owens observation. He infers from that, thus, If God
gave his Son to die for All, then he had as great an act of love, and made as
great a manifestation of it to them that perish, as to them that are saved. But
this follows not, for though in it self it was exceeding great, yea compared
singly with other acts as to the outward expression, the greatest act of love
to give Christ to die for men, yet in regard of the heart of God in it, and the
conjoying that act with others, he manifested not, nor acted so great love to
them that perish, as to them that are saved. 1. I say, in regard of the heart
of God, for in chap. 8. Mr. Owen tells us, Gods love is his velle bonum
creaturis, his purpose and will of grace; which if so, then that's to be
accounted the greatest to them, to whom he purposed the greatest good by that
act, which was but the medium of good to men. Now in as much as he purposed
more grace to some through that gift then to others, to the saved then to those
that perish, though in the medium they all shared, yet it cannot be said that
he manifested, or acted as much love to one as to another: To illustrate it
take this comparison, David put his life in hazard from the Israelites when he
fought with the Philistin, in that he laid his life down at the stake as it
were, 1 Samuel 19.5.
and it was the greatest act of love he could have showed to his friend to lay
down his life for him, yet in this act he might love his Father with a more
intense love then many others of them; yet he hazzarded his life for them all,
and showed forth that act of love to them all that in expression is highest. 2.
In respect of other acts. Though that act was greater then any other act of
love (I say suppose that) yet not so great as that and other acts also joined
with it. He loved believers with that and diverse others, as in compelling them
in, etc. 3. Yea suppose all loved alike in that, yet if some of them all so
alike loved, requiting that his same like-love worse then others, As Hosea,
9.15.
are left, and he takes their slighing his so great love so ill, that he will
love them no more: And others not so requiting him, but accepting it, continue
in his love (as the phrase is Joh. 15.10.) and he saves them, shall we say he
loves not these more then the other? If David venture his life for All the
Israelites alike, and after that he coming to have Power and Government, one is
by that knit to him and loves him again, as Jonathan did, and he enters into
Covenant with him to be his choice friend; and another regards him not for
this, but churlishly requites him, as Nabal did, and for that he destroys him;
shall we say now That David loved Nabal as much as Jonathan, because he acted
the same highest act of love for them both formerly? would not that be a
notorious falsehood? And is not this then a notorious fallacy in Mr. Owen?

2. He infers, That for whomsoever he has given his Son, to them "also he will
assuredly freely give all things. But I deny, that the Apostle says any such
thing. But thus. That having given his Son for us all, he will surely give us
all things with him. Us, that is, such as believe on him; Us, that are in
Christ, that are called according to purpose, etc. Jonathan, or Abigal making
this Inference, If David spared not himself, but put his life in his hand for
us all, when we were strangers to him, will not he that had so much love to us
then, give us ( Us, his federates and dear friends) with himself (having also
given himself to us by Covenant) whatever is in his power to the half of his
Kingdom? Will it follow from such a speech that Therefore whomsoever David
loved so well as to venture his life for them against the Philistin, to them he
will give any good thing that's desirable of him, yea, though many of them are
his arch-enemies, and do rebel against him? Who sees not this to be a false
Inference? and yet such is this of Mr. Owens. The believer does, or may expect
all good things from Christ that died for them (even upon that consideration
that he died for them,) and shall have them; therefore whosoever he died for,
shall have all good things too. Thence also that Faith is not in the number of
that All things spoken of, appears, because the parties thus speaking, and of
whom this is spoken, are actual believers before the making of this Inference.
That conception is like this, He that was at such cost, as to make a great
Feast for us (who are brought in to it already, and are at it with thankful
acceptance) how shall he not give Us to eat any dainty that is provided,
therefore its from this speech inferable, That he that was at such cost to make
such a feast, will make all that he invited, to come and eat every dainty of
it. Whereas he says, His description of those persons there spoken of to be
Elect, not All, but those chosen in Christ before the foundation of the world,
confirms the restraint of the Death of Christ to them alone. 1. He proves not,
nor I am persuaded can he, That any man yet uncalled has that denomination of
Elect in Scripture. 2. We may see the vanity of his Argument by this ensuing
Similitude. David venturing his life, and conquering the Philistin, and
obtaining the Kingdom, Shall he not stand by his friends, familiars and
kindred? He that did that for them, when mean, will he suffer any enemy to vex
and spoil them being invested with the power of the Kingdom? Ergo, David
hazarded his life, only for his friends, familiars, and kindred, and not for
any that were his enemies, or that afterward dealt injuriously and rebelliously
against him. Is this a good inference, The Elect of God (be they what they
will) shall be preserved by the Death, Resurrection, and Intercession of Christ
from perdition (which is all the Apostle there says, he says not they are the
adequate object of Christ's Death) Therefore Christ died for no more then they,
nor desired any good thing to be granted to any other, but to them? Who that
understands Reason would not hiss out such arguments? So from these words of
the Apostle concerning the Elect; Who is he that condemns, its Christ that
died; does this Inference fairly follow? That whosoever he died for shall not
be condemned? more then from this; If David's brother, or good Subjects had
said, Who is he that accuses us? Its David the King that ventured his life for
our good, and now raings to defend us from harm, it would follow, Ergo, None
that he ventured his life for against Goliath, shall be put to death for any
after-carriage toward him. It does but undeniably appear to me from all this,
that Mr. Owen understands not the drift of the Apostle, nor sees the manner of
his reasoning; but no whit evident, That Christ died only for the Elect, as he
says.

He next Allegation is, Ephesians. 1 7. We have redemption in him, Scrip. 6.
That is still, we that are brought to him, made accepted in him, translated
into his Kingdom (as Col. 1.14. and as himself grants in his Chapter against
the Socinians, where he denies any of the Elect to be freed from wrath till
regenerate) we have (that is, enjoy or possess) Redemption, that is, remission
of our sins, clearing and freeing us from all our bonds, etc. Therefore all
that he died for, or; Therefore he died only for us. Is this right reasoning?
put it into form and then judge of it; its thus. If the believer has redemption
in Christ, Then all that he died for, But the believer has, etc. I deny the
Consequence of his Major Proposition, and leave him to prove it. And it in what
sense All have release, and in what not, we have said before. There is
redemption in Christ for All to seek after, and so remission with him, preached
or predicable to all, that they might look after it, but, All for whom he died,
I say, have it not, that is, have not received it, and so enjoy it not. How
also they may be (comparatively to what their case should have been) blessed,
and how not blessed, in that sense spoken of, Romans 4.6, 7. we have showed in
Chap. 7.

His next is, Scrip. 7.
2 Cor. 5.21. He made him to be sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him, that is, in believing on him. Thence he infers,
All that He was made sin for, are made the righteousness of God in him. Its
like that, He brought them into Canaan that they might keep his Statutes, Ergo,
All that were brought into Canaan kept his Statutes; as we noted at the
beginning. So by his stripes we (we believers) are healed, Ergo, All that he
died for, shall, though they never submit to have the plaster applied. David
by hazzarding his life brought us his friends to honor, Ergo, He ventured his
life for no more but them that come to honor. As weak is that from Joh. 15, 13.
" Greater love than this has no man: If he acted the greatest, Why not all the
rest? In which there is nothing but Reason exalting it self against the Word of
God.

David put his life in his hand for All Israel, Why, seeing that was the
greatest act of love a man could show, did he not do all other acts of love to
them all as to Jonathan? Again, This This life is more then food, Matthew. 6.25.
Why then does God suffer any to perish for want of food, which is the less,
seeing he has given them life which is the greater? Why does he not enrich and
furnish them to the utmost? Where is the sobriety of Faith that should keep men
from being sick about such questions?

His next is. Scrip. 8.
I pray for them, I pray not for the world, and for their sakes I sanctify my
self. Joh. 17.9.19. Ergo, He died only for them. This is answered before, lib.
1. cap. 2, 3, 5. Its like this, A Prince procuring pardon for a company of
Rebels, releases them from the sentence of death, and by publishing his grace
to them, gains in some of them to be his servants, whom he makes his Favorites,
and imploys them to negotiate for him with the rest, that they also might
become his servants and find favor. Being about to leave that Country, and go
a far journey; he commits them to his Father, and entreats him to have a
special care of them his Servants and Favorites, admit them at all times into
his presence, make them acquainted with his counsels, assist them in their work
against all Opposers, And tells him in his request making, he asks not those
things for the Rebels yet standing out, but for those reconciled ones for whom
in special he set himself apart to make this request, and yet entreats him
also, That whoever of the Rebels yet in Arms shall by their ministration be won
in to like affection and service to him, they might find like respect from him
as they, Ergo. This Prince procured not the former pardon for all the Rebels,
or did not rescue them from the death they were going to. A baculo ad Angulum.
Such also is his last.

His last is, Ephe. 5.25. Acts 20.28. Christ loved the Church, Scrip. 9.10.
and gave himself for it, Ergo, Christ died not for all. David fought with the
Philistin, and exposed his life to danger for his friends and Fathers House
(suppose) to bring them to honor. Ergo, He did it not at all for All Israel.
The Church, People called, are properly the object of Christ's care, to be
washed and presented glorious, as a fit Bride for himself, Ergo, He loved, he
died for no more. Its like this. A man's wife is properly the object of his
Conjugal affection, Ergo, A man may love none but his wife with a love of
charity. The brazen Serpent was to heal no more then looked up to it, Therefore
it was provided for none to look to, but them that did look to it, and were
healed. Such are Mr. Owens Inferences. Christ eyed such as were to be given him
of the Father, as a people that would stand in need of much healing and
washing; and provided in his Death, that such should have what ever tends to
their perfection, Ergo, he laid down his life for no more to ransom them and
set them at liberty to seek after him. A Prince ransoming a thousand prisoners,
makes it in his bargain, that all of them that submit to him, upon view of this
act, should be made Courtiers, Only fifty of them submit, and are made so,
Ergo, he ransomed no more out of Prison. Such Arguments as these are scarce
worth so much time and labor as to answer. No one of the places alleged by Mr.
Owen, says, That Christ died not for All, or tells us, that there are some that
he died not for; nor can such a Conclusion be fairly, and by Scriptureproof be
enforced from any one of them, or all of them together. And whereas he thought
to have added more, He did better as he did, except they had more force in
them. And so I have passed through all his Arguments, which I have found
propounded with more confidence of their weight then he had reason. And so we
have done also with his Third Book.

Lib. Quartus; A view of, and a reply to his Fourth BOOK.
His Fourth Book is spent about answering our Arguments for the extent of
Christ's Death as a Ransom. So that, as in the other three, we had his Arguments
to throw down; So in this we have to defend our own against him.

CHAP. I.
A view of an Answer to the Premises laid down by him in his first Chapter.

IN the first Chapter of this Book, he lays down some Previous Considerations,
as Grounds upon which he intends to frame his Answers to our Arguments. Of
which,

1. The first is, Consid. 1.
about The innate Sufficiency of the death of Christ, That the death of Christ
is sufficient for the Redemption of the whole world, for the expiation of all
the sins of All and every man in the world, and that arising from the dignity
of his person, and the greatness of the pains that he suffered, he undergoing
the whole curse of the Law and wrath of God due to sin. This (he says) is its
own Internal worth (which I will not deny) but then he adds that, Its being a
price for any, and being beneficial to them according to the worth that is in
it, arises not from that, but is merely External, and depends upon the
Intention and Will of God: The intention of the offerer and accepter that it
should be for such some, or any. All which I will grant him also. But thence he
comes to view the Distinction used by some Protestant Divines, Of his Dying for
All Sufficienter but not Efficaciter, in regard of the Sufficiency of the
Ransom he paid, but not in regard of the Efficacy of its Application; which he
denies, except in this sense, That it was sufficient to have been made a Price
for All, but it was not a sufficient price and ransom for All, not because not
sufficient, but because not a Ransom. In which he speaks,

1. Improperly, as to his own intention, for that it was a Ransom, is as
undoubtedly a Truth, as that it had an innate sufficiency for All, but he
should have said (had he spoken rightly to his own meaning) not because not
sufficient, but because not intended for All as a Ransom.

2. Untruly, and so as he overthrows that distinction, for that which was not
done at all for All, was not sufficiently done for All. Now I on the contrary
affirm, That it was sufficiently endured for All, yea as a ransom, yea and so
effectual with God too for All, that he inflicts not upon All, what justice
exacted according to the sentence gone out upon Adam and All in him; had he
dealt with All men according to that word, He and all in him had that day
perished and been cut off for ever: but Christ interposing, made All things to
consist, and upheld the pillars of the earth, which else were dissolved. Yea
God deals mercifully and bountifully with All, and dispenses of his goodness to
All, quite contrary to the Demerit of All in that sin. And further he has done
for All so sufficiently in his Death, that He is a meet object for All to
believe on, and hope in, and (especially where the Gospel-proclamation comes)
its great unrighteousness and iniquity in men, not to depend on him, live to,
and serve him; even as great or greater then it was for the Israelites brought
wonderously out of Egypt, not to believe Gods word for bringing them to Canaan.
He has done so much for All and every man, that he is worthy they should look
up to him, and able in so doing to save them without renewing his sufferings,
or making a new bargain about them for them.

His inferences from that first premise I shall view also: they are

1. That he conceives, Infer. 1.
That the Assertors of Universal Redemption, do much undervalue the infinite
value and worth of the Death of Christ, which I deny, and challenge him to make
it good against us, which he assays, By telling us that we Affirm that a door
of grace was opened by it for sinners, but deny that any were effectually
carried in at the door by it. Which 1. Is a false imposition, for we affirm
that the sight and discovery of this has such virtue in it, that it
effectually pulls in many at the door, reconciles, washes, begets to hope, etc.
Yea this is the proper or ordinary way of Gods bringing in men effectually; to
glorify his Son in these his sufferings and sacrifice to them.

2. Suppose we should say he obliged not God by his Death to bring in any at
All; yet it will not thence follow that we extenuate the value and worth of the
sacrifice of Christ. If Mr. Owens principle be true it salves that, for he
says, Its being a price for this or that man (sure then by consequence too for
this or that thing) arises not from its inward worth, but is merely external
to that, arising solely from the Intention of the offerer and accepter, that
is, from the mutual part or Covenant agreed upon between them. Therefore if it
was not agreed upon by Christ and God, that God should bring in this or that
man, or any at all to believe in him, it would be no diminishing the virtue of
it, that being not hereby to be measured. No, should we say any of, or All
those things that he imputes to the Arminians, viz. That God might if he would
and upon what condition he would, save those for whom Christ dyed, and Christ
procured not a right of salvation for any, so that God might have dealt with
man according to a legal condition again, or that all and every man might have
been damned, and yet the Death of Christ have had its full effect, etc. That
Christ purchased no more for any, then that they might go to hell with; yet
supposing that such had been the Covenant between God and Christ (as doubtless
they do suppose so, that so express themselves) by Mr. Owens own principle
before laid down, we should be acquitted of dishonoring or undervaluing the
Death of Christ therein; that not being the Measure of its worth, what he
purchased by it, but what the dignity of his person and greatness of his
sufferings. The things purchased being only according to the agreement between
God and Christ, not the sufficiency of his Death to have purchased by it. Such
expressions may not rightly declare the agreement between God and Christ about
the end of his sufferings, but no way deny the inward worth of them by his
principles, from which this is wondrously inconsequently inferred.

2. His second is, Infer. 2.
That the innate virtue and sufficiency it has, is a foundation to the
general preaching of the Gospel to All Nations, and of the right that it has
to be preached to every creature, because the way to salvation it declares is
wide enough for all to walk in. How that should be a foundation for that, I
see not, more then the paying for ten prisoners in a thousand, ten times as
much to ransom them, as might have sufficed to have ransomed them all, but yet
excluding in the bargain All but ten, is a good foundation to go tell all those
thousand that there is very good news for them All; there is as much paid for ten
of them, as would have ransomed them All ten times over but 990. of them were
excluded the bargain, yet good ground to bid every one of them look for freedom
by it. Sure its not the wideness of the way that is ground enough to tell All,
that there is good news for them, but the liberty that they may have to walk in
it. The Truth is that Doctrine not only makes the Gospel needless to be
preached to All, but needless also to be preached at All, seeing none for whom
Christ dyed can possibly miss of life, by their doctrine, All their sins past
present and to come being satisfied for, and of due to be discharged, should
they hear nothing at all. But he infers further.

3. That, Infer. 3.
That inward sufficiency in it self (made insufficient to the most by that
exclusive intention) is a good ground to call all men every where to Repent and
to believe. I wonder what ground that can be for that. Sure as much as the
telling a thousand prisoners That one had paid as much for the ransom of ten
of them, as would have sufficed for the ransoming ten times so many as they all
are, is a good ground to call upon them All to have good thoughts of him that
gave the ransom for them some, to be sorry for their faults against him, and
to be broken at the hearsay of his love to them, and expect every one of them
to be set at liberty by virtue of that Ransom. I pray what greater ground
should a thousand men have, All to look for deliverance, because of the payment
of so much for so few, more then if they should hear that he had paid only so
much as would suffice to ransom them few. How can we exhort All to admire and
be affected with Gods love to them, mourn for their follies against such a
lover of them, love him for his love, and hope that he by virtue of Christ's
Death will fully save them, if we cannot say by the word of God (which is only
meet to beget divine faith) that Christ has dyed for half, nay for any of them
(for such may be the case for ought any of them know of their whole
Congregation) Is our humane conjectures and peradventures that such and such a
one may be of that Number, ground enough to bid men affect, and love, and hope
in God, as one that has loved them? Or do we speak of Faith and Repentance,
neither springing from Love believed, nor accompanied with love to God in our
hearts? Sure such Faith and Repentance are not those the Scriptures call for.
Or can we expect that the telling men of its infinite sufficiency will beget
hope in them, more then if it were only sufficient for them for whom it was
intended, whenas they are told they are never the more included in its
intendment by virtue of its infinite sufficiency, then if it was far less
sufficient? We may, its true, assure men of salvation if they be believers, or
do believe, but can we (upon that ground) assure any one of good ground for
their believing, or that Christ is an object meet for them to believe on, that
he is appointed as a Mediator for them, or is able to save them? For can we say
he is able to save any more then those that were included in his intention? If
he should save any more, he must make a new bargain for them, and pay a new
price for their salvation. What is this better then Law-preaching, to say, If
thou believe thou shall be saved? The Law promises life to those that keep
it, but affords not motive and spirit to effect what it requires. So does
their Doctrine promise life upon Faith, but gives no straw, affords no certain
object that such or such have cause to believe on him, demonstrates no love to
the soul to draw it in to believe, for that's uncertain, such Preachers give but
an uncertain sound, that cannot affirm, that the Word of God says, That there
is any thing done by Christ for any one man in their Congregations, that may
evidence it a just and right thing for him to hope in God for salvation.

But he tells us, That when God calls upon men to believe, he does not in the
first place call upon them to believe that Christ died for them, but that there
is no name under heaven whereby they may be saved, but only of Jesus Christ
Well, and is there not an intimation in that that Christ died for them? Sure he
that excepts the Name of Jesus Christ, intimates he has a Name by which they
may. And what is that? Name, Either signifies Power and Authority, or the
report and fame that goes on him. Now he that leaves it uncertain, whether
Christ died sufficiently for them (as he confessedly does that leaves it
uncertain whether Christ has died for them) leaves it also uncertain, whether
Christ has power by his death to save them. Nor can they fame him to be one
able and ready to save them; and so they cannot preach, that there is a Name of
Jesus by which they may be saved. So that the proof he brings, overthrows the
Assertion which it is brought to prove. Can men be called on to believe in God,
and not through a Mediator? And can they look through a Mediator on him, when
they know not of any they have? He then that calls upon me to believe through
Christ's Mediation (as whoever calls upon men rightly to believe must do) does
intimate, that there is something in his Mediation for me to be encouraged to
believe in God by, and so by consequence, that he died for me; else (be the
merit of it never so great) its no ground of Faith to me. And surely, however
Mr. Owen determins, God has no where so determined, nor the Apostles so
Preached. One tells us, That the Record of God (which he that believes not
makes God a liar) is this, That God has given us eternal life, and this life
is in his Son, He that has the Son has life, and he that has not the Son
has not life, 1 John 5.10, 11, 12. And surely this is the only full ground of
drawing men to the Son, when they are told by the Word of God, that God has
given them life in his Son, and the way to have it, is to have him, but
rejecting him, and not coming to him for life, they reject life, and deprive
themselves of what God has given them. He that believes not this in every part
of it when declared, makes God a liar; and will not, nor can come in to him to
believe on Christ. If he believe not that God has given him life, then will he
either despair, or seek it by Works, and not by Faith; if not that this life
is in Christ, then will he not look to Christ for it, or believe on him. If he
think he may have it and not have Christ, and have Christ or not have it, then
will he neglect believing on Christ as a thing unnecessary, or unprofitable for
him. So Peter tells the people, Acts 3.23. God sent Christ to turn every one of
you from your iniquities. And Paul, Acts 13.37. tells them, that Remission of
sins was Preached to them in Christ's name, both equivalent to Christ's
Mediating, and dying for them, and coming for their sakes. And so in 2 Cor.
5.19. and Matt. 224.9. The Declaration of Gods good will to them is laid down
as the ground of exhorting them to come in to God. And to say no more, See what
the testimony is, of which God made the Apostle Paul an Apostle, and Teacher of
the Gentiles in Faith and Verity. Is it not that in 1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6, 7. God
would have all men to be saved and come to the knowledge of the Truth, for there
is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus, who
gave himself a Ransom for All? And the appearance of the love of God to man,
was it that brought Paul himself in, Tit. 3.4, 5. Was it ever found that a man
was called by God to trust in that that he never set up for him to trust in! to
stay upon Christ's blood, and Christ shed none for him? So that I hope by this,
the vanity of Mr. Owens Inferences from his first premise appears, and that his
understanding of the Distinction of Sufficiency, and Efficiency, together with
the Consideration of the dignity of the Sacrifice of Christ, in regard as of
his person, so of the greatness of his pains, holds forth only this to us,
That God, to make his Sons sufferings more valuable then needed to be for the
bargain intended, put him to more pains then he needed to have endured, which
is a piece of blasphemy. But I pass from that Consideration.

2. His second premise is about the Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace,
Consid. 2.
and enlarging of the Kingdom of Christ after his appearance in the flesh,
opposed to the former Dispensation, restrained to one People and Family. And
this (he says) gave occasion to many general expressions in the Scriptures,
which are far enough from including an universality of all Individuals. All
which I grant him, and will Instance a few such expressions for him, as that of
Peter. Acts 10.34. Romans 1.16. and 10.13.
In every Nation he that fears God, and works righteousness is accepted of
him. And that, The Gospel of Christ is the power of God to salvation to every
one that, believes, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile, And that, The
Lord over all is rich in mercy to all that call upon him. Which (with other
like expressions) are general and opposed to the restrictive speeches proper to
the former Dispensation, large enough to take in the Believers and Elect of all
Nations, and to remove the restraining expressions, and yet far enough from
comprehending an Universality of all individual men, all not having these
adjunct qualifications. But of such expressions is not our Controversy, but of
those that are comprehensive of an universality of all Individuals, as All, All
men, The whole world, Every one. Now that in them is intended only the Elect
of All Nations, is to beg the Question, and is denied by us, and that neither
weakly nor groundlesly, as I hope will appear, when we view the particular
Scriptures. There are other passages in that Consideration untrue also: As that
there is not in the world Greek, Jew, Circumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, etc.
but Christ is All in All; that is only truly of the new Creature, Col. 3.10,
11. not of the world. Again, That the Spirit was poured out upon all flesh in
its being poured out upon the Apostles. That was of it indeed, but not the
accomplishing or full fulfilling of it, that is referred yet to a further day,
in which the knowledge of the Lord shall cover the earth as the water shall
cover the Sea; that indeed was partly fulfilled that was forespoken about their
Sons and Daughters prophesying. Again that That in Rev. 5.9, 10. contains a
Distribution of that that is set down more generally in other places (meaning
the 1 Timothy 2.6. and the like) which is untrue, for that speaks of another
business, the buying men to God to serve and live to him by the blood of
Christ, not only as shed by him, but also as presented in its virtue and
excellency to their hearts (as Hosea bought him a wife by a price given to her;
and as God bought him a people by bringing them out of Egypt, and doing great
things for them, which prevailed with them to be Gods and not their own) and
this is out of all Nations and Languages. But the other in 1 Timothy 2.6.
comprehends all the Nations and Languages out of which these were taken too;
whence also there is Gospel still to be preached to all Nations and Languages,
etc. after these redeemed ones are mentioned, Rev. 14.4, 5, 6, 7. What he says
to John 11.52. is answered before in the close of the last Chapter of the third
book.

3. His third Premise is, Consid. 3.
That we must distinguish between man's duty and Gods purpose. That's true, God
does not always purpose to make us do what we ought to do, or effect what he
wills us to do. Nor do we confound these two, nor say that God purposed to make
all to believe that he bids to believe (whether they listen to him or not) or
save all that he bids look up to him and be saved (whether they look to him or
not) but we would fain have Mr. Owen show us that God ever bids any man attend
upon an ordinance that was not provided for him, and punished any for not
attending on what was not ordained for them to attend to, that he bids any
believe in Christ, for whom he did not send Christ; bid any believe in his
blood, for whom he shed no blood. As we distinguish between the precept and
purpose of God, so do we also between the foundation of the precept and his
purpose; and affirm that God bids not men to attend to him for Good, where he
has not appointed them some medium in attendance to him, in which they might
have good. He bid none look to the brazen Serpent for whom he had not set it
up, nor punished any such for not looking to it. So that for his
after-inference, I shall only put this to Mr. Owen, to show that it is
acceptable to God, and the duty of man, that any man for whom Christ dyed not,
and for whom God sent him not, should believe and stay upon his Mediation, or
approach to God by him; that those men whom Christ excluded his Mediation, as
much as he did the Devils, have any more duty lying upon them to believe in
Christ, then the Devils have, or that they should in so doing be any whit more
acceptable unto God. As we would not confound Gods precept and his purpose, so
neither would we disjoyn Gods precept from the true ground of it.

4. His fourth is, Consid. 4.
That the Jews had an ingraffed erroneous persuasion, that the salvation or
deliverance of the Messiah or promised seed, belonged only to themselves who
were the offspring of Abraham according to the flesh, which is also untrue;
they ever held and believed that any people of any other Nations being
converted and proselyted to them were capable of fellowship with them in their
ordinances and blessings, and thence they endeavored to make many proselytes,
which had been bootless, had they thought by so doing they should yet have had
no share in their blessings; the rest, its true, that remained unproselyted,
were looked upon as Dogs; but any man, though not of Abraham's seed, yet by
Circumcision, and being proselyted, did grow into one body with them. Thence
the false Apostles, zealous of the Law and honor of the Jewish Nation, did not
plead against Gentiles coming to their privileges, but that as Gentiles and
Uncircumcised they should be so admitted: that was their great stumble, as in
Acts 11.3. Thou wentest into men uncircumcised, and did eat with them, and
Chap. 15.2. Except ye be circumcised and keep the Law of Moses, ye cannot be
saved, but to the proselyted Gentiles, as well as to the Jews of the flesh of
Abraham they preached from the beginning without scruple, as in Acts 2. Peter
and the rest preached to peoples of all Nations round about that were
proselytes, etc. and so in Acts. 6.1, 2. Their Church consisted of Jews and
Grecians. Not that, but this was the Mystery, that the Gentiles being yet
such, uncircumcised in the flesh, should be made fellow-heirs of the same body,
and partakers of the promises of Christ: But he tells us, That this taking in of
the Gentiles gave occasion to many general expressions, which we have granted
before: But that therefore the words, All men, World, Whole world, signify
only the people of God scattered throughout the Whole World, I deny, and desire
Mr. Owen to prove, seeing those expressions of All that fear God, Jew and
Gentile, All that believe, Jew and Gentile, etc. were sufficient for that
purpose, expressions used frequently when the Apostles speak of the
participation of the special benefits that come by Christ's Death, as
salvation, acceptance to favor the promises of God, etc. in which cases the
words All men, the World, the Whole world, are never used. Its never said the
Whole world is accepted of God, All men shall be saved, etc. and yet in those
cases there are such words used as exclude all limitations of those things to
the Jews. In every Nation he that fears God, etc. All that call upon the name
of the Lord: Whosoever believes, Jew or Gentile. And had that been all the
reason of the Apostles using general expressions, and had it been his
intention in them to include none but the people of God, those expressions had
been large enough, and apter for that business, affording no occasion of
misconception or contention; therefore we conclude, that seeing they had and
used other words to include all that are the subject of Gods promises in
Christ, which included but them, and all of them of all Nations, they had some
further reason in using these larger expressions, of All, Every one, the Whole
world, etc. in the business of the Death of Christ and the Gospel preaching,
especially, seeing they use not those largest words in affirming the enjoyment
of Eternal life and salvation to men, which yet are enjoyed, as far as Mr.
Owen would extend their signification. Beside, what made the use of those large
expressions to the Gentile Churches for rooting out of the Jews that foresaid
opinion? and yet to the Gentile Churches he most frequently uses it; or what
did that make to persuade the Eunuch or Gentile to take hold of the Covenant
when he uses them to those that had taken hold of it already? besides, would
not those other expressions of Whoever calls upon the name of the Lord, Jew or
Gentile, or Whosoever believes, Jew or Gentile, etc. have sufficed to those
purposes that Mr. Owen pretends. So that this gives not light into the sense
of those words, All, and Whole World, used by the Apostles in this business of
Redemption. Nor proves he them to hold forth a general distribution only into
men of All sorts (which the other phrases more clearly do) and not a collective
Universality. That in John 11.52. we have answered before, and it falls into the
number of those places, that speaking of the enjoyment of the special
privileges of the Saints (such as Union together in privileges must needs
include) use not a General or Universal expression, but a General qualified
expression. This was one end of Christ's Death, That all the Children of God in
all Nations, that is, all believers should be made one in privilege, but it
answers not those expressions that say, he dyed for All and Every one. It shows
what was one intention of his dying, not the extent of the Object of his Death
in every intention.

5. He tells us, The General words All, Consid. 5.
and the World, etc. must be considered and weighed with the context. Accipimus
legem, We desire so to do, and not to triumph merely in the bare expression, as
he says, though we have more reason to triumph in them, then they in
inferences, and those lame ones, from no expressions that can seem to enforce
them. Nor can he make it good, That our taking the letter of the Scripture in
the declaration of the principles of our faith, will uphold the
Anthropomorphytes, there being in the Scriptures contradictory expressions to
their conceptions, and no one Scripture that says the things attributed to God,
have the form of the same things in men; but we challenge Mr. Owen, or any of
them All, to show us one expression in Scripture contradictory to our
Assertion; any that says Christ did not die for All, or for any one particular
man or people. Nor will it uphold the Papists conceit of Transubstantiation,
they finding no letter of Scripture that contains that conception, either Name
or Thing, no Scripture that says he called the bread his body, much less that
says, that bread was turned into his body. So that that charge is fond and vain.

He passes in this to view the several acceptations of the word World in
Scripture, pretending only to view the significations of the word (...) (which
indeed is only pertinent) but he forgot that the word (...) is translated World
too, as well as (...), and is different from the word (...), else sure he would
not have produced Luke 2.1. to show that the World, called (...), signifies the
Roman Empire, unless he was not willing to see that, because his party usually
(though impertinently) allege it to straiten the signification of the word
(...) in this controversy.

To let go other acceptions of it, he tells us, It sometimes signifies, The
Good, Gods people, either in designation or possession, for which he alleges
Psalm. 22.27. against which I except. 1. That the word World is not in the
original, its (...), and so the Greek renders it, (...), All the ends of the
earth. 2. Nor is it probable that all there spoken of shall be, or are godly
men; for in the Distribution afterward there is mentioned amongst them, them
that go down to the dust; which may signify to destruction. And its said many
of those that profess Gods name in the latter days (even of the Gentiles)
shall be foolish Virgins, even at that time, and of them Satan shall deceive
multitudes and gather them to battle against the holy city. So that more shall
turn unto the Lord, then prove through-believers; The other places of Joh.
3.16, and 6.33, 51. we deny to be taken in that sense, except we should read
Joh. 3.16. thus, God so loved the Elect, or the good or better part of the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes should not
perish, which to me seems nonsense, the word (...), whoever believes, having
the force of a distributive or partitive to the word World, otherwise it had
been proper to have said, that they or it believing should not perish, or that
it should believe and not perish. In Ioh. 6.33, 51. and 2 Cor. 5.19. we say he
begs the question, and brings no ground that confirms his saying, we shall
refer the further consideration of them to due place. That in Romans 4.12. is
very impertinent, for it makes the words of the Apostle to sound thus, that the
promise was made to Abraham, and to all the people of God (for that's the force
of the word, his seed there) that they should be heirs of all the people of
God; which is a piece of nonsense. We say that the word World there, signifies
Mundum Continentem, not only the inhabitants, but all the things of the World,
as in 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. All things are yours, the world etc. chiefly the world
to come, The world, as heaven and earth and all things shall be made new. That
in Romans 11.12, 15. is impertinent too, and untruly alleged in that sense. The
Words, Riches, and Reconciliation, signify but the way or means to enrich and
reconcile; for that the fall of the Jews was not the formal riches and
reconciliation of the world, Upon To. 11.15.
is as clear as the noon-light, but that was the occasional way of enriching
and reconciling the World, not only the Elect and Godly, but the rest, though
many by rejecting the riches of Christ preached amongst, and the word of
reconciliation preached to them, with the grace therein tendered, were not
actually enriched with the riches proper to the Saints, and reconciled in their
hearts. As wholesome Laws and good Government are the hapiness of a Nation, that
is, the way and means of making a Nation in general happy, though many by their
evil-bearing them, and rebelling against them, should actually pull down
mischief upon their own heads: So the goodness of God extended to men in the
Gospel and Ordinances of God, is a Table to them, though they by their unbelief
turn it into a snare, Psalm. 69.22. and is a mercy to men in general, though
many by observing lying vanities, put away their own mercy from them, Joh. 2.8.
That place in Col. 1.6. Evidently signifies, Mundum continentem, place, not
persons. Thence the change of the phrase. Its come to you, as also in all the
world, He says, Not to you and to All the world. In the World, signifies
Place; To the World had signified Persons: The Gospel is Preached in the world
to men. That in 1 John 2.2. We deny to signify the godly only, we shall view
his proofs for it when we come at them. I might show also some begged, presumed,
and proofless Applications of diverse Scriptures quoted by him, to show that the
word World signifies men rejected, and accursed, as Joh. 15.19. and 17.25. with
some others, which in their expressions might have been applied to Saul, and
many persecuters of Christ that were after converted, but I pass them, with
diverse other things less pertinent. What he promises upon this Observation we
shall speak to when we meet it. Whereas he further notes, 1. That there is
often in Scripture an (...), an ingemination of the same Word in a several
sense, We grant it, but his Application of it to John 3.17. as concerning the
different significations of the word World in those two phrases, Not to condemn
the world, but that the world through him might be saved, we say is begged, and
desire any one clear proof that any believer, or number of believers living in
the world, are called the world, The present world. He notes, 2. That no
Argument can be taken from a phrase of speech in the Scripture in any
particular place, if in other places thereof where it is used, the
signification pressed from that place is evidently denied, unless the scope of
the place, or subject matter of it do enforce it. This we consess, as to
Argument, though to Faith a place may be sufficient where the Argument will not
enforce it by this rule. As to Instance. All that are in their graves shall
hear the voice of the Son of God, and shall come forth, some to the
resurrection of life, and some to the resurrection of condemnation. By his Rule
we cannot conclude, That All, and Every man shall arise out of their graves,
because the word All is taken in many places but for the generality of men, not
for every individual. As All men seek their own, etc. Therefore from the word
All we cannot enforce that signification. Again, The scope of the place will
not enforce it, for its independent to the preceding Verses, except in this,
that therein Christ asserts his glorious Power and Authority fore-spoken of;
That he had life in himself, power to quicken and raise up whom he would, which
might be demonstrated, as well in quickening the generality of good and bad in
their graves, as in every individual. Again, That distribution, Some to life,
and some to condemnation, inforces only that good and bad shall rise, not
every individual of either. Nor is the matter Res necessaria: Its in the power
of God, and in his Will to raise All or some, every individual, or but the most
and generality. And yet though reason cannot be pressed to conclude it in so
large an extent, yet Faith may be persuaded so to believe it; It being ground
enough for Faith to believe it so largely, That the words may bear it, and
there is nothing of evidence from God against the largest it will bear. It
being sauciness in man to put in his limitations in matters of Faith, where
Gods Spirit elsewhere, or the matter spoken of, does not necessarily enforce a
limitation.

"He nextly instances the word All, Denying that its ever said, That Christ
died for All men. Which we have answered before. We grant it sometimes is
applied Distributively to sorts, and sometime collectively, but deny that the
word holds forth such a Distributive acceptance only in the places
controverted. His instance of Joh. 12.32. I will draw All men to me, is but
begged: That it signifies all sorts we grant, That it signifies not All
individuals we desire him to prove. He thinks to prove it thus, That all that
come to him by the Fathers drawing, he will in no wise cast out. But herein he
prevaricates. For its not said in any Scripture, That all that God draws come
to Christ. Without his drawing none can come to him, but that every one that he
draws come, we find not. He drew Ephraim with the cords of love, and the bands
of a man, but no where says, that they came to him upon it, but seems rather to
complain against him of drawing back from him, Hos. 11.3, 4.2. Nor does Christ
say, My Father shall draw all to me, but he speaks of his own drawing. 3. Nor
is it manifest what drawing he speaks of, whether of Grace only to believe,
or of power also to be judged. The latter it may be, or both. For of judging he
was speaking immediately before. And that not upon the gracious inquiring after
him, as most refer it to that. verse. 20.21. But upon the Fathers voice coming
to him, that he would glorify him, verse. 28, 29. Immediately upon which he
says, Now is the judgment of this world, He says not the conversion of the
world, but the judgment, and that began in the Prince of it. Now shall the
Prince of the world be cast out, and then afterward he will draw All to him,
being lifted up First, on the Cross, secondly, in the Gospel, thirdly, By the
right hand of God to the Throne of Glory, a part of which glory is to judge All.
Being thus lifted up, he will draw all to him, either by Grace to own him, or
by his Power to be judged by him. And this he spoke signifying what death he
should dye, as on the Cross so a public death, and such as in and by which he
should receive authority over all flesh, etc. Why any should exclude this
drawing to judgment, I see not, he speaking of judging the world, and why to
deny it without reason for it, I see as little. Such a drawing I find in Psalm.
28. (...). Draw me not with the wicked, etc. So that as this place is begged for
his purpose, so its impertinently indeavored to be confirmed. That Rev. 5.9. Is
the interpretation of that Text Joh. 12.32. the Scripture tells him not: that's
begged and untrue also. For if they were the All, who are called the four
Beasts, and twenty four Elders, who and what then were those 144000; mentioned
to sing before those Beasts and Elders, and said also to be redeemed? Rev.
14.2, 3, 4. which number of 144000. agrees with the number of the sealed Chap.
7. Besides whom, were yet an innumerable number out of all Nations, Kindreds,
etc. If the first were the All spoken of by Christ, who were the other two
numbers exceeding that All? The following proof of (...), I conceive
impertinent too: for Did they take for Tithe the tenth species only, and not
rather the tenth individual in Geometrical or Arithmetical proportion of every
species? And so (...), as if Christ cured not every particular disease of the
people where he was, and that were brought unto him, for of them only he there
speaks. So his instance, (...), 1 Timothy 2.8. That it cannot mean every
individual place. I Answer, It means any individual place, where ever men come,
none that I know excepted. And that in opposition to an elected place only, as
formerly in Jerusalem. And if Mr. Owen will but grant us the same liberty of
interpreting the words (...) and (...), in verse 4. and 6. We desire no more. I
know not that the Apostle excepts either heaven or hell, when the believers
come into them, but they may pray in them. Paul conversed in heaven, and I
believe he prayed there too in his there conversing, Phil. 3.20. and for Hell,
Jonas prayed out of the belly of it, Jonas 2. And why others may not too that
can pray, I know not, if ever God try them so far as to cast them into it. His
other Exceptions I pass over; the whole Postulatum if granted being not
material against us, as we shall see, I hope, in due place. He gives us some
conclusions about the signification of the word All, as 1. That it signifies
All believers, so as to be restrained to them. So he says it is in Romans 5.18.
To all men to justification of life. But there he is manifestly out. For the
Apostle himself subjoyns the Substantive to the word All, All men, (...), not
(...): That the word Man is equipollent to the word Believer, is another
question, which I leave for Mr. Owen to prove. For for my part, I think not
that all men are only believers, and none but they, men. The 1. Cor. 15.22. In
Christ all shall be made alive, He says, is not All men, but All believers
only. In which he intimately asserts one of these two Propositions, either
that all men shall not rise or be quickened to life again; or, that it shall not
be in, or by Christ (for so this word (...) often signifies) quoting, Epes.
4.10. He tell us, That he might fill all things, signifies, That he might only
fill all believers; And so that in Psalm. 33.5. may not be applied to Christ,
That the earth is full of his goodness. Which, as I am not bound to believe it,
because I have but Mr. Owens word for it, so neither do I, no more then that
there is, or may be no act of justification in any sense, no not in the public
person, none to life without faith, because that's the ordinary way to life
eternal.

2. He says, " All is used sometimes for some of All sorts, its the same he
said before, only he backs it with another impertinent proof; for Jer. 31.34.
says (...), all of them, that is, of the house of the Judah and Israel in the
latter days, not of All sorts of men, and sure it is all the Israel of God,
the confessors of his goodness in faith that are taken into the Covenant, and
shall know God; not only some of all sorts of them, and whereas the Apostle
Paul translates it (...), All, in Heb. 8.11. he supplies the want of the
Pronoun Affix in the next phrase, (...), and I hope, All from the least of them
to the greatest of them, is as plain as All of them: he quotes also the 1 Timothy
2.1, 2. and tells us he thinks the Apostle by All, means All sorts, and so he
does; but that he means but some of All sorts is void of proof, for he says
not, some Kings and some peasants, but Kings and all in Authority, he names but
one Genus of men, men in authority, and he says all of that sort, And why not
all of all the other sorts as well as that? I expect some reason (more then I
shall meet with) before I believe it. Why all Merchants, all beggars, etc. may
not as well as all in authority be the object of my prayers, I know no reason:
I think I have as good ground to think All of the one shall be saved, as All of
the other. So that these are but impertinent observations to the purpose: But
then,

3. He would have us compare the General expressions of the old and New
Testament together; the Lord affirming in the New to be done, what was foretold
in the old should be done; so that they are answerable to and expository one of
another. Well, I accept the motion, but then this comparison must be adidem,
but so Mr. Owen compares not, for he compares prophecies of the conversion of
Nations and families to the Death of Christ for all, and his mediation for
them: but this is not equal. The dying of Christ for a man was not the
fulfilling of the prophecy of the conversion of that man, and of his coming to
Christ. Act. 15.9, and 13, 48. Col. 1.6.
Those prophecies agree with these speeches, God put no difference between them
and us after that by faith he had purifyed their hearts; and this, The Gentiles
glorified the Word of the Lord and believed, so many as were ordained to
eternal life, and this, The Gospel is come to you as in all the world, and
brings forth fruit as it does also in you, and many the like. But that he gave
himself a ransom for All and is the propitiation of the sins of the whole
world, expound these praedictions of the conversion of All Nations, I deny, for
these say not, All believe, or come to his holy mountain, etc. that invitation
in Isa. 45.22. Look to me and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth; is a
call, not a prophetical assertion That all the ends of the earth, shall look
to him and be saved. So that this also is but a fruitless inept comparison.
Whereas he says, when God says he will wipe off tears from all faces, Esa 25
7.8.
it hinders not but the Reprobates may be cast out to eternity. I answer, He
did in and by his Death wipe off tears from all faces; giving himself a ransom
for All, and being the propitiation for the sins of the whole world he keeps
off many a judgment that else would seize upon all, and produce many tears and
much sadness to them, yea and delivers all, from many a trouble and sorrow that
would else overwhelm them: though he does not wipe off all tears from off all
faces, as he will do off from some namely such as believe on him and follow
him, Rev. 7.17. and 21.4. Others abusing his goodness, and sinning against
those mercies toward them and deliverances of them, pull upon themselves tears
and sorrows afresh, that shall never be wiped off them. And besides, its more
equal that the Apostolical expressions should expound the prophetical, then on
the contrary the prophetical to expound them, the prophetical expressions being
as in a darker manifestation of Christ, so more obscure then the Apostolical,
who were to unfold the things of God more plainly. And to speak in the light
what was told them in darkness.

6. He bids us observe, Consid. 6.
That the Scripture speaks of persons and things often according to appearance
and not to reality; as calling men wife, just, and righteous, etc. he names no
Scripture-instance for them, but I hope he knows of righteousness in moral
acts and performances, and that real and true in its kind, an humane
righteousness not only in semblance but in reality, though not enough to
present a man righteous to God as pertaining to his rule for admittance into
his Kingdom; and so wisdom after the flesh, which is really a fleshly humane
wisdom, though not the wisdom of God but foolishness with him, and yet a real
wisdom in its place and kind for worldly things, Luke 16. but of the Death of
Christ there is but one kind, so that it must be really or not at all. His
instance of Mat. 27.53. that Jerusalem is called the Holy city, and yet it was
a den of thieves, is his mistake, to conceive holiness to be inherent frames in
the heart, which Jerusalem as a place and building was not capable of: Holiness
(as we have noted before) in Scripture more frequently signifies the being
separated to God for his name and service, and so it was really holy not
seemingly only: Nay rather in appearance it should be unholy; but in its real
consecration and separation to God (a thing not visible to the eye) a holy eye.
So he instances 2 Chronicles. 21.23. That the Gods of Damascus smote Ahaz, which
(says he) were but stocks and stones, and could never help nor smite him, but
it was God that smote him. Sure he has forgotten that the Gentiles did not
only sacrifice to stocks and stones, but to Devils also by them idols, 1 Cor.
10.20. And I trow the Devils might really smite him, or strengthen men to it,
and yet God suprcamly smite him too; God as supreme Judge, Satan as the
executioner or hangman, using men as instruments as in the case of Job. So that
this fails too, but much more his after-proof of John 5.18. where he brings the
Jews imputing to Christ that he brake the Sabbath day, in which they spoke
falsely to interpret Gods sayings by his Apostles by, as if he spoke so
mistakingly too. To which he adds, That many things proper and peculiar to the
children of God are often assigned to them that live in outward communion with
them, though in truth aliens in respect of inward participation of the grace so
assigned. But whether things were so assigned to them by the unerring and
infallible spirit of God, or by the erring and fallible spirit of men, he tells
us not, nor in what Scriptures they assigned things to them as erring men that
wrote not by Gods spirit. Therefore I can say no more at present to it, but
that his conclusion, " That some may be said to be redeemed, (...), which are
not so (...), is ungrounded and has (...). A dangerous suggestion of a rule
which men may make use of to any Scriptures as well, and subvert the truth of
them, as is also his next consideration, viz.

7. That the Apostles spoke many things according to the judgment of charity,
otherwise in themselves untrue, Consid. 7.
and therefore those things not to be exactly squared and made answerable to
verity in respect of them of whom any thing is affirmed. This I say in
substance is one with the former, and both of them are dangerous principles,
and the very openers of the gap to all the abundance of error brought in by the
Antiscripturists, they are directly their principles, That the Apostles writ as
other good men by a judgment of charity and appearance, and so what they say
may be false, we must not square them to verity because they would not then
hold out. And grant this that the Apostles were not in all things guided by an
infallible spirit (except where they themselves faithfully tell us so) and
where shall we stay? who shall tell us where that infallible spirit assisted
them, and where it left them? Nay though Paul tells the Thessalonians, That he
knew their Election and that of God, yet Mr. Owen will tell him he might be
deceived in that knowledge though. 1 These. 1.4. and 2 These. 2.13. But I believe
Paul durst not have said, he knew it, if he did but think so, out of a
charitable persuasion grounded upon a truth fallibly applied to, or discerned
in them. But perhaps the Apostles spoke not of Election there, as Mr. Owen
does. He thought, perhaps, that it might be made firm or sure, and perhaps it
might be neglected. He perhaps spoke of it, as Moses of the Election of the
Israelites, who though he tells them they were chosen to be a special people to
God, Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7. and yet freely too, yet tells them, That if they walk after
other Gods, and forget Him, they should surely perish as the other Nations that
he destroyed before them, Chap. 8.19, 20. I do but propound that to Mr. Owens
consideration, as also whether he by Election meant not an actual choice of
them, in pulling them out of the world, and bringing them to look after his
salvation. But however I will by no means yield him, That the Apostle spoke at
random, and out of a fallible humane conception of charity, and not by the
infallible Spirit, and so he has no advantage for his following. And why not?
why not, when he says, That Christ died for some that might possibly perish.

8. He tells us of The infallible connection according to Gods Will and purpose
of Faith and Salvation. Consid. 8.
Which we grant, understanding it of Faith rooted in the heart, and having
singled the heart to God, for otherwise there is a degree or kind of Faith not
so infallibly attended with eternal salvation, as that compared to the stony
ground, Matthew. 13.19, 20. And in those that made shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience. But he says, That that's the substance of the Gospel promulgation,
whoever believe shall be saved, that's the only thing held out to innumerable,
That Faith shall be attended certainly with eternal life. Truly I believe that
that's All the Gospel held out to innumerable indeed. For they that know of no
other Gospel predicable to them (at least believe it not) how should they
preach it? And truly, though that's a truth, yet not a truth meet to beget
Faith, but that declares God in Christ an object fit for souls in general and
particular to believe on. That that's all the divine Truth that God bids us
preach as Gospel to innumerable of men, I deny. He quotes for it, Matthew. 16.16.
1 John 5.11. but fails in them of his purpose. He shows his mistake of the
first, in that he thinks that that in Mark 16.16. is a declaration of the
Gospel that they should preach. As if our Savior had said, This is the Gospel
you shall preach, He that believes shall be saved, and he that believes not
shall be damned. Now that this cannot be the Gospel is plain, for then the
latter sentence, He that believes not shall be damned, should be part of the
Gospel too, and so good news, which I suppose, will be hardly judged so. The
truth is, Our having Savior bid them preach the Gospel, informs them what
should be the consequences of their preaching it, He that believes, that is,
that believes the Gospel that you preach, shall be saved, but he that believes
not but rejects it, shall be damned. The Gospel that they were to preach was
his Mission into the world as the Savior of it, his Death for our sins, his
Resurrection, Ascension, etc. with the promises of Life to them that believing
the Gospel believe on him, and so the Apostle preached also (as we have before
showed.) We declare to you good tidings, that God has performed his Promises
to us in raising up Christ from the dead. And be it known, that in this man's
name is preached to you remission of sins. And to instance no more, his other
proof is plain, that they preached more fully then as he tells us. For in that
1 John 5.11. He says not only this is the Record, that life is in Christ, and
he that has him has it, but also (which he leaps over) God has given us that
life eternal that is in Christ, so as that it behooves us to receive it in
receiving him, or else we are ingreateful and guilty of our own destruction.
Whereas he charge us with a Conditional will in God for saving men, I speak
not of any thing conditional in him, but I say, God propounds to men salvation
on condition, and will make good his Word wherever that condition is
performed by men. That which follows in this Consideration is spoken to
generally before, and therefore I shall pass it, and come to the next
Consideration.

9. He minds us of the mixed distribution of Elect and Reprobates, Consid. 9.
Believers and Unbelievers throughout the world, in the several places thereof,
in all, or most of the single Congregations, and that's another ground of
tendering the blood of Christ to them for whom it was never shed. Here are a
heap of begged questions, all without proof; As 1. That some are Elect and
others Reprobates, before the Gospel come to them, and fasten upon some to pull
them to Christ, and his Justice pass upon others in hardening them for their
rejection of Christ. 2. That there are believers, and unbelievers in the
Congregations throughout the world antecedently to the Gospels publishing to
them, and therefore the Gospel must be tendered to All, and the blood of Christ
offered to them for whom it was never shed. 3. That there are some men for whom
Christ never shed his blood, and that God has ordered it to be offered to
them. But 4. Chiefly, This is to be admired, that the holy Ghost that knows the
secrets of God, and revealed them to the Apostles, should out of these grounds,
affirm, that Christ died, and gave himself a ransom for All, when he wrote to
one of the Churches. All which are no matters of our Faith till they have
better proof. What he says of the Promises there is impertinent, for its not
of those we speak, but of the affirmations of the extent of Christ's Death,
Propitiation, and Ransom, which are not promises upon any condition propounded,
but Declarations and Assertions of things done for us in Christ, that are
grounds to us for Faith: Even such grounds as upon which the Apostles exhorts
to Faith, Matthew. 22.4. 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. etc. and from them (though not from the
promises which are the believers portion) Faith meets with something to
persuade us of his Death for All. Whereas he says the offer is not absolutely
universal. If he speak of it as profferd in act by men, its true, but if as
proferable and according to the terms of its Proposition in the Scripture, its
untrue, for there its expressly said, To all the ends of the earth, and to the
whole Creation. For Gods refusing to bestow Faith. I would have him show me
that God any where expresses himself as unwilling and unready to bestow Faith
upon men (where they have not first wilfully rejected him) as if it was a vain
thing to preach to most, and for most to hear, because God will not afford them
power of believing.

10. His last Consideration is of the several degrees of Faith, Consid. 10.
tending to clear this, That men have an object fit to believe on, though they
believe not that Christ died for them. Which I deny, for this believing on God
(the only ultimate object of Faith) being a reliance or depending on him;
presupposes an apprehension of God, as one able and willing to help him, and
that apprehension springing from his Word reporting him to be such, which
cannot be apprehended with this in question, Whether God has given Christ for
him or not? for if that be doubted or uncertain, its uncertain too, whether God
be willing to help him, seeing he has appointed help no ways but by him, and
through his dying for men. But let us see what are his Positions. He tells us
there is,

1. This That sinners cannot have salvation in themselves, in as much as all
have sinned and come short of the glory of God, Nor can be justified by the
works of the Law. This is indeed a truth to be believed, but not properly
Gospel or good news, much less does it show the object to be believed on.

"2. That life is to be had in the promised seed. But this is a lame
Proposition, for it expresses not whether life is there for them to whom its
preached, or only for some they know not who. If the latter, this not yet meet
to beget faith in God in them, it being yet uncertain wheher he bean object for
faith to them. That many believe not this that are outwardly called, is not
material, nor proves that there is no more Gospel Truth that appertains to them
proposable to them. And indeed, one thing that makes many not believe it, is
that they regard not the report of it, and they regard it not perhaps because
it propounds nothing for certain that may be beneficial to them.

3. That Jesus of Nazareth who was crucified at Jerusalem was this Savior.
This also is a truth to be believed, but yet affords no certain ground or
motive for any man's expecting good from God to himself, nor propounds him as a
fit object for this or that man to believe on. But then

4. He says, The Gospel requires resting in this Christ as an Allsufficient
Savior, with whom is plenteous redemption, able to save to the utmost all that
come to God by him. But can a soul rest on him that it knows not to have done
any thing for it to rest in? To rest in, is to sit down, and be at quiet in the
belief of something in which the soul sees it need stir no where else for
satisfaction, but it may certainly have it there. But how can a man preach to
any one, or he believe that Christ is an All-sufficient Savior as to him, and
so meet for him to rest on for safety, and yet cannot say by the Word of God
That Christ died for him, or was appointed by God to be a Mediator for him to
rest on? Is Christ sufficiently furnished for saving a man without an offering
made to God for him? Or can he remit his sins without shedding blood for him?
To come to God by Christ is through the viewing and considering his Person,
Sufferings, and Mediation to be encouraged to hope in God, and in that hope to
ask and wait for his salvation. Now what am I more helped for trusting in God,
by believing that all that find such encouragement in him as Mediator, as that
they are raised up to hope, and to have confidence in God thereby, have Him
All-sufficient to save them, if in the mean time not knowing whether he be
sufficient to save me, that is, whether he has done any thing as Mediator for
me, I cannot see encouragement from thence to hope and rest on God for his
saving me? Its true, few within the Pale of the Church may find strength to
perform that act of resting on God, and that is because they see not, nor are
showed what ground they have to do so. They are held in suspense about their
right to rest on him, or to think he is appointed for them. They see not the
way of entrance to God, how then should they approach by it, but deceive
themselves oftentimes in thinking they approach to him when they do not. The
Truth of God which being believed should work in them effectually to draw them
to God, is kept back from him, viz. That there is a Mediator between God and
them, who has died for them. That Word of God, is suspended upon acts in
themselves, which indeed properly slow forth from that Truth first believed by
them. Its love in God discovered to us that makes us hope in, and stay upon
him, but that in this way is held back from men till they do hope in him, and
so the Cart is set before the Horse; the thing that should draw us is set after
our drawing in. O poor preposterous way that souls are led in!

5. Now after all this, He tells us, We are called on every one in particular
to believe the efficacy of the Redemption that is in the blood of Christ
toward our souls. This also is obscurely, or preposterously laid down: For
why, I pray, says he, The efficacy of that Redemption is then to be believed,
and not rather our interest in that act of the Redeemer in giving himself a
ransom for us? Does he think that came in before? why then did he in no place
mention it, and show where it comes in that we are to believe that Christ died
for us? The efficacies of his Redemption in and upon us, we indeed look for,
and expect in and upon our coming to him, and we therefore come to him that we
might receive them, even grace and mercy to help us in times of need, and in
believing and resting on him we shall experiment them. After believing we are
assured of remission of sins, and eternal life; but where come we to know that
Christ died for us, and so that the Mediation of Christ has that in it for us
that we may be imboldned by to hope in God? Men talk of Gods working faith by
an Almighty power in them, as if he wrought it through the Air, and not by
opening his love and goodness in the Mediation of Christ, and so by his VVotd
that declares him. I cannot but question a great many of these men's faith,
whether they yet know what it truly is, they talk so strangely of the working
of it. Its by an Almighty power its true, ay but that's put forth in the Record
of the Gospel concerning Gods goodness in Christ to us. Does he mean by
efficacy of Redemption, but this, that Christ died for us? Beside that, that's
an notable confusion of an act done without us for us, and the operations of it
by faith in us, it crosses the way of the Apostles, who laid down the Gospel
thus; There is one God, and one Mediator between God and man (they staid not
there. Nor yet at this) the Man Christ Jesus. Which is all the Gospel that Mr.
Owen hints at that is to be preached before men's coming to rest on God, but the
Apostle goes a step further, Who gave himself a ransom for All. All this the
Apostle, the Teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity, lays down as the
Testimony of God, the object of our Faith concerning God and Christ, the
foundation of our approaching to God for salvation, and the demonstration that
God would have us saved. Now what is the matter that men can dare to venture upon
all the other parts or steps of the Gospel Truth, to be preached to men; as
that there is a difference between God and Man, a Mediator and Savior
appointed for men, and that this is the Man Jesus Christ? and then in stead of
the last, He gave himself a ransom for All, boggling at that and avoiding it as
a dangerous rock, put in this, That you must rest upon (...) in him, before you
have ground to believe (...) ransom for you, and then you shall know (...) for
All that believe, and so for you. (...) that men have departed from the (...)
down by the Teacher of the Gentiles in Faith, and that that he calls Verity, is
accounted a dangerous Very-lye? and yet they say they can set before men an
object of Faith as rightly as the Apostles. No, no, Our charge yet stands
faster against them then that the strongest hand of them All can move it. They
cannot preach, or represent God Doctrinally in that their way as an object that
the people they speak to has good ground to rest in for safety and
satisfaction; for they know not (confessedly) whether he has appointed Christ
as a medium of access for them, and as a Sacrifice and Ransom for their souls,
They can tell men he is able to save them that believe (provided they be the
Elect, otherwise not) but cannot assure that he is a meet object for them to
believe through, because they cannot assure them he has done any thing for
them. And thus we have viewed his previous Considerations. Come we now to view
his following Answers to our Arguments.

CHAP. II.
An Answer to his evasions from those Scriptures that declare Christ sent for
the world, and the whole world.

BEfore he comes to the Arguments that he would Answer, he dips his Pen in
Gall, and slings dirt upon the faces of them that will not forsake the sure
Word of God to take heed to his contradictory Conclusions made against it.
Pretending his Opinion to be undeniably confirmed by the Word of God, by many
Demonstrations, and innumerable Testimonies of Scripture, though not one place
has been brought to the purpose for it. Yea, I will make Mr. Owen this offer,
That if he can produce any one Testimony of Scripture that denied Christ to
have died for any one man of the world, or that limits his Ransom and
Propitiation to fewer then All, I say, That limits it, and I will yield him the
Cause, and say, that I have been egregiously deceived. But to let that pass.

Our first general Argument he frames weakly, and then makes us by reasoning as
weakly to defend it, that so he might have the more advantage against it. I
would make this, and the second from general expressions of Scripture into one,
thus

That Matter (or Article) of Faith, Major of this is founded upon this Rule,
Every Word of God is pure, nothing to be added to it, nothing to be taken from
it. But to limit where it no where limits, or to exclude where it excludes not,
is to take from it of our own heads, and therefore is not to be attempted.
Besides, it may be seen by induction. No other Truth that is so frequently laid
down in such general terms is taken limitedly to fewer, if no other Scripture
limit or restrain it, or the very Circumstances of the places where it is, as
might be instanced in Creation, Sinfulness, Preservation, Resurrection,
Judgment. The Minor has been cleared throughout this Discourse, that though
there be places that speak not of all its object (as also there are many about
Creation, Sin. Resurrection, Judgment) yet there is no limitation of it in any
of those places as a Ransom or Propitiation to a less object then the general
places will reach to. And that the largest expressions are used about it, is
clear, as All men, Romans 5.18 1 Timothy 2 6. Every one, Heb 2.9. The whole world. 1 John 2.2. That those phrases are in themselves extendible to All, and Every man
in the world, is plain, and confessed by Mr. Owen, That sometimes in the
Scriptures they are so used, and that very usually too, and most properly, as
is easy to show, And therefore may so signify there. His Argumentations from
the word World, I disclaim, nor does he find any so to use them as he
propounds them. We argue not the extent simply from the word World* but from
the words All, and Every, and whole World; and we understand the word World
extendible as far as them, not from the word World simply, but from these other
places reaching it to the whole World, and All men. As when its said, God
created man upon the earth, the force of the word Man proves it not that he
created every Man in the world, but yet we believe it extendible so far,
because other Scriptures say it of All Nations of men, and that he made them of
one blood. The Argument from the word World, we use against their conceit of
For the Elect only. In that we never find any Scripture, calling the world
Elect, or the Elect the World, but distinguishing them from the world, they
being in election separated from the world, They that would have us restrain
general words but to some particulars, must show us some ground for it, that
the Scripture somewhere in the same business so restrains them, for the
restraining of a word usually and Properly of a large extent in other things,
is no sufficient ground for our straitning it, in this, or another thing where
the Scripture does not plainly declare that it ought to be so straightened. And
this is our defense against them in straitning this Word to the Elect.

But Mr. Owen endeavors to show, that the general words in such places ought to
be straightened from the consideration of the places themselves. Beginning with
that in Joh 3 16. In which (the great Savior of the world assisting us) we
will follow him. He thereupon first gives us our construction of the place, and
that with as much weakness as he can. I shall give my Paraphrase my self thus.
God beholding man fallen (even the men of the world) pitied him in that
condition, and out of pity to him, sent him for a Savior his own only Son, to
this end, and with this intention, that he dying for him, and rising again, and
being perfected for saving man, all those of mankind whosoever that upon
declaration of him do believe on him, should not perish but have eternal life.
In which observe,

1. That the motive of Gods sending his Son, was that love or good will that he
bore to lost man, and readiness to show forth his mercy to them in providing a
fit medium and way to salvation.

2. The object of this love was Mankind fallen (as here expressed) indefinitely,
but as other Scriptures explain this indefinite, All men, the whole world.

3. His act of giving was both to death for men, and in the Gospel preaching
Him to men as an object to be believed on.

4. The end, That whosoever believes should not perish. In which we have

1. The Way to the participation of the choice benefits of him, viz. believing
on him.

2. The Extent of that choice benefit, whosoever believes. In which is also the
freedom for all, or any to look after that benefit, and through Faith to obtain
it.

Now in this Mr. Owen differs from us, That he notes the world to signify lost
men of all sorts both Jews and Gentiles peculiarly loved, and that love to be
an unchangeable act or purpose of Will concerning their salvation intending
absolutely the salvation of all this world to whom he gave him, and that
whosoever believes, not to be a distributive of that general the world, but
the very self-same with the word World. Before he confirm his own, he labors to
evert the other, and

1. Against that pity or propensity to be affirmed to be in God to the good of
the creature, he says thus, If there be no natural affection in God whereby he
is necessarily carried to any thing without himself, then no such pity or
affection to their good as is here intended. I deny the Consequence, for though
there be no such thing as necessarily is so carried, yet there is that's
voluntarily and freely carried so. Gods Will that is in him to do this or that,
is not necessarily carried to do this or that, but freely, but being freely
carried to this or that, its necessarily carried in a way suitable to his holy
and good Nature. Now that there is that in God that carries him to desire or
approve freely the good of man, appears in that he is said to be Love, 1 John
4.8. Now Love freely seeks the good of things. So again he swears that he
delights not in the death of the wicked, but rather that they should turn and
live. Yea, and says of him that dies, That he has no pleasure in his death,
Eze. 33.11. and 18. ult. And bewails those that had miscarried through their
folly, and deprived themselves of his mercy, Psalm. 81.11.14. Isai. 48.17, 18.
And so our Savior, the express Image of God, wept over, and pitied the folly
and misery of Jerusalem, Luke 19.41. But then he says, This intimates
imperfection in God, But he is not imperfect. I answer no, the imperfection is
in our conception, this in him is highest perfection. As Moses says, He is
perfect, though he says, He took the Isaelites out of Egypt to bring them into
Canaan, and many came not in, that might seem an imperfection in God, and that
he failed of his expressed purpose, but the imperfection is in our
apprehension. So he said of Elies house, He would establish it, but afterward
said otherwise. But we are to believe what he says, though it seem to us, who
want ability to comprehend him, to argue imperfection. The rest of his
Reasonings are mere carnal, he brings no patch of Scripture to prove that God
has not such good will to man, but vainly pries and inquires, Why does not God
engage his power to accomplish it, and how comes it hindered? Which are brutish
reasonings against Gods Assertions. When he says, Had thou done thus, I would
have done so, and so. And O that thou had done so, And I delight rather he
should live, Then to say, why does not God effect it then? Nay rather, Who is
vain brutish man, dust and ashes, to dispute against God, and reject his Words
upon his shallow Reason? Will man propound to God what shall be Wisdom to him!
Does not he indeed say, That his Wisdom is foolishness to men? And does not Mr.
Owen here make it good, and say, Its brutish wisdom amongst men? But know, O
vain Earth-worm, That the Wisdom of God is indeed foolishness to men, and they
cannot comprehend it, and the wisdom of men is foolishness to God, 1 Cor.
1.19.22.23, 24. Its wisdom (O vain man) to give credit to the Word and Oath of
God, and say Amen to it, That he delights not in the death of the wicked, but
rather that they shall turn and live, how ever foolish it seems to man, and
whatever absurdities his wisdom finds in it: For the foolishness of God is
wiser then the wisdom of man, and that weakness and imperfection that appears
in Gods ways, is stronger then the strength of men. His ways are unsearchable
and his judgments past finding out, Not to be measured by the shallow models
our Reason, but his Words are all Words of Truth, and he that will understand
his Ways must believe them, and be willing to deny the wisdom of the flesh
(which is enmity to God, and which God will destroy) and become a fool that he
may be wise. The Scriptures, we see, in Psalm. 81.14. Isai. 48.17, 18. Ezekiel.
33.11. and 18.32. 1 Timothy 2.4. hold forth what I speak of. The Nature of God
which is Love, acting forth it self in expressions of good Will to men, yea,
men in general, and such as miscarry. His other exception with its
confirmations, being only against his acting necessarily, are all vain and
invalid.

For conformation of his own Exposition, That by Love is meant an unchangeable
purpose, or act of his Will to save them, He gives this Reason, Because its the
most eminent and transcendent love that ever God bare, or showed toward any
miserable creature. Well, Let us first read it according to his Exposition,
and see what it will help him. It will run thus. God so Loved, that is,
unchangeably purposed the salvation of the world, That he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosever believes in him should not perish, etc. Which is
in effect, that he so unchangeably purposed the salvation of lost mankind, as
that he provided the most eminent transcendent medium for it to be saved by
upon condition of believing. And so it will be an unchangeable conditional
purpose to the world, and an unchangeable absolute purpose to believers that
have that condition. And may it not consist, or rather spring from his pity and
compassion to fallen man so to will and purpose? Yea, and may not the word Love,
rather signify that pity in which he so purposed, then that purpose that
sprung therefrom, seeing its the more prime moving cause of his sending Christ
that is here spoken of? Or will this Exposition content him? No, (though this
is as much as the words will bear with the following expressions in the Text)
yet this is not it he aims at; but this, That his Love signifies, an absolute
unchangeable purpose of saving every one for whom he gave Christ, and so of
giving, and causing them all effectually to receive whatsoever is needful to
their salvation. But the Text speaks not up to this conception, for then it
should rather have been thus, God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, and will make it believe in him so that it shall never perish,
etc. But neither such, not to that purpose is our Saviors expression. Such an
expression indeed would have represented God as propounding the salvation of
the world, as an end undertaken by himself to accomplish and bring about with
all the mediums conducing thereunto without condition on our part, whereas our
Savior speaks of it as an end propounded to, and attainable by the world on
condition of believing, as healing was to the wounded Israelites by looking
upon the brazen Serpent, unto which Christ is resembled, ver. 14, 15. Christ so
sets Gods good will before the world there, as may let it see and move it to
believing as its duty: But as M. Owen would have it understood, we may say
What He would fasten upon us, Solvite mortales curas, etc. Let every man take
his own course, and swim down the stream of a fatal necessity. If there be any
salvation to be had for him, he must have it, God will bring him to it though
he look not after it: and if it be otherwise, its in vain to think of it, its
not so much his fault, as Gods Will that he believes not, as a late Resolver has
too badly insinuated. While he determins that there is no other cause why some
believe not the Gospel preached to them, but only the Will of God himself.

As for his Reason, viz. because this is the most eminent and transcendent love
of God, etc. That would be considered how far its true, and whether it will
insorce his conception quite beside the tenor of our Saviors expressions. Love
may be considered, either according to the things it acts forth as tending to
the good of the party loved; or according to the inward strength of affection,
as affording us means of good, or possessing us of that good. In regard of the
first, this wasa most glorious eminent and transcendent act of Love. God
afforded many means of good to the world, but none of them in themselves so
worthy and so glorious as his Son, nor is there any thing in which either so
much of Gods heart or good will to the world is to be seen that he delights not
in their death, but rather in their conversion and living, or so much good to
be met with as in him. In nothing has God condescended more to man, or
provided so much good for him. As to its act then, and provision of means to
our good, this is the most eminent act of his Love to us. But yet this act of
giving Christ is but the provision of good for us, and of the best mean and way
to it. Its not the possessing us of the good in him; with reference to that,
some that were loved so, as to have Christ given as a way to life for them, may
not be the objects of so intense affection as others for whom he also gave
Christ; nor come to experiment that love of Delight or Fellowship, in which his
Love in giving Christ perfects it self in them that believe on him. This act
then, I say, of love to the world, in which God gave forth Christ, though it be
the most eminent and transcendent in regard of his provision of a mean to its
good, and though it be that through which the most choice delightful acts of
his Love are met with by those that believe on him, yet as its comprehensive of
the world is not an absolute purpose of all their salvation. The same most
eminent expression of Love may be acted toward many, and out of exceeding great
good will to them All too, and yet may not be with the like intensness and
eminency of affection and purpose for endeavoring to make it beneficial to All,
as we noted above in the instance of David lib. 3. cap. 9. In a word Gods
greatest love to the world, was not an unchangeable absolute purpose of saving
every one of them, and therefore the giving Christ out of love to the world,
was not a giving him out of such a purpose to save every one of them. The
phrase, So God loved, will not evince it. For though that word [So] intimates
so exeeedingly, so really and heartily, to such a remarkable astonishable
height, yet it proves not either that he loved it equally to his Son, or so as
to purpose absolutely the eternal salvation of all of them. For our Savior
expressing that [So] tells us that it was so as to give his Son, That every one
that believes in him should not perish, etc. but not so as to give all things
to it, as he says of his Son, v. 35. which yet is the same love in which he
loves his chosen, his called and believing ones. Joh. 17.24. Nor says he, so as
to cause them to believe in him, and have eternal life. So that that word [So]
will not prove that his conception.

Its true (as he also minds us) That the Scripture says, God commended his Love
to us in this, That Christ died for us, though that's not all the commendation
of it, but that he did that for us while we were sinners and ungodly. And I
think its a mavelous commendation of his Love that he died for All while
sinners; and they are the more to blame that withhold this so great
commendation from multitudes by which they should be induced to believe in him,
love, and serve him. But will that prove that that Love was not his compassion
and pity toward men, that is therein commended, or that it was an unchangeable
purpose of making all those he so loved to answer his love with love again, and
so to attain to eternal salvation? Cannot Love be commendable, exceeding
commendable, except it be so received by all it acts toward as to make them
grateful, and so to attain the effects that it produces to the grateful? Was
not Gods Love to Israel in bringing them out of Egypt by a mighty hand and
outstretched arm, and taking them out of the midst of another Nation by signs
and wonders, to be a people for himself, and speaking to them out of the midst
of the fire from heaven an exceeding commendable love, a love flowing from (and
most eminently of any other acts tending to the accomplishment of) his Covenant
made with Abraham, Deuteronomy. 4.31, 32, 33, etc. and yet all they, to, and upon whom
all those most glorious acts of his love were acted, were not therefore
possessed of that end, The land promised to Abraham to which they tended; nor
was his love therein then a purpose absolutely to possess them of that end,
except (as Mr. Owen here argues) he failed of his end. The greater commendation
it is of Gods Love that he gave Christ, the greater engagement it is to the
world to believe on him, love and serve him, and the greater its sin that it
not so answer such a love to them, and the greater will his terror be in
judging them, that Christ died for All, and yet many that had their lives
through his Death, lived not to him, 2 Cor. 5.10, 11.15. for God is a jealous
God and may be provoked to jealousy by men; and what is jealousy but love
enraged, or the fury that springs up from love abused, as when he that loves
has his love slighted and others preferred before him? Sure the Apostle uses
this very love and its greatness as an argument of terror to them that ill
requite it, reject it, or receive it in vain, 2 Cor. 5.11. with 6.1. Heb. 2.3.
and 10.26.29. and 12.22.24.25. 2 These. 2.10, 11. which were vain arguings, if
because this love was so commendable, therefore it was an absolute unchangeable
purpose of bringing all that Christ was given for, to eternal salvation.

But he says further ( Argum. 3.) That Gods love is a Velle bonum alicui, a
willing good to them He loves, and therefore sure they are the object of his
Love to whom he intends the good which is the issue and effect of his love,
viz. not perishing but having eternal life, But that happens only to the
Elect, Believers, etc. In which Mr. Owen slipped out of the matter in hand, the
nature of the love, to the object of it, and builds his Argument but upon an
Axiom of the Schoolmen that were not so far Gods privy Counselors, as that we
may build our says upon all their Maxims. And he faulters too in his Argument.
For whereas his Major speaks of Gods intending that end and issue that men
perish not, His Minor tells us of what happens, which makes his Argument to
continue a Quartus terminus. Surely God tells us, he so far intends not
perishing and eternal life to others, that he has no delight in the death of
the wicked, but rather that they turn and live, and that he wills not that
any perish, but that all come to Repentance, Ezekiel. 33.11. 2 Pet. 3.9. I know
because men think themselves wise in this world, and prefer their Philosophical
Rules before the Apostles counsel, To become fools that they may be wise, that
they will not bear the truth of those sayings, but muster up objections against
them, and say with Nicodemus, How can these things be? if God willed not that
they perish, but that all should come to Repentance, then these things must
happen to all, and none are loved of God, but they to whom those things happen.
And so they will teach men to blaspheme that goodness of God that leads men to
repentance, and to say, It was not goodness because they are not prevailed
with, but according to their own hard hearts, treasure up wrath to themselves
by sinning against it, yea and will make this so wonderful a transcendent
testimony of Love no love, except it had been, God so loved the world, that he
not only gave his son that every one that believes might not perish, but also
will make men so to believe and receive him that they shall never perish. Well
then might the Israelites for the far greatest part of them say, Its in vain
for us to serve God, and wherein has he loved us? seeing whatever great things
he did for them, they found not that he so absolutely purposed their eternal
salvation that he would by his omnipotent power compel them to it, for but a
remnant of them shall be saved. But for that willing none to perish, but rather
to turn and live, and so a willing salvation to men, God may be said so to will
two ways. First, In willing it to be, and so providing it in Christ and
propounding it to men, etc. and willing or requiring them to look to him for
it, with promise of conferring it on them in so doing. 2. To purpose or
determine that this or that man absolutely shall be saved. In the first way he
has willed salvation to the world in general, having put it in Christ and
willed the Gospel to be preached throughout the World, and they all to listen
to it, and obey it, but not in the second way. Now some may not receive, or
receive in vain Gods grace, willing their salvation in the first way, and turn
it into wantonness, and so it has not in them its effect it has in others
that receive it thoroughly: shall we therefore conclude There was no grace
extended to them, the other only and not they were the object of his love in
providing salvation for and propounding it to the world? But he adds,

(4) This that was the cause of giving Christ, is the cause of giving all good
things with him, Romans 8.32. therefore it must be toward them only that have
all those good things. I deny the consequence. The same love that led God to
appoint the brazen Serpent for healing, led him to heal them that looked up;
Ergo he set it up only for them that looked up. This argument slides also from
the nature of the love to the Object of it. The same love that led God to give
his Son to the World, leads him to give eternal life to them of the World that
believe, and so to give us that believe All things; but it follows not
therefore that the object of Gods love in its first act was not distinct from,
or at least not larger then Believers.

(5) His last argument is from the word (...), which signifies (says he) to
rest in his love, and so it must be a peculiar love. This is but vain, for this
word is used of Christ's love to the young man that had great possessions and
went away from him, Verse. 21.
Mark. 10.22. (...), and so to the Israelites of old that were many of them
loved no more, and so to Judas, Psalm. 109.3, 4.

2. He tells us, There is a difference in our acceptions of the word World,
which I conceive to be sinful mankind in general, He, to be the Elect
scattered abroad in the World with a Tacit opposition to the Nation of the
Jews. My Reason for mine is, 1. Because the word World (speaking de mundo
contento) primarily so signifies, as, He shall judge the World in
Righteousness, Psalm. 9.8. How then shall God judge the World? and, All the
World is become guilty before God, Romans 3.6, 9. 2. Because Christ is expressly
said to be the propitiation for the sins of the whole World, the Ransom for All
men. 3. Because it here sustains the nature of a whole, out of which believers
are taken as parts. He loved the world, that every one that believes, that is,
that every one of it or of the world that believes, etc. that's evidently the
sense of the place. Now its nonsense to say, That every one of the Elect that
believe, for that intimates that some of them might not believe. Its as if he
should have said of the Israelites, He brought Israel out of Egypt, that they
that follow him obediently in the wilderness might enter into Canaan, like that
in John 12.48. where the same phrase is used, I am come a light unto the world,
that whosoever believes in me should not abide in darkness, etc. He is a light
to every man, John 1.9. a light to them that hate his light, Joh 3.19. but they
for hating of it shall be deprived of it and abide in darkness, John 12.35, 26.
but all of this world to whom he vouchsafes his light, that believe in him,
shall not abide in darkness.

But Mr. Owen says, By the World are meant the Elect scattered abroad in the
World opposed to the Nation of the Jews; that this last clause is untrue,
appears by this that he was speaking this to a Jew to draw him to believe, and
therefore the Word World must not be opposed to them as excluding them: but let
us see how he refutes ours, and confirms his own opinion.

Against our latter observation from the reading of the Words, He so loved the
Elect that all of them that believe should not perish, viz. that it would seem
by that as if some of them might not believe, he replies, why? " Because he
sent his Son that they might not perish! To that I answer, No, but because the
phrase is Distributive, not [that it believing] as supposing that all that
World that Christ was given for shall believe, but [that whosoever, or every
one that believes] as supposing that though there is ground for all the World
to believe, yet all would not. So that the place holds not forth that Christ
must and will keep from perishing All for whom he was given, as Mr. Owen
suggests, but all whosoever and whatsoever that believe in him. But he answers
again, That God designs the salvation of all them in express words for whom he
sent his Son. To that I reply, that (by designing, etc. meaning his purposing
to bring them All to eternal salvation) its openly untrue, for he says no such
thing there, that he loved the world, and gave his Son that every one of it
should be made to believe and be saved, as I appeal to the Text it self, but if
he mean, (as he does not) that salvation might be propounded to it, and it have
a way by which it might in believing come to be saved, then I deny it not, but
so its said of unbelievers, John 5.34, 40. Whereas we say that, (...) is
divisive and partitive as to that Totum, the word world going before: to this
he says, that If it be so, then it restrains Gods love to some and not to
others. I answer No, but it it shows by whom and by what way the utmost end of
this love, or most choice blessing of it is to be enjoyed. Gods love in
providing a Medium through which men might look for and meet with salvation
respects the world in general; nor does that saying, that whosoever believes,
put a bar against any of the world, as if they might not in looking up to
Christ be saved, but it implies that the world as simply such, or as in that
state of sin and blindness in which God out of pity sent his Son for it, is not
the object of Gods absolute intention to give eternal life, but those of it
that believe; and the word Whosoever, is both an encouragement for all or any
to believe, and carries in it a supposition that the whole World likely might
not believe. As the setting up the brazen Serpent (to whom Christ is compared,
ver. 14.) was an act of love to all the strange Israelites, though the benefit
of healing was to be obtained in their looking up to it, and by none of them
that refused to look up; so was the gift of Christ to the world, though the
unbeliever not receiving him is not saved. But then,

2. He denies that that phrase is restrictive, but only declarative of his end,
how its not restrictive I have even now said, but that its Distinctive, not
taking in the whole world as the certain Object or subject of eternal life, is
showed also, and is very evident I conceive to all that have but common
judgment, and so that its not only Declarative of his end, but declarative of
it in such a way or expression, as implies that the Object that injoyes that
end, may (at least) be fewer then the object of giving him to such an end. Its
not, that all the world shall not perish, but that whosoever believes perish
not, etc. Besides no other Scripture says that the whole world for whom Christ
was given, did or shall believe on him, but expressly to the contrary, that some
to whom God gave Him as the true bread, saw and believed not, John. 6.32, 36.
and that many to whom he came received him not, He came to his own things,
amongst which his own Nation was, and his own Nation or people received him
not. So that for his exposition we have nothing but his bare saying; and that
offering violence to the Text too; as if it had been said, (...), that it
should believe and be saved, etc. indeed he after adds some reasons, we shall
weigh them also.

1. His first is, From what he said before about that love wherewith he loved
it, which was such a love as cannot be extended to All, which being refuted
before, needs no further Answer. See before Li. 3. Ca. 9.
The world of mankind share in this great act of Gods love, the sending forth
of Christ, and yet not all attain the utmost intention of it.

2. His second is from verse 17. Giving a reason of this that he says it was an
act of his love to the world; whereof he gives a double proof, one Negative,
he sent him not to condemn the world, the other affirmative, but that the
world through him might be saved, he says, the word World there must needs
signify believers and Elect, because its said that the World through him might
be saved, which if it be understood of any but believers, God must needs fail
of his end. This is answered before in the first Chapter of the first Book,
where he have showed.

1. "That the word saved is sometimes used in a lower sense then the having
eternal life, as the deliverance out of that condemnation fore-come upon us,
and so the world may be said to be saved, and the grace of God saving to All
men, Tit. 2.11. Romans 5.18. 1 Timothy 2.6.

2. That such speeches do not always declare the intention of God which he will
bring about, but an end propounded to men, which they in attending to the means
set before them ought to press after, and might attain to, and that its his
good will they should look after it, and in looking after it attain to it. See
the Instances thereof Acts 17.26, 27. Joh. 1.7. Psalm. 105.44, 45. Like to which
is this. He sent his Son into the world, not to condemn the world, but that the
world through him might be saved; that is, That he being filled with authority,
power, and sufficiency to save them, they might have him as a Savior or way to
salvation to look and listen to, and in walking in his Light and Truth might
attain salvation. Which end set before them, they many of them miss by
despising him who is the way to it. Therefore our Savior distributing the
world in two parts in the next verse, tells us, not who might have been saved
by him, but, who they are that attain the end propounded to them, viz. He that
believes on his Name, he shall be saved. He will do his Office to all that
come to him for it, according to Gods appointment. But he that believes not
(he that when Christ speaks to them that they might be saved (as in Joh. 5.34.)
turn a deaf ear to his words, Heb. 2, 3. and 12.25.
harden their hearts, neglect so great salvation, and refuses him that speaks
for heaven,) he is now judged, Now in the day of the Gospel. However God might
wink at men's ignorances in former times, yet Now God will not bear it that men
should despise him that speaks to them more fully for their good (His Son
preaching salvation to them,) but judges him. The word judges him, and the
Spirit condems him, and makes this word of salvation a Savor of death unto
death to him, because he has not believed on the Name of the only begotten
Son, because he did not trust to him for healing, when the Gospel declared such
readiness and ability in him to heal them. Which why, or how it should be, if
Christ was not sent for them, and was neither sufficient nor willing to save
them, as was said, Chap. ^ I cannot discern. So th^^ this Argument serves not
his purpose.

"3. The third is, That its not unusual to call Gods chosen people, the World,
This I deny, and he endeavors to prove from John. 4.42. The Savior of the
world. Which says Mr. Owen, he only is of them that are saved: a Savior of
men not saved, is strange. But how that may be true, we have hinted in the
former Argument. Besides, According to 1 Timothy 4.10.
Is this so strange to denominate a person by his Authority and Office, rather
then from his actings only in that Authority. May not a man be called Lord
chief Justice of all England, though he do not execute Justice to all persons
in England, or cannot so do by reason that many decline his Justice-executing?
So, may not a man be called, and indeed be a Physician for a whole Town by the
appointment of Authority, though many in it refuse to take Physic of him when
they are sick? And is not many a man constituted Minister of, and preacher to
all such a Congregation, when yet perhaps half of them despise his Ministry,
and refuse to hear him? Shall not he be called the Minister of that Parish
wholly, because many refuse to have his Ministry acted toward them? So Christ
is the Savior of the World, both in that, 1. He is He in and through whom God
is the Savior of All men, God not saving any man in any sense immediately, but
his Son doing all from him, Joh. 5.22. And 2. In regard that he is set up and
held forth in the Gospel as filled and furnished for saving All, or any man
upon looking to him, and all commanded to look to him to be saved by him. And
in the same sense He is said to give life to the World, both in that its
through his Mediation that the World has a being under goodness and patience,
contrary to the desert of their sin, which (had God dealt with man according to
the demerit of Adams sin, and the strict sense of his own Word pronounced upon
him) none in the world had had, but (if they had not been all forthwith cut off
in Adam) their beings would have been as far from Gods goodness and mercy, as
the being of the Devils, which is not worthy the name of life, nor is so called
in any Scripture, as man's is. And this is (as I conceive) that life out of
which he prays that his malicious enemies might be blotted, for in the book of
the righteous (which is of eternal life) they are not written, Psa. 96.28. for
which life He gave his Flesh to bear that sentence, that otherways in the day
in which Adam sinned should have fallen upon him and the whole world in him; As
he is called the Light that inlightneth every man that comes into the world,
meaning it of lower hints of light then what the believer peculiarly receives
from him. So that his other Quotations of John 6.33.51. are as merely begged as
any other, and as little pertinent, they being thus to be interpreted. As also
that he gives, exposes, and holds forth lise in the Gospel to the world, as in
ver. 32. The Father is said to have given him to them, and yet the world
neither receives him, nor the life tendered and freely given in and by him, Joh
1.10, 11. and 5.4. and 6.36. But he tells us that Christ in John 10.27, 28.
Says, He gives life to his sheep only; which is neither right nor pertinent,
for he neither puts in the word only, nor speaks of the life of the world, but
of eternal life. Which, if we take given for a free holding forth to men,
Compare Mark 15.23. with Luke 23.36.
so as that they may have it for nothing if they will accept of it (as the word
given is many times used, As where its said the Jews gave Christ Vinegar to
drink, and he refused it, and they gave him gall, etc.) then he gives it to the
world, even to others then do accept and receive it, as is said above to Joh
6.33. But if we take give for such an imparting it, as is accompanied with
receiving it, so neither we, nor Joh. 6.33. says, that he gives eternal life to
the world, much less, as it is in Joh. 10.27, 28. he gives it them, and they
shall never perish. Could he but have showed us one word to that purpose, that
the world shall never perish, it had been to purpose. For Romans 4.13. and 11,
12, 15. we have answered them before in the precedent Chapter. The falling of
the Jews is called the Riches and Reconciling of the world, as the decay of
Trade in another Country, and diverting it hither, may be said to be the
enriching of this Kingdom. In which the word Kingdom may truly fignifie the
whole body of the people, though many through idleness and riotousness in it
may deprive themselves of that enriching which it brought them, or gave them
fair advantages of. Besides, the world, the Nations in general, not the Elect
in them only, were reconciled or taken into savor as to the Gospel-preaching
to them, and opening of the Kingdom for them, which before they had no such
liberty to, but were looked upon as unclean, in respect of having the Kingdoms
outward Ordinances, and Privileges allowed them, but now were cleansed by God,
and accounted clean as to them; and that also was their riches though not the
riches of the glory of the Saints, they indeed have yet further riches, even
Christ in them the hope of glory; which many of the world reconciled as to the
former (of which the Apostle evidently there speaks, the Jews being cast off
from that, and not from inward Union with God which they had not ever that were
broken off) might and did miss of, by observing lying vanities forsaking their
own mercies, Jonas 2.8. either by unbelief or negligence in a vain cursory
receipt of the Ordinances and grace of Reconciliation therein tendered. So that
neither does that conclude the thing intended, namely that by the word world,
is there meant only Gods Elect and Chosen. His proof from Colos. 1.6. Lib. 3.
ca. 6.
We have before spoken to in Chap. 1. That of 2 Cor. 5.19. We have also spoken
to largely before in the Chapter about Reconciliation. Only I shall add here,
that the word world cannot there mean the Elect only, for then no need of
fearing that any toward whom that grace was vouchsafed should receive it in
vain, as is intimately feared by the Apostle. Chap. 6.1.2. As for the Argument
used from the Non-imputation there spoken of, we have showed it to be weak
also. God reckoned not the sins of the world to it in that he winked at them,
and did not demand satisfaction at their hands for them, but preached
forgiveness to them, which indeed was a very great blessing, but it comes to
life and happiness only upon them that receive it, and believe, as the Apostle
says, Romans 4.6, 7, 9. His reasons why the Elect should be called the world, as
they are (especially the three first) very slender ones, so they do all fall to
the ground, except it can be first proved that it is so called.

4. His fourth Reason is like Nicodemus's, How can these things be? Why does
not God give the Gospel to all then? who do any perish? etc. He might as well
say, If God brought Israel out of Egypt, that they might go to Canaan, why did
he not make them all trust in him, and carry them all thither? This is not to
believe the Word of God, that says, Christ is the Propitiation for the sins of
the whole world, etc. But to set our Reason against it, though we could say,
God has told us more about his revealing Christ then he does believe. viz.
That He is the true Light that inlightneth every man that comesin to the world.
But hewil there say too (as the manner of our darkness and unbelief is at every
truth of God that it cannotcomprehend) Durus est hic sermo, How can this be?
for he will scarce conceive that the Word can sparkle through the Humanity
united to it into the hearts of every man, except the Manhood too be plainly
declared, or that that divine being that the Gentiles are led to see in the
Works of God, is no other then the Word that was incarnate, and is the true
God, this may seem as strange to him as that to the Jews, Before Abraham was I
Am, and may meet with as many stones about it. For Truth is full of Paradoxes
to the wisdom of the Flesh, though plain to him that finds understanding.
Besides, God has sent his Gospel to All Nations and Peoples, though many have
put the light from them, and chosen darkness rather, even whole Countries and
Peoples, and therefore shall be justly condemned, not for that they had it not,
but because when God sent it, they received it not, but have from age to age
slighted and rejected it.

5. He heaps up another nest of absurdities upon us. As 1. That we cannot
understand this to be All, and Every man, except we grant some to be loved and
hated from eternity. But how our granting that should depend upon that large
extent of the Word, it will pose Reason it self to conceive, and Scripture too.
Sure he meant, Except we deny it, as we do, if by hatred he mean a purpose not
to send his Son for them, without their disobedience to his Son, and the light
extended through him to condemn and destroy them. 2. He says, We must make the
Love of God toward innumerable to be fruitless and vain. We deny that too. For
there-through they enjoy their lives, liberties, patience, bounty, goodness,
hints of truth to their minds, some more, some less, as he sees fit in his
wisdom, and God shall receive much glory. Though its true (and no absurdity to
say) that some do reject much grace, or receive it in vain, in regard of many
further fruits it would effect, yea, and turn that that was for their welfare
into a snare. Turning that grace and goodness into wantonness that should lead
them to repentance. 3. That then the Son of God is given to them that never
hear word of him, nor have any power to believe. Answer. Its not said, He gave
him to the world, but gave him simply out of love to the world, and give him he
might for them, to whom so properly he may not be said to give him. I suppose
you think he was given for, if not also to some children that die in infancy,
and yet they never hear of him, and so many former Jews might never hear of him
distinctly as that he should be crucified, and yet they had good by that they
heard not of. Death came in upon All through Adam, though many never heard of
him, and so may and does much mercy by Christ to such as never hear distinctly
of him. And did men in that mercy grope after God (as the Apostles say) they
might happily find him. What power God gives to men to yield up to the light
that comes from him, I cannot say for others, I am not in their bosoms, but for
my self, I am sure more then I have acted forth, and followed him in. And that
God gives no power to believe, or at least soberly to attend to God that they
might be helped to believe, but only where men indeed do believe, is as
inevident, as that God gave not power to Adam to forbear eating the forbidden
fruit, because he did not forbear. I cannot see into those secrets, how far God
acts, or acts not upon others, but the not seeing such secrets shall be no
reason to me to wave what is revealed (if not plainly in this, yet) in other
Scriptures of larger expression. If Mr. Owen see into men's spirits, and can
tell us what God does to all, and how far he deals with them, or finds the
Scripture expressing it, let him demonstrate to us, that God does give no power
to any to attend to him in the ways wherein he uses to beget faith according
to the means vouchsafed, but only to them that are actually brought to faith,
and I shall listen to him. 4. He says, " Then God is mutable in his Love.
Answer. That follows not, for so far as he says he loved it, he acted, and
never altered it, he did give his Son (and never reversed it) that whosoever
believes should not perish, etc. And yet we being mutable, and corrupting our
selves, God may say to us, as well as to Ephraim, Hos. 9.15. I will love them
no more, and yet the alteration in us only, not in him. The effects of the
same act may be different to an object without difference in the act, as the
same shine of the Sun may refresh a sound eye, and yet hurt the same eye when
sore. 5. Then he says, " He gives not all things to All to whom he gave his
Son. This with the Scripture alleged for it, is once and again answered
before. " 6. Then he knows not certainly who shall believe and be saved. Which
no more follows from it, then this, God loved Israel to bring them out of Egypt
that he might bring them that followed him into Canaan: But he brought not all
the Israelites into Canaan, Ergo, If he brought all the Israelits out of Egypt,
he knew not who would believe in him, and follow him into Canaan. What a piece
of Nonsense is such an Inference? But against the enlarging of the object, he
further thus reasons from the next particular, [That who so believes] thus

If the object be restrained there to believers, then that depends upon the
will of God, or upon themselves, If upon themselves, That contradicts, 1. Cor.
1.7. and men make themselves to differ. If upon God, then we make the place say
thus, God so loved All, that but some should partake of the fruits of his Love,
and to what end then did he love All? Is not this Out with the Sword, and run
the Dragon through with the Spear? To which I answer, That the second act, the
giving the enjoyment of eternal life, is here asserted but for them that
believe; and both the appointing life to the believer, and the effecting of
that faith depend upon Gods Will. As we can make no Law upon what terms to have
that life, So neither can we work in our selves that condition upon which God
gives that life. Faith is the gift of God. Acts 28.26, 27. with Joh. 12.40.
Yet this latter is so of God, as that it is not without some actings of man,
to which he exhorts men, and for want of which he justly faults them, yea
brings them not to faith. Its by man's hearing, though not of man's power.
Whence, though one man listen to the means, and is brought to believe, and
another that had as much power to have listened, stop his ear, and believes
not; yet it follows not that the first made himself to differ, because not his
listening, but God by it gave the faith; no more then one Israelite looking to
the brazen Serpent, and being healed, might be said to have made himself to
differ from another that looked not up in point of healing, in which they had
both yet remained alike, had not God given healing to the one, and not to the
other. The impertinency of the Allegation of 1 Cor. 4.7. I showed before. Nor
yet follows that other Inference, That its but thus, God loved All that but
some might partake of the fruits of his love, For 1. There are other fruits
then eternal life, of which all partake. 2. There is no exclusion of any from
that condition by which we may partake of that. When he says, That every one
that believes, Its to encourage all to believe, not to hinder any. The whole
Argument is but like this. God brought Israel out of Egypt, that he might bring
them that obeyed and followed him into Canaan. Either that restriction was
determined by Gods Will, or their own. If their own, then they made themselves
differ one from another, contrary to the Apostle. If by Gods, then the sense
is, He brought all out of Egypt, that he might bring but some into Canaan. To
what end then, I pray, did he bring All out of Egypt? Is not this, Out with the
Sword, and run the Dragon through with the Spear? Is not this folly and soppery
thus to reason, or from such a reason to deny the Truth of Gods Word, and say,
God surely did not bring any out of Egypt but whom he brought into Canaan. Or
will he ascribe Caleb and Joshuah's faith more to will, then the believing that
which is attested by the Word of God (or by the powerful working of miracles,
or the like) is the Truth of God?

Ay, But if believers only be the object that shall have salvation, Then the
general ransom is an empty sound. Answer. It is so to Unbelief, as God himself
is in respect of that infinite satisfaction that is in him, and so was Gods
bringing Israel out of Egypt to them that believed not. Such is the pernicious
nature of Unbelief, that it turns wholesome food into poison, but to such as have
learned to become fools, that God might make them wise, to those that learn to
subject their reason to Gods Truth, its not so, for they find it a motive to
draw them in to believe in God, and to admire his Love to men, and the depth of
his judgments toward them; yea, in a word, to teach them to deny ungodliness,
and live godlily, as Tit. 2.11, 12. And they find it a very wholesome useful
Truth to hold forth to others, to let them see cause for believing in God, and
hoping in him, and to charge them with folly and madness, that having such
ground to believe yet refuse it. The most precious Truth that is, is an empty
found in respect of spiritual good to the Unbeliever. Shall we conclude, Ergo,
its a falsehood? Gods goodness it self that lead men to Repentance is an empty
thing to those that harden themselves against it, and brings them to no
spiritual good or happiness, shall we therefore teach men to say God is good to
none but them that rightly use his goodness and receive the fruit of it in life
eternal? Is not this to teach men to despise the riches of Gods goodness? O the
blindeness of our reason in the things of God, and the folly of preferring it
as Umpire in matters of our faith, waving the Word of God that should rightly
guide us. But yet this let me say, Unbelievers shall see, and find one day,
that this general ransom was no empty thing in it self, it was merely their
folly and wickedness that made it so to them, and then it shall be full of
dread and terror to them that they have denied him that bought them. His
premises being such humane mistakes, high thoughts lifted up, and strengthened
against the Scripture-Declaration, his Conclusion, that Christ died not, or God
gave not his Son for them that believe not, etc. falls with them, They being
notable justifications of all Unbelievers, and Patronizers of slothfulness,
from which these things follow: That to Unbelievers God was not an object meet
to be believed on by them, nor had any real reason to love him, they being
ever hated by him, and he never doing them any good in his Son. That the want
of faith was no fault of theirs, for they could no way have avoided what they
did in not believing, God neither gave them cause nor grace to believe, etc.
But I shall rake no further in so unclean a dunghill, that savors so much of
Satan, and justifies the case of all Unbelievers.

CHAP. III.
A consideration of 1 John 2.2. and 2 Cor. 5.19. In Answer to what Mr. Owen
says about him.

IN his third Chapter he proceeds to another instance of Scripture for us, viz.
1 John 2.2. He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for our sins only,
but also for the sins of the whole world. Urged by us both from the plain full
expression, which (except in opposition to some called out of the world) always
signifies All men, the world, and then All men, besides those spoken of, with,
or opposed to it when so joined. And 2. From its opposition here to believers,
or speaking of it as a distinct party beyond them. To pass by his frivolous
exposition of men living in all parts of the world, which is as good as nothing
by way of opposition to us, That expression reaching to All men in the world,
except it were bounded with some limitation, as only some of all sorts living
in All places. And then we challenge him to show us the words, whole world, so
taken in any divine expression. I shall view his more serious reply consisting
of an endeavor to do these three things. 1. Clear it to whom the Apostle writ.
2. What his purpose and aim in this place is, 3. What the meaning of Christ's
being a propitiation is, and what he means by the whole world.

1. For the first, he says, This Epistle was peculiarly directed to the Jews.
But he holds in his proof of it. For 1. He confesses he has nothing in the
Epistle that nominates them to whom he writ it, to make the assertion
infallibly true, de fide; and so what he can say is no matter of faith, nor
sufficient ground of limiting what what is evidently propounded in it to our
faith. Only he brings probabilities (as he calls them) that it was intended to
the Jews (to them only he must mean, or he says nothing to the purpose) they
are these four.

1. That John was one of them that was to preach to the Circumcision with Peter
and James, Now they writ to the Jews, Ergo, John also. I answer, Whether by the
twelve Tribes, and the strangers scattered abroad, James and Peter mean the
Jews only, is questionable, seeing the place where the ten Tribes were carried
was scarcely then known, nor yet is. And besides, the Christians are taken into
their place and made one body with them, and I suppose are by our Savior meant
to be the twelve Tribes, when he says, The Apostles shall sit on twelve Thrones
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, Matthew. 19.28. Luke 22.30. And the
Christians were strangers to the world more then the scattered Jews, even the
Gentile Christians also because of their conversation, 1 Pet. 4.3, 4. And sure
that in 1 Pet. 2.10. Sometimes not a people, but now a people, agrees rather to
the Gentiles then the Jews. Again, We find Paul was one of them that was to
preach to the Gentiles, the prime of them, and yet its supposed he wrote to the
Jews the Epistle to the Hebrews. However, that he preached often to them is
manifest, Acts 17. etc. So John, though firstly, he was to preach to the Jews,
yet did take care of the seven Asian Churches, and living after all the rest of
the Apostles took care of all the Churches as an Apostle, and its most probable
that he writ to them all too; his Epistle being Catholic, that is, universal,
and without any particular limitation and inscription to any Church, or any
sort of believers more then them of James and Peter were. Yea, he inscribes it
to believers indefinitly, not to Jew-believers. Chap. 5.13. These things have I
written to you that believe, He says not, to you that are believing Jews, or
the like, but (...). Believers then, as such, and so all such, are those he
directed it to, that they might know that they have eternal life, etc. So that
there is more probability, yea, more from the very letter of the Epistle,
against his conceit, then for it. But

2. He tells us, John frequently intimates, that those he wrote to received the
Word from the beginning. Now the Jews had it first preached to them. He
instances Chap. 2. ver. 7. That commandment which ye heard from the beginning.
The words are thus. I write no new Commandment to you, but an old Commandment
which ye heard from the beginning, the old commandment is the word that ye
heard from the beginning. Now who would conceive, that the meaning of that is
this, The word that ye heard before the Gentiles? The truth is, He tells them,
He writes no new Commandment to them, but that which they always had heard
from the beginning of the Gospels being preached to them, They should not think
they preached one to them at first, but now (as some false Apostles would
persuade them, and as many Deceivers would do believers now) that its necessary
that they should have some other Doctrine then that at first preached to them,
some higher things then the Gospel contains, new things that they never heard
of before; no, says he, its but the same, as in ver. 24. Let that therefore
which ye have heard from the beginning abide in you, Let not that slip, those
first foundamental Truths, With that also in Revel. 2.24, 25. and 3.3.
and if that abide in you that ye heard from the beginning, ye shall abide in
the Father and in the Son. Its the same in substance with that of Paul to the
Gentiles at Corinth, 1 Cor. 15 1, 2, 3. I do you to wit of the Gospel which I
preached to you, not of another, but that which ye also received, and in which
ye also stand, and by which ye are saved, if ye keep in memory how I preached
to you, viz. How that amongst the first truths ((...)) Christ died for our
sins. Keep, says he, those truths heard in the first place, the word of the
beginning of the Gospel of Christ, as Mark calls it, Mar. 1.1. and as its
called, Heb. 6.1. The Word of the beginning of Christ, and in Chap. 3.6. (...),
the beginning of the Confidence, those Doctrines which first begat confidence
in them, that's the old Commandment, though new in it self, and comparatively to
former Dispensations in shadows in darker Ages of the Church. So that makes not
one jot for him. Beza In locum expounds it Verbum Evangelii ab iis jam pridem
auditum quibus ins^ribitur Epistola, Christianis sc. minime novitiis, etc.

3. He argues from the opposition between us and the world, as a Jew reckoning
himself with the Jews, in opposition to the rest of believers in the world,
Which he thinks is enough alone to manifest whom he wrote to. But this is the
most improbable of all the rest, as if the Apostle writing to all believers
would not reckon himself one with them, whether Jew or Gentile, but keep open
yet the old distinction, which the Gospel came to take away. Again, How usual
was it with Christ, speaking to believing disciples of the Jews, only to
oppose them to the world, and by the world to mean unbelieving Jews also? as in
Joh. 15.19. and 7.7. and 17.14. So Paul to the Gentiles as to the Corinths, 1
Cor. 11.30. opposes the world to believers of the Gentiles, and by the world
means all final unbelievers, Jew and Gentile. Nay, if this had any force, then
in 1 John 5.19. he should strengthen the Jew in their obstanacy (which he says
they had) against the Churches of the Gentiles, for there he opposes himself
and those he wrote to, to the whole world besides, in like manner as here. We
know that we are of God, and the whole world lies in wickedness. Now if he writ
as a Jew, reckoning with the Jews, and set himself with them in opposition to
All other believers in the world, then he says there, That he and the believing
Jews were of God, but all the Churches of the Gentiles lay in the wicked one.
And who would not abominate such an Exposition? Nay, Mr. Owen should do well to
find any one place in all the Scripture, where the word world (specially
spoken of with distinction from believers or any sort or Nation) fignifies
another sort or kind of believers. So that that's vain too.

His last is, His mentioning and given cautions of Deceivers, Seducers,
Antichrists, etc. As if any man that minds the Scriptures could be ignorant
that these kind of people did pester also the Gentile Churches, as the
Galathians, Corinthians, Churches of Asia, etc. And that the Apostle Paul was
as circumspect of the Gentile Churches, and as careful to preserve them from
these Seducers as possibly could be, and so that John living after the rest of
the Apostles needed as much to war and watch over them as an other Churches.
Nay, he that shall equally weigh things will say, there was more need for them
then others, because they receiving the Gospel from the Jews, the Deceivers of
the Jews had more influence upon them then upon their own Churches, for they
were apt to question Paul's Doctrine upon this ground, that others of the Jews
that pretended Authority from the Apostles taught otherwise. Besides, that the
great stumble of the false Apostles was in the Gentile Churches, that they
wanted Circumcision which the Jewish Churches wanted not: to say nothing that
we find them troubling the Gentiles often, but never that they troubled with
such Doctrines the Jewish Churches, Acts 15.3, 4, 5.23, 24. So that I shall
need to say no more to that first Consideration, having undermined it, and made
it unable to afford that patronage to his Gloss that he puts upon it.

2. For the scope and aim of the Apostle. It is, says he, to give consolation
to believers against their sins and failings. If any man sin we have an
advocate, etc. But herein also he comes short. For though 1. I grant that he
writ to comfort believers, all or any believers, and not believing Jews only,
and that that was his main aim, yet it was not all; for 2. He affords them also
a Direction in case of other men, to improve their interest in their Advocate
by Prayers, Intercessions, etc. for them according to Paul's direction to
Timothy, 1 Timothy 2.1. etc. Thence its to be noted, That he says not, If any of
you sin, but indefinitely, If any sin. But suppose he aim only at the comfort
of believers, what then? He adds, Then he can speak of none but them only, and
that the extending it to All, can possibly make nothing to the end proposed,
namely, the Consolation of believers. But sure he is out here. For the
consideration that Christ renders God propitious to strangers (such his power
and prevalency with him) is an argument much conducing to persuade them, that
he will render him much more propitious to his children that are wounded for
their follies, and fly to him. And I conceive the Apostle may be understood so
to speak in Romans 8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but gave him up for us
All, That is, for us All men, one and other, how shall he not with him (having
given him to us also, as Beza notes on the place) give Us (that is, his chosen
ones) All things? He that does good to good and bad, to them that are unkind,
and ill-requiting, will not he do good to us that love him, and are born of
him? Surely if this afford no comfort, I know not what will. Nay, I see nothing
in the Text aggravate the consolation more then this. Its like that in Matthew.
6.26, 28. He feeds the Fowls of the Air, and clothes the Lillies, how much more
you his children? So here Christ is free for All to come to God by, how much
more you that have believed and are his peculiarly. He procures that
gratiousness, and kindness or mercy, be extended to the whole world, how much
more to you his choice Inheritance? That's the very voice of unbelief that
counts this light Manna, and retorts the Argument, as Mr. Owen does. They
perish most of them through unbelief, so may I too. So might the Disciples have
retorted; Ah Lord, but many of the fowls of heaven are taken and killed, and
perish for want of food, and so may we do too. The Argument is strengthened from
that, If God care for Birds, made to be taken, and killed, and for Lillies that
fade, and are cast into the Oven, much more for you that are his children
ordained to an eternal inheritance. So, If the world, many of whom yet perish,
find Christ ready to do them good, till they have made themselves void of all
excuse, and hardened their hearts against him, much more will he be ready to
accept us, and pass by our offenses who believe on him. Yea, if their perishing
is for their unbelief, and they might be brought into special favor did they
believe, what cause have we to believe on him, and not let go our belief! And
yet in this the Apostle does no more throw the consolation of believers to
Dogs, then Christ did throw the consolation of his Disciples to the fowls, or
then James does the believers consolation to Dogs, in James 1.5. Nor is Christ's
dying for men, the childrens proper portion; that's yet to prove, but the
Kingdom and Privileges of Christ in the enjoyment of God, which we do not
throw to any Dogs, which yet men are not accounted as merely natural, but as
Rebels against the grace of God, proud scorners, Prove. 9.8. except it be by
some conceited Jew^ like spirits that count themselves the only Elect and
Privileged people, and all others as refuse and reprobate beside themselves,
and men of their opinion, etc.

3. For the words, Propitiation and the whole world. 1. The word Propitiation
in the Greek (...), (coming of that Verb the Publican uses, (...), Be merciful
to me, whence the Lord is said to be (...), merciful, and of which comes (...),
signifying The mercy Seat, (Though we translate it Propitiation, Romans 3.25.
But indeed is the Propitiatory) In Hebrew is (...) of (...) that signifies to
cover. Whence he argues, That to be a Propitiation is to cover sin, appease
wrath, and reconcile God, so as to make the sinner be pardoned and received to
mercy for his sake, so that the Law shall never be produced or brought forth to
his condemnation. Whence he asks, Are the sins of every one expiated? Is God
reconciled to every one? Is every sinner pardoned? Shall none have the
transgression of the Law charged on him? Why then is not every one saved? For
Answ. to this. 1. I say, That he prevaricates in what he notes upon the word
Propitiation, in Greek (...), which he confounds with (...), that signifying
the Propitiatory or Mercy Seat, this the Propitiation, or Sacrifice offered to
make atonement. Concerning which, 2. He does not, nor can prove, that the
offering of it up to God for a person, or persons, did in it self cover that
persons sins, and exempt him from the punishment of them according to Law, or
reconcile them actually to God, except where the persons whom it concerned
closed with it, or came by faith unto God through it: the atonement made for
all the Congregation on the day of expiation, did not exempt such a one, as
whose soul was not afflicted within him that day, from cutting off, Levit.
16.29, 30, 31. with Chap. 23.28, 29.30. So in 2 Chronicles. 29.24. Its said, An
atonement was made for All Israel, and yet ten Tribes of them were in
Captivity, and many of the rest laughed Hezekiah and his zeal to scorn. That by
that offering they were so much as typically and legally all reconciled to God,
and their sins against the Law expiated, so as the punishments appointed in the
Law for despising it, were not to be inflicted upon them, I fear Mr. Owen will
not be able to demonstrate. Nay, the Apostle intimates, in Heb. 10.26.29. That
they that had the sacrifice of Christ offered up for them, and the blood of it
in some sense sanctifying them, (...).
wilfully after the knowledge of the Truth sinning against it, and despising it,
have no more benefit of it, there remains not further a sacrifice for them. It
seems there was one, even that of Christ for them before, The Propitiatory
Sacrifice did indeed expiate sin, and reconciled legally the person to God when
it was accompanied with Faith in him that brought it, or for whom it was
offered, or with a submission unto God according to Law; and so the comers to
this Sacrifice of Christ, have all those effects by him enumerated to
perfection, but not all for whom it was offered, or for whom he is a
Propitiation. 3. A Propitiation he is for them all in this, That by his
offering of himself, he is that Thing or Person unto which God having respect
is propitious or favorable to them, deals not with the world according to their
deserts, but is patient and bountiful to them, delights not that any perish,
but that all should rather come to Repentance, unto which his goodness and
patience also leads. As also in this, that Christ is He that has done so
much in his Death, and Mediation for the world, that he is set before it in the
Gospel as a mean of reconciliation, and acceptance into the favor of God, he is
free for the whole world to come to God by, and any person of it may find
favor with God through him. Yea, 4. The sin of the world, even of Adam, and all
in him, is so covered or expiated by his Death and Sacrifice, that God took not
the forfeiture of our lives according to the desert thereof, out of respect to
him, but in that sense (at least,) justification of life is to all: both a
being under mercy here, and away to life for us in Christ for hereafter. That
Law I find not (I mean the Law inflicting death upon Adam and all his
Posterity for eating the forbidden fruit) shall be produced against any as the
cause of perpetual ruin. Yea, that the whole world through this Sacrifice of
Christ are brought near to God, the Kingdom exposed to them, and no man to be
called common or unclean as formerly (So as upon that ground its unlawful for
him to enter it,) we have showed before, Acts 10.28.
so that this word cannot straiten the following words signification; Which in
the next place comes to be spoken to. viz. The whole world, in which the
greatest weight lies, and of which he says, That it being seven or eight times
in the New Testament, it cannot except in one, and that in Re necessaria, be
made appear that it compriseth all and every man. To which we say, That we
affirm not that it so signifies here, because its evidently a distinct party
from believers: but we say it signifies All besides them, and they and the
whole world beside, are all, and every man. And I desire him to prove, that the
words whole world when distinguished from believers does not signify all the
rest, and with them make All and every man. He instances (1) Rev. 3.10. where
the word is (...) not (...), and so not so pertinent: and yet his note there is
not right, for he says, There it cannot signify All and every man, because
whereas its said, an hour of temptation should come upon All the world, its
said, some shall be preserved from it, But the words are (...), out of, not
from, and a man may be preserved out of that that comes upon him, as the
preserving the Israelites out from Egypt does not argue but that they were in
it first. The hour of temptation comes upon all that dwell upon the earth, but
all are not preserved in that, and out from that hour of temptation, from being
swallowed up of it. However, The word whole earth there may signify all but
them that should be preserved, and with them All and every one, and that's
enough to our purpose. 2. Col. 1.6. Is impertinent, as I showed before, and his
observation that it signifies only believers, is very vain. The Apostle says
not, It brings forth fruit in all to whom it comes, that's evidently false, if
he mean it of fruits to life, but in all parts of the world it did. The same
impertinency is in that of Romans 1.8. It speaking of place, not of persons too;
In all the world, not by all the world. The like, or worse, is in that of Luke
2.1. where neither the word (...) is used, nor the speech the Word of God, but
of a proud Emperor, that was the tenor of his Decree, not the Appellation of
God put upon them. His Conclusion then that (...), is nothing but (...), is
groundless. By that rule. 1 John 5.19. and Romans 3.19. (which he forgot) should
signify the whole Catholic. Church lies in wickedness, and is guilty before
God, etc.

2. He says, All Flesh, All Nations, All Men, etc. are as large as the whole
world. I Answer, In themselves they are, but they may be otherwise used. This
is to fly from the terms, not to explain them, to tell us what other words
signify, not that that's spoken to: and yet in his Instances of the use of
those words in the Prophesies, there is this disparity which he considers not,
viz. That the whole world is spoken of as a distinct party from (and a party
reaching beyond) those that are clearly spoken of as believers, beyond the we
that walk in the light, confess our sins, that have an Advocate, etc. But in
those Instances, That All flesh shall see the salvation of God, All the ends of
the earth shall remember and to turn to God, He will pour out his Spirit upon
All flesh, etc. There is in none of them places such a distinction, as speaking
of a party at present existing beyond those that are believers. To say nothing
that those are Prophesies not affirmed of people in all times, but only fully
to be fulfilled in the last times, in which all flesh, good and bad then
living, shall see God saving his people, and every eye shall see Christ the
salvation of God coming in the clouds of heaven; and all in the last days
shall remember and turn to the Lord, so that the knowledge of the Lord shall
cover the earth as the waters shall cover the sea; and the Lord shall be one,
and his name one in all the earth. Though I believe all of them shall not be
through with Christ and his people, for after a thousand years Satan shall
deceive many multitudes of them, Rev. 20.8, 9. Yea, then also shall the Spirit
be poured upon all flesh, the power and breath of God shall in abundance be
upon it, to abase and confound it, not to make all flesh grow and be admired,
or prophecy, and do wonders, but then shall the sons and daughters of Sion
prophecy. It shall be a spirit of Prophecy upon them; but he says not so to
all flesh upon whom its poured. So that those may be taken in the fullest
latitude of those times, and of those ages pointed at chiefly, without any
error I conceive. The Spirit of the Lord shall breathe upon all flesh and make
it wither, as in Isai. 40.6, 7. And in the children of Sion it shall be a
spirit of Prophecy. Now whereas its said, that that was fulfilled in the day
of Pentecost, Acts 2. I answer, Prophesies of that nature have a twofold
fulfilling. 1. In a first fruits, so it was then, and since in its measure in
the Churches. 2. Fully, in the full accomplishment of them, and then it shall
have its latitude and extent. Again. 2. When its said, This is that spoken of
by such a Prophet, its not always meant, this is the full accomplishment of
that, or the thing primely pointed at there, but this is of the nature of that,
as in Matthew. 2.17. The weeping of the Bethlemitish mothers for their children
killed by Herod, was as that spoken of by Jeremy, Chap. 31. There was then such
a weeping as was there spoken of. But yet to any Reader its evident, that the
Prophet Jeremy aimed not primely at that, but at the carrying away of the
Ephramites descended of Joseph, and so of Rachel. Thence that promise in the
next verse, They shall come again from the land of the Enemy. So that in Acts
2. was a pouring out of the Spirit to abase the flesh, and a giving them to
Prophecy, as was spoken of in Joel, though Joels eye pierced further then that
very pouring it out upon those persons in that manner, and those present
ensuing effects. That All the Nations shall be believers, I grant, and then the
whole world, ye all that believe shall have little difference, and so much
those places, and that of Isai. 2.2. will hold forth. But that the whole world,
now or in John's time, were so, or that the words whole world distinguished from
believers, who have Christ a propitiation, signifies only believers: I deny
the former, as evidently false, and the latter as a groundless conceit.

3. He reasons thus. The words whole world signifies sometimes the worser part
of the world, and why may it not then the better? To which I answer, that the
word world has reason when distinguished from men called out of the world, and
opposed to them, to signify the worser part, because distinguished from the
better. But why when distinguished from the better, it should signify the
better, I know none. I ask him why in that case it must not signify the worse
too. Now here its manifestly extended beyond the better part, Us that have an
Advocate, and not for us only, but for the whole world. If he could find me
any place where its distinguished from a bad party, as bad as any can be, there
we might allow it happily so to signify rather then here. After these
considerations (and from them) he mentions some small reasons which are all
spoken to in what is said already, except the first, viz. That he speaks not of
Impetration, but of Application, but none ever said that the Application of the
death of Christ is universal. To which I answer, That what ever it speaks of,
its Universal; we must not square the Scripture to our speakings, but our
speakings to the Scriptures. 2. Its not spoken here of the application of
Christ's Death by Faith, but of what Christ's death does with God for All men, or
rather what Christ is with God for them, by virtue of it, not what Christ does
in men, nor the fruits that follow upon this Propitiation believed in by men,
as Romans 3.25. does. This Scripture, 1 John 2.2. tells us what Christ is with
God for All the world, that in Romans 3.25. tells us how God propounds him to men
in the Gospel, and what he is to become to them by Faith, and what benefit they
shall receive. There is the mercy Seat, here the atoning Sacrifice, as here
considered he keeps off many a blow from All, as there propounded and received
by Faith he brings to us remission of all, etc. His other Reasons and
Reasonings being fore-spoken to, I pass.

He is out again about 2 Cor. 5.19. when he tells us, That the world that God
was reconciling (ver. 19.) was the Us that he reconciled and put the word of
Reconciliation into the hearts of (ver. 18.) [that is indeed the Apostles and
Preachers of the Gospel onely] which is so evidently false, that it needs no
other answer then the noting of it. For why does the Apostle exhort others
still to be reconciled, and style themselves the Ambassadors of God for that,
if the World that God was Reconciling was only the Ambassadors of
Reconciliation? His confounding [hath reconciled us by Christ] and [was
reconciling the World in Christ] deserves not looking on, the rest we have
spoken to. Only where he says, That [God was in Christ reconciling] holds
out an actual work of Reconciliation, and must be either Conditional or
Absolute. I answer, What God has done already is absolute, but the
Reconciliation to be accomplished on men's part, and in men, is conditional, and
the actual reconciling on Gods part, and tendering the accomplishment of it in
men on condition, are competible enough, as Gods actual leading Israel toward
Canaan, and the tendering to bring them into Canaan conditionally to many
individuals were. But then he asks, What is that condition? I answer, That they
listen to, and cordially receive the grace of God. But then he says, The words
must signify either that God was reconciling a believing world, or an
unbelieving world. I answer, Neither, properly, for the world could be looked
upon as neither (if he mean of believing in, or unbelief of Christ) as God was
laying its sins on Christ, and punishing him for it, and preparing means to
reveal his goodness to them; for till there be an object of Faith, vertually,
or actually fitted for our faith to lean on, and till that be discovered, the
world is not chargeable with unbelief in it, nor can believe on it. It was a
world at enmity with God, and not believing (yea without any known ground of
believing) in him, till the revelation of Gods goodness to them come unto them.
His Dilemma was answered long before.

He affirms, that all that God was in Christ reconciling, shall be reconciled;
but I desire his proof for it, for the Apostle intimates that some might
possibly receive that grace in vain, and so not be reconciled. Whereas in
answer to T. More. He asks if all the Elect are not men. I answer, that that
was not questioned, but whether the Apostle saying, that he persuaded men,
meant that he persuaded the Elect only, or others? Whereas T. More says, That
2 Cor. 5.18. says, that some of those men were reconciled to God for whom
Christ died. " Mr. Owen says its most false. But sure he knows not what he
says, if he say that 2 Cor. 5.18. says, That all that Christ died for were
reconciled, or that the Apostle in that verse speaks not but of some, namely,
themselves that were employed to preach to others, as also if he affirm that
all them that the Apostle persuaded, were in their first persuading reconciled.

He tells us Joh. 1.9. may be read thus, The true light is that that coming
into the world inlightneth every man. But that's not much material, for it must
needs come before it inlighten. The matter is, that it inlightens every man.
Now to say that this is every man that is enlightened, a Mr. Owen says, is to
leave the matter spoken of wholly uncertain, for that may be All, or None, or
the Most, or the Fewest. Upon this his note he might have put that observation,
[viz. " That some corrupt the Scriptures] better then where he put it. What
follows in that Chapter in its substance all answered already. Only I must
note, that he abuses Luk 2.34. Telling us that it says, Christ was set for the
fall of many; stopping too soon, and leaving out a main word of the Text, for
its thus, For the fall and rising again of many. And yet a Decree to condemn
some for not listening to, and believing in Christ sent for them to be their
Savior, may well stand with (yea necessarily presupposes) a Decree to send
Christ to be their Savior first, or as looked upon in a condition preceding
that their not believing on him, but rejecting him. And so we have scaled the
walls of hi^ Defense against that part of our first Argument.

CHAP. IIII.
An Answer to his fourth Chapter, about the words All, and Every, used in
diverse Scriptures that speak of this business.

HE next sets himself to oppose our persuasion or faith, as it leans upon those
Scriptures that expressly say, He dyed for All. And that he needs to do, or else
he should acknowledge himself to be exceedingly blameworthy; for that in
express terms point blank, contradictory to the express terms of the
Apostles, he has very frequently in this Treatise, denied him to have dyed for
All. If he will make his saying to be Gospel, he must pull down the sayings of
the Apostle, and the Gospel he preached, and make that no Gospel, and those
expressions to be dangerous and erroneous; which because he durst not do, in
direct opposition to him (as he is bold to do against us) therefore he
endeavors subtly to undermine the Apostles expressions; telling us, That no
strength of Argument can be taken from the words themselves, that so generally
express the matter, because the word All is often taken for fewer then every
man in the World. Now that the word All is sometimes so taken, I grant, that
is, in places where reference is had in it to particular Nations, Countries,
Families, societies, etc. in which the foregoing passages manifest, that the
writer speaks not of all the world, or of men indefinitely, as also in certain
Historical narrations of men's sayings, and many times when the things spoken
of, are the actions, councels and passages of men; In which places yet it
signifies, the Generality or Universality of men in those places, parts,
societies, etc. or so far as the actions, speeches, and carriages of men may
reach. Of this nature are, All shall know that ye are my Disciples. Provide
things honest in the sight of all men. Ye are our Epistle, read and known of
all men. All took John to be a Prophet, All Judea went out to John to be
Baptized, etc. But that ever the Scripture speaking of God and his actions,
thoughts, will, knowledge toward men, uses the expression All men (without some
particular reference to some particular place, Country, or Kingdom only spoken
of or to) and therein means fewer then all Generally or Universally, much less
that he thereby signifies the Elect or Believers, or the like, I do deny, till
I can see something brought to convince me otherwise, especially in Doctrinal
and fundamental truths; such as the Creation, Redemption, Resurrection, and
Judgment are. And I conceive in such cases, its not ground sufficient to
straighten and limit our faith about a truth so expressed; (no other Scripture
denying it of any, or restraining it only to some) that these general
expressions in places not Dogmatical, or not speaking of the actions, thoughts,
etc. of God toward men, but of men's sayings, actions, etc. (whose abilities are
of lesser circumference) signify less then All Universally. I think by Mr.
Owens Rules, the Apostle to the Hebrews argued very fallaciously, when from the
word All, (the very word excepted against) he thus argues, Heb. 2.8. Thou have
put all things under his feet. In that he put all things under him, he left
nothing not put under him. To this Mr. Owen might as well except, and say, That
follows not; for the word All things, does not signify Universally and
collectively, but only some things of all sorts, and sometimes only the elect
and beleivers. Now if the Apostle so reason in that Doctrinal expression, in
things attributed to God as the Agent, I would fain see some reason why also we
may not infer from this, He gave himself a ransom for all men, Ergo, He left
out no man from his ransome-giving. If he answer, we do not see all men
ransomed, we might reply in the Apostles words, neither do we yet see all
things put under him. Our sight or not seeing of things, is no sufficient
ground of denying credit to Gods sayings. But I pass on to view Mr. Owen in
what follows, in which first, He falls upon the consideration of 1 Timothy 2.4.
God wills all men to be saved; in which he considers, 1. What is that will of
God there spoken of. 2. Who are the All of whom the Apostle is there treating.
To the first he says, The will of God is taken either for the will of God
intending, or will commanding and approving, and wishes us to take our option
of what we will understand it. To that I answer, That of his will intending to
effect their salvation, I do not understand it (if by saving we mean in eternal
life, otherwise I may) the form of speech is passive; not, God will save all
men, or God purposes and determines to save all men: but God wills all men to
be saved. Nor is it, God will bring all men to the knowledge of the truth, but
God wills that (or would have) all men come to the knowledge of the Truth, and
in such like speeches the word signifies, its desirable, or approved of God,
that all men be saved, etc. He has provided a medium by which they might, and
he desires that they would be saved, etc. as in Psa. 81. Oh that my people had
he arkened! etc. Isa. 48.17. Oh that thou had hearkened to my Commandments!
and Luke 19.41. Oh that thou had known, at least in this thy day, etc. and 2
Pet. 3.9. Not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
Repentance, according to that Ezekiel. 34.11. As I live, I have no pleasure in the
death of the wicked, but rather that he should turn and live. And so the word
(...) is often used, as Mark 12.38. (...), the Pharisees desired, or liked to
walk in long Robes. So Mark 14.36. (...) not what I will, that is, like or
desire: so Cor. 7.7. (...), I desire that all men were as I am, that is, that
they had such power over their wills and affections as I have, that they could
abstain from marrying, or marry as they see cause or ground, as I can. So we
take it here to signify voluntatem beneplaciti, Its good in his sight that All
be saved. And thence he commands All every where to repent, and to look to him
and be saved. Now to this he replies, that then this All, can be no more then
to whom he grants the means of grace, which are indeed a great many but not
the hundredth part of the posterity of Adam. But here,

1. I deny his inference. He approves the salvation of Infants, that have not
those means of grace he speaks of. 2. We say, that those that have the most
full means of grace, are others then Mr. Owen bounds it up to, so that yet his
exposition is untrue. 3. We say with the Apostle, that God created all Nations,
that is, Adam and all his posterity, to seek after him, and wills them to feel
after him, from any one of whom he is not far off; yea, he has granted the
knowledge of truth, ( Romans 1.18.) as the words are here, (...)) to all the
Heathen, debarring none of them from it, but would have them acknowledge what
they see, and not smother as they do. Yea, he has sent out his Gospel to them
all, willing them all to come to that, though many have rejected it, and hinder
one another from coming to it. Mark 16.15. Col. 1.23.
Now whereas he says, That "stream of light which the Gentiles have about God,
cannot save them; So I say of the Scriptures too of themselves: but he from
whom that light comes, and to whom it leads, is able to save them, and the
Gospel is his power to salvation to them that believe it: and he would have all
look to him and grope after him, by what they have, and let him alone with what
follows: And though Mr. Owen tells us, " that it will not follow from thence,
that Christ dyed for All; yet I conceive it does; God never commanding any to
look to him and be saved, or never approving any man's saving, (so far as I can
find) but in, and by the virtue of a Mediators Death, it being point blank
contrary to the rule of his justice, to save a condemned man upon whom he has
pronounced Death, without satisfaction by Christ. But because we have a firmer
bottom for that, even that that follows ver. 6. I shall here wave it.

Having left us to our option, he gives us his own opinion, viz. That it seems
to him exceeding clear, that his efficacious will is here intended, viz. the
will of his purpose, and that its here affirmed that he will save All, which is
evidently false, for the words are not (...), who will save all men. I would
wish Mr. Owen who is so lavish in his expressions against others pretended
sorry and irrational dealing (as he shows himself to be cha. 6.) would put on
his Spectacles, and mind well what he affirms as truth when he writes again,
for as he falsifies the affirmation, so he endeavors to confirm his conception
by a sorry argument, viz. That the purpose of God should be the bottom of our
prayers, which contradicts his former previous consideration, cap. 1. where he
asserts that between Gods purpose and our duty there is no connection: And
against the practice of the Saints, as of Jeremy, who prayed for a people that
God determied to destroy, and give over to their enemies. And contrary to our
Savior, who prayed the Cup might pass from him, though he submitted himself to
his Fathers Will. Its enough that we do what God bids us, and what he tells us
its acceptable to him though we know not his purposes. If he approve all men's
being saved, and coming to the knowledge of Truth, that's ground enough for our
so desiring too, and furthering it what we can. So Paul's desire and prayer for
Israel, were, that they might be saved, even them whom he generally says of,
that they were blinded, Romans 10.1, 2. and 11.5, 6. His Premises being so
faulty, his Conclusion must needs be untrue, viz. That all men then must be
saved, if by all men be meant every man in the world. To the consideration of
which words he nextly proceeds.

2. By All men (he says) the Apostle intends all sorts of men indefinitely
living under the Gospel, or under the enlarged dispensation of the means of
grace. That this is in it no man (I think) will deny, but that this is all the
truth of it, I expect he should confirm; but in coming over it again he says, "
That by all men is meant, only of all sorts of men, that is, but some of all
sorts; Which is larger then the former expression in this, that, before he
confined it to men living under the Gospel, now to all sorts indefinitely; for
indeed there is a sort of men, that through their own former wickedness, or
others slothfulness, have not the Gospel now preached to them as we have, as
the Indians, etc. which here he may seem to include too; and then this latter
expression contradicts the former; but scanter in this, that he said before,
all sorts of men, which might reach to all of all sorts. Now its but of all
sorts, that is, but some of all; which he endeavors thus to confirm.

1. That the word All most usually signifies in Scripture many of all sorts,
and therefore it must do so here too. To this I answer. 1. That his Proposition
is false, Where it signifies many of all sorts only in Scripture once, it
signifies all of all sorts of those things whereabout the word is used twenty
times. And this I will undertake to make good against him.

2. In those very places he propounds to show, that it so signifies, he does
but Petere principium. Viz. About Christ's curing all diseases, and the
Pharisees tithing all herbs.
We have spoken to them before

3. I say, That when it speaks of the actions of God toward men, or of his
purposes, thoughts, knowledge, or the like, it very feldom, if ever, signifies
in any other place (but many of all sorts) but all generally or universally, if
the speech be not bound up to some particular Place or Country. Besides,

4. Did it so elsewhere, it would not follow It must do so here too. "Whereas
he says, There is nothing to impel another signification that's larger. I
answer, yes, This, that its laid down as a ground of praying for all men. Now
we are not to limit our prayers to some of all sorts, for then we should be
ready to say, though we refuse to pray for such and such as we have not seen
sin to death, yet we have done our duty. Yea, though we pray but for them all
that seem to be of our mind of all sorts, for then we might say we have prayed
for some of all sorts, and that's all that's required: however, in praying for
the Church only, we might say, we have prayed for many of all sorts, and so
that we have done what is required (there being as we think some of all sorts
of the Church) and so we should elude the Apostles exhortation by our own
Tradition, as the Jewish Elders used to do with Gods Commandments: the Apostle
speaking here of all men, as a distinct party from (yea all the residue above
and beyond) the Church of God, who are to pray for them. And that his former
gloss is untrue also, of all sorts of men living under the enlarged
dispensation of grace is here evident, for we are not only to pray for all
those that live under the Gospel, but for all not under it also, that it might
be extended to them; seeing he would have all men embrace that, and be saved by
him. But by Mr. Owens Exposition we need not pray for enlarging the Gospel to
those Indians, or any further then it is, but only pray for such as have it
preached unto them, and not for all of them neither, but for some of them,
which when its left to our judgments and wills to regulate us in, the Apostles
precept will scarce amount to this, Pray for whom ye list, or will.

2. He says Paul leads us plainly to this Interpretation, for having wished us
to pray for all men, he expressly intimates, that by all men, he understands men
of all sorts, ranks, conditions, etc. To this I say, That his intimating that
we should pray for all sorts and ranks, does not prove that he limits it to but
some of all sorts and ranks, which is the thing to be proved. Nay, The words of
the Apostle confutes such a limitation rather, for he says not, for some Kings,
some people, etc. but for Kings indefinitely, and all in Authority universally:
so that he mentioning but one sort of men, as especially to be prayed for
amongst all men (because they are such as all the rest are chiefly concerned
in) and bidding us pray for all them, that is, all in Authority, and place of
Government, he rather shows us by that instance of all of one sort, what he
would have us do in all the rest, then any way teaches us to limit it but to
some of all. For that those words contain a formal distribution of All into
many sorts, I deny. But only there he particularizeth one sort, in praying for
whom, all the rest under them are in a manner included, so that his paralleling
it with Jer. 29.31. where after the people are mentioned, Kings, Queens,
Eunuchs, Princes, Carpenters, Smiths, is both vain and impertinent. For
besides that there is no such destribution here, except he include Carpenters
and Smiths, under that phrase, All in Authority, it would not (did he) serve
his purpose, it not proving a limitation of the former General to but some of
all sorts; As if Jeremy had said, Some of the Kings and Queens and Princes
only were carried away.

3. He says We are to pray for all whom God would have to be saved, But we
ought not to pray for all and every one, knowing that some are Reprobates, and
sin to death, concerning whom we have an express Caution not to pray for them.
To this I answer, First, That the words are not, Pray for All that God would
have saved, but absolutely, Pray for All -- for God would have all saved, etc.
Secondly, We are to pray for all, or any whosoever by this Precept; only the
other tells us how long, till we see they have sinned to death. That does but
exclude a certain condition or sin of some, not exclude their persons in all
conditions. Nor are we to judge any Reprobates by an eternal purpose, and so
exclude them. God no where calls any so, but such as have actually rejected
(and are given over of) him. As he does good, and affords patience and mercy
till then to lead them to repentance, 1 John 5.16.
so, till then we are not to reject them. Thirdly, Nor are the words, Thou
shall not pray for him, but There is a sin to death; I say not, that thou
should pray for, or concerning it.

4. He says, All shall be saved whom God will have to be saved, for who has
resisted his will? Answer, That all shall be saved that God would have to be
saved, I deny, For God would have all men saved, Isai. 49.4, 5.
but all men shall not be saved. He would often have gathered Jerusalem (for
that often plainly refers to his coming in his Prophets by his Spirit, and in
his many great works done for them, for often he came not in the flesh to them)
and yet they were not gathered. He has pleasure or will (as the word
(...)signifies) that men should rather turn and live, then sin on and die, but
all of whom that is spoken do not so, etc. His confirmation is no divine
testimony, but he only strikes in with the Caviller, Romans 9. For that's not
Paul's affirmation or Doctrine, That none resists the Will of God; but its the
voice of fleshly Reason cavilling against sound Doctrine. Thou will say to me,
why does he yet complain, for who has resisted his Will? Therefore it may
suffice to answer, as the Apostle does, Nay but, O man, who art thou that
answerest against God? that art bold to contradict Gods Word with thy reason?
Who art thou? thou can not see wood for trees, as we use to say, thou art in
thy reason resisting him, and yet thou say Who has done it? Many a man
rejects and resists the Counsel of God to his own hurt. The Kings and Rulers
that take counsel against Christ, resist Gods Will or Counsel, they stand up
against it, Psalm. 2.1, 2. Its true, they overthrow it not, but they miss of the
good it would have brought unto them had they submitted to it. They may Stare
contra consilium Dei, they cannot evertere consilium Dei. Had the Apostle said,
He will save all men, Mr. Owens reason had been weighty, but as it is said, it
is not. Many a man does not what God would have him, nor attains what God sets
before him, See Psalm. 81.11, 14, 15. Isai. 48.17, 18. Luke 13.41, 42.

5. He says, God would have no more to be saved then to come to the knowledge of
the truth, for these two things are conjoined in the Text. But 1. If Mr. Owen
means of coming to it by outward hearing, we deny it, He would have Infants
saved too, that he wills not to listen to the truth. 2. If otherwise, we deny
his Minor, That God would have not All in all Ages come to the knowledge of the
truth. His confirmations of it are not concludent, viz. Psalm. 149.19, 20. He
showed his Word to Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments unto Jsrael, he dealt
not so with any Nation, etc. That says not, he would not have all in those ages
come to know the truth. If his not dealing so with them, as with Jacob, argue
it, then he would not have Job and his friends, or any of other Nations come to
know it, for he dealt not so with any of them as with Israel. Though he
revealed his Statutes and Judgments in that manner and measure to the Jews
only as to no Nation else, yet he would have had the Nations about them at the
hearing of his name by them have come to them for it. And besides, the Apostle
says not, and come to know his Statutes and Judgments, but to know Truth. And
truth they had, ask the same Apostle else. He tells us so in Romans 1.11. They
imprisoned the Truth in unrighteousness. Sure they had it then, though they had
it not so much, nor were so dealt with as Israel was. And he would not have had
them imprison it in unrighteousness, and bound it by their understandings and
exaltations of their own reasons as they did, but retain and acknowledge it, and
submit to glorify God in it and be thankful. So might they have had the truth
come more in upon them, and revealed much more unto them. Nor matters it that
God suffered them to walk in their own ways, and winked at those times of
ignorance, Acts 14.15. and 17.30. for that shows but his patience, partly in
not consuming them for their follies, and partly his Justice in giving them
over to their own delusions: but not that they had not truth, or that he would
not have had them own and acknowledge it, and seek after him in it; nay, both
those places intimate the contrary. The first says, he left not himself
without witness, in that he did them good, etc. The other, that even some of
their own Poets had, and held forth such glimpses of truth, as had they minded
and submitted to them, they would not have worshipped Idols and Images of their
own framing, but groped after him that made themselves. Nor does the hiding of
his mystery from former Ages confirm it ( Col. 1.26.) for that was the uniting
of Jews and Gentiles in such glorious privileges in Christ, which is the
mystery there spoken of, which was hidden too from the Jews, Yea, from the
Apostles too in former Ages; and yet they had Truth, though not all Truth.
Matthew. 11.25, 26. was before spoken to. But 3. Besides all this, we may say,
that he speaks not here of the Ages past, nor in the time past. Its not (...),
he in times past would, nor is it, he will bring all to know the truth, But now
for the present, he wills all to come to know it. Over and above what they had
formerly, God now sends his Gospel unto all Nations, and would have them come
to know it, embrace it, and propagate, and preserve it to all their individuals
and posterities. This he would have them do, and this is approveable before
him, and acceptable to him, and so God wills all to be saved. He would have had
them acknowledge Truth in times past, but now he would have them much more come
to it, and acknowledge it, it being more fully opened. So that our Assertion
and Exposition will bear up it self against his Arguments. We may use the
Apostles All men without limiting or restraining it, (which is all I desire)
and defend our selves against the loud clamor of Error, and Heresy, which the
spirit of Error fastens upon us by those that have exalted their reason above
the Scripture, and carry themselves as Masters to it, not scholars of the
Spirit of God in it: not only the words themselves but the scope of the place
too will bear us out, but it will not them that limit it to the Believers, and
to the Elect, for (beside that they never are called all men) we find both
precept and practice for praying for such men as are not so, but prove
reprobate; and we find God by his Spirit contesting with many to seek him, and
to look after, and receive the knowledge of the Truth, and be saved by him,
which yet for rejecting those his wrastlings, have been rejected, as is plain
to any that mind, Psalm. 81.9, 10, 11, 14. Prove. 1.22, 23, 24. Matthew. 23.37.
Luke 19.41. etc. Now for these All that the Apostle says, God would have to be
saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth, Mr. Owen confesses the 6. verse
proves, that Christ gave himself a ransom; that All being of the same extent
with this in verse 4. Therefore he said not right, when he denied that the
Scripture says, he gave himself a ransom for All men; that in ver. 4. being
expressly All men. And also his Conclusion here is wrong, viz. That Christ died,
and gave himself only for his Elect, and such as shall be eternally saved, for
that's the sum of his Conclusion. His Argument from the word Ransom, and so the
commutation he speaks of is answered before in lib. 3. cap. 5. Mr. Rutherfords
reasons being the same in substance with what we have had before in Mr. Owen, I
shall not insert any thing of them here, nor give them any other answer, then
what I have given in Mr. Owen to him.

2. The next place that he endeavors to bear off the force of, is 2 Pet. 3.9.
God is patient to us, not willing that any should perish, but that all should
come to Repentance. To avoid the light of which, he corrupts the Text by adding
to the words, but detracting from the sense; he will have it read, that he is
patient toward us, not willing that any of us should perish, but all of us
should come to Repentance. By such liberty he might answer any Argument, For he
does like the Papists, when we tell them of being justified by Faith, and not
by Works, they can answer with this addition, the Works of the Law; we are not
justified by them, but by other works we are. Besides, who are that Us none of
which he would have perish, and all of whom he would have come to Repentance?
He says, Those that had pertook of the precious promises, chap. 1.4. whom he
calls Brethren, chap. 3.1. (and that he might be sure to make the text speak
what he would have it, he runs back as far as Math. 24.) the Elect, intimating,
that they include some part of the world uncalled. But besides that, he no
where proves that, and that its very far fetched to find the substantive of this
word [(...)] there, can that be any reason of his patience? Could any of them
perish, should Christ come the sooner, who can in no wise be deceived or drawn
away by perverse Doctrines from Christ? Or are those that have received the
precious promises of eternal salvation, and Brethren to the Apostles, in danger
to perish, if Christ should come sooner, who are ready to think long for his
coming for their deliverance? Or are they yet short of Repentance? Apage has
nugas. The plain sense is, That God is patient in behalf of us that believe,
and does not speedily execute Judgment for us, (as the like phrase also
signifies in Luke 18.7, 8.) though he be much provoked to come and plead our
cause, and destroy ungodly men; yet he forbears, not willing any should perish,
not being hasty to destroy any, as one that would have them perish, or as one
that delights in their destruction; but affording all men in general space
for repentance of their follies, and evils, desires and approves of it, that
they repent, his goodness and forbearance leading to that, even such as abuse
it, and treasure up wrath against themselves by it, as is affirmed of Jezabel,
Rev. 2.21. and others, Romans 2.4, 5. Now, as we desire not to stretch the latter
clause to every individual, (as to Infants while not capable of it) so neither
can it be limited to the Elect only: he willing others also (as that
fore-quoted Scripture proves) to come to Repentance; but to the generality of
men we do extend it. That God hated any from eternity, he has often said, but
never yet proved it, nor has he showed, that God denies repentance to any,
before they put away obstinately what would lead them to it. He that gives that
which leads to Repentance, cannot be said to deny it to them to whom he gives
that, while that is giving to them: as he that gives a plaster that will heal,
if men according to the power they have would apply it, cannot be said to deny
healing, though some refusing to apply the plaster are never healed.

3. The next place sought to be eluded is, Heb. 2.9. That by the grace of God
he might taste Death (...) for every man. Where first he "tells us, all
acknowledge that (...) is put for (...), Every one, is put for All, by an
Enallage of number. Which as he but begs, so see I no ground for granting him.
Its as proper a speech to say, (...), as (...), if not a tittle of the Law
shall pass away till all be fulfilled, then why should we causlesly let such a
change be made of whole words of the Gospel, seeing the Gospel is more
permanent? But then again he tells us, That this expression of Every man, is
commonly used in Scripture to signify men under some restriction. That its so
used in speeches about men's actions, thoughts, knowledge, etc. and in places
where the foregoing speeches to which it has reference, are evidently bounded
up to particular Nations, Countries, Parties, I grant; it then signifying but
any one without restriction, that come within the reach or opportunity of such
men, to act such things toward, as are in those speeches spoken of, or that
appertain to those places or parties, as in that of Col. 1.28. but that in
speeches, in which its coupled with God or Christ, as Mediator, acting,
willing, purposing, or knowing, it signifies but some of those that it refers
to, I deny, chiefly in matters of fundamental concernment, as the death of
Christ for men is. That that he produces from 1 Cor. 12.7. might seem to evert
the truth of this, The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man. But
to that I answer,

1. That there is not the same word, its not (...), but (...), which is a
Distributive always of some Totum before mentioned; which there is (...),
about spiritual men, the members of Christ, to every one of them, (not (...))
is the Spirit given; and the like is that (...) in 1 Cor. 4, 5. Then shall
every one (that is, of the Stewards or Ambassadors of Christ) have praise of
God, in which I conceive, is also a Synecdoche Speciei pro genere, praise for
judgment or doom. But that it fignifies All, and Every one here, Mr. Owen will
not allow for these Reasons. 1. " Because to taste Death, is to drink up the cup
due to sinners; Which is as good a note as Mr. Garners, that to taste, is to put
a taste and relish into it. " That to taste signifies, so to drink up a thing,
that no one drop remains for any to drink after one, (as Mr. Owen says) is an
exposition of the word Taste, contrary to its usual signification; for men are
said to taste when they do but sip or make trial, or the sweetness or
bitterness, etc. of a thing; not when they eat or drink it all up. Sure when
Jonathan tasted a little honey, the meaning is not, that he eat all up that he
found, 1 Samuel 14.43. or when some are said to taste the good word of God, and
powers of the world to come; the meaning is not, that they had got all the
knowledge that was to be had of them, and left none for others. Surely Mr. Owen
thinks not that the righteous taste of any afflictions or drop of anger, and
therefore this of Christ's death need not be propounded to them by way of
consolation, to let them know that he experimented what they suffer, and knows
how to succor them, for they need no succor that grapple with no death. But
grant that he tasted and swallowed up into victory too that death which was
common to all in Adam, and thence will raise all out of it, by the virtue of
his Death and Resurrection. Will it thence follow there may no second Death
befall any De secunda morte ita, Ambr. in Comm. in Romans 5.14. Est and alia mors
quae secunda dicitur, quam non Adae peccato patimur, sed ejus occasion
propriis peccatis acquiritur.
for despising and despiting him, living still to themselves, and not to him?
or that whoever perish in a second death, Christ never tasted the first for
them, even that displeasure which would have for ever taken away all
dispensations of favor and goodness to them? But 2. He tells us, He sees an
evident appearing cause why he should use that phrase, and call them for whom
Christ died All, viz. because he writ to the Hebrews, who were deeply tainted
with an erroneous opinion, that the benefits purchased by the Messiah were
proper to them of that Nation, excluding all others. Not to question here,
whether they had any such conception (which we have spoken to in chap. 1.) but
supposing it to have been so, yet how does this expression any way help them?
The Apostle should rather have been the more wary of writing but the Truth to
them, and telling them that is was for every one that believes, for that might
have bin better born, then for every one, as if he extended to one and other,
believer and unbeliever. If that had been an error, he would not have made way
for it, to put the Jews out of one error into another that might rather more
stumble them then the other, it being an expression of large extent. Sure if in
any place, this might have been limited to the Elect and believers, it ought to
have been to those that were ready to stumble that but they should share with
them.

3. He tells us, There is a description of those for whom Christ died, in the
Chapter, which will not suit to All, viz. many sons to be brought to glory, the
sanctified ones his brethren, the children that God gave him, those that are
delivered from bondage of death, etc. That Christ died for them, and had in his
eye such ends in his dying for them, as are spoken of with reference to them,
is true. But that he died for them only, or that those after-clauses are a
full description of that All, or every one that he died for, I deny. 1. Because
its suits not with the phrase here [every one, or All] by his own confession.
Sure that can be no description of the persons contained in the word All, that
will not suit with the expression it describes, or that will not suit to All.
2. Its against those other places we have spoken to. 3. Its an uncouth
exposition, making the word (...), which is an Adjective, and so cannot have a
full signification in it self without another word, as its Substantive, to
stand alone without a just signification, till another verse (between which and
it is a full period) come to make up its sense, and then that that is supplied
for its Substantive is of a different number, and has another Adjective of
number joined with it. A thing unusual, and scarce to be paralleled in any
other place. And here I might take up Mr. Owens own words, in lib. 2. cap. 4.
Such is the powerful force and evidence of the Scripture-expressions of this
truth, Mr. Hows Answer to the Vniversalist, cap. 1.
that it scatters all its opposers, and makes them fly to several hiding
corners, as Mr. Garner, upon this is forced to make the word (...) a Verb
transitive, and to signify to put a taste into death, leaving the word (...) as
it was. Mr. How, (with as silly an evasion, as his throwing by the Proposition
which he should have opposed in terminis, and not as he did, thrust another
into its room, and bend his Arguments against that: as if I defending That
Faith alone without Works justifies, a Papist should come and tell me I mistake
the question, I should say thus, Faith which is alone without Works justifies,
and so spend his Arguments to prove that false) he I say will have it read, He
tasted whole Death, or every Death, and not to express for whom at all: though
to make way for that conceit he breaks down all Grammar rule and example,
making (...), a Verb of sense, to govern a Genitive case with the Proposition
(...) without giving any one example for such a thing. And now M. Owen (as also
M. Stalham) as fondly will make it stand alone without a Substantive, till the
other Verses afford it two or three; whereas indeed its substantive was
intimated before (as its ever in other places understood to be man, when its
put alone without another to declare its meaning) Lord what is man (says he)
that thou art mindful of him! or the son of man that thou should visit him!
thou made him a little lower then the Angels (which was true of him in Adam
and in Christ both) thou have crowned him with glory and honor, thou have set
him over the works of thine hands (which is true too of man in Adam and in
Christ) but we see not All things yet put under him, (that is, under man,
spoken of before with reference to a second subjecting them in the world to
come) but we see Jesus (made lower then the Angels, that he might taste Death by
the grace of God for every one) for or by the suffering of Death crowned with
glory and honor. We see him who for that end that he might suffer Death for
all, or for every one of the rest of men (of whom he had been speaking) by
Death attained to this, to have glory and honor, though not as yet to have all
things put under him. The one part of that prophecy is fulfilled though the
other be not. The next verse of bringing many sons to glory, is not spoken of,
as of his work, but as Gods. He made Christ perfect through sufferings, that he
should be their chief Leader or Captain in the way to Salvation, in which he
speaks of Christ under another Notion then in this Verse. For there are two
considerations here of the Death and sufferings of Christ: one as he is the
propitiation and gave himself a ransom suffering in stead of Sinners, and
that's in the 9. verse, for every man. 2. As having the promise of a seed, or as
God having a purpose to make some sons in him by Faith, to which he must first
be viewed as a propitiation for man, that he might be an Object of their Faith,
and a medium of their sonship) he was to be their pattern and Leader, their
Captain and Example in the way, to whom he would conform them, and whom they
might have as an example for direction and encouragement in their believing,
and this end of his sufferings respects only those that being brought in to
believe on him, should need his example to encourage and guide them in such
trials and sufferings, especially for God, as thereby they are exposed to. So
he speaks of his dying and sufferings, ver. 10.14.18. Chap. 4.17, 18. 1 Pet.
2.21. Christ suffered for you, leaving you an example that ye should follow his
steps. So also Heb. 12.2, 3, 4. Now M. Owen confounds these two together into
one, and makes his sufferings as a Captain and Leader in the way to life, to
be but of equal latitude with his suffering by way of propitiation: And so he
would cut off all propitiation from the old Fathers and Believers, who had him
not as their example to look at in their sufferings: and 2. from all Infants
that cannot have him as their example to walk by, and 3. from all, till
believes and in the way of Salvation, for neither of conversion or any such
thing as is of that nature was he an example, he never being out of Gods way.
And this indeed is the very issue of that argument against the latitude of that
Scripture, in its signification according to its expression.

4. Another Scripture that he seeks to elude, is 2 Cor. 5.14 15. where rendering
a reason of his earnestness in persuading men, one and other, because of the
terror of the Lord in the day of Judgment to which they must all come; he tells
them The love of Christ constrained them so to do, upon this ground that
Christ dyed for All; for from that he was led to infer these two principles. 1.
That then All dyed or were dead: all were dead in point of Sentence is proved
in this, that Christ dyed for All; which he would not surely, if any of them
had not been so dead: or thus, in that one dyed for all, then all dyed (in him)
in his dying, it was as if all had dyed for themselves, and so there is mercy
for them, a way to life opened in and by Christ, and so ground of Preaching to
them, exhorting and persuading any or every one of them (as Colos. 1.28.) to
repent, be reconciled to God, seek his face etc. as one that was not far from
them, but to be found of them. 2. That he having done that, he would have them
live to him in the life he gives them; otherwise (as in ver. 10, 11.) it would
be terrible with them at the day of Judgment, when he calls them to an account,
how they have spent their lives that they had by him.

Against this, he denies that all are bound to live to Christ, but only they to
whom he is revealed, nay indeed, only they that live by him, and have
Spiritual life in and with him. I am glad when error speaks out so far that
men may discern it; for by this the false Teachers are well helped with a
plea; they may say they were not obliged to live to him, and therefore ought
not to be punished the more for that that they denied him to be their Lord and
to serve him. And so all those in Math. 25.41, 42, 43. they may say to him,
what had they to do to live to him in his people, to feed and cloth him? etc.
what had they to do with him? they were not bound to be his servants, and to
seek his ends; they never see him etc. but if they had no obligation to live to
him (even they that say they never knew or saw him to be lived to and served)
how comes he to plead against them, and judge them for it? Where there is no
Law, sure there is no transgression, if there was no obligation upon them to
live to him, then it was no chargeable fault upon them that they did not so
live, but sure all the world shall one day see that they had something of his
Law, though they heard not of his Death. But by M.Ow. rule they should not be
obliged to seek after God, for many of them perhaps riever heard distinctly,
that God created them and made all things for them. Its the light and truth
that he conveyes to every man that is the rule of their living to him, and
according to their failing in that he will condemn them, Ioh. 1.9. To. 1.18.
19. Ro^ 2.12. Mat. 25.31, 35, 36, 41, 42, 43, etc. their being under previous
obligations hinders not this according to what knowledge, or means of knowledge
they had of him though but as God, for he is that God manifested in flesh that
made and governes all things. Whereas he says, the [All wee] v. 10. are All
believers, especially the Preachers of the Gospel; that's true, but except he
mean they only, its impertinent. If he mean so, yet (as he cannot prove it
so) it follows not were it proved, that the All here that Christ dyed for
(which more manifestly is to be referred to the men he persuaded, this being
but another reason rendered of that at which his enemies the false Apostles
stumbled) means only all believers; nor can it probably be so, that they were
the men only in danger of Gods terror, for how then did Christ purchase all
good things to them? sure to be out of the danger of that is one good thing
also. But to pass that, let us view his after strange Assertion, viz. That by
All, is meant, only the Elect of God, All believers: which to me is strange,
for that there is not any mention of those words in the Chapter, much less
amongst those preceding verses, of which this is rendered as the reason; but let
us view his arguments for it, viz. 1. That here the Resurrection of Christ is
conjoined with his Death. He died for them and Rose again; but for whomsoever
Christ rises, he rose for their justification, To. 4. ult. and they must be
justified, But All are not so. Ans. 1. That his Resurrection is conjoined is
true, and so it is intimately in all the other places of 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2, 9.
and where ever his Death for us is mentioned, its intimately the Death of him
that rose again; for had he not risen he could not have been a ransom or
propitiation; its not said here he rose again for them, but simply, He rose
again; which indeed he must needs be conceived to have done as an Object to be
lived to; we cannot live to a dead man. 2 That for whomsoever he rises, he
rises for their justification, and they must be justified; the places of Romans
4. ult. and 8.34. say not, they being believers only that there speak
applicatively of themselves. He dyed for our sins, this he did as and while we
were ungodly; and he rose again for our justification, that we believers (as
in ver. 24. To whom it shall be imputed, we believing in him that raised up
Jesus, he raised him with this intention that we believers) might be justified.
The coupling of two such speeches together do not argue that the objects of the
acts mentioned in them are of equal latitude, as in Cor. 4.14. He that raised
up the Lord Jesus, will also raise us up by Jesus, and present us with you. Its
not a good Inference, because they two are put together, therefore all that are
raised by Jesus shall be presented with the believers. And yet 3. If by
Justification we mean a right and just giving Sentence of freedom from that
Death that was come upon us in Adam as the reward of his disobedience, so I
grant it in its latitude, according to Romans 5.18. to All men to justification
of life, or if it be meant justification in the public person, as that that is
open for all to partake of, upon obedience of Faith, and so for our
justification, be only that we might be justified in his person, and that he
being perfected might be fitted to justify All or any man upon his believing,
so I grant it too, and affirm that he is able and fit to justify All upon
their looking by Faith unto him. Otherwise if it signify, that we undoubtedly
might have that justification, and be presented righteous and acceptable before
him, then the equal extent of all so justified, and all he dyed for, is
denied, and not at all proved from those places as is said before:
Justification so not being an immediate fruit or effect of Christ's resurection,
but following upon Faith as is plain, Romans 5.1. Gal. 2.16. Tit. 3.5, 6. 1 Cor.
6.11. whence its said to be by Faith, by the name of the Lord by the Spirit of
God etc. But inasmuch as he could neither be an Object of Faith to any, nor any
be discharged from their sins, nor presented righteous in him, had Death
swallowed him up, and he never risen, (2 Cor. 15.14, 15, 16, 17.) therefore he
is said to rise for our justification, that he might justify us in believing
on him, and so us that believe on him. That justification in the most special
sense does come upon many that Christ dyed for, is granted, and so both meet in
many the same persons, and such may say they are the Object of both; but that
thence they have equal Objects in point of number, is denied. Those Israelites
that intred into Canaan, might truly say, the Lord judged Pharaoh and the
Egyptians to bring us out of Egypt, and he led us in the wilderness to
possess of Canaan; and yet all that came out of Egypt, or were led in the
wilderness, were not possessed of Canaan.

2. He says he speaks there of those only, who by virtue of Christ's death live
to him, are new creatures, to whom the Lord imputes not their trespasses, who
become the righteousness of God in Christ. How God imputed not to the world
their trespasses we have showed before, for the rest of the expressions they
contain a shameful way of reasoning, Because that was one end of his dying
for All that they might live to him, therefore he dyed for no more then them
that do live to him and fulfill that his end. By that way of reasoning I will
prove that God made not all, because all seek him not, from Act. 17.26, 27. If
Paul had said, He dyed for all that live no longer to themselves but unto him,
it had been to M. Owens purpose, but when he says no such thing, but He dyed
for All, that they that live should live to him, To say that he vouchsafed a
mercy to no more then they that fulfill the end of that mercy, is exceeding
lame reasoning. By that Argument John bare witness of Christ to no more then
them that believed; John's Gospel was written for the use of no more then they
that believe it, Joh. 20.31. Psa. 10^, 43, 44.
God brought no more out of Egypt then them that kept his Statutes; John bare
witness only to those that received Christ, were made the sons of God,
received of his fullness grace for grace, were borne of God, saw the glory of
Christ as the only begotten of God. For those phrases follow that other
expression in Ioh. 1.7, 12, 13, 14, 16. Just with as much coherence to it as
those phrases that Mr. Owen reckons up, follow this we speak to in this
Chapter. And if we might take that liberty in expounding any verse we please,
by all the verses that follow it, so as to say the subject spoken of in the
one, is what ever after is spoken of in the other (as Mr. Owen does here, and
in Heb. 2.9.) we should make mad expositions.

3. He tells us, The Article (...), is joined with (...), they all died, or
were dead, evidently restraining that All. Thus He. But what All? That all that
died. That Article is not put to Christ died for All, but to All died, and
therefore were there any such force there in the Article, it makes nothing
against us, for we speak not of restraining the All that died, nor indeed is it
any other then Relative, if one died for All, then they All died. But that he
treats only of believers there, is merely proofless, as it has been showed. By
this reason, in Romans 5.19. the making men sinners by Adams fall should be
restrained, because its (...), the many, or those many were made sinners. These
are sorry evasions.

4. He tells us, All those spoken of by the Apostle are proved to be dead,
because Christ died for them, and that in a spiritual death to sin. His proof
of which latter clause is Vorstius and Grotius, good proofs to build our Faith
on. But 2. He says The Text proves that to be the sense. But what part of the
Text says it? Why, he tells us, That the intention of the Apostle is to prove
that all for whom Christ died, are so dead to sin, that they should henceforth
live no more thereunto, but to him that died for them. What a heap of vanity is
here! this is Idem per idem. The Apostle means by Dead, Dead to sin, because
its his intention to prove all Dead to sin. Where is there any such word as
Dead to sin? Or what ground was this for his being so zealous, as if he were
beside himself in pressing men to believe and live to Christ, if they were all
dead to sin already? What means he by [so dead to sin, as that they should live
no more to it,] means he so, that they ought to live no longer to it? I would
know of him, who is not so dead to sin that he ought not to live any longer to
it? Nay, does not his saying, That they might not henceforth, etc. argue, that
hitherto many did what they ought not, though Christ had died for them a long
time before? Or means he that they should, that is, that that should be the
event, they shall live no longer to? Then I would fain find proof for it in
the Text. Is, that they might not, and they shall not, all one? Does not Sense
and History confute this? Does not many a man that Christ died for, yet live to
himself? Did all believe John's Witness because its said, He bare witness that
all might believe? He says, this "agrees with Romans 6.5. but that's untrue too,
for this speaks only of Christ's dying for us, and to what end; that speaks of
our being baptized into Christ, and planted into his likeness. But to that we
spoke before, lib. 3. cap. 4.

5. He tells us, The Apostle speaks here of Christ's Death in respect of
application: The effectualness of Christ toward those for whom he died, is
here insisted on. But the falsity of this is sufficiently discovered in what is
said already. In a word, here is not one concluding Argument. His conclusion is
very wrong, That here is no mention for Christ's dying for any, but those that
are dead to sin and live to him. Let any man read the Text, and he may see that
untrue. For that says not, He died for all that live no longer to themselves,
etc. but he died for all, that they that live might live no longer to
themselves, intimating, that as yet many do not as they ought to do. But I am
weary with raking in such impertinent Arguments.

5. Another Scripture, is 1 Cor. 15.22. In Christ all shall be made alive;
Whence we argue. All that Christ raises out of Death, he died for, that they
might be so raised. Else how comes it by man, if not by something acted in the
humane Nature, and not only by the divine Power of God? But Christ shall make
all alive. But Mr. Owen tells us, This All, is but All believers, because he
brings Arguments from Faith, the Gospel, and such things to prove it, and
speaks after of Christ's members, them of whom he is the first fruits. As if the
Apostle might not speak of the Resurrection of all men, and yet speaking to
believers bring proofs fitted to them. And as if his after-mentioning of such
as believe, proves that he asserted not the Resurrection of any but them. Its
plain, some of the Corinths denied the Resurrection of the Dead, not only that
they themselves should arise, but also the dead in general, ver. 12. Now what
they denied he asserted. Which its clear also, is a Truth not to be
demostrated by reason, but merely to be believed upon divine Authority, and the
foundation of it laid in Christ's Resurrection. And therefore, whereas Mr. Owen
(and Beza too) object this, That the Apostles Arguments are taken from the
Resurrection of Christ, the hope, faith, customs, and expected reward of
Christians, which would have been ridiculous to be held out to the men of the
world to prove the Resurrection of the dead in general. Its very absurd. For 1.
The Apostle never held out other Arguments to the Heathen then Christ's
Resurrection, which he preached as a matter of faith to them, and declared as a
matter evidently known to themselves, Act. 17.30, 31. 2. They being believers
that denied the Resurrection of the dead in general, he might well show the
inconsistency of that denial with their own principles, and how it overthrew
the most of those things which they made profession of as Christians. For the
dead in general not arising, then neither should they arise and receive the
reward of their faith and sufferings. His arguments of that nature show but
that they were Christians he writ to, capable of such demonstrations, not that
he asserted only the Resurrection of Christians. But (2.) He says, The word
(...), denotes a blessed Resurrection, a Resurrection to a good life and glory.
Which is but his assertion; much more, " That its never used about the common
Resurrection. For, I pray you, does not the Lord Jesus use it of the Fathers
quickening the dead in general, Joh. 5.21. As the Father raises the dead, and
quickneth them, and is not the Sons quickening whom he will, both applied after
to his quickening here, and raising all hereafter? Does that hinder the truth of
his quickening whom he will, that he will quicken All? So, 1 Timothy 6.13. Is it
not said, That God quickneth, or gives life to all things, and can that be in a
blessed Resurrection? Does (...) signine more then to make alive, and shall not
all the dead be made alive? How else shall they come forth of their graves, and
receive their doom? The Apostle here having showed that Christ rose again,
proves by that, that the dead shall arise too, and that by Christ's getting
victory over death comes the Resurrection. As man brought in death, so by man
came in again the Resurrection of the Dead for as in, and by (for the word
(...) is often Ev in signification) Adam all dye^ so in (or by) Christ all
shall be made alive. He says not all in Christ, As if he spoke of the believers
only, but in (or by) Christ, all shall be made alive, which he declares
orderly: First Christ, then they that are Christ's at his coming, then
afterward [(...)] comes the end, that's the third step, namely the general
Resurrection of the rest which is the end of all, as is declared, Rev. 20.6,
11, 12. Now that Christ may not be called, The first fruits of those that
sleep, with reverence to All (as Mr. Owen suggests) I see no ground, more then
that he may not be called the firstborn ofeverycreature, and the believers a
first fruits of his creatures, Jam. 1.18. Nor does his making peculiar
application of the usefulness of this Doctrine to believers, hinder his
affirming the Resurrection in general; For that's an usual thing to make special
application of any general doctrine to those to whom he treats of it, as from
Gods bounty to all, to press believers in case of want of wisdom to ask of God,
Jam. 1 5, 6. and so from the doctrine of the general Judgment asserted, to
infer the accountgiving of believers, and to draw useful deductions to them in
special, Romans 14.11, 12, 13. So his arguing here also is unsatisfactory.

6. The last place spoken to in this Argument, is that in Romans 5.18. as by the
offense of one (or one offense) to all men to condemnation; so by one
righteousness to all men to justification of life. To which (not having read it
right, for he translates (...), upon all men* when indeedt signifies but unto
all men, neither the condemnation nor justification in their full signification
coming upon all, Christ holding the first off, and the wilful folly of men in
rejecting Christ* holding the other off from coming upon many) He thus replies
That by the words, All men, can none be understood but those upon whom the free
gift actually comes to the justification of life meaning to eternal life. Which
I deny, for that by the like reason Adams sin should bring the sentence of
condemnation, to, or toward none but them that actually are condemned and
perish. But how proves he it? Why, after the old fashion, by taking those
expressions which he pleases, in the former verses, and making them expositions
of this, and so he tells us, They are they that are said to receive the
abundance of grace, and the free gift of righteousness to reign in life by
Christ, to be made righteous by his obedience, etc. Just as if I should expound
that in Romans 14.11. [Every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess
to God] by taking the former expressions, viz. None of us lives to himself, and
none of us dies to himself: etc. Whether we live or die we are the Lords. Why
do thou judge thy brother, etc. and so gather thence this Conclusion, That by
every knee, and every tongue, is only meant of all that live to Christ, and are
Christ's, that are brethren, etc. These are his kind of reasonings, which how
palpably gross they are, and unbeseeming a man of learning, I leave to all to
judge: He tells us further, That the resemblance between Christ and Adam stands
but in this, that the one brought the guilt of condemnation upon all those in
whose room he stood a public person, which indeed were all men: and the others
obedience and righteousness, brought justification and salvation upon all them
that he stood in the room of as a public person; that's the sum of his
discourse upon it: which (though if by justification and salvation, he means
but an acquitting them from that charge or judgment that should have forthwith
destroyed All in Adam upon his sin, and so a giving them an escape from that,
or a justifying and putting salvation into Christ as the public person; for
all it may be granted, yet it) both changes the Apostles phrase as before was
noted, reading (upon) for (to) and leaves it undetermined, whose room he stood
in, and if he speak of justification from all sins past and present, with
acceptance into favor, and communication of eternal life; is to be denied,
and I desire his proof for, it. In the mean time whereas he speaks of Christ's
All and Adams All, there are no such words in the Text, but in both branches
expressly (...), not (...), and (...) as he would have it. But against T. M. he
says that it seems a monstrous doctrine that Christ should stand in the room
of reprobate persons, hated of him from eternity, such as he knew not, hid the
mysteries of salvation from, and refused to pray for, who were damned already
in Hell, and irrecoverably past the limits of redemption.

To all we have before spoken, and showed how he mistakes in all these
particulars; he stood not in their rooms as reprobates, or as damned in hell,
nor says the Scripture he hated any from eternity, or refused to pray for any,
except in a special Prayer made for special Privileges, for actual
believers only, and men as so considered in the future. But men were reprobated
and damned for rejecting the beams of light and truth that came from him who
first virtually, and after actually bare that blow, that should at the first
otherwise have destroyed them, and All men. He might as well have said, that
its a horrible thing to conceive as the Apostle intimates, that its possible
any should be destroyed for whom Christ died, and bring upon themselves swift
destruction, whom he bought etc. as is intimated, Romans 14.15. 1 Cor. 8.11. and
2 Pet. 2.1. And indeed many truths seems monstrons and absurd to reason, if it
be made umpire in our believing. As for Christ's being Advocate ((...)) to them,
T. M. never affirmed, " that he being Priest, Prophet and King over and for
them, may destroy those that refuse to be sprinkled by his blood, count the
blood of his sacrifice a common thing, refuse to hear his voice as a Prophet,
and to have him rule over them as a King, is no strange thing to them that
believe Scripture expression, as Numb. 19.20, 21. Heb. 2.3. and 10.25.26, 29.
Act. 2.22, 23. Luke 19.14, 27. Whereas he says T.M. brings 7 Arguments to
confirm that Christ stood in the room of all, he exceedingly wrongs him in
making him to bring for arguments some things that are without all color of
being intended as Arguments by him, as that Adam lost not Election (which he
only put in by way of Parenthesis, not as a proof of that Assertion) and those
that he notes as his 5th. and 6th. Arguments, being only branches of the
declaration of his judgment. To say nothing that he abuses his Reader in other
passages; as whereas T. M. says, that God glorified his Son in making him a
public Person, by death to restore all men lost by the first Adam, Heb. 2.9.
and that he wrought redemption and righteousness with God for men, in the
behalf of all men, being indeed the public Person, and in this his public
place not betrusted with fewer then the first Adam; in which passages he
declares his judgment, grounding it upon certain Scriptures, as Heb. 29.1 Cor.
15.45, 47. 1 Timothy 2.5. Romans 5. M.O. reports him as if he said these are the
expressions of the Scripture. But the fuller sight of his wrong dealing with
him, I leave to the rational comparison of their Books, by them that are not
blinded with prejudice with either of them, or of the matters undertaken by
them. And as for his answers to those devised Arguments, I shall not spend time
and paper about them. Only whereas he says that Christ is no where compared
to Adam in respect of the extent of the Object of his Death, but only of the
essicacie of his obedience: That that is false, the Scriptures in hand
evidently shows, for he says not only, As by one offense judgment came
untocondemnation, so by one righteousness to justification of life: but
expressly makes the comparison too in regard of their objects; As by one
offense to all men to condemnation, so by one righteousness to All men to
justification of life. I would feign know of M. Ow. what the Apostle says in
the 18. v. distinct from what he said before in the precedent verses, taking
away his equalizing of the Object. So that that speech looks but like an
Assertion of one resolved not to own a truth, be it never so plainly expressed,
if it suit not with his own opinion that he maintains. Again, whereas he
denies that Heb. 2.9. holds out that Christ stood in the room of every man,
and refers us for proof to what he said to that Scripture: his saying to it
being proved impertinent and vain already, we need not here give him any
further Answer. Sure he that dyed for every man, stood in the room of every
man. in that his dying, or else M. Owens own Argument from the force of the
words (...) chap. 10. lib. 3. are mere vanities. Whereas he says further, that
no one word of God says that all men were given to Christ to redeem. I answer,
nor did T. M. say so, but having spoken of the Death of Christ in the room of
all mankind, and his Resurrection, he added by Parenthesis, that they are all
given him and shall be brought unto him, quoting for proof Phil. 2.8.11. Romans
14.9. which intimates his meaning to be, that they were given into his dispose
as upon his resurrection, and that all are given to Christ in that sense Psalm.
2.8, 9. fully declares, I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and
the utmost parts of the Earth for thy possession, and thou shall rule them with
an Iron Rod, etc. But I deny that ever the Scriptures say God gave any man to
him that he should dye for him. In dying for men he bought them rather, and
upon that God gave all to him in a general way to rule over them, and he gives
him some by his gracious call, to be his peculiar charge, and to be set free by
him from all their inthralments in conscience, and from the power of pollution
and temptation. Whereas he says, Christ is called the last Adam in respect of
the efficacy of his death to the promised seed. If he mean in that regard
only, its but his mere Assertion, and so till it be proved needs no more
answering, it being the same in substance with what he said before against the
extent of the Object of his death, contrary to Romans 5.18. which we have even
now answered.

Against this passage of T.M. [ that Christ by his death brought all men out of
the Death they fell into by Adam] he opposes this, that the Death men fell into
in Adam was a death in sin, and the guilt of condemnation thereupon. For which
he quotes Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. To which I desire the Reader to remember what I
said above about Redemption, Chap. 5. lib. 3. that we fell into a twofold death
in Adam, one as the natural and proper fruit and consequence of that sinning,
the deading all our powers to that that was spiritually good. 2. The wages and
punishment of this sin, that is, destruction and utter ruin. Ioh. 8.31, 32.
The latter of these Christ bare for us, not the former; for then he should
have had our pollution in him too, which is cross to truth. Therefore when we
speak of bringing us from the death we fell into in Adam, we are to be
understood, of that Christ endured for us, not the other, which he brings us
out of by his Word and Spirit received into us, and not by his dying only, or
Resurrection also. And therefore M. Owen here prevaricates, as in another
passage fastened upon M. More, he abuses him, for he no where tells us (as M.
Owen charges him) that the presenting himself just before the Father, was the
ultimate thing by Christ intended, not a tittle that way.

He has also many heavy words against M. More, for saying, God accepted the
Sacrifice of Christ as if all had dyed, risen, sacrificed, satisfied, etc.
which spring from his own mistake, as if Christ in dying for All, was said to
dye and satisfy for all sins that ever they should or might commit, and so
procure an acquittance and discharge from them All to be without fail as on
his part, and what ever failing in any condition happen on their part made over
unto all; which as its contrary to those intimations that speak of their
perishing, for whom Christ dyed, as a thing possible; yea, and of some ments
pulling swift condemnation upon themselves, whom he bought, which could not be
were that position true; so its also a gap to all carelessness and
licentiousness, for then let all men take what course they will, Either Christ
dyed for them or not: if not, no endeavor can do them good, God is their enemy
and hated them before they offended him, even from all eternity, and they must
have no better, do what they can, then what the hatred of an Omnipotent God
will produce unto them: if he did* Then eia agite, nothing can pull a dram of
wrath upon them, their score are all wiped off, both what they have run into
and what they shall. The Apostle never preached such Doctrine, but that they
that walk in the light, as he is in it, that walk not after the Flesh but after
the Spirit, that are rooted in the Faith, and not moved from the hope of the
Gospel, shall have this benefit by Christ's death, that no condemnation shall
befall them, all their sins are cleansed etc. Verily, Christ putting himself
into the place of Adam in the day that he sinned, and in due time bearing that
heavy death that else had seized on All and overcoming it, and presenting
himself to God as a Conqueror over it, was far more acceptable to God, then if
all men in the world had dyed and overcome. For we had done it but for our
selves, and out of love to our selves; but he out of obedience to his Father
and love to us, and the same work is far more acceptable to God, when done out
of Charity, then when done out of self-love and mere necessity. Beside the
dignity of his Person, and neernesse to his Father far above ours; but I pass
that too.

" Heobjects further against T. M. because he says (comparing Christ and Adam
in respect of the effect and fruit of their works in the public place) that as
by the sin of Adam, all his posterity were in and by him deprived of that life
and righteousness they had in him, and are fallen under sin and death (though
secretly, invisibly, and in some sort inexpressibly) so by the efficacy of the
obedience of Christ, All men without exception are redeemed, restored, made
righteous, justified by the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, the
righteousness which is by the faith of Jesus Christ being unto All, etc. Thus
M. Owen relates him, upon which he infers. What remains then but that All
should be saved? the Holy Ghost affirming, that all those whom he justifies he
also glorifies. Romans 8.30. and thence runs into that Rhetoric (which as we
showed above belongs to his Doctrine) Solvite mortales curas. Besides which he
excepts also against his parenthesis and quotation of Romans 3.22. to which I
shall first Answer, and then to his Inference. 1 He says he knows not what he
means by secretly, invisibly, and in some sort inexpressibly, sure he supposes
not that these things may be made the Objects of our senses. I answer, He does
here Nodum in scirpo, quarrels at what is true without exception; for may not
both sin and death be both seen and felt in their power inwardly? does not
all the powers of a man feel the pains of Death, and the conscience see and
feel the guilt of sin, and yet no one of all them condemned in Adam in that
day of his sentencing felt them but Adam, nor could they not being as yet
descended from him, and yet all of them were virtually condemned and should
have perished in him, had not Christ stepped in; are there not sensus interni, as
well as externi? why else calls the Apostles some men (...) Ephesians. 4.19. And is
not this imputation in some sort inexpressible? can any set it out to the full?
If they can, I would I could see them do it. 2. He calls him Impostor etc.
because he quotes but part of Romans 3.22. the righteousness of God by the faith
of Jesus Christ unto All, etc. And is this is such a piece of evil as to make
him worthy the name of a wicked Impostor because he stopped there and cited not
the following passage, and upon all than believe; which he apprehends to speak
to a further business? What name deserved M. O. then for gelding the Text in
Lu. 2.34. as we noted at the close of the 3d. Chapter? Sure he was there the
Impostor. Alas, how many such advantages might I have taken to have given M. O.
such Epethites for leaving out, adding, altering expressions of Scripture more
groundlesly? That the righteousness of God is unto All, the Apostle says, and
that was as much as he needed in that passage to make use of: but that it comes
upon all that believe, pertaines to his following consideration, and is
frequently acknowledged by him, and whereas M. Owen says, the word [Believe,]
pertains to both Alls, its but his conception, the Text is not, (...), and
therefore except he give us some proof for it, Mr. Moore, and I too, may
question what he says, yea, and make use of this part of the verse too, to
prove, That the Righteousness of God (according to the Gospel-Declaration) is
to All, without deserving the name of Impostors; this very place, Romans 5.18.
holding out that [(...), is (...), not only (...)] justification is to All
men, may warrant us to understand that so, without danger of heresy or
imposture: but that it comes upon as many as it extends toward, I have no such
Scripture proof to warrant me. Surely Dr. Preston in his Treatise of Faith,
about page 8. asking whom Gods Righteousness is giving to, and answering, to
All without exception, thought it not an Imposture, but called it the ground of
all comfort or consolation: nor made he such a conclusion, Ergo, it comes upon
All, and so All shall be saved, Solvite mortales curas, etc. But I shall now
pass to his Inference. And first I note, That Mr. Owon deals fraudulently with
T. Moore in relating him: for whereas by way of distinction, and to prevent
mistake, he says, That this recovery is in Christ, so as that in him, and by
him in that done, and wrought in his own body, they are again redeemed,
restored, and made righteous, and that it might be said as things are looked
upon in Christ, who was in the room of All, that (as all in the former respect
have sinned, etc. so) all are justified freely by his grace, etc. This clause
[In him, and as things are looked upon in Christ] which was the principal
distinguishing clause in this parallel, he wholly omits and falls upon the rest,
as if he had said, They are in themselves justified, redeemed, restored, etc.
and then upon this man of Clouts he falls very foully, as if he beat all to
pieces Master Moors comparison in it. The leaving out that Clause, which was
the most special thing in it, made way for all the following absurdities that
Mr. Owen puts upon him, and the keeping that in, would Answer them all. For a
man may be all this in another, and yet not the better for it in the issue. For
I ask, Were not we once all righteous, holy, innocent, in the image of God in
Adam? Did not God make us so there? And what now shall we infer, holy and
righteous, and yet condemned, dye, accursed? will God cast his own Image into
hell? And shall we produce the Scriptures, that the righteous shall shine as
stars in the Firmament, but all were made righteous in Adam, Ergo, All shall
shine as stars in the Firmament: but this is untrue, and contrary to Scripture,
Many shall perish, Ergo, All were not righteous in Adam. Who would not hiss out
such reasonings? Again All were sinners, and condemned to death in Adam, yet
Enoch never died, and Elias was taken up into heaven, and many shall be
glorious with Christ. Like this, The Kingdom is all at peace, and agreed with
the King in its body Representative the Parliament, therefore none in the
Kingdom opposes him, nor shall any ever be condemned by him, suppose he come
to power for doing any thing against him. Auditum admissi risum teneamus?
Christ the representative person was justified, and so all justified and
restored in him, Therefore all men in their own persons shall be eternally
saved. He cleared the score for them as Death was come upon them in Adam,
Therefore though they remain Rebels, yet in themselves they must be saved.
These things being the offspring of Mr. Owens fraudulency, how impertinently
is that Scripture quoted by him, Romans 8.30. that speaks of justification as
coming upon men by receipt of Christ, (...), those that he justified, he
glorified. And again, How vain is his inference; whom he justified he glorified
Ergo, all that he justified he glorifies too. Might we not by the like
authority from this foregoing passage [whom he called them he justified] deny
that wisdom called those in Prove. 1.24. That she gave over to destruction? and
those many that were but some of them chosen. Matthew. 22.14. or else he must of
necessity grant that either some are justified that are after reprobated, and
were never chosen, or else that he made but an inconsequent inference. Besides,
He imputes a mere falsehood to him, when he informs his Reader, as T. Moors
Assertion, That the righteousness of God comes upon all Unbelievers; quite
contrary to his Assertions, as any man may see that reads his Book, yea, quite
contrary to that for which Mr. Owen faulted him as stopping at that phrase,
unto All Whether Mr. Moore now has corrupted the Word of God, or Mr. Owen
mistaken and corrupted Mr. Moore, let the Reader judge.

But before he leaves this Place and Chapter, He gives us some Arguments to
prove, That Christ in his Obedience, Satisfaction, etc. was not a public
person for every man in the world, Elect and Reprobate. Believers and
Unbelievers. A thing that we affirm not, as he expresses it, viz. We say not
that he sustained the person of any, either as Elect or Reprobate, in giving
himself a ransom from the death come upon all for their sin in Adam, but of men
as fallen, not as Reprobated for rejecting his Truth, nor as elected through
obedience of the Truth: and therefore his first Argument being against his
sustaining the persons of men under the notion of Reprobates, and the seed of
the Serpent, etc. needs no further answering. Otherwise we say, that for them
that by denying the Lord that bought them come to be rejected, and to be of the
feed of the Serpent, Christ sustained the place of a public person, as only
fallen and condemned in Adam, his other arguments follow, viz.

2. Christ as a public person represented only them, for whose sakes be set
himself apart for that office and employment wherein he was such a
representative; but upon his own testimony which we have, Joh. 17.19. he set
himself apart to that service and employment for the sakes only of some, and
not for all and every one, Therefore he was not a public person in the room of
All. To which I answer, 1. By denying the Minor, for neither does Christ say
for their sakes only I sanctify my self, nor were they there spoken of, all
the believers; so that had he limited it to those only, he had by this argument
represented only them that were sent into the world, as he was sent, to preach
the Gospel (for to them that speech is there applied) and so excluded all that
should believe through their words: Read Joh. 17.18, 19, 20. 2. Nor does he
tells us that that that he sanctified himself to there, was all that in which
he was a public person and representative in giving himself a ransom, and if
that be not proved, he says nothing.

3. Christ as a surety was a public person, but all are not in that Covenant
of which he was a surety, Therefore not a public person for All. This
Argument, is fallacious, leaning upon this foundation, If Christ was not a
public person for all in every respect, Then for all in none, which we deny.
His being a surety relates to his undertaking in heaven to see the Covenant
which he has already sealed performed to the parties to whom it appertains.
Its like this, The Parliament as a public body have engaged their public
faith for seeing all them paid that have lent them any thing, but all the
Commons in the Kingdom have not lent to them, and so they are not engaged to
all of them in that way: Ergo, they are not the Representative of all the
Commons in the Kingdom. The business of Christ's Suretiship he quite mistakes,
as if the Apostle there affirmed him to be a Surety for all for whom he died;
which that place says not.

4. His Argument from Christ's Satisfaction, and Romans 8.33, 34. alleged to
prove it, I have answered before in l. 3 c. 7. and l. 1. c. 3.

5. The fifth says, That Christ never did any thing in vain in respect of any
for whom he was a public person. But many things which he did as a public
person were altogether in vain and fruitless, in regard of the greatest part of
the sons of men, etc. To which, If by fruitless he mean totally, both in
respect of His, and his Fathers Glory, and their good, then the Major is
confessed, and the Minor denied. For he was glorified, and all they in their
day had mercy and goodness by his Death, even they that then at the time of the
accomplishment of his Sufferings were dead: But if he means in regard of men's
receipt of that utmost benefit that they might have received by it. Then I deny
the Major. For Christ as a Prophet and Teacher speaks to many men in vain, in
that respect, See Isai. 49.4. And I said, I labored in vain, speaking in the
person of Christ, as the 5. and 6. verses make it plain. So Matthew. 23.37. and
so the Apostle intimates that some that departed from the Faith, and turned
aside to seek righteousness in their works, abrogated Christ to themselves, and
made his Death as a vain thing, crucifying him again to themselves. Gal. 2.21.
and 5.2, 4, 5. Heb. 6.5, 6. And that some receive his Grace in vain, 2 Cor.
6.1, 2.

6. His next is, That if God was welpleased with his Son in what he did as a
public person in representing others, then must he be welpleased with all
those whom he did represent, either Absolutely, or Conditionally. But so is he
not either way with all, etc. As pertaining to an absolute welpleasedness, I
deny the Major. David might be welpleased that Joab mediated for Absalom, and
yet not welpleased with Absalom. As for a conditional welpleasedness we deny
the Minor, That God would not be welpleased with all men upon condition Did all
submit to him, seek him etc. they should all find him pleased with them.
Through Christ's Mediation he would (...) well pleased with Cain, upon this
condition, that he had believed and done well, as Abel did, Genesis 4.7. So with
Pharaoh, had he loved his people, and learned the knowledge of God by them,
Matthew. 25.35, 36, 41, 42, 43, etc.

7. His last Argument is only a quotation of many Scriptures that say, He
prayed not for the world, when he requested peculiar favors for believers, That
he gave himself a ransom for many, Gave himself for his sheep, his Church, is
our forerunner, shall save his people, etc. to which we have before answered.

CHAP. V.
A Vindication of our use of those Scriptures, which we say intimate a
possibility of such to perish for whom Christ dyed.

WHereas we have often made use of such Scriptures as intimate the perishing of
such as Christ dyed for; M. Owen in the next place seeks to wrest them from us,
intimating that we therein do injury to the consolation of poor souls, and make
vile the precious blood of Christ, and esteem it as a common thing. Against
which our defense is what he himself supplies us with in his Preface, That we
must not lie to comfort souls, and d^wb them up with mortar not duly tempered,
To tell them that either Christ dyed for them, or not; If he did they are sure
to be safe, they cannot out-sin the efficacy of his blood upon them, nor fail
of the inheritance; sure our way to comfort souls is not by such words as the
Scripture warrants not. But while we comfort souls by minding them what God
has done for them in Christ, and what he is ready to do further; we are also
to let them know, that its in his way, in attending to his word, looking to his
son, abiding in him, etc. that they shall meet with all the efficacy of Christ's
blood to eternal salvation; so it will cleanse them from all their sins, and
present them righteous, and obtain the dispensation of Spirit to them to abide
in them for ever. But if they neglect and slight him, they cannot escape his
chastisements: which negligences too upon confession of them and turning from
them, it is ordered to wash away, but abidden in they shall for them be cut off
from him, and I think this is according to the Apostles manner of preaching;
See Romans 8.1.13. 1 Ioh 1.7, 8, 9. Joh. 15.2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10. etc. and 14, 15,
16, 17. But other ways of comforting from it, we know none. And if to speak of
it as the Holy Ghost speaks of it, be to vilify and count it a common thing, I
know not wherein truly to magnify it; we must stick to his speaking, however
any censure us for so doing. And yet we account the blood of Christ truly
precious, as being the blood of God, the blood of the Covenant, and as such,
not common to All, much less profane and of little virtue. We judge it of
infinite esteem with God, so that it obtains what ever according to the
agreement between Christ and him it requires; and being obeyed, and the
sprinkling of it received, it speaks peace, purges the conscience, cleanses
from sin, keeps off punishment; yea (abid in) it leads up the soul that's
sanctified by it to all perfection: yea, so virtuous we judge it, and of such
value with God; that he most severely revenges men's slighting and contemning
it, not believing on it, or not abiding in it; yea, to utter destruction,
according to the intimations of these Scriptures that we come to speak to; That
which he makes an Argument of our slighting it, that we make an Argument of our
prizing it, and counting it precious in the sight of God; even that he so
severely punishes and destroys them, that having it shed for them and
propounded to them, would not trust it, but rebelled against him that shed it.
I think it springs from the preciousness and excellency of Christ, Psa. 2.10,
11. Ioh. 3 36.
both in himself, and with God, that God so severely punishes those that
believe not on him, that refuse to Kiss him. It nothing hindered the
preciousness of the Feast ( Mat. 21.4, 6, 7.) that they that were bidden were
so severely destroyed for refusing it: Romans 2.4, 5. Jude 4.13.
nor is it an undervaluing of Gods goodness, that men for hardening their hearts
against it, treasure up wrath against themselves; or of the grace of God, that
some turning it into wantonness, procure to themselves the blackness of
darkness. The better a thing is that God propounds to us, and calls us to, the
greater is his displeasure against its rejectors; Heb. 2.3. c. 10.29.
they shall less escape and be more punished, that neglect the salvation
preached by Christ, then they that neglected what was preached by Moses. Gods
speaking in a way of grace to people, and calling to the blood of the Covenant,
as they are greater encouragements to hear him, and hope in him, then when he
spoke from Mount Sinai in terror; So shall the slighting such a way as affords
such encouragements, be more severely punished, Heb. 12.18, 22, 24, 25. We
esteem not a Plaster less precious, because men that will not apply it, or
not let it lie on, are not healed by it; but if it cure every wound to which
its applied, and on which its permitted to lie, we highly esteem it. M. Owen
should remember that himself granted that the innate worth and virtue of a
thing and its efficacy as to persons, are very different, and that not to be
measured by this; therefore these are but Sophistical flourishes to scare souls
from receiving the truth, or leading to a negligence in attending to it, while
they carry in them this intimation, that if a man can but find an act of Faith
in him at any time (though perhaps that's but his conceit too) the blood of
Christ belongs to him, and he is su^e enough from falling, no matter for
abiding in Gods ways, and taking heed to his Word; he may hear any Doctrine,
do any thing, the virtue of Christ's blood will preserve him from final
miscarrying, and to say it will not, is to dishonor it. Truth will fling off
many such foolish flourishes as these, which yet I meet with, taken up, and
used sometimes with great confidence in Pulpits: but I confess I pity them
that so do. The Word of the Lord is a reproach to them, and they cannot bear
it: they will not give that honor to Christ's blood, that God gives it in the
Scripture, but yet will plead for an honor of their own framing: like the old
Pharisees that honored the Sepulchers of the Prophets, and in the mean time
believed not their witness, and killed their successors. I shall shut up this
point with M. Owens own words in his Preface. If we maintain the virtue of
Christ's blood, let us do it in his own language, or be for ever silent: that is
preciousnesse in it, that God ascribes to it, our inventions though never so
splendid in our own eyes, are unto him an abomination.

The places oppugned by him in their native intimations and significations, are
Romans 14.15. 1 Cor. 8.11. 2 Pet. 2.1. Heb. 10.29. which we do not bring to prove
(as he suggests) that Christ dyed for All, and every man in the world; but to
prove that he dyed for more then the Elect, and so use not so directly for the
proof of the extent of it to its fullness, as to disprove their limitation of
it to the Elect and Believers. Let us view what he says to them.

1. The First is, Romans 14.15. Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ
dyed. We say thence, that the Apostle intimates that one may perish for whom
Christ dyed, else his admonition was altogether groundless, as empty and
superfluous, as if he had bidden them, not to make Christ's blood by his Father
to be abhorred, or not to pull the stars out of the Firmament, etc.

To this M. Owen (ut nodum quem solvere nequit, gladio dissecet) denies that
there is any such intimation (he might as well have said these words are not
written) only says he, others are commanded not to do that that goes in a
direct way to destroy him; he should have added, but which never so much done
could never have so destroyed him; and so they might have answered, Ah Paul,
thou set a scar-crow before us, we can never do that; we are sure, between
all our stumblings of him, and his destruction, that Christ has dyed for,
there is as great a gulf set, as between hell and Abraham's bosom. But he adds
they might be dehorted from that that's in it self impossible because though the
one could not perish in respect of the event, yet the other might give occasion
of perishing in a procuring cause. To which I answer. 1. That I never find the
Apostle giving such dehortations. 2. I ask, is there any procuring cause of his
perishing for whom Christ dyed? Can any thing procure that the blood of Christ
shed for him, shall not save him? if not, why talks he here of a procuring
cause of that that cannot be procured? if yes, then he grants what he fights
against. The Apostle says not, Do not that that might destroy thy brother had
not Christ dyed for him; but, destroy not with thy meat him that Christ dyed
for. From that sleeveless Answer, he falls to question, if a man may not be
dehorted from attempting that that he cannot possibly do? To which I say, yes;
by showing him that he goes about an impossibility, as Gamaliel did, Act. 5.38,
39. but there is no such way of dehorting here; no, nor does he dehort from
attempting it only, but from doing it. He says not, Attempt not to destroy
him, you will lose your labor in it (nor does he intimate that they had so
wicked an aim in what they did, as to seek to destroy him) but, Destroy not
him for whom Christ dyed, do not that which may have such an issue upon him. I
would have him furnish me with one Instance, in which God bids a man not to do
that, that according to his own declaration he has told him cannot possibly be
done: so he had done more, then by putting the question. His instance of the
Soldiers not breaking the bones of Christ, is nothing, except he could show,
that though it was revealed to them that they could not possibly do it, yet God
bid them not to do it. He asks further, If every one be damned that one
attempts to destroy by grieving him with unocharitable walking? I answer, that's
not material, its enough that every one (though Christ dyed for him) is
destroyed, who by reason of another uncharitable walking is turned aside from
Christ, so as that he never more walks with him and owns him. After all this,
he calls such Arguments as this Men of Straw; but such as he cannot beat down
with any fair dealing. That's his policy to amuse the Reader, and scare him from
it, by casting disgrace on it, when he cannot evert it. Lastly he tells us, That
he denies not but many perish utterly, whom we in our walking are bound to
account so redeemed. I might put him to it to prove it that we are bound to
judge such, or such a man elected, or redeemed, that is not. But suppose it
true; yet this serves not his purpose, for the Apostle speaks in the general
Theory, not with special application to this or that; joins in a Precept
destroying, and him that Christ dyed for; though we may judge this or that man
Elect that is not; yet should we say in the general, bring not an Elect man by
deceit to destruction, M. O. would go near to tell us there is a repugnancy in
terminis, that in that we say a man is Elect, we intimate, its impossible for
him to be so deceived. We do not say, Destroy not Christ, because we know that
none can; If that was but the Apostles meaning, it was better to have said,
Endeavor not to destroy him, for whom, for any thing thou know, Christ
dyed. But Destroy not him for whom Christ dyed, contains an implication in
terminis, if it be declared too that none such can be destroyed. So that in all
this he has but trifled.

2. The second place is 1 Cor. 8.11. Shall thy weak brother perish for whom
Christ dyed? which (he says) has a little more strength then the other.
Therefore we must look for a little more weakness in his Answer to it, in which
he flies about, and knows not where to fasten. First, by Perishing there, he
cannot apprehend that there is meant eternal damnation. Why so? there is no
reason given, except that the occasion was eating things offered to an Idol;
and sure by such an occasion to fall back to Idolatry, or serving Christ and
Idols together, is enough to plunge a man into eternal condemnation (which the
word also, when speaking of men, and no mention of some bodily judgment or
danger made in the verses whereabout its used most frequently, See Cries. in
hunc locum.
if not always, signifies) and he confesses such a sin is damnable in it
self, and that for any thing that lies in us, he will perish. A but the Apostle
adds, for whom Christ dyed, and so intimates that his dying for him will not
keep him from it that stumbles, and turns away to Idolatry finally upon any
occasion. That God always revenges sin with damnation, we thence infer not, no
more then we can from that, No fornicator or Adulterer shall inherit Gods
Kingdom; but that he so avenges it in all, that by occasion of offenses persist
to stumble at Christ, we fear not to infer. Surely his after words are no
reason of his not understanding by perishing, eternal damnation, viz. That he
was but a seeming brother, and that Christ did but seem to dye for him. Sure he
thinks hypocrites, and such as Christ died not for, may so perish. But he gives
that, I suppose, for a second Answer, and so he mightily changes the case, and
turns the Apostles words into another form, for now in stead of, And shall thy
weak brother perish for whom Christ died? he has made it, And shall they
counterfeit brother perish for whom Christ did but seem to dye? Nay, he tells
us, As he is said to be a brother, so Christ is said to dye for him; That is,
he counterfeited, and made the Church believe he was a brother, and Christ
counterfeited too with him, and made him, (nay the Church too) believe that he
died for him. Do not these things quite enervate all the force of the Apostles
Arguments and Aggravations, which are three especially, 1. He is thy brother,
and therefore thou ought to care for him. 2. Thy weak brother, and therefore
to be the more tendered by thee. 3. Christ died for him, and will thou destroy
him? Had they been of Mr. Owens mind, they might easily have retorted it thus;
If he be a brother indeed, and Christ indeed have died for him, he will
continue with us, and cannot perish, for Christ has procured all good things
for him, and so preservation, etc. But if he do fall, we have but discovered a
hypocrite, and parted with him, and discern that Christ never died for him. Is
this to expound the Scripture, or to pervert and elude it? But why did he but
seem to be a brother? Surely hypocrites use-rather to boast themselves of
strength, and seem to be strong, then to appear weak; they use not to dissimble
and counterfeit the lowest places, or least strength, as we may see in Jehu.
But we are brethren only by Faith. That's untrue. In a Church Fellowship, Faith
and Confession make brethren, with professed agreement in joint worshipping. And
such also as have true illuminations, and some measure of says in believing
the truth, and seeking God therein, may, and do turn aside as the Scriptures
witness. As the Galathians did run well (not hypocritically, but well) and yet
some of them Paul greatly scared, for they were turned away from him that
called them. And others put away a good conscience, making shipwreck of faith,
1 Timothy 1.20. Sure a counterfeit profession never makes a good conscience. Weak
believers not yet settled and rooted, nor so far prevailed with, as to be
brought to commit their souls to Christ, nor made one with Christ, and his
chosen ones in spirit and throughness of heart, are in danger of falling off by
corrupt doctrines and temptations, if they take not diligent heed to Christ and
his doctrine. Thence the Apostles were especially earnest in watching over, and
admonishing such. And yet that faith, truth, confession, goodness of way and
walking they had, might truly denominate the^ brethren. And such the Apostle
speaks of here as had had some illuminations, and their hearts closing with the
truth, yea, the truth so powerful in them as to pull them out of the worlds way
and fellowships, and made them attend amongst the Church for further knowledge,
and divine teachings; yet being not established, and so thoroughly united to
them in Spirit, they might be shaken and turned away again by offensive
carriages. But that the Apostle should mean him thou countest a brother, and
Christ to have died for, or wish him only to avoid endeavoring his perishing,
is a mere perverting of the Apostles saying: The Apostle uses not to speak
things contrary to truth, to suit with seeming appearances to men, as we noted
above. As for his making us draw an universal Conclusion from this or the other
Scripture, viz. That therefore he died for all Reprobates, its none of ours,
but this; Therefore the after perishing of men proves not that Christ died not
for them, as they use to argue; nor did he dye for the Elect only, as they say.

3. The third place is, 2 Pet. 2.1. Denying the Lord that bought them, and
bring upon themselves swift destruction. In which he questions every thing, As
1. Whether by Lord, be meant Christ as Mediator? 2. Whether by buying be meant
an eternal Redemption by the blood of Christ. 3. Whether it be spoken according
to Reality or appearance. To the first he says, It rather signifies God the
Father, because the word (...) is every where given to him. To which I answer,
1. Christ calls himself (...), which is all one with (...), Matt. 10.25. and
alibi. 2. Jude in his Epistle, which is almost word for word the same with this
Chapter, tells us (speaking of these men) that they deny (...); the only
Master, God, and Lord Jesus Christ, where a Vnicus articulas omnibus istis
epithetis communis, omnino declarat Christum esse Herum illum unicum. Vid. Bez.
in locum.
Beza strongly contends, that all those Epithites are given to Christ, there
being no pause between them; and but one Article prefixed before them All,
blaming Erasmus much for otherwise rendering it. Nay, He tells us, That one
ancient Greek Copy (Codex Complutensis) reads it thus, (...). And sure if that
b Vide etiam Z^nch. in Jud 4. Qui Deitatem Christi inde arguens, haec habet.
Petrus vero a quo Judas desumpsitsua, docet Jesum Christum esse hunc (...) quem
falsi doctores negant. Etiam (...) (inquit Petrus) qui illos mercatus est
abnegantes: quis mercatus nos est nisi Christus suo sanguine? etc. Et Paulo
post, Confirmat Judas Christum esse hunc (...) nostrum Deum. Illa enim omnia
praedicata de uno subjecto Jesu Christo praedicantur; cum unus tantum sit
articulus ((...)) communis omnibus ille praedicatis. Zanch. de trib. Elohim.
par. 1. lib. 6. and 5.
place that answers this so exactly ascribe that title to him; its not to be
denied, that this does it too. But he says, Its not a proper word for our
Savior in that work of Redemption, because its such a Lord and Master as
refers to servants and subjection, but the end of Christ's purchase is always
expressed in words of more indearment. But this is frivolous, for in 2 Cor. 5.15.
He died for all that they might live to him, expresses subjection, and to be as
his servants, as the end of his death. So in 1 Cor. 7.22, 23. upon this ground
that Christ bought us with a price, its said, He that is called being free, is
the Lords servant, and so in Romans 147, 8, 9. Thence the Apostles through
redeemed by Christ, I trow, style themselves the servants of Christ. To say
nothing that the word (...) is used to denote as much reference to subjection
as this can; and (...) used over all in the house, Elect and others. See Matthew.
15.^7.27. and 18.25.32. Joh. 15.15. Matthew. 20.1.16. 2. Was not such a word as
argued their duty of a subjection, fittest to aggravate their sin of denying
subjection? Whereas he says, God only in the following verses is named, and not
Christ. That's not so, for in ver. 20. where he speaks again to this Apostasy of
theirs, they are said to have escaped the pollutions of the world, through the
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. But 3. Suppose it be meant of God, Is not Christ
as Mediator God too? And is not God said to purchase his Church with his blood?
Acts 20.28. Does he buy any into his Church, but by the Death and bloodshed of
Jesus Christ. He says, Yes, and that's the second thing to be spoken to, in
which he says 2. its uncertain whether this buying was made with the ransom of
his blood, or by the goodness of God delivering them by the knowledge of the
truth from Idolatry. To which I answer, By both. The goodness of God is not
extended to fallen man but by Christ's death. The Declaration of which (as so
testified) is the truth that God makes forcible for drawing men to himself from
their Idolatry, Tit. 3.4, 5. 1 Cor. 15.2, 3. That there must be a price is
evident, and I find no other price mentioned in the New Testament, but the
blood of Christ, either as shed, or as also testified; if Mr. Owen does, let
him show it; for us to devise prices, is to add of our own heads to the
Scriptures. Now if Christ be the price, its not material, whether we say that
the Lord that bought them be God or Christ, the act of buying or purchasing
being attributed to both, Acts 20.28. 1 Cor. 6.20. Rev. 5.9. Christ buys men
unto God, and God buys men by Christ. God gave Christ as a price to purchase
men, and Christ gave himself for, and gives himself to men. And there are these
two things in this buying, or price, by which people are bought. 1. Christ
given by God and Himself to the Death for men, that they might be preserved and
delivered and from the destruction due to them in Adam. 2. Christ given of God,
and by Himself to them, in point of tender and free offer, as in Joh. 6.32. and
(at least) good things given unto them, by and through him. And as I
understand, none are said in Scripture to be bought or redeemed from their vain
conversations, or unto God from men, till this price made known to them, buy
them off from their love to those other things, and engage them for God to be
his. Thence men reason inconsequently, from those Scriptures which say By the
blood of Christ, men out of all Nations, Peoples, or Families, are bought or
redeemed to God, As that in Rev. 5.9. and 14.4. and 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
which speak of the efficacy of his blood declared and believed, engaging their
hearts and spirits to and for God (as Hosea bought him a wife by a price given
her, Hos. 3.2.) to deny the extent of Christ's given himself a ransom, and dying
for men. These two things then I understand in this place of Peter. 1. That God
had given Christ to the death, and he gave himself a ransom for these false
Teachers amongst all the rest of men, and thereby they, with all other, were
delivered from perishing in that sentence of death which should in Adam have
(else) destroyed them, and had with others their liberty to the Church and
Kingdom of Christ. 2. That God in the Gospel presenting this his love unto
them, and this his Son that dyed for them (or the Son presenting himself so)
and so as the only Lord and Savior, able and ready to save them, with
promises of salvation upon their submission to him, bought them, or disingaged
their hearts from their former idols, worships, vain and evil ways (called,
ver. 20. the pollutions of the world) and had engaged and purchased their
affections to his Gospel, People, Salvation, and Glory set before them, and so
to the service of him; and they now after all this denying him (as the
Israelites after their bodily redemption did. Deuteronomy. 32.6.) They brought upon
themselves swift destruction. If Mr. Owen would fasten any other sense upon
this place, he must show us that any people are said to be bought or redeemed
from their vain conversations (as these were ver. 20. for such are the
pollutions of the world) by any other price then the blood of Jesus, 1 Pet.
1.18. or 2. That some are bought with that for whom it was never shed. That God
glorifies it to, and purchases those by it for whom it has done nothing, nor
shall do any thing; for we have proved and do believe him to have dyed for All.
If he perform either of those two things, we shall listen further to his
exposition. Whereas he says " The word (...) answers to the Hebrew word (...)
he deals not ingeniously with his Reader. For the word (...) in all those
places he brings for proof of it viz. Deuteronomy. 7.8. and 15.15. and Jer. 15.21. and
in all other places generally so far as I find yet, is in the Greek translated
by the word (...), and not by the word (...), and so those places of 1 Pet.
1.18. and Luke 1.78. may better be applied to that observation that Mr. Owen
thence makes then this. The Hebrew word that Answers to "(...) is the word
(...). He objects further the Apostles not mentioning the Word Price. Isa. 55.1.
But that's frivilous, for if we speak of buying things (especially of Gods
buying) a price is necessarily intimated as the correlate to buying, though we
may buy the grace of God without price, yet he buys not us at that rate, we
are well paid for what ever God has of us. Whereas he would have this buying
to be only a deliverance by Gods goodness from the defilements of the world,
a separation of them from them by the knowledge of the truth. Besides that that
note is grounded on his former mistake, that the word (...) answers to the
Hebrew (...) to deliver, I would feign have him show me that God extends any
(real) goodness to men without Christ's buying them from their obligation to
the misery contracted to them by Adam, or else that rather confirms that
Christ dyed for them, and the knowledge of him as so dying for them, and able
and ready thereby to save them, bought them; yea, what else is it to know him
Lord and Savior? How Lord but by dying for them especially? how else a
Savior? Again, did God give them any thing in that truth made known to them
worthy their forsaking the world for him? had they any share, right, interest
in that truth, namely in the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ?
was there any good for them to get there? (for to be sure the worlds good they
were not like to get by that knowledge in those days.) If yes, then whence
proceeded that if he never dyed for them, if it declared no salvation as
attainable by them? would men leave all and expose themselves to persecutions
for mere uncertainties, when they could not be told that Christ had done any
thing for them, or God by Christ? or that Christ was a Mediator for them to
attain to happiness by? If they had no right to the truth, nor that had any
thing of goodness in it for them, what had they to do with that truth that so
little concerned them? If he say it had matter of advantage in it, for them for
ought they knew, they might think it had though it had not. Then I answer, they
had made but a blind bargain, and they knew not the Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus. It was rather a mistake about him that gave them that escape from the
worlds pollutions, then any knowledge of him; had they known him rightly, they
should have known that they had no such reason to let all go for him that had
excluded them his mediation, and could not save them, not having dyed for them:
And then having made some trial, and not finding that which they had
mistakingly looked for, but that he was a dry tree and barren wilderness to
them; was it not more excusable that they should leave him and take such
comforts as the world would afford them, and not go on to suffer for him that
would not save them, he having not dyed for them? Whereas he further adds, that
the Apostle is silent about washing them in the blood of the Lamb; what a sorry
shift is that? How many places speak of buying men, and yet mention not the
washing them in the blood of the Lamb, where yet there is no doubt but his
blood was the price that bought them; as to instance, in Rev. 14.4. and 1 Cor.
6.20. Again, What is it to wash in the blood of the Lamb? I fear there may be
some mistake in that. Is it any thing else, but when the death, sufferings or
blood of Christ declared in the Gospel and set home by the Spirit, do cause the
heart for his loves sake that so loved it, to renounce its vanities,
affections, lusts etc. and removes its fears, despairs, horrors, etc. that the
guilt of sin before the remedy was known filled it with? do we think that this
washing the souls in the blood of Jesus is without application of the blood to
it? Was there ever such a washing heard of, in which the medium of the washing
and the thing washed, were not to each other applied? Or do we fancy any bodily
or material application of the material blood of Christ that issued out of
his side? Sure its nothing but through the Spirits revelation of the death and
sufferings of Christ for us, and the hope therein set before us, a cleansing of
the heart and conscience from guilt and pollution. And is not that intimated
here? Is not the knowledge of Jesus Christ Lord and Savior, to know him as one
that dyed for us, and is appointed to be our Mediator and way to God, able and
ready to save us by virtue of those his sufferings for us? could there be less
in that knowledge of Christ that will give a man escape from the worlds
pollutions? and when that knowledge does wash from pollutions, is it not the
blood of Christ therein known that washes? Was not that it that washed Paul
from his former conceits in his Pharisaisme and from all his pollutions? Phil.
3.7, 8, 9. Tit. 3.4, 5, 6. and that washed the believing Corinths, 1 Cor. 6.11.
because he names but the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and the appearance of Gods
love to man, the name of Christ and Spirit of God as the way of his and their
washings, shall we say neither he nor they were washed in the blood of Christ?
These are sorry evasions, unmeet to shift off the shining truth with. 3. But
his last evasion is vainer then any of these, viz. That he might speak of them
only (...), not according to Truth, but according to appearance; for which he
quotes again that formerly answered place of 2 Chronicles. 28.23. As if the Apostle
writing Dogmatically, and laying down Prophetical declarations of things that
would be, and aggravating the hainousness of their sin that should deny
Christ, should conjoyn things according to truth not conjungible. If he had
spoken of some particular person then in being, there had been somewhat more
show for such an evasion, and yet in truth not enough to make the Apostle
couple as incompatible things together in his expressions, as to talk of
Christ's or his Elects perishing. But much less color when he speaks of things
in the Theory and Dogmatically, not with Designation of this or that person.
This is but all one as to say, Christ (or God) seemed but to be their Lord and
Master, and they to be his servants by way of purchase, and so they had the
more ground of denying him, seeing he was not what he seemed to be, nor had
done what he seemed to do. And whereas he adds That its the custom of the
Scripture to ascribe all those things to every one that are in fellowship of
the Church, which are proper to them only that are true spiritual members of
it; as to be Saints, Elect, etc. (Not to examine the truth of that again) were
it so, yet it could not be of force here; these in the very formality of them
as the subject spoken of being styled false Teachers. Sure though he might
write to All in fellowship with the Church (that is in Doctrine and Profession)
as Saints etc. as in some sense they were truly, yet its not supposeable that
he judged these he looks upon as departed from the Truth, and false Teachers,
to be such, or to be bought by Christ, if he thought indeed such manner of
people were never so bought. To be a member of the Church, and to be Elect, are
terms very competible, but to be (and so to be spoken of) as a false Teacher
bringing swift destruction on himself, and yet in the same view to be looked
upon and spoken of as bought by the Lord, if no such are indeed bought, is
componere non componenda, to couple words and things together that are we not
competible, like those that talk of Almighty nothings. So that we see no
solidity in his exceptions to this place neither.

Whereas in his winding up he tells us that this will not conclude Universal
Redemption, and 2. That those who are so redeemed may perish, is contrary to
express Scripture, and 3. That this could be no peculiar aggravation of the
sin of any, if the matter was common to All. These are but prevarications. For
1. We conclude not hence the universality of Christ's death, but only that its
not so bounded up to the Elect only as Mr. Owen and his partners bound it. 2.
That its contrary to express Scripture, as to Rev. 14.4. That any so redeemed
should perish, is a speech fallacious and untrue. For 1. How knows he that that
in Rev. 14.4. is express Scripture and speaks according to truth, and not only
according to appearance more then this? might not we by as good Authority say
that the Apostle speaks there but according as things seemed to him in a
vision, but not that all he says there is spoken according to truth, as he
has to say so of Peter here? 2. What means he by So redeemed? if only that
Christ dyed really for them, and not in show only, and that the knowledge
hereof, and of that salvation that thereby is in him (even for them to look
after, and attainable to them by Faith) bought them really off from the world,
and engaged them to Christ, then there is no such passage in Rev. 14.4. as that
none such can perish. That speaks only of a certain number redeemed from the
earth, and men that were virgins and defiled not themselves, but followed the
Lamb where ever he went. But it says not, either that All bought by Christ, and
brought to escape the pollutions of the world by the knowledge of him, do keep
themselves such unspotted Virgins, and walk constantly after Christ, nor that
they shall All be saved. Not a syllable to that purpose. It says those 144000.
did keep themselves Virgins pure and chaste to him, and that they overcame and
triumphed according to the promises set before the Churches in general. But
these false Teachers did not so, but returned back again to their pollutions,
and therefore though bought (yea, the rather for that) they should be
destroyed. I wonder that men have no more fear of God before them, then to say
the Scripture expresses such things as are not expressed in it, and in the mean
time tell us, they are but appearances (like seeming dreams) that are
expressed. 3. How this is a peculiar aggravation of their sin, may be seen by
what is said above, viz. in that it has more in it then merely a dying for
them, yea, more then is common to every one, especially in the degree of their
being bought. As also further, in that all do not so disserve him that bought
them, no not all of them that perish, as these that by false doctrine should
deny him, and lead many others into the transgression with themselves.

4. The last place is, Heb. 10.29. of how much sorer punishment shall he be
thought worthy, who counts the blood of the Covenanted a common thing, etc. He
should have done well to have taken in ver. 26. also. If we sin willingly after
the knowledge of the Truth received, there remains no more sacrifice for sin,
etc. And told us whether such a one as so sins had any sacrifice before his so
sinning or not? and so whether they deprived themselves of any benefit they
might have otherwise had by Christ's Sacrifice. I have asked one or two that
question from whom I could never yet get answer to it. But let us view what he
says to that other verse. He tells us Its an argument to persuade to
continuance in the Gospel-Doctrine taken ab incommodo, and that 1. He speaks
here only of professors of the Gospel, and so it cannot be applied to All
[thats granted, nor do we so apply it, but to prove that men's perishing for
whom Christ died, is a thing that the Apostles supposed, and so that Doctrine
that confines Christ's Death to them only that shall be eternally saved, is
erroneous] 2. That the Apostle asserts not what is, or may be, but only adds a
commination upon a supposition, (to deter from a thing impossible, he should
have said) but if the Apostles speech does not imply a possibility for one that
is sanctified by the blood of Christ, to count it a common thing, and so to
fall into condemnation; yea, if this does not sometime fall out, how is it that
men generally make use of this place to describe the sin against the holy Ghost
that is unpardonable? Is there not such a sin as that? or do they take
incompatible and impossible expressions to describe it? Certainly, if the
description be of impossibilities, and things that never fall out, then the
thing defined is of that nature too. Again, will any say that its never found
that any man tramples Christ under his feet, that is, despises and scorns him?
or that none ever despite the Spirit of Grace? I suppose all will agree that
these things (sometimes at least) are committed. And why then shall we think
that the expressions of either side are suppositions of things that may be, and
sometimes are, and only think otherwise of this that lies between them, and is
as much supposed as either of them? Either let us say they are none of them
possible, or else say they are all so, or show some weighty ground to the
contrary. He tells us Paul supposed, that if the Mariners left the Ship, Acts
27. they could not be saved, and yet it was not possible that they should not
be drowned, because God had told him he had given him all that were in the ship
with him. But, first, that concludes not this supposition to be of a thing
impossible, at least no more then it does the other too, that before it, and
that after it, or then it does any other supposition in Scripture, it being to
another business. Secondly, That saying of God might not hold forth to Paul
that it was impossible they should any of them be drowned. For Paul was not
unacquainted that God oftentimes in such speeches intimates a condition. As
when he told David that Saul would come to Keilah, and the men of Keilah
deliver him up, 1 Samuel 25.11, 12. and yet neither of them came to pass, because
there was intimately, ver. 13. this condition in his Answers, viz. if David
staid there. So he told Ely, that his house, and the house of his Father should
walk before him for ever, yet he after tells him it should not be so, because
he had not hearkened to him, 1 Samuel 2.30. so he said by Jonas, Yet forty days
and Niniveh shall be destroyed; and yet there being a condition employed in it,
they were not destroyed, Jonah 3. and 4. So Paul knew how to interpret Gods
Sayings, that they held forth a certainty of the event upon submission to him,
by them to whom they were spoken, in the use of such means as he sets before
men, but yet include a possibility of missing, upon tempting him, or rebelling
against him; and so he might well say, Except these men abide in the ship, ye
cannot have Gods Promise accomplished, ye cannot be saved. God does not so
promise us an end, that's that to be attained, though we tempt him, and reject
the means; as clearly appears by multitudes of the rebellious Israelites
failing of the promised Canaan. Yea, the words, I have given to thee all that
are in the ship with thee, might signify a giving their lives into his hand,
so that he using the means propounded of God to him, they should be preserved,
but his neglect of them might have been a willing throwing away, or letting go
what God had given him. Again, thirdly, the case is different in this, That
there Paul had a promise of all their lives, but I know no one word that says,
none of them that Christ died for, or that are sanctified in any degree by his
blood can or shall perish. That they that believe in him, hear his voice, and
follow him, shall not, its confessed; but in those speeches there is intimated an
abiding, and perseverance, for else its an evident case they would not. But
that all that do at any time, in any measure or degree believe, or that at any
time hear his voice, shall always do so, or that they that in any degree are
sanctified, shall persevere therein to the end, and cannot neglect Gods
Salvation, and by willing neglects fall away, I find no Scripture that affirms
it, but much to the contrary. That he has for ever perfected by his Sacrifice
those that are sanctified, is true, if either we look upon perfection as
provided in himself for them, viz. that thereby they are so completely
furnished with all things needful for them, that they need not to turn any
whither else for any perfection, he being a fountain of living waters for them:
or if we understand it of his former dealings in all times propounded as an
encouragement for our abiding in him, he has for ever perfected his sanctified
ones by that one Sacrifice, and therefore we may comfortably attend to him, in
and by that, for perfecting us also, nothing being able to keep us from that
perfection to be had in, and by it, but our renouncing that that is appointed
for our perfection. That many do believe for a time, and turn away again, is
affirmed in Scripture, as also that that faith was operative in them to make
them rejoice and spring up as the green corn on the stony ground, yea, to purge
them from their former sins, to give them to escape the pollutions of the world
through lust, to make them devote themselves to God, etc. which I think is that
the Apostle calls their sanctification. So that, except Mr. Owen can produce a
Scripture that says, That All that are ever sanctified by the blood of the
Covenant, shall not, nor can perish, but shall be eternally saved, his instance
is not parallel with this in hand. That admonitions and warnings of things that
in regard of Gods purpose, shall never come to pass, are not in vain and
fruitless, we grant: it being supposed that such a purpose has appointed to
keep off such an issue by such admonitions and those admonitions and warnings
being taken and submitted to by them to they are given. But that ever God so
purposed concerning all that at any time or in any degree are sanctified, and
that none such ever do, or can reject such warnings and fall away, is the thing
in question and to be proved, First, before we can grant that so it is here,
and that that strengthens our conception to the contrary beside what is said
above, is what the Apostle says ver. 25. where he tells us some were in those
ways that lead to this backsliding, with reference to whom he admonishes them
the more earnestly and backs this warning with these threatenings.

3. He tells us that these made profession of all these things, and that an open
renouncing these, deserved such a commination, though the Apostates never had
any such true interest in the blood of Christ, etc: But I answer that their
professing such things as they had not, is both a devise of which the Text
speaks nothing, and it comes not up to the case by the Apostle propounded,
nor suites with the type to which he alludes; for he alludes to the people in
the wilderness that were really delivered from the Egyptian bondage, and had
the blood of the Old Covenant sprinkled upon them as really as others, though
they made not so good an use of it, nor were persuaded to such steadfastness in
the Covenant by it; he speaks of such despising the Law as the Law it self
declares. Now to match with this such as only boasted of those things but
Christ never did any of them to them, and so that had no such real engagement
to Christ as they had to Moses, is unparallel. Beside, the case propounded is
thus; what such a one is worthy of that being so sanctified should despise that
blood that sanctified him; not what he is worthy of, that never having such an
engagement to that blood, but only boasting himself of it should despise it,
so that that's impertinent too.

4. He says, It was the manner of the Saints and Apostles to speak of all
baptized persons as sanctified, and so mentions back-sliders as they were
esteemed so to be. To which I answer as before, that that is to make the
Apostles not to write in things Dogmaticall and Doctrinall after an infallible
Spirit, but after a fallible judgment of their own and other men's. Besides,
the Scriptures say not they so judged of any in their writings that were not
so. But suppose they did so, yet after what rule walked they in so doing? He
says in Chap 1. the rule of charity, to which I answer, that that might perhaps
be ground for so speaking of men while they walked in the Doctrine and
Profession of the Church; but no ground for so speaking of Apostates as such.
That's not charity, to suppose that a man that does so trample under foot the
Son of God, sin wilfully after the knowledge of the truth, etc. to have ever
been sanctified by the blood of Christ, if they that so do never were or could
be so; or if those that ever were so, could never do as is here supposed.

5. He says if the Text be interpreted positively, and according to the truth
of the thing, then these two things follow. 1 Faith, and Sanctifition are not
the fruits of Election. Ans. That follows not, but only this, That then All
Faith and Sanctification are not the fruits of such an Election as he speaks
of. And that's true enough. For I suppose he will say the faith in them that
fell away, compared to the springing up of seed on stony ground, was not the
fruit of Election; nor yet that goodness of conscience that some put away, nor
that escaping of pollutions that others fell from, all which I look upon as
equivalent to this sanctification, and indeed to be the very thing here spoken
of. 2. " That believers may fall finally away, which I do believe they may,
such as we have spoken of, and I think Christ himself implies it too; and all
that Mr. Owen can say cannot disprove it.

6. He says: Nothing in the Text inforces that these persons spoken of must
needs be truly justified and regenerated believers, much less, that Christ
dyed for them, but only by strained consequences. The first part of which is
not to our purpose, how far they were believers or how regenerated; but for the
latter of them, that Christ dyed for them will inevitably follow, both from
that its said There remains no more sacrifice for sin upon such sinning, which
to me implies that there was one for them till then; and also in that such are
said to have been sanctified by the blood of the Covenant; except he can show
that ever the blood of a sacrifice sanctified any for whom and whose
sanctification it was never shed. Whereas he says The ancients called Baptism.
(...) in which by a solemn aspersion of the symbol of the blood of Christ,
they were externally sanctified and set apart etc. intimating that the Apostle
might mean but that too, its too weak. He should tell us how the Apostles use
to call things, not how other Ancients; and particularly that the Apostles ever
call the outward Baptism or the Water in it the blood of Christ, and their
Baptism the being sanctified by that blood though it was never shed for them;
else he says nothing. For the Apostle says not, the symbol of the blood, but
the blood of the Covenant sanctified him. Again he he says (...) in Scripture
frequently signifies to Consecrate and set apart to Holy use. True, I believe
that's always in the signification of it, or its very seldom (if ever)
otherwise, and so the blood of the Covenant is supposed to have sanctified
these; but that he calls an appearing, counterfeit sanctity, sanctification,
here I desire his proof for it before I can yield it. But his conclusion from
all this is most impertinent, viz. That then no true, real, internal
sanctification proper to Gods Elect, is here intimated. For, 1. The most true,
real, special sanctification accompanying Election, is a setting them apart to
Holy, to most Holy use, and consists more primarily in that then in any thing
else, and is resembled by those phrases used of old about the Temple. 2. Who
can imagine that we in this Argument endeavor to prove that sanctification
here signifies a sanctification proper to the Elect, who endeavor hence to
prove that others besides the Elect had the blood of Christ, not only shed for
them, but also in some measure operative in them so as to sanctify them? and
yet we deny that this sanctifying was but a mere external setting apart to the
enjoyment of Ordinances. The Apostle tells us in that parallel place of Heb. 6
4, 5. they might taste the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to
come, and partake of the Holy Ghost; and Peter, that they escaped the
pollutions of the world, which is more then a setting apart to Ordinances
only. And let this suffice to this Chapter.

CHAP. VI.
Some Observations upon, and Replies to his Answers to the 20. Chapt. of T. M.
Universality, etc.

HIs 6. Chapter has little in it (though it be very long) but what is answered
before; it containing an Answer to the 20. Chap. of T. M. Book, Entitled the
Universality of Gods love, etc. is much of it but a Repetition of things spoken
to before (as that Chapter occasioned) with much insulting and accusing
Rhetoric against him he answers. Therefore I shall only take notice of here
and there a passage in it, especially those that are not before spoken to, that
I may not repeat, nor grow over-tedious. In his first page of it, he charges
our Doctrine with discrepancie from the word, and self-contradiction, but
produces not one place or thing in which his charge is made good; in the mean
time we have showed his not only discrepant from, but point blank contradictory
to the word God, as much as For All, and Not for All, can be contradictory. He
tells us p. 4. of this Cha. (that is of his book the 261.) that they say not
that the Scripture in one place restrains what is in another place spoken more
largely, as if in some places its said for All men, and in others not for All;
but one place expounds another in it; as those places that say, He dyed for his
Sheep and Church; etc. declare what that All is for whom he is said to die. The
first part of which is very true, and we have made use of it; the second very
false and without all proof. Such a way of Interpreting it is, as did we apply
it to any other thing almost, we should evidently destroy the faith. For by the
same rule we might say, that the Scripture says he dyed for his Church and
Sheep etc. but when he says he dyed for the ungodly, the unjust, All men; he
declares who are his Church and Sheep, viz. the ungodly, unjust, the enemies of
God and in a word, All men. So again the Scripture says, God made all Nations,
and all men, and we believe it; but then when he says he made Israel, that is,
the Elect of all Nations, who are called the Israel of God, he expounds who are
the All that he made. So, All that are in their graves shall come forth, that
is true and we believe it; but when its said they that are Christ's shall rise
at his coming, and them that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him, that's the
Interpretation of that All that shall rise So God is good to All, Psa. 145.9.
that is he is good only to Israel. Psalm. 73.1. This is the way of Mr. Owens
interpreting, which deserves as bad Rhetoric as he can give T.M. But I will
not retaliate in that kind with him; only I will reach him back his
admonition. Oh let not M. Owen be of them that corrupt the word of God. In the
close of the same page he says, That our Sanctification is ascribed to Christ's
Death, Heb. 10.7. I answer, The comers to the Sacrifice ( ver. 1, 2.) are
sanctified by that sacrifice according to the will of God. Its Gods will that
the believer in it be sanctified by it. But if he means that his act of dying
sanctifies us bebefore believing (except in that sense that Peter speaks of,
when he says God taught him to call no man unclean or common, Act. 10.28.)
then he contradicts his own expressions against the Socinians, lib. 3. cap. 8.
page 151. and he goes beside the expression of the Scripture. In page 267. He
says He would not have us turn Indefinite propositions into Vniversals; and we
tell him again, that we would not have particular propositions the measure and
Interpretors of Universals: As his Sheep to Interpret All; T. M. argument had
this intimation in it, that such indefinites as Sinners, Ungodly, are not to be
limited by us, where Scripture elsewhere does not limit them.

He often quarrels with his reasoning and frame of Arguments, where they are as
good or better then the greatest part of his own; as in his 4th Argument, he
quarrels with him for not bringing in the Medius terminus over again in the
conclusion; as any that compare his last note upon that Argument, with the
Argument it self, may see. And I think that's a great fault in reasoning, and
that which he elsewhere faults him for. But I think P. or Passion blinded his
reason; or else God let him fall into that oversight, that he might see that
some grains of charity are needful to be afforded to them we deal withal,
because we our selves may have the like or greater infirmities then those we
reprove in others.

In page 270. He says, It was never denied by any that Christ dyed for all. But
that's not so, for with those very expressions abundance quarrel; yea, any that
reads his Book may find that he himself flatly denies it, without the addition
of the word Men, above forty times (to speak within compass) But he says the "
making All to be All men, and Every man, is our addition; which we have
formerly spoken to, and Answered; yea, and showed that some effects and
consequences of it are expressly said to be to All men. For the challenge he
after makes, I have undertaken it here with him, though not in every passage in
terminis; but thus, I will maintain that the death of Jesus Christ, had not
only the Elect and them that shall be saved eternally for its object; but was
in general a ransom for All men: and that Christ has thereby obtained life
and salvation in himself, free for all men, or any man to look to him for, and
to partake of in believing. In page 271, 272. there is a controversy about
that in Ioh. 1.7. that all men [(...)] through him might believe; whether that
be spoken of John the Baptist, or of the Light to which he witnessed. Authors
there are of both minds, yet it must be attributed to M. Mores Sophistry
learned from the old Serpent, to apply it to the Son of God, the light
witnessed to. And yet for ought I can see, or he can show, there is neither
danger in so applying it, nor incongruity with the Text. All that he says
against it is, That we are said to believe (...), not (...); in and on him, but
not by him, in which he is out; for I can show him where we are all said to
believe (...) viz. 1. Pet. 1.21. (...), that by him to believe in God. So that
more of the Old Serpent was in Mr. Owens answer, then in Mr. Moors Position.
Whereas T.M. having said that God wills all men to come to the knowledge of the
truth, adds, that God will not be wanting in sufficiency of helpfulness to
them; if as light comes, they suffer themselves to be wrought upon and to
receive it. M. O. in page 273. all to berates that saying, and tells us There is
in it of the poison of the old Serpent, the Pelagian poison of Free Will and
Popish-Merit of congruity, with I know not what: as if he thought it spoke too
well of God, whom they rather make to be an Abaddon, a man-destroyer, as if he
made them in hatred, and with intent to ruin them, and therefore is not so
gracious to them. But I would Mr. Owen would disprove the saying, and show that
God ever denied sufficiency of helpfulnesse to any one for coming to know the
truth of God, that as light was afforded, received it, and submitted to it; or
else be more sober then to speak so evilly of things he knows not, and that
deserve no evil from him. Free Will, further then God frees it, and Merit of
congruity we utterly disclaim, and what he calls the Arminian Universal grace,
we well understand not. What good God does to any, it is of mercy, not of
merit: and that he does more to all, and gives them more liberty of will then
they walk up to, I am persuaded, till Mr. Owen refute it. In page 275. Whereas
T. M. speaks in his Argument of Will and Power in the Spirits moving,
sufficient to bring men to believe. Mr. Owen in his Answer, page 276. mistaking
his expression, talks of the Spirits giving Will and Power to men to believe:
Whence his Query; How a man may have a Will given him to believe, and not
believe, is groundless, as to his Discourse, and needs no answering. But he
further denies, That any internal assistance is required to render a man
excuseless for not believing, if he have the object of faith propounded to him,
though of himself he has neither Power nor Will of himself so to do, having
lost both in Adam. To which I say, 1. Man having power to attend the outward
Mediums of faith in which the Spirit uses to convey Light, Understanding,
Convincement, and to draw men to believe, if he neglect them, he is
inexcuseably chargeable with unbelief, though he never had internal Power or
Will given him of believing. He that dispises the means that are suited to his
power, despises the end propounded in the means, and may be charged for not
attaining it; this I believe. And this Answers in part to one grand objection
of our opposers; Have men power to believe? We say that's no matter, let them
hear, and attend in means afforded, and as God convinces in them, let them
confess their follies, and turn in his reprovings according to that ability he
gives them, more or less, Vt supra, cap. 4 lib. 3.2. That man had Power and
Will in Adam to believe in Christ, and there lost both, I deny; for there was
an incompetibleness with that his innocent condition, and believing in Christ a
Mediator, for this implies sin which that estate knew not. Again, it was a vain
thing that a man should have Power and Will to that which was not for him in
that condition; nay, which he could not come to have need of, but by losing
that condition in which he had that power and will, and so the power and will
also supposed to be had therein: we use to say, Deus and natura nihil faciunt
frustra. Mr. Owen must bring some proof for that more then his bare
affirmation, before it will pass with us for an Article of our Creed.

"In page 280. He undertakes to clear the meaning of Ezekiel. 18.23.32. and 33.11.
to belong nothing at all to the extent of the ransom (which indeed more
directly speak to his willing that all men be saved, and not willing that any
perish, but that all come to Repentance; to which purpose, and in some such
like cases I have made use of it: and so more remotely it intimates the ransom,
and Christ as Mediator, he being the way by which there is both ground of
returning, and an object meet to be returned to, for life propounded to us, and
provided for us) But he endeavors to bound this up to the Israelites, Only in
respect of outward judgments, and to that purpose, 1. He would have us mind
who this is spoken of, or to, and says, doubtless its only to the house of
Israel. Which is fallaciously answered; for, propounding two questions, he
answers but to one, and yet passes it, as taking it for granted, that in that
one both are answered. He asks of whom, or to whom he speaks: and he answers,
doubtlesly he speaks to the house of Israel only, which as its not denied, so
is it unsatisfactory too. For the persons spoken of in a Proposition, may be of
larger extent then the persons spoken to. As to instance, The Apostle speaking
to the believing Ephesians. Chap. 5.3, 4, 5. Bids them flee fornication,
wantonness, etc. for says he, for such things comes the wrath of God upon the
children of disobedience. Shall we say that because he speaks to the believers
at Ephesus only, Chap. 1.1. therefore that saying, The wrath of God comes upon
the children of disobedience, is true concerning them only? Or because in 1
Cor. 6.9. he speaks to the believing Corinths only, or at most, but to
believers that call upon the Name of the Lord Jesus, therefore that
proposition, No unrighteous person shall inherit the Kingdom of God, extends to
them only to whom he speaks, Ver. 25. So because its said, Hear now O house
of Israel, therefore the extent of the Proposition, ver 11. is but this, He
delights not in the death of the house of Israel, as Mr. Owen makes it; as if
the wicked, and the house of Israel were convertible terms, and equipollent,
and of equal latitude. Is not this fallacious arguing? The medium brought to
prove a Conclusion is not of greater extent then the Conclusion? or the Minor
Proposition must be the measure of the Majors quantity? as if because going to
prove a lie to be avoided, the Minor is but this, A lie is a sin, therefore the
Major, viz. that sin is to be avoided, extends no further then to the sin of
lying. Who knows not, that its usual with the Prophets and Apostles from
indefinite and universal propositions of truth, to infer particular
instructions and reprehensions? etc. As from this, God gives liberally to All,
to infer, If any of you want wisdom, ask it of God, Jam. 1.5. The man is
blessed that trusts in God, therefore taste ye, and see how good he is, Psalm.
34.8. And such is the Prophets way here. The people despair because of Gods
judgments threatened, or repine at his chastisements. God indefinitely by his
Prophet lays open his good will toward men, and thence exhorts them to take
heart to seek and turn to him. Thus, God delights not in the death of the
wicked, but that they rather turn and live, therefore not in your death,
therefore turn and live; that that is Gods way in general, may make for your
instruction and encouragement in particular. Now 2. Whereas he asks what will,
that is, that God wills not the death of the wicked in. I answer, as before,
his Will of welpleasedness, as the word (...)signifies. Its not desirable or
approveable, that wicked men go on in sinful ways and dye, but rather turn and
live. And this may be true even of those that have not such express commands
and Revelations of his mind as others. God would not have them smother what
truth they have, but glorify him according to what they know of him, and be
thankful, and seek him, as Romans 1.18, 19.21. Act. 17.26, 27. 3. He tells us, We
miserably mistake the meaning of the Prophet, because he speaks but about
temporal judgments upon their land, etc. I answer, That he speaks about them
is true; but that he speaks but about them, and that the word (death) holds
forth there no more but temporal death, and the word (live) but a natural
earthy life and prosperity, as if he might have pleasure in their eternal
death, though not in their temporal, and as if he delighted not to give them
eternal life upon their repentance, or, as if the Proposition is but true of
the outward, because applied to comfort them, in that also these things, I say,
are untrue, and I deny them. Did the putting away their evils, and turning to
God, and making them new hearts, respect only their avoiding temporal
judgments, and living in outward happiness, when the Scripture often tells us,
That it pleases God many times to confer outward happiness upon, and keep off
temporal judgments from those that never think of turning, but live in all
wickedness. See Psalm. 73.1, 3, 4, 5, 6. Jer. 12.1. Job 20.7, 8.9, 13. Surely
from Gods not delighting in the death of sinners any way, may be argued, that
he desires not their destruction from this life; as from Gods wrath coming upon
the children of disobedience, that then the believers disobeying should be
sorely chastened, and yet sore chastisements here, not be all that's contained
in the word wrath, as affirmed to come on the children of disobedience; these
are frothy arguments, and not beseeming Mr. Owen. Its more frothy to limit an
indefinite Proposition to some few particulars, where nothing inforces it, as
to draw from thence a Conclusion general. Nay, indefinite propositions are most
usually of general signification (as might easily be showed) in the Scriptures:
but I leave that to the observation of the Readers. Only minding them, that
this is by the Apostles Paul and Peter affirmed in the general, as in 1 Timothy
2.4. 2 Pet. 3 9. So that Mr. Owen here has said nothing to purpose. He says (
p. 283.) That the ends of the earth, Isa. 45.22. are they that look up to God.
A strange Collection, he might as well say [from Isai. 55.7, 8. Let the wicked
forsake his ways] That the wicked are they that forsake their ways and turn to
God. If the persons exhorted are always the performers of what they are
exhorted to, that would be wonderful. And yet he says that his gloss is
beyond denial; and again, " That only Elect and Believers are there, and in
Isai. 49.6. clearly intimated. I marvel by what Argument he can demonstrate
it, that we may not deny it: Sure his ipse Dico is not enough for it, and yet
that's all he brings to prove it.

He tells us p. 287. That its most certain that the Lord Jesus sends not his
servants with a lie, to offer that to all that belongs but to some, and asks
what is thence concluded. I answer, That M. O. is in an error then, in saying,
The Death of Christ is only for the Elect; For if the Lord Christ sent not his
Servants to offer that to All, that belongs only to a few, and yet he sent the
Gospel with the Contents thereof to be offered to All, then it follows, that
that that is therein offered pertains not only to some few. For otherwise he
grants, they that so offer it are sent with a lie. That its offered to All, he
grants partly here, and partly in Chap. 1. where he said The Gospel is to be
preached to All Nations, and has a right to be preached to every creature.
Therefore unless they that are to Preach it should preach a lie, the Contents
of it pertain not only to some, but to All. " Quod erat probandum. Whereas he
says, We are to prove that Christ dyed for All, as well them that never heard
the Gospel, as for them that do. I Answer, That pertains not to us; but to
believe what Christ by his servants has delivered to us; that he dyed for All
and every one, and is the Propitiation for the sins of the whole world: which
is proof and ground enough for our believing that he dyed for them also, the
phrases being sufficiently comprehensive. If any will bring in that limitation
to the Apostles expression, they must show us just warrant for so doing. Its
enough to us to believe the generality and Universality of it, that the
Scripture never excludes any from it, but in general Universal phrases
affirms it.

In page 288. he speaks as if T. M. affirmed that we are bound to pray for
every singular man that he may be saved, and supposed that there is nothing
else that we are to pray for men, but that they may be saved by Christ. Which
(to give the mildest language) are more mistakes of him; for as he affirmed
neither of them in his proof to which M.O. Answers, as any that read it may
see; so it suffices that we pray for all in general, that God would reveal the
knowledge of his truth unto them, and spread abroad his Gospel amongst them,
and afford them such testimonies of his goodness as may lead them to
Repentance; and for what other things may concern their welfare here, the less
is no whit excluded by praying for the greater. Though indeed I know no warrant
we have in all the Scripture to pray God to save eternally (that is, to give
the privileges proper to believers, to) them that have not yet believed. How
Act. 8.22, 24. proves it false, that an assurance of Christ dying for men in
particular, is not our ground of praying for them (as M.O. says) I am yet to
learn, except he can prove that Peter was not assured that Christ dyed for
Simon Magus, which he that extracts out of that place must be somewhat more
skillful in Chymestry then I am. Whereas page 290. he says, we turn the most
intense and incomparable love of God toward his Elect, into a common desire,
wishing, and affection of his Nature, opposite to his Nature, and failing of
its end. Its a great mistake as to us at least, and to the party he there
opposes. We grant Gods love as intense and incomparable to his Elect, as he by
any Scripture proof can make it, and far more incomparable then here he imputes
to us. Whereas he says that in Tit. 2.11, 12. is not a common love, he begs
that Assertion: for the words are the grace of God (...), saving to All men
has appeared. And if saving to All men, be not common, I know not what
expression can argue it common. And yet that then it must save All men in
eternal life [as he implies this grace does All them to whom it is extended]
is in my view as as great an inconsequence as that; If the Lords mighty power
was a saving power to all the Isralites out of Egypt, then it must certainsave
them all, all the way into Canaan. That the (...) too spoken of ^it. 3.5. was
such as that the believers therein and therethrough received the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost is granted; but that therefore,
All that were comprehended in it do, and shall receive them, is another
inconsequence, not yet proved, no more then Caleb and Joshuahs being by the
power of God and his presence with them in the Cloud, the Manna, etc. prevailed
with to believe, and so were preserved and brought into Canaan, would enforce
that all that he put forth his power toward, and vouchsafed his presence among,
and gave his Manna to, and the Pillar of a Cloud to lead them etc. they were so
prevailed with to believe, and brought into Canaan also. Hujus modi
inconsequentiis illius scatet liber.

P. 292. He faults T. M. for rendering they love darkness rather then light, to
be a choosing darkness rather then light, which is a mere trifle, for he that
loves one thing rather then another, prefers that thing and chooses it before
the other. And whereas he adds, " that there is no comparison instituted
between their loving light and loving darkness, as if they had loved both, but
one more then the other; that nothing overthrows his saying. For where one
thing is loved, and not another, there is choice also as well as when two
things are loved one above another. And yet his denial of their loving both is
not true in all men that love darkness. Many a man loves the truth in many
things, and approves it, that yet loves his lusts more, and so prefers them
before it; as those that ( Joh. 12.42.) Loved the praise of men more then the
praise of God. There is no question but they honored and desired the praise of
God, but yet so, as that to have it they would not loose the praise of men. So
Herod reverenced John, and bare good will to him, but yet preferred his
Herodias before him. But whereas from that phrase Ioh. 3.19. T. M. inferred,
surely there was light for them; M.O. trifles again about that, and says, He
durst not say that it was the counsel of God that they should receive it. To
which I say, Sure it was his council to them to receive it, and they rejected
the counsel of God against themselves, Luke 7.30. Pro. 1.23, 25, 29, 30. Indeed
what he councels or purposes to do himself, or cause to be done, that shall
stand, and so much that in Isa. 46.10. says, But what he councels us to do, is
not always done by us, though only in his counsels obeyed there is standing
safety for us. But by [for them there was light] its evident T.M. meant it was
presented to them, as that that they had right to look upon and receive, yea,
ought of duty to have received; And not only it was a common stock, as light
in the Sun for blind men, as M.O. speaks, for these men see the light and
something in it that crossed them in their purposes and designs, else would
they not have hated it. Blind men take not delight in one color more then in
another, seeing they discern no difference, whereas there, and in p. 293. he
says that these places of Ioh. 2.8. Mat. 16.26. Romans 2.5. Hos. 13.9. make
nothing against his position, nor for the extent of Christ's Death, he is much
mistaken, or will not acknowledge what is presented to him. He says, Jonas 2.8.
tells us that they that forsake God, forfeit their mercies temporal and
spiritual, which they had before received. But can any man be said to receive a
real mercy from God, who have nothing from him but in hatred, and with a
tendency to aggravate their misery, as is necessarily employed by M.O. opinion,
which tells us that God hated many from eternity, whom Christ dyed not for, and
yet will judge them the more severely for the abuse of every thing they have,
though given in that hatred. Count you that a mercy, to choke men with Gold, or
to hang wedges of it about their necks, and throw them into the Sea to drown
them? have they any Spiritual mercies from God for whom Christ dyed not, and
did he so in his opinion for Idolators and Back-sliders from God? Besides, he
speaks not out all the truth; for men not only through observing lying
vanities forsake what they have, but much that they might have had, as is
plain, Psalm. 81.14, 15. Luke 19.41. there are things pertaining to their peace,
that they miss off; and how could they had any such things, if Christ never
dyed for them, or was not Mediator for them? If it be said that our Savior
speaks thus of outward peace and mercies; besides that that's too scanty an
exposition, seeing Christ preached the Kingdom of God to them, its no
sufficient evasion: God usually punishing men with deprivation of temporal
mercies, for neglecting eternal, Mat. 22.7. Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12. He says Romans
2.5. speaks of the Gentiles, who had the works of God to teach them, and the
Patience of God to wait upon them, yet made bad use of both, which is too
slender an Answer to the place. Could he not find it in the Text that they led
them to repentance? and can he show us any ground of Repentance and change of
mind, for any man that has no cause in and from God for it, nothing better to
be enjoyed by them in and with God, then what he sets his mind upon already? or
that any have any such favors afforded them, as lead to Repentance, with whom
God deals according to the sentence pronounced upon All in Adam; and for whom
Christ never came to procure any such things for them: or that Christ procured
such things for any for whom he did not interpose himself between the Sentence
of Death and them? Sure these things deserve a little more consideration then
he affords them. Besides that, they make against his exposition of 2 Pet. 3.9.
where he would tie up Gods willing men to come to Repentance, to the Elect
only; for here he speaks of Gods goodness and patience, leading such to Repent,
as treasure up wrath to themselves by occasion of Gods goodness to them. Mat.
6.26. Mark 8.36.
Sure he will not tell us they are the Elect only too. He makes little of
those expressions in which men are said to lose their own souls, but only as
if therein was intimated, " That they make the loss of them sure to
themselves; then it seems it was not sure enough to them in Adams sinning; and
why not? Sure Adam lost us All sure enough: If Christ did nothing for
recovering them, they are lost sure enough, without any man's doing any more to
loose them. But perhaps he means that they make it evident to themselves that
Christ did nothing for them, and so that they remain lost by Adam. Sure this is
a new way of exposition; and before it pass for current, he must prove, that to
lose or save in Scripture signifies only to make it evident that a thing was
lost or saved beforehand, or that we are said to lose by doing this or that,
that that was lost out of our power before we did that. As that if a
Corporation have forfeited their Charter, and it was taken from them an hundred
years ago, so that now they have none, yet they that are now of it do forfeit
and lose it by so doing something that they should not; let him show us that
the Scripture speaks in that language, and we shall listen to his evasion. His
after Collection from T. M. is spoken to before, its but his own
misunderstanding of him, and so are all his Inferences drawn from it.

For his Argument from Gods expostulations, page 296. it is to show that God
wills them to be saved, and delights not in their destruction, which opposes M.
Owens Interpretation of 1 Timothy 2.4. and by consequent intimates Christ's
interposing himself between God and them, there being no salvation to be had
for any but in him, and those expostulations being with others then the Elect,
about looking and listening to him, etc. What there is in God we cannot tell,
but as the only begotten Son has revealed to us, and that is indeed, that
there is in him no imperfection. But that he desires not those (...) salvation
that miss of, it he has no where told us that I know of: but often the
contrary, and yet that may be in him without imperfection. We are no competent
Judges by our narrow conceptions of his perfections. There is that in and with
him that seems foolishness to our wisdom, and weakness in our judgments, that
yet is wiser and stronger then we can conceive of, 1 Cor. 1.22, 23, 24. Its
sauciness in us to prescribe rules to Gods wisdom and perfection, and
rashness to say what is or is not in God, but as Christ has revealed to us.
Obedience is better then Sacrifice, and a simple belief of his words, better
then our wisest reasonings against them. In page 298, 299. There is some
difference about judging All men by the Gospel. Indeed it should be said
according to the Gospel, the difference is grounded on the diverse understanding
of that phrase, Romans 2.16. They take it that this Truth, That all shall be
Judged, is according to the Gospel. We understand it also that Christ in
judging shall proceed according to the Gospel. Not that we mean that they had
heard not the Gospel shall be judged for rejecting, or not believing what they
heard not; but that they shall be judged only for and by what they had given
them, and they received or abused; but that Christ in judging, by, and for
those things, shall not go according to the Law of Creation, requiring them to
have done according to that that was given them in Adam, and so according to
the strict rule of that first Obligation; but only as in rejecting Light and
Truth given them, or accepting it, they have sinned against, Romans 1.18, 19, 20,
21.
or submitted to God dealing with them, in and by the Mediator, the Word of
God, by whose interposition of himself between God and them, their lives,
liberties, mercies, and all the light they had since the Fall, was derived to
them, Joh. 1.9. and so according to the Gospel that relates Christ to have died
for them, and to be Lord over all thereby. And that such shall be his
proceeding in Judgment, I am the rather persuaded by that of Christ himself, in
Matthew 25.31.46. etc. where declaring the manner of his Judging All Nations; he
tells us his Rewards, and punishments shall be given according to men's
carriages of themselves toward him in such Mediums as he appeared in to them.
He Judges men to life, as feeding and clothing Him; to death, as not doing
such and such things to him. Which he makes out to be an equal sentence, though
many shall reply, that they never see or knew him, as an object to be so or so
acted toward by them. He mentions nothing there to be charged upon them as
acted by Adam, or by them, but with reference to himself, which deserves also
some consideration. Whereas in page 299. He tells us of Totus mundus ex to to
mundo, a whole world out of the whole world; That he says without book, I mean,
without Gods Book (speaking of the world as it now is) having borrowed it from
Prosper, or at highest from Austin. But we desire not to prefer the Traditions
and Documents of the Elders (though they might be in many things worthy men in
their times) so highly as for them to justle out, or by them to Interpret
Apostolical Doctrine: or by them to teach men their fear toward God, as was of
old, and yet is too common a fashion. Philosophical Speculations, and the
Elders Traditions, are used as pillars in Gods building, and many lean more
upon them, then on the pillars of Gods own erecting, setting up their posts and
pillars by his, and slighting his for them, which we approve not. Lastly,

Whereas he says, The common faith, is the faith of Gods Elect. I easily grant
it, and say, That the Apostle in Tit. 1.1, 4. in both places means, The faith
delivered to the Saints, the Doctrine of Faith (as its no unusual thing for him
to do) which is the faith of Gods Elect, because its that which they believe
and hold forth to others, even to the world; and its the common faith, because
as its believed by them All, so its common to the world in point of right to be
preached to them, and embraced by them. Its that that contains good news for,
and matter to be believed by All. But I have done with these his
prevarications, with which he Answers T. Moors twentieth Chapter. I have passed
over many of them, the whole being a heap of mistakes, and disdainful jerks,
anwhat seems to be of any weight, is already fully answered.

CHAP. VII.
A view of, and Reply to Mr. Owens Answers to some other pretended Sophisms (as
he calls them) against his Doctrine.

IN his last Chapter he pretends to Answer some usual Sophisms, and captious
Arguments of the Arminians, which he styles empty Flourishes yet remaining. As
first, this Argument.

That which every one is bound to believe is true. An Argument, which for my
part I own not in this form, as to All, and every man in the world, it being
not preached to every one, that Christ died and is risen. And I conceive that
God requires not an explicit faith of propositions, that they have no
Revelations of giving them ground to believe. But thus I own it, against their
restrictive doctrine of tying Christ's Death to the Elect only, viz. That which
of every one to whom the Gospel is preached, is required as necessarily to be
believed, that he might come to believe on Christ for salvation, that is, for
every such man true in it self. But that Christ died for him in particular is
required to be believed of every one to whom the Gospel is preached as
necessary for his believing in Christ for salvation. Therefore for every one to
whom the Gospel is preached: That is true.

The Major leans upon this truth, That he that is required to do, or believe
any thing, is therein required to do or believe all those things that are
necessary thereto, so as that without his doing or believing of them, he cannot
do or believe those other things required of him. The Minor we shall speak to
by and, when I have examined some things that he says to the Minor of the
Argument as mentioned by him. As

1. He says " The believing that Christ dyed for a man, is the saving
application of Christ to the soul, as held out in the promise. In which he
mistakes, for its only a believing Christ to have so satissied for his sin by
his death, and to have such fullness of Redemption in him for him, that he may
hopefully go to him for remission and salvation, there is good ground for him
so to do, and its his sin if he having opened such a way for him to God and to
salvation, he should neglect it. But for the promises, they belong only to
those that through this belief of the grace of God, Gal. 3.22.
are drawn actually to trust in Christ and love him; whence they are called the
things prepared for them that love God, and that trust in him before the sons
of men; and for the confirmation of these men in the expectation of those
promises, the belief of Christ's death for them is further useful. The Death of
Christ was for sinners, enemies, the ungodly, All men: but the promises of God
in Christ, and so the Kingdom, are not the portion of any such; but men are
made heirs of them through believing, Ioh. 1.12. Gal. 3 26.29. Tit. 3.6, 7. so
that here is a very foundamentall mistake as to the question in hand in this
very saying.

2. He says To believe that Christ dyed for any, must be with reference to the
purpose of God the Father, and intention of Jesus Christ himself, and that that
is it which with regard to any Universality is opposed by him. Which words I
well apprehend not his meaning in. If he mean by Reference to Gods purpose and
Christ's intention; according as God purposed and Christ intended for them, or
that God purposed and Christ intended that he should dye for them; so we indeed
mean by that phrase. But if by it he means that God and Christ purposed in so
doing eternally to save him; we so mean not that every man is bound to believe
of Christ's death for him: But that such was Gods purpose and intention in
Christ's dying for him, that if he believe in him and in God through him, he
shall undoubtedly be saved, Ioh. 3.16. And yet we put no If unto Gods purpose,
which as secret concerns not our Faith (for as Luther well says, De Deo
abscondito nulla est fides, cognitio, etc. But we put that If, into the way of
men's participation of that salvation as God has revealed it. Besides to tell
us how he opposes the Universality of Christ's death, when he has almost done
opposing it, was not done (no though he had expressed himself more clearly in it)
very learnedly.

He says, The term Every one, must relate to All men in the like condition;
which we grant it may. And that like condition (in my stating it here) is not
only as sinners, unregenerate etc. but also as the Gospel coming to them and
reporting good news to them in Christ, requires obedience of Faith of them,
that they may be pulled out of that sinful estate. Something he says to the
Major too, viz. That that every one is bound to believe, is neither in it self
true nor false, but good; which to me is a Paradox; good being not the Object
of Faith but of appetite, desire and love. Truth is the Object of Faith,
chiefly of that that is divine and required by God; for men may believe, and in
some cases ought to believe that, that in it self holds forth evil to them: as
men are bound to believe that they are sinners, though its good that they
should believe so, yet its not a good thing that they are bound to believe
therein, their being sinners is not a good thing.

But now to the Minor, not only as in the first place mentioned by himself, but
also in a manner as owned by me. He denies that every one that's called to by
the Gospel Preached, is bound to believe in particular that Christ dyed for
him. To make good which denial; he says.

1 That no man is bound to believe that that's false: but that he dyed for every
man is false, and he has proved it so before. This is Petitio Principii, and
contrary to the Scripture. He is no competent Judge in his own cause, and any
that reads my Answers may see his proofs have all failed.

2. Then (he says) men should be bound to believe immediately that that is not
revealed; though Divine Revelation be the Object of all Faith. I deny this
consequence from the Minor either as laid down by me, or stated by him in the
second way. And whereas he says, That the Scriptures do not hold out any where
that Christ died for this or that particular, as such, but indefinitely as
sinners; specified of times antecedently by Gods purpose, and consequently by
their own purchased obedience. To the first of these passages, I say, that the
Scriptures holding out an Universal proposition, of truth, are, though not
immediately, yet mediately the Object of Divine Faith to any one particular for
himself that's included in the general. As when its said, All have sinned; To
believe thence that I have sinned, is a Faith closing with and springing from
that that is revealed, though not immediately in the expression, yet by
undeniable intimation and consequence; And so in the case of the Resurrection
and Judgment, in closing with this divine Revelation, that all shall rise and
be judged, I necessarily upon the same divine Revelation believe that I shall
rise and be judged also; Yea, unless I believe for my self, I do not believe
the Divine Revelation as concerning All. So is the case here, God having
revealed that Christ dyed for every one, and all men etc. In believing that
Divine Truth, I believe that he has done so for me; for that Divine Revelation
includes me as a man and one of the world. And if it be not so, I deny that
any particular man's Faith in that particular can be proved to be grounded on
the the word of God, or that he has any right to believe on the Mediator, or
that there is a Mediator for him. To the latter passage about the Scriptures,
holding it forth only for sinners indefinitely, often so and so specified, I
answer, 1. "That's untrue, Its held out also for the world universally; 1 Ioh.
2.2. and for men generally, 1 Timothy 2.4, 6. Heb. 2.9. Again, "2 He contradicts
himself, for if Scriptures specify those Sinners for whom Christ dyed, to be
such or such, then it holds not out his Death for sinners indefinitely.
Scripture holds forth nothing in any place, but as it agrees with the truth of
other places, and indefinitely and boundedly, are contradictions when spoken of
the same subject; Sinners unlimitedly ((...) and limitedly ((...)) are
incompetible expressions. 3. I deny that the [Objectum totale] the full Object
of the Death of Christ is any where specified, either by the purpose of God to
save them eternally, or the consequent obedience found in them, which denial
we have managed throughout this discourse.

3. He says, The purpose of God and his intention, is not propounded as the
Object of the Faith of any, but only his commands, promises and threatenings:
the latter clause of which is not full enough; for neither are his commands
properly the Object of Faith but of Obedience, nor are those things mentioned
the only object of Faith, sure his Declarations may have a share therein too.
2. His purpose and intention that he should die for this or that man, is
necessarily involved in the object of Faith propounding that he died for All
men. But his purpose or intention of bringing this or that man absolutely to
eternal life, is not revealed as the object of Faith to any not united to
Christ by Faith, and the inhabitation of the Spirit: But that's beyond our
question, not intended at all in the Argument, as either way produced; and so
its impertinently here mentioned by Mr. Owen. In this also is answered his
fourth Exception, viz. That no command in Scripture to believe, is to be
measured by Gods purpose and intention. His fifth only answering to the Minor,
as disowned by me, I have nothing to say to it. But then he says, That the not
owning the Argument as in the first way propounded, makes it useless as to the
cause defended. To which I answer, That for Christ's dying for every man in the
world, we have more divine proofs then that can come to; but as altered into
the second form, it proves that Tenent untrue, that Christ died only for Gods
Elect, and them that shall for ever be saved, against which I own it. Besides,
this being granted, it will follow, That the Gospel being proposeable to All
the world, and that obedience of Faith also requireable thereupon of All, there
is the same truth in the matter of the Gospel concerning Christ's Death for them
all also, it being otherwise not proposeable, nor the obedience of Faith
requirable of them. His answer to this, That its no safe disputing of what
should or would be, if things were not as God has appointed them, satisfies
not. For as 1. We need not such disputings, were men contented to be so far
fools as to believe Doctrines as God propounds them. And 2 As such suppositive
Conclusions may be as strong and undeniable upon such supposed principles, as
positive conclusions (...) positive premises, yea, and may illustrate positive
truths too, at lest they are as lawful for us to use, as for them that oppose
us. So 3. This is not only suppositive but positive, that the Gospel is
predicable to All, and therefore the commission runs to preach it to All, and I
say its in this positive truth implied, that the truth therein declared (as
true before men's faith) is true for All, for otherwise there would not be in it
a predicability unto All, and ground for requiring Belief and Obedience of All
(we have opportunity, and that we might preach it unto) upon such preaching it.
But he excepts, That if the Gospel were preached to All the world, and All in
the world, yet this is all the will of God, that could in general be signified
by it to them, viz. That he that believes shall be saved, and he that believes
not shall be damned, and so that God has concatinated these two together,
Faith and Salvation. Which that its untrue, we have showed before in Chap. 1.
The Gospel declares good will to All, That God would have all men saved and
come to know the truth, etc. ut supra. It argues men's wisdom have too much
blinded them from seeing into, or understanding the Gospel, when they find
nothing in it for sinners, and men in general, but that they that believe shall
be saved, and can show them no good reason that any of them have to believe in
God, more then the Law can show that says, he that does thus and thus shall
live. For ought that they can tell them God has from Eternity hated them, and
there is no way to salvation made for them. Surely that's not so much as what he
further points to, That there is no name under heaven whereby they may be
saved, but that of Jesus, for that intimates that by that Name they may. But to
this I have spoken sufficiently before.

To what he says about the not believing Jesus of Nazareth to be the Christ and
their need of him, that its a soul-condemning infidelity of such obstinate
refusers to come in upon the Call of the Gospel; and not a refusing to believe
that Christ died for every one of them in particular; I have answered also
before; and say here further, That each of them are condemning. The last,
because there is not a believing of the Testimony of God, that he bears of his
Son, and so not a receiving the love of the Truth, the love that the Truth
witnesses, and so not a leaning upon his Mediation, nor an approaching to God
thereby. For how should he come to God by his Mediation, that refuses to
believe that he died for him in particular, and so that his Mediation for him?
The Jews (says he) were charged with infidelity for not believing Christ to be
their Messiah. And truly by Mr. Owens Doctrine he was not so. For how was he
for them, if he was a Mediator for none but the Elect, seeing they persisted in
unbelief and rebellion? Sure men's not believing their need of a Mediator, or
that Jesus is He, proves not that they are not chargeable with not believing
Christ to have died for them, no more then others not believing themselves to
be sinners, proves that they are not chargeable with not believing in Christ.
The object of Faith, I trow, is not to be measured by men's acts of Faith, but
their acts ought to come up to that that's in the object.

But beyond all these, he has somewhat more to the Minor, viz. That they to
whom the Gospel is preached, are bound to believe with that faith which is
required to justification only. I will not stand upon that word only, I am
content that he grants, They are bound to believe with that Faith; but then he
assumes, That that is not a full persuasion that Christ died for any one in
particular. Here I except against the word full persuasion, as being a Quartus
terminus, which is not fit for a Disputant to put into a Syllogism. Nor is it
to the purpose, that it is not justifying Faith; its enough to this business if
it be necessary to a justifying faith (according to the Revelation of the
Gospel since his Ascension) to believe and be persuaded that Christ died for
him in particular, though his persuasion be not full; Romans 3.25
and that I say is necessary. For to believe to justification, is to believe on
God through Christ, or in the blood of Christ, and that is from that that
Christ as Mediator has done and is further authorized to do, to be persuaded
to rest on God for salvation by him. Which I deny that any man can rightly come
to, except he believe that that which God has done in Christ, and that which
Christ has done as Mediator between God and man, was done also for him. I can
Divinely gather no boldness from the blood or sufferings of Christ to approach
the Holies, and look to God to save me, further then by a Divine Faith that
leans upon Gods testimony I am persuaded that those sufferings of Christ
concerned me, and were for me. But let us see how M.O. goes on in this
business, and that is thus; He says, there is an order natural in it self, and
established by Gods appointment in the things that are to be believed, so that
till some of them are believed, the rest are not required. As a man is not
commanded (nor can be reasonably) to get to the top of the Ladder, by skipping
all the lower rounds. But what makes this to prove the business in hand. 1.
This shows that a mau cannot come to believe with a justifying Faith, (the
thing ex confesso required of them to whom the Gospel is preached) except he
orderly believe those things that lead unto it, of which I contend, That this
is one, to believe that God has provided him Christ to be his Mediator, and
that he has died for him, and so that he has good ground to believe in him,
and rely on God through him; and so it makes for what I say; but it proves not
that every step in that order are not required of every one to whom the Gospel
is preached, that so he may come to that that is principally required, viz. To
justifying Faith. His comparison is not worth a Rush to that purpose. For
though I would not rationally bid a man climb up into a chamber by a ladder,
and skip all the rounds save the highest, yet I may rationally bid him climb up
to it, and go by all the rounds, and so by the highest, and I trow, his not
going up one step will not excuse him for not going all, even up the highest
too. He that commands me to believe with a justifying faith, surely commands me
therein to go by every step that tends to it, and to believe all that's
absolutely requisite for believing with that faith. 2. He here speaks against
his main Concession, viz. That men that hear the Gospel are bound to believe
with a justifying faith. For here he says in substance, That that's not required
till they have first believed the truths that lead to it, and so Gods Commands
shall be bounded by man's obedience. If any man to whom the Gospel is preached,
shall deny to believe that there is such a one as Christ, that man is not
required of God to believe in Christ, for its irrational to require him to
believe in him, till he has first obeyed him in believing the other. I suppose
any man that understands reason, will rather think that Mr. Owen had not the
exercise of reason about him when he here talked of irrationality: the first
proof of his Argument contradicting his Argument. For the Argument says, That
they to whom the Gospel is preached are bound to believe with a justifying
faith, and the proof says it is irrational that they should be required to
that, till they believe that there is an object of faith To say nothing that
the believing Christ to have died for a man, is not the highest step to that
faith, as he supposes. But after this he sets down his order, viz.

1. That men are to repent and believe the Gospel to be the Word of God, to
contain his Will, and that Jesus Christ therein revealed is the power and
wisdom of God to salvation. 2. That there is an inseparable connection between
faith and salvation. 3. That there be a conviction by the spirit of a necessity
of a Redeemer to their souls in particular, whereby they become weary, heavy
laden, and burdened. 4. A serious full recumbency, and resting the soul upon
Christ in the promise of the Gospel, as an Alsufficient Savior, able to
deliver and save to the utmost them that come to God by him, Ready, able, and
willing, through the preciousness of his blood, and sufficiency of his ransom,
to save every soul that shall freely give up themselves to him for that end
amongst whom he is resolved to be one. Now (says he) in doing all this there is
none called on by the Gospel, once to inquire after the purpose and intention
of God concerning the particular object of the death of Christ, every one being
fully assured that his Death shall be profitable to them that believe in him,
and obey him: but after all this, and not before, it lies upon a believer to
assure his soul of the good will, and eternal love of God to him, to send his
Son to dye for him in particular. I might here return him his own words with
admiration, Oh what a preposterous course is this, and how differing from the
right way of the Gospel! 1. I would know what is that Gospel that men in the
first place are to believe to be true: Is it only that Jesus Christ is the
power and wisdom of God to salvation, and the connection of faith and salvation?
That we have showed before to be untrue. The Word of God it self tells us, that
the Gospel used to tell men of Christ's being sent of God, to turn them in
particular from their sins, and to lay down that as the ground of Repentance,
and believing on him, 1 Timothy 2, 4.6. And the Apostlesays expressly, that that
was the Testimony, or Gospel that God ordained and sent him to preach. ver. 7.
Acts 3.26. And that God would have all to be saved, and come to the knowledge
of the truth, for there is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the
Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for All; and can a man believe that
to be true, and not believe that he gave himself a ranson for him? Is he no
body? So that what he says in this first step, overthrows him. But 2. See the
preposterousness of these men, that that the Apostle writ about the
High Priesthood of Christ to the believers as peculiarly useful for them, to
lead them up to perfection in their faith and confidence, viz. [That Christ
has the office of an unchangeable Priesthood, and is able to save to the
utmost all that come to God by him, because he ever lives to make intercession
for them] that is here produced as the ground to draw in unbelievers, though
the intercession there mentioned is not affirmed there for any, as, and while
yet unbelievers: and on the other hand, that which the Apostle tells us, was
the Testimony, whereof God had made him a Minister and an Apostle to preach to
the Gentiles that were ignorant of God (as that before repeated) that is not to
be preached as true for any ones particular, and as so to be believed by him
till they are made believers. Who would think that wise men should go so
preposterous a way? but that its the judgment of God for their leaning to
their own wisdom, and no more then is fore-prophesied, that God will destroy
the wisdom of the wise, etc. 3. He impertinently mixes the object of faith with
the operations of that object attended to and believed, as conviction by the
Spirit of their need of a Redeemer, and recumbency in him with the truths of
God that lead to that convincement, and reliance on him. The Argument is about
the object of faith needful to be believed by all that hear the Gospel, that
they may believe to justification. And he tells us of an order in the
operations of God upon men's spirits, before they believe as they should do. And
yet he minds not that the convincement of the great sin of unbelief is not
kindly effected, till men see they have ground of believing, and yet believe
not; till when the heart rather thinks it is sin and presumption to believe.
But when it sees that Christ has done so much for it, then it must needs be
convinced that it sins greatly, in not betrusting it self wholly to him. 4. He
confounds the object of faith about the Mediation of Christ, and the object of
his Death, with the secret Purpose and Counsel of God about our particular
right to, and enjoyment of eternal salvation. 5. He talks of rolling the soul
upon Christ in a Promise, whenas he cannot prove that any can have him in a
Promise to be rolled on, further then he is supposed first to have dyed for
him, the Promises being sealed in his blood, and the way of closing with them
is believing in his blood; which how should men do wh^le its wholly doubtful to
them, whether they have any thing to do with his blood or nor? Indeed. 6. He
supposes that a soul is brought to believe in God, and to trust in his mercy
through Christ, before it know of any love in God toward it; whereas he uses to
draw with the cords of love, and testimonies of his goodness. Its goodness seen
in him leads us to repentance; Its not only a letting sinners see a need of a
Savior, and that there is one able to save them that go to God by him, that
will suffice to draw in a man that yet cannot see him as a way for him to go to
God by (as he is not for any otherwise then he has died for them, Heb. 10.19,
20.) to roll himself upon God for salvation. Never yet could any sinner that
indeed was convinced to be so, and to be under wrath, and that saw Gods Justice
and Anger against him, hope in, and expect help from God by Christ, not being
first persuaded that Christ had done so much for him, that he might have
salvation through him. Many men may delude themselves, and take their own
self-actings for acts of Grace, as the Pharisee did, Luke 18.10, 11. and from
their endeavors, and self reformations, seem to commit themselves to God, and
conclude themselves to be believers, that yet never knew what it is rightly to
believe. The true Gospel-believers believe through Grace, 2 Cor. 6.1.
as they Acts 18.27. That is by the grace and goodwill of God declared to them
in the Gospel. The grace of God appearing to them, teaches them to live
godlily, and saves them from their former disobedient condition. Tit. 2.11, 12.
and 3.4, 5. They do no, per (...)(as the Pharisee) argue Gods grace toward
them by their frames toward him, that God loved them first, because they (as
they conceive) love him, but on the contrary, they therefore love him because
he first loved them, and sent his Son for them. Believing Gods Testimony of
what Christ has done for them, they are helped through the power of God to
believe in him, and cast themselves upon God for further saving. So the
Apostles were led, Romans 5.10. and not from believing on him, to argue that
Christ died for them. So that this notwithstanding that Mr. Owen has said, I
yet stand to my former Argument, and shall not need to put it into the
following frame in his Book, into which he puts it.

By this that is already said, Concl. 1.
his following Conclusions appear clearly to be some of them untrue, some
impertinent. viz. 1. That all called by the Word; in what state or condition
soever they continue, are not bound to believe that Christ died for them by
name, but such as are so and so qualified. medium for them to come unto God,
and to believe in him by.

2. That the Precept of believing with fiduciary confidence that Christ dyed
for him, Concl. 2.
is not proposed, nor is not obligatory to all that is called, nor the not
performance of it any otherwise a sin but as it is in the root and habit of
unbelief and not turning unto God for mercy. To that I answer. M.O. granted
before, inasmuch as it is justifying Faith) and so its obligatory to them all.
And to that end (as it thereto necessarily conduces) to believe that Christ
dyed for them; the not believing which, is a giving God the lie, it being
contained in the record given of his Son; which (contrary to his fifth and sixth
Conclusions) is too, that there is one Mediator between God and men, who gave
himself a ransom for all men: and not only that he that has him has life;
but also first, that God has given us eternal life, and that life is in his
Son. See that expressly affirmed to be part of the Record of God, which the
unbeliever makes God a liar in not believing, 1 John 5.10, 11, 12. And whether
Mr. Owen has dealt faithfully, or fraudulently with the Word of God, in
leaving out the first part of that Record (as once before he left out, God has
given us eternal life) running into that fault, which more groundlesly he
called the trick of the old Serpent in T. M. and put the name of an Impostor
upon him for, I leave it to the Reader to judge. As for his

3. That no Reprobate for whom Christ died not, It shall be granted him, when
he has proved what he here begs, viz. That there is any such Reprobate, for
whom as fallen in Adam, Christ never died. His

4. That the command of believing in Christ given to All, is sufficiently
spoken to. It, with all conditions, or necessary conducements thereto are
required of all those to whom the Word is preached. Amongst which necessaries,
the believing Christ's Death to be for them, we have showed to be one. Therefore
I shall say no more here to it, but view what he says to a second Argument, viz.

That Doctrine that fills the mind of men with fears and scruples, whether they
ought to believe or no, etc. To which he tells us. 1. That doubts and scruples,
may either rise from a doctrine it self in its own nature, giving cause
thereto, to those who perform their duty rightly; or from corruption and
unbelief, setting up it self against the truth of Christ. I answer, It Is
corruption and unbelief, setting up it self against the truth of Christ in the
Gospel, that makes men hold forth the Particularity of Christ's Death as being
undergone only for the Elect, and the Doctrine it self gives occasions and
causes of scruple to men, in this, that men seeing their sinfulness, and
looking upon God, but according to what this doctrine presents of him to them,
they are wholly uncertain whether the Mediator was sent for them or not, and so
whether God be an object of faith fit for them. 2. He tells us that objection
supposes, That a man is bound to believe, that Jesus Christ dyed by the
appointment of God for him in particular, before he believe in Christ Jesus;
and that men that are of that persuasion of the restraint of the Death of
Christ to the Elect, may scruple whether they ought to believe or not, which he
says, is to involve our selves into a plain contradiction; for according to
Scripture, for a man to be persuaded, that Christ dyed for him in particular,
is the highest improvement of faith, including a sense of the spiritual love
of God shed abroad into our hearts; the top of the Apostles consolation, Romans
8.34. and the bottom of his joyful assurance, Gal. 2.20. so that we require
that a man do believe before he do believe and (suppose) that he cannot
believe, and shall exceedingly fear whether he ought to do so, except he
believe before he believe. To this I answer, That for a man to be persuaded
that Christ dyed for him, is no where made the highest improvement of faith:
but only that faith by the belief of this has been improved (and so may be) to
highest pitches: the soul that perceives, see and minds the love of God,
therethrough commended, so as to be drawn to God thereby, abiding therein may
grow up to great assurance therein; and find matter of exceeding great
nourishment unto eternal life: But it follows not, that because from that
believers have sprung up to such assurance of eternal life, as in the greatest
trials and temptations to trust in him for it, and make their boast of God
(which is the highest improvement of faith) That the bare believing that Christ
dyed for them, is the faith of full assurance. Some of the Israelites from
beholding the great power and goodness of God to them, in delivering them out
of Egypt, and bringing them over the red Sea, etc. were led to follow God with
a full heart, and to be silled with a full persuasion that they should be
brought into Canaan and possess it; but it followed not thence, that the belief
or knowledge that God so delivered them, was the faith of full assurance of
entering into Canaan, by all that knew that they were thence delivered. So Paul
was lead with confidence to trust in God for future deliverance, by this, that
he had delivered him; and yet its not ever true, that he that believes that God
delivered him from one danger, is confident he will from another; much less
That that belief in all that so believe (yea or in any) is the confidence that
he will deliver from another. 2. Whereas he asks if it include not a sense of
the spiritual love of Christ; I answer, That where the Death and Resurrection
of Christ are opened to the heart by the Holy Ghost, there the love of God is
shed abroad into the heart also; but not wherever this proposition is believed,
viz. Christ dyed for me: many a man believes that, and yet sees not into the
glory of it, nor the depth of goodness held forth in it, and so has not the
love of God therethrough shed into his heart; yet the minding God in this, is
the way to meet with the holy Ghosts displaying that love. Many Israelites
believed that God brought them out of Egypt, 2 Pet. 1.9.
that had not such a view of his power and love therein (or at least, like them
that forget that they were purged from their old sins, forgot what they had
seen) as to be lead to confidence in God for the future by it. 3. Whereas he
says, " By this a man must believe before he believe; What strange thing is
that with reference to diverse acts of believing? did not he himself say, that
we must have a faith of reliance and recumbence in Christ, and before that too
believe many truths of the Gospel before we can believe that Christ dyed for
us? so that there is believing before believing, and believing before believing
again, and yet he counts that absurd in us, when we say only, we must believe
the word of God to be true, before we can by it be led to believe in God; we
must believe Gods goodwill to usward, and a medium provided for us by whom to
go to God, before we can be persuaded to go to him by faith, whom otherwise we
look upon as angry and dreadful, ready to consume us. We cannot put our
confidence in his blood, and there through rise up to assurance of eternal
life, except we first be persuaded that he shed his blood for us; So long as we
doubt whether he be a Mediator for us or no, and whether he has given himself
to ransom us from death, we shall doubt whether God will accept us or no, or
whether he hare us from eternity or not, and whether we have any thing to do to
take encouragement from the blood of Christ to approach him, because we know
not we have any right unto it. Nor can Master Owen, nor all the world beside to
help him, make it appear to be otherwise, but that the soul will question
whether it may expect salvation from God, or betrust it self with God, so long
as it knows not but he hates it, and Christ has never done any thing with him
for it.

3. He denies, That a persuasion, that it was Gods will that Christ should die
for him in particular, neither is, nor can be necessary that a sinner be drawn
to believe, because other grounds will do it without. The consequence of this,
is, that many things were spoken unnecessarily by the Apostles, Act. 3.26.
as when Peter says, Christ was sent to turn every one of them from their
iniquities. And Paul that the grace of God reconciling the world, 2 Cor. 5.19,
20. and 6.1.
was to them, Corinthians, to persuade them to be reconciled. That he preached
to the Corinths in the first place, that Christ dyed for our sins, 1 Cor. 15.2,
3. And so all those general phrases that include men's particulars; But let us
see what other grounds he gives, viz. That it is the duty of sinners, as such,
to believe, Math. 11.28. Isa. 55.1. To believe, in what? in the blood of
Christ, as Romans 3.25? Then it supposes it shed for them all, and so its a truth
according to the Gospell-declaration: but denying the extent of his Death, how
can he make it out, that sinners as such ( A quatenus ad omne valet
consequentia.
which reaches to All sinners) ought to believe in Christ? What have sinners,
if not Elect, to do with Christ? besides, he had said before, they must be
sinners so and so convinced and qualified, before they are to be called upon to
believe in Christ. And I fear he will upon second thoughts say, that those
Scriptures hold forth, that sinners, not as such, but as so qualified with
thirsting after Christ and being weary, etc. are there required to believe; but
many a soul is hereby put upon doubting, whether it be Elected, or so convinced
and thirsty, etc. as is required, and so whether God be not an enemy to it from
eternity, and so whether it has cause of trusting in him. 2. The command of
God, John 3.23. That shows it to be its duty, if it could be proved to extend
to it, for that says, That we believe in his name, and a soul may more justly
doubt whether that We reach to it, seeing they that deny the extent of Christ's
Death and teach it to doubt of it, use such applicatives as We to oppose an
Universality, and to signify but the Elect and Church, etc. This therefore yet
leaves the soul to doubt whether it may hope in him for salvation, especially
being told that these things God sends to men indefinitely, that the Elect
only might be brought to him; he has no goodwill to any other, and that its
Elect it knows not, commands to believe while men are taught to doubt whether
the object to be believed in (as such) pertains to them, can give no more
security from doubting, then the building with one hand and pulling down with
another secures the building from falling.

3. " The threats against unbelief. That indeed does as much as the threat for
not keeping the Law, fills the soul with terror on every side, while it hears
that God commands more to believe then have cause so to do, and threatens them
for not believing, and yet gives them nothing to induce them to it; no evidence
of his goodwill to them to draw them to believe: this may fill them with hard
thoughts of God, representing him to them like one that bids another eat, or
else he will kill him, but yet gives him no meat to feed on, no evidence of his
goodness that may induce him to hope and trust in him.

4. " The alsufficiency of the blood of Christ to save all believers. This may
make the soul say; O how happy are they that do believe, and that have his
blood to drink, for its able to save them, but as for me I know not whether it
belong to me or not, or whether one drop of it was shed for me, and so how I
can lean upon it: I hear its not sufficient to save any that it was not shed
for, not for want of inward worth in it, but because its not for them, and I
may be one of them for ought I know.

4.5. The promise of life upon believing, and the assured salvation of all
believers without exception. These two are of the same nature with the former;
only the soul has this to except. Its not every believer, for many fall away
in time of temptation, having no root in them, as my faith cannot have if I
know not that Christ dyed for me, and so grow not upon Gods love therein
evidenced to me. The soul cannot so believe as to love God (and so but with a
dead faith) unless it believe his love first. It may see all its endeavors to
believe, and to rest on God, to be but fleshly strivings out of self
principles, and at the best it argues Gods love but from its own believing,
which it may justly question, the heart being deceitful, and he a fool that
trusts for it for evidencing his condition. This is but a promise and an
assurance of thriving to all that eat duly of a meat, which it knows not
whether it may or can duly eat or not; for to eat the flesh, and drink the
blood of Christ, and so to believe on them; is when the soul beholding the love
of God and Christ in his Death and sacrifice commended to it, does gather
boldness and encouragement to love and cast it self upon God, and so grows up
into the full assurance of peculiar love to him, even to eternal life; without
the knowledge of love to the soul first, it can but at highest come to this: It
may be I am one that God loves, and perhaps not; well, I will leave thinking
about it, and tyring my self with thoughts (if I can) and let it alone, I must
submit when all is done to be disposed to Heaven or Hell by him; which indeed
is a condition most sit and needful for the Gospel to be preached to, but is
far from faith in God which works by Love, and is justifying. These things, The
call to believe, the command, threatening, promise, etc. are good evidences that
the ransom is given and accepted for All, and there is good provision in
Christ for them (God never using to call men to any ordinance that he appointed
not for them) and coming with this they may encourage thee to believe on, and
love him that gave his Son for thee to believe on. And this (employed by them)
is that declaration, that good tidings to sinners, that indeed draws them into
believe through the spirits working in them, or else if they turn their backs
upon it, renders them thoroughly guilty; when they shall say in their hearts, O,
what did God for me! and what cause had I to believe, and to have stayed upon
him, but I refused it! As the Israelites in Egypt were indeed sinners, for not
believing when God had done so much for them to engage them to it. His
conclusion then under this head is false, viz. That those are enough to remove
all doubts, and fears, much less (which I would rather urge against it) are
they sufficient to encourage and imbolden the heart and frame it to believe;
but more especially is that false that follows in him viz. That those are All
that the Scripture holds out to that purpose. It holds out others, as we have
noted from Acts 3.26. and 13 37. 1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6. but of this he can take no
notice, they are nothing for his purpose. I could give him back here some of
his own expressions, as that in page 283. That if pride and error had not taken
too much possession of men's minds, they could not so far deny what they read
in plain texts of Scripture (as if they had never seen them) to maintain their
corrupt and false opinions. But he answers further.

4. That that persuasion which asserts the certainty of the Death of Christ to
All believers, and, 2. That affirms the command of God, and call of Christ to
be infallibly declarative of that duty which is required of the person
commanded and called, which if it be performed will be assuredly acceptable to
God. 3. That holds out purchased, free grace, to all distressed, burdened
consciences whatsoever, and 4. Discovers a fountain of blood alsufficient to
purge all the sin of every man in the World that will use the appointed means
for coming unto it; that doctrine cannot possibly be the canse of any doubt or
scruple in the hearts of convinced burdened sinners, whether they ought to
believe or no. I answer, that this is in a manner the same with the former, and
there answered. I will add this touching the second particular, that its
ambiguous, whether by the person called, he mean, by man in the preaching of
the Gospel, or by God effectually, for many are of that mind that God calls not
nor holds forth Gospel to all that the Ministers declare it to, but only to
the Elect; and if he be of that mind too, its not so undoubtedly true to the
hearer as he would make it, that God requires what the Minister does, because
they may be divided; the command and call may be intended only to some, that
the hearer knows not whether he be one of or not, though the Preacher out of
ignorance direct it to all; and this may beget much doubting in the hearer
whether its Gods voice to or him no. Again he supposes more in this Doctrine
he pleads for in two last particulars, then is in it; as that it holds forth
purchased free grace to all distressed burdened consciences; there are many
among the Heathen have their consciences accusing them, yea and sometimes like
furies burthening them; there are many that profess Christ, conscious of
heinous sins, and are ready to despair, and make away themselves for them;
there are many burdened that they can no more walk up to the righteousness,
and labor to stablish righteousness to themselves, and cannot be settled. Will
Master Owen say that their doctrine holds forth purchased free grace to all
these? that I deny, for it says he purchased free grace only for the Elect: and
that all such are Elected, I suppose he will be put to it to prove; seeing many
such go on in their sins notwithstanding their burdens, and many seek to put
them off, and sometimes do stifle them by worldly employments and vanities, and
many actually despair, and make away themselves. If he say he means not such,
the matter is where it was, the distressed conscience may yet doubt (and is apt
so to do) whether it may not be one of those in the issue. As for that in the
fourth, that there is an alsufficiency in the blood of Christ for all that will
use the appointed means, etc. I will not stand to tell him (though I might)
that his speech here is like one of them that in us he uses to tax withholding
Free Will, which seeing he declaims against, I hope he will be so charitable as
to allow us the like liberty of speaking, without fastening upon us that Odium.
But I say, (to pass that) I fear he will be put to it again to prove this also
by his doctrine, seeing many are willing to run to Ordinances, and do any thing
to have ease, and comfort, and yet afterward forget that they were purged from
their old sins, and having escaped the pollutions of the world, and walked in
the means appointed for a while, afterward embrace the present world, and fall
off again, which their doctrine intimates, they must do, and will, if not
elected, or else never meet with any thing of God to purpose, though they
should continue attending the means to the last gasp. I fear he will not say
Christ had any Free grace for these; and yet all weary, heavy laden sinners,
one and other Christ calls to him, yea, and the fools and scorners too, the
wicked, unrighteous, and who not? to listen to his Doctrine for salvation. So
that these are but fair flourishes, that being looked into, wind up only in
this, Though ye be never so much troubled and weary, and never so diligent now
in the use of means, yet forasmuch as your Election is unknown to us, we cannot
say that there is any thing purchased by Christ for you, or that the blood of
Christ is sufficient to purge you, because we yet know not whether it was shed
for you; whatever inward worth it has in it, yet it being shed only for the
Elect, he may not be able to save you by it, nor unless ye be elected will all
your use of means profit you, if you should continue in them. And so all
depends yet (even its future use of means too) upon that hidden purpose; and
till that be known, whether there be any cause for it to rely on Christ, and
love him, and God in him, he knows not; so that all these answers avail him
nothing; therefore he does well to leave his answering, and fall to querying,
viz.

What that is, that according to our persuasion, men are bound to believe when
they first know that Christ died for them? I answer, They are to believe, that
Christ is their lawful Lord, and able to save them, and that they ought to live
to him, also that God is good and loving to them (which is not a thing known
beforehand, (as he says) but in and through the knowing Christ to have died
for them, as the Cause, though it be before the Effect, yet in ordins
cognoscendi, it may be through, and in order of nature after the knowledge of
the effect) which also the Spirit will there through be now glorifying, and
presenting to the soul, (they attending the doctrine of Christ, and following
him therein) till it raise them up to full assurance, as it did the Apostles
Yea, upon the knowing of the death of Christ for them, its to believe that God
delights not in their death, but is ready, in and through Christ to save them;
and will do it, they (as they herein see good ground, and as also they are by
the Gospel that declares it obliged to do) waiting on him, and trusting in him.
Now whereas he says, That they cannot, there being no fruits of his Death but
what are common to All, which may be Damnation as well as Salvation. That's very
untrue. 1. Damnation is not the fruit of his Death, but of men's abusing the
mercies they have by his Death, and their refusing to listen to him, and look
to him for salvation. 2. The fruits of his Death in them, and to them that come
to him, are washing, purging, sanctifying, giving in remission, peace, joy,
spirit, and life everlasting. So that, that is either an ignorant mistake, or a
wilful slander; and yet, as its true, that some men may so abuse the Doctrine
of Christ's Death for them, or so disserve him, that his Death for them may be
an aggravation of their punishment and misery, so in that sense. As the fruit
of Gods Presence with the Israelites that led them out of Egypt into the
Wilderness, was to them that believed (as they all had reason to have done)
protection, and guidance into Canaan, and possessing them thereof; but to
others that (causlesly) rebelled (through their own folly) destruction: So is
Christ, and the Gospel of Christ, a Savor of life to life in them that
receive, but of death to death in them that reject him. So that, as he answered
impertinently, and inconcludently for himself before, so he answers untruly,
and irrationally here for us. But I leave that also.

From this he comes to tell us, That there are two things that both persuasions
pretend to, the exaltation of Gods free Grace, and the Merit of Christ. To the
first of these he plays the Rhetorician, more then either Logician, or Divine.
He asks what that free grace is. And I answer, This, That God has given his
Son to die for All, and through him tenders salvation freely in the Gospel to
All, Whoever will, let him come, he is ready to receive him, rejecting or
reprobating none from it to destruction, but for their rejecting his Truth and
goodness made known to them. His Queries, Whether it stand in Election,
effectual Vocation, Justification, Sanctification, Redemption in the blood of
Christ, (If by Redemption in Christ's blood, he means the actual setting their
spirits at liberty from sin and corruption, and from the power of Satan's
delusions, to worship and live to God (effected by the sprinkling of his blood
upon them, Heb. 9.13, 14) as is there intended, Rev. 5.9.) miss the cushion.
Though Free Grace stands in all these things, which we maintain as well as
they, yet the extent of it, we say not stands in them, but in giving his
Elect (one in whom his Election and purposes all are) to the death for All, and
setting him up as a medium, to whom coming, any of them may (and in coming
shall) find Justification, Sanctification, Redemption, and what ever follows.
which the Gospel holds forth freely to All, as ready in him for them, and to be
dispensed by him to them upon believing, which so held forth is the medium also
of his effectual calling. Whereas he asks, If it be not universally a figment
of our own brains, or a new name for the old Idol, Freewill. I answer, That it
is not the first, the authority of Gods Word acquits us, which we dare not for
all the Sophisms he has brought against it, renounce, to cleave to that only
Elect, which he, and the Elders traditions have created, and to which they bow
the knew of their faith, more then to Gods Word. And if no device of our own,
then no new name. For that Idol of Freewill, which we no more adore, if so much
as they, who substracting the declaration of Gods good Will to men as
pertaining to them (the medium appointed by him for his power to work in to
uninthral men, and empower them to believe) do yet call upon men to believe and
get Christ, as if they had power of themselves to get him, and to believe on
him, thundering damnation upon them that believe not, though they say God never
gave any power to them, setting men upon an endeavoring by their own power,
and approving their such endeavors, as the products of Gods Grace (as the
Pharisee did Luke 18.10, 11.) though they have not declared that to them, as
pertaining to them. We attribute no more to Will then the Scripture affords.
Its merely with our expressions suitable to the Scriptures that they quarrel
at. As when we say, God would have done this or that, but they would not; they
will not come to Christ for life; they did not choose the fear of the Lord.
These kind of expressions, many when they hear from us (as if they were so
wholly taught the Fear of God by the Precepts of m^^, or were so destitute of
the fear of the Lord as not to mind whose expressions those have been) by and
by they cry out; What have men free will then? You set up Freewill now: as if
the expressions of our Lord and Savior were judged dangerous and heretical by
them, and not fit for his servants scarce to mention; but these are of those
(...) of whom Paul speaks, from whom we have need to pray God to deliver us.
We know no power or freedom of will that men have to good, that God has not
given them. And we think it less derogation to his grace, and more agreeable to
the Scriptures, to say, that God in his workings with men, gives them liberty
and power to make use of, and listen to the means of light and life afforded
them, and that when he in those means works and convinces, moves at and strives
with their hearts, he gives them (in those strivings and convincements) power
and liberty, to see and mind, and acknowledge what they could not do before,
and in such acknowledgement yet to attend the means and grope further after
him, if perhaps he may (when he has unraveled them of themselves) enable them
to believe; and that they wink with the eye, refuse and reject the means put
within their reach and suited to their infirmity; or if they do attend them,
yet that when they meet with reproof and convincement, they refuse to see or
take notice of what God shows them, and to hear the inward voices of spirit
that speak to them, rebel against the light, and pull away the shoulder,
quenching, smothering, and imprisoning the operations of Gods Spirit and truth,
and that for these things he justly rejects them: then to say that God does
nothing for men, gives no power to them, requires all that they had in Adam
(for which the Scripture affords them not one title of proof) calls upon them to
do things to which he gives no power or means, and yet condemns them for ever
not for doing them, and yet such are M. Owens expressions: as when he says, We
make God to propound life upon such a condition as he knows they cannot perform
without him, and yet in it, he will do nothing for them, he will not give them
it. Which is a great mistake for want of believing the truth of God recorded:
for when he bids men listen to him, and their souls shall life, if some refuse
to listen, and others when convincements come tending to the saving them out of
their sinful condition, willingly turn from them and will not abide them, nor
fall down under them, and so not listen to his inward convictions of them, but
run away from him that would not be wanting in their further listening to him
to quicken them up to believe, and so to gather them; shall we slander God, and
say now, because these never come to that believing, that he would not bestow
upon them that condition? he knows that they cannot believe of themselves, and
he will give them no faith. Because they cannot believe of themselves, follows
it therefore that they receive no power from him by which they might attend
upon the means in which he uses to beget faith, and give it to men? shall he be
said to deny them faith, when they refuse to listen to him that would gather
them to the faith? says not he himself that he would have gathered Jerusalems
children, and they would not? was not this gathering them, a bringing them by
faith into himself (as the Chickens under the Hens wings) for safety? was not
their refusal in not soberly attending to him, but shutting their ears against
his sayings? shall we say he refused to give that that he chides them for
refusing to receive? Come forth the best of you all, and prove that God has
not given you in his workings upon you, power to have sought him and attended
to him better then ye have done, and then I will say your reasoning for the
wicked is good, that he set salvation before them upon a condition that they
could not have without his gift, and yet he refused to give it them, otherwise
his after-comparison [in which he says, We make God like a man tendering a blind
man a thousand pounds, if he will open his eyes which he cannot] is but an
inept one, for God complains of men for shutting their eyes, and otherwhere
bids them but look with their blind eye-holes, that they might see his word
that he sends giving light to them that attend upon it, being never so blind.
But enough to these Rhetorical Flourishes, and Rabshekah like language against
the glorious grace of God, and Scripture-truth, for which I am persuaded one
way or other, serius aut citius, God will rebuke him. What he says about the
Gentiles, is before answered, Where he gives less he looks for less again;
obedience to his truth being acceptable to him, and rebellion against him
detestable, whether in more or less; nor will it be an excuse to them that they
had no more, when they have volunrarily put away and rejected that more that
God sent them, I mean the Gospel, or imprisoned and abused that less they had.
And yet I am persuaded, many of them shall rise up in judgment with their
less, against many amongst us that have more, he lets them know and perceive
more then they acknowledge, and gives them more of his goodness and kindness
then they answer, so that when he pleads with them they shall have no excuse,
Romans 1.18, 19, 20, 21.

That our Doctrine everts the whole Covenant of distinguishing grace, is
another untruth; we hold and prove that the Death of Christ seals and ratifies
it, and we think the free grace of God freely made it, and powerfully pulls men
into it as he pleases; holding it forth to men largely, and ready to enter into
it any that will hear him, Isa. 55.2, 3, 4 Whereas he asks, Did that ever do
good to any as to salvation which is common to all? he speaks as one despising
the riches of the bounty of God that leads men to repentance, because of their
wickedness that are not lead by it, teaching others also wickedly to blaspheme
it. The Gospel that's common to good and bad, does good to many, being the
power of God to salvation to them that believe. The Death of Christ, yea and
the patience of God that's common to all, is effectual for good to salvation to
many, and shall be to any that are led to repentance by it. The grace of God
that is (...), to all men saving, teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and to live godlily, righteously and soberly, etc. 1 it. 2.11, 12.
He asks further, If they be not the two properties of the grace of God, that
it be Discriminating and effectual. He should have proved rather then have
moved questions only, We say it is both effectual in all that receive it
rightly, and Discriminates them both in privilege and disposition from all
those that reject it, and so does this that's extended in Christ to All men.
Besides the grace of God in the Death of Christ discriminates men from fallen
Angels its (...) not (...). If he say all they for whom it is, and to whom it
is extended in any degree, are made to receive it effectually to life eternal,
we wait for his proof for it; but surely Paul intimates otherwise, 2 Cor. 6.1.
These that follow are slanders, viz. That we make the bestowing of Faith no
part of free grace, or at least leave room to free will to have the best share
in the work of salvation, even of believing it self, which is as untrue or
more, then that Naaman had the best share in the work of his healing, because
he washed in the river Jordan; or the blind man, Joh 9. in his receiving his
eyesight, because he went at Christ's bidding to the pool of Siloam, and washed
there; would that be good Doctrine, that Because upon the doing those trivial
things God gave them healing, therefore not God and Christ, but themselves were
to have the greatest share in the glory of it? Apage has impietates
calumniosissimas, of which nature is that too that follows, That this Assertion
brings Roprobates to be the object of free grace, and denies the free grace of
God to the Elect, makes it Universal to all, but ineffectuall to the Elect,
all to have a share in it, and none to be saved by it; which are all as gross
untruths against us, as he could have invented.

But then he asks, " In what point their Doctrine makes it not free grace?" I
answer, in that ye debar the greatest numbers of any liberty and possibility of
coming to partake of it, ye make it not free to or for all, but bound it up to
some few. We know in some regard ye make it free, that is, in point of any
merit of it in them to whom ye say it is, but not free for any to come to, and
hope in, as pertaining to them (nay for none so without much fored one by them
to evidence that it belongs to them) but he says, He calls not that grace that
goes to hell? No sure, nor we neither, nor is that goodness or patience that
goes to hell, or Gospel that goes to hell; but I hope we may say, they that
having free grace extended, and held forth to them, not receiving it, or
receiving it in vain, or turning it into wantonness, may go to Hell, as well as
they that abuse Gods goodness, patience, Gospel, and yet none of these things
abused go to hell; So Psalm. 139, 8. Jonas 2.3.
except in a sense to the disordered dismal conditions of men, to bring them
from the nethermost hell in that sense, as David sometime speaks, Psalm.
86.13. and 6.3. I can but wonder that wise men should be so infatuated as to
think there is any weight in such their sorry expressions: but for not
enlarging it to all he says, " Is it in their power to enlarge it? No Sir, not
further then it is, but its in your power surely to let it alone to have its
own bounds that God has given it, and so to speak largelyer of it then you do.
"We know he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, in point of more
abundant striving with men and compelling them, and in receiving whom he
pleases (even the worst of sinners coming to him) and hardens and gives over
whom he will, and we know too by the same authority that he is good to all, and
free for all to look to, would have all to be saved and come to know the truth,
delights not in the Death of the wicked, but rather that he should turn and
live, and that Christ has given himself a ransom for all. Lets not have the
Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, neither with respect of persons nor of places
of Scripture, either let us believe all or reject all. He says further, "
Should he throw the childrens bread to Dogs? Nor Sir. nor yet be wiser and
holier then God, to shun his words out of pretense of service to him, nor call
that common that God has cleansed, esteem any as Dogs but such as turn again,
and bite against the favors showed them, and are scorners of the mercies
tendered them, or deceitful workers that bark against Gods truths, and are
ready to bite too if power be given them, otherwise take heed that you deny not
free grace to ungodly and sinners under opinion that they are Dogs to whom
mercy is not to be tendered. He says further, that they believe that the grace
of God, works faith in all to whom its extended. Yes, I believe that they are
readier to believe their own conceptions, for which they have no Scripture
proof, yea against diverse intimations of Scripture, then the plain
Scripture-expressions. For the New Covenant here again mentioned by him, I have
before expressed my self about it, I believe righter then that he can disprove
it. What follows are generally revilings of the truth of God, and despising the
grace extended to All as not worthy men's thanking God for it; a grace that does
no good, a sigment of our own making, etc. only he tells us he will pray for us
that we may have infinitely more of his love then is contained in effectual
Universal Grace and endeavor to keep people from being seduced by us. For the
first, We tell him its his unbelief of it makes it seem ineffectual to him,
Tit. 2.11, 12. and 3.4, 5.
but to such as believe it we we find it effectual both toward God and others,
and prove it an open door and way for our approaching to him for those more
especial things that all through unbelief receive not. For the second, I pray
God show him and his companions in doctrine how much they stand in peoples
light to hinder them from seeing that goodness by which they should be saved.
But what need he endeavor to keep me from being seduced, Seeing he thinks it
impossible for any that Christ dyed for, to be seduced, and all the rest must
perish? to to what end will he busy himself to prevent impossibilities? or
about them that God has hated from eternity?

What follows about Christ's merit, are but Rhetorical disparagements of the
grace of God as Universal, in which he frequently puts the ly, or brat of our
own brain, or some such like language upon Gods and his Apostles declarations,
for such are these, That Christ dyed for All, and is the propitiation for the
sins of the whole world, etc. To which we shall give no other Answer (they
being not Arguments but frothy flourishes) but remembering him that brought no
railing accusations, refer it to the Lord to rebuke Satan the adversary of
Gods free grace and goodness. He applands afterward his own opinion, and casts
dust upon the truth, representing his own in these four following propositions.

1. "That Christ dyed only for the Elect. 2. That all those for whom Christ
dyed are eternally saved. 3. That Christ purchased all saving grace from them
(he means for All, and that so, as to be effectually made over to All for whom
he dyed. 4. Christ sends the means and reveals the ways of life to all those
"for whom he died, I suppose he means in the declaration of the Gospel to them
in this their life time.
If M. Owen can prove any one of these to be true from Scripture (for in all
this his book he has failed of it) then I will be bound to give up the cause
to him, and say that he has done more then all his brethren could yet attain
to.

The Assertions he lays down as ours, are diverse of them mere slanders; as
that we say, 1. Most of them for whom Christ dyed are damned, which is more
then we know or dare determine, not knowing what a numerous increase there may
be of believers in the last Ages of Christ's reign, nor being able fully to
comprehend those sayings, 1 Pet. 3.19. and 4.6. 2. That he purchased not any
saving grace for them that he dyed for. 3. That he ratified and sealed not any
Covenant of grace with any federates. 4. Has no intention to redeem his
Church, etc. as if he had learned to practice that evil principle, Calumniare
andacter, haerebit aliquid.

His last disquisition is about Gospel-consolation, Whether persuasion gives
the most? before which he propounds some considerations, as

1. " That all true Evangelicall consolation belongs only to believers: but I
think this at first dash is unsound; for I hope poor sad souls, that sit in
distress, and through the sight of their sins dare not believe (nay prehaps are
in despair) have nothing in the Gospel to comfort them, and induce them to
believe.

2. That to make out consolation to them to whom it is not due, is as great a
crime as to withhold it from them to whom it is, I grant that both are crimes.

3. That T. M. attempt to set forth the Death of Christ so as All might be
comforted, is a proud attempt. I can say this for him of my own hearing from
his mouth, that he is clear in that, for I heard him say long since that the
title was not of his appointing, but the Printers or some other above for him.

4. That Doctrine that holds out consolation to unbelievers from the Death of
Christ, is a crying Peace, peace, where God says there is no peace. That's true,
if by unbelievers he means men as such and so persisting, otherwise it may not
be true, as is noted to the first: we endeavor not to comfort unbelievers in
their unbelief (further then to let them see there is ground for their
repentance) but as the Gospel was first preached to Abraham and his Family
before the Law, so we preach the Death of Christ for all, as a medium to their
better convincement of their unbelief and impenitence, and an argument to
persuade them to Faith. (For how shall they indeed be convinced that its their
sin not to believe, or be persuaded to believe, except they have God set forth
as a meet Object for them to believe on?) And if they persist in their
disobedience, we have in the Gospel-Declaration, Acts 10.36. Luke 10.5, 6.9.11,
12.
that that will strike terror and amazement into them for their unbelief. It
was the preaching of Christ, and so of his Apostles (whom we desire to follow)
first, to preach peace to the world, and exhort them not to rest without it,
and in so doing, we preach peace to none but whom its to be preached to. God
first hangs out a white Flag of Reconciliation and Peace in Christ, before he
holds out his red of Judgment and Indignation, which follows where that peace
is despised, Mat. 10.12, 13, 14, 15. Having premised these things, he lays down
these four Conclusions.

1. That the extending the Death of Christ to an universality in Object, cannot
give the lest ground of consolation to them whom God would have to be comforted
by the Gospel.

2. That the denying the efficacy of the Death of Christ toward them for whom
he died, cuts the nerves and sinews of all strong consolation, such as is
proper for the believer to receive, and the Gospel to give.

3. That there is nothing in the restraining Christ's Death to the Elect, that
in the least measure debars consolation from them to whom it is due.

4. That the Doctrine of the effectual Redemption of the sheep of Christ by the
blood of the Covenant, is the true solid foundation of all durable consolation.

1. To confirm the first, He premises, That all Gospel-Consolation belongs
only to believers; which I have before showed to be untrue. The Gospel
propounds comfort also to souls ready to despair utterly, that they might
believe. And the best way to comfort such, is, to let them know that Christ
died for them, and that by opening to them (according to the
Scripture-affirmation) the extent of Christ's Death, and of Gods goodness
therein. Having propounded that, he nextly argues against its being of use to
believers, as that, (1.) No Scripture so propounds it. Which is untrue also;
for that in 1 John 2.2. does, as we have seen, for Mr. Owen confesses his
business there is to comfort believers, and the Apostle to that propounds
Christ as a Propitiation for the sins of the whole world; and not only of us
the believers to be comforted. See what I have said to it largelier, cap. 3.
lib. 4. He says further, (2.) That no comfort can accrue to them from that
which is common to those, 1. That shall perish to eternity, Isa. 51.13. Psa.
100.2. 1 Pet. 4 19. Ps. 31.15. and 103.18.22. etc.
2. That God would not have comforted, And 3. that stand in open rebellion
against Christ; And 4. That hear not of Christ. This also is disproved, De
facto, from the forementioned place, as was showed before upon it. Besides; The
Creation is common to them All that he mentions, and yet that's of Consolation
to the believer; and so Gods Governing all things, the Resurrection, Judgment,
etc. Gods Presence with the Israelites in the Cloud, was ground of exceeding
comfort to those of them that believed, and yet it was common to them with the
rest; and to them that believed not hastened their destruction.

" He bids men (3.) consider by their own experience. But who speaks he to
here, and whose experience will he take in this matter? Them of his own mind?
they believe it not, and therefore cannot experiment its good. If them that
believe it, they will many of them say, That they have met with great
consolation by it, and have been brought through it to believe, and walk both
holily and hopefully with God. Yea, some in their agonies upon deathbed have
met with great comfort in it, and dyed trinmphantly. But of these things Mr.
Owen is no competent Judge, he being no believer of it. Verily they have been
carried above all other, those considerations that reason suggests (from others
perishing Christ's Death notwithstanding) knowing that what ever befalls others
its for their folly and unbelief, Heb. 4.2. 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4.5.11.
of which they see this Doctrine gave no cause, nor gives any (but for faith)
to them. No more then the consideration of Gods like dealing with our fathers
in giving to them the Gospel, and like Gospel Ordinances, in a sort, as to us,
and yet their perishing for their unbelief, lusting, and abusing them, is an
argument to discourage the Churches that have them now from believing. Men
being led through the sight of Gods Grace in the Death of Christ to trust in
him, they fear not wrath, but rejoice in mercy, and in the hope of the glory to
be revealed upon them. They see that in it for them, that (contrary to his
reasonings) draws them to believe whatever others do that listen more to their
reasons, then to God in it. Caleb saw enough in Gods Presence to comfort them
against discouragements from the strongest of enemies, notwithstanding that
(yea, with never the less confidence because) many amongst whom he walked, were
(for not trusting in it) consumed by it. But he says, A soul may object. Oh,
but Christ is not a propitiation for all sins. To which we can tell him, yes,
except that sin against the holy Ghost. He has so far obtained redemption for
all other, that he can forgive them, yea will that his goodness and fullness of
redemption prevailing with them to submit to him. And in waiting on him in his
Gospel we can tell them too, that he will quicken them powerfully, bring them
out of their prison doors, take them in, etc. In hearing they shall live. So
that all that objection is but frothy.

2. To the second. That the extending Christ's Death cuts the nerves of all firm
consolation to believers (which we have already disproved) he endeavors further
to demonstrate thus. 1. Because it divides the impretration and application.
Answ. It conjoyns them both as to believers (the parties spoken of) most
firmly. We declare that whatever Christ has impetrated that's specially good,
he has impetrated it to be conferred upon the believers, and sealed the
Covenant made with them for ever. So that his after-reasoning there is vain,
and indeed he leaves it as pertaining to the believer (the thing propounded)
and applies the case to an unbelieving sinner. 2. He says, We divide the
Oblation and Intercession, and that makes against the believers consolation.
Answ. This is vain too, for we say, both these pertain to the believer. He ever
lives to make intercession for those that come to God by him. Sure Mr. Owen
has been a prevaricator, and did it so exactly, that he has not forgot to do
it yet. These two Considerations might rather make against unbelievers
continuing such, concerning whom we say, That Christ makes not so special
Intercession as for others. And that to them that fullness in Christ shall not
be applied or communicated. But this is beside the business, Amphoram instituit
and urceus exit. We affirm, and strongly maintain them both as to believers; to
which we also apply those two places cited by him, viz. Romans 8.^2.33, 34 and 1 John 2.2. And yet in both places, I conceive he strengthens their consolation,
from considering the general, as I have before noted. If he gave his Son up for
us All, how shall he not with him give us (us the Elect of God, the Called
according to purpose) all things. Is he so good to all? how specially good to
us then that are made his friends and children? But we deny, that those further
things (as there spoken of at least) are attributable to all that Christ died
for, one and other, but only to believers. 3. He says, Our denying the
procurement of Faith, Grace, Holiness, the whole intendment of the New
Coverant, cuts the nerves of believers consolation. We deny not that he obliged
his Father upon his Covenant, to glorify him, and bring in people to him
according to his own good will. But suppose we wholly denied it, what is this
against the consolation of believers that have faith already given them: we
granting and firmly holding it, that he is to wash, sanctify, lead and guide
them by his Spirit, and intercede for them for their perseverance unto glory,
and to mediate for them the performance of the new Covenant. Such sorry
mistakes I sometime hear out of Pulpits, in which men merely mistake
themselves, and slander us. His Queries are all impertinent, and to no purpose:
his Conclusions untrue, and against the comfort that this Doctrine affords.

3. In the third place, he endeavors to show that their Doctrine " hinders not
the consolation of Believers. To that I say, That he dyed for Believers,
hinders not their consolation that know themselves to be Believers: but that
that he dyed for such only, does them no good, it being contrary to the
Scriptures, and taking from them that Gospel that they should preach to others:
and also that motive that should lead them out to Charity toward All, and to
exhort them to prize and live to Christ; they not knowing to whom these things
appertain, or not knowing at least the Gospel-ground for them. I say also that
it hinders men that yet believe not, from seeing that Christ dyed for them, and
so from believing in him. He says, " Many experiment the contrary. To which I
say but this, That I have not yet met with any that I could perceive to be
such, or to prove themselves such by the limiting of the Death of Christ.
Indeed God may and sometimes does work by indefinite propositions, as That he
dyed for sinners, for the unjust, ungodly etc. these sayings being his own, and
the subjects of them in themselves being of equavalent extent with Universals;
so that though they do not actually lead out their conceptions and thoughts to
the Universal extent, yet indeed virtually they do, while the Soul is drawn in
by considering his Death as propounded to, or affirmed of men as under such a
condition as is universal. For his reasoning, Christ dyed for Believers, I am
such a one, therefore for me; though the Major is true, yet the Minor cannot
well be affirmed of those that know not otherwise before, that Christ dyed for
them (and if they do this medium is needless to them) for what Faith has a
man before he believe that Christ dyed for him, by which he may know and
believe that Christ dyed for him? not a faith that works by love, because
that springs from an apprehension of Gods love, for we cannot love him but as
we behold him loving us first. Not a Faith by grace, because while men doubt or
know not that Christ dyed for them, they know not the grace that the Gospel
holds forth to move them to believing; seeing according to the
Gospel-Declaration all grace runs by and through Christ's mediation. And if not
such a Faith then the Major and Minor agree not; for they will not say that
Christ dyed for All that have a dead Faith, or conceits of faith wrought by
self-endeavor, seeing men may have those and yet perish. So that this argument
has in it a great deal of deceit, and puts men upon many inconveniences to
prove the Minor, upon which all the grounds of their comfort stand. For upon
that act of their faith, Christ himself with all his death and mediation is
laid, that being the foundation they lay him upon, whereas those things as
asserted in the word, for them, and credited by them, should lay faith upon
him, and so themselves also upon him by faith. Whereas he says that a better
syllogism then this, He dyed for All men: I am a man, ergo, for me; I deny it:
For

1. This is a more immediate Divine Faith, as springing from, and being
bottomed upon the Word of God, as has been seen. 2. The Minor is more
conspicuous and evident. 3. The grace of God is more admired, to see that he
dyed for me while yet I am as other men, a sinner, then when by my industry I
think I am framed to believe; for then I look upon his love through something
found in me, in which I differ from others, which lifts me up above others,
looking upon them as not so framed, but the other abases and leads to love and
pity others, even sinners, that are as I. But oh the pride and vanity of man's
heart, that prefers such consolations as take in something of the creatures
frames with them, before those that have nothing but God to a naked creature to
spring up all his frames from pure love without him! How many are the
endeavors and strifts of men again and again to make out this proposition, I
am a Believer, while in the mean time they reject and believe not that love of
God to them as men and sinners, that should indeed in the receipt of it and the
Spirits setting it home, make them believers, and spring up all those frames
which they as it were by works of the Law endeavor after (and cannot that way
attain) that they might evidence themselves to be believers, and when they
think they have by much strift attained to believe, then those their strifts,
their faith as they suppose with all the signs that they have annexed to it,
are taken in together as the ground of their comfort and hope in God; yea, of
their belief that Christ was sent and dyed for them, which yet they are at a
loss in, questioning Gods love to them and their ground and cause of hoping in
him, as they see cause to question their own love to, and so by consequence
their own faith in him. A miserable way it is (God knows) that this Doctrine
leads multitudes into, while they either curiously pry into Gods secrets,
almost to destraction, or else look into themselves for fruits of faith, that
may evidence them to have faith and so their Election, and so right to Christ
and his Gospel, and all this before they can see that there is any thing in the
Gospel that is good news to them, or any love in God toward them that works
that Faith and those Fruits in its appearance, by which their Election should
be discerned by them.

4. The fourth thing he leaves, only desiring the Reader to peruse that place
of Romans 8.32, 33, 34. which I also commend to the Reader, that upon good
grounds knows himself a Believer, one in Christ, walking after the Spirit, and
not after the flesh; for to such it is written, and to their consolation, ver.
1.28, 29, 30, etc. and I say to such its a rich Mine of firm, lasting comfort,
consolation, joy, assurance, rest, peace, refreshment and satisfaction; no
place fuller or sweeter that I know of, and all springing from the
consideration of God as their friend and Father, justifying them, Christ that
dyed for them and rose again now interceding at Gods right hand for them, that
they may be one with Christ in privileges and glory, and have the New Covenant
fully performed to them. But if the Reader that believes desires to persuade
others to faith: or if he be one that knows not whether God has any goodwill
to him or no, and so is not yet by faith in Christ, that place will afford
little to him. But I desire him to read 1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6. that God wills All to
be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth, That there is one God, and
one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a
Ransom for All, etc. And if he believe that record of God, that testimony born
to him and his Son, he may therein see Gods good will to him and good ground
for him to seek him through Christ that gave himself a ransom for him, good
cause to Repent of all his evils against him, that is so well affected toward
him; good cause to leave his evil ways of grieving him, and live to him, and
love him that is so loving to him; good cause to hope in his mercy, and in that
hope to call upon him, and seek to enjoy more knowledge of him and experience
of his salvation, and good matter to hold forth to others for their conversion
and bringing in to Christ. None of all which their restrictive Doctrine (which
is Antichristian as it hinders the course of the Gospel of Christ, and keeps
men in ignorance of the grounds they have to repent, seek after, love and hope
in God, and not at all held forth in Romans 8.32.) can lead them to; for by it
none who yet believes not, and so knows not himself to be Elected, can see
any ground to believe in, live to, love, please or serve God, inasmuch as for
ought he knows he is from eternity an enemy to him, and hates him; but it will
lead him to go on resolutely in his way, and do what seems good to him, seeing
by that its undeniably true that if Christ dyed for him he cannot miscarry, if
otherwise, he must, do what he can, as has been noted; But let him that yet
doubts of Gods love to him reject that devised Doctrine that contradicts the
Scriptures, and letting alone the secrets of God (which pertain not to him yet
to know, nor shall hurt him if he attend and yield up to that that is revealed,
yea, shall be also profitably revealed to him if he submit to what is revealed,
Psalm. 25.14.) let him I say mind the record of God that he has given of his
Son, that he has given himself a Ransom for All, yea, and that God has given
us eternal life (even us whom he commands to believe in the name of his Son 1
Ioh. 3.23.) and this life is in his Son, he that has the Son has life, and he
that has not the Son has not life; thence shall he see both ground to believe
that God has given him eternal life, and put it into Christ, and also both
necessity and encouragement to believe on Christ, that in believing he may have
that life, even that eternal enjoyment of God in Christ, that will for ever
satisfy him and make him happy.

FINIS.
(...).

A Symphony of some Ancient Doctors of the Church, with the truth here
defended, added to show that it is no novelty of yesterdays standing, as some
are pleased to charge it.
Chrysostom in Joh. 1.29. (...).

Idem in Heb. 2.9. (...), etc.

Clemens Alexandrinus. Orat. ad Gentes. (...), etc.

Athanasius De incarnatione verbi Dei. (...), etc.

Et Paulo Post. (...).

Those sentences forealledged are in English thus.
Chrysostom upon Joh. 1.29. That Lamb (speaking of the Paschall Lamb or the
Lambs offered up in the Jewish sacrifices) never took away any one man's sins:
But this (that is Christ the Lamb of God) takes away the sins of the whole
world, for it being in great danger to be destroyed, he quickly freed it from
the wrath of God.

The same Author, upon Heb. 2.9. says thus. That by the grace of God he might
taste death for every one; not for the believers only, but also for the whole
world, for he dyed for All; but what if all believe not? yet he has performed
that which concerned him to do.

Clemens Alexand. Hear ye that are afar off, and hear ye that are nigh hand.
The Word is not hid from any, the Light is common, and shines unto All men.

Athanasius in his tractate about the Incarnation of the Word of God Now
forasmuch as the debt of All ought to be paid (for All ought to die) therefore
for that cause especially he came and sojourned here, and after the
manifestations of his Divinity by his works, it remained that he offer up a
sacrifice for All, delivering up his Temple (the Temple of his body) unto Death
for All, that he might discharge and free All from the old transgression.

And a little after in the same Tractate. There was need of Death, and it
behoved that Death should be endured for All, that the Debt due from all might
be satisfied; wherefore the Word for that it could not die (for it was
immortal) took to itself a body capable of dying; that he might offer that as
his own for All, and that he suffering for All by reason of his conjunction
with that, he might destroy him that has the power of Death, to wit, the
Devil.

Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus (...). (...).

Theophylact in Johan. 6.51. (...).

August. in Joh. 3.14, 15. Serpens aneus in ligno positus venena vivorium
serpentum superavit, and Christus in cruce suspensus and mortuus, antiqua
diaboli venena restinxit, and omnes qui ab eo percussi fuerant liberavit.

Idem in Psalm. 69. Judas abjecit pretium quo ipse vendidit Christium, and non
agnovit pretium quo ipse a Christo redemptus erat.

Prosper in Respons. ad object. Gallorum. Christus dedit pro mundo sanguinem
suum, and mundus redimi noluit.

Item sent. quarta super capita Gallorum. Qui dicit quod non pro totius mundi
redemptione salvator sit crucifixus, non ad Sacramenti virtutem sed ad
infidelium respicit partem, quum sanguis Jesus Christi pretium totius mundi
sit. A quo pretio extranei sunt, qui aut delectati captivitate redimi
noluerunt, aut post redemptionem ad candem servitutem sunt reversi.

Vide Ambrosium in page titul.

Cyrillus Alexandrinus in Joh. Evang. lib. 11.25. Quemadmodum praevaricatione
primi hominis ut in primitiis generis nostri, morti addicti sumus: eodem modo
per obedientiam and justitiam Christi, in quantum seipsum legi subjecit
(quamvis legis author esset) benedictio atque vivificatio quae per spiritum
est, ad totam nostram penetravit naturam.

Leo Epist. 72. ad Juvenalem. Vt autem repararet omnium vitam, recepit omnium
causam, and vim veteris Chirographi pro omnibus solvendo vacuavit: ut sicut per
unius reatum omnes facti suerant Peccatores, ita per unius obedientiam omnes
fierent innocents, inde in homines manante justitia, ubi est humana suscepta
natura.

Cyrill of Jerusalem in his Instruction or Catechize, 13. The Crown of the
Cross is, that it enlightened those that were blind in ignorance, and loosed All
that were held in bondage under sin, and redeemed the whole World of mankind.
Nor marvel thou that the whole world was redeemed by it, for he was not a bare
Man, but the only begotten Son of God that dyed upon it.

Theophylact in John 6.51. By the life of the World perhaps he means the
Resurrection; for the Death of the Lord procured the General Resurrection of
all the whole kind (or race) of man; perhaps also he named the life of holiness
and happiness the life of the World, for though All have not received that
sanctification and that life that is in the spirit, yet Christ gave himself for
the World, and as to what appertained to him, the world is saved, and the whole
nature sanctified, inasmuch as he has received power to conquer sin, and sin
fled away by that one Man, Our Lord Jesus Christ, even as by that one man Adam
it (that is, the world, or the nature of man) fell into sin.

Austine in Joh. 3.14, 15. The brazen Serpent put upon a pole of Wood overcame
all the venom of the living Serpents: And Christ being hung upon the cross,
and dying, quenched the force of the old poisons of the Devil, and freed All
that were smitten by him.

The same upon Psalm. 69. Judas cast away the price for which he sold Christ;
and acknowledged (or owned) not the price by which he was redeemed by Christ.

Prosper in Answer to some objections of the Gauls. Christ gave his blood for
the World, and the World refused to be redeemed (that is, actually set at
liberty) by him.

So again. He that says the Savior was not crucified for the Redemption of
the Whole world, has not his eye upon the pretiousness or virtue of that
mystery, but upon the part of them that believe not; whereas the blood of Jesus
Christ is the price of the whole World, from which price they are strangers,
who either being delighted with their captivity refuse to be set free, or after
they are set free return again unto their former bondage.

Cyrill of Alexandria upon John's Gospel, lib. 11. cap. 25. As by the
transgression of the first man we were as in the first fruits of our kind bound
over unto Death after the same manner by the obedience and righteousness of
Christ, forasmuch as he subjected himself unto the Law who was the Author of
the Law, the blessing and quickening which is by the Spirit (or Divine nature)
has pierced to our whole nature.

Leo in his 7^ Epistle to Juvenal. That Christ might repair the life of All,
he took the Cause of All, and loosed the force of the old handwriting by
satisfying for All. That so as by the Guilt of one All were made sinners: so
also by the obedience of one All might be made innocent; righteousness thence
flowing down unto men, where is taken the nature of man.

I Might have added more Testimonies both Ancient and modern, as amongst the
ancient, Ignatius, Jrenaeus, Theodoret, etc. and amongst the modern Luther,
Hemingius, and in a word the generality of the Lutheran Divines, as also
Musculus, Vrsinus, Suffragium Britanicum, Bishop Davenant, yea the Articles and
Catechize of the Church of England, but these already alleged may be
sufficient.


