TO every Member of Parliament Charles Hotham of Peter-house in Cambridge
presents this following brief Account of the proceedings of the Committee for
Reformation of the Universities, in their depriving him of his Fellowship in
the said College, together with his Exceptions against those proceedings. In
answer to such suggestions as may possibly be made in Parliament by his
adversaries; who by their presence there, will have the opportunity of
objecting against him, when himself cannot be permitted in person to make a
Reply. And for such a clear stating the Question of his Appeal, as that he may
at length, after his near twelve Months attendance, have a speedy Judgment in
Parliament, without being further delayed, and again put in danger of being
wronged by a tedious unnecessary reference to the uncertain Report of a
Committee. His long attendance for a Hearing having already been more
burdensome to him, then the worst of Censures. Himself having been thereby
enfor't, to his great expense, and prejudice of his studies, to attend almost,
a whole year at the Parliament door, while another hastily put in by that
Committee, has stood possessed of his legal and just right.

A true and perfect Copy of their proceedings out of the public Journal Book
of that Committee, being the only true ground for a Superior Judicature to
proceed upon in Appeals of this nature.

May 22. 1651. At the Committee for Reformation of the Universities.
ORdered That Doctor Palmer, Mr. Nevil, Mr. Oldsworth, Mr. Moile, Mr.
Millington, Mr. Dormer, Mr. Peter Temple, and Mr. Rous, or any two of them be a
Sub-Committee; to consider of the Book this day presented to this Committee,
Entitled, The Petition and Argument of Mr. Hotham, etc. And to Report their
opinions concerning the same to this Committee on this day seven night.

The Report.
The Petition and Argument of Mr. Hotham.
THe Book, though without a name, owned by him, dispersed by him, his Letter
about it, Epistle to the Committee, his Argument against the Order of the
Sub-Committee, page 11, 12, 13.

This I say, That that power which can eject a man out of his legal possession
for a misdemeanour of a date near two years old, committed and punished in the
days of his minority, long before his entrance into that possession, must sure
be very transcendent, and above that of any, either Common Law, or Chancery
that I have heard, page 137, 138.

Gilbert Millington. Peter Temple.

May 29. 1651. At the Committee for Reformation of the Universities.
Upon hearing the Report from Mr. Millington, touching the Book entitled The
Petition and Argument of Mr. Hotham, etc. And upon long and serious debate
thereof,

It is Resolved by this Committee.

That the writing and publishing of the said Book, which was this day publicly
owned before this Committee by the said Mr. Hotham, is scandalous, and against
the privilege of Parliament.

Resolved by this Committee.

That Mr. Hotham, Fellow of Peter-house in Cambridge, be deprived of his
Fellowship in the said College from this time forward, And the President of
the said College is to see that this be put in execution accordingly.

Present at the making of this Order, besides the Chairman, were these

Members following.

Mr. Oldsworth. Mr. Salloway Sen. Sir. Arthur Haslerig. Mr. Say. Mr.
Millington. Mr. Peter Temple. Mr. Rous. Col. Harvey. Ex. by me R. Needler, C.
C. James Challoner. Robert Brewster. Law. Whitaker. Will. Say. Gilbert
Millington.


Exceptions against the forementioned Proceedings.
1. THe Sub-Committees not indifferent discharge of their trust, which was to
consider and report their opinions of the Book in general, which they did not,
but neglecting the general scope of the Book, wholly tending to the advancement
of a Commonwealth interest, only culled out of the Preface and Conclusion such
passages as seemed distastful, and presented those only to the Committee.

2. Their delivering in their Report, not while he was present, but after he
was withdrawn, so that he had no means of knowing his Charge, or making any
Defense.

3. Granting he had been, according to Justice, admitted to the hearing of his
charge, and making his defense, the charge should have contained a recital of a
breach of some Law, which it did not, and the defense should have been admitted
to those two necessary points of inquisition, 1. An fecerit. 2. An jure
fecerit, to matter of right as well as of fact; but the question of fact was not
moved to him, in reference to any precedent charge (which was not, as far as he
knows, delivered in till he had first owned the Book) and from the latter and
most necessary part of a defense, viz. To the point of right he was wholly
excluded.

4. The writing and publishing of his Book was resolved to be scandalous, but
he conceive that a punishable scandal must be such only as the Law determines
to be of that nature, and not left to the breast of every Judge or Committee to
determine and punish at their own arbitrary discretion. Besides, if what he
has written be true, he hopes 'twill be accounted no scandal.

5. It appears not that the publishing the proceedings of any Court without
their license, is a thing unlawful, or that to publish a Committees proceedings
without their leave, is any breach of privilege of Parliament. And by the way,
he cannot but stand amazed that such printing, if only matter of fact or right,
Christianly and truly stated without the least falsification, untrue
imputations, or uncivil raylings upon any, should be such a scandal in the eyes
of many: the same thing being so commonly practiced in our legal Courts of
Judicature; and besides, it being much to the Parliaments Honor to have their
proceedings such as they may allow and countenance the publication of them to
all the world. But if any shall be found to have in a Committee grossly abused
the trust committed to them by Parliament, the manifesting of those persons
enormities in a way of seeking redress from the justice of the House, is no
dishonor to the Committee in general, or to the Parliament, but rather 'twill
be esteemed their greatest honor to hear and redress the just complaints of
any, even against their own members. Now to give full notice to every member of
the House, and others concerned, of the whole state of the Case without
printing, 'twas near impossible, his bodily strength not sufficing to
transcribe so many Copies himself; and to have done it by others, would have
been too vast a charge: yet was it necessary for him, to counterbalance the
advantage his adversaries had of misinforming the members of the House, by some
large and particular information of the whole truth in all its circumstances.
Besides, there was some necessity of publication of these proceedings in all
places where his name, so eminently blasted by this Censure, was known or heard
of. If a Committee of Malignants had done him this evil, he might have born it,
the censure of such known enemies had been no slander; but for a Committee of
Parliament, whose honor and interest he had always, throughout the whole
wars, and by this very Book so faithfully asserted, thus highly to censure him,
was a deep stain upon his repute, not to be otherwise washed off, then by a
public vindication, especially his complaints to the Parliament, by their
multitude of other affairs, finding so slow and difficult an audience.

6. Of Parliament privileges, not known to be such by any due promulgation, a
breach cannot be justly punishable.

7. Quere, whether it belongs not solely to the Law, or Parliament it self to
declare their own privileges, or to the proper Committee of privileges, and
therefore whether for this Committee to take upon them to determine of the
privileges of that grand body, and punish a breach thereof, was not in them a
breach of privilege.

8. Committees in their original Constitutions, were never set up to the
arbitrary Courts, but only to be executors of the new emergent Parliamentary
Laws, as were the ordinary Judges of the old established Laws, and therefore are
to proceed according to those rules, not their own arbitrary discretion, else
they would seem to hold too much resemblance with so many Star-Chambers and
High Commissions: yet was it he thinks never heard of even in those most
arbitrary Courts, that a man was sentenced without being admitted to hear his
charge, and make his defense both to matter of right and fact.

9. A man put into a Fellowship by Parliamentary Authority, is by that power
invested with the same rights as one regularly elected into his Fellowship: Now
such as are elected into Fellowships, were never conceived justly ejectable,
but for a transgression of some local Statute of the Founder, or Law of the
Nation declared punishable, with such forfeiture: One formerly admitted by
mandate, was not more ejectable at the Kings will, then one legally elected.
Therefore the Petitioner being made Fellow by authority of Parliament, renders
him not at all the more obnoxious to an arbitrary censure.

10. Those words culled out against him by the Reporters, were spoken of one,
who having petitioned the Committee for a Fellowship in our College, they did
thereupon order us to elect a godly and learned person into that Fellowship: We
looking at this man, as the most eminent in all good qualifications, and
tacitly recommended to us by the Committee it self, chose him into the said
Fellowship: but Doctor Seaman suggesting to the Committee that he was guilty of
Heresy, and that he had once drunk the Kings health, though he was not the
principal, but only occasionally present, and the fault besides both committed
and punished in the days of his minority, near three years before that
judgment; he having all his life both before and after that short seducement,
given abundant evidence of his piety and good affection to the State; the
Committee did notwithstanding at the sole instance of Doctor Seaman, eject this
man out of his legal possession, newly conferred on him by a due election of
the President and Fellows, according to Justice, and our Founders Statute, and
put in Doctor Seamans Sizar, a man incapable by Statute, into his room.
Therefore it is left to the judgment of every indifferent man, whether his
descant upon those proceedings were not very temperate, and abundantly within
the bounds of modesty, when he only affirmed that that power which could do
those things, must sure be very transcendent, and above that of any, either
Common Law or Chancery, that he had heard of. Besides, in that very passage
presented by the Reporters to the Committee, they much wronged him, both in
their omission of that preceding introduction, which might have caused a more
favorable interpretation, and mis-reciting the very words themselves, as may
appear by comparing their recital with the expression it self, page 137. of his
Book, last Edition.

11. If any object to him his expressions of Mr. Byfield: He answers, that he
could not but call a Spade a Spade, and wishes they had been by that Committee
taken notice of to a better purpose, that man's manifest and frequent intrusions
having been in the eyes of many a great scandal to their proceedings.

12. There are (as common fame gives out) some other objections against him
whispered into men's ears by some Clergy complying Monarchists, as that he holds
erroneous opinions, and is disaffected to the present Government; but he
hopes, better credit will be given to the language of his actions, and to the
testimonies of those Gentlemen of the University of known worth and fidelity to
the State, who have known his conversation these many years, then that such
rumors should be given ear to. And he is well assured twill appear by all his
words and actions when they shall come to an open scanning, that a redundancy,
not want of affection to true Religion and this Commonwealth, has been the
only cause of these aspersions from counterfeit Professors, and of all his
other sufferings.

Yet if ought of this nature was in his absence objected against him by any of
the Committee when the Question of his Printed Book of the Negative Voice was
in Debate, or shall now be repeated in Parliament, he hopes twill by all
indifferent men be looked at as a most gross impertinency: the Question being
then in Committee only concerning his Printed Book of the Negative Voice
referred to a Sub-committee to consider, and make Report of to that Committee,
which Report (as appears by their own Register) was the only ground of their
Sentence; and much more impertinent must these suggestions needs be in
Parliament; the matter humbly tendered to their Judgment being only, whether
the Prerogative of a Negative Voice as inconsistent with a
Commonwealth-Interest shall be forthwith abolisht; and whether a Sentence,
pronounced against a Member of this Commonwealth, and known Friend to the
public Interest without his being allowed the Common Justice of knowing his
Accuser, hearing his Charge and making his Defense, be not in all Law and
Equity a mere Nullity, and of right to be declared such by the Supreme
Authority of this Commonwealth.

If notwithstanding any shall trouble the Wisdom of Parliament with such
impertinencies, he hopes, that by whomsoever objected, they will among just men
be accounted no just ground of Censure till the truth and weight of them appear
upon a full hearing of both parties, and mean while that this present
extrajudicial Sentence, with all proceedings thereupon be revoked and himself
restored to his Right and Possession again in as full and ample manner, as if
he had never been ejected by that Committee.

And finally, that the Negative Voice, the root of this and many other
mischiefs, in all its threefold branches; of having the power of 1. Calling and
dissolving of Meetings. 2. Proposing or refusing of Questions. 3. Acting or
neglecting the Resolves of the Major part. Placed in the sole Power of one Man
of the Community, be as a pressing Grievance, speedily and for ever abolisht by
the wisdom, and to the great Honor of this present Parliament.

CHARLES HOTHAM.


