THE REBUKES OF A REVILER Fallen upon his own head, In an Answer to a BOOK put
forth by one John Stelham, called a Minister at Terlin in Essex.

Wherein is showed unto all Spiritual men, that he himself is justly proved to
be a Contradictor of the Scriptures, while he falsely accuses others thereof,
that are clear, and the saying is fulfilled upon him, he is fallen into the
Pit, which he dug for others, for even that way which he calls Heresy, do
we Worship the God of our Fathers.

By R. H.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black-spread-Eagle at the West End of
Paul's, 1657.

THE REBUKES OF A Reviler, Fallen upon his own Head.
In an Answer to a Book put forth by one John Stelham, called a Minister at
Terling in Essex.
Whereas the ancient of days has appeared, and the Lord God of Israel, and
of his holy Seed for ever, has in these our days, being his own appointed
time, stretched forth his hand to gather in his Remnant, which has been
scattered, and starved upon the barren Mountains, and he has made known his
arm and power, in raising up his righteous branch, and in bringing out of
Captivity his own Chosen, that his own Name may be exalted for evermore, and
his marvelous light has he caused to shine forth unto many that have sit in
darkness, and he has cried, behold me, behold me, unto a people that has not
been called by his name; yea, from this time it shall be said, What has God
wrought, and who is like unto them that are saved by the Lord, a happy people,
and blessed are they whom he has chosen for his own Inheritance, they dwell in
their tents, and none can make them afraid, for there is no Enchantment against
Israel, nor no Divination against the Seed of Jacob, he that curses them, it
shall return upon his own head, and he that defies them, shall surely be
confounded in a day; for God has spoken, and it shall surely come to pass, he
has said, and it shall not be revoked* They that wait upon him, shall never be
ashamed; but his presence shall go before them, and his righteousness shall be
their reward: Therefore, O ye Mountains, and Hills, wherefore are ye gathered
together, ye high and lofty Oaks, and rebellious Children, to what purpose have
you set your selves, as in Array for B^t^^l, against the Lord, and against his
Anointed; in vain have you sought Divination against Israel, and to no purpose
have you risen up to resist Mount Sion, whom the Lord is establishing* and
exalting above the Dominions of the earth, and though many have set themselves
(and of the wisest too, in our age) to gainsay the truth, which is revealed, by
subtle Arguments, and have traveled in pain to bring forth misty vapors, to
blind the eye of the simple, and have laid, and sought so to do, stumbling
blocks of iniq^ity before the people, by multitude of crafty* productions, and
lying arguments: Woe unto you, wise Writers and Scribes, you have taken away the
Key of Knowledge, and have neither entered the Kingdom, nor suffered others to
enter that would, what will be your doom, and what will be your judgment, O the
heavy hand of the Lord will be upon you, you damnation sleeps not a moment:
And whereas John Stelham* one o^ Gogs* Army against the Lamb and his followers,
a falsely supposed, and contrarily called, and unjustly named, Minister of the
Gospel, has out of his corrupt, wicked, old, lying heart, (which he confesses
he has) brought forth a large Piece, out of Babylons treasure, of falsely
collected, and falsely framed Arguments, whereby he has sought to offend the
way of the Lord, but the rather has burdened his own Soul, by his own
wickedness, and offended himself, and made himself unworthy of life eternal,
and is reckoned in the sight of the Lord, and proved in the sight of man, to be
indeed sinful: John Stelham: yea* he is numbered, and truly too, among Babylons
Children, and the Liars, and Hypocrites, whose portion is in the lake, and not
among the Children of the Lord, for them, he has set himself to oppose, and by
his subtilty, secretly sought out Inch^ntments, and endeavoring to curse, whom
God has blessed, he is accounted among the uncircumcised, and shall not die
the death of the Righteous, neither shall his last end be like unto his, except
he repent; yea, God has kept him back from honor, and to shame and disgrace
he is already promoted, in the sight of all the Saints, and all his work is
trodden down, as a branch of a dead tree, to be cast into the fire, and what
though he have traveled full 10 Months, or more, yet his birth is imperfect,
and the fruit of an Egyptian Womb, which has obtained neither praise of God,
nor favor of man; and what though his Arguments be many and subtle, through
the strength of his devilish wisdom, whereby he has descended into the
darkness, to fetch up his stuff, and invented in his mind, and framed in his
evil thoughts, which has filled his Volums by his envious pen; and what though
he has taken seeming occasion against us by his industry and bent his tongue
to utter it, as feinedly and zealously, as may blind the si^gle eye, and in as
great hypocrisy, and pretended Righteousness as possibly may: What then of all
these things, let him take this for an Answer in full, to all his many
Arguments, and to his whole Work and whatsoever is brought forth, or may be yet
lodging in his sinful heart ever to declare, We are of God, his Covenant is
with us: and the whole World lies in wickedness, and he that is of God hears
us, and this is enough, Reply to all what he has, or can say further against
us; and this Testimony the Father gives of us, who has chosen us in him,
before the world was; and let him, and all our adversaries know, That our
Religion is in that which keeps unspotted of the world, and our acceptance with
God, is in him, who is the light of the world, who exercises our Consciences,
in all good things toward God, and toward man, and though we answer not, yet
are we no worse; and though we answer, yet are we no better; praise of men
approves us not to God, nor dispraise of men makes us not sorrowful; But our
peace is in the Father, whether the world do us love, or hate, or praise us, or
dispraise: And first of all like unto Rehum and Shimshai, and their companions,
he appears with his Dedication, much like unto theirs, from the same spirit,
and unto the same end, as may be seen, Ezra 4. 9, 11, 12, etc. and in the
manner of Amaziah* Priest of Bethel, unto Jeroboam the King, with a Message
much of that nature, as in Amos. 7. 10, 11, etc. and this man with his feigned
flattering titles, appears to the chief in Authority for Approbation of his
work, that men may accept it the more, but that is little worth, if God accept
it less, and in much secret hypocrisy, has he uttered the Intent of his mind,
in less than a sheet of Paper, to the Protector, and Council of State, whom we
hope in for more honesty than to believe Lies, and the indictments of a sinful
wicked heart: Well, but if they will harden their hearts to believe
unrighteousness, they shall be filled therewith, till both the ancient, and
honorable, and the false Prophet, that prophesies lies, which is the tail,
Isa 9. 15* be consumed together, and the Saints shall stand on the earth, and
the Dominion shall be given into their hands: Then among his flattering titles,
he seems secretly to complain of Abuse made of the Press, for the spreading of
Anti-scripturial, and Antichristian Errors, as he says: Indeed his own works
do prove his words true, that the Press is abused, which has by his Pen
scribed so many Lies, Reproaches, Slanders, and Errors, and the Press the
instrumental cause of spreading them abroad, whereby the Press has been
abused, to the dishonor of Religion and Piety, if not to the dishonor of
Authority also, then he seems to hint at the Cruelty and Outcry of many, for
crying Club*law against the men called Quakers; but whether with approvement,
or otherwise of it, his mind is not uttered, however by the Lies and Slanders
ensuing out of his own mouth, it is easily proved, that he is of that very
generation of Persecutors, though he so well do not approve of Persecuting with
the hand, yet he allows, and himself is guilty of persecuting with the tongue,
which is one in nature, so that hereby the great hypocrisy, of this man
appears, in condemning others secretly of what himself is guilty of openly,
then he is pleased (though the Lord be vexed) to cast forth his peevish smite,
against the light of Jesus Christ, wherewith every man in the world is lighted,
in words, thus venomously uttered, that perverse Principle of their viz Quakers
self-adoring light: Will the Protector and Council believe this, or will they
promote him, to honor, or magnify him, because of his oprobrious speeches
against the light of the Son of God, let them answer and testify against him,
for blasphemy, who has in his hastiness uttered his envy and wickedness, and
no less then denied the Lord that bought him, in calling, and shamelesly*
stiling the pure light of Christ, the Way, the Truth, and the Life, Perverse
Principle, and Self* adoring Light: and thus it is manifested the Press is
abused by such an Antiscripturial, and Antichristian error proceeding out of
John Stelhams old heart, and manifested from his Pen, then with his lying
Message he follows after his flattering titles, and says ere long the Lord
himself will rebuke them viz. Quakers
to silence, that they shall neither write, nor speak so presumptuously etc. if
his Lords believe this Message, they shall never bless him, but in the end
curse him, when the production of his lying Prophecy appears, which is
deceiving of their Souls, and will prove a curse upon them, and posterity, and
is feeding of them with hopes of vanity and lies, and on his own head shall his
false Vision fall; a Rebuke into silence shall come upon him, the sin is his;
writing presumptuously, and arrogantly, and the judgment there of shall he
feel, and all that believe him; truth shall be established, and his lying
tongue is but for a moment, then his lie he adds to his Message, which is that
the Lord Jesus is fighting against them viz. Quakers
with the Sword of his mouth, etc. What wicked presentation is this to the
chief Rulers of Nations, even lies, one heaped upon another, to suggest into
the minds of men, to stir up wrath in their hearts, against the just: nay,
Jesus is our Prince of peace and righteousness, and is with us, and fights for
us, and who can be against us, none but such as are his enemies, and have
denied him, and his light, and counted it a perverse Principle, O how fain
would John Stelham, (sinful indeed) gain a Kingdom by flattery, and have praise
of his work by his Lies, which he has made his Refuge, and his Weapon too,
they that believe him shall perish with him, that's all that may be said; his
flattering titles and words of guile, may gain upon the wicked, but the just
man is preserved from the fury of a deceitful tongue, then his (supposed)
humbly Supplicate after his false Vision and lying Messages is, That every
person whatsoever, may not, impune, strike them viz. Quakers.
Corporeally, etc. This appears fair in words, if his meaning were right, yet
while he supplicates, That every one may not, though whether he means any one
may not, (I determine not) strike them corporeally, etc. Yet to publish his
Lies, and Errors, and Slanders he would have liberty, and this is but so much
more secretly, to strike in the greater hypocrisy, in more crafty subtility;
and indeed, well may the Priests of England be ashamed of what has already
been acted, as to striking and cruel abuses, and works of that nature, the
blood of many harmless has been spilt woefully in streets and Steeplehouses,
through the means of the false Prophets, and it may be they will now take
another Weapon, seeing that has failed, and not wrought effect, no more shall
any formed weapon against the innocent, and though some of them have shamefully
cried, Fight Lads for the Gospel* others may with as much hypocrisy write for
the fighting lads, and in as great deceit: And then he gives an Exhortation in
his Supplicate, and says, Be pleased to let them viz. Quakers
know, that we are guarded by a better Law, then what they upbraid us with; its
time to be ashamed that you have been so long guarded by a Popish Law, yet the
secret craft of this man is noted, in this subtle suggestion, a better law
would he have, what, does it too much shame you, by the name of Popish law, and
would you be less discovered, if the law of the same virtue, were of another
Authority than Queen Mary, and of another Dominion than the Pope, therefore a
Law from the Protector he would Supplicate, if possible, That however we may
not have liberty to divulge our Doctrine in their Assemblies, as he says, and
then this evil man, and deceiver, who waxes worse and worse in his way,
impudently slanders the way of God, and reproaches the Doctrine of the Gospel
of Christ, and would wickedly make men (more honest than himself) believe* That
these men's viz. Quakers
Tenants, as he says, are as reprobate stuff as the Jesuits, their
blasphemies as horrid as the Popish Parasites* Oh the wickedness and impudence
which has appeared out of this man's heart in those few words, wickedness, in
that his words are lies, and devilish; and impudent, in that he dares thus to
appear to an Authority, with the Dedication of Lies; Let him take notice of
this* We are clear from his false Accusations, and of Popish Doctrines; But
they that are one with him, are not from being guarded with a Popish Law, and
these are truly Romes Subjects, who are guarded with his Law, more than we are
Romes Emissaries, which secretly he would cast upon us, and make the Protector
and his Council believe it, if their hearts be so hardened: But better is
thought upon concerning them, though I. S. would make them evil, suggesting
evil into their hearts: But a false Prophet is known by his Lies and Slanders,
and secret smiting; and then he says, He would have some of this Sect viz.
Quakers
more narrowly watched, etc. and stigmatized: Oh cruelty! out of the abundance
of the heart his mouth utters, like a Pot boiling, with anger that cannot
contain it within the mouth, what lodges in the heart of this man, consider,
what less, then in their hearts, who were Queen Mary's Jesuits and Priests, if
the Protector and Council would answer, the cruel intent of his mind, as Queen
Mary did theirs, Balaam, or worse he is; for he has sought enchantment, and
would curse before they sent for him to do so, but it shall return on his own
head, who is watched against, for a Wolf and Devourer, and stigmatzed for a
Deceiver, and false Deviner, one who art marked for a false Prophet, and known
to be so, by every one who is taught of God, and in the end of all this
secretly uttered wickedness, and cruelty, insinuatingly, expressed* to suggest
evil into the minds of men, more honest than himself, he wishes for Blessing
upon his Highness and Honors, that they may discern true Spirits from false,
such who proceed out of the mouth of the false Prophet, from such as proceeds
from the Father, and from the Son, indeed of such a gift of discerning they
have need, and by the fruits they may try every Spirit, and in a just trial, by
just judgment, are thou tried, and thy spirit is made manifest, to be the
spirit which proceeds out of the mouth of the D^agon, who wars against the
Saints, and out of the mouth of the B^ast, who has many Heads and many Horns,
which Beast arose up in the Apostasy since the Apostles days, and thy Spirit
is made manifest to be that spirit of the false Prophet, who deceive* the
Nations, for thy fruits does discover thee a liar, aslanderer, a perverter of
the right way of God, art thou proved, and such things proceeds out of the
mouth of the false Propher, and so let them beware of thy Spirit, who art not
guided by the Spirit of Christ Jesus, nor of the Father, but a worker of
darkness, and a reviler of the light of Cstrist, calling it (false
Prophet-like, as being led with the Spirit of the Dragon, and of the Beast)
Perverse Principle: We have measured thy spirit to be as I have said, and he
that speaks otherwise, speaks a lie, and if the Protector and his Council
believe otherwise* they believe a lie, and cannot obtain a blessing, though
thou with thy lying Spirit pray for them, whom God (the Father of blessings)
hears not, but is against thee; and this is my prayer, The Lord rebuke thee,
and thy wicked tongue, and give the Protector and his Council a better
understanding than to believe thee, else will the Lord make them cursed to
themselves, and to the Nations, of them my heart hopes better things, and this
might serve for a full Answer to thy whole Book, and by this little of thy work
that I have viewed, and turned nto the sight of all, art thou discovered, to be
an enemy to God, and a secret envier of his people, and by what thou have said
it appears what the rest of the whole matter can be, an evil spirit cannot
bring forth good works, but yet a little further, is thy matter unvayled for
the sake of the upright.

And further, I. S. after his wicked Presentation to the Rulers of this Nation,
with lies and evil Speeches proceeding out of his old heart, he writes an
Epistle (out of the same heart) to the Church, as he calls them, wherein is
many words uttered, but altogether tasted with that leaven of his malice,
against Quakers and Quakerism, who seems to be the greatest burden upon his
evil heart, because truth is among them, and if truth go on, his deceit will be
more made manifest, wither, and perish, and so as subtly as may be he would
defend himself, in the sight of his Church that his shame may not appear before
them (it may be lest his Hire should be abated) and he seems to cast a cloak
upon them, but whether out of pure love to their Souls, or for his own Gain,
and such a sum of Money, God knows; however the least Child in the truth
dwelling in the light, sees his length, and can measure his state, and knows
that good cannot come from an old lying heart* and he speaks something of
wondering after the beast and false Prophet, but has not described what the
Beast is, and the false Prophet: And I refer the Reader to a Book called, The
Measure of the Times: wherein the Priests of England, such as I. S. is reproved
according to the Scripture, to be the very branches of the same Root of false
Prophets which all the World wondered after in John's time; and though he speak
much to his Church of Christ without, and of his birth, blood, and his
righteousness, and justification thereby* etc. but to all that, I say, All are
Reprobates but such in whom Christ is within them, and none are justified but
such, nor has any part in the inheritance of God, though they may profess
never so much of Christ without, and what he has done for others, yet except
he be within them too, to change and renew them, and give them power over all
their sins, their profession of him is vain.

I am no picker of Quarrels, else many of his words might be searched, which I
run over hastily, knowing his voice to be the voice of a stranger, and not of
Christ, who never made use of an old sinful heart to pen Epistles to Churches.

But into this lets search; he says, Christ blessed Infants Baptism: Where, or
when, I ask proof of this, and till then I say I. S. has belyed Christ, and
the generation of the just; Well may he belie us, when he has belyed Christ,
who could not bless that which there was not: there was no Infants Baptism that
ever we read of in his days: sure prople will be more wise than to be
established through Lies, else their sin be upon them, if through hardness of
heart they be given up to believe Lies, that they may perish.

He speaks of a well ordered Conversation; Indeed this seems Hypocrisy, to
exhort others (their Churches) to that which many of the Independen Teachers
have not themselves, who are Hirelings, and takes Gifts, and Rewards for
Preaching, and is in the way of all the Deceivers of old; and they that do
these things have not a well ordered Conversation, but a Conversing with the
generation of ungodly, and when we read the plain words of Christ, Luke 17. The
Kingdom of Heaven is within you: he says, we madly wrest the reading of the
words, when we neither ^dd nor diminish; now he seems to say, It is the Kingdom
of heaven among you, and not the kingdom of heaven within you; and so blames
the Scripture, and confounds the doctrine of many of the Independents, who say,
the Scriptures is believers Rule; but he seems to charge the Scripture with
false translation, and therefore is subject to alteration, and so cannot be the
rule of Believers according to his own account, and thus by wicked men are we
blamed when we do not speak according to Scripture language, and now as
wickedly charged by I. S. for speaking just in the Scripture expressions, with
madly wresting the words, but thus it was before, and whatsoever we do now by
our enemies must be reviled, and our words abused, contrary to our innocent
intents.

Then in the end of his Epistle, he desires the Prayers of his Church, that his
Reply may be accompanied with power according to the truth of it.

Indeed so it shall, and no more; according to the truth of it, which is very
f^lshoods and deceits; so shall the power of the Lord confound it, and turn it
into folly and confusion, as may be seen by a sober man, who this following*
does with patience read, and weigh.

Then many things is uttered by him in his Epistle to the Reader, he seems to
show he says, how R. F. and his Associates have made up A Litter and Fardel of
Erroneous Divinity: and secretly charging us with making up of what we profess
from some Writers before us.

But to this I Answer, His reproachful words, Litter, and Fardel, and
Erroneous, we bear with patience, rather rejoicing that we are accounted worthy
of the reproach for the truths sake from an envious man, than to be angry with
our reproaches: But however, let him and all our enemies know, what we profess
and bear witness of, we receive not from man, but from God, even the Gospel
which we testify of, by the revelation of Jesus Christ in us, we received it;
and informs others to the same door, which is, by our Ministry, that they may
receive the same: and this is but his poor shift, to undervalue the power and
truth of Jesus, in the sight of men, who would falsely make men believe, That
our Doctrines are but the spawn of many ancient Errors, as he says, brooded by
some Modern Writers, when as the Doctrine of Christ and the Apostles we bear
witness to by the same Spirit, and not to any other Authors who were without
the Spirit of Jesus: and all these shifts ^aves not the Priests of England from
being discovered, and their deceits and abominations to be made manifest by our
Light and Doctrine, which is the Light of Christ, and the Doctrine of the holy
men of God before us.

And further, his wickedness appears by reproaching and reviling dead men, such
as H. N. Jacob B. W. E. with others, whom I confidently believe were men in
their Generation more honest than himself, and more upright with God, and
sincere in what was made known to them, than this same reviler who is set to
revile both living and dead, if they do but cross his fancy: Let all men take
notice of these things, and of his rebukes, with an evil heart, whom the Lord
does and will rebuke by the Spirit of his mouth, in the day of his just
judgments, who art a reviler of the just both living and dead: and all along
in that Epistle, as in the rest of his Book, which is the Rebukes of a Reviler,
he bends his very tongue, as the poison of Asps being under it, against the
Quakers, reckoning them with the Papists, and such others; but this is but as
the Pharisees his forefathers did, who numbered the Son of God, and condemned
him with transgressors, and betwixt two thieves.

And in the end, he desires his Reader to receive in Love, what in his Book is
found agreeable to the Spirit of God in Scripture truth, agreed; so let it be,
and therefore many things in his Book, which is not given forth by the Spirit
of God, nor according to the Scripture truth, which the honest Reader may find
upon a serious reading and search, with the Spirit of God, and according to the
Scripture is to be judged and condemned, and not received; what shall the
honest Reader receive this for truth, That the Light of Christ Jesus is A
Preverse Principle, and that Christ blessed Infants Baptism, with very many
such like things of the like nature proceeding from the same spirit, which is
proved not to be of God* but of the Devil, for every tree is known by its
fruit, and every spirit by its works, and words: many other things more
devilish, if more devilish can be; he charges us withal in a most unreasonable
manner, that our Religion is the Fort of Babel, and that Jesuitical Plots and
Designs are carried on by some of us; and Quakerism is built upon the fourfold
pillar of Papistry, with such like; the very transcribing of his words shows
his wicked spirit by his unsavory words; which things we do deny in the
presence of the Lord, and are clear in his sight from these divilish
accusations* though I. S. play the Devils part, in this Epistle as well as in
his whole Book: and is an accuser of the brethren, and is to be cast out and
judged, with the life of God, and to give testimony against his lies and
slanders is sufficient Answer, and the next time he enterprises the like Work,
we demand of him witness of his words, what these Jesuitical Flots and Designs
are, we do carry on; Which slander is so divelish could he prove what he says*
his words would take away our lives; but to raise the unclean spirits against
us, though the Nations is truly supposed the purpose of his words, and not
being content with what he himself can believe us in, his work reaches to raise
the rage of whole Nations to execute their fury as well as his own upon us, and
so his words gives ground to all the wicked that does believe him (for none
else can) to persecute the people, and way of the Lord, under the false account
of being Plotters, and of having ill Designs, which things we stand witness
against, and seeks the peace of all men, though he have bent his tongue for
Lies, and brazen'd his face to utter them without fear or shame, to suggest
evil into men's minds that they may harm the upright, but it is known by his
words what lodges in the heart of such a person, who thus openly and
impudently does slander just men to the taking away of life* if any were so
divilish to witness lies and slanders, as he is in forging of them, and
declaring of them, and that to the Protector and his Council too; but from
these things we being clear, are the more ready to bear his Lies with Patience,
and does not pray for fire to devour him, though he be our enemy and the Lords;
but rather wishes his returning from his ungodliness, than a destruction upon
him in his ungodliness; and whereas the substance of his matter invented in his
mind and brought forth into view, is a going about to prove that in twenty two
particulars mentioned by him, we do contradict the Scriptures, but his ground
is false from whence his whole work proceeds, for not in any particular of what
is mentioned do we contradict the Scriptures, though his whole work be founded
upon this thing, of our contradiction to Scripture, and while we be approved in
the sight of the Lord, we reckon his s^^nders to be rather a testimony to us,
that we are of God, than a discouraging of us in the ways of God: and we do
not allow that I. S. be our Interpreter, and the Expositor upon our words: for
then no question but he will judge out of his prejudicial mind, false
Judgment, and pervert the innocent words into contradiction of Scripture, and
of our selves, but to the single mind and witness of God in every man we appeal
for judgment, and does in the sight of God commend our selves to every man's
Conscience, and begs not belief of any, but knows all that be in the light of
the Son of God witnesses to us, and feels our Doctrine to be the Doctrine of
Godliness, reaching to the witness of God in every one whereby we are a good
savor to God in all, and though I. S. judge our doctrine to be Scripture
contradictions, yet his judgment is but out of his old lying heart, which can
bring forth no better than it self even false judgment, and lying words, which
out of it has plentifully abounded, in his false Rebukes; therefore let the
Reader first search into the ground from whence his work and judgment does
spring, and try if an old Lying heart, and sinful wretch (as he confesses he
is) can bring forth good fruit; no, we matter not what his judgment of us be,
when as we know the heart is corrupt from whence it does spring, not in the
light of the spirit of God, do we in any one particular insisted upon, by him
Contradict the Scriptures, though by his dark mind so he wickedly judges of
us, even as the Pharisees, his forefathers, did judge of Christ to be a
Blasphemer and a Contradictor of Moses, and the Prophets, who did fulfill them,
and put them to an end, and not destroy them, nor contradict them not in the
sight of his Father, though to their corrupt judgment; and Christ tells them
that they erred not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God, who had old
lying hearts, and were sinful wretches, even such as John Stelham has
confessed himself to be, and therefore his words and judgment, and theirs is
like to be all of one nature* judging truth to be error, and the way of God to
be Heresy and Blasphemy, this the Pharisees did of old, and even thus does
John Stelham and his Companions do at this day; but why should any be troubled
hereat, seeing herein Christ's words are fulfilled upon us, who said, they shall
speak all manner of evil falsely against you for my names sake; and so has this
man done with his light scornful spirit, and fulfilled Christ's words, who
because he has not known the Father, nor the Son, has spoken evil falsely
against them that follow Christ, and this were sufficient answer to his whole
Book; yet let us see what follows, and let the Reader try with all moderation,
that he may be edified, and may know the true spirit from the false, and the
doctrine of the Gospel from lying visions; and may cleave to the truth, and
escape the error, and let none believe hastily, things uttered without
knowledge, out of I. S. deceitful heart.

FOrasmuch as many of the Servants of the Lord have been moved of the Lord to
set forth in order, several Declarations of those things which the light of the
glorious Gospel shining in their hearts, has given them the knowledge of* and
for this end are they published, that others also may know the certainty and
truth of those things which are believed, known, and enjoyed amongst us, not
that they can be known by reading the letter in which they are delared, but
through their diligence and obedience to the light wherewith Christ has
enlightened them [though not for it] which is the same light which shined in
our hearts, and gave us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ, by which light of the glorious Gospel who are faithful in
it to the Lord, their understandings come to be opened, that they stumble not
at those things which are testified in the truth, neither at that which is
declared in other Scriptures, but it being that in this our day it has pleased
the f^ther to bring forth in life and power that mercy and truth (which the
Scripture speaks of) by which iniquity is purged out, and as it is become a
savor of life unto life in those that receive and believe in it, so it is also
become a savor of death unto that death which rema^ns in both Priests and
People in this age, who hates the light who can scarce hear it named or that
people should be turned unto it (as the Apostle did turn them from darkness to
the light, and from the power of Satan unto God that they might receive the
remission of their sins, and be partakers of the inheritance amongst them that
are sanctified) but when they hear that Preached or Printed, which they may do,
and out of which they cannot receive the remission of their sins, then envy
rises up in them, and a perverse mind, and ungodly Speeches, and false
Accusations, saying, that we speak of a natural light, and of a natural
conscience, when as we speak of the true light which has enlightened every one
that comes into the world, and in which Christ's doctrine stood which said to
the people, and to the Pharisees again, and again, I am the light of the world,
as Joh. 8. 12 Joh. 12. 46. but now because the light is come, and the glory of
the Lord is risen upon us, and we declare it freely, as we have received it;
therefore is floods of ungodliness risen up against us, but it is impossible
that the seed which the Lord is manifesting his light and power to bring forth,
should be kept always under the power of death, which seed is now terrible in
the Lords power, and will yet be more terrible as his power increases, which
is now going forth as an Army with banners, for the torment of the wicked is
already begun, because the righteousness of God is now spreading over the
Nations, and neither the rulers of the darkness of this world, nor all the
Printings and Preachings of those who be out of the life of God, can hinder
that which the Lord has begun and is carrying on by his own power, though the
nations are angry, because that by the light of his glorious Gospel shining
forth, his wrath is revealed upon them for their ungodly deeds, that the
Scripture which cannot be broken may be fulfilled; and therefore it were better
for them to be silent, and put their mouths in the dust* if so be, for them*
there may be hope, then to rise up against that wihch is more unchangeable than
the heavens and the earth, and therefore in vain have the enemies of God* and
People, in all Professions joined themselves together against the light of
truth, and the way of the Lord, which many in our days have fallen upon, but
is broken to pieces, and it has fallen upon many and grinded them to powder,
and nothing shall escape, for the day of the Lord is come, and it is very nigh
to you that hate it, a day of darkness, and of gloominess of clouds, and of
thick darkness (and now the seed of God is) as the morning spread upon the
mountains a great people and a strong, there has not been ever the like,
neither shall there be any more after it^ even to the years of many
generations, a fire goes before them, and behind them a flame burns, the
land is as the garden of Eden, before them and behind them a desolate
wilderness, and nothing shall escape them, the appearance of them is a^ the
appearance of horses, and as horsemen, so shall they run, etc. the earth shall
quake before them, the heavens shall tremble, the Sun and Moon shall be dark,
and the stars shall withdraw their shining, and the Lord shall utter his voice
before his Army (as he now does) for h^s Camp is very great for he is strong
that executes his word, for the day of the Lord is great and very terrible,
and who can abide it.

And now, according as the Prophet Joel Prophesied, is it come, and coming to
pass, Joel 2. 2, 3, 4, 10, 11. against which seed, men of corrupt minds, and
reprobate concerning the things of God, are risen up, who in their first
appearance, in their writings, profess themselves to be that which they are
not, seeming right unto many through their feigned words, and fair sp^eches,
deceiving the hearts of the simple, for whom Christ died: but afterward in the
same writings (to those that see) they manifest themselves what they are, and
being so considered as they are seen and known cannot deceive, and therefore to
all people who desire to be edified and satisfied in the ground and truth of
things as they are made manifest by the Lord, to the light in you I speak, that
in it you may be able to understand truth in what I say, and by the truth to
judge of things that differ, for such as the tree is, such is the fruit; an
evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit, neither can one fountain send forth
sweet water, and bitter.

Now as concerning a Book given forth by John Stelham (Priest at Terling in
Essex) who having an evil eye because Gods is good, and being fil^ed with
indignation, because God has mercy on his own seed whom he has blessed, has
out of the abundance of his heart spoken it forth; now the way to know that
which is spoken in darkness is to read it in the light, and i^ his t^stimony in
any thing, as coming from him, is to be believed, it is that which is
concerning his own condition; and if his estate and condition be such, that in
it he can receive the things of God, and minister them to others, then they may
be received: but if his condition be such, that in it he cannot receive the
things of the Spirit of God, then that which cannot receive* cannot minister,
and so he is to be silent, and none to expect the things of God from him, being
neither fit to reprove, nor to rebuke, but to be reproved and rebuked, as will
appear as follows:

The Ground in him, and the Heart out of which this abundence of words in his
Book proceeds; in it (as he declares) is yet the root of all Error, and of all
sin is in him and seen by him not mortified, and that he has an old lying
heart, and flesh, wherein there dwells no truth, no good thing, a sinful wretch
and worm, subscribing himself the sinful John Stelham, as in his Introduction,
in page 80. and page 117*

Now therefore, we having found out the Root and the Ground, to be a root of
Error, and the ground of Deceit, and a heart wherein dwells no truth, nor no
good thing; therefore from that which is unclean shall we not expect that which
is clean to proceed, nor truth from that wherein dwells no truth, but from the
lying heart and deceitful tongue has the Lord delivered us, so that if we be
called revilers and be rebuked, and a charge laid against us, as to contradict
the Scriptures of God, and be called Antiscriptural, Antichristian, and
Antispiritual, We have now learned to know whence it does proceed, even from
the old lying hearr, and flesh, wherein there dwells no truth; and we can bear
it because we know that till that heart be taken away, and a new heart known
wherein is Truth.

We must be reproached, and spoken evil of falsely, for his sake who has taken
away the old lying heart, and has given us a new heart wherein truth dwells,
and where truth proceeds out from, and herein are we manifest from the children
of this Generation, and herein are the two states known, and the two conditions
of men, according to the testimony of Scripture, and the parable which Jesus
spoke, Luke 6. 39. Can the blind lead the blind, shall they not both fall into
the ditch? And verse. 45. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart
brings forth that which is good; And, an evil man out of the evil Treasure of
his heart brings forth that which is evil, for out of the abundance of the
heart his mouth speaks: And hereby is the tree known by his fruits, and the
heart of the wicked was ever filled with lying and vanity, and understanding
was hid from them, the Lord was grieved with such that did err in their hearts,
and had not known his ways, Psalm. 95. 10. and such their hearts was fat as
grease, and in their hearts they imagined mischief, and studied destruction,
Psalm. 119* 70 Psalm. 140. 2. and this was an evil which was under the Sun, that
the hearts of the sons of men was full of evil and madness while they live,
Eccles. 9. 3. And such a heart was in the Scribes and Pharisees a lying heart
wherein dwelt no truth, filled with evil thoughts, as Christ said, Wherefore
think ye evil in your hearts, Matthew. 9. 4. and out of the heart did arise all
false accusations; calling the truth blasphemy, and the way of it heresy, and
such who be in the state as John Stelham confesses he is, was never appointed
by the Lord to watch over Souls, But such where Christ did dwell in their
hearts, and because they were sons, God sent forth the spirit of his Son into
their hearts, Ephesians. 3. 17. Gal 46. and such had truth in their hearts doing the
will of God from the heart, and did draw near unto God with a true heart, in
full assurance of Faith, having their hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience,
and their bodies washed with pure water; these did not profess the things of
God in an old lying heart, wherein dwelt no truth, but called upon the name of
the Lord with a pure heart, and said that the end of the Commandment was
Charity out of a pure heart, and of a good Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned,
from which some swarved (in the Apostles days) having turned aside unto vain
jangling, and such desired to be teachers of others, but the doctrine is
corrupt, and the Ministry of Faith is not held where the heart and conscience
is not pure; And the Lord is good unto such who be of a clean heart.

Now as concerning the Scriptures.
John Stelhams Testimony from the old lying heart wherein dwells no truth, is
this, That the Scriptures are the word of God, and truly so called, and the
letter and Scripture is all one, as page 3, 4. but to contradict that himself
he says in page 5. the letter taken strictly is but legal Administration using
these words, the letter kills, i. e* The bare legal command without a promise
of power or pardon, as a bare letter void of strength, life, and spirit; it
leaves all men under a killing sentence* and curse: let them that have
understanding judge. Again, as concerning the letter in page 6. he expresses
himself thus, ( The Spirit is given by it.) And in the next words says the
Scripture is but instrumental to the Spirit.

Now mark, the Letter taken strictly being legal without a Promise of Power or
Pardon, void of strength, life, and spirit, (The Spirit to be given by this
which he confesses is void of strength, life, and spirit) and is but
instrumental to the spirit, whether this be not contradiction and confusion,
let them that read judge: For in reading these things which he has published,
many may seal to the Confession of his own Condition to be truth* but that
which he has declired of the things of God to be false; For now the light
being broken forth, such doctrine cannot be received, nor believed; that the
spirit is given by the letter, but that which is declared in the letter, was
given forth from the Spirit, which was in them which spoke it forth; but people
may long have the letter, and think in it to find God and eternal life, and may
die in their sins, though I. S. say that not one man in the world, knows God to
be God, till he finds him in the Scripture. But I say unto him as Christ said
unto the Pharisees, who had neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his
shape, had not his word abiding in them, nor did not believe in the light, and
that he was the light which did enlighten every man that comes into the world,
search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are
they which testify of me, says Christ the life, but those thought that they
had the life in the scriptures, deceived them, for they wanted the life when
they thought they had it and so I. S. thoughts that he has the spirit by the
letter, deceives him, for when he finds the spirit and eternal life, then his
old lying heart in which is no truth, but the root of error will be taken away,
and so the light which comes from Christ the life, in which the spirit is
received, condemns all such thoughts, for they proceed out of that heart
which is not upright before the Lord* neither is it set to seek the Lord in
that way in which he and his spirit is found.

Again, I. S. talking of the Scriptures, intrudes into things which he has not
seen, comparing it with that which he has seen, and so in what he says he is
blind, saying, The Scriptures is a more standing rule, than visions.

To which I Answer, The night is upon him, that he has no vision, and
therefore does not know what a vision is a rule unto, nor the continuance of
it, as those in Israel, which said that every vision fa^leth, and so would not
have them a standing rule, and that reproach of the visions of God, was so
common, that it was become a Proverb amongst them; but the Prophet who was in
the light* and had the vision of the Lord* and had the word of the Lord, he was
to reprove that Proverb, and to tell them that they should no more use it as a
proverb in Israel, and said, the days are at hand, and the effect of every
vision; and so with the light, who be in it does now reprove all such proverbs
and preachings against the visions of God, for from the visions was the
Scriptures spoken forth, and that which they had seen they declared; so that
which gives forth words is greater than the words, and without vision the
people perish, and they may perish while they have the letter, but they cannot
perish while they have the vision; and although there be vain visions, they do
not make the true of none effect.

And although there be Sorceryes and Enchantment that does not make the true
resurrection of the dead of none effect; but the blind must stumble at the
things which they do not see.

Again, I. S. says, That the Authority of the Scriptures is owned among the
Jews to this day.

Answer.
Answ. No, Christ is not owned amongst them who is the Authority, and Power,
unto which the Scriptures give testimony that he is so, neither are they yet
converted, as thou thy self confessest, and they who be in the unconverted
estate, does not own the Authority of the Scriptures though such may talk of
them, as thou do, speaking that of them which they never spoke of themselves.

Again, I. S. says, in the 17. page, As deep things as the Spirit has
Revealed, they are all in the Scripture.

Answer.
Answ. Nay, There was things Revealed which was unutterable, and many things
which was Revealed, and also Written, which is not in the Scripture; as the
Book of Nathan the Prophet, and the Prophecy of Ahijah the Shil^^mit^, and the
Visions of Iddoa the Seer, which was against Jer^b^ans the Son of Nabat, 2 Chronicles 9. 29. And the Book of Shemath the Prophet, 2 Chronicles. 1. 2. 15. And the
Book of Jehu, 2 Chronicles. 20. 34. And the Book of Gad the Seer, 1 Chronicles* 29. 29.
And the Book of Jaser, 2 Samuel 1. 18. and the Prophecy of Enoch, who prophesied
of the coming of Christ in his Saints, to execute Judgment upon all, and to
convince all that are uugodly of all their ungodly deeds and hard speeches,
which ungodly sinners have spoken against him, as Jude bears witness; and he
also saw and Prophesied, of Israel according to the flesh, that they should do
wickedly, and slay him who was the light of the world: And much more which is
not written in the Bible; And that which was manifest unto Paul, which he wrote
to the Corinthians, in an Epostle, not to company with fornicators; that whole
Epistle is not in the Bible, 1 Cor. 5. 9. And likewise that which was revealed
unto Paul in the dispensation of the grace of God, given unto him how that by
revelation God made known unto him the mystery, which he wrote unto the
Ephesians in a few words whereby they when they read, they might understand his
knowledge in the mystery of Christ which in other ages was not made known unto
the sons of men as it was then revealed unto his holy Angels and Prophets by
the Spirit, which Epistle, in which that mystery was written, is not in the
Bible, Ephesians. 3. 3. And the Epistle which Paul wrote to the Laod^ceans, which
he charged the Colossians to read amongst them, (and that theirs should be read
in the Church of the Laodeceans) wherein his thanks and prayers to God was for
their stedfastness in the truth wherein he made manifest the unprofitable
talkers, who went about to draw them from the truth of the Gospel, and from
their diligence in good works of eternal life, as many vain, and unprofitable
talkers are in the world now doing the same work.

And whereas I. S. says, That the Epistle of Paul to the Colossians was read
as the Word of the Lord in the Church of the Laodeceans: Why does he not as
well ^ear witness that Paul's Epistle to the Laodeceans was read as the word of
the Lord amongst the Colossians, Col. 4. 16* And if he read in his Church the
Epistle to the Colossians as the Word of the Lord, why does not he read to his
people that which was written to the Laodeceans, they both being given forth
from one Spirit* So let him consider of those things above mentioned, and try
whether his words will stand unreprovable, 67 page, saying, God might have
revealed more than is in the Scripture, but he pleased not so to do: In that
page, mentioning Samuel* Moses, and the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles,
saying, All that they have spoken is written both according to what was Written
before, and for substance the same.

Answer.
Answ. What I have spoken, and shall here speak, may sufficiently make manifest
that his words proceed from the old lying heart, in which dwells no truth; for
I have showed out of the Prophets, and out of the Apostles many things which
was both revealed and declared, which is not in the Bible written: And likewise
I shall show farther, of the things concerning Christ, testified by John, and
we know that his Testimony is true, saying, And there are also many other
things which Jesus did, the which if they should be written every one, I
suppose that even the world it se^f could not contain the Books which should be
written, John 21. 25. So that all is not written which was revealed, wrote, and
spoken, which if much more were written which was made manifest, by it with
that which is written, could they not know the Lord, their minds being from the
light of Christ, which does reveal and make manifest that which may be known of
God in them.

And many who have the Letter, and are Ministers of it, are sensual, having not
the spirit, nor the word of God, nor the testimony of Jesus, and their Ministry
is but as Chaff to the Wheat, and the Lord is against them; For what is the
chaff to the wheat, says the Lord, Jer. 23. Is not my word like a fire, says
the Lord, and like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces. Now many have the
letter, and know not the word of the Lord as a fire, neither is the rock broken
with the letter, and such use their tongue, for it is their own, and the power
of the Lord is not come over it, such cause the People to err, and does not
profit them, being not sent, nor commanded of the Lord, for who are sent and
commanded of the Lord, the Lord uses their tongues to speak his words, which
he puts into their mouths, and such words does profit the people, and not cause
them to err, being spoken according to the law, which is light; And the
testimony of Jesus, which is the Spirit of Prophecy; and such do witness the
Scriptures, that as they cannot be broken* so they cannot be denied by the
Spirit which gave them fo^th to be a Declaration, of those things which was
reveale^, known, and believed: But they are not that which they are a
declaration of, the letter testifies of the eternal life, but it is not, it
neither gives it: It testifies of the Light of ^he glorious Gospel shining in
the heart, which gives the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, but it
is not that light which gives that knowledge* It testifies of the Way, but
Christ is the Way; and of the Word* but God is the Word; and of Redemption, but
Christ is the Redemption, and not the letter, though it testifies of
Justification, and Sanctification, but they are wrought by the Word in the
grace and power of Christ, and so every one who will own the Scriptures, as
they were given forth to be owned must first own that of God in them, which is
manifest to work in the Creature, that which they testify of, that Christ the
power of God they may witness, working all their works in them, and for them,
according to the Scriptures.

But contrary to the Scriptures, I. S. from the root of Error, says, That the
written letter is the spiritual Arm and Sword of the Spirit, and that the very
power of the written Letter puts Satan to flight^: And in the same Page, says,
That the Devil has Scripture in his mouth.

Answer.
Answ. Let the People take notice, and read the Scriptures, and see if there be
any such thing that the sword of the Spirit was ever in the Devils Mouth; for
the spiritual Armor which is said to be the Word of God: But the Word of God,
which is the sword of the Spirit, is that by which he is to be destroyed, and
is in the mystery hid from him, and all that follow his lusts: But though the
Devil, which did not abide in the truth, and his Ministers who are out of the
truth, may take the letter in their mouths as they have done, and say its
written so, but the word of the Lord*s not in their mouths, which is the sword
of the Spirit, and such will use the letter in their mouths which cannot cease
from sin, whose eyes are full of Adultery, beguiling unstable Souls, their
heart being exercised with covetous practices, cursed children, which have
forsaken the right way, and are in the Error of Balaam, loving the wages of
unrighteousness, and taking them, and such have the letter in their mouths, but
knows not the Word of God, which who comes to know, it restrains them from all
such practices.

Again, I. S. from his blindness and root of Error, and lying heart, wherein
dwells no truth, but much confusion says that the letter, i. e. the Scriptures
is the true ground of the believers Faith: and again in the same page says,
That Christ in the Scriptures is the true Ground of Faith: And to prove the
former, he brings Prove. 22. 19. 20, 21. That thy trust may be in the Lord, I
have made known to thee this day, even to thee, have not I written to thee
excellent things in Counsels and Knowledge, that I might make thee know the
certainty of the words of truth, that thou might answer the words of truth
to them that send unto thee.

Answer.
Answ. By this Scripture the Lord is made the ground of Faith, and not the
Letter: And therefore did the Prophet make known excellent things in writing,
in counsel, and knowledge, and for this end did the Apostles both preach and
write, that the Faith of those which heard them, and read their writtings,
might not stand in the wisdom of words, nor in the letter, as its ground, but
in Christ the Power of God, and Christ who preached the true doctrine, that in
it every one might believe* said to the World, and to the pharisees, While ye
have the light, believe in the light, that ye may be the Children of light, and
these had the letter, but did not believe in the light, which light is Christ,
and which light is the foundation of Faith, and is the foundation of many
generations, in which many did believe, before, this letter which declares of
it was written; And that Faith which stands in the light, and in the power of
God is the ground of the Scripture letter, from whence it did proceed; after
they believed they spoke and wrote that which is now declared, in Chapters. And
every one which come to the true ground of Faith, must come to the light to
believe in it, that they may be the Children of it, and then the Scriptures
will be profitable unto them, they with the light having the understanding
opened to see for what end they were given forth, and how they come to be
fulfilled, and witnessed in that which gave them forth; for the ground of Faith
to believers is but one both before and since the Scriptures was written, which
is Christ, in whom whosoever believes shall be saved, let Christ be in what he
will, for he was the ground of Faith, when the letter was not, and he is the
ground of Faith when it is, and no other foundation for Faith can any man lay,
than that which is laid, Jesus Christ who is the true light, and enlighteneth
every man that comes into the world, that all men in him might believe, and
they that believe not that he is so, shall die in their sins, as Christ says,
Joh. 8. 24.

But John Stelham going on in his own devised Fables, would pervert the words
of truth, both in our writings, and in the Apostles, as it is manifest, in his
writing, of this reviling Rebuke concerning R. F. and I. N. E. B. and F. H. and
others, which whosoever read their words, and his, they may discern truth from
devised fables without much Reply unto it, as in some places he is mingling his
own words with theirs, joining a lie to the truth, that he may contradict it as
false; as every one that reads with understanding will see, which when they
have spoken plain truths, which he himself has often in his Book confessed
unto to be truth, will afterward give his meanings to their words, as he has
done unto the Apostles words, saying, If they mean thus, etc. then he goes
about to contradict his own meaning, and when he has contradicted his own
meaning; then he says he has contradicted their words, though he have before
confessed the truth of their words, so he has not contradicted the words as
they were spoken, but because they spoke not his meaning with the words,
therefore the true words must be false in his judgment, and bear his rebuke,
as his Book does make manifest, and adding his lie to the words of truth, these
two things are his greatest proofs to resist the truth, in page 77. he has
mingled his own words with the words of R. F. in which page he acknowledges a
former addition, and yet renews another. R. F. having been speaking of the
light, which enlighteneth every man which comes into the world, (he adds)
which where it is (and it is in every man, it renews the judgment, etc*) he
here adding his own, and then rebuking it, would make people believe lies, that
all might be damned who believe not the truth.

But on the contrary, for we never have said that every man's judgment is
renewed with the light, though they be enlightened, for they are enlightened
who hate it* and who are void of true judgment because they hate the light
which they be enlightened withal. And also the Apostles words he perverts and
gives meanings unto, which if he did not they would be a plain testimony with
that which he has set himself to oppose, so giving meanings both to their
words, and our words, his meanings must be the ground of his Believers Faith,
and not the Scriptures, as he said before.

The Apostle Peter speaking of a more sure Word of Prophecy, wherein they did
well to take heed, as unto a light that shined in a dark place, until the day
dawn, and the day star arise in their hearts, 2 Pet. 1. 19. Knowing this first,
that no Prophecy of the Scripture is of any private interpretation, for the
Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as
they were moved of the holy Ghost, to this I. S. adds not heart-prophesie, no
breast-prophesie, but written down in Books, etc. which is contrary to the
Apostles words, for he does not exclude heart-prophesie, for there was never
any prophecy but did proceed out of the heart before it was written in any
Book.

And the Apostle says, Until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your
hearts, and that holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost,
and that which moved them to speak Prophesies was in their hearts, and the
Apostle did not bid them wait till the day star did arise in the Scriptures,
but till it did arise in their hearts, and then he told them how the Prophesies
of the Scriptures came.

Peter saying, Until the day dawn, and the day star arise in our hearts, I. S.
says, That is until by the study of the Scriptures, more light be cleared up,
etc.

Now let all them of understanding, read, and compare his words, and the
Apostles, and they may well conclude with his confession, that he has an old
lying heart, and flesh, in which dwells no truth, but the root of error and
gainsaying of the truth; and as for many other of his devised fables, and false
meanings, though I let them pass here unanswered; yet they may be seen with the
mind, informed in the truth; and all who are of God, and of the truth, may know
that it is a small matter for us to be rebuked, or judged to be in confusion,
who so evidently has confounded both our words, and the Apostles, into his own
false meanings, and so contradicts them both; but that remains sure which
gave forth the Scriptures, and abides in us, and we know that they cannot be
broken, but must be fulfilled, as they were given forth by the Word, which they
were given forth from, by taking heed unto which the young man's way is
cleansed, and by which the old lying heart is reproved, that which was given
forth from the Spirit, cannot be by it denied, but that which would darken
words without knowledge is denied; that which would set up devised fables above
Christ, the Spirit, and Scriptures, that by the Spirit is denied without
contradiction, and as we shall by the Spirit, and by the Scriptures try John
Stelhams Doctrine; which if he deny them both* then by his own Argument we
shall prove him, and see whether he will own himself to be judged by that with
which he would judge others, whether they be Messengers sent by Gods Spirit: His
Assertion laid down Page 60, to try withal, is ^his:

Such Messengers as speak more than is in the Scripture, are not sent by Gods
Spirit, nor guided by him to what they say. By this then is all that of him
before mentioned, cast out, being both more, and contrary, to what is in the
Scripture; as also that which is to be declared, as follows in his second
head, as he calls it, of Scripture Contradiction; he is speaking concerning a
Trinity, and three Persons: which words a^e not spoken in the Scriptures, he
naming the Father, Son, and Spirit, by such names as the Scripture never did:
and so about words and names which the Scripture does not mention, arising out
of the Devination of his heart does he multiply words to hide the truth, and
shut the kingdom from men, and so has no ground, for the word three Persons,
from the Scripture, but the Scripture in one translation speaking of Christ
being the express Image of the Fathers Person, and in another translation
says, that he is the express Figure of the Fathers substance, as he is
witnessed to be by those that know him, and so till he find the word three
Persons and Trinity in the Scriptures* let him own his own rule to judge him,
to be no Messenger sent by Gods Spirit, because he speaks more than is in the
Scripture, who says, The holy Ghost is a Person, and this person dwells in
Saints, though not personally: (mark this) A Person dwell in the Saints not
personally: all this confusion is as tares, which men gather, which must be
bound in bundles and cast into the fi^e; for what is the Chaff to the Wheat, or
what is a I such invented words to the knowledge of the Father, Son, and
Spirit, which are one, which bear record in heaven; and there are three that
bear witness in earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, and these three
agree in one, and when these are known in their witness in man, what they
witness unto, and what they witness against within and without, such will give
them names according to their works* and according to the Scriptures.

The Third Head of John Stelhams Scripture Contradiction is concerning the
light which every man is enlightened withal; which of all things is most hated
by all such whose ways, words, and works, are contrary to it; for it being
risen in the hearts of the Children of men, to give the knowledge of the truth,
has in this day made many wiser than their Teachers, and now they which have
caused people to err, are by the light seen, and by the children of light are
denied: and they being denied, their envy is up against the light which has
made them manifest; and they walk not by the light, nor according to the
Scriptures, but there is a line of confusion comes over them; by which now they
walk, and from which their Writings does proceed, as John Stelham in page 52
says, they may affirm agreeable to the Scripture, and yet contradict the
Scriptures in saying that Christ is in every man, or that the light in every
man leads to the Father; And says, Christ, God, or as God is in every man, and
a spark of his godhead light is in every man, but there is not in every man
that redemption light which leads to the Father.

Answer.
That Light which Christ has enlightened every man withal leads to the Father,
all who are led by it and believe in it, and condemns all from the Father which
do not obey it, but hate it, and speak dispitefully against it, who are turned
out from God who is light and truth, into the confusion, saying, that the
God-head-light is not the Redemption-light; but with the light that Lie and
confusion is judged for ever: and in affirming that the Godhead light is in
every man, and then calling it common and old Creation-light, and
Scripture Light, page 61* and the light of Nature, page 74, 75. and a legal
light, page 76. and a created light, page 78. and an universal light, (unto
which I say, as God is, so is his light, and so is his godhead not created, nor
natural, and as every one comes to know the light, which by I. S. is so
reviled, they shall neither follow, nor believe his Doctrine, till he can prove
when the light of the Godhead was created, and how it became natural, or legal,
or where he had those names, for the Scriptures does give no such names to the
light; and so by his own rule he speaking more than is in the Scripture, is not
a Messenger sent by Gods Spirit, nor guided by it in what he says.

As also in other things, as in Page 64. saying, That light without Scripture
is no light: Then Enoch's light in which he walked with God was no light, nor
Jacobs light, nor Isaacs, nor Abraham's, for they were without these Writings,
and this letter which he calls the Scriptures; but they were not without light:
And thousands have so much light, whether they have the Scriptures or not as to
see this darkness, as to say light, though saving light without Scripture is no
light; did the Scriptures make the light to be light, and was the saving light
made by that which was written, let all take notice and turn away from such: in
another place he calls the Scriptures but the Declaration that Christ is the
Word, and calls them a Vessel that the light is put into, in page 43. and 44.
Now let them of understanding consider and judge whether the vessel be the
maker of that which is put into it, and whether Wine that is put into a Bottle
be made Wine by the bottle, or whether is it not Wine without the bottle, and
Water put into a vessel be not Water without the vessel, or whether the vessel
make it to be Water: John Stelham says, Every verse of Scripture is a little
vessel of light, and that light without Scripture is no light, so these things
have I laid open, that every one may see how the Lord has turned wise men
backward, and made their wisdom foolishness, and that they may see how those
stumble and fall, and are snared, and taken; whose light is turned into
darkness, and how great that darkness is, and now are the Scriptures not
denied, but fulfilled, for now is the light and truth come into the world, by
which they are found to be blind which said they saw, and in which they see,
that were blind, and now the depths are seen which are covered with darkness,
and Babylon is seen the Mother of Harlots which bring forth in confusion, and
bind up in ignorance other confusions and lies I shall also mention, given
forth by I. S. in his Book.

As page 68. he says, That God was, and is the Word, according to Joh. 1. 1.
and in page 69. he says, The Father is not the Word, nor never so called
(which is contradiction) and in page 70. says, Christ is more in the
Scriptures than in his Saints (which is false) for greater was that which the
words came from than the words, which did but declare of the fullness from
whence they came* as all that know Christ will bear witness unto, and against
all such that say Christ is more in the words than in them which speak the
words.

Again, in page 73. he says Christ the Author of Salvation to them that obey
him, speaking in the Scripture saves by the Scripture (which is false and
contrary to the testimony of the Scriptures and the witness of them which
witnessed his Salvation, who said, By his life are we saved, and by Grace
through faith which was the gift of God, and not by the letter; and their
witness was true for God and his Works, and against all such who are of a lying
heart, and spirit of error, who would make the letter to be the light (yea
more, even that which makes light to be light, and so greater; for that which
makes a thing is greater than the thing that is made, and would have the letter
to be the Word, when as the letter says* God is the Word, and would make the
Scriptures to be that by which people are saved, as in page 73 saying* Christ
saves by the Scriptures, but the Scriptures speak no such thing of themselves,
for they say that there is no other name under heaven by which men can be
saved, but by the name of Jesus* neither is there such a word written in the
Bible that say men is saved by Scriptures, nor that the light of the Godhead is
natural as I. S. says, that he may set up a light of Scriptures as he calls
it.

And he speaks in page 82. of having our minds darkened with the light of
Scriptures; mark, does that light, which he has in all his Book been exalting
above the Godhead light, and above that light which Christ has enlightened
every man withal, darken men's minds, what is it then that must enlighten them,
here is his testimony of the light brought up to the full, that all, who can
receive it may believe it, for he says to us, if our minds were not darkened,
with the light of the Scriptures, the two texts in Romans 10. 18. and Col. 1. 23.
might resolve us how the Gospel is preached to every Creature, and not to the
principle of light in the Conscience, how can the Scripture resolve us of the
light, if it darken our minds, but by these things this is made manifest, that
darkness has blinded his eyes that he neither knows the light, nor the
Scriptures which was given forth from it.

Again, another of his contradictions concerning the light in page 23, 24.
compared with page 75. is this, saying the light that shined in Paul's heart,
and the light that shines in the Scripture is the same light, and God who
shines in the heart by Gospellight, according to the Apostles words, 2 Cor. 4.
4. contrary unto which in his 75 page says. That the Gospel light about
matters of Salvation, of which the Apostle speaks, never entered, never shined
into men's hearts.

Answer.
Answ To this let all take notice, and consider, whether of these two
(Contraries) they are to believe: the one saying, God shines in their hearts
by Gospel light: and the other says, It never entered nor shined into men's
hearts: But if the Scriptures or the Apostle is to be believed, he says, for
God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts
to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ, but we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of
the power may be of God, and not of us, ^ Cor. 4. 6, 7. here was the light of
the Gospel shining in their hearts in matters of Salvation* giving them the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, and they were the
vessels in which the light did shine, and from which they spoke the hidden
wisdom of God in a mystery, and so that which they spoke of the light, and of
the Gospel is yet a mystery unto such whose eye is blinded, with the God of
this world, and the ways of unrighteousness, knowing neither the light nor the
Gospel of Salvation, but filling up their line of confusion as has been
already manifest; and may further be made manifest.

Priest.
Again, John Stelham in his 6. head of Scripture Contradiction speaks concerning
the Law, and goes about to distinguish between the two Covenants which the
Scriptures speaks of, but knows not what he speaks, nor of what he affirms,
but contrary to the Scriptures speaking of a Moral and of a Ceremonial Law
which the Scriptures speaks of no such words, nor no such distinctions, as of a
Moral Law to be the Covenant of Works, and that the Ceremonial Law is not a
Covenant of Works, but of Grace.

And whereas he tells of a Covenant of Nature which is one with the Covenant of
Works; and so here is several Covenants which I. S. has made, and several
Names here given to the Covenants which God never gave, nor they which spoke of
the Covenants never gave such names to the Law in the words of Scripture as
Moral, Legal* Natural, Ceremonial, so that is all without, and contrary to the
Scripture language.

And whereas he goes about to prove Adam to be under a Moral Law, which he
calls a Law of Works, but has no Scripture to prove it from, but from his
suppositions: as thus, If it was not of Grace, it was a Covenant of Works* and
again, If the Covenant of Works was not made with Adam in innocence, God could
not in justice require satisfaction of his posterity under the Fall, etc. A
third supposition to prove Adam under a Covenant of Works is this, Either he
stood under the Covenant of Works, or was under the Covenant of Grace, or he
was under no Covenant, etc.

Unto which I Answer, All such Priests and Teachers who be out of innocence
themselves cannot tell what Covenant those are in with God who are innocent,
and in the image of God in holiness and righteousness, and therefore from such
have we so much perverting of the Scriptures, and violating of the Law of God,
to make it according to their imaginations; But unto such God says, What have
thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in
thy mouth, seeing thou hate Instruction* and castest my Words behind thee,
psalm. 50. 16. Thou give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames deceit; But
I say that Covenant in which Adam was with God in his innocence, and in his
image, he stood in that, and by that, by which he was made a living Soul, and
in that was in unity and Covenant with God, for the disobedience of which he
was driven out from God into the Earth; and none was under the Law of Works,
neither was that Law added until there was transgression which it was added
because of; but that which is innocent, and without sin, unreprovable in Gods
sight, is under no Law but that which endures for ever, which does free from
sin and death those that be in it, which is made manifest unto some since the
falling from it, and which the Isles is to wait for till it be made manifest
where it is not already revealed, and all who come to have right to speak of
Gods Precepts and to take his Covenant in their mouths, they see and comprehend
all such darkness, which does not speak according to words of Scripture, but
speaks of three Covenants contrary to Scripture, saying, that the first
Covenant promises nothing of Salvation, nor mentioning nothing of a Savior,
and yet says, that that Covenant is a part of Gods Word, and his Will, and
pure law, (and yet mentions nothing of a Savior) and again says that the
Moral Law, he calls of Works, which promises no Salvation, mentions nothing
of a Savior) that this which mentions nothing of a Savior, is to be a
directory and rule to true believers, for the ordering of their Sanctification
(^s it is also in Christ's hand guiding them by his Spirit) so this cannot build
nor join together, and so time to cease building* any more in confusion; but in
denial of that false doctrine, I say, That there is but two Covenants spoken of
in the Scriptures, which is a plain testimony of them without any such
confusion or contradiction as the Apostles to the Hebrews, saying in that he
says a new Covenant, he has made the first old, etc. And in the first
Covenant as you may read, Heb. 9. in all these things there was Christ held
out, and mentioned in the shadows and figures; and so that Covenant which
promises no Salvation, nor mentions any thing of a Savior, that we deny;
for there is not such a Covenant in the Scriptures, -- For that which said, Do
this and live* promised life, and mentioned Christ who is the life, and by
Christ who is the life and light of men is that Covenant fulfilled, and by his
power both the obedience and life is brought forth, of which that Covenant
speaks and the new Covenant being come that God has promised, wherein he
has put his Law in their hearts, and his Spirit in their inward part, and all
such needs not to come to such Priests to be taught, who tells of a Covenant
which promises no Salvation, nor mentions any thing of a Savior; for we,
who be in the second* know the first fulfilled, which Christ was held forth in
under Ordinances of Divine Service, and a worldly sanctuary, and diverse
washings, and carnal Ordinances which never made the comers thereunto perfect
as pertaining to the Conscience; but now is Christ the Covenant of God, and
Covenant of light come and preached, and with his light shines in men's
Conscience that he may make perfect as pertaining to the Conscience, which
Covenant is now witnessed among thousands (and such denied which speak of a
Covenant that mentions nothing of a Savior, and that to be the rule of true
believers.)

Priest.
Again, in John Stelhams 5th head of Scripture Contradiction, he speaks
concerning Sin, saying, That the more a Soul is sanctified, the more he sees
his moats to be beams; and that Paul was groaning and sighing all his life time
under the body of sin and death.

Answer.
Both these are false: For the more a Soul is sanctified, he is not the more
taught to lie, or to see falsely, but the more he is taught to see clearly, and
discern a moat to be a moat, and a beam to be a beam, and knows the differance:
And Paul thanks God who had given him the victory over sin and death, which he
had not while he groaned under the body of it; and so both the Saints, and the
work of sanctification, is falsely accused by such, and such are to be denied,
as Enemies to God, and to his Work.

In the reading of this, let all people take notice, That in the several and
particular Heads of I. S. Book, where he says, he has contradicted us; he is
proved himself to contradict the Scriptures: and so far as he contradicts the
Scriptures in those particulars, so far he may say he contradicts us, and our
testimony being one with the Scriptures in them things.

Priest.
For in his 6 Head, as concerning Justification, he says, He that is justified,
is justified by God, not under the Aspect or Notion of a Saint, and as such;
but of a sinner, and as a sinner believing in Jesus, not as he loves God, or
overcomes the world by Faith, etc. but as believing on Christ dying, etc.

Answer.
Now this testimony of I. S. is contrary to the Scriptures, for God never
justified any as hating of him, nor as a sinner, but as made obedient through
Faith according to the Scriptures, as the Apostle witnesses, Gal* 2. 16. Even
by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we
might be justified by the faith of Christ, etc. so they believed that they
might be justified and the ungodly they were first called (out of their
ungodliness) and whom he called, them he also justified; and they whom he
justified, them he also glorified, and by him all that believe are justified
from all things from which they could not be justified by the law of Moses,
Acts 13. 39 and so all who are justified by the Lord, are justified from their
sins, and not in them, as all shall witness who come to be justified by Christ
from their iniquity.

And whereas I. S. would set the law and justice of God at a difference with
the Gospel, and as contrary, in saying, the law and justice finds us, and
leaves us sinners; Gospel and Mercy declares, and pronounces us righteous:
now the one pronouncing a man righteous and the other pronounce the same to be
a sinner; these two are contrary: but the Scripture has another testimony,
saying mercy and truth are met together, righteousness and peace have kissed
each other, Psalm 85. 10. Now here is unity, here is not righteousdess,
pronouncing one thing, and mercy another; for the righteousness of God is
revealed from heaven against the disobedient; and this will not leave them
disobedient, nor sinners, if ever they come to mercy: for it does not leave
them as it finds them: and so that doctrine is accursed from God, which says,
That the justice finds them sinners, and leaves them so; and to say that
Justices pronounce them sinners, and Mercy pronounce them righteous: but to
satisfy all people, a few words may serve to answer the volume of that
darkness and blindness given forth by him before mentioned, should a man full
of words be justified, Job 11* 2.

Again, Concerning I. S. in his 7. Head concerning Regeneration, says, That
the Word of God that is Preached, was never without, or besides Scripture, etc.
And as in other places he has said, That the Spirit is given by the Letter; so
here would make Regeneration to proceed from it; which this being denied, he
concludes it had been better the Scripture had not been known, no^ written.

Answer.
The Word and Gospel was Preached unto Abraham, without Scripture and before the
Scriptures was written: and they who are Regenerated and born again, it is by
the immortal Word which is able to save their Souls, which Word was before the
letter was written, and who be begotten again, and born by that Word, it is
profitable for such that the Scriptures was written and given forth, and the
Scripture by such is honored; but such who calls the letter the light, and
the Word, and that which begets again into the new birth, by such both the work
of God is despised, and the Scriptures perverted, and denied.

Priest.
Again, I. S. in his 8. Head of Contradiction, speaking of Perfection, utters
forth more consusion and contradiction to himself, in his speaking of the
Communion of the Saints in heaven, and does lie concerning the Saints on earth,
saying, The Saints in Heaven hoped for the perfection of their bodies at the
Resurrection, etc. And again contradicts that, in saying, That at death they
have a final perfection, and a full harvest, and reward of peace, etc.

Answer.
Now this is the issue, that all people may take notice, he has so envied
perfection and Christ's doctrine, which says, Be ye perfect as your Father
which is in Heaven is perfect; and them who now Preaches that doctrine, that
he has set out a volume to declare against the Saints being perfect here: yea,
and his envy has reached to Heaven to prove that the Saints in heaven is not
perfect, but waits for the Redemption of their bodies; which now if people mind
the Scripture, there is no such doctrine in it as the Saints in heaven has not
received the Redemption of their bodies, for they who had received the first
fruits of the Spirit upon earth, did wait for the adoption and for the
redemption of the body, till the Creature it self be delivered into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God, and Romans 8.
this was witnessed, and is witnessed* and this is the work of the worlds
Teachers instead of presenting them perfect in Christ Jesus as the Apostles
did, they would make people believe that the Saints in heaven their bodies is
unredeemed; if so, where is that redemption wrought? And whereas I. S. would
make people believe that there is none clean: now Christ said concerning those
that followed him, Now eyere clean, through the Word which ^ have spoken unto
you, John 15 3. And David says, That the Lord is good unto such as are of a
clean heart, Psalm. 73. 1. And the Lord said concerning his people, That he
would pour clean water upon them, and they should be clean from all their
filthiness, Ezekiel. 36. 25. And this Prophecy was to be fulfilled: and the Lord
said also by his Prophet Zeph. That his Remnant should do no iniquity, nor
speak lies, neither should a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth, Zeph. 3.
13. And Paul preached wisdom among them that were perfect; and as many as were
perfect should be so minded, and Christ preached to the pure in heart that they
should see God, Matthew. 5. Now if there were none perfect, Christ preached unto
such as there was not.

Now this is the chief ground of I. S. and the rest of the enemies of truth and
of perfection, to declare against it because some fall from it, as his instance
of C. A. or others in the like: To which I answer, Their falling into that
which is not perfect, does not make that which they fall from imperfect, for
the Angels that kept not their first state, which was perfect, did fall from
that which was perfect: A virgin state is perfect, but if any go out of that
state, and become foolish, yet that which they depart from is perfect; and if
any do fall from the truth, and do not abide in Christ's doctrine, that does not
make his Doctrine to be unperfect; for Christ says, Except they abide in him,
who is perfect, they cannot bring forth fruit: is not he that is in Christ
perfect, though some do not abide in him, and is not the truth, truth, because
some deny it? Was not Christ's Doctrine and the Apostles true, because Demas did
forsake it, and love the present world: and was not that part of the Ministry
which Judas had committed unto him perfect? and was not he the true Christ that
Judas preached, though afterward he betrayed him? now if people do but truly
consider all those that now do turn from the way of truth, which is now
preached, and lived in by us, it may be an evident token to justify us in the
way of truth, seeing what they go into when they go from the light which Christ
has enlightened them withal, which while they abide in it, are kept out of
all filthiness of flesh and spirit: and so long they may speak of perfection,
and of the gift of God which is perfect; but if any go from the light, then
they are let at liberty to act all uncleanness with greediness, and so are cast
out from us, and from perfection: and if any such deny the truth, and forsake
it, yet there remains in them a withness for the truth, and against their own
uncleanness, as in C. A. who from the witness of God in him, was made to
confess that if he had continued in the light of Christ, he could not have so
sinned against the Lord, and so by his transgression fell from the way of life,
and could not continue in Christ's Doctrine no longer: and so such things may
satisfy people concerning the way of truth: for while they are of us, all such
things is denied by them: but when they go out from us, then they become
Drunkards, Swearers, Profane, Adulterers, Fornicators, and so every evil Work
is committed, and then they turn to the Priests Doctrine, where all such things
are, and are excused: and then the Priests rejoice and give thanks if any turn
from the light of Christ, and the obedience of the Gospel into Drunkenness and
Profaneness again, where they were before, and if they will but swear and
respect men's persons, and use the rod of violence, and persecute, and shed the
blood of the Innocent, and be conformable to the World, that is the Priests
rejoicing; and if any turn from the truth into any act of uncleanness, then
they take that as a proof against those that abide in the truth: and such a
thing is a better proof to them then all the Scriptures* and those are they
that re^oy^^ in ^niquity, and watch for evil, and so they rejoice in that
which we have ^ast out as abomination* and these are they that plead for a life
in sin while they are here, and that say that the Saints glorified in Heaven do
yet hope for the Resurrection of their bodies, and so not come to the end of
their hope though in Heaven, whenas the Saints upon earth Witnessed the end of
their hope, the salvation of their souls. Now these may well deny perfection on
earth, who deny it in Heaven, which the Saints, we, and the Scriptures do
witness it in both, and against all such who are not fit to speak of the
things of God.

Again, In his 9th Head of contradiction he speaks of a Wa^far (which yet he
himself never came unto,) and in it he wrests Paul's words, and so would turn
the truth into a lie, saying, as if Paul should say thus: If sin that wars and
fights in me has no power to condemn me, then there is no condemnation to me:
which words Paul never spoke, and it is a lie in the ground, for it is not sin
that is the condemnation, but the light which lets men see their sins, because
men love darkness rather than the light: as many in this age have manifested
themselves to do, and the light shall be their condemnation who are not yet
come to the War, nor to the Victory which the Scripture speaks of.

Again in his 10th Head of Contradictions speaking of Repentance, as if he
would prove that we denied, or disclaimed godly sorrow, and his proof is this:
If we disclaim in* dwelling sin in the godly, we disclaim godly sorrow. Let all
people take notice of this, If we deny in-dwelling sin, we deny godly sorrow:
this is contradiction in the highest degree; but against it, this I shall
affirm, that none comes unto godly sorrow, but they deny dwelling sin, and they
that do not deny in-dwelling sin, denies godly sorrow.

Again, John Stelham in his 11th Head of Contradictions to the Scripture, in
his speaking of the Word, and means of Grace: he is setting up that which
before he has been pulling down, in page 123. where he says: That they are
justified from all legal obligations, and conditions of their own workings both
within them, and without them. And in page 174. he is setting up Obligations
and conditions of Reading, Hearing, Prayer, Preaching, to which he says, life
and salvation is promised: and so would have salvation come by Works, which he
has so much declared against before, and so makes Prayer, Reading, Preaching,
etc. not only the means through which salvation comes, but the cause for which
they are saved, saying: To prayer is promised salvation. Now to the informing
of minds of people, I say, That all promises are to the Seed, and the
fulfilling of the promises, is witnessed through its obedience to Christ's
command, and through the works of righteousness: but none can pray so as to be
heard of God and accepted, but who have first known, heard, and believed him
whom they call upon, which none do but who own the light which Christ has
enlightened them withal, which teaches to Pray, Hear, Read, and Preach with
knowledge and understanding.

Again, I. S. in his 12th Head concerning Baptism, would go about to prove the
sprinkling of Infants to be the Baptism, and so denies both John's who was
from, and Christ's, and the manner of them, and sets up another which the
Scripture does not mention, as sprinkling Infants, which who reads his Books
may see his proofs: by consequences would have the Scripture speak that which
in never mentions in plain Precept* and so would turn the truth into alye,
and so by his own rule in the 68th page of his Book shall he be judged: Such
Messengers as speak more then is in the Scripture are not sent by Gods Spirit*
nor guided by him to what they say. But that all people may come to a right
understanding of the Scriptures, and that which is testified by them, is to
come to the light which Christ has enlightened them withal, which light was
before Ordinances was, and which light gives to see the place of Ordinances,
and their time wherein they are to be obeyed, for the light comes from the
substance of all the diverse washings, and carnal Ordinances, and it leads into
the one Baptism which is the substance of that of Water which John who was a
Prophet was the Minister of, and Christ said unto his Disciples, John verily
baptizeth with Water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost, and with
fire; but he never commanded them to baptize with Water, but commanded them to
go teach all Nations, baptizing them into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost: and although some of the Disciples, and Paul for a time did Baptize with
Water: yet who shall judge their permission in it, although Paul an Apostle of
Jesus Christ witnesses, that he was not sent to baptize, but to preach the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 1. 17. and thanks God that he had baptized no more of them, yet
witnessed that they were all Baptized with one Spirit into one Body. And I. S.
says, To be against Infants Baptism, is contrary to Acts 2. 28, 29. This is
false, for that Scripture does not command it, nor give president for it; let
the Reader search if he find any such thing, as the Scripture proving Infants
Baptism, but the promise is to as many as the Lord shall call, and so he has
foully belyed the Scripture, for if that Scripture be contrary to such who are
against Infants Baptism, then must he prove from that Scripture Infants
Baptism to be commanded as practiced, which he cannot do, and so is a
perverter of the Scripture, and it is truth that we do deny brain imaginations,
and sprinkling Infants with water; but then he rambles over many Scriptures,
proving the Baptism of Believers; these proofs are impertinent, what is this
to prove Infants Baptism? so that is passed by here, as making arguments
against Believers Baptism, except one professing that were our present
adversary, but in this he is pursued from all the Scriptures; he cannot prove
in justice that ever Infants Baptism was either commanded, or practiced,
though he craftily wind about never so much in his Imaginations and
consequences. And in the general I answer: Much by us have been written and
spoken to this purpose, so our judgments in this charge is fully known, of
which we are not ashamed before men, as being fully justified herein in the
sight of the Lord; and so as to this particular more need not be said.

Again in the 12th Head of Scripture, Contradiction as he says concerning the
Lords Supper* I. S. makes much ado because of our denial of carnal
Inventions, and Imitations practiced by many in the exercise of that called the
Supper of the Lord, though with one heart and mind we say, and witness that
Christ's flesh and blood is our meat and drink, and none has life in them
without it; yet does receive it in the Spirit and power of God, and does bear
our testimony against Imitations, and false likenesses set up in the World, as
the Wicked and Profane people, such as live in pride and wickedness, and
covetousness, both teachers and people, eating a little Bread* and drinking
Wine so many times a year in such a form and manner, and way as Christ nor his
Apostles never practiced such things in, and no change wrought among people but
both before and after (if not in the very time) fulfilling all wickedness and
unrighteousness in words, and ways, and thoughts; yet by false suggestion
from their Teachers, believing vainly themselves to be the better, or Saitns
for the practice of such things, whereas they do the more thereby vex the Lords
soul, and grieve his Spirit by hypocrisy and deceit: this we call carnal
Inventions, and does deny it in the presence of the Lord that it is evil, and
not accepted of God, but condemned in his sight. I. S. proves not that any
thing which Christ instituted to be practiced among the Saints only, even was
practiced in the World among such who are not called, neither sanctified, and
this is abomination to the Lord, to practice the Saints words, or ways, and
have not the Spirit of the Father, which we cannot see among the people of this
Age, no nor manage them professing to be selected Church members, but pride and
envy abounds among them all; and in that spirit of disobedience in which they
live to the Ordinances of Christ, they have no right to practice that which
only is to be practiced among them that have the Spirit of the Father and
nothing that Christ instituted for his Saints do we deny in its life and age,
but lives are changed, and Antichrist has roled, and even the things which
once he instituted your practice of them who are poluted, are abomination to
him; and this is a full Answer in general, as to the thing, though I pursue
him not in every particular word, and argument, to lay open his folly: but our
judgment in this is known, he that can receive it let him, and the belief of
the wicked we shall not beg: in these things we are approved of God, and in
the denial of all false Imitations, and who is he that shall condemn.

In the 14th* Head concerning Prayer*
Concerning Prayer we do not contradict the Scripture in our practice, I. S. is
the liar herein, who has made it a subject to treat two leaves upon: for
praying in the Spirit, and by the Spirit, and in public and private too we
own, and do practice, as is known to thousands: our enemies can witness for us,
and according to the Scripture too, and not contradicting to it any way: but
this is the offense against him at which he is troubled: that we should deny
the prayers of the Pharisees, or of such who are in the steps of the Pharisees,
viz. who for a pretense make long Prayers, and stands praying in the
Synagogues, who are out of Christ's, and the Apostles Doctrine, and the prayers
and practices of such, we do not deny according to the Scripture, (which
says*) the sacrifice of the wicked are abomination to the Lord: and they shall
receive greater condemnation who makes long prayers for a pretense, as it is
manifest concerning many in this Generation, (and against the praying of the
Hypocrites, and of hirelings, who pretends to pray in love to Souls, when as if
they had not a great sum of money from the people, would not pray among them,
but seek a place to pray at, among such who wou^d give them money, and hire,
and this praying is for a pretense, and we do deny it in public, (and does not
offend God herein,) though we vex I. S. hereby, because some will not worship
the beast, and bow a hat off, while he is praying in an Idols Temple, which he
complains of in I. P. though he himself that prays have a Cap on* (and himself
confesses) not wicked man's prayers are accepted public or private: and here he
has condemned all his own praying, who confesses he is wicked, and sinful,
and his heart is old and lying; Let all take notice of this, which if he had
not confessed it, it is sufficiently proved: then why shall he ever hereafter
be offended, seeing his prayers are not accepted, according to his own
confession, if any tell him so, or declare against his praying, and before any
can truly pray, they must receive the Spirit of the Father, (and them we know
who are not led by the Spirit of the Father*) them and their prayers are to be
declared against by the Saints, and are condemned in the sight of God. And I.
S. says, If this counsel be followed, viz. waiting in the Light, till the
Spirit leading be known, it makes known nothing of Public Ministers, Church
officers, Baptism, Lords Supper* public order of prayer, nor of Christ as
Mediator* nor of the Spirit of promise, etc. The light that every man has
makes manifest nothing of this he says (he in this is a Liar, and slanderer
of the people of God) who are led by the moving of the Spirit in the light of
the word Christ Jesus that lights every man, and owneth the public Ministry
of Christ, which is received by the holy Ghost, and Church, and Baptism, and
Christ as Mediator, and the Spirit of promise: and all these thing* (all the
Saints upon earth who have the spirit of Christ shall witness against I. S.
herein to be a liar of the light and Spirit of God, and so is a transgressor,
and his wickedness may largely be laid open, but the least of the children of
light may see his folly, and madness* who also lyingly says, that Quakers they
nourish up people in the light that every man has, (which is the light of
Christ Jesus) in opposition to Scripture light: this is also utterly false* and
a lie, and the author proved to be of the Devil, for the light of Christ leads
up in the fulfilling of the scripture, and not in opposition to it; but by his
lightness and lies he is made manifest to be a d^c^iver of the people, and so
take thy own words in thy conclusion to thy self, thou art he that is a ienated
from the Scripture, and from the Spirit of God also by thy lying spirit of
Contradict^on, which is manifest in thy writings.

In his 15th Head concerning singing.
We do not contradict the Scripture: (herein again thou art a liar,) but
singing with the Spirit, and with understanding, we own of such as are redeemed
out of the World, and are not of the world* but singing of David's experiences,
sung in the World; by such who are of the World, this singing we do deny as it
is practiced in this Generation, in Rhyme and Meeter, in a vain multitude of
people, where all, or most of them do dishonor God in singing David's words,
which themselves are out of the life of, and in a life quite contrary, singing
the law of God is dear to them, and that they exercise themselves in it, when
every moment of time they are exercised in Wickedness, and casts the Law of
God behind them, and thus singing lies* and that which is not true to them, yet
in the name of the Lord. Other Reasons many may be given why we deny singing in
this Form, and manner, and way, as singing is practiced in this Generation: but
this Instance is sufficient to all honest people, but Cavellers mouths are not
soon stopped, not by the truth: and all I. S. professes as to maintain this
manner and practice of singing, are all impertinent: he proves that the Saints
sang, and were exhorted to it, but what is this to the purpose to prove the
World must sing who are unconverted, which singing we oppose only, and not the
Saints singing in the Spirit, who are moved to it by the Spirit. O thou Liar,
wherefore do thou say, To be against singing David's words (by the world in
Rhyme and Meetre) as we do* is contrary to Ephesians. 5. Col. 3. does these
Scriptures hold forth any such thing, let the Reader try, as that David's
experiences may be sang in the World in Rhyme and Meetre, nay they do not; and
so thou art a liar on the Scriptures, to be taken notice of, and marked for a
wrester of the Scriptures, and in this we have often declared our minds by
words and writings, that Poetry, and I. Hopkins, and T. Sternolds brain
invention we have denied: yet David's Psalms we have owned, and do own them, as
they were given forth by the Spirit of God, and not as they are perverted, and
added, and diminished to such a compass of syllables as they are now in
practice; and thus I have given you a further testimony for, and against
singing, wherein we deny it, and wherein we own it, and so leaves his muddy
stuff, and so counts it not worth raking in, only a Lie, or two, or more he is
proved in, as the Reader may take notice also of one thing more, where he
charges R. F. falsely, to speak falsehood for saying the Priests of Eug. they
teach people to sing, lies in hypocrisy, this they do, and do wickedly in it,
and he has added to their wickedness in denying it to be so: for to all people
without exception they give to sing; I am not puffed in mind, nor has a
scornful eye, and they making not exception in giving forth their Psalms to
sing: (some that they give it forth to are puffed in mind, and have scornful
eyes, and these they teach to sing Lies in hypocrisy to any honest man; this
appears true, let I. S. shuffle and twist never so much.

In the 16th Head concerning Elders, and Ordination.
We do not herein contradict the Scripture, but witnesses forth according to
it, that who are moved by the Spirit of God to watch over the Flock, and
ordained with gifts thereunto, may take the oversight of the Flock wittingly,
and of a ready mind, and not by constraint, nor for filthy lucre sake, as I. S.
and his Generation of false Teachers, who preach for hire, and for gifts, and
rewards: such are not ordained of God to watch over the Flock, but runs and was
never sent, and therefore shall not profit people at all, and such an
ordination we d^^y* who are ordained at Schools, or by natural arts and
sciences to speak their brain-study by a glass, this is by man, and not of God,
and God does deny it, and we testify against it by the Spirit of God, and does
say, the call to the true Ministry and Eldership is not by man, nor of man, but
by the Lord, according to Gal. 1. 1. yet such a one is approved of all the
Saints, and goes forth not contrary to men, who fears the Lord, for the
spirit of life is one in them that are called and ordained by it, and in them
that bears witness to truth what does such approve with the Spirit, that are
called by the Spirit: this is our judgment, and the judgment of truth,
whatever I. S. or any of his fellows raise up to oppose it; and herein we do
not contradict the Scriptures, he is that liar, in the subject matter on which
he treats in the Title of his Section.

In his 17th Head concerning Ministers Maintenance.
Concerning this we do no way contradict the Scripture* but witnesses
according to it, that the Ministers of Christ does receive freely, and gives
freely of what they have received from God, and having planted a vineyard, may
eat the fruit of it, and keeping a flock, may eat of the milk of the flock: and
when they go into a house, may eat such things ^^ are set before them, and yet
may not be chargeable to any man, and this is according to Christ's
instructions, and not contradictory to the Scriptures, though I. S. be pleased
to so style it, but all such who preaches for hire, or takes hire for
preaching, and seeks for their gain, (for 50 l. or 60 l. per a^num* or the
like) from their quarter (a Parish or Town) and such who take Ti^hes, Gifts,
and Rewards for preaching, which people should not give them except they
p^eached, and such who have sums of money, and lives in pleasures and vanities,
and lust* and fullness of the Flesh, as the Priests of England does, (this
maintenance we do deny) and them that act those things, we deny to be Ministers
of Christ, or that any Maintenance by way of a Ministry does belong to such who
are greedy dumb dogs, and can never have enough as Isai 56* such practices and
men we oppose, and does no whit contradict the Scripture, but it witnesses to
us herein, and against all such, and therefore I. S. and his Brethren the
Independants who acts such things, they contradict the Scripture, and so are
truly guilty themselves in action of what they falsely accuse us in words for
such who walks in the steps of the false Prophets, as he and they does that
preach for hire, and takes Gi^ts and Rewards for preaching, are contrary to all
the true Ministers of Christ, and the Scripture, and the Spirit that gave it
forth condemns them: and much as to this we have publicly spoken, and written,
and so here I need say the less, though much might be said to manifest I. S.
folly and vanity though they that plant a vineyard may justly eat the fruit
thereof: yet what is this to purpose, he is a thief that eats of the fruit of
that which he has not planted, but is hired thither for so much per Sermon, or
per annu^, and plants nothing for the Lord, and he that preaches the Gospel may
live of it, but this shames I. S. and this Generation of Teachers, who many of
them might beg bread at peoples doors, had they not a Law by violence to
compel maintenance from them; which thing is a very shame to all righteousness
which is practiced by most of the Priests of England at this day, grievous to
be related what unjust proceedings are acted upon the poor people by unjust
judgments against them for to maintain Ministers, so called; what is the thing
that I. S. pleads for? (Tithes, or a hundred, or two hundred pound a year? he
is a Liar to say that we contradict the Scripture, because we cannot uphold
this, but must bear witness against it, so whilst he falsely charges us with
contradicting the Scripture, in the very same thing he and his Generation are
found in this practice contrary to all the Ministers of Christ that ever was
sent by him, and in the very practice of the Deceivers, Antichrists, and false
Prophets, in making merchandise of people through covetousness, in preaching
for hire, and in seeking for their gain from their quarter, and this is the
very truth, let I. S. and all his fellows read their own contradiction, to the
example of all the Ministers of Christ in their cursed practice of maintenance,
which is the greatest oppression this day in England: and this is their grief
against us, because God has opened our mouths to declare against them, and to
show their folly and wickedness unto all people: and when the Law of the Land
ceases to maintain them, which will come sooner then they expect, then may they
beg their bread, or perish for want, and that is all the fruit that their
vineyard of wild Brambles will bring forth to them, and if every particular of
his words should be searched, much rottenness might be let forth: but in
plainness I have spoken, as to the truth of things in pleading for truth, and
in denying his deceits, and the oppression of hirelings, which I cannot call
Ministers maintenance.

His 18th Head concerning immediate Calling.
In this we do not contradict the Scipture, I. S. is a Liar herein also; but we
say such as are called of God, are called by his Spirit, and lead with it, and
fulfills the will and work of God in the Spirit, and such as are called by the
Spirit of God, are appoved by all the Saints of God* who with the same Spirit
bears witness to such as are called by it, and speaks by it; the Ministry of
God is not of Man, nor by Man, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ, which is
not learned by natural arts, but received in the Holy Ghost, and this the
Scripture bears witness to, (but the Call to the Ministry, by natural learning
at Oxford and Cambridge, this I deny, and trample upon, and all your arts* and
knowledge, and humate study* and languages, is not able to make a Minister of
Christ, (this I do affirm,) though they approve one another, yet are they not
approved of God without his Spirit, and they that have his Spirit denies
natural learning, as to be made a Minister of Christ hereby* and E. B. his
words are owned, transcribed by I. S. cited page 16. in the warning* etc. and
all that he says does not prove that any of the Ministers of Christ were
called by the Church, or approved unto that work of the Ministry, by them who
were not called by the Spirit, and guided with it; he says, the sending of God
is twofold, and for this he has no Scripture to prove it* and so holds forth
that which the Scripture will not evidence: And further he says, he pretends
to no such Call of an Apostle; if he have not the same Call, by the same Spirit
as the Apostles had, he is no Minister of Christ, and in measure he has
confessed to be without the same Call, as the Apostles was called with, and
will not pretend such a Call.

Again, He falsely Charges R. F. with Crucifying the Ministers of Christ: which
is a Lie, and of the Devil, though none of us may spare to call Hirelings,
greedy dumb Dogs, and devourers, and lazy sheperds, and in this we do not
contradict the Scriptures, nor work offense toward God, nor our neighbor: And
he concludes, Who of us (we or they) shall have the worst of it in Conclusion,
the day shall declare: unto that day we are willing to come, by which we, and
all the blind Priests of England shall be manifest; and we know Liars, such as
I. S. shall not have the better, who is to us made manifest already to be out
of the way, and out of the power, and life, of God.

His 19th Head, concerning immediate Teaching.
In this we do not contradict the Scripture, as I. S. falsely charges us withal,
but does say (that we are taught of God) and needs no man to reach us, but as
the anointing of God, which abides in us, and the promise of God is fulfilled
upon us* Jer. 31. we are all taught of God from the least of us to the
greatest, with whom the Covenant of God is established, and this is the cause
wherefore we let forth our selves to the world, who are yet in the unconverted
state, that they also man come to the knowledge of the ways, and teachings of
God in the Spirit, and may come into the Covenant of peace, where none need to
say, know the Lord, but all these are taught of him, (yea and immediately too)
by his Spirit, and this we do witness, and the Lord does witness with us,
though the unbelieving heart of I. S. and his fellows* cannot believe it, but
does gainsay it, as being contrary to the Scripture, when as themselves does
contradict the Scripture in denying it, so proving themselves guilty of what
they do accuse us of falsely, but this is that their folly may appear to all
men, as it does to us, and I. S* has belyed the Scriptures, Dan. 9. 1. and 1 Timothy 4. 14. in saying it is contrary to those Scriptures, to say the teaching of
God is immediate, let the Reader try, and I. S. says, he is yet to learn the
promise of the immediate teachings of God, to be given to all that are to teach
others, and this does make it manifest, that himself is without the promise of
God, and is not yet taught of God, and so without Gods Covenant, being not
learned in the teaching of God by his Spirit, which is immediate.

And thus to confound truth, he has by his confession, shamed himself, and
showed himself to all men, to be unlearned in the doctrine of Salvation.

Further, he says, If God had intended to have given teachings immediately
without any medium* then would he not have sent Preachers abroad for them to
hear: mark this man^ blind productions, and what impudence is in his heart, who
holds forth, That God intended not the thing to be what he promised should be,
he promised to teach his people himself; and this man holds forth, that he
intended it not, and so has no less than charged God with Hypocrisy (let the
Reader mark this) but this is the ground wherefore the Ministers and Preachers
were and are sent abroad, to bring all people to be taught of God by his
Spirit, and to inform their minds, to the gift of God in them, that by the
Spirit received the knowledge of, they might know the things of God, which is
not known but by the Spirit of God, which all that are Children of God are led
and guided by, and they that are not led with the Spirit of God, which Spirit
is immediate, (are not the heirs with Christ) nor none of his* let I. S. say
what he will, or may; this we believe, and this the Scripture gives testimony
of for us, and with us.

Yet further, to manifest his folly, he says, It is erroneous enough, and
contradictious to the whole Scripture, when R. F. truly tells him, and says,
Thou that art not taught of God, shows that thou speaks a vision of thy own
heart, and not from the mouth of the Lord: let the Reader search where the
error and contradiction to the whole Scripture lies in these words, or whether
he has not proved himself blind and ignorant, and in error, and contradiction
to the Spirit of God.

Further, he says, Never did any but God slayers, and Spirit-wounders, go
about to separate the Word of God, and his breath: Now let this be considered,
Christ did tell them (the Pharisees) who had the words, which God had spoken by
the Prophets, that they had never heard the voice of God; here he divides or
separates betwixt the words and the voice (or breath) and was no God-slayer,
nor Spirit-wounder, as thou have wickedly and blasphemously laid down thy
Position, where thou have concluded, Christ to be one against whom thy words
are laid down: let the Reader prove thy doctrine.

His 20th Head, concerning Questions.
In this we do not contradict the Scripture, I. S. is taken with a lie in his
mouth, who has made it a subject to treat upon, (for Questions in their places
we own) but such as are of the Devil we deny, as Christ did who showed himself
as a sool unto all men's wisdom, when the subtle Pharisees and others tempted
him, who would not answer their crafty Questions, though them that questioned
insimplicity, he did to resolve and satisfy them, and inform them into the
knowledge of the Father.

Then some leaves he has filled with producing some of our Queries out of some
of our Books, Commenting thereupon, and would prove them ignorant, and
unprofitable, and the like, but it had been more just, and of a better report
for him to have answered them, and showed them to be (as he says of them) to
all people, rather then in a manner backbited them, and reproached them, and
not showing wherein it lies; and if they be so needless, and vain a^ he says,
then the sooner had such a wise man (as he thinks himself) I. S. confuted them
by sober and plain answers* but what if our folly in the sight of men be wisdom
in the sight of God, and his wisdom foolishness with God? no matter what he say
of us, who has showed himself already, and confessed truly that his heart is
old, and lying, and sinful: so we can expect no better judgment from his Pen
then what is in his heart; but while we are approved in the ^ight of God, we
matter nor what men say of us, especially one that has set himself to be our
enemy, and the Lords enemy, and I leave the honest sober Queries to be read,
which he has falsely branded with Pride and Ignorance, and such like, (as
this) what rule have you in scripture for putting off the Hat? (this is an
honest question) which he wickedly slanders with pride, (and whether is your
Gospel free without charge as the Apostles was, yea or no; these and such other
questions he rails against to be Ignorant, and quarrelous, and vain, and of the
devil; now it had been more honest to have confuted them in answering
discreetly, then to have thus branded them. And he says, It is one thing to
take hire for preaching, and another thing to preach for hire, whereby his
scope is to excuse himself may be, and his Brethren, (who are hirelings,) and
would not be counted to preach for hire, though he dare not deny, lest all men
should see his folly)* but that they have hire for preaching; but then let him
tell us when, or where ever any of them preached, and had no hire, and then we
will believe they preach not for it, but such as receives sums of money of one
man, or a country which would not be given him, except he preached to them*
this same man is a hireling, and preaches because he has hire, and has hire
because (that the ground) he preaches. Further, he says, Christ's righteousness
which justifies a believing sinner is not the essential righteousness of his
Godhead, and here he has spoken ignorantly, and held forth as if there is two
righteousnesses of Christ, which I call for a proof from him for, else let him
confess to his shame that he has added to the Scripture, for the righteousness
of Christ is but one, by which all the Saints are justified.

Further he says ignorantly enough, that which is done according to the bare
letter of the written command, or from a gift of the Spirit, or in a Gospel way
from a living principle of grace, acts of holiness by the holy Spirit, and
Faith given stirred up, this is a righteousness of ours says he, and seems to
separate it from the righteousness of Christ, as he holds forth, let men behold
his ignorance. Further he says, though it be wrought by the strength of Christ
in us, yet as to Justification Paul would not be found in it; (this) for a
word, (mark again Reader) can thou see any thing here but ignorance, as if
Paul were justified by another Christ then what wrought in him, to will, and to
do. Further he says, Paul counted all things but loss and dung, even what he
had done, or suffered since conversion, that he might win Christ. Mark again,
what was the converting of many hundred of souls by Paul, and many other works
of God wrought by him but dung and loss so I. S. holds forth; this is
Ignorance indeed, he has showed his Ignorance by what he has said, and not
proved in any thing, that concerning questions we contradict the Scriptures.

His 21th Head concerning Civil Honor.
In this we do not contradict the Scripture by arguments nor practice* but does
honor all men in the Lord; and cannot respect men's persons, nor have them in
any admiration for any advantage; yea we honor men in reproving them in their
unrighteousness; and I. S. pleads much for civil honor: the Scripture speaks
not of Civil honor, and the question is, what this honor is that he calls
civil? and wherein it may be done, and not in transgression nor in respect of
persons, Magistrates is to be honored by subject on to their just commands,
requests and laws, and by patient suffering under their corrupt Laws, and evil
commands, and not resisting evil: yet the person of no man is to be respected,
for he that does commit sin, and is a transgressor of the law of God, and
Ministers of Christ are to be respected for their works sake, and they desire
no honor nor praise of men, but knows reproach and infamy is their respect
from the men of this Generation: and as for hirelings and deceivers, they are
respected of the world, but condemned of God, and of his Saints, and testified
against, and Parents are to be respected in the Lord by their children, and
Masters by their servants: but where God commands one thing, and Parents or
Masters another, as it often comes to pass, in Christ's time, as it does now,
whether to give respect to God or man, this I leave to be judged by sobe men
that makes conscience of what they say; and thus in short I give* a testimony
how we honor, and would have all honored in the Lord, and leaves I. S. long
discourse to himself and his company, and does bear witness against the vain
superstition, and foolish customs of this Generation.

His 22d Head concerning Swearing.
In this we do not contradict the Scripture, but says and practices according
to Christ's words, Swear not at all, which is spoken absolute, and without
condition, and mitigation (and he says) we take these words of Christ against
his meaning, and this is false and wicked too in I. S. who would he seen to
hold forth, that when Christ said, Swear not at all: he meant not as he spoke,
(for both Christ and the Apostle James were righteous in what they delivered
concerning Swearing) who forbids all manner of Swearing, no cause excepted, and
we take Christ's words according to his mind* and does deny all Oaths, and
abides in Christ, and the Apostles Doctrine, and our yea is so* and our nay is
so, and whatsoever is more comes of evil, and I. S. would plead for swearing
before a Magistrate (but that Magistrate which fears God) and loves his way
will believe a man sooner that cannot swear for conscience sake then he that
makes no conscience of Swearing, and such a one is liker to testify lies with
Oaths, then he that for conscience sake denies Oaths; and in his conclusion he
says scholastically (though Ignorantly) they that will not expound Scripture
by Scripture, and compare the precepts and examples for Swearing without
prohibition against it, fall into Scripture contradiction, but R. F. nor others
will, (therefore etc. this is unsound, and laid down, but not proved at all,
neither major, nor minor, and here by he has concluded wickedly: the Apostle
James, and Christ himself to be fallen into Scripture contradictions who did
expressly forbid all swearing, and did not compare the precepts and examples for
Swearing, with the prohibition against it: and thus I. S. is taken uttering
folly with his tongue, and has drawn a conclusion upon Christ, and the Apostle
James to be contradictors of Scripture, let shame cover his impudent forehead.

And they that charges Christ, and the Apostle James with contradicting
Scripture, are enemies to God, and of the devil, and for eternal vengeance:
but I. Ste^ha^ has done so, and therefore he is an enemy to God, and of the
Devil* and for eternal vengeance.

But further at large, as concerning Swearing, and our testimony thereof, is
laid down at large in a Book called, The glory of the Lord arising.

And whereas further, I. S as a man not weary of iniquity, goes on after his
false charging of us with Contradictions to Scripture, charges us again, That
we contradict our selves in many things; which Accusation we bear with as much
patience as we do his former, seeing they are all out of one heart, and to the
same end; for it is a small thing for us to be judged by man, and so that
wherein he charges us with self-contradictions, I pass lightly over, having
cleared the truth, that we do not contradict the Scriptures; but if this man I.
S. had been in generations past, what would he have said of Isaiah who was sent
to tell Hezekiah from the Lord, That he should die, and not live; 2 King 20* 1.
At the same instant of time the Word of the Lord came again to Isaiah, that
Hezekiah should be healed, and that he should go up to the house of the Lord:
These were both the Word of the Lord to Hezekiah, and yet no contradiction in
Isaiah, though such a Spirit as I. S. would so have judged: And what would he
have judged betwixt David and Jeremiah, Psalm* 119 and the 103. and Jer. 23. 29
David says, The Words of the Lord are sweet unto his taste, yea sweeter than
the honey to his mouth: And Jer. says, The Word of the Lord is as a fire, and
like a hammer, which breaks the Rock to pieces: Now there is no contradiction
in these two, not to that Spirit by which they are guided, though so it might
seem to such as I. S. whose minds are dark: And what would he have judged of
Christ's words, Matthew. 12. 30. and Mark 9. 40. where Christ said, He that is not
with me is against me, and he that is not against us is with us; and yet in
these words there is not contradiction to him that has an ear to hear: But if
I. S. had been in those days, out of his evil heart, would he have charged the
holy men of God to be contradictions to themselves, it is very like that he
would, and these things I leave, with the Reader, to be considered of, for we
who have the same Spirit, do clear Christ, and the holy men of God from
contradictions, and knows I. S. and such as he, to be seekers of occasions
against the just, and would make offenses where there is none, for as I have
said, we do not allow I. S. to be the interpreter of our words* for then no
question, but he would have his own end, and meaning; and in I. S. says, We
deny the letter of the Scripture to be Scripture; this is charged upon him to
be a lie, as it is well known through this Nation, both in Doctrine and
Conversation, we own the Scriptures; and to deny Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John's
Declarations of the Gospel, to be Gospel, is no denial of the Scripture; for
the Gospel was preached to Abraham, which Gospel was, and is the power of God,
before these four men did Declare of it, though we deny their Writings to be
the very Gospel which is the power of God, yet we do not deny, but they truly
declared of the Gospel, and this is to own the Scripture as it speaks of it
self to be.

Let I. S. judge what he will of us, and whereas he speaks of Gospel-letters,
and Scripture-Gospel* the Scripture give no such names to it, but says the
Gospel is the power of God, and that is the Gospel which we Preach, even the
power of God unto all people, let I. S. judge by consequence what he will.

And further, he would plead for the title of Master, from the example of
Abraham's servant, but this is nothing to prove the lawfulness of a Minister of
Christ, that they may be called Master: for Christ says to his Ministers, Be
ye not called Masters, and the Spirit of Christ being our rule, that leads us
in the fulfilling of Christ's words, let I. S. shuffle as he will: Also he lies
of J. N. to say he denies, and grants the same thing to be in the letter, for
though he say he that believes has the witness in himself* which is truth:
yet he does not say the letter is the Believers witness, which he seems falsely
to be charged withal; and he says the Spirit of God must give the spiritual
understanding of the Scriptures; But this he does in another way, than that
whereby he inspired the penmen of the Scriptures.

Now this is false doctrine; For Christ the Way, the same to us, as to them,
and not another way of understanding Scriptures, nor by another Spirit than
that which gave them forth; and he says, Christ directed to himself* Joh. 5
39. as revealed in the Scriptures, and more than that, as conveyed by the
Scriptures to a Soul: Now let the Reader take notice and search that Scripture,
Whether he has not added to it, yea or nay? or where any ever had Christ
conveyed to them by Scriptures: it does say the Scriptures testifies of him,
but it does not say that he is revealed in the Scriptures, nor conveyed by them
to a Soul; and this is his additional gloss to corrupt the text, to undervalue
the eternal Spirit of the Father, by which Christ is only revealed, and
received, and not by the Scriptures.

And for E. B. to say, That he came not to them with en^icing words, neither
what he had gathered from the Scripture without him, But to declare the Word of
the Lord, and not to speak his own conceivings and imaginations (this is true
and no contradiction in it, though I. S. say these cannot both be true, to say,
That he neither came with what he had gathered from Scripture, nor his own
imaginations* for the Apostles of Christ did not preach what they had gathered
from Scripture, neither their own imaginations, but preached the Word and
Gospel of God which they had received from God, and not gathered from
Scripture, nor in their own imaginations; and because he says, both these
negatives cannot be true, then it is concluded, that himself preaches either
what he has gathered from Scripture, or his own imaginations, and let him
choose to say whether he will; and in the next, he will be proved a false
Prophet, and that E* B. compiled a Book out of Scripture, Collections, is
false, for having the same Spirit which gave forth the Scripture, which brings
the Scripture to remembrance, is not compiling a Book out of Scriptures; and I.
S. is found a false accuser, and E. B. neither a self Contradictor, no^ self
curser, and these are true words to this generation* and owned with the Spirit
of God, though I. S. in his scornful spirit abuse them* he that has the Word
of the Lord, from the mouth of the Lord, to declare, he is reviled* and mocked.

But he that speaks the imagination of his own heart from the Saints
conditions, he is heard and owned, and this is neither Scripture contradiction,
nor self-contradiction, let I. S. judge out of his own heart what he will;
neither is this self contradiction to ask which of the Saints h^d the witness
of their souls union to seek in the Letter, and yet to affirm the Spirit opens,
and brings that which is spoken in Scripture to remembrance. Let I. S. first
answer the query in plainness, which is an honest query, and not to imply from
it his own conceptions, to make appear self-contradictions let the sober Reader
judge where the contradiction lies, and he says the Spirit is in the letter,
and goes about to prove it if he could; if the Spirit be in the letter, then
all must have the Spirit that has the letter, and the Spirit is where ever the
Bible is, which I do deny, for many has the letter, and professes it, which
knows not the Spirit, and many has the Bible in their pocket, which has not
the Spirit there: and this will be confessed by I. S. and all his fellows, and
so he must revoak, who ^aith the Spirit is in the Letter, and the Spirit gives
life, but the Letter kill: In his proof he says, The written Word, viz. the
Letter is of greater authority then the Writer, (mark here) Christ was one of
them which gave forth Scripture, and he was a greater authority then what was
written: and I say, as it is plain to all honest men who can believe truth,
that the holy men of God who had the Spirit were of greater authority than the
Scriptures since has been which they left behind them. But I. S. has set
Christ, and all them that gave forth Scripture to be less in authority then
the Scriptures; let wise men judge of this matter, he says, They were
imperfectly holy that wrote forth the Scriptures, and this is an absolute lie,
for the Scriptures gives this testimony of many of them that wrote it, that
they were perfect men, and he has also slaunde^ed Christ to be imp^rfectly
holy; and in his next let him p^ove what this Imperfect Holiness is, and till
then we deny there is any Holiness ^mperfect*

Further, he says, The promises of the Scripture are his Chariot to convey
him, (Spirit) whether he pleases to go; but where is his proof for such a
Doctrine; but all that he says does not prove* that the Spirit is in the
Letter, though he say to make up the sum of his matter, Daily experiences does
demonstrate that the Spirit is in the Letter: but where is the man? let him
answer that thus has experienced, that always when he has seen the letter,
and handled the letter, has seen and handled the Spirit, the testimony of ^n
honest man I will believe, but not I. S. assertion out of his own heart.

In his 2d Head of Self-contradiction.
Concerning hearing the Word, this is not contradiction to say, they who are of
God hear his Word* and yet to deny the hearing of such as I. S* who is not a
Minister of the Word, but a professor of the Letter, for proud men, and
covetous men, and false Acculers, such as I. S. is are we exhorted to turn away
from by Paul: and this is not a denying our selves to be of God, as I. S. would
charge us withal, because we deny to hear hirelings, for we hear Gods Word,
and his Voice, and therefore do we deny to hear Deceivers, and this is no
self-contradiction, nor saying, nor unsaying, let I. S. judge what he will, the
Saints shall be my witness: and though we say that the Saints teacher cannot be
removed into a corner, as says the Scripture, and that the Saints will find
their teach as they lie in their beds: both these are true, and not
self-contradiction, let a sober Reader judge whether he can find contradict on
in those words, but fain would I. S. have his lies believed for truth, that he
might have praise of men for his works has gained no praise of God; and he
says, R. F. has proved not lies yet against him: if it were so, let the
Reader search whether there be none proved against him now: but let him not say
like a Pharisee, I am no liar, but rather let him repent of his lies and
wickedness.

His 3d Head concerning the Light within.
Wherein much ado he makes, as to prove the light of Christ spoken of Jo: 1. 9
to be a natural light, and he says the light given to all men, even that light
spoken of Jo. 1. 9. is a dim light* and is cold, and insufficient to Salvation,
and unable to make true discovery of the true Savior, and such like
contemptible undervaluing words of the pure light of Christ, by whom the world
was made, who lights every man in the World: and by this it is known more
evidently what Spirit I. S. is of: but there is none of us who have received
the knowledge of God by the very light of Christ which shines in our hearts can
believe him: and this is no contradiction to say that every man is lightened by
Christ with the true light, and y et to say, some men are living in a natural
condition, both these are true, for some hates the light of Christ, and their
deeds are evil, and such are in a natural condition; but this does not prove
that Christ has not given them light, though they be in a natural condition, I
leave it to spiritual men to judge, though they say it seems strange, that some
should live a natural condition, and yet have the light of Christ given them,
says he, as if every man brought a Savior with him into the world. This last
is his false conception, but he is man's Savior by whose power every man is
brought into the World, and if I. S. did but understand as we do, that some
love the light, and some hates it: such as hates it denies Christ: he that
loves it receives Christ, who knows this strangeth not, I. S. wondering shows
his Ignorance who would secretly charge us to be bewitched with a Notion, of
accounting nature grace, which we do not, and it is his own condition he that
conceives Lies, believes them, and tells them, is the rather bewitched.

And further, he says the light in every man is a poor, base, beggarly scrap
to the Gospel treasure; these words are uttered in his hastiness, and without
either fear or knowledge, for he that lights every man with the true light of
life, (or of condemnation) is not base beggarly scraps, as I. S. says it is,
for it brings to the knowledge of the Gospel treasure and pearl, and not other
light, and thus whilst he thinks to prove us self-contradictors, proves himself
a villifier, and a blasphemer of Christ Jesus the Savior of the World, who
lights every man that comes into the World. Again, he would make this
contradiction, because we say every man in his first state is as a Beast, and
yet saying every man is lightened: but this is not contradiction no more than
the former is; and then he speaks of natural conscience, and secretly charges
a^ if we should say it is potent and victorious at last; but this is is a
secret slander of his, for we say Christ only is victorious, and through him
are we made Conquerors, and not by natural conscience: and he speaks of Gospel
conviction to be above the conviction of natural conscience; but I would know
of him where the Gospel conviction works, if not in m^ns consciences? and so in
his next let him divide if he can, and show the difference of such convictions.
Further, he would say that this is contradiction to say that every man in his
first birth may see himself to be natural; and yet to say that the light which
discovers natural corruptions, is not natural, but spiritual, both these are
true, for the light shines in darkness, which shows the darkness, and is not
darkness but light: and he that can understand that Scripture John 1* 5. shall
see the truth of both these to b^ no self-contradiction.

Further, he says the Scriptures are a rule above the Saints light, and unto
it, and not so, their light above the Scripture: this is confusion, and he
knows not whereof he affi^ms, for the Spirit of God is the Saints rule, and
that is greater than the Scriptures, and the rule of the Spirit of God is above
the Scripture; but such as I. S. who talks of Scriptures to be a rule, and yet
acts these things which the Scriptures declare against* are but found in deeper
hypocrisy, for he that is ruled by the Spirit of God walks up in the
fulfilling of Scriptures. And further, I. S. confessed, and says this he
knows, that he is more brutish then a man, and has not the knowledge of the
holy, and this is truly confessed, his own works manifest his condition to be
true, and he confesses he never obeyed natural light as he ought, and as he
might, and this is truly confessed: for if he had obeyed that light which he
calls natural, he would not thus have stumbled at him who has lightened every
man.

And further, he charges a deceit when men will put off that for redemption
light which is but old creation light; let him charge them that are guilty: but
yet we say that the same is Redeemed by whom the world was created; and this is
without any deceit, and he that lighteneth every man with the light, that is
but one, he is the Savior of all that receive him in the light, and he is the
condemner of all that hate his light; and this is no self-contradiction, but
the very truth as it is in Jesus.

Further, I. S. would make it appear if he could that we contradict our selves
concerning sin and Christ, but his whole Section I leave to be read in his
Book, and let the wise Reader judge whether his proof be any such thing, only
his lie will prove what he says; he says, We hold Christ to be in all, this
is his Lie, for we say Christ is not in the Reprobate, neither did we ever
affirm that Christ is not in the Reprobate, and so is not in all; neither do we
concerning Justification contradict our selves in the Spirit of God, though so
it may appear to I. S. blind mind, and so would make it appear to others by
blind arguments by his own meaning. Again I. S. would charge self-contradiction
upon, because we bear witness to the New Covenant, and does say, the children
of God are taught of God, and needs no man to teach them, but as the anointing
within them, and yet does write and print; here he says we condemn in others
what we allow in our selves. Now to all honest people this is no contradiction,
neither a condemning in others what we allow in our selves, for therefore we
write, and print, and speak, that all may come to the knowledge of this thing,
and may be converted to God, and know his teaching within them; but what would
I. S. have said of John who told them they needed no man to teach them, but as
that within them; and yet did write Epistles to them, very like he would have
called this contradictions. And the same is our cause, who does and must do
(though I. S. and his companions be grieved therewith) because their folly is
laid open, thereby print, and write, and speak that people through the Ministry
be brought to know the teaching of God in themselves, and yet herein in the
light of the Spirit of God, do we not contradict our selves, let I. S. say what
he will: neither do we allow in our selves what we condemn in another, this is
one of I. S. his lies; we allow the Ministry of Christ, yet does not allow the
Ministry of Deceivers, and yet is not in contradiction; and this in short may
give the Reader to understand the deceit, and deceivableness to lie in I. S.
who is found seeking offenses against us without any cause given him: and he
lays snares for another, which does entrap his own feet. And whereas he has
transcribed E. B. his confession in the warning to Vnderbarrow, which
confession is still owned, and no self contradiction proved by it, for though
God s^ake by G. F. to him, this does not contradict the teaching of the Spirit
of God, as that E. B. was not taught by the Spirit of God, for as I have said
G. F. did minister as many does at this day, that people should come to the
teaching of God in themselves, and herein we do not contradict the Scriptures,
let I. S* make as many blind arguments as he can; and that instance about I. L.
being of the same nature with the former: the Answer supplies both his proofs,
neither of which does prove us in contradiction, but is a witness to the
Ministry of Christ, and to the conversion received through it, wherein we are
taught of God, and needs no man to teach us, but as the anointing the Spirit of
God within us, which is immediate, and yet we preach the Gospel to others, that
they may come to witness the same with us, even the teaching of the Spirit of
God, and for this end is the Ministry of God sent by us to bring others to the
knowledge of God through it, and this is no self-contradiction, let I. S. say
what he will.

Further, I. S. does instance E. B. his calling man's light natural and carnal
in the Warning, etc. and would call his contradiction to some who does deny the
light of Christ to be natural and carnal, as the Priests of England term it;
but this is no contradiction, for though w^ do deny that the light of Christ
Jesus is natural and carnal, and does not allow any so to call it, yet the
light of man, by which carnal men does judge of carnal transgressions, is
natural; E. B. does never say that the light of Christ is natural and carnal,
but the light of Man is so he says, and in this Instance there is no
contradiction; neither in any parts of the words following, which is
transcribed; and much might be said as to the occasion of those words being
uttered when E. B. was in prison falsely, as many have been since, who was one
of the first that by ^mprisonment was a sufferer for the name of Jesus in the
North of England, before I. S. was troubled with any of us; but it is
sufficient what is said to the man's light by which carnal men judges of any
thing, is one thing, and the light of Christ Jesus which is spiritual men's
guide is another thing; E. B. speak of man's light, and I. S. foolishly opposes
him as if he spoke of the light of Christ Jesus, and so opposes his own
conception. And further, I. S. asserts, That Scripture light is the standing
rule for faith and manners, so are not immediate revelations, and teachings.
Here he has set up the Scriptures above the Spirit of God, and above the
Revelation of Jesus Christ, the Saints was led by what the Spirit revealed* and
taught, Christ said he should teach into all truth, and they that were the Sons
of God were loved by the Spirit of God, and that was their rule to be led by in
their Faith and manners: but yet see a hypocrite, ( I. S. is he) that pleads
for Scripture to be the rule, and yet is acting in many things contrary to the
Scriptures, as at large may be instanced; neither is in all the Scripture the
Scripture called light, but Scripture says Christ is the light.

Further he says, There is sufficient light in the Scripture to guide men to
salvation: mark his Doctrine, whether he has not preached another thing than
Christ to be the way, and whether he has not made Christ, and the blood of
Christ of none effect, without which no salvation* But he says there is
sufficient in the Scripture to lead men to salvation, and neither Christ nor
his blood is in Scripture, let it be moved.

Further, he says, The Scripture was given by the Spirit for a rule; this we
desire a proof off by plain Scripture, and till then we deny it. And further,
he says, The Spirit gives out himself by Scripture: and yet he says he never
said the Scripture did give the Spirit, and this is an absolute contradiction,
as may be noted so I. S. is taken in the snare contradicting himself in one
quarter of a sheet of Paper, and has not at all proved us to be
self-contradictors concerning any of these things mentioned by him.

Further, he says in his 8th Head, That our possessing perfection, and Quaking
after Moses example, cross shines on the other, but wherein he does not show,
neither can the honest-minded read any contradiction in it, but only it seems
I. S. has set himself to cavell.

Further, he says, We contradict our selves concerning Quaking, and trembling,
from this confession, that the same power that made Moses to quake and tremble,
the same power we witness; but wherein does this contradiction appear in these
words, let honest men try the cause, and I. S. be silent; and whereas he
Instances I. P. standing in an evil cause, and of I. P. he may be silent,
whose blood he or his Generation sought after: and now might they well be quiet
of him, their wills being stifled by drinking his blood as it were: but that
wicked men must add to their own wickedness till it be fulfilled, that they may
receive their reward, and I. P. was bold, as is the children of God; and though
I. S. would clear himself and his company from what was done to I. P. yet by
the effect it appeared that there was enough envy in them toward him and the
truth, and though his body be in the ground, yet the Spirit of the Lord which
guided him stands alive, a sufficient witness against them, and all their cruel
and wicked dealing; and let I. S. judgment be what it will, neither concerning
growth of Grace, nor forms of Religion, nor fruits of the Spirit do we at all
contradict the Spirit of God; neither does he prove us in these things whereof
he accuses us in strife and debate, (except against such as I. S. and the
Devils Kingdom,) neither in emulation, hatred, scoffs, or any of these things
whom the Lord has redeemed us from, though we be falsely accused in these
things, as in many other by him; and whereas he would prove their preaching in
their method, and Points, and Reasons, and Uses from the example of the Saints
in former ages, he falls far short in effecting his extent, for he cannot prove
that they studied for what they spoke, nor that in such a way they delivered
what they said an hour by a glass, etc. as the Priests of this age do; also if
it were they preached in the like manner as the Apostles did, yet not by the
same spirit, but by the spirit of error, and for a wrong end, that is the thing
which makes their manner abominable, when as they are not guided with the same
Spirit of the Apostles, and their preaching in their method of points, and
particulars is rather an art of preaching by humane policy, and not the gift of
preaching by the Spirit of God; neither do we concerning humility, and love
contradict our selves, but are in humility, and love toward all men, even such
as wrongs us we seek no revenge against, and herein does our humility and love
appear, yet cannot we respect any man's person with hat or knee, and that is it
which I. S. I suppose is offended with.

In his 13th Head concerning Ordinances.
He charges us with self-contradiction, because we say we own praying, etc. and
yet has given over Family prayer, morning and evening, and at meals, but this
is no contradiction: for we own praying in the Spirit of God, but does deny it
without the Spirit, and this is no contradiction; he may as well say it was
contradiction in Christ to cry against the prayers of the Pharisees, and yet to
teach his Disciples to pray, and to pray himself; this is the same cause of
ours which he foolishly charges with contradiction, and as I have said the
prayers of the Wicked we deny, and yet does own Prayer in the Spirit, and who
are moved by the Spirit morning or evening, or at meals, or otherwise, and this
is truth let I. S. gather what he can from it.

Further, he says, If we teach one another, why do we condemn them for
teaching. But to this I have answered Preaching or Teaching by the Spirit we
own, and without the Spirit we deny; and because we say we own all that which
is Gods, as Baptism, the Lords Supper, and Sabbath, etc. pet does disown in
practice their Water Baptism, and their form of breaking of Bread and Wine*
and their forms of Church Fellowship, and their form of keeping a Sabbath; this
he charges to be contradiction, but it is not so in the sight of the Lord,
though I. S. falsely so judge it; for their Baptism and breaking of Bread and
Wine, and their Church fellowship, and keeping of a day, I say their exercise
in these things we do deny to be of God, as in measure is proved, and may be
further if need require; and I say we own that which is Gods* and which is led
unto by his Spirit, and practiced in his fear, and counsel, and yet we do deny
all their Immitations of any thing which God commanded does own the command of
God, and yet does not contradict our selves, though I. S. falsely so judge of
us.

Further, he charges us with self-contradiction, concerning speech, and
silence, because we check some for speaking, and yet speaks or writes our
selves; but this is the same with the former, and the same answer will serve,
that speaking that which is not in the Spirit we check, which is not the voice
of Christ, but of the stranger, and yet does own that which is spoken by the
Spirit of God, and herein does not contradict our selves.

Further, he says, We contradict our selves concerning Conscience and Laws;
because we say there must be no Law concerning Religion, viz. to bind any man
to worship in this or the other way, and to bind him from this or that way of
Worship, and yet in exhorting the Rulers that their Laws be according to that
in the Conscience; but in these words there is no contradiction, for the Laws
being according to the light in every man's* Conscience, that Law will not bind,
or limit the Conscience from this or that way of Worship in Religion, for that
Law is un* just which binds or limits the pure conscience of any man; but that
Law which is contrary to the light in every man's conscience, is oppression, and
we bear witness against it; and though we do say no Law must be laid upon
Religion, that it is to say, to bind any man's Conscience to or from such a form
of Religion; and though we further say that all just Laws is and should be
according to the light in every man's conscience: yet in this there is no
contradiction.

And whereas I. S. speaks of such Laws who persecuted, prisoned, and crucified
for the testimony of a good Conscience, God has hewn down in all ages says
he: Let the Rulers of England take notice of this from the mouth of one of
their Teachers. And further, I add, so will God hew down in this Age all those
Laws by which many are persecuted and prisoned, as he has done ie other Ages;
therefore let it be considered by them.

And he says, The Magistrate is not to level his Law with every man's
conscience and light: and this he speaks in opposition to us, but he needs not,
for we say the same that some men's Consciences are defiled, and we do not
desire the Laws to be made according to men's several opinions, and defiled
Consciences, but according to the light of Christ Jesus in every man's
Conscience, which is but one in all, and is according to the Law of God, and
every just Law will be according to it, and though I. S. by his own meaning
would make it appear contradiction in our saying no Law must be concerning
Religion, and yet saying all Laws should be according to the light of Christ in
the Conscience; Now by these words we do not mean that we would not have a Law
according to Religion, but no Law to limit to or from this or that manner of
Religion, and this does very well agree with our saying, let all your Laws be
according to the light of Christ; so by his misinterpretation of the first he
makes it appear to be contradictions to the second; but it is not so in the
light of the Spirit of God.

And further, R. F. saying the law of God answers his Justice, and the light of
Christ in the conscience answers the law of God which is perfect, according to
that in the conscience; these words I. S. charges with two errors: but let the
Reader try where the error lies, and not believe I. S. false deduction from R.
F. plain words, which are simply uttered, through subtilty wrested.

And I. S. speaks as if some would have Magistrates to make Laws to bind
themselves from striking at offenders, Blasphemers, Gospel and Church
disturbers, etc.

In answer to this, we are not they that would have any Magistrates to bind
themselves from striking at offenders, who are truly able to judge of offenses,
we own that such should be punished according to the offense, but the
Magistrates Law reaches but to the outward man, to keep that in peace and good
order, and not to the inward man to bind or limit that.

And as for Blasphemy, and Gospel, and Church* disturbing, we find many
Magistrates not able to judge thereof: but many on the contrary calling truth
blasphemy, and reproving of sin in Teachers and people, Gospel and Church
disturbing, and so by false judgment making such offenders which are not, and
so abusing their power, and condemning the Innocent rather then the guilty, and
these are such as I. S. speaks of, where the strong man armed keeps the house,
and these are rather a terror to well doers then to evil, and such
Magistrates, and such Laws by which the just are oppressed, and the hands of
the wicked strengthened will the Lord confound* in a day to the glory of his
name, and to the refreshing of all his people, who is now every way oppressed
by evil men, both by Rulers, Teachers, and People.

And as for the rest of his Book, its but of the same nature with the former,
and not worth answering to, only his lies I do deny, and his first following
is, that all our Doctrines are raised upon the ruins of the Scriptures
excellency, and authority; this is false, neither does his proof at all make it
good. His second lie is, that our corrupt Tenants are built upon false and
novel Interpretations, and this is two lies together, our Tenants are not
corrupt, neither do we build any thing which we hold upon false
Interpretations. His third lie is, that it is pride that has bred, and does
feed our opinions and practices: and this is also false, and to prove it has
wrested some of E. B. words. His fourth lie is, that unbelief begets, and
procreates all our errors, and our love of error with our derisions of the
truth; here is many lies folded up in one, which are all denied with the life
of God, and the author of them proved to be of the Devil, and we proved to be
of God, who are spoken all manner of evil against falsely for the name of
Jesus. His fifth lie is, that we do subtly couch many errors under spacious
words of truth: this lie also I bear Witness against, as also against his
Sixth, wherein he charges us with mere ignorance, and wilful blindness about
the covenant of Grace, etc.

His seventh lie is, that much of mystical Babylon, and confusion is in our
Writings, and ways: this is also a lie and of the devil; and also against his
eight I bear testimony, our Doctrines and practices ends not in Apostasy,
neither are they blasphemy against Christ, as I. S. impudently asserteth; so
that from the first of his Book to his last his whole Work is born witness
against not to be of God, but of the devil, and in vain has he striven, and
his Work shall not accomplish any part of his desire: for the Quakers against
whom he has Written cannot be offended in Christ, though I. S. have
endeavored for to make their way and Doctrines in the sight of men abominable;
but his Work shall not prevent the purpose of the Lord, nor the gathering in of
the upright-hearted from the mouths of devouring Shepherds, such as I. S. and
the Priests of England* who is it that does not begin to see their deceits and
abominations? yea thousands do, and many more shall do; so that all their
striving to uphold their Kingdom is but in vain, for God has blasted al their
glory, and he will teach his people himself, and govern them by his own Law and
order, and the Kingdoms of this World shall be changed, and shall become the
Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, and Antichrist and all his ministers
shall be confounded, and the Beast and the false Prophet shall both be taken
alive, and cast into the lake.

Ah, John Stelham, against whom have thou set thy self, and exalted thy horn?
against whom have thou bent thy strength, and shot forth thy envy in crafty
words of guile? who is it that thou have defied, and girded on thy armor
against, and counted them as nothing before thy uncircumcised strength? even
against the Lords people have thou thus done, though thou will not now know it,
yet one day thou shall know it, when iniquity is come to an end, and
transgression finished, and thou shall stand in thy lot at that day, and
receive according to thy work a just and righteous reward from the hand of the
Lord, in the day of judgment, when every secret work of iniquity shall appear
to condemnation; and in the mean time, the Lord will bring forth good unto his
people, even from thy evil, and all things (even thy evil purposes) shail work
together for good, unto such whom God has called: and thy works and purposes
which are to trouble them, and to break them, and to make them appear vile in
the sight of men, even thy work does the Lord turn, to establish them, and to
unite them; and in the sight of men, thy work against us, proves us to be of
God, and thy self to be of the Devil, who was a persecutor from the beginning,
and thou shall be scattered in thy imaginations, and thy whole work has God
confounded, and it shall not accomplish any whit of that end propounded in thy
sinful heart, which has brought forth milchief, for it is blasted in the anger
of God, and men shall neither call it, nor the Father of it, any more blessed:
And Friend, had thou known how little it does accomplish of thy evil intent,
thou would have spared thy labor, and employed thy service to another end, and
then had not thy wickedness so greatly appear in the sight of God, nor thy
shame and nakedness in the sight of men, as it now does, by this thy sinful
deed, brought forth of a cursed womb, and conceived in unrighteousness: Alas,
alas man! How art thou fallen into the pit which thou have dug for another?
And how does the shame overtake thee, which thou have thought should fall upon
us; let thy wickedness correct thee, and know thou* that the Lord will not
forsake his people, who cannot be offended in Christ, though thou cast
stumbling blocks of iniquity in the way, and would cause them to sin; but even
so much the more, as thou speaks evil against the way of the Lord, are they the
more upright therein, and the more loving and delighting in the path of
righteousness, and thou have but the more fully discovered in many things from
thy own pen, the wickedness and wrath that has secretly lodged in thy heart*
and it appears that thy wisdom is devilish, and from below; deceiving and
being deceived, and thy path is in craft and subtilty, and not in innocence and
plain simplicit^, and ^ this manner, and by this means chiefly is thy work
managed unto an evil end, but the Lord has rebuked it, and will do yet more,
till it appear to all men, as it does to us, to be what I have said of it, and
it shall be a shame to thee, and shall not receive praise neither of God nor
man, but condemnation in the sight of both; and had thou known that we are
established even on the top of Gods holy mountain, and cannot be moved nor
shaken, by such weak pitiful blasts of confusion and ignorance, coming out of
thy mouth, where poison lodges under thy tongue, sure had thou known it, thou
would have traveled in another path; but that thy folly might appear unto all
men, is thy work sent abroad, that they may see what lodges in thy mind, even
more envy then in the heart of Balaam, and more desire of evil to the Lords
people than ever, was in him; and thou fulfils the measure of thy forefathers
wickedness, till the sum be accounted, and destruction follow, thou have too
much troubled thy self, in laboring, and thy reward will not countervail thy
pains; had thou but only spoken against us, we should have born it, and thou
might have been the more excused, but in that thou have spoken against the
light of Christ, and called it perverse Principle* and many other blasphemous
words of bitterness against the very truths of Jesus.

This is the cause wherefore we have answered thee, and thou art utterly
inexcusable; for what thou have done, it is not altogether through ignorance,
though much ignorance be in it, but out of perfect rebellion, and purpose of
mischief; and for Mastery we do not strive with thee, but rather wishes thy
repentance, than thy destruction; and who does not believe but your kingdom (I
mean the Priests of England) is going down apace, and your glory fading as a
flower, and the Lord will make you a shame to your selves, who has for many
ages preyed devouringly upon the upright, and through perfect covetousness have
made merchandise of Souls; and now many has an eye opened to see your shame,
and it appears with horrible detestation; even the saying is fulfilled, As
troops of robbers wait for a man, so the company of Priests Murders in the way
by consent, as the Prophet said: and as Christ said, Woe unto you, you will not
enter your selves, nor suffer others to enter that world.

Wherefore thou J. Stelham. even thou repent of this thy Wickedness, for the
wrath of the Lord is gone forth against thee, and evil have thou done against
God, and against his people, and against thy own Soul, and this thou shall know
one day to thy exceeding sorrow, unto which time we leave thee, and could have
born all thy scandalous rearms without replying again, but only for the sake
of the simple, that thy neighbors may see thy folly, and all men to whom thine
and this does come, and we have not been large, but in short, have in
singleness of heart born our testimony once more to the truth of the glorious
Gospel which we have received of God, and not of man, and against thee and thy
sinful heart, and whatsoever proceeds out of it, for thou being evil, how
can thou speak good things, the Tree must be good before the fruit can be so,
but out of thy evil heart have thou brought forth evil, and must receive the
reward of evil whether thou will or no; and what if we should go about to show
wherein the Priests of England do contradict the Scripture, might not we have a
large Catalogue, even in all your Worship, and in the most of your practices,
acting contrary to the Scripture, and contradicting that Spirit that gave it
forth in Doctrine, and in conversation in such an enterprise as this might, we
make your folly sound abroad; and as to the contradicting your selves, and
being of many judgments and opinions, and difference in many particulars about
the things of God among your selves herein you abound almost above measure; and
this if need require, could I by the strength of Jesus sufficiently make you
appear abominable in the eyes of all just men, and so think not in thy self
that you are free from Scripture, and self-contradiction, but truly guilty your
selves in what thou have wickedly accused us of falsely, which does but prove
thee to be of thy Father who is an accurser of the Brethren, and proves us to
be of God according to Christ's words, we are spoken all manner of evil of
falsely for the name of Jesus Christ, whom we serve, and therefore are hated of
the world because we are not of it; but without much more words I leave this I.
S. our adversary to the judgment of the Great Day, wherein we and he shall
receive according to our deeds, and till then is as willing to have dispraise,
as praise of men, who is not a Jew outward, but a Jew inward, who has no
praise of men, but of God, who is of the Kingdom of Christ, which is not of
this World.

E. B.


