A WOE AGAINST THE Magistrates, Priests, and People OF KENDALL in the County of
Westmerland, Pronounced from the Lord by one of his PROPHETS.

Which may warn all the persecuting Cities and Towns in the North, and every
where, to Repent and fear the Lord, lest the Decree go forth against them.

Also the Stumbling Block removed from weak Minds, who are offended at the
strange Signs and wonders acted by the Servants of the Lord, scornfully called
QUAKERS In the Northern parts of this Nation.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1654.

The word of the Lord came unto me saying, Write and declare against that
bloody Town of Kendall, and leave it without excuse.
HEar ye which pretend to be Rulers, and ye that pretend to be Teachers, and ye
people, the trumpet of the Lord is sounded, gather your selves together, for I
will plead with you, your iniquities are come up before me, and your
Transgression is come into mine ears; Woe, woe, and misery is coming upon you,
you shall be as Sodom and Gomorrah, and as Admah and Zeboim; Desolation and a
cry, a cry, lamentation, howling, bitterness and sorrow shall come upon you
at unawares, the sword of the Lord is drawn against you, it is sharpened for a
great slanghter, and you shall be cut off, because you have despised my name,
and trodden under foot my precepts, and walk after your own wills, and the
imagination of your own hearts; and yet says the Lord, they say I am amongst
them: Woe unto you hypocrites, I am weary of you, and of all your profession it
stinks in my Nostrils, and I abhor it as much as if ye slew a man; you have
slain my Son, you have mocked my Prophets, and despised my Messengers which I
have sent early and late to forewarn you of the evil to come, have not I
wrought signs and wonders amongst you, as ever was in any day, or from the
beginning, have not I made the Mountains tumble down in your sight, have not I
caused my Judgments to fall upon them that have set themselves against me? have
not I cleansed the Lepers? have not I quickened and raised them out of the
grave, which were dead in Sins and trespasses? have not I brought down the
proud? have not I exalted the low? have not I caused the weak things to
confound the wise? have not I sent signs among you, and have sent my servants
to declare against you, as I did to Nineveh, and have you not heard it? have
not I commanded my Servants to go bare and naked in your sight, to be a sign to
you that your covering is now rent, and your garment is to be torn, and you
shall be left naked and bare, and you shall be made a mock and a proverb to
all, as my Servants have bin made a mock and a proverb to you; and I will
scatter you in my indignation, and I will cause my fury to rest upon you till I
have consumed you; Ye Rulers that rule by your own wills, and ye false Prophets
that cry peace to this people, and all ye People that delight in lies, is not
all manner of wickedness committed amongst you? As Pride, Covetousness,
Oppression, Persecution, Mocking, Stoning, and Imprisoning, haling before
Magistrates them who are made to do my will, and to declare against you; Ye
strive against me, says the Lord, ye cry a Confederacy, ye consult together,
ye plot, ye call all your Inchanters against me; thus says the Lord, ye shall
be broken as Pharaoh, and go down to the pit with Egypt, Mesheck and Tuball,
and all the uncircumcised; Woe is me, the spoiler is come up against you, and
blackness covers you, and a consumption is entering into your bones, my eye
shall not spare, my hand shall not pity, but it will bring this upon you, howl
and lament ye Oaks, ye Mountains cleave asunder, and all ye people, both great
and small, be astonished, put on sackcloth, put your mouths in the dust, for I
will make my fury to pass over you, and none shall be able to deliver you, said
the Lord; write this, let them know, but they will not hear, till I have caused
my fire to burn them up and there be no remedy.

Written from the Spirit of the living God, by me who am a wita Witness for his
name, whom the world knows not, but named by the world, Franc. Howgill.

Oh ye raging Priests, who have set your selves against the mighty power of the
Lord in his own, whereby he is manifesting his works, his strange works* his
acts, his strange acts, making his servants signs and wonders amongst the
heathen, and them that know not God, nor his power, whereby he is choosing that
which seems foolishness, to confound the wisdom of the wise, which you who
stand in your own wills and wisdom, know nothing of; but in this, as in other
things, out of your envy against the truth, take occasion to lay
stumbling blocks in the way of others, wherein you plainly aypear to be in that
generation, who will neither enter into the kingdom your selves, nor would
suffer others; you who take occasion to Preach and Print against the truth,
because the Lord has caused some of his servants to go naked along your
streets, as in Kendal and Kirkby-stephen, as signs of his wrath to come upon
that pride and fullness that Priests and people live in; and this, you who never
knew what it was to obey God, contrary to your own reason and wills, (for who
act such things, act contrary to their own wills) cry out on a delusion and
madness, thinking thereby to make the truth odious to others, but it is that
the Scriptures may be fulfilled upon you, as it has been on your generation
before you, who counted always what the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles did
madness, and called them mad-fellows; but now all you who fear the Lord, and
believe his Word, take heed of the deceit of these men, and mind not what they
say, who have set themselves to speak evil of the things they know not, but
search the Scriptures and there you shall find, that the mighty God (who has
power over all flesh, and what he commands none must dispute by their Reason
(though it seem never so foolish, and against their wills) but must obey) has
always before his great Judgments which he has about to bring on a people, or
Nation, made some of his dearest Servants to pass and act as signs to such
Nations of what was to follow, and was so usual among the Prophets, and them
who knew the word of the Lord, that the Prophet Isaiah speaking in the name of
the Lord Jesus Christ, says, I and the Children whom thou have given me, are
for Signs and Wonders in Israel, from the Lord of Hosts that dwells in Zion,
Isaiah 8. 18. And if ye search the Scriptures of the Prophets, you shall see in
what strange and foolish things to the wisdom of the world they were acted in,
as in Esaias 20. the Prophet was to go Three years naked for a sign, what the
Lord would bring upon Aethiopia and Aegipt: Now had these men lived in his
days, they would have cried that up as a delusion and madness, and not as the
Word of the Lord, as they do at this day; for they neither know the Lord, nor
his Word who stand in their own wills: Also read the 4. of Ezekiel, and see
what a sign he was to both the houses of Israel and Judah, a strange thing to
the wisdom as ever was: also read the 5. of Ezekiel, and see what a sign he was
to be, and what folly he was to act as to their wisdom, and that in the midst
of the City: also Ezekiel. 12. 18, 19. and 24. 16. to the end of the chap.
likewise Ezekiel, 12. to 17. v. and many other of the dear Servants of God, who
were not only to declare the Word of the Lord from his mouth, but also to be
signs to them to whom he was to prophecy, that so he might leave them all
without excuse.

Now those who then were Priests, and should have bin teachers and leaders of
the people to fear God, and hear his Word, and observe his signs, and repent
that the Judgments might be prevented, they were the only men that hated,
reproached, persecuted, and called the prophets, Christ and his Apostles
madmen, deceivers, because of these things, which into their wisdoms could not
enter, and stirred up the Rulers and ignorant people against them* that they
might put them to death as it is at this day, but these in our days are more
inexcusable then all that ever went before them, inasmuch as they had no
Scripture to show them that the Lord had commanded such signs formerly; but
these have the Scriptures that witness to the same thing; which scriptures
they make a trade on, and cry up in words, but are ignorant of that Spirit by
which they were acted that gave them forth, and envy and persecute that
obedience that was acted in them, in whom it is now acted; and they might as
well cry out against Esaias for a madman, because he went naked at the word of
the Lord, and the rest of the prophets and servants of God for acting such weak
and foolish things, to their wisdom, as they did as against these for obeying
the Lord in the same or the like things whatsoever, for God is not tied to any
rule to walk by, but his own will; and where he commands woe to him that does
not obey, and where he commands not, woe to him that acts in his own will, and
says, it is the Word of the Lord. Wherefore all ye that fear the Lord, take
heed of being stirred np by these men to speak evil of that you know not, but
consider that the priests have been always the move^^ and perswaders of the
people against Christ and his Kingdom, and power in his saints, and instead of
being forward to speak evil of the things you know not, turn in your minds into
the fear of God, and mind the light in your conscience that will let you see
what sins you are guilty of, which these signs are threatenings to, that you may
repent of them, and escape the Judgment and find mercy, as they did in the
time of the prophets, who feared the Lord and escaped the Judgment; but the
envious, scorners and fools passed on, and were punished and know this, that a
wisemans eye is in his head and such an one has his guide within himself, and
will not be hasty to follow others though they be multitudes to do evil, and
such know it is better to be silent, then to speak evil of the things they know
not, and when was there ever any truth of God brought forth, but it always
suffered the violence of the proud and haughty, where the seed of the serpent
reigns and shows his enmity; and it is the same now, for that which has been
is at this day, but it is that the power of the Lord may be seen, in carrying
on his simple truth, against all the Wisdom and Power of of the World, and
plotting of the Serpent, yea and he will carry it on to his praise, and to the
confounding all his Enemies, who must stumble at the stumbling stone, and be
offended at the Rock, that must break them to pieces, wherefore be silent all
flesh before the Lord, whose foolishness is more then thy Wisdom, and whose
weakness is more then the strength of all the World, who is a defense to his
poor despised ones, in the midst of their enemies. Eternal praises to thee who
art our Wisdom for ever.

To all you who have Eyes and yet are blind, and who have Ears and yet are
deaf, and have Hearts and yet cannot understand; To you I am moved to declare.
THe Lord is proclaiming himself to be King, and all the Mountains and every
Isle and every Oak of Bashan, and all the Cedars of Lebanon, and all who rule
as Kings and Conquerors shall bow: Hear ye deaf, the Trumpet is blown, the
Standard is lifted up, there is open War proclaimed between Michael our Paince
and all the Inhabitants of the Earth. Arm your selves, O ye Mountains and
gather your selves on he^ps O ye Isles, the glittering the Sword of the Lord is
drawn, and a fire is before him, and all ye will be found as stubble, and you
are all to be slain heaps upon heaps, and are all to go down with all the
uncircumcised Rulers and people into the Pit; the Lord the mighty Jehovah is
revealing himself from heaven in flames of fire to render vengeance upon all
the workers Iniquity; for you have slain the heir of the Vineyard, you are
killing his Prophets, and imprisoning his Saints; to you all Professors,
Rulers, and Priests, which say you are Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue
of Satan; I speak in plainess of Speech unto you all who live in all the
abominations of the heathen, and yet say you love Christ, do not you call the
Master of the house now Beelzebub, do not ye mock, and set your mouths awry ye
sons of the Adultress, and of Sodom, at the light of Christ which enlighteneth
every one that comes into the world, which light did lead all Saints into
purity, and up to God, and this you call Natural, and them who witness
redemption by the Son, you call blasphemers; Christ which you profess and yet
know not, was accounted by your generation a blasphemer, and all the Apostles
and Saints were persecuted by your generation as evil doers, as despisers of
Government, as disturbers of the peace, as leaders of the people into iniquity,
as the offscouring of all things, as sheep for the slaughter, and were al of
them put to death and in prison by that generation which professed God, and
said they had his ordinances, yet slew them who professed him and kept his
statutes; for if ye be not wilfully blind, are ye not doing the same now;
mocking, haling, imprisoning, bringing before Magistrates them that witness
Jesus Christ in them, and because they bear witness against all sin; Did ever
any of the Saints of God persecute, imprison, or hale before Magistrates, and
falsely acuse any? Did ever the saints complain to Authority to guard them? Hear
ye whited tombs, ye painted sepulchers, what Gospel is this ye profess? what
God is this ye serve that must be defended with clubs, swords, Rulers, and
carnal weapons; the Saints who had the everlasting Gospel, said, their weapons
were not carnal but spiritual, and yet they were mighty through God to beat
down strong holds, even principalities and powers, thrones and dominions; but
your Gospel and Ministry can do nothing without a sword; All people see where
you are, and what you are doing, you run headlong to ruin; those who were
despised by that generation of Pharisees and Professors which you are in, were
a burthensom stone, upon which all that opposed did break themselves; so this
generation whom ye set at naught, ye shall be made to bow and throw down your
Crowns before them, and before the Lamb who is our Leader and guider, Glory
unto him for evermore; its hard for you to kick against the pricks, for we
witness the two edged Sword of the Lord shall bathe it self in the blood of his
Enemies, and shall be made fat with slaughter. O ye Mountains ye shall become a
plain for the ransomed to come over you; all your profession shall be as
stubble, and you shall be left naked and bare, and nothing shall be able to
cover you, because you are crucifiers of Christ and the Saints, repent that you
may be hid in the day of his fierce anger, which is to come upon all the
workers of iniquity.

F. H.

FINIS.

