AN INQUISITION AFTER BLOOD.

To the PARLIAMENT in statu quo nunc, AND To the ARMY Regnant; Or any other
whether Royallist, Presbyterian, Independent or Leveller, whom it may concern.

Blood is a crying sin, but that of Kings
Cries loudest for revenge, and ruin brings.
Printed in the Year, 1649.

AN INQUISITION AFTER BLOOD.
THE scope of this short discourse is to make some researches after Truth, and
to rectify the world accordingly in point of opinion, specially touching the
first Author and Aggressor of the late ugly war in England, which brought with
it such an inundation of blood, and so let in so huge a torrent of mischiefs to
rush upon us. There be many, and they not only Presbyterians and Independents,
but Cavaliers also, who think that the King had taken the guilt of all this
blood upon himself, in regard of that Concession he passed in the preamble of
the late Treaty at the Isle of Wight; The aim of this Paper is to clear that
point, but in so temperate a way, that I hope 'twill give no cause of
exception, much less of offense to any: the blood that is sought after here,
shall not be mingled with gaul, much less with any venom at all.

We know there is no Principle either in Divinity, Law, or Phylosophie, but may
be wrested to a wrong sense; there is no truth so demonstrative and clear, but
may be subject to cavillations; no Tenet so plain, but perverse inferences may
be drawn out of it; such a fate befell that preambular Concession His Majesty
passed at the Transactions of the late Treaty, in that he acknowledged therein
that the two Houses of Parliament were necessitated to undertake a war in their
own just and lawful defense, etc. and that therefore all Oaths, Declarations,
or other public Instruments against the Houses of Parliament, or any for
adhering to them, etc. be declared null, suppressed, and forbidden.

It Is true, His Majesty passed this grant, but with this weighty consideration,
as it had reference to two ends.

First, to smoothen and facilitate things thereby to open a passage, and pave
the way to a happy peace, which this poor Island did so thirst after, having
been so long glutted with civil blood.

Secondly, that it might conduce to the further security, and the indemnifying
of the two Houses of Parliament, with all their instruments, assistants, and
adherents, and so rid them of all jealousies, and fear (of future dangers)
which still lodged within them. Now touching the expressions and words of this
Grant, they were not his own, nor did he give order for the dictating or
penning thereof; the King was not the Author of them, but an Assenter only unto
them: nor was He or his Party accused, or as much as mentioned in any of them,
to draw the least guilt upon themselves. Besides, He passed them as he does all
Laws and Acts of Parliament, which in case of absence another may do for him in
his politic capacity, therefore they cannot prejudice his person any way. I am
loath to say that he condescended to this Grant, -- Cum strict a novacula supra,
When the razor was as it were at his throat, when there was an Army of about
thirty thousand effect if Horse and Foot that were in motion against him, when
his Person had continued under a black long lingering restraint, and dangerous
menacing Petitions and Papers daily obtruded against him. Moreover, His Majesty
passed this Concession with these two provisos and reservations,

First, that it should be of no virtue or validity at all, till the whole Treaty
were entirely consummated.

Secondly, that he might when he pleased enlarge and clear the truth with the
reservedness of his meaning herein, by public Declaration: Now the Treaty being
confusedly huddled up, without discussing, or as much as receiving any
Proposition from himself as was capitulated, (and reciprocal Proposals are of
the essence of all Treaties) it could neither bind him, or turn any way to his
disadvantage: Therefore under favor, there was too much have used by the
Parliament, to draw that hipothetick or provisional Concession to the form of an
Act so suddenly after in the very heat of the Treaty, without His Majesty's
knowledge, or the least intimation of his pleasure.

Add hereunto, that this Grant was but a mere preambular Proposition, 'twas not
of the essence of the Treaty it self: And as the Philosophers and Schoolmen
tell us, there is no valid proof can be drawn out of Proemes, Introductions or
Corallaries in any science, but out of the positive assertions and body of the
Text, which is only argument-proof; so in the Constitutions and Laws of
England, as also in all accusations and charges, forerunning prefaces and
preambles (which commonly weak causes want most) are not pleadable: and though
they use to be first in place, like gentlemen-Ushers, yet are they last in
dignity, as also in framing, nor had they ever the force of Laws, but may be
termed their attendants to make way for them.

Besides, there is not a syllable in this preface which repeales or connives at
any former Law of the Land, therefore those Laws that so strictly inhibit
English Subjects to raise arms against their liege Lord the King, and those
Laws e contrario, which exempt from all dangers, penalties or molestation any
Subject that adheres to the person of the King in any cause or quarrel
whatsoever, are still in force.

Furthermore, this introductory Concession of the Kings, wherein he is
contented to declare, That the two Houses were necessitated to take Arms for
their defense, may be said to have relation to the necessity, a part post, not
a part ante: self-defence is the universal Law of Nature, and it extends to
all other creatures, as well as the rational: As the sluent Roman Orator in
that sentence of his, which is accounted among the Critiques the excellentest
that ever dropped from him; Est enim haec non scripta, sed nata Lex, quam non
didicimus, accepimus, legimus, verum ex natura ipsa arripuimus, hausimus,
expressimus, ad quam non docti, sed facti, non instituti, sed imbuti sumus, ut
si vita nostra in etc. For this (meaning self-defence) is not a written, but a
Law born with us; A Law which we have not learnt, received or read, but that
which we have sucked, drawn forth, and wrung out of Nature her self; A Law to
which we are not taught, but made unto, wherewith we are not instructed, but
endued withal, that if our life's be in jeopardy, etc. we may repel force by
force. Therefore when the House of Parliament had drawn upon them a necessity
of self-defence (and I could have wished it had been against any other but
their own Sovereign Prince) his Majesty was contented to acknowledge that
necessity. As for example: A man of war meets with a Merchant man at Sea, he
makes toward him, and assaults him; The Merchant man having a good stout
vessel under him, and resolute generous Seamen, bears up against him, gives
him a whole broad side, and shoots him 'twixt wind and water; so there happens
a furious fight betwixt them, which being ended, the Merchant cannot deny but
that the man of war, though the first Assailant, was necessitated to fight, and
that justly in his own defense, which necessity he drew upon himself, and so
was excusable, a posteriori, not a priori; As the Civilians speak of a
clandestine marriage, Fieri non debuit, sed factum valet; It ought not to have
been, but being done it is valid: whereunto relates another saying, Multa sunt
quae non nisi peracta approbantur. There are many things which are not
allowable till they are passed.

The Kings of France have had sundry civil wars, many bloody encounters and
clashes with their Subjects, specially the last King Lewis the thirteenth,
which turned all at last to his advantage; among other Treaties upon that of
Loudu^, he was by force of Article to publish an Edict, Dons lequel le Roy
approuvoit tout le pass comme ayant este fait pour son service, etc. Whrein
the King approved of all that was passed, as done for his service, etc. and
these concessions and extenuations are usual at the close of most civil
wars; but there was never any further advantage made of them, then to make the
adverse party more capable of grace and pardon, to enable them to bear up
against the brunt of Laws, and secure them more firmly from all afterclaps;
They were passed in order to an Act of Abolition, to a general pardon, and
consequently to a reestablishment of Peace; now, Peace and War (we know) are
like Water and Ice, they engender one another: But I do not remember to have
read either in the French story, or any other, that such Royal Concessions at
the period of any intestin war were ever wrung so hard, as to draw any
inference from them, to cast thereby the guilt of blood or indeed the least
stain of dishonor upon the King; For Royal Indulgences and grants of this
nature are like nurses breasts, if you press them gently there will milk come
forth, if you wring them too hard you will draw forth blood in lieu of milk:
And I have observed, that upon the conclusion of such Treaties in France, both
parties would hugg and mutually embrace one another in a gallant way of national
humanity; all rancor, all plundrings, sequestration, and imprisonment, would
cease, nor would any be prosecuted, much less made away afterward in cold
blood.

Touching the Comencer of this monstrous war of ours, the world knows too well,
that the first man of blood was Blewcap, who showed Subjects the way, how to
present their King with Petitions upon the pikes point, and what visible
judgments have fallen upon him since by such confusions of discord and
pestilence at home, and irreparable dishonor abroad, let the world judge. The
Irish took his rise from him: and whereas it has been often suggested, that
his Majesty had foreknowledge thereof, among a world of convincing arguments
which may clear him in this particular, the Lord Maguair upon the ladder, and
another upon the Scaffold, when they were ready to breath their last, and to
appear before the Tribunal of heaven, did absolutely acquit him, and that
spontaneously of their own accord, being unsought unto, but only out of a love
to truth, and the discharge of a good conscience: But touching those c^uentous
Irish wars, in regard there was nothing whereof more advantage was made
against His late Majesty, to imbitter and poison the hearts of his Subjects
against him then that Rebellion, I will take leave to wind up the main causes
of them upon a small bottom.

1. They who kept intelligence and complied with the Scot, in his first and
second insurrection.

2. They who dismissed the first Irish Commissioners (who came of purpose to
attend our Parliament with some grievances) with such a short unpolitic harsh
answer.

3. They who took off Straffords head, (which had it stood on, that Rebellion
had never been) and afterward retarded the dispatch of the Earl of Leicester
from going over to be Lord-Lievtenant.

4. Lastly, they who hindered part of that disbanded Army of 8000. men raised
there by the Earl of Strafford, which His Majesty, in regard they were
soldiers of fortune, and loose casheer'd men, to prevent the mischiefs that
might befall that Kingdom by their insolences, had promised the two Spanish
Ambassadors, the Marquesses of Velada and Malvezzi, then resident in this
Court: which soldiers rise up first of any, and put fire to the tumult to find
something to do.

They, I say, who did all this, may be justly said to have been the true causes
of that horrid Insurrection in Ireland; and consequently it is easy to judge
upon the account of whose souls must be laid the blood of those hundred and odd
thousand poor Christians who perished in that war: and had it been possible to
have brought over their bodies unputrified to England, and to have cast them at
the lower House door, and in the presence of some Members, which are now either
secluded, or gone to give account in another world, I believe their noses would
have gushed out with blood for discovery of the true murderers.

Touching this last firebrand of war, which was thrown into England, who they
were that kindled it first, the consciences of those indifferent and unblassed
men are fittest to be judges, who have been curious to observe with impartial
eyes, the carriage of things from the beginning.

I confess 'twas a fatal unfortunate thing, that the King should put such a
distance 'twixt his Person and his Parliament, but a more fatal and barbarous
thing it was, that he should be driven away from it, that there should be a
desperate design to surprise his Person, that Ven with his Myrmidons, and
Bourges with his Bandogs, (for so they called the riffraff of the City they
brought along with them) should rabble him away, with above four parts in five
of the Lords, and near upon two parts in three of the Commons: Yet it is fit it
should be remembered, what reiterated Messages his Majesty sent from time to
time afterward, that he was always ready to return, provided there might be a
course taken to secure his Person, with those Peers and others who were rioted
away from the Houses; it is fit it should be remembered, that there was not the
least motion of war at all, till Hotham kept his Majesty out of his own Town
Kingston upon Hul, where being attended by a few of his meniall Servants, he
came only to visit her, which act of Hotham's by shutting the gates against him
was voted warrantable by the House of Commons, and it may be called the first
thunderbolt of war: It Is fit it should be remembered, that a while after there
was a complete Army of 10000. effect if Horse and Foot enrolled in and about
London to fetch him to his Parliament by force, and remove ill Counselors from
about him, (long before he put up his Royal Standard) and the General named
to live and die with them: and very observable it is, how that Generals Father
was executed for a Traitor, for but attempting such a thing upon Queen
Elizabeth, I mean to remove ill Counselors from about her by force. It Is also
to be observed, that the same Army which was raised to bring him to his
Parliament, was continued to a clean contrary end two years afterward to keep
him from his Parliament. It Is fit it should be remembered, who interdicted Trade
first, and brought in Forraigners to help them, and whose Commissions of War
were near upon two months date before the Kings. It Is fit it should be
remebred how his Majesty in all his Declarations and public Instruments made
always deep Protestations, that 'twas not against his Parliament he raised
Arms, but against some seditious Members, against whom he had only desired
the common benefit of the Law, but could not obtain it. It Is fit to remember,
that after any good successes or advantage of his, he still Courted both
Parliament and City to an Accommodation; how upon the Treaty at Uxbridge, with
much importunity for the general advantage and comfort of his people and to
prepare matters more fitly for a peace, he desired there might be freedom of
trade from Town to Town, and a Cessation of all Acts of Hostility for the time,
that the inflammation being allayd, the wound might be cured the sooner: all
which was denied him. It Is fit to remember how a Noble Lord at that time told
the Parlements Commissioners in his Majesty's Name, at the most unhappy rupture
of the said Treaty, that when he was at the highest he would be ready to treat
with them, and fight with them when he was at the lowest: It Is fit the pres^^^
Army should remember how often both in their Propos^^^, and public Declarations
they have informed the world, and deeply protested that their principal aim
was to restore his Majesty to honor, freedom and safety, whereunto they were
formerly bound, both by their own Protestation and Covenant, that the two
Commanders in chief pawned unto him their souls thereupon. Let them remember,
that since he was first snatched away to their custody, he never displeased
them in the least particular, but in all his Overtures for Peace, and all his
Propositions he had regard still that the Army should be satisfied: let it be
remembered, that to settle a blessed Peace to preserve his Subjects from rapine
and ruin, and to give contentment to his Parliament, he did in effect freely
part with his Sword, Scepter, and Crown, and every thing that was personal to
him: Let it be remembered with what an admired temper, with what prudence and
constancy with what moderation and mansuetude he comported himself since his
deep afflictions, insomuch that those Commissioners and others who resorted
unto him, and had had their hearts so averse unto him before, returned his
Converts, crying him up to be one of the sanctifiedst persons upon earth: and
will not the blood of such a Prince cry aloud for vengeance?

Let it be remembered, that though there be some Precedents of deposing Kings in
this Kingdom, and elsewhere, when there was a competition for the right Title
to the Crown by some other of the blood Royal, yet it is a thing not only
unsampled, but unheard of in any age, that a King of England whose Title was
without the least scruple, should be summoned and arraigned, tried, condemned,
and executed in his own Kingdom, by his own Subjects, and by the name of their
own King, to whom they had sworn Alleagiance.

The meanest Barister that has but tasted the Laws of the Land can tell you,
that it is an unquestionable fundamental Maxim, The King can do no wrong,
because he acts by the mediation of his Agents and Ministers, he hears with
other men's ears, he sees with other men's eyes, he consults with other men's
brains, he executes with other men's hands, and judges with other men's
consciences; therefore his Officers Counselors or favorits are punishable, not
(...) and I know not one yet whom he has spared, but sacrificed to Justice.
The Crown of England is of so coruscant and pure a metal, that it cannot
receive the least taint or blemish; and if there were any before in the person
of the Prince, it takes them all away and makes him to be Rectus in C^r^a. This
as in many others may be exemplified in Henry the Seventh, and the late Queen
Elizabeth: when the first came to the Crown 'twas mentioned in Parliament, that
the attainder might be taken off him, under which he lay all the time he lived
an Exile in France; it was then by the whole House of Parliament resolved upon
the question, that it was unnecessary, because the Crown purged all. So
likewise when Queen Elizabeth was brought as it were from the Scaffold to the
Throne; though she was under a former attainder, yet 'twas thought superflous
to take it off, for the Crown was lies away al spots, and darteth such a
brightness, such resplendent beams of Majesty, that quite dispel al former
clouds: so that put case King James died a violent death, and his Son had been
accessory to it (which is as base a lie as ever the devil belched out) yet his
access to the Crown had purged all. This business about the plaster which
was applied to King James, was sifted and winnow'd as narrowly as possibly a
thing could be in former Parlements, yet when it was exhibited as an Article
against the Duke of Buckingham, 'twas termed but a presumption or misdemeanure
of a high nature: And it is strange that these new accusers should make that a
parricide in the King, which was found but a presumption in the Duke, who in
case it had been so, must needs have been the chiefest Accessory.

And as the ancient Crown and Royal Diadem of England is made of such pure
allay, and cast in so dainty a mould, that it can receive no taint, or contract
the least speck of enormity and foulness in it self, so it does endow the
person of the Prince that wears it with such high Prerogatives, that it
exempts him from all sorts of public blemishes, from all Attainders,
Empeachments, Summons, Arraignments and Trials; nor is there or ever was any
Law or Precedent in this Land, to lay any Crime or capital charge against him,
though touching civil matters, touching property of meum and tuum, he may be
impleaded by the meanest vassal that has sworn fealty to him; as the Subjects
of France, and Spain may against their Kings, though never so absolute Monarchs.

In the Constitutions of England, there are two incontroulable Maxims, whereof
the meanest mootman that has but saluted Littleton cannot be ignorant: the
first is, Rex in suis Dominiis neque habet Parem, nec Superiorem. The King in
his own Dominions has neither Peer, or Superior. The other is Satis habet Rex
ad poenam quod Deum expectet ultorem: it is punishment enough for a King that
God will take revenge of him. Therefore if it be the Fundamental Constitution
of the Land, that all just Trials must be by Peers, and the Law proclaims the
King to have none in his own Dominions, I leave the world to judge, what
capacity or power those men had to arraigne the late King, to be in effect his
Accusers and Judges; and that an exorbitant unsampled Tribunal should be
erected, with power and purpose to condemn all that came before it, to clear
none, and that sentence of death should pass without conviction or Law upon Him
that was the head and protector of all the Laws. Lastly, that they who by
their own confession represent but the Common people, should assume power to
cut off Him who immediately represented God, -- Cui dabit parts scelus expiandi
Jupiter? --
Well, we have seen such portentous things, that former Ages never beheld, nor
will future Ages ever be witness of the like: Nay, posterity, after a Century
or two will hold what is now really acted to be but Romances: And now with
thoughts full of consternation and horror; with a heartfull of amazement and
trembling for the flagrant and crying sins of this forlorn Nation, which has
drawn such an endless war, and an unheard of slaverie upon it self, I will
conclude with this short prayer, which carries with it as much of universal
charity, as of particular: God amend all, and me first.

FINIS.

