Manus Testium movens: OR, A PRESBYTERIALL GLOSS Upon many of those obscure
prophetic Texts In Canticles, Isay, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, Habakkuk,
Zachary, Matthew, Romans, and the Revelations: Which point at The great Day of
the Witnesses rising, Antichrists ruin, and the Jews Conversion, near about
this time.

Wherein Dr. Homes, with the rest of the Independent Antichristian
Time-servers are clearly confuted, and out of their own Writings condemned: And
against them proved, That the present Usurpers in England are that
Antichristian Party who have slain the Witnesses, and shall reign but three
years and an half, which time is almost at an end.

To this Book must be joined Lingua Testium, being its proper Preface.

Written by Testis-mundus Catholicus Scotanglo-Britanicus.

Printed in the Year 1651.

To the Reader.
READER,
THree things there are to be accomplished in the world before the Day of
Judgment. 1. The rising of the Witnesses. 2. The ruin of Antichrist. 3. The
restoration of the twelve Tribes to their own Land. This is that first
resur^ect on; and blessed is he that has part therein, Rev. 20. 5, 6. Three
times a day do I usually bow the knee to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, That he would speedily accompl^sh these great things in the world.
Might I be so blessed of God to live to see these days, I should with much
rejoicing sing te Deum -- in the morning, though I were sure to sing a nunc
dimittis -- in the afternoon: Until then, I shall with sighs and groans say,
Deus misereatur; or with the Greek Church in their Liturgy, (...).

These things, though most learned men hold they are credenda and speranda, yet
few by their practices hold them to be stretanda: indeed, one of the living
Fathers of our English Church is so far from hoping, That he does not believe
the last of these three glorious things shall ever be in the world: It Is very
strange to me, and that which is most strange, I find the same Author lashing
with his satyricall whip, not only those that have writ amiss* but those that
adventure to write upon the Revelations: but what said the Fox in the Fable,
when he could not reach the grapes too high for him? after much pains, said he
to himself, (...), grapes are exceeding sower. Had this learned man been
private in his tart expressions, I had not been so public: but when
(Pharisee-like) such learned Doctors shall neither enter in themselves, nor
suffer others to enter in, it would provoke a stone to speak. What though he
understands it not, must it therefore follow, that no body else understands it?
various are the gifts of God to his people, and it is as lawful and as
necessary for us to study that, as any other part of the Bible: It is a sin to
be wilfully negligent in the s^arching into those Prophesies, which give light
to the times we live in: in the Revelations there are shallows as well as
depths; there both the Lamb may wade, and the Elephant may swim: and so they
may in Paul's Epistles, and in the Evangelists, and in all the Prophets: the
understanding of the prophesies, is the bright side of the Cloud to the
Christian world; and when God shall turn this bright side toward the Jews (who
only have had the dark side toward them these 1600. years) then shall they be
converted: the not studying of the Prophesies, was the gross Hypocrisy of the
Jews. Ye hypocrites, says Christ, ye can discern the face of the sky, and can
ye not d^scern the times and the seasons? The not understanding, or neglect of
searching to understand the prophetic texts of the Old Testament, was the
cause of the greatest sin and scandal in the Church that ever was committed,
and that was the murdering of Christ: and I am confident the self-same
ignorance and neglect has been the cause of the greatest sin and scandal that
ever was committed in the Gospel Church, and that is the slaying of the
witnesses: and therefore, if searching after the Mind of God in his written
Word (which is all writ for our instruction) be to be vild in any man's eyes, I
am resolved I will be more vild in that man's eyes if I can: If reproaches,
scoffs, threats, or earnest disswasions of friends, or foes, could have
quenched my little spark, it had long since been out: Bt by the grace of God I
have done what I have done, and his grace is superabundant to me: though it is
true, I am alone in regard of associates in this study; yet I am not alone in
regard of assistants, for many of the ancient Fathers are with me, and (which
is all) the Scriptures are with me. I have gone this warfare at my own great
charge, and it seems I must fight in this warfare alone. My earnest desire was
but to engage a grave wit to peruse my writings, and for that end these papers
were sent to him; but he (like Benzoma in the Talmud) was sem^er foris; so that
when they returned to me again, I perceived he had not so much as cast his
eye upon them, his other employments plied him so hard; so that my poor papers
came from this rich man's study (like Lazarus from Dives's gate) as full of
sores as they went. From thence they went (as I supposed) to men, but it seems
they met with monsters, at least with monster-makers: Had they smothered (like
the worst of Egyptian Midwives) this my hard-favour'd babe at the place of
bringing forth, it had not been half so much; but in that they have, by their
pinching it, and plucking off its limbs, endeavored to make it a living
monster, to be a never-dying-monument of reproach to the Father: This grieves
me; but why should it grieve me? when all the world knows that the babes of
Sion are enforced to be brought forth amongst Asses in a stable, when the Brats
of Babel lie in the best Rooms of the Inn. They go forth, Cum privilegio
(though not Regiae Majestatis) whereas mine steals out by unknown ways, like
Paul from his enemies, by a basket, over the wall: Considering the Printers
care, and fear, and danger, I have rather cause to excuse him, then exclaim
against him: I hope this book will meet with none, but such as in their wisdom
will amend ordinary faults, and mistakes: and for the other, I hope the Errata
will instruct them. Those things totally left out most afflict me.

The subject of the Book I gave thee in the three forenamed things to be
accomplished on each of these three, I have implici^ly handled these three
Queries.

1. Who the Witnesses are. 2. Where they are. 3. When they shall rise. Under
this I have handled (diverse from all English Writers) who he is that slays the
Witnesses, where he shall slay them, how long they shall be slain, and where he
shall be slain (and when) that slay them; and so of Antichrist, and of the Jews
conversion, when they shall be converted, who they are that shall be converted,
and by whom they shall be converted. This I have handled more at large in the
other little Tract called Lingua Testium, which ought to be joined to this, and
was so intended, though the winds and storms of persecution severed them. My
hearty prayer to God is, that this clay and spettle may (by the powerful
operation of Gods spirit) be effectual, to the opening the eyes of those blind
souls, who by the blind are led out of the way, and both fallen into the ditch.

What I have done, is but as a Rams horn in a weak man's hand; which one stone
(in probability) from Jericho walls is able to dash in pieces: yet what cannot
a rams horn do, when God sends it forth by his commission? it is able to
overthrow the strong walls of Jericho. In God alone I put my trust, he is my
strength, by his help have I leaped over the wall of many difficulties; and by
his power I trust I shall undermine and blow up the wall of Babylon. I am sure
it stands (though formidable to the beholder) (...), upon a tottering
foundation; and blessed are those Princes, and blessed those people and persons
whom God has given a heart to enterprise so great a work, though they die in
that service, Rev. 14. 13.

My prayer is that this Tract may be (as that voice in Jerusalem before its
ruin) A voice to the Magistrate, and a voice to the Minister, a voice to the
Papist, and a voice to the Protestant, a voice to the aged, and a voice to the
young, a voice to the rich, and a voice to the poor, and a voice to all that
belong to the Election of grace, to forewarn them to fly from the evil to come;
for be assured (O ye people of England) that God will visit you, and that
speedily, with his sore and heavy judgments: as you have been singular in sin,
so will God single you out to punishment: the day is at hand when Traitors and
Covenant-breakers shall cry to the Mountains to fall upon them, and to the
hills to cover them from the wrath of God, which will inevitably fall upon them.

Now that I might call some souls out from amongst them, before the wrath of
God break in upon them, and it be too late, I have written this ensuing Tract
with as much plainness and brevity as I could, I have pared off all
difficulties which might perplex the Reader, either in the method, or in the
style; I have given thee here the cream of many a months study, which I have
gathered out of the choicest books in Europe. I have left no stone unturned)
nor any Library in England (that I could come at) unransackt. I expect no
bribes of breath or profit, but the profit of mine and thy soul, which is the
soul of profit: as to other profit I am a stranger; indeed I am a great looser,
for I have consumed both my body and estate to enrich my soul, and others in
this study: nothing but my bed and my meals have been tedious to me since I
undertook it; and if the Lord be pleased to prosper it to the good but of any
one soul, I shall dedicate my whole life in praises to him, and account my
corporal losses a thousand times repaid me. For this end, I beseech thee
Reader, to read it, as I writ it. Sequestrate thy self from distractions, and
sit down as in the presence of God to search after his revealed Will in these
misterious texts. Watch against the Devils temptations, for he is most busy
about a man when he sits to meditate on these texts He shall never profit by
this, that does not (as that Father says on the Cant.) Carnalem exuere
affectum; he that comes to this treasury with smutcht and coalie heart and
hands, shall carry away pro thesauro carbones: If thou therefore find not that
expected satisfaction at the first reading of this book, lay not the fault
(like Senecas Nurse) presently upon the book; but see that it be not thy fault
in reading it: I give thee this the rather, because I know it will have many
Censurers; but I am confident few confuters: remember (good reader) as thou
must answer one day for thy lost hours, which are double loss; and as for thy
sluggish hearing and praying, so for thy sluggish and unprofitable reading of
books: The Lord therefore for Jesus sake grant, that thou may so read as to
understand; that therein thou may be blessed, which is the only end of the
Authors labors.

Vale.
THe earnest endeavor of Dr. Homes on October the 8. 1650. was to persuade the
Lord Major, Aldermen, and the chief of the City assembled at Christ-Church,
that now this year 1650. the things done against the lawful Parliament of
England: together with the grand defeat given to the Scots by Cromwell, was the
fulfilling literally of his Text in Psalm. 149. 8. 9. To bind their Kings in
Chains, and their Nobles in fetters of Iron, that they may execute upon them
the vengeance written: this Honor have all his Saints, the honor of
imprisoning, arraigning, condemning, and beheading the only Protestant King in
the world, of dis^^bing the Protestant Peers of the Parliament of England, and
of secluding the sincere Protestants of the Commons of England, the changing of
the Government of England, the removing of the Covenanted Reformation, and the
invading of Scotland, and overthrowing of the covenanting party; such honor
have all the Saints (says Dr. Homes:) this is says he (page 6.) remotio
impedimenti, the removing of impediments, and the holy ones; that is, the
present power now sitting at Westminster, which he calls a Parliament, have
removed these impediments: the Dr. gives a Catalogue of his Saints, (viz.) the
Parliame^^, the Council of State, the Army, the Magistrates* the Ministers, and
the Churches: these are the Doctors holy ones. I wonder how the Dr. left out
the King of Spain, the p^incipal Saint next to the Pope in these honorable
actions they doubtless have (according to the Doctors interpretation)
endeavored long before now in 88. and the Gun-powder-plot to fulfill the
Doctors Text literally, that is, to overthrow King, Lords, and Commons, and all
that stand steadfastly to maintain Protestant Laws and Religion: these are the
things done, and these are the persons who perform them, the actions (says the
Dr.) are glorious, and the actors holy ones, neither is this any new notion of
the Doctors; for he professes that 8. years ago, he was of this opinion, that
this year 1650. should produce such glorious effects, as the beheading of King
Charles upon a Scaffold at his own door, (for so the m^n means plainly by his
expressions.) Is it not strange that this Dr. should be so old a Prophet? nay,
is it not strange that he should be so soon a Prophet, and so strange a
Prophet? for in the year 1642. the Dr. (as he says) foretold these things to
come to pass this year, and in 1639. thousands of people know that he was a
malicious blood-hound of the persecuting Prelates, one that prosecuted honest
Christians at the Bishops Courts with most inveterate hatred, and how suddenly
did this man put off his Paritors Bag, and put on his Prophets Mantle? how
soon did he that pleaded for Crucifixes, Cringings, surplices, crossings, and
Popish ceremonies, that prayed for Bishops by what names or titles soever
distinguished, that prayed for our gracious Sovereign King Charles, King of
great Britain, Defender of the faith, and supreme head of the Church in all
causes, and over all persons: how soon did this man turn? and how strangely
was he altered? that in 1642. he should foretell the ruin of his gracious
Sovereign, and now count the day of his ruin and his Peers, that glorious day
which literally fulfills the Doctors prophetical Text: the young King and the
Nobles may by this perceive what good friends the prelatical Bratts are to
Monarchy; but we proceed from page 20. to p. 27. He takes pains to the purpose
to persuade the people to praise God, since such glorious wonders are effected
this day in these times, and he lays at the Presbyterians with all his might,
railing at them, that they will not come in to make up the choice with his holy
people; he tells them, it is (...) defect in their Consciences, and if they be
Saints, they are in the dark, or else they are full of prejudice, or under some
strange temptations: nay, a little after he says, they are no Saints; for it
is a contradiction in Adjecto, to say a man is a Saint, and will not be
thankful; nay in page 2^. he says, they are wilfully obstinate, and page 23.
miscomplexioned, and in page. 27. they are weak in judgeme^t, and distempered
in spirit.

From the Presbyterians he turns away, and betakes himself in his use to his
holy people; and in page 32. he exhorts them to praise God in opposition to
Kings, Monarchy being turned into Democracy, and Kingdoms into Common wealths:
here he turns Statesman, and takes upon him to tell what is the best Government
in the world, a regular Democracy (says he) assisted with an occasional
Aristocracy in trust is the safest Government: here he goes about to put his
holy Council of State above his holy Parliament; he goes on, and most falsely,
and most unjustly slanders the Government of the Jews, saying that this
Democracy that he desired, was the ancient Government of the Jews: here he does
abuse both Moses and Joshua, and all the Judges of Israel, which were absolute
Monarchs, he proceeds and tells us that the first degenerate King was Nimrod;
observe here how the Dr. insn^res himself.

First, He acknowledges the Office of a King to be lawful, why else does he
say, degenerate King? for if a Kingly Government be not lawful, Nimrods Office
was enough to make him degenerate.

Secondly, He acknowledges there were lawful Kings before Nimrod, therefore he
calls this Nimrod not the first King, but the first degenerate King; here the
Dr. spoke truth not at unawares, but premeditatively; for in page 9. He
acknowledges, that there was a holy King before Nimrod, and that was
Melchizedeck King of Salem, Priest of the most high God, Heb. 7. This
Melchizedeck he says was Sem the Son of Noah. mark then how this wicked
perverter of the ways of truth even against his Conscience contradicts
himself; for in page 32. he stirs up the people to praise God for the
Destruction of Kingly Government and Monarchy, that Kingdoms are turned into
Commonwealths, and Monarchy into democracy, and in page 39. brands all those
with the mark of Antichristian, which go about to uphold Kings or Kingly
Government, and yet confesses that Kingly Government is lawful Government; can
any sober-minded man give credit to such a self condemned wretch, he proceeds
in page 32. to raise at Kingly Government, saying that God is angry at the
peoples asking a King, and God gave them a King in anger, the 1. Sam. 8. the
Doctor never considers it was their manner of asking a King that provoked God,
neither does he consider how that God gave them only a King in wrath; for God
continued the Office when he destroyed the person of the King, and God himself
those David King, after Saul; which Government continued unremoved for ^4.
Generations together, Mat. 1. and at last it was (as a grievous punishment for
their sin) removed. But the Doctor forgets or conceals this: he proceeds to
exclaim against the lives of Kings, thereby to defame their Office, he calls
them ambitious bloodsuckers, and asks, what Kings have done since Christ's time
until now for Christ? but even much against Christ and true Christians, he
forgets that the first Christian King in the world was he that subdued this
Kingdom of England to the profession of the Gospel; he forgets what Constantine
that Monarch did, in turning all the Empire, the most of the world, from
Paganism to Christianity. I Will only ask this question of the Doctor, what
glorious reformation in the world was ever wrought without a Monarch? but the
Dr. proceeds and tells us page 23. that there is divine reason, why States
should incline to Democracy: one reason is; because God did create us not Kings
but people: take this reason of the Doctors one way, it is ridiculous
nonsense: take it another way, it is an absolute untruth; for Adam the first
man created by God, was created a Monarch, God put all things under him to be
subject and serviceable to him; but his chief reason against Monarchy is;
because God has settled his decree against Monarchy, Dan. 2. Here the Doctors
juggling is discovered; for it is not Monarchy, but degenerate Monarchy that God
threatens to throw down: and this the Dr. does as good as confess in page 32.
where he confesses that the Monarchy of Nimrod was a degenerate Monarchy,
because a tyrannical one: now to argue, because God will overthrow tyranical
Monarchy, therefore he will overthrow all Monarchy, holds no more true in the
consequence, then, because God will damn all reprobated men, therefore he will
damn all men. Thus have I given you a summary view of the chief things in the
Doctors Sermon; whereby it may plainly appear to every eye, that the drift of
this fellow (as of the rest of his Jesuited fraternity) is to prove the
Protestants of England, and their civil Government to be Antichristian, and
that those that have blown up the lawful Parl. are the Saints of the holy
people, whom God has set apart for such a work, and honored them withal,
that they have bound Kings in Chains, and Nobles in Fetters of Iron: this he
calls the throwing down of Antichrist, which eight years ago he foretold would
come to pass, about this year 1650. which is a year that the
Independent-time-servers much ha^p upon, and this Dr. in special alleging many
Texts of prophetical Scripture to make good what he affirms in this explication
of some Texts of Scripture, I do acknowledge there is much reason and truth;
but in the application of these Texts most abominable falsehoods: therefore I
will deal with the Dr. as Primasius did with Tichonius the Donatist, who wrote
on the Revelation before him, he made use of what was good in the book, and
what was otherwise rejected; for (as he in his prologue on the Revelations
says, A wise man will not refuse a precious stone, because it sticks in a
Dungil; so neither is precious truth to be rejected, because it may be found
sometimes amongst heretical opinions, namque fides a per fidis colligit quod
suijuris esse cogn^verit, says he; what is good in the Doctors book, I shall
make the best and the truest use of, and what is evil and irrational, I shall
discover it.

As an introduction to this weighty business, I shall first discourse of
Monarchy, which is so much cried down by the Doctor. First I shall prove it to
be Jure divino. Secondly, to continue in the Church visibly from Adam until
Christ, except in a time of Gods extreme wrath on the Church, when he seemed to
destroy them. Thirdly, that Monarchs have always been the chief instruments by
whom God has done the great and glorious things in the Church. I will treat as
briefly as may be on all these.

1. Monarchy is Jure divino; because God instituted it. He created Adam, the
Monarch of the whole world, Genesis 1. 28. he had dominion over every living thing
that moves upon the earth; if any should say, except man: I do here affirm,
that Adam had dominion over man; for by the 5. Commandment, man was bound to
submit unto him. If any should say, that the form of Government was broken by
Adams fall. To that we answer, though the fall of Adam disinabled him to
perform exactly the duty of a Monarch, and disinabled his posterity to the
exact performance of their duty; yet their fall did not absolve the one or the
other from their duty: the Law stood when Adam fell, and exacted as much from
Adam and his posterity, after they fell, as before they fell, and they were as
much bound to fulfill the same after as before, otherwise there had been no need
of a Mediator: so that the Argument is strong: What was instituted by God, and
never abrogated, is still in force: that Monarchy was successive, is very
clear; for Cain, Adams eldest Son, was by Gods appointment to enjoy the
dominion after his Father, Genesis 4. 7. for his well doing or evil doing God will
reckon with him; not Abel, though he were a real Saint, no, Abel must by Gods
institution subject to Cain; Cains wickedness could not excuse Abels
subjection; nor Abels Saint-ship dispossess his ungodly Brother: says God to
Cain, unto thee shall his desire be subject, and thou shall rule over him, so
Chrysostom de causam padius Calvine Ainsworth, and many other learned men
understand the Text, and so the Septuagint translates it: now if Abel, then
Abels inferiors were to submit unto Cain, and so by consequence, all the world
after this horrid breach in nature. God put a vast difference betwixt the holy
seed and Cains posterity; for God raised out of Adams loins a Monarch for the
Church.

2. This Monarchy we prove continued in the Church until Christ: after Abels
death God gave Adam a godly Son in his st^ad Sheth, Seths Family was known by
the Sons of God, which implies thus much, that the Church of God were a
people then separated from the world, from Cains wicked posterity, who soon run
into Anarchy, out of which arose cruel tyranny.

These times were dark times, for we have very little either of civil or
ecclesiastic History, until after the flood: therefore Scaliger calls this
time tempus (...), a time not manifest; yet this is manifest, that the Church
was distinct from the world in Seths Family: they were a community of
themselves, and it is most probable, nay I think I may say amongst Scholars, it
is undeniable, that Monarchical Government continued in Seths posterity,
passing from him to his Son Enos, and so to Canaan Enos Son, and so to
Mahalalel Camaans Son, from him to Jarud, from Jarud to Enoch, from Enoch to
Mathuselah, from Mathuselah to Samach, from Samach to Noah: I humbly conceive
(with submission to better Judgeements) Genesis 5. is a cropologie of the
Monarchs, that succeeded in the Church before the Flood, at last the Church
admitted of a cursed toleration, by mixing themselves with the Atheistical
world: whereupon God swe^t the whole world away, except 8. persons who had kept
their Garments clean. Noah the Monarch of the Church hereby became the Monarch
of the world, which was but little, and confined within a little compass after
Noah: Shem succeeded instead of him wicked Ham's posterity, together with
Japh^th, ran into heathenisme, and into Anarchy; out of which arose the
monstrous Tyrants, such as Nimrod; but Kingly Government by the Doctors own
confession, was preserved in the Church at that time; for he says page 9. tha^
Shem the Son of Noah was Melchizedeck; now Melchizedeck (the old Testament and
the new, (Heb. 7. tell us) he was King of Salem, he was a King: so that we
having proved Monarchy in the Church, to be visible from Adam till after the
flood, I doubt not but by Gods grace to make it more clearly appear from the
flood until Christ, except in the case of a national desertion, when God for
their sins forsook them, and purposely as a designed judgment on the Nation,
threw down their Government, and made them extremely miserable by taking away
their Monarchs: Now this is so far from aspersing Monarchy, that it is a high
commendation of Monarchy, and sets t^ke stamp of necessity upon it, without
which the Church and State cannot well subsist; after the flood Sem the Son of
Noah was the Monarch in the Church, he is called King of Salem, because he was
King of that place, which afterward was called Jerusalem, as some conceive. As
for his being without Father or Mother which the holy Ghost mentioned, Heb. 7.
3. I humbly conceive, it is spoken in reference to his Offices: his Priestly
Office, he received immediately from God: all the other Priests were the Sons
of Levi, they had a Father; but this had no Father, he was the anointed of God,
and herein he was a Type of Christ, he was (...) in this sense, because he
received his Priesthood, not from any Pedigree, but immediately from God: other
Priests if they could not prove their Pedigree were to be cast out from being
Priests; but these Priests were of the Order of Aaron, of the Tribe of Levi:
this Melchizedeck is said to be without beginning of days, or end of life;
perhaps, because (as the Doctor says) he lived many years in both worlds, that
is, in the old before the flood, and in the new after the flood, Sem lived
fourscore and 18. years in the old world, Cen. 11. 10. 11. and he lived 600
years in the new world after the flood; as Genesis 5. gives us a true Catalogue of
the Monarchs in the Church before the Church: so Genesis 11. gives us such another
Catalogue of those who lived after the flood unto Abraham: Shem had Elam and
Asher. before the flood, Genesis 10. 22. but they were drowned in the flood, but
two years after the flood Sem begat Arphaxad, who was his eldest Son, who had
the right of domination, after him succeeded Salah his eldest Son; after Salah
succeeded his eldest Son Eber, after Eber Peleg, after Peleg Reu, after Reu
Serag, after Serag Nahor, after Nahor Terah, after Terah succeeded Abraham:
here God only set down the Monarchs in the Church; for every one of these had
more Sons then one it is probable, but they are not mentioned, because they were
not the eldest Sons, they had not the privilege of the firstborn, who by Gods
Law, Genesis 4. 7. were to have the Dominion. Thus you see Religion and Monarchy
kept together in Sems Family after the flood until Abraham.

With Abraham God made a Covenant, and promised to make him a Nation, and a
great Nation, Genesis 12. 2. and that he would give him the Land of Canaan, and
his seed should possess it, and multiply as the dust of the earth, Genesis 13. 15*
16. This was a gracious day of comfort to the poor Church, to hear of a blessed
seed that shall grow up to a great Nation, and be a blessing to all the world;
this promise did God renew to Abraham, after he parted with Lot: this Abraham
was both valiant and pious, as appears by the redemption of his Kinsman Lot out
of the hands of those Kings which took him captive* after which Victory
Melchizedeck met him, unto whom Abraham (as a King in homage to him, and as a
Priest in duty to him) paid Tithes: this Melchizedeck probably was Sem; for Sem
was then living, and lived above 150. years after this fight, so that it was
Abraham's duty to pay Tithes to Melchizedeck; for he was by right the absolute
Sovereign in the Church, and in that respect without Father or Mother, that is,
without any superior, and in that respect Melchizedeck was a type of Christ;
for Christ is absolute Monarch of the Church, he is without Father or Mother in
that respect, he is subject to none. But to the thing in hand: we see it is
clear that Monarchy and Religion have been continued in the Church together,
from Adam to Abraham: now from Abraham till Christ. Monarchy continued in the
Church: it is so visible to every one that reads the Scripture, that I will put
it under the third Position which I intend to treat briefly on, viz.

Thirdly, That the greatest good that ever the Church of God received here on
earth from God, they received from the hands of Monarchs.

The Scripture tells us of four glorious days that have been and shall be in
the world before the day of Judgment; three of these days are past, viz. The
day of Gods making known himself on Mount Sinai to his Church, in the
dispensation of his grace and love to his Church, in giving them Laws and
Ordinances for standing rules of his Worship, until the time of perfect
Reformation: Moses the Monarch of the Church was the instrument of receiving
these Laws and Ordinances from God, and the instrument of divulging them to the
Church: Moses was not only the Instrument of the greatest deliverance of the
Church from the greatest danger, but the Instrument of conveying the greatest
good to them. That this Moses was an absolute Monarch, none will deny that has
either wit or modesty, for the twelve Tribes received the Law at his mouth, and
all matters of Judicature were determined by him, beyond him there was no
appeal; the people or the Elders did not choose him, but he ordained Elders and
set over the people; he was an absolute Monarch, none might speak against him
or resist him; every Christian that reads the Bible, knows this to be a plain
truth: he was the first Monarch that was over the twelve Tribes and their
families, which were many thousands in number: this Moses God appointed to be
the Ruler over these great people; he led them like a flock of sheep; no
shepherd had more absolute command over his flock, then Moses over the twelve
Tribes. The Monarchs of Israel in their infancy, (whiles the Church was in
Tabernacles) were called Judges; the removing of these Monarchs was the
greatest Judgment that could befall the Church, and and it was the greatest
mercy of God to restore them again. This Samuel in reasoning tells the people,
1 Samuel 12. 8. God gave not Moses and Aaron to Israel, until Israel cried unto
the Lord: Ordinary prayers will not attain so great a blessing to a nation as a
godly Magistracy and Ministry, they must be strong cries to God that must
obtain such extraordinary mercies, ver. 9, 10. the people provoked God by their
Idolatry, and God threw down their Government, and made them serve their
enemies; and then the people cried to the Lord, and renewed their Covenant,
then God sent Gideon, ver. 11. he raised him up to deliver them: God never took
away Monarchy from Israel, but in wrath for the peoples sins; and God never
restored it again, but he gave it as a singular mercy, and sign of his favor
to them.

4. Ob. God gave them a King in his wrath, and he was angry with the people for
asking a King, God calls it a rejecting of him.

A. We answer briefly: 1. God gave not the Office of a King, but the Person of
a King in wrath. 2. He was angry at the peoples manner of asking a King, for
they asked not a King of Moses describing, Deuteronomy. 17. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
but a King like the Heathens that were Tyrants; well says God, they shall have
such a King that shall play the Tyrant amongst them like the heathen Kings;
therefore God bids Samuel show them what manner of King God will give them;
this Tyrant God gave him for a scourge, yet no man, no not David, though he
were a Saint and an anointed Saint, durst touch Saul's life; though Saul were
really a murderer, a Tyrant, and a public enemy; if David's heart smote him
for cutting off Saul's skirt, O how would it have smote him had he cut off his
head! Monarchs are responsable for their actions to God: No man on earth, much
less their subjects may judge or condemn them, but God only; God took away this
wicked King in his anger, as he set him up in his wrath. 3. It Is manifest that
God anointed David, and set him up King over Israel of his own free will, and
made a promise unto him (as unto Abraham) that his seed should inherit the
throne after him to many generations: Now began the Israelites to flourish now
Kingly government was established; now, and not till now, had they perfect
Conquest over all their enemies round about; now the Ark was fetched home to
Jerusalem, that had long lain in obscurity. And after David, Solomon built a
most sumptuous and rich Temple unto God, he placed the Ark in it, where it
remained in its resting place; he builded Altars, ordained Sacrifices, made the
Sea, the golden Candlesticks, the Trumpets and all the holy vessels of gold and
silver; he ordered the Priests, and maintenance for the Priests, and the
Singers, and the Porters; this was the second glorious day above others in the
world; this day far exceeded Moses his day for beauty, and luster; but Moses
his day was the stand^ng rule, all was writ by Moses his copy, though it was
writ in a far fairer hand by Solomon: this day was the noon-time of Reformation
with the Saints under the old Testament, and this day God made a Monarch to be
the instrument of effecting it.

The third glorious day in the world, which was the day of all days, was the
day of Christ's coming in the flesh to perfect a Reformation; he was (Luke 3.) a
Monarch by succession from Adam, and of the Royal family of Judah; he was the
mighty King long looked for and long before promised; he was and is really the
King of the Church, he made null and void all Moses his Ceremonial shadows, he
pulled down the Temple-worship, and set up Laws and Ordinances of his own;
never man spoke or did like him; he was Monarch not only over the souls of all
men in the world, but is by right of succession, conquest, and compact with his
Father, Monarch of the whole nations, of the bodies as well as the souls of
men: this Monarch has gotten him a true right by his conquest as well as by
his natural prerogative, and therefore he truly may bear that name and title
which others usurp, (...), the King of Kings ruling over Kings: Christ is King
of Kings and Lord of Lords, he has absolute power over the bodies and souls of
all men, and expects obedience from them all; it is he that gives all the men in
the world protection, and gives them wealth and honors; he is never a jot the
less King over the body, because he is a spiritual King and King of the soul;
for as the rich man that commands the gold is master also of the cabinet that
holds it, so is Christ of the body which is but the cabinet of that precious
Jewel the soul: Christ refusing to be made a King, and saying his Kingdom was
not of the world, deprived him not of his due, for he was born Monarch of the
world as descending from Adam, and King of the Jews as descending of David; and
when he was on earth he gave Laws to all the world both Jews and Gentiles, to
be observed on pain of damnation, herein he exercised the power of a Monarch:
This Monarch is in his being independent, and in his power independent, he has
voluntary commands which he will have his subjects to obey though he give no
reason for it.

This independent power is only in him, no man is independent but only this
mighty Monarch; and therefore the Protestants rightly call the Pope Antichrist,
because he makes himself absolutely independent in his power, which is to make
himself equal with Christ; nay in this he sets himself above Christ; for
Christ when he was on earth, subjected himself to the Scriptures, and referred
himself to the Jews to be tried by their own Prophets, whether he were not the
Christ; but the Pope usurpes a power over the Scriptures; and herein I may
truly say, that Independency is the formalis ratio Antichristi, because it sets
up man equal with Christ, yea above Christ.

This Monarch, the Lord Jesus set up new Laws, Statutes and Ordinances in the
world, the which we find in the new Testament; this day was a glorious day to
the Gentiles, but through the Jews obstinacy and unbelief was a black dismal
day to them, for they pulled his blood on their heads to their bane, which
blood was appointed for their salvation.

The rules that this Monarch gave from his own mouth, and the mouths of his
Ambassadors the Apostles, are appointed for standing rules unto the end of the
world, before which there is a fourth glorious day to come.

This fourth day the Prophets have prophesied of, and Christ has prophesied
of, and the Apostles have prophesied of, and especially John in the Revelations
had a sight of; this day shall subscribe in matter of fundamentals and
substantials to the day of Christ's being on earth; but it shall as far exceed
that day in luster and in glorious effects, as Solomon's day exceeded Moses; and
my reasons are, because the Jews and Gentiles shall be united this day in one
faith; and if Christ's day of rejecting the Jews were the riches of the
Gentiles, how much more their fulness. 2. There are more glorious promises
made to this day (in the Prophets) then any day; for this day now coming was
the day that the Prophets chiefly prophesied of, when they prophesied of a good
day to Judah and Jerusalem. 3. This day shall procure the destruction of the
three grand enemies of the Gospel, the Dragon, the Beast, and the false
Prophet. 4. And all the Kingdoms in the world shall become Christ's, which since
the Creation has not yet been effected; of this day I am to treat. We have
seen the three other days effected by Monarchs, this glorious day shall also
be effected by a Monarch so far as I can perceive; for it must be done by the
rising of the slain Witnesses, which is a lawful Magistracy and a lawful
Ministry, which we shall prove in the ensuing discourse; where we shall treat
of the things immediately preceding this great day; viz. 1. The Witnesses
slaying, and the Beasts of the earth tyranny over the Saints. 2. We shall
concur with the Doctor in the time, and say, that in the end of this year 1650,
or near about that time, this glorious day of the Witnesses rising and
Antichrists ruin shall begin; but we shall absolutely deny and disown the
Doctors signs of Antichrists fall; for he says, That the beheading of the
King, and the casting off the Lords, and the beating of the Scots, is the
glorious beginning of Antichrists fall; and hereby is his text liberally
fulfilled; herein we shall uncase the Doctors weakness or wilful wickedness,
it may be both: The which I will endeavor to do; by laying open the manifest
truth as it lies in the Scriptures, many of which texts the Doctor quoteth.

We are both agreed, that the time of Antichrists fall shall be near 1650. this
present year or presently after it, therefore we will pass that, both of us
concluding, That the great day of Reformation is to begin this year, or within
twelve months of this year 1650. as the Doctor Learnedly proves in Page 15,
16, 17.

But now the difference that will arise betwixt the Doctor and I, will be about
what shall be done in this great day.

This I do affirm, yet not I but the Scriptures: 1. That the Witnesses shall
arise in this day. 2. That the Dragon, the Beast and the false Prophet shall be
overcome in this day. 3. The Jews shall begin to be converted, both the two
Tribes and the ten Tribes, and all the Kingdoms in the world shall become
Christ's. In the general, as I have delivered them, I think the Doctor and I do
not much differ, unless the Doctor differ from what he has formerly
delivered, which is no strange thing if he do.

I affirm, That the glorious day of destroying the Beast and this false
Prophet, and chaining the Dragon, and of the Jews conversion, shall be begun
when the Witnesses arise from their slaying: Now this implies two things, when
the Witnesses arise from their slaying: Now this implies two things,

1. That the Witnesses shall be slain immediately before this day.

2. That some enemy of the Church shall slay them.

So that it will not be amiss to enquire, 1. Who slaies them; and 2. when they
are slain; we shall do both together exceeding briefly.

In Revel. 11. 7. and Daniel 7. 25. there is both; 1. The Beast that slaies
them, 2. The Witnesses that are slain, and 3. the time when this shall be, in
Revel. 11. 7. when the Witnesses have finished their testimony, that is, when
their 1260 days, (i.) years of prophesying in sackcloth is out, v. 3. Then the
Beast ascending (or that ascends) out of the bottomless pit, shall make war
with them, overcome them, and kill them. After three days and an half, (i.)*
three years and an half, these Witnesses must rise, v. 11. and immediately after
the seventh Trumpet sounds, and then the Kingdoms of this world became the
Lords and his Christ's, v. 15. This all men will grant is the beginning of the
great day of Reformation which immediately follows upon their rising. And this
is worth the noting also, v. 13. the same hour the eminent enemies of the
Church are slain, these men of name who are numbered by their name, those
painted outside Saints, but inside devils, they shall fall, and then, v. 19.
the Temple of God is opened, and the vials are poured out, this you have in
Revel. 11. Now mark how that in Dan. 7. answers to this: Daniel in this chapter
had a vision of the four Monarchies, the Assyrian, the Persian, the Grecian,
and the Roman Monarchy: After these four Monarchies are extinguished, Christ
will set up his Monarchy, v. 18. The Saints of the most high shall take the
Kingdom and possess it for ever and ever, that is, until the day of
Judgment: this is the beginning of the glorious day of Reformation, which
shall be when the Roman Monarchy shall be destroyed, which is the last of the
Kingdom or Monarchies; this is to be done at the sounding of the seventh
trumpet, Rev. 7. 15. when all Nations and Kingdoms shall become Christ's: But
mark how inquisitive Daniel is, when he comes to the Roman Monarchy, Dan. 7. 9.
he would fain know the truth of this Beast and of the ten Horns, and of the
other (mark that) which came up after the ten Horns, before whom three fell;
even of that Horn that had eyes, and a mouth that spoke great things, whose
look was more stout then his fellow, v. 20. I beheld and the same horn made
war with the Saints and prevatled against them: Here is the Beast that slaies
the Witnesses, for it is one that rises in the end of the Roman Monarchy;
Quando r^gnum Romanorum est distruendum, says Hierome, Fabritius Paulutius,
Hugo Cardinalis, Theadoretus and Hector Pintus, with others; and he shall throw
down three of the ten Kingdoms subject to Rome; he shall throw down three
Kings, that is, (says Viega) tres reges pure profitentes evangelium. three
Kings purely professing the Gospel. But Theodoretus puts this question, Quomodo
tres superiores ^odem tempore humiliabit, how will he throw down three Kings at
one time? Certainly we of this age can give the best answer to his question,
for thus, he shall cut off, Regem trium Regnorum, and ita tres Reges in una
persona humiliabit; or thus, by pulling down at once the three Estates of King,
Lords and Commons, who make the supreme Power of the Nation, where he usurps
this Power; but this question is needless, and therefore we pass it by. The
main thing we intend to prove by Daniel is, That this Beast is he that slaies
the Witnesses, and the same with that in Rev. 11. 7. because he is of the same
time, for that in Daniel rises when the Roman Monarchy is going to
destruction; and that in Rev. 11. 7. arises when the reign of Antichrist is
drawing to an end, which Antichrist is the last head of the Roman Monarchy the
Pope: as this beast is of the same time, so he does the same things with that
in Rev. 11. 7. for there he makes war with the Saints, prevails against them
and slayes them: and in Dan. 7. 24. this other little horn that rises after
the ten Kings belonging to the Roman Monarchy, this little horn that is an
upstart base fellow (say the Fathers) a man of no repute amongst the Kings of
the earth, shall subdue three Kings* this horn must necessarily be some new
upstart fellow, who rises in the western Empire, distinct from other Kings;
this horn shall speak great words against God, and shall wear out the Saints of
the most high, and think to change times and Laws. These words need no comment,
since the times we live in are a sufficient comment on them: and they shall be
given into his hands, until a time and times and the dividing of times, that
is, three years and a half say all Interpreters; which is just that space of
time in which the Beast that starteth up out of the bottomless pit, domineers
over the slain bodies of the Witnesses, so that these places do but explain one
another, and both set forth one and the same Government, and bloody enemy.

But this that makes it most clear of all other, is that which immediately
follows the horns reign, an exercise of Tyranny over the Saints, Dan. 7. 26,
27, the Judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his dominion, to consume
and destroy it unto the end, and the Kingdom and dominion, and greatness of
the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints
of the most high; here begins the glorious day after the horns tyrannical
government and dominion is destroyed: this answers to Rev. 11. 13. where the
men of name are destroyed, and then as in Daniel, the Saints possess the
Kingdom under the whole Heaven. So the seventh trumpet so^nds, and all the
Kingdoms in the world become the Lords and his Christ's, that is, they all
submit to his scepter and become Christians, bating their old profanesse: so
that here in both places you have clearly discovered the Beast that slays the
Witnesses, and the time when, together with the length of his reign, and what
immediately follows.

Note. Observe also whence this Beast arises, it is out of the bottomless pit:
this bottomless pit is Independencie, I will prove it can be nothing else.
Aleazar and many other learned men do not take bottomless pit to be meant
hell, but some say it is meant confusion, and others the sea, but I affirm that
it is meant Independencie, in Rev. 9. 1. When the fifth Angel sounded, there
fell a Star from Heaven, that is, a Bishop from the true Church, to the
earth, from a Pastor to become a Prince, from Ecclesiastic affairs to Civil
state affairs, and to him was given the key of the bottomless pit. The Pope
was the first that unlocked the door of Independencie: Mark it, and it will
appear that Independencie is the formilis ratio Antichristi; for until the
Pope of Rome got to be Independent in respect of the Emperor his Lord and
Sovereign, and Independent as relating to the Councels, he was not Antichrist,
but herein in his exalting himself by Independencie above all Magistracy, which
is called God in Scripture, in making himself Independent, he made himself
Antichrist; for reduce the Pope but to his due obedience to the Roman Emperor
whose power he usurps, and to Counsels to bring him under their censure, and
the Pope will be reduced to his primitive institution, that is, to an honest
plain Pastor, which is all his due, and all that the primitive Bishops of Rome
were. The Pope had the key of Independencie, for by making the Dukes of Italy
free States (i.e.) Independent as to the Emperor; he shut the Emperor out of
Italy his proper dominion, and thus as he continues Independent he continues
Antichrist; who sitting in the seat of God, exalts himself above God, for he
says he is Independent as to the holy Scriptures, and that the Scripture is
dependent upon him, and herein he exalts himself above God: by this power of
Independencie, the Pope let into the world all manner of ignorance, heresy and
profanesse: by the Power of Independencie the Pope drove a godly Magistracy and
Ministry into the wilderness for 1260 years: and now by this last beast rising
out of Independencie and setting up Indepencie, I say by that Independent
beast, the Witnesses, the Magistracy and Ministry that had finished their
testimony, that is, had finished their Directory, cleared and vindicated their
Doctrines, and had agreed to cast out Independencie and Popery out of the three
Kingdoms, even then, when they had finished their testimony, this beast breaks
them in pieces by making war against them, and killing them; thus you have the
Witnesses slaying, and the Beast that slayes them immediately before the
glorious day of Reformation in the world.

A further description you have of this Beast, by his Government that he sets
up, in Heb. 13. 11, 12, and 18. and in Dan. 11. 36, 37, 38.

You have heard already when he rises, it is in the end of the Roman Monarchy,
when the 1260 years, of the Popes reign draws toward an end; and you have
heard out of what this Beast that slayes the Witnesses arises, it is out of
Independencie; for mark it, as Antichrist the Pope arose by the key of
Independencie, out of the purest Church (viz) the Roman Church, and drove the
Witnesses (which undoubtedly are the Magistracy and Ministry) into the
wilderness, so this Beast rises out of Independencie, rising out of the
bowels of the purest reformed western Church, and slay these Witnesses who had
finished their testimony against Antichrist: the nature of Independencie
amongst men is to destroy Magistracy and Ministry.

But that you may know this Beast more diststinctly, Rev. 13. 11, 12, 18. sets
forth his actings against the Church: observe how like the expressions o^
Daniel and John are in the discovering of this Beast and his actings, in Rev.
13. 11. I beheld another Beast rising up out of the earth; he is called
another, because distinct from the Beast of the sea, ver. 1. so says Bishop
Cowper: and then out of the earth, to show also that he is not the same with
the Beast of the sea, as some would have it. Cottherus speaks plain truth
against all his opposers; this Beast of the earth (says he) is Rex octavus,
and incipit quando prima bestia destinet, and incipit cum bestia ascendit ex
abysso, he is the eighth King (meaning that ^ev. 17.) and begins when the first
Beast (the Beast of the Sea) goes out, and he begins when the Beast arises
out of the bottomless pit, Rev. 11. 7. So that he understands by the Beast of
the earth, the eighth King, (Rev. 17. 11.) and the Beast arising out of the
bottomless pit one and the same beast, only the one text sets out his rising,
the other his reigning, and the other his ruin: First, He arises out of the
earth; which notes to us that he is a Lay man, for earth is here put as
contradistinct to sea; to note, that as he that drives the Witnesses into
sackcloth rises out of the Clergy in the Roman Church, (for Rev. 13. 1. he
usurpt the throne with seven heads and ten horns, that is the Roman Imperial
seat,) so the beast that slay the Witnesses (though he rise by Independency as
the Pope did) yet he shall be a Lay man, no Clergy man, but a Layick. Secondly,
Or by earth may be meant (as often it is in Scripture) a mean and low condition;
to note, that this terrae filius that slayes the Witnesses, shall be a fellow
of low descent: This well agrees with Daniels expression of the same Beast,
Dan. 7. 8. he calls him a little horn, Cornu parvulum quia in principio nullius
momenti reputabitur in occulis Regum terrae, says Hugo Cardinalis, he is a
little horn, because in his beginning he shall be of no esteem or repute
amongst the Kings of the earth; he shall not arise out of any Kingly stock, but
out of some obscure, private, broken family: This Beast of the Earth is
therefore called Dan. 11. 21. a vilde Fellow, I confess this more immediately
belongs (as say interpreters) to the transactions of affairs in the end of the
Macedonian Empire, but Th^odoretus imboldens me, whose opinion is that the
likeness of things acted in the end of the Macedonian Empire (immediately
before the coming of Christ) to the things to be acted in the end of the Roman
Monarchy (before the great day of Christ's coming to convert Jews and Gentiles)
made Daniel to comprehend both under one expression: this is very probable, for
(as the Rabbis say) an Iota of Scripture has a mountain of sense depending on
it; mark therefore how in the end of the Roman Monarchy, Dan. 11. 21. a vile
fellow shall stand up, he is an upstart, an usurper, he shall not have the
honor of the Kingdom given him, but he shall come in peaceably, and obtain the
Kingdom by flattery. Mark how he gets to his Kingdom, not by open force, but by
pretenses of peace to settle the Kingdom in peace; this Party must be
disbanded, and the other Party thrust out of the Kingdom, and another Party
must be supplanted, and all under pretense of Peace; the King must be taken
off, and the Nobles degraded, and the Commons secluded, and all for the
settling of peace; his motto is Pax quaeritur bello, I have read it in his
Standart, all his pretenses are peace and restoring the Freeborn people to
their Liberties. Two things discover him clearly; First he succeeds in the room
of a King which is destroyed, neither in wroth, nor battle, v. 20. how then, if
neither by wroth nor battle, then certainly he must be destroyed by a
deliberate act of pretended Justice against him, and so destroyed by cutting
off his head as a malefactor. Now that King so destroyed, this vile fellow must
succeed. Nay v. 22. he shall proceed to overthrow the Prince of the Covenant:
Now we see how it has succeeded with the Covenant-keeping Party at the stern
of government. The like Paraphrase may run in the following verses, setting out
this beasts designs against the King of the South; but I will not be too bold,
since the times are comments on these texts: let this be sufficient to make us
know, that the Beast of the earth, and the little horn, and this vile fellow,
are none and the same Beast, even he that slayes the Witnesses; and his two
horns, and his Dragons tongue, are but to set forth his hypocritical
pretenses; as the Serpents tongue beguiled Eve, so this fellow beguiles
innocent persons to their ruin. His two horns signify his power, his Army,
they are like Lambs horns: Rev. 13. 12. it is not said, the horns of the Lamb,
but horns like a Lamb, that is harmless: he pretends that his Army shall lay
down Arms whenever the Parliament will command them; they are Conscientious
men, who profess its against their Principles to fight, but to suffer for
their Religion: This Beasts Army are all innocent Doves, and harmless Lambs,
all Saints, persecuted Saints forsooth, that count all men bitter-spirited men
that believe not every word they say; but he has the tongue of a Dragon: It
alludes to the Serpent in Paradise that deceived Eve, and so overthrew Adam the
only Monarch of the world. So does this Beast with his Lambs horns, through his
lying, cheating, swearing, forswearing, and cheating of effeminate silly
people, overthrow the only true Christian Monarch in the world; (I wish it be
not proved, that they have had a hand in Adams ruin, through the subtilty of
Jesuits those Christian-State Serpents:) therefore this horn is said to have,
Dan. 7. 8. the eyes of a man, that is, abundance of humane policy, says
Theodoret, and much dissimulation, says Maldonatus: and then he speaks like
the Dragon, that is another note of this beast; like unto which you have that
Dan. 7. 8. he has a mouth speaking great things: observe, this beast has not
the Teeth, nor the Tail, nor the Sting, but the Tongue of the Dragon; so that
Fabritius Hectors comment on those words, seems to me very good Os loquens
injentia (i.e.) eloquens, Superbus, malledicus; jactabundus, fallax and mirax
and divinitatem sibi arogat, he is eloquent, proud, an evil speaker, full of
boasting, a deceitful fellow, and a threatner, and he arrogates divinity to
himself, this is something near the matter, for he aches upon him to preach
divinity, this puts me in mind of their interpretations, who by the Beast of
the earth understand the earthly power of Antichrists Preachers which shall be
exc^eding numerous toward the later end of the world, when Enoch and Elias are
by them to be slain; by Enoch and Elias they mean the two Witnesses; this is
the opinion of Haymo, the ordinary Gloss, Viega, Rodolphus, Richardus, Beda,
Ausburtus, Panno^ius, Rupertus, and others: it is very much, for these Authors
so long ago to foretell us, that in these days we should have an army of
Preachers rise up and slay the Witnesses. I am sorry that I must be so tedious,
but I cannot let pass the words of Petrus Bullingerus upon the two horns of
the Beast of the earth, Scripturas in hypoc^isin gerunt, faciuntque faciunt ex
ejus Cornua bestiae dum adulterant verbum Dei and non nisi ad confirmanda
Satanae mendatiae illis utantne, they profess the Scriptures (says he) in
hypocrisy, and out of it they make horns for the Beast, while they adulterate
the word of God, and make no use at all of the Scriptures, but only to confirm
the lies of Satan in an ancient manuscript (which I found in Bibliotheca
Bodliana) I found this passage in it, speaking of the Horns of the Beast (says
he) he has two Horns, either to note that he pretends to be the defender of
the two Testaments, or that he would seem to be the protector of the
Gospel Church amongst the Gentiles, and the great friend to the Jews: this he
pretends to in the sight of the world, said Sybill^ frandulentia, Enoch et
Elias preditet; but under that deceit he shall slay the Witnesses: believe it
these passages are not to be slighted; for my own part, when I consider the
times we live in, and see how exactly the ancient writers words are fulfilled,
I rather count them Prophets then D^eamers.

Now because we will (if possible) enforce the Dr. to see his mistakes, we will
yet make out this Beast more clearly by his Horns: take but that of E Lapide
and Josephus A Costa. C. E Lapide says, that Cornu ^ignum erat Regni, so that
belike these two Horns, must be two Kingdoms that this Beast shall wear:
Josephus Acosta (l. 2. de novissimis Temporibus Cap 17.) thinks that these two
Horns signify Episcopal dignity, which is the Miter that Bishops wore: which
Miter has two parts like two Horns upon the Head, crit ergo quispiam Apostata,
^t simulator religionis ecclesiae, honoris proditor, that these two ^e^uites
may not fall together by the ears, we will reconcile them: would Cornelius E
Lapide have this Beasts two Horns, two Kingdoms? we will grant it: would
Josephus A Costa have it a Myter like to Horns? we will grant that also: England
and Ireland are the two Kingdoms, that the Beast has gotten by his policy and
power; take the Harp and the Cross as they are now joined by the Beast that
has joined them, and put them on his head, they make a perfect Miter: and thus
I have reconciled these two learned Jesuits, which I hope none will judge but
that it is a work of charity in real truth. Oh! but that Beast in Daniel
subdueth three Kings; how then has he but two horns? Sol. he shall cut off the
King of three Kingdoms, and in that sense he shall pluck up three Kings in one
person, or he shall defeat the power and forces of three Kingdoms, he shall
cause them to fall and fly before him; but the third Kingdom he shall never
subdue to his obedience, he may wear the Cross and the Harp in his Miter; but
he shall never wear the Lion; for in that Kingdom he shall come to his ruin,
as anon we shall show. I now pass on to make a further description of this
Beast, as the Holy ghost sets him forth: we shall proceed, v. 12. And he did
all that the first Beast could do before him, and he caused the earth and them
that dwell therein to worship the first Beast, whose deadly wound was healed. I
think the Text may be better translated into English, I am sure nearer to the
Greek Copy, and he did all the power of the first Beast in his presence, so
reads Pagnine, Montanus, Biblia Fanensis, Sixtus Quin^us, Lyra. This verse sets
forth the manner how he got to his greatness, which is described by his acting,
and the end of his acting: in the end you have the manner of his acting, in the
other the effect of ^is acting; in the Text there are two [first Beasts] and
both distinct and different from each other, though few interpreters have
discerned it: the former first Beast he makes his example or pattern, by which
he proceeds and acts, the latter first Be^st he makes the pattern of his end.

Observe how the Holy Ghost differs these* the first Beast is that which
acted immediately before him, and that must necessarily be the Beast of the
Sea; for that Beast is immediately before him in the same 13. Chapter, verse
21. This is none other but the Pope: now he does all that the first Beast could
do in the sight of him, that is, in the presence or sight, or with the
approbation of the Pope, he exercises his power. Now what power has the Pope?
surely none at all; but what is usurped, the Pope is called the first Beast, in
regard of this last Beast of the earth: he is called the first, because he is
the first great enemy of the Church, within the Church: the Heathen Emperors
were Rulers over the Church, but they were without the Church; but the Pope is
the great tyrant of the Church within the Church now professing Christ: he was
the first that drove the witnesses into the Wilderness, and made them wear
Sack* cloth: now the last Beast that slayes the witnesses, which is the Beast
we are here treating of, is he that gets up into his power by exercising the
power of the first Beast (that is) the Pope: now it is well known, that the
Popes exercise no power but what is usurped, they got their power by their
dissembling and pretending Saintship, and advancing the interest of the Gospel,
and all the Saints they got it by lying, perjury, Covenant Breaking, rebelling
against their liege Master the Emperors, by throwing them down, they got into
their Thrones, which to this day they possess: now all this usurped power does
this Beast of the earth exercise in the sight of the Pope, in conspecta ejus
adest, Antichristo adjuvante et mandante, says Viega, that is Antichrist (the
Pope) helping and commanding him to dethrone his sovereign Lord the King, to
slight the Counsel of the godly Ministry, and persecute them; (for such power
the Pope exercises) to pretend godliness and Saint-ship, and to write and
speak in the ears of all the world like a Saint, and yet act in the sight of
all the world like a Devil: herein he follows the steps of his predecessors the
Popes: the Pope by independency gets his usurped greatness, and this Beast by
independency gets to his usurped greatness: he makes the Popes former devilish
stratagems which exalted them, engines to exalt himself.

And he causes the earth and them that dwell therein, to worship the first
Beast, whose deadly wound was healed, here is his end, it is to subject the
people of the earth to the first Beast, whose de^dly wound was healed in verse
3. The Caesarian head was wounded, the Pope healed this wound, as to the
recovering of the Roman pomp and State. Now Caesar was the first Beast in
respect of the Popes, who succeeded the Emperor; and the Pope is also the
first, in relation to the Beast of the earth, who succeeds him, and in relation
to the precedent matter, which altogether treated of the first Beast that
should rise within the Church, to make the Antichrist which were Popes, now
these words [whose deadly wound was healed] clearly distinguish this Beast from
the Popes, for they were never since their rising wounded with a deadly wound;
but it is known, that the Goths and Vandalls gave a deadly wound to the
Caesarian Government in Rome, which was made up and healed by the Popes.

So that the Government that this Beast of the earth sets up and makes people
submit unto, it is the Government of Caesar's: now in a word, the Government of
Caezar was by the power of his sword, he against the votes of the Senate of
Rome, advances with his Army to Rome, pulls down all the grave and
honest-hearted Senators, and only sets up his own packt party in the Senate,
which being done, by his Conquests he enlarges their territories, and they
enlarge his honor: at last he makes himself sole Emperor, and they his
Subjects to act and vote what he commanded them; thence Rome became that seat
of the Beast, having ten horns; for so Alcazer seems to understand ten horns to
be Polyarchiam Senatorum: so another says of the Senate of Rome, tot erant
reges quot Senatores: and possibly the ten horns crowned under the Pope, may be
meant the Conclave, those infulati mystae, those crowned Cardinals, who make up
the Government to drive the wi^nesses into the Wilderness, as this last beast
and his ten horns, (that is) his packt party of Senators, who give one vote
with the Beast (Rev. 17.) in the slaying of the witnesses, this gives us a
clear insight into that hard Text Rev. 17. 8. of the Beast that was and is not,
and yet is: this Text clears it, that he is the eight, because he is one
distinct from the Pope, and yet he is of the seven, because he does what he
does in the sight of the Pope. with his good likeing. The Pope, (all men know)
makes the 7. head of Rome distinct from the other Governments, and this eight
Beast is one of the seven, because he beats up the woman with seven h^ads, and
ten horns, Rev. 17. 7. had not the beast of the earth slain the witnesses, the
witnesses would have destroyed the woman, they had resolved to saw off three of
her horns, England, Scotland and Ireland; but when the witnesses were agreed to
root out Popery* and to establish the Pro^estant Religion, then up starts the
Beast of the earth, (this Beast here men^ioned) and s^ayes the witnesses:
therefore John in his vision (Rev. 17. 2. when the Angel comes to show him the
damnation of the whore) saw this Beast that bears the woman, well may he have
the title of upholding Rome, by slaying the witnesses; for otherwise Rome by
the witnesses had been shaken. I have not (...) enough to vindicate this 17.
Chapter from the false glosses put upon it, it shall be the work of a longer
day; only I hint this by the way, that this Beast is he that was (that is, as
Junius says) in the Caesarian head, and is not [that is] in the same Family
it is not; but yet is, that is in the same Government, for the likeness and for
the kind it is the same Governnest and the qualities of the Beast are such:
this very Beast Daniel describes after the self-same manner, Dan. 11. 36. 37.
38. And the King shall do according to his will, and he shall exalt himself and
magnify himself above every God, and shall speak marvelous things against the
God of Gods, and shall prosper until the indignation be accomplished, for that
that is determined shall be done.

Neither shall he regard the God of his Fathers, nor the desire of women, nor
regard any God, for he shall magnify himself above all.

But in his estate he shall honor the God of forces, and a God whom his
Fathers knew not shall he honor, with gold and silver, and precious stones,
and pleasant things.

This King Hierome conceives is Antichrist: this King as Cothi^s on Rev. 1. 3.
calls him the eighth (there mentioned in Rev. 17. because he is the last great
enemy of the Church, which by slaying the witnesses, bears up Rome, which
stands tottering in the 7. head the Pontificality:) so he is called by Hierom,
Dan. 7. 8. the eleventh King, because he is the last u^start usurper which
erects a new Government amongst the ten European Kingdoms, formerly belonging
to the Roman Empire, so that by the Fathers confession, this King must not
arise until the end of the Roman Monarchy: now it is concluded by all learned
men, that the Roman Monarchy is now near its end, and what little horn that is
which is now started up, and has pulled down tres Reges Christum pure
profitentes, (for so Viega says he must do) I give all this world leave to
judge, that are sound in the principles of this present Religion; it is well
known that only England, Scotland, and Ireland, were the three Kingdoms in the
world, that of late professed the principles of the Protestant Religion purely*
and that is to profess Christ purely: Ireland might justly whiles it was
subjected to the English, be called one of the three Kingdoms* purely
professing the Gospel though since it may justly be called Egypt, for that
bloody cruelty to the true Church: now who it is that has usurped these three,
by distroying the lawful King of the three Kingdoms every Child can tell:
Observe but Bright m^ns Comment upon this Text, he calls this King Antichrist,
Hi^r^m calls him Antichrist, and so do many of the Fathers indeed. Brightman
applies it to the Pope, but I see no reason for it; I do not deny but that the
Popedom^ is that state under which the Church shall be afflicted 1260 years;
but it is questionable whether the Popedom be the Antichrist exclusively, I do
acknowledge that it is that Antichristian state out of which Antichrist shall
arise; but I humbly conceive (yet not I alone, but all the Fathers) that the
man Antichrist is he that slayes the witnesses* I do not deny but that the
Pontifick state since it got the Key of independency, is that man of sin spoken
of 2 These. 2. 4. who opposes himself to all that is called God. The likeness
of the expression here in Daniel and this, made Brightman conclude that it was
the Pope; but it is no wonder if the Holy Ghost use like expressions, to set
forth the Beast of the earth (which all the Fathers and most of the Papists
call Antichrist) because there is a near, relation betwixt the Pope and him:
the Pope made the Keys of the bottomless pit, and this Beast of the earth, Rev.
11. 7. comes out of the bottomlespit, the Pope is the 7. head of Rome, and this
is of the seven; he does all that the Pope did before him: the Pope rose by
lying, cheating, forswearing, rebelling against his Sovereign, deposing of him,
and sitting in his seat, tolerating blasphemies, and setting up Heretics upon
design, yet professing much holiness and Saint-ship* and so does the Beast of
the earth; he treads in the path of Roman policy, doing the same things in the
presence, or with the good liking of the Pope. The Pope set up a strange
Government in Rome, and so does this Beast of the earth in the Kingdoms that he
threw down, his usurpation is set out by his magnifying himself above all Gods,
that is, Magistrates; the strange Government he shall set up is the God
Mauzzim, that is, the Government of force, the sword-Government, such a
Government as his Fathers never heard of; he shall honor it with gold and
silver, that is, he shall make his Officers rich, and his packt party he shall
make them rule over many: his word shall give them power to write as the Popes
did, volumus, et mandamus, we enact and be it enacted; and the next thing they
shall do is to divide the Land for gain, yes, that is it! We have a large
comment upon this Text already written in large Characters, upon the Kingdoms
burdened back; so that by this you see how the Holy Ghost agrees, [both in
Daniel and Revel.] in the describing of this Beast by his Government In Revel.
13. he sets up a Government of his own forcing by his sword, and in Daniel he
sets up the God Mauzzim, which is the Government of force. If any should doubt
whether the Beast in the Revelations, and this in Daniel, which we have so
often quoted, be one and the same, I prove it thus; if Daniel agree with the
Revelation, and the Revelation with Daniel in the identity of time, of action,
of rule, and ruin of the Beast, then most probable that Daniels little horn
and John's Beast of the earth, are one and the same; but the time of the Beast
in both, is one and the same: for that in Daniel rises in the end of the Roman
Monarchy, and that in Rev. 7. rises when the witnesses have finished their
Testimony, that is at or near the end of the 1260 years reign of the Beast of
the Sea, Rev. 13. after which immediately John saw the Beast of the earth
arise, and her actions are the same in Dan. and Revel. for in Dan. 25. he wears
out the Saints of the most high, and thinks to change times and Laws, and Rev.
1^. 7. he shall make war with the witnesses, overcome them and slay them, and
in Rev. 13. 10. 11. when he that led captivity is to go into captivity, then
the faith and patience of the Saint is tried, then their two suffering graces
shall be eminently exercised, and then v. 11. shall the other Beast, the Beast
rising out of the earth appear, this Beast is he that exercises their faith
and patience; whiles he raigns the Saints shall have little else to live upon;
his Government also is the same; for in Dan. 11. 38. he sets up the God Mauzim,
the sword-power, and in Revel. 13. 12. he inforceth people to subject to the
first Beast, whose deadly wound was healed, that is, to a packt party of Rebels
to the Commonwealth* such as the Senate of Rome was, when Caesar forced away
all the honest men out of the Senate, and set up his own party to govern, this
was upheld by the sword, and set up by the sword: he is also the same in the
matter of duration, for that in Dan. 7. 25. continues a time, times, and the
dividing of time; and this in Rev. 11. rises and triumphs over the slain
witnesses, three days and a half, which is both one time, both making three
years and a half.

Lastly, He is the same both in Daniel and Revelation, in his ruin, and in the
time of his ruin. The time of this Beasts ruin is set-forth in Dan 7. 11. the
Beast was slain, and his body was destroyed: this the Fathers call the 11.
King, because he is diverse from any of the Kings that were before him under the
western Empire, he being the last, and this was at that time (v. 13.) when the
Son of man came in the Clouds of Heaven, and v. 14. there was given him
dominion and glory, and a Kingdom, that all People, Nations and Languages might
serve him: these phrases we shall see Christ borrows in Mat. 24. 30. 3^.
immediately after those days, what days? the days of tribulation, how? verse
24. there shall be false Christ's and false Prophets, and shall show great
wonders, see Rev. 19. 20. the false Prophet was taken that wrought miracles
before the Beast. Mark how Matthew goes on, insomuch that (if it were
possible) they shall deceive the very Elect. In Rev. 13. 13. and he did great
wonders, so that he made fire come down from Heaven on the earth. By the signs
which were permitted him to do in the sight of the Beast, who does not see that
these expressions are all to set out this one Beast? Immediately after these
days of tribulation, which are days of blasphemy, and heresy, and separation
from the true Church (v. 30.) ye shall see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds
with power and great glory: and (v. 31.) he shall send his Angels with the
sound of a great Trumpet, and gather the Elect (those that belong unto the
election of grace, from one end of Heaven to the other: this is the same with
that forecited place in Rev. 11. great voices in Heaven, saying, the Kingdoms
of the world are our Lord, and his Christ's, and when was this? this was when
the witnesses were risen, and stood upon their legs, v. 11. and v. 13. near
that hour when the great Earthquake is; which time of shaking Heaven and Earth,
is foretold in Luke 31. 24. immediately after the time of the Gentiles is
fulfilled: now the time of the Gentiles is 42. months, Rev. 11. 2. which is
according to the Doctors account 1260. years, which being up, then the signs
in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, that is, the Antichristian
state shall be shaken down, and then the Son of Man shall appear in the Clouds
with glory and great power, and then the elect redemption draws nigh: the
great voices, Matthew. 24. 31. allude to Christ's passion, when he yielded up the
Ghost, he cried with a loud voice, it is finished, and after three days he
arose, and called his Disciples to a mount in Gal^lee, where he appeared to
them, and proclaimed all power in Heaven and in Earth, was given to him, and
then the Disciples were made Apostles; such are the effects of the rising of
the Witnesses: Oh, how do I adore the infinite wisdom of the Holy Ghost in the
Scriptures! how clear might this truth be made to the weakest capacity, were
there but a worthy pen about it! The time of the beasts reign is expressed in
D^^. 7. 22. to be when the ancient of days come (^) when the Kingdom becomes
the Lords, Rev. 11. 15. and the Saints possessed the Kingdom, that is, the
witnesses stand upon their feet, Rev. 11. 11. 12. and they (i.e.) the godly
Magistracy and Ministry did ascend up to heaven, that is, they possess that
place of dignity from which they were cast, it cannot be otherwise understood
in Dan. 7. for v. 25. the Saints of the most high are they that he tyrannizeth
over three years and a half: so he does in Rev. 11. 7. 9. which Saints of the
most high are the Magistracy and Ministry, the two witnesses principally meant.

There is one notable place more in Dan. 12. 45. which points at time and the
place of the ruin of the Beast. This Beast of the earth or this King, (as
Daniel calls him) shall plant the Tabernacles of his palace, between the Seas
in the glorious holy Mountains, yet he shall come to his end, and none shall
help him: this holy Mountain, learned men on all sides conclude, is some
eminent Kingdom for holiness: therefore the Independent Pulpitmen, say, it is
England, this day eminent in exalting the Saints and holiness; certainly, it is
that Kingdom which has kept its Garments clean from spiritual fornication, and
has not received the marks of the Beast, nor bowed down to his Image, that is,
engaged to be true and faithful to his unlawful new Government. And of all the
Kingdoms in the world, I think it is Scotland, where the Beast of the earth
has placed his Tabernacles, where he now is, and where I believe he shall come
to ruin. But mark what imediately follows this, Dan. 12. 1. And at that time
shall Michael and Christ stand up, and it shall be a time of trouble, as in
Mat. 24. and Luke 21. And at that time the elect shall be all delivered, that is
as much to say, as all the Kingdoms in the world shall become Christ's, both
Jews and Gentiles shall be brought to Christ: this glorious day is in several
places called a day of Resurrection, it shall be to the Jews as a day of
Resurrection: now all this is to be at the 7. Trumpet sounding; and therefore
the ruin of Daniels Beast and John's Beast are at one and the same time; and
therefore it is but one and the same Beast that they both mention. As for those
that affirm this Beast is Antiochus, who reigned in the time of the Grecian
Monarchy, and was destroyed before the Roman Monarchy was in being: it is so
wide from the Text, that it is impossible to be true; for this little horn
arises not only after the Grecian Monarchy, but after the Roman Monarchy
became ten horned: he rises the last distinct from them all; and therefore I
will say to such men, as Aquinas says to Porferrius upon the same text,
holding the same opinion, haec interpretatio tam fatua est, ut responsionem non
mereatur.

So that you have the time of rising, the time of continuance, the actions, and
the ruin of the Beast, to be one and the same both in Daniel and the
Revelation. But that we may not be mistaken in this beast of the earth, take a
more exact view of this beast, as the Holy Ghost describes him in Rev. 13. 13.
And he does great wonders, for that he made fire come down from Heaven on the
earth, in the sight of men, and deceived them that dwell on the earth, by the
signs which were permitted him to do in the sight of the beast, saying to them
that dwell on the earth, that they should make an Image of the beast which had
the wound in the head, and did live. And he did great wonders, it is in the
original, (...), great signs. Upon the same occasion, Christ uses the same
words, setting out the parties that shall do these signs, Mat. 24. 24. There
shall arise false Priests and false Prophets, (...), and shall give out great
signs, these signs shall be held forth to the world immediately before the
ruin of the Roman Monarchy, v. 29. and the calling of the Jews. v. 30. 31. and
making all the Nations in the world submit and come into the Gospel.

To this Text directly answers that in Rev. 19. 20. there the false Prophet is
taken (...), which wrought miracles in the presence of the other beast, whereby
he deceived them that received the mark of the beast: this clearly
demonstrates, that it is the same beast in Rev. 13. 14. for there he deceives
the people; and to that the Holy Ghost alludes, Rev. 19. 20. I will entreat the
Reader to observe, how this beast of the earth gets to his power, in v. 11. of
chap. 18. it is by the horns of a Lamb, and by the tongue of a Dragon. What
more innocent then a Lambs horns? and what more fair and smooth, and deceitful
then a Dragons tongue? Observe this, that the two last enemies of the Gospel
Church, shall arise out of the purest Churches: Rome was the purest Church in
the world, it had the famousest Magistracy and Ministry in the world; yet in
that Church starts up an Independent Government amongst the Churchmen, which is
called the Pope-dom, and strips both the Magistracy and Ministry of its glory:
this is called Rev. 11. the Sackcloth condition of the two witnesses: so that
out of that pure Church arose the great enemy that drove the wi^nesses into the
wilderness: and now when the Pope-dom is ready to fall, and the witnesses have
finished their testimony (that is) resolved to cast off Independency and
Prelacy, which in its exorbitancy is nothing else but Independency: then
up-starts this beast of the earth, who arises out of the purest Church, and
out of the purest part of the Church; he is one that professes piety beyond
all others, one that holds all the principles of Religion to be true, that
cries out against Antichrist more then any. As the Popes by pretending the
advancement of Christ, and Peter's chair, advanced themselves to that excessive
pride and tyranny over Church and State: so does the beast of the earth by his
pious pre^ences of setting up Christ, advance his own wicked designs, and
slayes the witnesses. As the beast of the Sea arose out of the Church, where
the famousest witnesses, viz. Magistracy and Ministry were, and drove them into
Sackcloth and into the wilderness, that is, into some remote Kingdom in
Europe, where they remain 1260. years: so must the beast of the earth in this
wilderness, arise amongst the witnesses where they are finishing their
testimony, and there he must kill them: therefore when John comes to see the
judgment of the whore, he was carried into the wilderness, (i.e.) that remote
Country, whither the witnesses by the beast of the Sea were driven, Rev. 11.
3. But this place only in the world is England; for here only a lawful
Magistracy and Ministry has for 1200. years been visible in Sackcloth: so
that you must expect this last enemy of the Church to be more cunning, cruel,
and subtle to deceive, then any that ever were before him; for he has all the
politic tricks of Rome, he does all that the first beast could do before him,
did the Pope fall from his first principles, so does he, did the Pope depose
and murder, and rebel agoinst his liege Master the Emperor? so does he against
his Sovereign; did the Pope persecute the Ministers that would not comply with
his designs? so does this beast. Did the Pope impudently and ridiculously
profess to the world, that all his Rebellion, murdering of Emperors and Kings,
and deposing of them, was for the promotion of the Gospel, and the good of the
Church? even so does this beast. So that he does all that the first beast could
do before him, yea and more too; for he does greater wonders, he makes fire to
come down from Heaven on the earth, in the sight of men: this is one of his
great signs whereby he deceives people. Observe this, his pretenses and
designs are on purpose to deceive the people, and he deceives the people mearly
to set up his new Government, he sets it up by his doing wonders: this is an
eminent Character of a cheater, and the Antichrist to prove his honesty by his
signs and wonders. That power is an usurped power, that has no other title
then signs and wonders to maintain it. It Is an Antichristian power the Holy
Ghost tells us: for Antichrist comes with lying wonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2. I omit to
repeat the several strange opinions of both Protestants and Papists, upon these
words, [and he makes fire come down from Heaven] neither shall. I show the
difference in the Copies; because I possibly may do that hereafter. At this
time I shall only deliver the soundest and most clearest opinions. Brocard
comes nearest the mark of any Englishman; for he conceives, it alludes to 2
Kings 1. 10. where Elias proved himself to be a man of God, by causing fire to
come down, and consume those that came against him: his allusion is good, had
he rightly applied it; for this beast of the earth pretends to be by his good
success, as prevalent with God, to destroy those that were against him, as
Elias was. But Cornelius, e lapide comes nearer the mark: for he conceives this
expression of fire coming from heaven, alludes to that in the 2 Chronicles. 7. 1.
where Solomon sacrificed in the sight of all the people (after he had made his
public prayer, in the sight of all the people) had by fire coming down from
heaven upon his sacrifice, an unquestionable evidence of Gods acceptance of his
prayers. This allusion is also good: for this beast of the earth, pretends to
be the only man to build Gods house; and for that end makes a glorious
profession, and proclaims Fasts, wherein (as if endued with Solomon's spirit, he
makes public prayers unto God to bless him in his undertakings for him, and
his cause: after which he proceeds to act the highest murder, treason and
rebellion; and succeeding well in it, he c^yes out to the people, behold
providence, behold a return of prayers; we fasted yesterday and to day, we have
had success, this is the fire which comes down; but observe it, it is in the
original, (...), be made fire. Observe that, it is fire of his own making: he
plotted the design, and then fasted, he conveies the fire under his own
sacrifice, it is false fires that he makes. I conceive, it alludes to that in 1
Kings 18. 36. 38. where Elias that eminent Servant of God, proved himself to be
a true Prophet, and all the rest to be but Baalls Prophets, by the fire which
God sent from Heaven on the earth in the sight of men: so does this Beast of
the earth endeavor by his signs to prove himself as prevalent with God as
Elias, and as true sincere a worshipper of God as Elias, and all that oppose
him, or cross his designs, to be put Baalls Priests: and thus he proves it, I
fast says he, and my enemies fast: they fast to preserve the ancient
Government, I fast to throw it down, after I have fasted I prevail; but though
my enemies fast, God hears them not: they have no fire comes near their
sacrifice, though they cry and weep day and night; but so soon as I fast, the
things I fast for is presently accomplished; and this his success in this
audacious villainy, murder, and rebellion against Gods Law, natures Law, and
his own solemn Vows and Covenants, he makes the silly people believe is the
return of his prayers, the fire of Gods sending from heaven upon his sacrifice.
This notes, that this Beast in his slaying of the witnesses, shall pretend to
act eminently for Christ, and make the world believe he is an eminent Saint,
and that all the godly faithful Ministers are but Baalls Priests, (as they are
now termed) to him. But observe the next verse, v. 14. And be deceived them
that dwell on the earth: he for all his signs is but a cheater, therefore he
is called, Rev. 19. 20. the false Prophet. He pretends to be such as Elias, who
was a true Prophet; but he is a false Prophet, and only cheats the people:
therefore Mat. 24. 24. he is said with his company of seducers like himself, to
seduce, if it were posible, the very Elect; and for this end, he cheats them,
to submit to his Government, which he has set up by the power of his sword,
that is the meaning of these words (saying to them that dwell on the earth, that
they should make an Image of the Beast which was wounded with the sword and did
live.) This is the end of all his pretenses and pious acts, it is to subject
the people to that Government which he sets up: he fasts and prays, and
humbles himself; but it is to cheat the people, and all this he does in the
sight of the Beast, (that is) the Pope, for there is no other beast in being
but the Pope, that the Holy Ghost intends: now to do it in the sight of the
Beast, (says the Roman Glossary) is to do it with the beasts good liking; so
that what he does the Pope approves of, and likes well of. Indeed I believe the
Pope will never frown at the beheading of a Protestant King, and blowing up of
a Protestant Parliament, who resolved and were agreed to unhorse his ^surped
holiness power in the three Kingdoms. The Pope cannot but look on with great
content, yea, and triumph in this year of Jubilee, which falls out according to
the Prophecy, Rev. 11. 10. when they give thanks for the removing of the
witnesses, it shall be a year of rejoicing with the enemy, to see a King and
Parliament utterly broken, who covenanted to break Rome; and to see an Assembly
of Divines battered and broken, and their labor in a reformation utterly
frustrated, this cannot but rejoice the Pope and his Conclave. What? To have
that accomplished now, which Digby, Faux, Catesby, Winter, and Garnet, and all
those Gunpowder-Saints could never accomplish, to have it now accomplished by
his new canonized Saints? This cannot but be well liking to the Pope. V. 15.
And it was given to him, to give life to the Image of the beast, that the Image
of the beast, should speak, and should cause, that whosoever would not adore
the Image of the beast, should be slain. This Image of the beast has allusion
either to that Image which Nebuchadnezer set up in the plain of Dura, enjoining
all men upon pain of death to fall down and worship it; which the conscientious
godly Jews refusing, great and extraordinary provision was made for their
destruction: but when the Soldiers had bound the three conscientious Saints,
and all the great men of the times came to see their destruction, behold, they
that threw them into the fire were destroyed, and the poor Saints stood upon
their feet, Christ appears amongst them in the Furnace, forthwith they are
released; and immediately after, all the Kingdoms in the world are made to
know, that the persecuted Saints God is the true God by sound of Trumpet: so
shall (...) be with the Saints in this beasts Reign, he that will not adore
this beasts Image, that is, subject to his Government, subscribe to be true and
faithful to his usurped and unlawful Government, shall be killed, or in a civil
sense, he shall be outlawed, and made incapable of bearing Office in Church or
State. Nebuchadnezers Image was 60. Cubits high, and 6. Cubits broad, a high
Image; but the number of this beast who sets up this Image, is 666. he is
exceeding in cruelty and wickedness; all the enemies of the Church that went
before him, at least 600. times. Or else, [Image] alludes to that in Dan. 11.
38. where the King there is said to honor the God Mauzzim, that is, a
sword-power. And this Image here is the same: for it is a sword-power, such as
Caesar erected by the sword, and supported by the sword, until he had completed
his Conquests. There in Daniel he makes his God Mauzzim to rule over many, and
here in the Revelation he causes, that as many as will not submit to this
Image of the beast, should be killed: I conceive that these two Texts agree
with each other.

And it was given him. Observe, this beast is one single person that sets up
this Image. I am very prone to believe, that the Image that this beast sets up,
is that mentioned in Revel. 17. 12. And the ten horns which thou saw, are
ten Kings, which yet have received no Kingdoms, but receive power as Kings one
hour with the beast. It Is absurd to say, these ten Kings are the ten Kings
under the Roman Emperor, which denominate Rome the beast (as they say) with ten
horns.

1. Because the ten Kings subject to Rome, they were distinct Kingdoms; but
these ten here mentioned, have no Kingdoms, nor any Crowns on their head.

2. Neither are they real Kings, they only have (...) power as Kings, they
write, (we inact, and be it inacted) as if they were Kings; but they are not
really Kings.

3. These rise and reign with the beast, which beast cannot be meant the Pope;
for v. 1. the whore is the Pontifick state that sits on many waters: this beast
is called verse 33. the scarlet-colored beast; because he slayes the
witnesses: he is as the heathen Emperors, red with blood; therefore they are
called the red Dragon, Chap. 12. 3. he is full of names of blasphemy; because
he is the tolerator and supporter of blasphemies: he has seven heads and ten
horns, because he bears up Rome with 7. heads and 10. horns. Rome had fallen
by the hands of the witnesses, had not he slain them v. 7. This beast bears up
the woman with 7. heads and 10. horns, v. 8. The beast is called, he that was
and is not, and ascends out of the bottomless pit: this can be no other but
that beast that slayes the witnesses, Rev. 11. 7. This beast v. 11. is called
the eight, and of the seven: now this cannot be the Pope, unless we will make
Rome have 8. heads, which is ridiculous, and by the learned irreconciliable,
v. 12. These Kings receive power an hour with the beast; if these 10. horns
should be meant 10. Kings or Kingdoms, subject to the Pope, it is known they had
Kingdoms before there was a Pope; but these rise with this beast, which is he
that slayes the witnesses.

4. These 10. Kings have but one Dominion or Kingdom amongst them all:
therefore v. 17. they are said to give (...), their Kingdom: and how do they
give it? the Text says, (...), that is, they make one vote, the former part of
the verse translated from the original runs thus; ^for God has given to the
hearts of them, that they fulfill the sentence of him, and that they make one
vote, and give their Kingdom to the best; so that it is clear, these 10. Kings
sit and vote together in one Kingdom: by which it is manifest, that they are not
the 10. Kingdoms subject to the Roman Empire. But here we must be careful to
avoid one mistake, that is, not to take these 10. horns, Rev. 17. 16. for the
same persons v. 12. but only the same Office in distinct parties hands: this is
clear; for those v. 12. rise and fall with the beast; but those v. 16. give
their Kingdom to the beast: therefore they had a Kingdom before the beast was
in being. 2. Those in v. 12. go to reign with the beast; but these v. 16. bring
the Pontificality to ruin. Those in v. 12. are that faction that the beast
sets up as Kings: these are said to be ten; because they are poliarchia
senatorum (as Alcazar calls them) for 10. is but indefinitly, as 10. Virgins,
and 10. Husbands; for many Virgins, and many Husbands: so here 10. Kings, that
is many men, exercising the Authority of Kings, who have voted themselves the
supreme power of the Kingdom, hi december Reges erunt tempore Antichristi, unde
dicuntur nondum accepisse potestatem, says Alcazar, the 10. Kings shall be in
the time of Antichrist, he means this beast of the earth: therefore they are
said not as yet to have received power, and they receive power one hour (i. e.)
a very short time) cum bestia (says E. lapide) quia bestia primariam habet
potestatem, Reges autem abea sunt secundi because the beast has the chief
power, but the Kings have but a secundary power from them. The beast may well
have the primarypower; for by his sword-power they were set up, and upheld by
it; so that it is evident, who the beast is, and what the Image of the beast
is: his giving life to the Image is by putting Authority into their hands, to
act and enforce the people to subject to their Taxes, edicts, and Commands, and
to outlaw every man that will not engage to be true and faithful to them.

Thus the Reader may perceive who this beast is, and what kind of Government he
sets up, and the tyranny and cruelty of this beasts Government when it is set
up. Before it was set up, they pleaded nothing but liberty for tender
Consciences, they showed nothing but the horns of a Lamb, and the tongue of a
Dragon, speaking smoothly, pleading for brotherly love, and tender bowels over
the Saints, until they were got into the Throne, and then nothing but treason
and high treason, to be laid to their charge, who should dare to question any
of their actions, or not subject to their power so as to subscribe to be true
and faithful to it: thus you may perceive his Government in the form of it.

Now follows the Subjects of this new Government, v. 16. And he made all, both
small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their
foreheads: so the English and many Latin Translations read it. The Subjection
is universal, it is a Catholic term, as well as design, all men of what rank
or condition soever, must submit and subject.

Their manner of subjection is set forth by giving a mark. I am enforced here
to vindicate the Text, not in the Copy, for I find no difference worth
troubling the Reader, in the Greek Copies, but both the Latin and the English
Translations, I humbly conceive may be corrected.

The vulgar Latin, the complutence reading, and others render [(...)] Habere
and learned Beza (which I wonder at) renders it, accipiant: as they give no
reason, so I see no reason why it should so be read, the Greek Copies read it
thus, (...), to a word it is read thus, That they should give a mark to them
upon their right hands, or upon their foreheads; so the Siriack Interpreter
reads it, and Montanus. Now I conceive [(...),] which to a word is read [upon]
because it properly signifies [ super] or [in] should be rendered in this place
[cum] my Reasons are scriptural; for [(...) in Scripture signifies (Revel. 7.
15.) [with] he that sits on the Throne shall dwell with them: There (...)
signifies, with: this is not only usual in the Greek Language, but also in the
Hebrew, (says Drusius) it is frequent to put (...), which signifies super; for
(...), which signifies cum: so that I conceive the verse may well be
translated thus. And he causes all, both small and great, rich and poor, bond
and free, that they give a mark to them with their right hands, or with their
forehead: so that this Text clearly holds out (as the former the kind of
Government erected) the kind of worship and subjection that people shall be
enforced to give to it. Other Kings make their Subjects swear allegiance to
them; but this new Government makes men give a mark with their right hand;
that is, subscribe to be true and faithful to the Government: the right hand is
the writing hand, now with that they must give a mark: the word is (...),
which as Pareus well observes, signifies a mark or letter, which is made in
writing, whereby others may understand by reading of the same, the intent of
the writer.

Obj. But how do they give the mark with the forehead?

Answ. By not only subscribing to the Government, but by pleading for it, and
disputing for it, preaching for it, and reading Lectures upon it, and openly
owning and applauding it: this is to give the mark with the forehead, to the
new Government of the Beast.

V. 17. And that no man might buy or sell save, he that had the mark or the
name of the beast, or the number of the name. I find no difference in the
Copies, nor in the Latin Translation for the most part.

The times are a sufficient Comment on this Text: this verse seems to me in
these three Kingdoms to be a States Aphorism, or a principle, by which (to
proceed) no man must buy or sell. In v. 17. the precedent verse, there you find
an Act made, that all men shall engage by way of subscribing to the beasts
Government: Here in verse is the punishment, if he do not, he shall be
outlawed, he shall neither buy nor sell; it signifies (says Bullinger)
neminem sub Antichristi regno in tuto fore, nisi qui opere et verbo
abominabilem illius Tyranidem approbaverit: eum enim vulgo dicimus tutum esse
qui emere aut vendere potest, ubicunque commodum illi fuerit; sine quo homines
non possunt vivere, that no man shall be safe under Antichrists Kingdom; but he
who in word and deed approves of his abominable tyranny; for we commonly, say
he is safe who can buy and sell, where he can profit himself best, without
which liberty man cannot live; and yet this beast denies this liberty of the
Birthright to those, who will not submit to him. Amb. Episcopus has a notable
gloss upon this Text: so has Haymo and Ausbertus. Tempore Antichristi (says
Haym^) neminem vendere aut emere bonorum praedicatorum, id est, libere Christum
praedicare: and again he says, nec quisquam eas merces cum quibus nunc fideles
Christi charactere signati negotiantur, dare aut accipere possit, nisi qui
Antichristi signo signari censeatur, id est, perversam illius teneat fidem, et
obscaenas actiones imitetur. I thought he meant (at first view) that no man
durst pay Tithes to the Minister, nor the Minister take any unless he subscribe
to their Government; if he had said so, he had hit the nail; however he is
near the matter; for he conceives that this Antichrist (meaning this very beast
we speak of, who justly deserves the title of Antichrist) shall stop the
mouths of the Ministers of the Gospel, that Christ's spiritual wares shall not
be bought and sold. But I conceive this expression of not buying and selling,
is to express the excessive cruelty of the beast of the earth, against those
that will not submit to his new Government, as Nebucadnezers Furnace was heated
7. times hotter for those that would not bow down to his Image; so this beasts
cruelty is sevenfold greater then ordinary, against those that will not bow
down to his Image, or to his Government* therefore when this beast appears.
John ushers him in with this phrase, Rev. 13. v. 10. here is the patience and
the faith of the Saints. And in chap. 14. and 10. 11. 12. a place worth
observing, because misused by most Expositors. There the Ministers forewarn the
people not to bow down to such a Government, nor to own the beasts authority,
v. 10, 11. upon pain of damnation, v. 12. here is the patience of the Saints:
here are they that keep the Commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus. The
Holy Ghost seems to bring in the words abruptly, to note, that when this new
Government of the beast comes upon the Stage, the patience, faith, and
sincereity of the Saints will be shaken and tried: the blast of persecution
that this beast raises against the Saints will be such, as will blow off the
Periwigs of profession from Hypocrites Bald-pates: you shall know a sincere
godly Saint by the badge of persecution, by his patience under afflictions, and
his steadfast faith which no persecution can once move, and by his sincerity,
and keeping Gods Commandments, keeping both Tables, neither proving Rebel to
God, nor to his lawful Magistrate: Here are they that keep the Commandments.
But mark what follows, v. 13. Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord:
either it is meant that they are blessed that die in Christ, because freed from
the sad calamities of these times, or else they are blessed that die for
Christ, and that cause of his which they maintain; and the reasons. excellent:
for they rest from their labor in a Reformation; and that Reformation which
they toiled and labored for, so soon as they are gone, follows them: that
covenanted Reformation immediately follows the slain witnesses. For the next
verse 14. Christ appears in a white Cloud, (the same with Mat. 24. 31. and
Revel. 10. 1.) it is the effect of the 7th. Trumpet, after which the vine of the
earth is reaped, and the blood of him and his Company is shed in a dreadful
manner: the same with Revel. 11. where 7000 men of name are slain, and the same
with that 3. Habacuk 4. 5. 6. where we find horns coming out of Christ's hands,
that is, power in his hands, he goes forth with terrible judgments to measure
the earth. But more of this anon. We see the time when this Image is set up, is
the time of the witnesses slaying, it is a time of miserable persecution, which
is set out by not buying and selling; a thing that every man ought by the Law
of nature to afford his Neighbor, and is bound to perform to all men; but this
beast takes away the Saints maintenance, their Offices, their dignities, their
livelihoods, and their lives, he hangs up whole Families, as it were in
Gibbets: this beast as he is the cunningst, so the cruellest to the poor
Saints: therefore says Christ, Mat. 24. except these days should be shortened,
no flesh [then] living should be saved* that is, with a temporal salvation; but
that God for the Elects-sake, which cry to him day and night, will shorten
these days. This beast would devour the flesh of all the Saints, for he
suffers none to buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the
beast, or the number of his name. In v. 16. there they that subject give the
mark; and in this verse they must have the mark, that is, a Certificate that
they have subscribed, or else he shall have no audience in their Courts, nor
egress and regress at their Garrisons, he shall not pass the Country from
City to City, without this Certificate: this mark must be a subscription; for
how else can it be conceived, that they should give the marks, and have the
mark? I hope the Reader will pardon me, if for brevity sake I pick not up
their Arrows, which shoot wide at this mark. Viega, conceives, the mark, the
name, and the number of the name, are three distinct Characters of this beast.

1. He thinks it is the frame of Antichrists Government to the life. If Viega
mean, in policy; I think he is right: for this beast is like the Pope in his
politic devilish designs: he will lie and cheat, and supplant, and flatter, and
forswear, and murder, and yet pretend fair like the Pope: therefore he does
all in the sight of the Pope, and Revel. 17 He is of the seven.

2. Viega conceives he has a name written in plain Letters, whereby he may be
known. This I have much ado to believe, yet we will give the Jesuit fair play,
and (if that will content him) we will show him one whose numeral letters in his
name, contain the full measure of time allotted him by the Holy Ghost, which in
Dan. 7. 25. is three years and an half* now that makes forty and two months,
and 1260 days: so many years is allotted to the Pope to reign, as to this beast
of the earth there is days allotted. The Pope keeps the witnesses in Sackcloth
1260 years, and this beast slayes the witnesses, and raigns 3. years and a
half, which makes 1260 days: this beast arises not until toward the end of
the Popes reign, and then upstarts this Antichrist this witness-slayer, and he
raigns but so many days as the Pope raigns years, which is 1260 days, which
makes 3. years and an half: now in the numeral Letters of Olaverus Cr. you may
find 1260. which if we begin to count from December 1647. or thereabouts, when
he set up this Image his God Mauzzim, his sword-power, his time of tyrannizing
over the Saints, will be up about June next 1651. for near about that time his
42. months is out, about the evening of the day of 1651. this present year by
this account the afflicted Church is in great hopes to see light. And oh that I
had time but to show how many clear old Testament prophesies there are, which
give light unto this matter; but I pass this. Primasius and others, (as
Hypolitus de consummatione seculi) think the name and the Character of
Antichrist to be (...), that is (says the Author) nego Creatorem, nego
baptismum, nego adorationem a me Deo praestari solitam: if this be the
Character of Antichrist, we in England need not go far to look for Antichrist:
if to deny God, and to deny Baptism, and to deny the worship of God and his
Ordinances be Antichrists Character, as doubtless it is, Perorius is of this
opinion, Inter plura hoc convenit fore insigne Antichristi, nego baptismum,
nego Jesum.

But above all, give me Mr. Thomas Goodwin, a Cambridge-man, now head of a
College in Oxford, he speaks in his Manuscript (which he said the times would
not then bear, when he writ it) upon the Revelation, chap. 13. v. 17. by number
he understands, a Company taking part with Antichrist in a more remote kind of
subjection: and then a little after that, he tells us, that the name of this
beast is to be found out in Europe, where the Company is that powers out the
Vials on the beast: and farther he says, that his name is to be found amongst
those in these Kingdoms that receive the name: by the number of his name he
understands, such as do hold and bring in such Doctrines and opinions, and
practices in worship, or shall reckon and account them Papists in heart and
affection, and so they are of the number of his name, that is, in account: such
numerantur Papistae, they aim at Popery, and though their profession deny it;
yet when their actions and corruptions in Doctrine and Worship shall speak it
in all men's Consciences, especially all Orthodox reformed Protestants cannot
but so judge their ways and actions to be such as speak to all men's hearts,
the Pope they only fear and worship. Farther he says, they are those in Titus
who deny God in their practices, they shall profess the Protestant Religion,
and in their practices and under-hand-dealings, and policies, depressed it, and
advance the Popish Religion and party.

These are justly to be accounted Papists, and receive the mark of his name:
(did you ever read such a bitter spirited man against the heads of the
Commonwealth of England?) yet he proceeds: It imports (says he) a secret
cleaving to him, and so to be of his Company, and truly as those that receive
his name; but yet inprofession go not so far as to take that name, or the
open owning of him, yet really to do that which shall cause all men so to
reckon them; nor is this all (though this were enough to hang a Presbyterian,
if he should so lay out the Commonwealths knavery) but he proceeds, and tells,
when these with the beasts number shall appear in the world. They are (says
he) the last Champions before the Popes fall: the Prophecy is of a Generation
of men in the last days who are lively set out in 2 Timothy 3. 1. 10.
self-lovers, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents,
unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, Covenant-breakers, false
accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those which are good, Traitors,
heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasure more then lovers of God, having a form
of godliness; but denying the power of it: they are such as creep into Widows
houses, leading captive silly women. This their folly (says he) shall appear
to all men, and being discovered, it will be their ruin (Amen;) but yet they
must proceed further, even to the slaying of the witnesses in that Kingdom,
which is the tenth part of the City: these are called the last, because they
are the last Champions of the beast, and are said to be overcome by the
Witnesses. All this (Reader) I assure thee I have from Mr. Thomas Goodwins
Manuscript: now whether he have not spoken high treason according to the late
Acts, I leave thee to judge. Without all doubt he has spoken truth, and that is
a wonder in this age; for though Independents may say any thing, yet they
seldom speak truth now adays. But Mr. Goodwin may be forgiven: for this truth
of his, is an old truth, and old truths are out of date: he wrote this above
ten years ago, as I am informed, and men change Religion and opinions, and
principles, in ten days now, and perhaps he is one of them; for it is incident
to the Goodwins, to walk the Antipodes to their own writings. By having the
name of the beast, I humbly conceive is to make an open profession of his
Authority and Power, to profes to be one of his followers: so on the contrary,
Revel. 14. 9. there the followers of the Lamb had his Fathers name written on
them that was their mark, the number of his name.

There is a difference betwixt the name of the beast, and the beast it self the
people of the earth measure: the beasts name, and therefore wonder at him; but
they that have wisdom number the beast himself, and find him in every thing
fall short of the true measuring Reed, and therefore reject him as an Hypocrite
and usurper. The number of his name is put here in opposition to the number of
the beast in the next verse. To have the number of his name is to cry him up
for a Saint by his good success, and to honor him for his prosperity, as
fools do; but he that has wisdom numbers the beast, and measures him by the
word. If the beast be numbered by his name he is a Saint, a destroyer of
Antichrist, one of Christ's Instruments to pull down all those that stand up
against his Kingdom: if you measure his Army by their name, they are all
Saints, the holy ones, teachers and preachers, men endued with spiritual gifts,
and divine qualifications beyond any Minister of the Gospel; this is their
name, therefore they are called men of name, (Revel. 11. 13.) which shall be
slain at the rising of the witnesses, they are cried up for Saints, and admired
by the world for their successes and Victories: they measure only their name,
and that makes them cry up this beast for a Saint; but mark what the Holy
Ghost says, v. 18. Here is wisdom: let him that has understanding count the
number of the beast. Here is wisdom, this is a phrase not used by way of
exclamation (as Pareus would have it;) but in opposition to those fools and
lack-wits, who measure the name of the beast, that is, look upon him as he has
raised himself into great wealth, and honor, and esteem in the world. Behold
(say they) his successes, behold he is in possession of the three Kingdoms,
behold his fair promises, behold his victories over his enemies, behold how God
has answered his appeals to heaven: he no sooner appeals to Heaven say they;
but he has miraculous success against his enemies: the Moon fights for him,
and the Heavens fight for him, and he by a small number discomfits great Hosts
of men: and will any be so wicked as to think this man and his Army are not all
Saints, and his cause the just and the good cause? whereas these men only
measure the beast by his name, they count the number of his name; but those
that have wisdom count the number of the beast. Those that have the fear of
God, which is true understanding, measure not the name but the beast: let him
that has understanding count the number of the beast. (...), amongst humanists
as well as Divines is put to signify measure as well as number, the phrase is
borrowed from the Jews Customs, who in all things concerning the Temples
service proceeded per number weight and measure. Thus the utensels of the
Tabernacle were numbered, weighed, and measured by Moses, and those of the
Temple by Solomon, and the purest Gospel Church is thus measured, Revel. 22.
number weight and measure, was the rule by which to know the truth of all
things about Gods house: now of these the greatest is number, that has the
precedence: they all depend one upon another, he that numbereth rightly,
measures rightly; and he that measures rightly weighs rightly. You may
number without measuring or weighing, but you cannot weigh or measure without
numbering: this differs a fool from a wise man, a fool can stretch out a
line, or fill an Ephah, or he can put things into the Scales to weigh; but he
can neither measure aright, nor weigh aright, because he cannot number, he
cannot tell how many pounds it weighs, nor how many Gallons it holds, because
he knows not how to count and number them. A Bowl of the Sanctuary which was
of pure Gold, had it not been weighed and measured, and the weight and measure
numbered, might possibly have been stole, and a gilded piece of Brass more
large and glorious to the sight put i^ the Room; which fools that only looked
on the outside, and never measured nor weighed nor numbered, it would have
thought the more glorious Vessel; but now the Officers of the Temple could not
be cheated, because they weighed, measured, and numbered it in the Church of
God: there are many pieces of Brass, and tinkling Simballs, which make a far
more glorious show, then those that are just weight, measure and number, and
are pure Gold; but when they come to be measured by the golden Reed, the word
of God, and weighed and measured, and summed up, they are found to light by
those that have wisdom, though fools that look on their gilded outsides,
dote upon them.

Let the spiritual wise man come and measure this beast that these fools cry
up so, and they find him by the word of God, a cheating, false, distembling
gilded Hypocrite, they will find him by the word of God to be a usurper, a
murderer, a Covenant-breaker, and a Traitor (as Mr. Thomas Goodwin calls him)
and the slayer of the witnesses. The man of understanding that weighes him,
measures him, and numbers him, will find him to be the number of a man, none of
Gods number, there is not one such Vessel in the house of God as he, he is
weighed and found to light, and therefore must be cast out from amongst the
true Saints. This beast and his new Government will be found but the number of
a man, a patcht piece of man's invention, and none of Gods institution.

And his number is 666. these words seem to assert the former, here is the
product of his number, it is here summed up to be 666. now this is the number of
a man, of man's devising, and not of Gods; for Gods number runs upon 12.
Patriarchs, were the foundation of the Jewish Church, the Church^Officers under
the Law were numbered by 12. the Porters and the singers, and the Priests their
Orders run upon 12. The Gospel Church runs upon 12. The woeman is clothed with
12. Stars, Revel. 12. The new Jerusalem is founded on 12. and has 12. Gates.
Revel 21. But this beast being numbered, he runs upon sixes, his number runs
upon sixes: we read of one Giant, an enemy to the Church that was famous for
having 6. fingers on his right hand, and 6. on his left; and 6. toes on each of
his feet, and we read of an Image, whose height was 60. Cubits, and whose
breadth 6. Cubits; and here we read of a beast, whose number is 666. he runs
upon sixes: now whether the number of this beast alludes to that Image in dura,
which was numbered 66. or not, I cannot tell, it may be so; for as that Image
was the cause of dreadful prosecution to the Saints of God, so shall this beast
cause sore prosecution to fall upon the Saints of God: yea, this beast shall be
far more cruel then any of the enemies of the Church before him, he shall be
more monstrous in his attempts against the Church, and he shall reach higher
then ever any enemy before him: the tallest we read of before was but 66. but
this is 666. all the enemies, the most hellishest Traitors could never yet root
up the Protestant Government in England, they could never blow up King, Lords
and Commons, by their most secret plots; but this beast does it at noonday, in
the face of all the world. Oh that I had but room here to write his History, I
should make the ears of all that heard it tremble, to remember these horrid
unnatural villainies that this beast of the earth, whose nummber is 666. has
committed, all the conspiracies of Rome and Spain (though they have not now
been idle) could never yet do the tenth part of that mischief to the Magistry
and Ministry of England as he has done: how has he overthrown them, even when
they had finished their Testimony: how miserably is our covenanted Reformation
broken in pieces by the prevailing Treason and rebellion of this beast. As for
those who seek to find the beast in the number of his name, I conceive they
stumble upon these two gross mistakes: they take the word number in a literal
sense, which is to be interpreted in another sense, it signifying there the due
proportion of the beast in number, weight and measure, thereby showing he is an
usurper, a thief and a robber, none of Gods appointment. 2. There is another
stumbling block, at which Interpreters, not a few fall; they go about to find
the number of this beast in his name, whereas the Holy Ghost does not bid us
number his name (for that the fools of the world do) but he bids them count
the number of the beast; count him in his rising, he rose by his Lambs horns,
and Dragons tongue, by flattering and hypocrisy, blasphemies and deceits;
count him in his acting, he acts by the Devils and the Popes Commission; count
him in his power, he sets up his Sword-power, a tyranical unlawful power: count
him in his means of obtaining that power; and it is his signs and wonders,
whereby he cheateth the people into a compliance with, and subjection to his
Power and Dominion. Look upon him, and count him in his several Acts of power,
and he is extreme tyranical; he makes it death speak against the new
Government, and then he forces men, even against their own Consciences, to
subscribe to his new Government, or publicly to own it, by observing his
public edicts, and keeping and solemnizing his Fast-dayes, and Fe^st-dayes;
and if not, to deprive them of the privilege of buying and selling to outlaw
them; and God only knows what worse thing: thus count the number of the beast,
and his number is none of Gods, but the Devils number; he is full weight no
where but in the Devils scales. In plain truth, he is a hydeous monstrous
Tyrant against the Church, exceeding all that went before him; for the Popes,
they only drove the witnesses into Sackcloth, but this beast slayes them. Thus
have I tediously (though not impertinently) showed thee Reader, the beast that
slayes the witnesses, and the time when he does slay them; and by this time, I
doubt nor, but thou see that those whom the Dr. my Antagonist, makes the holy
ones, are those that slay the witnesses, and those (for whose destruction he
impudently gave thanks) are the slain witnesses, I mean the lawful Governors,
and Government in the State* and the lawful Governors and Government in
Church; for it is the Offices of both, which being destroyed, may justly be
called the slaying of the Witnesses: all rational sober-minded Protestants may
easily find the slain witnesses, if he will but look to the casting down of the
Covenant-Reformation, and the Instruments of that Covenant. In the Covenant he
may find their testimony, the which both Magistrate and Ministers having
finished, that is, fully agreed upon and resolved effectually to put in
practice; up comes this beast of the earth, and with his Sword-power, slayes
them and their reformation, and this is the time of slaying of the witnesses:
now this, (as we have proved) he did when he set up his God Mauzzim, Dan. 11.
38. that is, his Sword-power, the which was set up in Anno 1647. about August
or December, when he got the strength of the Kingdom by Sea, viz. the Navy into
his hands, and (...) Cinque Ports, Castles, Strongholds* and fortifications of
the Kingdom: Together, with the general Command of all the forces in the
Kingdom of England and Wales: at which time he seized on the royal person of
the King of England, marched up in Arms against the Lords and Commons assembled
in Parliament, charged illegally, persumptiously, and unjustly, the chief of
the Members of the House of Commons with Treason, put them to flight,
imprisoned diverse of the Lords, and several of the Commons, and the chiefest
and honourablest of the Magistrates of the City of London, and by his
Sword-power, set up his packt party of fagitive Members which fled from the
Parliament* and openly subscribed to live and die with this fellow, whose
designs were to blow up King and Parliament, as since all the world has seen
it true. I humbly conceive we may reckon the name of this beast to begin then,
and the slaying of the witnesses then to begin, so that the next conclusion, or
proposition for me to prove will be this.

That the beast of the earth that did slay these witnesses, shall be destroyed,
and the witnesses that he slew shall rise again about this year 1651 by slain
witnesses rising again, I do not mean the same persons that were slain, but the
same Offices that were pulled down, shall rise again, the lawful State,
Government, and lawful Church Government shall rise again, for the more plain
and clear demonstration of this, we must lay down some few Propositions to be
premised.

1. That as the former part of the Revelation sets forth the enemies of the
Church, and the Church her sad condition under those enemies, especially these
3. enemies, the Dragon, the Beast, and the false Prophet: so from Rev. 14. to
the end, you have the vision of the Reign of the beast, the Dragon, and the
false Prophet, and the rising of the Church to a glorious State.

2. That the beasts destruction that slayes the witnessests, and the witnesses
rising again are at one and the same time; for as the beasts rising* and the
witnesses ruin were at once, Rev. 11. 7. so the witnesses rising and the
beasts ruin shall be at once, as the cause and the effect. The beasts rising
was the cause of the witnesses falling, and the witness rising again is the
cause of the beasts ruin.

3. That those witnesses are a goodly Magistracy, and a goodly Ministry, which
are called Rev. 4. 4. 6. 7. 24. Elders, and 4. living Creatures; one like a
Lion, another like a Calfe, another like a man, and unother^like an Eagle: this
alludes to the Ministry of Priests, who had their Habitation near the
Tabernacle, being in 24. Courses, and the 4 beasts were the 4. chief Tribes,
which had the rest of the Tribes divided equally under these 4. Banners, to
pitch on the North, East, West, and South of the Tabernacle to defend it ^these
4. round, and the Priests tipified a Gospel Magistracy, set to protect the
Church and the Ministry from enemies without. This godly Magistracy and
Ministry, I humbly conceive are called Rev. 10. 1. ^. the feet of Christ, the
right foot and the left, Zach. 14. 4. there Zachariah saw the feet of Christ
stand on Mount Olivet, (i. e.) the witnesses assend (as Rev. 11. 11. 12.) to
Heaven, these are also called, (Rev. 11. 3. twoe witnesses, and v. 4. two Olive
Trees, and two Candle-sticks. Olive Trees to give svpply of Oil to the
Candle-sticks, and Candle-sticks to contene that Oil, the two chief Instruments
of light in the Church, v. 5. these have fire in their mouths: therefore Ezekiel.
1. 13. they were like fire, and like Lamps, there the wheels and the
beast^signified the Magistracy and Ministhy, as the beasts draw the wheels,
and the wheels support the Arc which was brought home, so the Magistracy and
Ministry act for the good of the Church, when the beasts went, the wheels
went, and when the beasts were lifted up, the wheels were lifted up, to note
that as it fares with the Magistracy, so it fares with the Ministry: if one
goes up the other goes up, if one goes down, the other goes down. Ezekiel. in that
Chapter prophesies principally of the glorious Gospel-day which the Jews shall
enjoy at the end of the Roman Monarchy; but more of this hereafter: these two
witnesses are called (as I conceive) Rev. 4. 15. 18. the Angel of the Temple,
and the Angel of the Altar, Solomon the King was he that built the Temple, he
was the Angel of the Temple; but the High Priest was the Angel of the Altar,
there he sacrificed and offered, and he had power over the fire of the Temple,
these 5. Lam. 3. are called Fathers, and Mothers in the Church.

These are called, Revel 20. 4. the souls of them that were beheaded for the
witness of Jesus, and those which did not worship the beast, nor his Image, nor
had taken his mark on their foreheads, or on their hands. This verse shows the
punishment which the Magistrates shall undergo, they should be cut off with
the Axe, (so Beza reads it) and the other, to wit, the Minist^y they should
suffer for not subscribing the beasts Engagement, they will not worship his
Image, nor subject unto it; they will neither with forehead, nor hand, give or
receive, the mark of the beast.

4. Propos. That the Vials then begin to be powered out, when the witnesses
arise, and this beast goes to ruin; that is to be proved by the Vials Objects.
The first is the beast of the earth. The second the beast of the Sea. The third
is the Prince of the air, that is the seventh Vial, which falls on the air,
which leads to the 5. proposition.

5. Propos. That the great Battle, Revel. 19. 19* and the Vials pouring out are
one and the same thing; for they have one and the same Object, to wit, the
beast of the Sea, the false Prophet, Rev. 19. 20. and the Dragon the Devil, the
Prince of the air, Rev. 20. 2. and 3.

6. Propos. That the thousand years binding of Satan, and the thousand years
Reign of the Witnesses with Christ, do not begin until the great battle against
the beast, and the false Prophet be fought after this Battle: the twelve Tribes
of Israel shall be converted to the Gospel, and return to their own Nation, and
be united under one King.

All these propositions fall under the discourse of the beasts ruin, and the
witnesses rising. I will not undertake to discourse particularly at large on
each of these particulars; for then I should swell my discourse into to a large
volom, but only occasionally as they fall in under the general proposition of
the beast of the earths ruin, and the witnesses rising.

The exceeding many rubs that I have in my way, especially those that English
Expositers lay in my way, (I mean Protestant Writers, either English, or
translated into English. As Brightman, Pareus, Meade, Bernard Napier, with
several others) do not only pu^ me to infinite pains, in uniting ravelled
truth, but put me out of a pleasing method; for in this work, I am put to as
much pains as Alexander, when at once he answered six Ambassador; how much I am
contrary to the opinion of the most English Expositers, my seven forenamed
Propositions show; but how agreeable these propositers are to the mind of the
Holy Ghost, by the help of the Holy Ghost, I will make it my work to show to
the world from the Scriptures themselves, which are the best expositions of
themselves.

2. The second general conclusion is, that which I shall how treat of, (viz)
That the beast of the earth that overcame and slew the Witnesses, shall be
overcome, and the witnesses that were overcome and slain by him, shall rise
again, about of this year 1651. For the proof whereof, the first proposition,
must be laid before the Reader, (viz.) that as the Holy Ghost shows John the
first troubles of the Church under the Seals, unto Constantine, (which were
the persecutions of the Heathen Emperors, called the red Dragon) and the
persecutions of the Church under the beast of the Sea, and the beast of the
earth, from the time of Antichrists rising after Constantine, under the
Trumpets; all which reaches to the 14. Chapter, so from the 14. Chapter, to
the 21. Chapter: the Holy Ghost sets forth the rising of the Church, and the
ruin of the enemy; in Chap. 13. He sets forth the Reign and Tyranny of the
beast, of the Sea, and the beast of the earth: the beast of the earth we have
seen him in his rising, and in his Government, and we have numbered him in
both, and plainly uncased him to the world.

Revel. 14. In the 14. Chapter there is the Church coming out of affliction,
there is the slaying of the witnesses set forth with the cause, and a Prophecy
of the beast of the earths ruin.

Rev. 15. In Chapter the 15. you have the witnesses risen, you must note the
Witnesses slaying and rising again alludes much to Christ's death and
Resurrection; for as they must be confirmable to him in sufferings, so the Holy
Ghost uses the like expression to note that such like glorious effects shall
be at the Witnesses, rising as at Christs^Resurrection.

Rev. 16. In Chap. 16. You have the witnesses pouring out the Vials on the
beast of the earth, on the Sea, i. e. the beast of the Sea, and the last Vial
into the air, that is on the Prince of the air: these three are the only
three great and least enemies of the Church, that are within the Church: as for
the Turks and Pagans, and such who know not, nor profess Christ, they are not
mentioned here, the Holy Ghost looks at those enemies that shall be in this
day of the powering out of the Vials within the Church, naming themselves
Christians, and professing Saint-ship, as the Pope the Vicar of Christ, and his
party Catholic Saints and the beast of the Earth and his party, new lighted
Saints of a high strain; and the Prince of the air who rules in the Children
of disobedience, cloakes his Traitors, and blasphemers, and despisers of Gods
word, and Drunkards, and fornicators, swearers, and Anabaptists; with the name
of Saints, and to act all these in the highest way of wickedness, must go for a
high point of Saint-ship. These three Enemies you shall see them all at the
pouring out of the sixth vial, laying their heads together, there is the
Dragon, the Beast, and the false Prophet, spitting venomous counsel against
the Church, immediately before they go to ruin at the great battle. In Rev:
17. you have an open view of the Beast of the Sea, and the highest state and
pomp of Rome, and the Beast of the earth, and his kind of Government, and
manner of proceeding immediately before their overthrow and damnation, that is,
in the time of the Reign of the Beast of the earth, who slaies the Witnesses.

In Revel: 18. is set forth the horrible destruction of Rome, and its final
ruin: and the time of her ruin, it shall be v: 7. when she glories in her
pleasure, and sits as a Queen, and expects no sorrow, then shall her plagues
come in one day (i. e.) year: it seems to me to be about her year of Jubilee.
In Revel: 19. you have the Saints thundering forth hallelujah for pulling down
his Enemies, and setting up his own Throne, where from v: 11. to that 3. verse
of Chap: 20. you have a view of Christ in majesty, and his Army going forth to
the great battle against the Beast, the Dragon, and the false Prophet, who are
all taken and overcome; the Beast and the false Prophet cast alive into the
Lake, and the Devil bound a thousand years: so that after this Battle, the
thousand years tranquillity of the Church is to be expected, and then (Revel:
20. v: 7.) when the thousand years is expired, Satan shall be let loose again,
and immediately after shall follow the day of Judgment. Rev: 21. and 22.
describe the glorious state of the Church triumphant, after the dissolutions of
the Heavens, and the Earth that now are.

The 17. 18. and 19. Chap: they are as it were an exegeti^, or Exposition of
the three Chapters immediately preceding them: As also the 11. Chapter, from v:
11. to the end. One thing I will entreat the Reader to observe, from Rev: 13.
v: 10. and 18. at the rising of the Beast of the earth the Holy Ghost, as it
were, Ex abrupto, uses this expression, here is the faith, and here is the
patience of the Saints: To note that the rising of the Beast of the earth
should certainly be the time when the Witnesses should be under sore
affliction, their offensive weapons should be taken from them, and their faith
and patience which are defensive weapons, which two, only Saints have, and
with which they are able to beat a road through Hell, through the deepest
sorrows and troubles. Now these graces this Beast of the Earth, by his cruel
persecutions, will make them eminently to exercise while he reigns. But in ver:
18. when his reign comes to an end, then says the holy Ghost, [Here is
wisdom.] Let him that has understanding count the number of the Beast. Now
the Beast comes to be measured, it is not [Here is the faith and patience] but
[Here is wisdom.] None but the Saints have wisdom, and understanding, for
they only fear God. Now the Saints wisdom shall be as eminent in measuring
this Beast with the reed of the Word of God* and casting him out of the true
Church for an hipocrite, and enemy to true Religion, as their faith and
patience was eminent under his tyranny. Independencie shall be cast out of the
Church by them.

Now follows immediately in Revel: 14. the vision of the true Church coming out
of affliction, they are the 144000. sealed ones, in Revel. 7. that now stand in
Mount Sion with the Lamb; and now a new song begins to be sung by heavenly
harps: the new song was a Reformation, for that's a strange and new song to the
world. This song the 144000. learn, that is, the true Church, they are the
singers, and their instruments are stringed instruments.

1. Here Is the number 144000. In the Temple there were but 144. Musicians, which
divided themselves into twelve Consorts: but here are 144000. to note the
transcendent glory of this Gospel day in the multitude of converted souls.

Here are their Instruments, Harps, which are stringed Instruments, to teach us
whither to go, to learn the meaning of this Text. And that is in Hab. 3. which
Chapter is called a Prayer upon Segionoth, that is a term of Music that none
knows: therefore some read it, ignorances, and so it well agrees with this
song, which no one knew how to sing, save Harpers. This Chapter is dedicated to
the chief singer on Neginoth, or my stringed Instruments. Now Harps are
stringed Instruments; so that this song of Habbacucks is tha^ song which these
Harpers sing.

^. It Is a new Song, in Revel: 1^. and this of Habbacucks is also new: for none
know how to sing it but the Harpers, it is a Prayer of Segionoth, or ignorance to
all except to the singers on Neginoth: or the stringed Instruments. 1^th.
Psalms are dedicated to Neginoth, all which begin with Prayers for its
deliverance of the Church out of great misery, and end with Prayers for its
deliverance: And such is the Song of the Harpers, Rev: 15. 3, ^. This of Habb.
is the self same song, to be sung by these, Rev: 14. Now it is new, because the
conversion of the twelve Tribes, and ruin of Antichrist, and raising of the
Witnesses, and making all the kingdoms in the world Christ's, and chaining up
the Devil a thousand years, is a new song never sung before; these that rise
with the slain Witnesses sing it. He that reads this Chapter wisely will see,
ver. 2. Christ's powerful and glorious coming. ver: 7. 8. the vials that hele
power out, and his manner of coming on horses, as Rev: 19. all which the
Revelation in the same expression mentions of Christ's coming at the 7th.
Trumpet.

Papists calls this Chapter of Habbac: v: 6. the joyful and famous song,
preparation by an Angel is made for the Preaching of the Gospel to all the
world, the sum of his Doctrine is in v. 7. Fear God, and give Glory to him, for
the hour of his Judgment is coming, this hour of judgment is that Revel: 18.
10. In one hour is thy Judgment come: this the world has warning of, in v. 8.
the next Angel follows, saying, v. 9. Babylon is fallen, is fallen, then the
third Angel follows with a loud voice, as the others do, (observe now is the
time of loud voices in the Church, which are heard until the 7th. Trumpet
sound, he forewarns every man of the danger of worshipping the Beast and his
Image, for says he, v: 10. If any man worship the Beast and his Image, and
receive his mark in his forhead, or on his hand the same shall drink the wine
of the wrath of God, v: 11. Yea of the pure wine which is powered into the cup
of his wrath, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, in the
presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb. v: 12. And they
have no rest day nor night, who worship the Beast and his Image, and receive
the mark of his name, there is the patience of the Saints, here are they that
keep the Commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus. These words are but once
used before.

(...) and that is in Rev. 13. 10. immediately before the rising of the Beast
of the Earth. Now here they are repeated, to show the cause of the Saints
sufferings, it shall be for opposing this Beast of the Earths new Government,
and not subscribing to be true and faithful to it, which is here set down by
worshipping the Beast and his Image, and receiving his mark; this shall be one
great cause of the Witneses slaying; therefore in verse. 13. there is a heavenly
voice that says Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord: and the Spirit
gives two reasons, 1. Because they rest from their exceeding pressure of
calamity (for so (...), which coms from (...), signifies.). 2. Their works
follow them: To read it according to the Greek copy, it is [but their works
follow them,] to note, though the Witnesses be slain, and that Reformation
which they so labored in, be for a time plucked out of their hands, so that
they are forced (as Nehemiah) to cease from their labors, yet that work shall
follow them, the work of Reformation shall follow the slain Witnesses; Blessed
are the dead: this is either to set out the horrible tribulation of these
times, (as in Matthew. 24. Mark 13. and Luke 21. they are called) so that he
shall be blessed that is taken to God, from out of these troubles; or rather
for encouragement to the godly Magistracy and Ministry, which are persecuted,
imprisoned, and banished, and in danger of their lives, for keeping their
Covenant, and their integrity, and not breaking Gods commandments, either the
first or the second Table. Therefore Ver. 12. it is added [Here are they that
keep the commandments of God] it seems it shall be a time of trampling Gods
Law under foot, so that they that keep Gods commandments shall be rare and
eminent men, it shall be a rare thing to find a faithful man: When Christ
comes ('it is spoken of this time, of his coming in the white cloud, as follows)
shall he find faith on the earth? 'Twill be a rare thing to find either
faithful Magistrate or Minister, or men of a strong faith: most men will
comply and engage through the weakness of their faith. Observe what follows
this time of slaying the Witnesses, verse. 14. And I looked, and behold a white
cloud, and upon the cloud one like the Son of Man, having on his head a golden
crown, and in his hand a sharp sickle. After the slaying of the Witnesses
immediately follows Christ in the cloud, with his sickle in his hand. Observe
that in the 14, 15, 16. Chapter they all make one vision, and every verse from
the 14. Chapter to the end of the 16. begins with a (...), except when the
sense is continued in two Verses, or a reason in one is given of the former,
which is not above thrice throughout the three Chapters, there is no [(...)] to
be found: the matter in the three Chapters is copulative: In the first part of
this Chapter you have the Witnesses finishing their testimony; the Church
coming out of Babylon: having made a progress in reformation, the chief
instruments are slain; the Magistrates and the Ministers who had taken infinite
pains, had thrown down Superstition, Prelacy and Popery, and covenanted to
establish the Gospel in its purity, these on a sudden, when they had finished
their testimony, are cast out of their Offices, imprisoned, banished and
beheaded. In Rev. 20. 4. there is the manner of the Witnesses punishment, and
the cause of their sufferings, For the cause of Christ, and for the Word of
God, for going about to establish the truth of Christ according to the Word of
God (for so the Covenant runs) they were cut off with the axe: There Is both the
Magistrates punishment and the cause plainly set down: And which did not
worship the Beast, neither his image, neither had taken his mark on their
foreheads, or on their hands; that is, they refused to acknowledge or own the
authority of the Beast of the Earth: it is certain that this can be meant of
none but the Beast of the Earths government; for this power of setting up an
Image, and enforcing men to worship it, is attributed to none but him: And
whether the punishments prescribed be not now inflicted upon the
Covenant-keeping Ministry this day, let all the world judge: There has
nothing been so clearly fulfilled in the eyes of the world this thousand years,
as this of the slaying of the Witnesses this day in our eyes: Oh that we had
hearts to conceive aright of it. Verse. 4. But now follows the glorious day,
Christ in a white cloud: Here two Propositions must be cleared: First, Here
begins the seventh trumpet to sound: Secondly, The seventh sounding causes all
the vialls to be powered out, on the Beast of the Earth, on the Beast of the
Sea, and on the Prince of the Air. Then begins the seventh trumpet to sound,
when Christ begins to take the Kingdoms of the world, and make them his own,
and reign over them, Rev. 11. 15. But in Rev. 14. 14. then Christ is crowned
with a golden crown, when he sits on his white cloud; therefore the time of
Christ's coming in the cloud is the time of the seventh trumpets sounding; and
for this cause, says the Holy Ghost, (lest men should mistake the time) Rev.
11. 14. The second woe is past, and the third woe comes quickly, when the two
Witnesses stand upon their feet and are called up to heaven then the seventh
trumpet coms swiftly and without delay, for so the word (...) signifies;
therefore Rev. 16. 15. in the very middle of the narration of the great
battle, that the Dragon, the Beast, and the false Prophet shall f^ght against
the Lamb; when they gather together to that great battle, Christ gives this
warning to the Church, that when he is a coming, the enemies gathering together
with great strength and force, is a true sign of Christ's coming But how does
he come? The text answers, Behold I come as a thief: Latro, quia latenter
insidiatur, that is, suddenly, before a man expects him, he is up with a man on
a sudden before he is provided for him: So will Christ fall upon his enemies in
a day when they look not for him, and in an hour when they are not aware of
him, When they were gathered together, v. 17. then the seventh Angel powered
out his vial, and then a loud voice coms out of the temple, saying, It Is done,
that is, as Rev. 10. 7. the mystery of God, the great mystery is finished, as
he has declared by his servants the Prophets; so that, of the sounding of the
seventh trumpet, it seems the Prophets have prophesied.

The seventh trumpet sounding, Rev. 11. 5. Christ sitting on the white cloud,
Rev. 14. 14. crowned the seventh Angel pouring out his vial into the air,
Rev. 16. 17. and Christ riding on a white horse, Rev. 19. 11. who had on his
head many crowns, v. 12. and was clothed with a garment dipped in blood, v. 13.
and had an host cloathen in white linen, and out of whose mouth goes a sharp
sharp sword, to smite the Gentiles withal, v. 15. whose name is written on his
vesture, and thigh, the King of kings, and Lord of lords, v. 16. and the great
battle, from v. 17. with the effects of it, to v. 5. of chap. 20. these all
set out one and the same thing, viz. The destruction of three grand enemies of
the Church within the Church, and the restoring of a godly Magistracy and
Ministry to its former luster and beauty; to the thorough carrying on of a
reformation, which the Dragon, the Beast, and the false Prophet, the three
grand enemies, destroyed, in destroying the two Witnesses, (i.e.) the godly
Magistracy and Ministry, that lead the people out of spiritual Babylon.
These things will be cleared in due place.

The second is that which I suppose most Englishmen will oppose, because it
opposes most English writers, and opposes the Doctor in his new Thanksgiving
book P. 2. who says, we are under the sixth Seal, and the sixth Trumpet of
that Seal, and under the fourth Vial of that Trumpet, if not under the fifth.
I Will run after his fantastic stuff no farther, by way of repetition, but
return to my second Proposition, and prove that none of the Vialls are yet
powered out, because they are not powered out until the seventh Trumpet sound,
that is Argument of it self sufficient, for the seventh Trumpet has not yet
sounded, ergo, no vialls are as yet powered out.

Argument. I prove that none of the Vialls shall be powered out, until the
seventh Trumpet sound, from Revel. 15. 5. and Revel. 11. 15. 19.

The Vialls are not powered out until the Angels come out of the Temple, Rev.
25. 16. and they come not out, until the Temple of the Tabernacle of the
Testimony in heaven was open, v. 5. but the Temple of God was not opened in
heaven, until the seventh Trumpet sounded, Rev. 11. 15. 19. ergo, the Vialls
cannot be powered out, until the seventh Trumpet sound.

2. Argument. I may argue thus from Revel. 16. 1. If no Vialls be powered out,
until John heard a voice out of the Temple, then none are as yet powered out;
for no voice coms out of the Temple, until the Temple be open, and the Angels
come out, which we have clearly proved, is not till the seventh. Trumpet
sounds, and the seventh, Trumpet sounds not, until Christ come in the cloud
crowned to possess the Kingdoms, and to destroy the three grand enemies, the
Beast of the Sea, which kept the Witnesses in Sackcloth, and the Beast of the
Earth, which ^lays the Witnesses, and the Devil, who raigns and rages against
the Gospel, with his crew of Traitors, blasphemers, heretics, and the like,
which is not yet fulfilled, therefore no Vialls are powered out.

3. Argument. If no Vialls be powered out, until the Vial be powered out on the
earth, which causes a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had
received the mark of the Beast, and upon them which worshipped his Image, then
no Vial is as yet powered out; for by earth, is here meant the Beast of the
Earth, and his followers: Now the Beast of the Earth and his followers, we
proved already were not in being, until 1647. and no Vial has been powered
out upon him as yet, for he is now raging over, and trampling under the slain
Witnesses; therefore none of the Vialls are as yet powered out, nor can we
expect them, until the three years and an half of his reign be expired, which
we hope is not many months longer.

4. Argument. But to take an Argument ad hominem, there are many learned
Divines of these later days, who hold that the Witnesses are to power out the
Vialls, the slain Witnesses rising do it, this is most probable; if so, then I
bring a double argument thus, If the Witnesses rising power out the Vialls,
then no Vialls have yet been powered out; for as a learned Divine, November 5.
last said, The Witnesses are not yet risen, their rising will be conspicuous,
when they rise, the Saints shall sing the Song of Moses, Rev. 15. 3. and they
shall be a terror to all their enemies round about them, who shall see their
rising and tremble at it, Revel. 11. 11. they shall put on white linen (which
is another Argument) Revel 15. 6. before they go to power out the Vialls: but
from the time of the Popes raigns, to the time of the Beast of the Earths reign
the Witnesses were in Sackcloth, and therefore could not power out the Vialls,
and since they have been slain, and now are dead, dead in Law, outlawed
persons, dethroned, degraded, secluded, sequestered, and dissipated them, so
that until the slain Witnesses rise, there can be no Vialls powered out; and by
consequence none are powered out, for the Witnesses are not risen.

I am not ignorant how there are very many and learned Protestants, who say
that at least an hundred years ago, some of the Vials were powered out, but what
ground have they from Scripture to say so? every Scholar positively concludes
none at all; what then is their ground, but only the strength of their fancy in
crooking sacred texts to corrupt histories: as for example, Pareus is of
opinion that Luther powered out the first Vial upon the earth, when he preached
against Pardon-Mongers and Indulgences, and all the ground he has for it, is,
because he finds that Luther was a stout opposer of Pardon-mongers and
Canonists; whereas he that reads but with an impartial eye the history of the
German Churches, since Luther, will rather conclude that the Pope powered out a
Vial on the German Churches, then the German Churches on him; it is the most
senselessest thing, and the most rediculous in the world, for wise men to
affirm, that four or five of the Vialls are powered out on Rome and the Pope,
when the Pope and Rome were never in greater pomp (witness this year of
Jubilee at Rome) and his Counsels and politic devices never more prosperously
succeeded then now. It Is true indeed, Husse and Hierome of Prague, and Luther,
and those German Princes, who defended those truths which their Ministers
taught, prove that there were Witnesses then in being; but for certain, the
Pope made them wear sackcloth, all Europe will affirm it. Queen Elizabeth, the
famousest Princess in the world against the Pope, how was she, and her
Ministry and Kingdom kept in sackcloth? once the Armado from Spain put her and
all the Kingdom to fasting and sackcloth; she her self went daily in danger of
her life; at least twelve several attempts of treason against her person were
discovered, so that she escaped hardly the Popes clutches with her life. Now to
call this a pouring out of the vialls on Rome, is that that gives just occasion
to the Papists to scorn and deride our Expositors: Let not Rome think that she
has had one of her plagues yet: When God powers out his vialls upon her, she
shall feel then to the purpose: Romes plagues are not to come till the politic
State have reigned 1260. years, and then let Rome know, in a day, that is, a
year, Rev. 18. her plagues shall come upon her. The Beast of the Earth must
lead the way to destruction, in whose ruin the chief strength of the Pope
shall go to ruin, and the Devil too; and therefore it is (I conceive) that in
the great battle, that this Beast shall fight against the Lamb; for none but
he this day is capable in person to fight against the Lamb, and his 144000.
followers: For I conceive by this completenesse of the number of Christ's
followers, it is meant a National Church that he fights against; if so, then it
must be Scotland, or no Nation in the world; for they only are a Natinall
Church truly reformed. When he is overcome, it is said, Rev. 20. 21. that the
Pope was taken when this false Prophet is taken, because the Popes interest is
most concerned in this Beasts overthrow. Could the Pope (who by his Beast works
all his miracles in the sight of the Pope, or with his approbation) overthrow
the covenanted people in England and Scotland, the Protestant Cause would not
have rest for the sole of its foot in the world, and then the Pope would
flourish: But if the Covenauters in Scotland should prevail against the Beast
of the Earth there, the Pope must not look to stand long, and that the Romish
Politicians know, they have read the Covenant over and over, and know full well
the contents of it, and the intentions of the takers and keepers of it, so that
the Popes interest is highly concerned in the success of the Beast of the
Earth, who bears him up; who falling, (which will doubtless be very suddenly,
for the vial is first powered on him, Rev. 16. 2.) immediately follows the
vialls upon the Romish party, and so Romes ruin coms on a sudden.

As for those who affirm in their writings, that there is a large space of time
betwixt vial and vial in its pouring out: I dare affirm the contrary, that
they have no cause nor ground for it in the world: 1. Not from Rev. 16. from v.
1. rather the contrary is proved; for there is command given at once to the
seven Angels to power out the seven vialls. 2. They are called vialls, which
(say the learned) are wide-mouthed and large vessels, like a kettle, to
signify large and sudden measures of wrath on Gods enemies: Sodom (with two
Angels who powered out their vialls on it) was utterly destroyed on the sudden
with a terrible destruction; but here are seven Angels and seven vialls, to
note the terrible and irresistible destruction, and the full and complete
destruction of the enemies: this destruction that God shall bring on these last
enemies in these last days, shall be to their final ruin; and therefore it is
that Babylons ruin is compared, Rev. 18. 21. to a millstone cast into the sea,
and Rev. 20. 20. the enemies were cast into the lake, which burns with fire and
brimstone, that is, into hell: now out of hell there is no redemption, these
are the same enemies on which the vialls are powered out. Though here the Beast
of the Earth be called the false Prophet, it is but to let us know it is the
same Beast that makes fire come down from heaven, (Rev. 13. 13.) that is,
before he takes in hand his enterprises, that he may cheat the foolish people
of the world, he makes open appeals to God in the sight of the world, to own
his cause, and give him success according to his integrity herein: He imitates
Elias; and after he has fasted, and prayed, and made his appeals, he has his
desired success, and then he makes the world believe it is the return of his
prayers: all which makes the world cry up his cause for Gods cause, and him and
his party for the true Saints, and the great Reformers: But for all his
successes, he is but a false prophet, a lying, traitorous, perjured, malicious
enemy to the Church and Saints of God. These seven Vialls are but figurative
expressions of the sudden, terrible, and final wrath of God upon the enemies
of his Church, which we shall find against the same enemies in Isaiah 11. 15.
Zach. 10. 11. Luke 21. 23. Matthew. 24. 29. Mark 13. 24. I will briefly tovch
upon them all, because they give much light unto our present discourse; observe
this by the way.

Note. That the finishing of the Mystery of God, in the days of the voice of
the seventh Trumpet, is for certain revealed to the Prophets in the Old
Testament, Revel. 10. 7. and I am very confident, that this is the day that
Ezekiel saw, Ezekiel. 1. Chap. 10, and this is the day that Solomon sings of,
indeed it was their fervent desire, that were Saints under the old Testament,
to see the day of Christ's appearing in the flesh; therefore Cant. 1. 2. Let him
kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for his Love is better then Wine: They
under the Law were kissed only with Moses mouth, they received the Law from his
mouth, the most soul-refreshingst part of it consisting in Sacrifices, in meat
Offerings, and drink Offerings, Wine and Oil, but they desired the Ordinances
from Christ's mouth, which was better then such Wine, better then the
Ceremonial Sacrifices; but when Christ came in the flesh amongst them to give
them Ordinances, v. 5. they looked on Christ's blackness, they looked on his
mean parentage, his poverty, and his sufferings, they looked on him, as on the
Tents of Keder, which were course, mean, base things, what (said they) is not
this the Carpenters Son? they looked only on his humane nature, which was as
mean as the Tents of Keder, but they looked not on his Divine Nature, which was
glorious as the Curtains of Solomon, which was of most rich stuff, and
curiously wrought, this they looked not on, but (ver. 6.) on the blackness of
Christ, because the wrath of Gods hot displeasure scorched him on the Cross;
therefore his mothers children (i.e.) the Jews were angry with him, and this
was all the reason, because he neglected his own safety, and comfort, and ease,
and life, to give them safety, and comfort, ease, and eternal life; he was the
Keeper of the Vineyards, but his own Vineyard he had not kept. He was the
Churches keeper, though he kept not himself from Gods wrath.

This day of Christ's coming in the flesh, the Jews thus by their blindness
and unbelief lost, and therefore that day is not the day that the Prophets mean
in their Prophecies shall be the glorious day to the Jews, but (as the Rabbis
say, and that (as to that) truly) it is some glorious day of restoring the
twelve Tribes again in the end of the Roman Monarchy: this day was the day that
the Jews (that believed in Christ when he was on earth) looked for; therefore
said some of them, Will thou at this time restore the kingdom to Israel? Acts
2. They did look for a restoring of the kingdom of Israel to its former luster,
as in David's time: This will be at the sounding of the seventh trumpet: and of
this mystery at this time to be revealed, he Prophets have prophesied; as in
Isa. 11. there you have a Prophecy of the Gospel day; and from Christ's
incarnation to the end of the Roman Monarchy; for the three other Monarchies
were past, and only the Roman Monarchy in being, when Christ was born. In the
eleven first verses there is set forth the excellency of Christ the Author of
the Gospel, and the glorious effects of his Gospel. Now in this Gospell-day
God will recover the second time the remnant of his people, that is, Israel,
from Assyria and Egypt, and from the Islands of the Sea: This day of redemption
must of necessity be the day of redeeming the Jews from under the Roman
Monarchy: for Paul Romans 15. 12.) quotes Isa. 11. 10. to show that Isaiah
prophesied of Christ's coming, and the Gentiles believing in him: Now this of
the Gentiles conversion was under the Roman Monarchy, therefore (Isa. 11. v. 11)
the recovering again of Israel and Juda must be meant of their redemption by
Christ, and conversion under the Roman Monarchy: this no rational Textman can
deny, v. 11, 12, 13, 14. you shall find these expressions quoted by Christ,
Matthew. 24. their flying on the shoulders of the Philistims of the West, v. 14.
is to express the great advantage the Jews shall have in their conversion to
Christ by the destruction of the Western Roman Empire, which are their
spiritual Philistims, who allow them not to search the Word, they keep all
spiritual weapons from them, and by their spiritual wickedness and
superstition harden the poor Jews in unbelief: therefore the Pontisick State
is called (Revel. 7.) in Hebrew Abaddon, i.e. a destroyer. In Isa. 11. v. 12.
and 13. there is another Argument: For God promises here to gather Israel and
Juda; Ephraim, (that is, the Royal Family of the ten Tribes) shall not envy
Juda, nor Juda vex Ephraim, the twelve Tribes shall be united; but they were
never yet gathered together since the Babylonish Captivity, nor were they ever
united as yet, therefore this is to be fulfilled: Now in that day when these
things shall be accomplished, v. 14, 15. Edom, Moab and Ammon, that is, all
Heretics, who are the worst of enemies to the true Church; for Edom came of
Esau the apostate, v. 14. and Moab and Ammon were the sons of Lot, begotten and
born in incest. Now all these in after-ages pretended that they were the true
begotten sons of the Church; the Edomites said that their father Esau was the
first born of Jacob, and therefore they were the true Church. The Moabites and
the Amorites they said that Lot was their Grand father, therefore they are the
true Church. Now these three were the basest, maliciousest, and cruellest
enemies that the true Chruch had, and so are heretics and Apostates, which the
world shall be full of (Mat. 24. 26. 29.) before the conversion of the Jews;
but these shall be trodden underfoot: as David when he came to the crown
subdued them round about, so will God, v. 15. and God will destroy the tongue
of the Egyptian Sea, that is, the Popedom, which is the tongue of the Roman
Church, which is spiritual Egypt, and smite it in the seven streams, that
they may go over drie-shod: this Christ quotes, Rev. 16. 12. there is the river
which God will smite in the seven streams and dry it up, that Israel may come
to the Gospel: Romes accursed doctrine, pomp and tyranny shall come to ruin,
not only at Rome, but in the West and East India's there God shall break the
Popish Religion, and the Tribes shall take notice of Gods mighty hand, and give
glory to God: the like expression we have in Zacharia, Zach. 10. from v. 6. to
v. 9. the Jews conversion is declared: This Cornelius a Lapide conceives is
meant of the Jews conversion: this was begun (says he) by the Apostles, but
shall be perfected by the two Witnesses: I like well the words in some sense;
they are doubtless most true, but v. 11. when he does this, what will he do?
he will pass through the Sea with affliction (the Septuagint reads it, He will
pass through the narrow Sea.) and shall smite the waves thereof, and the deeps
of the river shall dry up, and the pride of Ashur shall be brought down, and
the Scepter of Egypt shall depart away: Compare these places with the Vialls,
and they are all one, as in time, so in expression: but I am too tedious. In
Mat, 24. Mark 13. and Luke 21. we may find all the Vialls there mentioned: I
will touch upon one for all. Luke 21. 24. there begins the Jews woes and
sorrows from the time of Jerusalems destruction downward, until the time of
the Gentiles be fulfilled, what is the meaning of that? Look in Rom, 12. 25.
there is repeated, that blindness, in part, is happened to Israel, until the
fullness of the Gentiles be come in; it is all one with that expression, Until
the time of the Gentiles be fulfilled; but when is the time of the Gentiles
fulfilled? look in Rev. 11. 2. there the time of the Gentiles, that is, the
time of Antichrists reign (say all or the most Interpreters) is 42 months
(Salary months) which make 1260 days, days being put for years, the meaning
is, the full time of Antichrists Reign is 1260 years; and when these years are
expired, then the fullness of the Gentiles is come in, and then all Israel shall
be saved by Jesus Christ; as Esaias 59. 20. the place that Paul quotes, where had
we time, it were easy to give the Reader an exact view of these times, in the
precedent matter to the text: there we may see Christ's coming to repay
vengeance to the Enemies in the Islands, that the West may fear God; and this
shall be done, ver. 19. when the Enemy comes in like a flood, and how it shall
be done? the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standart against him: this is
absolutely prophesied of that time, when the fullness of the Gentiles is come
in; that is, when the time of Antichrists Reign is accomplished: I am not
ignorant how far I am from the common interpretations of this text; but I am
confident, upon Scripture-grounds, I come nearer the mind of the Holy Ghost,
then they that say, by the fullness of the Gentiles, is meant, the glorious time
of the full coming in of the Gentiles to the Gospel.

Blindness is happened, in part, to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be
come in; here is the measure of the time of the Jews rejection from the Gospel,
so long as till the fullness of the Gentiles be come in. If by fullness of the
Gentiles be meant their full conversion, then the Jews shall not be converted
until the full conversion of the Gentiles be accomplished: but this is contrary
to the Apostles words in the same Chapter, for ver. 12. Now (says he) if the
fall of them be the riches of the world, and the diminishing of them the riches
of the Gentiles, how much more their fullness? So that by this text, it is
clear, that the rising of the Jews shall be the bringing in of a far greater
number of Gentiles to the Gospel, then their fall could do; and therefore it is
that the Prophet says, In this day people shall flock in to the Gospel, as the
Doves to the windows; and ten women shall take hold of the skirt of a Jew, and
go after him; that is, embrace his Religion, being a Christian: And hence it
is, that at the sounding of the seventh Trumpet a voice is heard crying aloud,
That all the Kingdoms in the world are become the Lords, because of the great
conversion of Souls throughout the world; that shall be when the Jews begin to
come in to Christ: So that the fullness of the Gentiles, in that place, cannot
mean any other then as Luke 21. 24. expresses it, the fulfilling the times of
the Gentiles, which Rev. 11. 2. is 42 Months, and that is 1260 years (the full
time of Antichrists reign) and so long the true Church (which is Jerusalem)
shall be trodden under foot, Cajetan well observes (though few of the Romish
Writers which quote him observe it) that donec plenitudo gentium intret, is the
mystery which Paul would have the Romans not ignorant of, lest they should
think too well of their Church; and doubtless this is the mystery which the
Holy Ghost (Rev. 10. 7.) says shall be finished in the days of the voice of
the seventh Trumpet, as the Prophets have declared. So that we must look i^ to
the prophesies concerning this mystery, and the seventh Trumpet, as well as
into the Writings of the Apostles. Beda on Luke 21. 24. says, that it is the
same with Romans 11. 25. and many of the Popish Doctors agree with him, which is
as much as I will desire, to make good my assertion. The Ancients, and many of
the Romish Doctors conclude, that Israel shall be converted to Christ about the
end of the World. Says the ordinary gloss in the end of the World when
Antichrists falsehood shall be detected; and (says Abelardus) in the end of the
world they shall be converted, per the Witnesses. So says Remigerus: Now the
Witnesses rise not until the full time of Antichrists reign be accomplished,
Rev. 11. Therefore when the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in; that is,
Antichrists reign shall be accomplished, Israel shall be converted: Of this
opinion I suppose learned Protestants are, That the Romish Apostasy, is the
cause of the Jews Obstacy; until the destruction of which, they shall continue
in their blindness: This opinion Contzenus the Jesuit cries out of, as the
opinion of Heretics. I conceive he cries most against learned Melancthon, who
on that text tells us, of the ruin of the Gentiles Church by heresies, and
apostasy; which apostasy being fulfilled, the Jews shall be converted: To this
purpose he speaks excellently and truly; but mark what follows in Luke 21.
25. After the time of the Gentiles is fulfilled, then there shall be signs in
the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the stars; and upon the earth distress of
Nations, with perplexity, the seas and the waves roaring, men's hearts failing
them, for the powers of heaven shall be shaken. These are the vials that shall be
poured out on the Churches enemies; and what then? ver. 27. Then shall they see
the Son of Man coming in a cloud; and then, ver. 18. When they see these things
begin to come to pass, let the Jews lift up their heads for their redemption
draws nigh: compare Matthew. 24. and Mark 13. with this text: this day must be
meant of the Jews conversion, therefore it sets forth some Gospel-day; for
should it be the day of Judgment, it would be the day of their Damnation:
therefore when the vials are poured out, they shall see the Son of Man coming
in a cloud with power and great glory: this leads me back to the text that I
have run away so long from, Revel. 14. 14. there immediately the witnesses were
slain, John looked, and behold a white cloud, and on the cloud one sitting like
the Son of Man, having in his hand a crown, there is his glory; and with a sharp
sickle, there is his power; and then there are the Angels, the Angel out of the
Temple, and the Angel from the Altar, and they make supplication, that the
harvest of the earth, which is ripe, may be reaped by Christ, who had the sharp
sickle in his hand; and at their supplication Christ goes to work with the
Vines of the Vineyard of the Earth, and cuts them down; and then the blood of
the Vines of the Earth, that is, the power of the beast of the Earth is broken,
and their blood in a great measure shed at the same time, Revel. 15. John saw
another sign in Heaven great and mavelous; this great sign is that in, Matthew.
24. and Mark 13. the sign is seven Angels, with the seven plagues; the great
sign is Gods eminent wrath against the Roman Monarchy, in all its power and
strength; for by clouds, trees, waves of the Sea, and stars, Jude (13.) tells
us, are meant, heretics in the Church, they shall be cast from heaven; that
is, out of the Church: or else by Sun, Moon, and Stars, are meant the higher
powers in a State. So Jacob interprets his son Joseph's dream; but observe what
John sees: before the Vials be poured out, he saw, ver. 2. a glassie sea
mingled with fire; The sea in the Temple was made of brass, it was not to be
seen through, only they that looked into it, saw what was in it; it typified
the Jewish Church, which only were the people of God, and had the true worship
and knowledge of God; no other Nation were in covenant with God but they,
until Christ came; the water in the sea was a type of Christ's blood, which was
to other Nations conspicuous. But now in the Gospel Church here John sees a
glass sea with fire in it, which may be beheld of all that come near it, or
stand afar off it. John baptized with water, but Christ with the Holy Ghost and
fire; this Gospel Church now shall have abundance of splendour when the
Witnesses rise; for those that stand upon this glass sea, are the slain
witnesses who now are risen again: they are they that (after the Lord Jesus
has reaped the Earth, as Habak. 3. 4, 5, 6. with his horns in his hand, with
pestilence and fire measuring the Earth) are said to have gotten the victory
over the beast of the Earth, and his Image; that is, his government, and his
mark and the number of his name; that is, over his Engagement and
subtil-insnaring stratagems; these sing the song of Moses, that is, they sing
Hallelujah, Rev. 19. for the wonderful deliverance of the Church out of great
danger: they keep solemn and serious Thanksgiving days to God, for restoring
again their Church, and State-Reformers.

After that follows the seven Angels, who after the Temple was open, went
forth with great power, and Rev. 16. pour out the Vials: to say directly, who
these Angels are, or what the Vials are, I dare not, for these things are to
come, and have not been as yet fulfilled.

This, I think, may clearly be made out, that the Beast of the Earth shall be
destroyed when the Witnesses rise, and then shall follow all the Vials upon
Rome, and the other Enemies of the Church professing Christianity; for in all
these Vials I do not find a word that is applicable to the Turk, but only to
the Beast of the Earth, the Beast of the Sea, and the Dragon, which are all
within the Church. 2. This also may be made out from what we have said, that
the Vials shall all be poured out within a short space of time; for if the
Vials shall not be poured out until Antichrists reign be accomplished, and
before the Jews are converted, then they must be speedily poured out, because
the Jews conversion immediately follows the ruin of the Roman Monarchy:
therefore in Mat. 24. 29. after the Vials are poured out upon the Roman
Monarchy: then ver. 30. the Kindreds of the Earth shall mourn. Such a mourning
as Zachary speaks of; They shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and
mourn over him. I conceive Christ borrows that expression, For here they shall
see the sign of the Son of man, and mourn: and verse. 31. and he shall send his
Angel with a sound of a Trumpet, this is the seventh Trumpet, and they shall
gather together all his Elect from the four winds. The sounding of the Trumpet
was a sign, that some solemn day, or public good was at hand: the Pharisees
therefore sounded a Trumpet in the Marketplace, to proclaim the glad tidings
of Alms to the poor; but especially (to which the Holy Ghost alludes) the
joyful year of Jubilee was proclaimed by sound of Trumpet, which set the
engaged free; so shall this seventh Trumpet proclaim the joyful time of the
Jews conversion and freedom, from all bondage spiritual and temporal: As the
seventh Trumpet blew down Jericho walls, which was the great city that hindered
the Hebrews from passing into Canaan, so the seventh Trumpet sounding shall
blow down Rome, which hinders the Jews conversion to the Gospel: these very
expressions you shall find in Esai. 11. 12, 13, 14. which speaks of the calling
of the Jews in the end of the Roman Monarchy. This is not (as Chrysostom
thinks) spoken of the day of Judgment; for that day Christ would not have us
curious in searching after: but this Christ would have us diligently to inquire
after, and therefore gives us a parable from the Figtree, to assure us, that by
the precedent simptome, viz. of subtle deceivers, and blasphemous heretics,
and cruel persecutors of the true Church, we may as certainly conclude, that
this day draws nigh, as we may be certain the Summers coming, when we see the
trees bud forth and blossom: Indeed v. 36. he says, that of that day and
hour knows no man, but what day and hour is that? It Is the day and hour of
the heaven and earths passing away, that is, of the day of Judgment, that the
Angels know not; but of the day of pouring out the Vialls on Rome, and on the
enemies of the Church, and of the Jews conversion, I am confident it is clearly
held out in Scripture.

Having laid down these things, to prove that the Witnesses rising, the Beasts
ruin, the Vialls pouring out, and the Jews conversion shall be near together:
For a stronger confirmation, we may bring two texts, Rev. 11. 15. the seventh
Trumpet sounds, and then the Vialls are powered out; there the seventh trumpet
begins Romes ruin: and Rev. 10. 7. when the seventh Angel shall sound, the
mystery of God shall be finished, that is, the mystery that Paul would not have
the Roman Church ignorant of, Romans 11. 25. If this be meant of Gods work
against Antichrist, then the seventh trumpet finisheth, as well as begins Romes
ruin: Compare it with Rev. 16. 17. The seventh Vial is powered into the air,
that is on the Devils kingdom, who is the Prince of the air, for the seven
Vialls are powered out, either on the earth, that is the seat of the Beast of the
Earth; or on the sea; and rivers, and Sun, and throne, that is, the Pontifick
State, which has many strong holds and politic props to uphold it: the Sea,
that is the Ecclesiastic state, that is the Popes place, on this the vials must
be powered, or else on the air, that is the Devils Kingdom: so that the seven
Vialls set forth the complete conquest that God will make over all his enemies,
which in Rev. 19. is more clearly described, where Christ goes forth to
battle against his enemies. The parties that fight this battle against
Christ, are those that are under the Beast of the Earth; for Rev. 17. 13, 14.
those ten horns rule as Kings, but are not Kings, who with one consent give
their power and authority unto the Beast. these shall fight with the Lamb, and
the Lamb shall overcome them; for he is the Lord of lords, and King of kings,
and they on his side, called, and chosen, and faithful: this Lamb is the same
that fights the great battle, Rev. 19. for v. 16. he has the same title of
honor, the King of kings and Lord of lords, that is, making good his promises
which he has made both to the Jews and Gentiles, he will now make himself
known by his name Jehovah, not only making, but fulfilling promises; and, which
is worth observing, here you see Christ v. 15. treading the wine press of the
fierceness and wrath of God almighty, as in Rev. 14. 19. where when Christ
comes against the Beast of the Earth with his sickle, he uses the same
expression, to note, it is one and the same Beast both here and there. In Rev.
19. 19. there John saw the Beast, and the Kings of the earth and their hosts
gathered together to make battle against him that sat on the horse, and
against his army: it may be this Beast is that in Rev. 17. which is the Beast
of the Earth, Rev. 13. 11. and the Kings of the earth are those ten horns, Rev.
17. 12. which gave their power to the Beast, and v. 14. make war with the Lamb:
By Beast is meant the Beast of the Sea, who by his Emissaries and Politicians
promotes a war, and prosecutes it with all vigor and malice against Christ and
his faithful people, and so stirs up the Kings of the earth, to make war with
them; Observe, in this battle the Beast is taken, and with him that false
Prophet which deceived them that received the Beasts mark, and them that
worshipped his Image; these, in this battle were both cast alive into the lake
that burns with fire and brimstone, that is, destroyed with a terrible
destruction: I cannot, I dare not peremptorily say where this battle shall be
fought, but certainly it must be where the Witnesses are slain, and where the
Beast of the Earth sets up his new Government; for when the victory was got, it
was got over the Beast, and the image of the Beast. And Rev. 20. 4. After this
victory the Witnesses that were beheaded for Christ's cause, the same Offices
were exalted, and the Ministry that suffered for not worshipping the image,
and receiving his mark, these also were exalted, therefore this battle must be
fought by the Witnesses, Christ being the conqueror (for in this battle the
Lords mighty hand shall eminently appear) and it must be fought against the
Beast of the Earth, and his party: now the Beast of the Earth has set up his
new government no where but in England, Ireland, and Scotland: in Scotland he
is now endeavoring to set it up. That this great Battle, and the Vials pouring
forth are one and the same thing, to me is clear. First, From the actors and
parties on both sides, who are the same both in pouring out the Vialls, and
fighting the Battle; and these act at the same time for Rev. 15. 5. When the
Temple in heaven was opened, then the Angels came forth in white linen to pour
out their Vialls; and in Rev. 19. 11. (where the great Battle is fought) John
saw Heaven opened, and Christ on a white horse, who (Rev.14. 14.) he saw in a
white cloud, and his Army clothed in white linen, Rev. 15. 6. He treads the
Vine-presses of Gods fierce wrath by the sword of his mouth, Rev. 19. 15. and
Rev. 14. 14, 20 he treads it with a sharp sickle: By all which it is apparent,
that neither the Vialls, nor this Battle, are to be fought until the Witnesses
put off their sackcloth, and put on their white linen; and then by the same
parties, at the same time, both are accomplished, which indeed are both one and
the same thing in action, though several ways expressed for the clearing of
the thing to the understanding of the Reader; For as the cutting down of the
Vine, and the pressing of it in the Vine-press, notes the utter passing away of
the Vine and the Vintage: So does that other expression of casting the Beast of
the Earth into the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone, signify his utter
ruin: and this is clear by another argument, taken from the parties against
which the Battle is fought, and the Vialls are poured out, they are the
self-same Enemies (viz.) the Beast of the Earth, the Beast of the Sea, and the
Prince of the Air, and their Kingdoms; these (as we have showed already, are
the Objects of the Vialls, and the Enemies which Christ overcomes, Rev. 18. 19,
20. and Rev. 20. 3.) are the Beast of the Sea, the false prophet which is the
Beast of the Earth, and the Prince of the Air, which is called the Dragon, the
old Serpent; now they are at one time also, Rev. 16. 16. when the enemies come
to Harmaggaddan to battle, then the seven Vials, which is the final wrath of
God, go forth in thundering, and voices, and earthquakes; and the great
victory is expressed, by casting alive, both the Beast and the false Prophet,
into the burning Lake, and chaining the Devil in Hell 1000 years.

This great Battle cannot be fought before nor after the Vialls be poured out,
ergo, they must be both at one time.

First, Not before the vials be powered forth, because this great Battle utterly
confounds these three chief Enemies of the church; the Devil who sets up the
Pope, who keeps the Witnesses in sackcloth; and the Pope who sets up the Beast
of the Earth, who slays the Witnesses; and the Beast of the Earth who does
uphold the Popes and the Devils Kingdom: Therefore I conceive the great Battle
shall be fought against him, in whose ruin the Devil and the Popes Kingdom
shall be overthrown; and that is the reason, I conceive, why after this great
Battle, Rev. 19. 20. it is said that the Beast, that is, the Pope was taken,
when only the false Prophet sought in person, and was ruined: because in the
false Prophets (who is the Beast of the Earth) cause the Pope is most nearly
concerned. Farewell Popery in these three Kingdoms for ever, when once the
Beast of the Earth goes to ruin: all the Statutes shall be in force then
against Popery, which are now repealed, Esa. 59. 18. This is the day of repaying
vengeance to those Islands; the Pope shall be utterly ruined in Scotland,
England, and Ireland: but now if these Enemies should be destroyed before the
Vialls be powered out, then Vialls must be powered out in vain, for these three
are the only Enemies of the Church; and when they are overcome, there are none
to stand against the Church; the rest shall fear, and give glory to God.

I do not believe, for my part, that the Turk shall be destroyed by the sword,
non credo quia non lego (as Augustine says) I do not find it any where in
Scripture, that they shall be destroyed by the sword, unless they be put under
the Devils Banners (as well they may) and so be destroyed with the Devil: But
my hope is, that their Religion only shall be destroyed, and they brought in
by a mighty conversion to the Gospel: my reason is, because both the Hebrecians
and Grecians are inslaved most to the Pope in spiritual thraldom: therefore the
Pope is called both Abaddon and Apallion: now when the Pope shall be ruined,
both Jews and Gentiles shall come in to Christ with more glory and fullness then
ever, which may be in the destruction of the Western Antichristian Gentiles;
but not in the Eastern Gentiles destruction, but glorious conversion. A remnant
only of the Antichristian Faction shall be converted, Rev. 11. 13.

Secondly, This Battle cannot be fought after the Vialls are powered out, for
the Vials produce the utter ruin of the Enemies of the Church: Now if the
Battle should be after the Enemies of the Church are overthrown, it must
necessarily be a Battle with the Air, (as we say) there are no Enemies to be
subdued; all is finished when the Vials are powered out: Therefore by necessary
consequence it is clear, that the great Battle, and the Vials, are one and the
same thing. Now then put all together, if the Vials and the Battle be the same,
and this Battle must be fought by the Witnesses, and their Army, with whom
Christ by his mighty power will eminently go forth: (for in no other sense is
Christ coming on a white horse to be taken) and these must appear in fine and
white linen, which is contrary to sackcloth which in till then, they were, and
at this Battle the Beast, and the false Prophet, and the Dragon, must be ruined.

Then I prove that this Battle is not far off, and that from the Doctors own
calculations in his Thanksgiving Sermon: There he proves to my hand from Rev.
13. 5. that Antichrist began his 42 Months Reign, which makes up 1260 years;
which is the time of the Witnesses abiding in the Wilderness, and in Sackcloth:
Now (says he) Antichrist began to work and act vigorously about the year 390
after Christ; I do believe this of the Doctors to be a real truth; and for
confirmation of the same, I will add one word or two.

I do affirm, that about that year, 390. the Bishop of Rome began to be
formally Antichrist; for then they began to claim an independent power as unto
the Magistracy and Ministry: He claimed a privilege of being exempted from
the censures of Councels, as being above them; for he made the Eastern Councels
but his Sons, and he their Father; and Sons have not power to censure their
Father: and then they began to overlook Emperors, to excommunicate them, to
depose them, and to free themselves from their censures. Hereupon the
Magistracy and Ministry were in a short time brought under the Popes feet, and
made to wear sackcloth, and then the Church fled into the place prepared of God
for her, Re^. 12. 6. which place is England, as shall be proved.

The Devils stratagems of setting up Independency in the Chair of Rome, was the
Key of the bottomless pit which the Devil put into the Popes hands: and it is
indeed the formalis ratio Antichristi; for Independency set the Bishops of Rome
above Magistracy and above Ministry; above man's Law, and above Scriptures; and
Gods Law, as their Decretals manifest: therefore Paul 2 Thessalonians. 2. sets him out
to the life, ver. 4. He opposes himself above all that is called God, above
every Magistrate; and then he, as God, sits in the Temple of God, that is, in
the Church of God; for Rome was for a long time the purest Church: Now in this
Church the Independent Prelate sits as God, making Laws like a God: None but
God has an Independent power, but the Pope he takes upon him an Independent
liberty, and authority and privilege of himself; and by himself alone, and
without any other, he takes upon him to alter Scripture, add to Scripture, and
detract from it: in this he sets himself even above God, and so is the true
Antichrist. Now this Independent power, the Bishop of Rome began to put in
practice about the year 390. to which add the just measure of the time of this
Antichrists reign, which is 1260 years, and it makes completely 1650.

The other pertinent place which the Doctor alleges is, Dan. 12. 11. from the
time the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, there shall be 1290 days, (that
is years) now about the year 360. that destructive abomination of ruining their
Temples foundation, overturning their Altars, and destroying their Sacrifices,
and burning their Utensels, and so putting to an end their Sacrifices, began:
now add to 360. 1290. and it makes 1650. Now this year 1650. (says the Doctor)
must be the great year of doing great things against Antichrist, page 17. He
calls wise men to consider, how here in England there has been a King bound,
and some Nobles, (he means beheaded) and how Kingdoms have been changed into
Commonwealths; and how Scotland has been beaten over and over, he leaves wise
men to consider, whether these are not high acts of throwing down Antichrist:
These acts he calls page 18.) the making good of his Doctrine; and upon that
account, exhorts the people to praise God, for cutting off the King, and
throwing down the House of Lords; and from page 25. to page 27. or thereabouts,
he sets up a tone of railing in the most ridiculousest style, and weakest way
of arguing against the Protestants of England, for not keeping the Thanksgiving
day, that I am ashamed our English Nation should be so much disgraced, as to
have the Title of Doctor set before it. In page 32. he tells the Lord Major,
and the rest of the Companies, That they must not only as Saints give thanks;
but as people considered in opposite distinction to Kings, Monarchy being
turned into Democracy, Kingdoms into Commonwealths. This Democracie he highly
commends, and in the same page with a Whores (or rather with a Whore-masters)
forehead, affirms this most andacious and notorious untruth, That this
government was anciently among the Jews in the time of the Judges: I have
already proved this Doctor to be a Teacher of false Doctrines; therefore I pass
by these things, only I would entreat the Reader to take notice how under the
pretense of crying down Antichrist, there are subtle deceivers not only crept
in, but rushed in; and by authority maintained, allowed, and ushered in, to
depress and destroy the true Saints and Church of God, by stigmatizing them
with the mark of Antichristianism, and to exalt and extol the actors and
actions of these whose design is wholly to exalt Antichrist: Was it ever heard
before, that Protestants made a day of rejoicing for the fall of a Protestant
Nation, and a Protestant King? Who truly rejoices at this but Rome, and the
Romish Factors? I Will say no more to this, but return to the Doctors
Calculations; and out of his own mouth, by Gods grace, I hope to make it clear,
that what he calls the throwing down of Antichrist, is the s^aying of the
Witnesses; and these which he calls the Saints, and Holy Ones, are they that
are the slayers of the Witnesses.

The Doctor is strongly conceited, that this year 1650. shall be a year of
terrible things against Rome: his grounds for it are plausible, I do confess
it, and I am upon the same grounds as confident as he, That Rome shall have a
fatal blow immediately after this year: I know many are ready to laugh at this
opinion, and say, Was Rome ever in greater pomp then now? When did ever Rome's
Designs prosper more then now throughout Europe? Is it not a year of Jubilee, a
year of feasting and rejoicing with Rome, how then can it be imagined, that
Rome should have a fatal blow about this year? To this I answer briefly, Rome's
prosperity is that great Sumptome of her ruin; for Rev. 18. 7. Her ruin shall
come in that day that she thought her self most secure, How much she has
gloried her self, and lived deliciously, so much torment give her; for she
says in her heart, I sit a Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow.
Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine,
and she shall be utterly burnt with fire. In these two verses the Holy Ghost
uses this as a strong Argument, to persuade us, that Rome's ruin shall be
when the World least expects it. Observe what the Lovers of Rome say in verse.
9, 10. They shall weep, and cry, Alas! Alas! thou great City, for in one hour
is thy judgment come. By all which it is manifest, that Rome's ruin shall be
sudden, and unexpected; and therefore it is an argument, that Rome's ruin is
nigh, because of her pomp and great prosperity. I Will bring another proof for it
in Rev. 11. 9, 10. It shall be a time of merry making and feasting. I am almost
persuaded that the Holy Ghost points at the year of Jubilee that is now at
Rome, to note to us, That when the slain Witnesses shall be dead in the
streets, and unburied, then Rome shall keep a year of feasting and rejoicing;
which year of feasting, is this present year, 1650. Now they are making merry,
that a Protestant Parliament, a Protestant King, and a Protestant Ministry,
are overthrown: but mark what follows on a sudden, those Witnesses, that
Protestant Magistracy, and Protestant Ministry, stand on their feet, and then
comes the Earthquake, which shakes their Enemies to the ground: So that the
day of Rome's rejoicing does but usher in Rome's ruin: And therefore
prosperity and success so much cried up by this Antichristian Doctor, is an
argument, to me, of their speedy ruin. Would but the Doctor read Rev. 11. 7,
15. wisely, he might see himself with shame, acting the part of one of
Antichrists Ministers: I perceive he knows well that Antichrists reign is near
at an end; he that knows that, cannot (if he search diligently) but see in Rev.
11. 7. that three years and an half before the Pope's ruin, a Beast shall
arise, and slay the Witnesses that have finished their Testimony, that is, a
godly Magistracy and Ministry; when they had agreed to root out Popery, and
establish uniformity in Doctrine, Discipline and government, this Beast that
does these things against the Witnesses, he cannot but see is he that rises
after the ten Kings subject to Rome: he rises (say Interpreters) in the end of
the Roman Monarchy, and throws down three of the Kingdoms, and changes laws,
and times, and wears out the Saints, three years and an half, the self-same
that slayes the Wintesses, Rev. 11. 7. and after that he and his crew keep
thanksgiving days, that they that hindered them in their designs (they say
obstructed justice) are removed, one of this crew, and one of these
Antichristian Beasts the Doctor proves himself. This Beast, I have already
proved, is an Independent, and pulls down the lawful Magistracy and Ministry,
and sets up his own Preachers, and his own government: We have showed his
government in Rev. 13. and in Dan. 11. 37. it is the god Mauzim, that is, a
government that he sets up by the power of his sword, a sword force: Now I
prove that this power of forces was set up in or about September in the year
1647. for then did the Beast of the Earth get the Navy into his hands, and all
the Land Forces throughout the Kingdom, either to disband them, or command
them; he got all the strong Holds and Castles in the Kingdom under his command;
and about the same time he laid violent hands on the Kings Maj. and clapped his
royal person up in prison, suffering no man to come near him; and about that
time made an assault upon the Parl. imprisoned some of the Peers, some of the
chief Citizens of London, and some of the House of Commons, enforcing others of
the most noble of the House of Commons to fly, and set up his own engaged
Party in the House, to overtop the others: Here began the Beast to reign, and
here began the slaughter of the Witnesses, all which was about September or
October 1647. By which account we shall bring it almost even with the Doctors,
that this Beast that rises out of the bottomless pit, and slayes the
Witnesses, the time of his reign must be consummate soon after the end of this
year 1650. for then his three years reign is up, and then the time of the
Witnesses lying slain is up, and then they must rise, and then the Vialls must
be poured out, and the earthquake will come upon the enemies, and then the
Beast and the false Prophet shall be cast alive into the burning lake.

I verily believe that we are near to that prophetic great day prophesied of
in the old Testament: In the old Testament it is called a great Day, and so it is
called in the new Testament, Rev. 16. the battle against the enemies of the
Church is called the battle of the great day of God almighty, that is, of the
great year of God; God will do great things for the Hebrews this year, both for
the ten Tribes, and the two Tribes. Great things will he do for the Gentiles
this year, and terrible great things will he do against his enemies. This day
is called Hos. 1. 10. the great day, What day is that? the Context tells us,
it is the day of the conversion of both Tribes, and uniting them under Christ.
In Obadiah 15. it is called the day of the Lord upon all the heathen: God will
plague the enemies of the Church, verse 16. but verse 17. on mount Sion shall
be deliverance, to note this day is the day of rendering vengeance on Rome, Rev.
18. and of saving mount Sion, deliverance shall be there, Rev. 14. 1. for the
Lamb stands on Mount Sion, and all his sealed Ones with him: in Zach. 14. (for
I can multiply proofs from every one of the Prophets which illustrate this
day) I mean to sit down and give the Reader a view of this Day of the year
1650. by the Doctors and my account, as Zach. 14. describes it, he gives us a
full view of this Day: He calls it the Day of the Lord, ver. 1. But what shall
be done in that day? in general the spoil (meaning the Churches spoil) should
be divided in the midst of her, ver. 2. For I will gather all Nations against
Jerusalem to battle, and the City shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and
the women ravished, and half of the City shall go forth into captivity, and the
residue of the people shall not be cut off from the City. Here is a particular
Narration of the Churches affliction in this day: This must be understood
(says Diodate) of the spiritual and corporal Wars which Antichrist shall
make against the Church. I do believe this Exposition to be really true; for as
he says, God shall suffer a great part of his Church to be discomfited and
subdued, Rev. 11. 7. as Diodate is excellent in his Annotations, so on this
text he is most excellent: for he turns us to the right place, to find out the
Enemy, that afflicts the Church with this sore affliction; and that is in Rev.
11. 7. the Beast that slays the Witnesses; and Dan. 7. 25. wears out the
Saints; he makes war with them, and overcomes them; Cornelius e Lapide, in one
sense, understands this in Zachary, of Antichrists tyranny over the Church: so
that this verse gives a description of the Beasts tyranny that slayes the
Witnesses: Indeed some of the Rabbis understand it literally of Antiochus
rifling Jerusalem; but their (...) are not (...), therefore we pass them: of
all men Oecolampadius comes nearest the sense of this text in the explication;
he paralels the first verse with Matthew. 24. which speaks of the great
tribulation of the Church toward the end of the world, per Antichrist, ver. 2.
By Jerusalem, he understands the visible Church of true Believers, by all
Nations, or Gentiles He chiefly understands Antichrist, who subdues poor
souls, by the insnaring of their consciences in his Trap of Deceit, and
Fetters of Tyranny: so he understands the taking of the City, Sicut enim
milites domus devastant, virgins stuprant, ita Antichristus Christi sponsas
animasque vitiat. This text agrees with that kind of Government the Beast sets
up, Rev. 13. 11, 17. and with the actions of that King, Dan. 11. 36, 37, 41. He
shall enter into the glorious Land, and many shall be overthrown by him: and
ver. 39. He shall divide the Land for gain: There Is the spoil divided: this is
a type of the affliction the Gospel Church shall be in, when she is going out
of Babylon to a Reformation: It shall be a day wherein all these Vipers of Hell
shall appear; which Paul tells us of, 2 Timothy 3. 12. 3, 4, 5, 6. Rebels and
Traitors, Heretics and Blasphemers, who assault Government as a Town, and
rifle the glory of a Kingdom, as a City taken by storm. They commit spiritual
Rapes, by leading silly women captive after their heresies: Therefore Christ
tells us, Mat. 24. it shall be a time of tribulation with the Church; for false
Christ's, and false Prophets shall deceive many, the Church of God shall be
miserably torn, as a City taken by storm; but what follows? Then shall the Lord
go forth and fight against those Nations, as when he fought in the day of
battle, and his feet shall stand (in ver. 3.) that day upon the Mount of
Olives; in eo loco (says Oecolampadius) ubi pseudochristi pravaluerunt, ibi
veniet Dominus in majestate: So that we must look for the rising of the
Witnesses in that Kingdom, where false Christ's, and false Prophets prevail:
this learned man is mistaken, in that he applies it to the Day of Judgment.
Observe how this suits with Rev. 13. 11. to the end, and Rev. 14. 1. After the
Holy Ghost had described the Tyranny of the Beast in Rev. 13. immediately
follows, Rev. 14. 1. Christ standing on Mount Zion with his sealed Ones; and
here you see him standing on Mount Olivet.

This is that day which the Church of the Jews, I mean the godly Jews, longed
to see. These feet of Christ's Solomon in his Song commends, and Isa. 52. 7.
There the Church admiring, says; How beautiful upon the Mountains are the feet
of him that brings glad tidings; that is, Christ.

I conceive by feet, are meant the Witnesses, which Rev. 10. 1, 2. are called
Christ's right foot, and left foot; for they are the Instruments that Christ
makes use of for the propagating the Gospel* It cannot be meant literally of
Christ's feet, but of a godly Magistracy and Ministry, which the Lord shall
eminently promote, Rev. 11. 11* by restoring them to that condition they were
in when they finished their Testimony, immediately before the Beast of the Earth
slew them; yea to a far higher state.

God shall set the Magistracy in the Throne again, and Ministry in their
places again; they shall stand on their feet again; they shall be higher in
power and greatness then ever they were: therefore ver. 12. they are said to be
called up to Heaven. Observe; as the Beast that slew the Witnesses and his
party, brought the Witnesses into as much disgrace as might be, ver. 9. in not
suffering their dead bodies to be buried; that is, using them with the highest
acts of insulting cruelty: For the expression (as I conceive) is taken from
insulting Warriors, whom in a vaporing bravado, to show how much they disdain
their Enemy, and how basely they esteem of him, tell him, they will give his body
to the Fowls of the Air; that is, disdain to give him the honor of a burial;
thou shall die as a Dog. In the great Duel fought betwixt David and Goliath
before they fought, you shall find these insulting expressions proceeding from
each of them to the other, in the 1 Samuel 17. 44. said the Philistin to David,
Come to me, I will give thy flesh to the Fowls of the Air, and the Beasts of
the Field. The self-same says David to Goliath, ver. 46. They could not throw
more indignominious expressions into the face of each other then these: Now
this is practiced against the Witnesses by the Beast and his party that slayes
them: but as their cruelty toward them is exceeding, so shall their honor in
their exaltation be exceeding; and their enemies repayed with the same ignominy
and reproach, Rev. 18. 6. Reward her as she has rewarded you: How is that? Why
he gave their carcasses to the Fowls of the Air; and the Witnesses must now
give the Beast and his Army's carcasses to the Fowls of the Air: and therefore,
Rev. 19. 11. When Christ rides on his white horse, and ver. 14. his Army
follows him on white horses (these are the Witnesses risen) and when the Kings
of the Earth and their Armies gather together (as in Zech. 14. 2. they do; for
it is one and the same battle) then Christ, ver. 17, 18. calls the Fowls to a
great Supper, even to the carcasses of his Enemies. Here Christ pays them home
in their own coin; they would not suffer the Witnesses to be laid in grave, and
God will not suffer them to be put in grave, for the Fowls shall eat them: this
Battle in Zech. 14. 3. and Rev. 19. is one and the same, because it is fought by
the same person Christ, and the same Army, and in the same place, and at the
same time as we shall make manifest.

This battle shall be fought when Christ's feet stand on Mount Olivet: the great
question is, What is meant by Mount Olivet, or the Mount of Olives? Take it
literaly, it was a Mount which stood on the East side of Jerusalem; which for
the goodly Olives, and the plenty of Olives, that it yielded, it was called
Mount Olivet: This was the place of Christ's delight; there he was most
conversant; there he preached, and there he usually resorted to pray: No
Mountain in the world had so much of Christ's presence, and his Ordinances, as
this Mountain: there Judas betrayed him and his Disciples; there Christ
appeared again after his resurrection; his feet stood on Mount Olives before he
ascended up into glory: there he ascended into Heaven in the sight of those
that crucified him; for that Mount looked into the streets of Jerusalem, and
they in Jerusalem could plainly see the Mount of Olives.

Hence judicious-learned Interpreters conclude, that by Mount Olives, in the
Prophets sense, is meant the Church of Christ, where the Ordinances of Christ
are purely, frequently, and powerfully taught; and where submission to Christ,
as Lord and King, is yielded.

Upon this ground, Martinus applye^s this expression of the Prophets to the
Church of Rome, affirming Mount Olivet to be the Church of Rome: quia ad pedis
Christi seipsos subjiciunt, because they subject themselves to Christ: For Oil
(say the learned) is an hierogliphick of submission and subjection. Ambros, in
Luke 21. expounds Mount Olivet to be the Church: Some of the highest and
chiefest of the Independents of this age, are of the same opinion; and
therefore do not stick to say; that Mount Olivet is England, which is the most
delightfullest place for Ordinances in the World.

Since the Romanist and Independent agree, and will have it so, it will be
treason to gainsay them; we will therefore comply as much as may be: For my own
part I do believe, that by Mount Olivet, is meant some eminent delightful place
in Europe, famou^ above other places, for Religion, for Doctrine, for
Discipline, and Government, and for eminent Saints.

I do believe it is meant that place where one (like Judas) both a Thief and a
Traitor, and an Apostate, and a deceitful Hypocrite, rises up with his armed
men, and with a kiss, of pretending to exalt Christ, and promote the interest
of Saints, betrays the cause of God, and the chief Instruments of a
Reformation, into the hands of the High Priest of Rome, who by his instruments
crucifies them.

2. I believe it is the place whereas Christ was betrayed, so there he shall
rise again; for Christ's feet, after his resurrection, were seen standing on
Mount Olivet: so I do believe the Witnesses that this Judas-like fellow shall
betray to death, shall rise again in the same kingdom or place; there they
shall stand on their feet, and be called up to Heaven, that is, to high
promotion, far above the reach of their Enemies.

I conceive this Mount, and that in Rev. 16. 16. are one and the same: for
Harmagedon (says Brightman) signifies a Mountain of delight: the same (says
he) in Dan. 11. 45. The enemy that goes against the Church, shall pitch his
Tents in the glorious holy Mountain; or, as in the Original, in the Mountain of
delights of Holiness.

These expressions of the Holy Ghost, in these several places, set forth one
and the same thing to us, if we view but the scope of all: for in all three
places, it is one and the same Enemy going forth to battle against the Lord
Jesus in one and the same place, and at one and the same time, and produces
one and the same effects; for in Dan. 11. the Enemy goes to utter ruin by the
coming of Christ, Dan. 12. 1. and Rev. 16. 16. that battle produces the
seventh Vial which finisheth all; and in Zach. 14. 3. Christ shall fight in
that day, as when he fought in the day of battle: when ever Christ fought a
battle he ruined his Enemies; so will he here, as in Judge. 7. Esaias 9. 4. Now if
the Romanists and Independents will give me leave to join Scotland and England,
once united (accursed be he that was the cause of their separation) I will
comply with them, and conclude, that these two Kingdoms are the Mount of
Olives, where Christ's feet shall stand in the day of battle; it is that place
where the Witnesses were betrayed and slain, and that place, where, in the
sight of their Enemies they shall ascend to Heaven; that is, be eminently
exalted above their Enemies.

V. 4. And his feet shall stand in that day on the Mount of Olives, which is
before Jerusalem on the East, and the Mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst
thereof toward the East, and toward the West, a very great valley; and half
of the Mountain shall remove toward the North, and half the Mountain toward the
South, in that day; that is, the day that the spoil is divided in Jerusalem;
and the Gentiles gather against Jerusalem to battle, the same day that the
Beast makes war with the Saints, and overcomes them, Rev. 11. 7. and Dan. 7.
25. and when they shall gather together to Harmageddon, Rev. 16. 16. and when
he pitcheth his Tents in the Mountain of delights of holiness, Dan. 11. 45. In
this day shall be these great things done as follows: The Mount of Olives
shall cleave in the midst thereof, toward the East, and the West, a great
valley.

Note, This is spoken of the last years reign of the Beast of the Earth; and
therefore it is called one day, a prophetic day, which signifies one year: For
this verse sets forth the great Rent that shall be made by the Beast of the
Earth, amongst those that were formerly united under one King, and in one
Faith, and locked fast together in one Covenant: amongst these there shall be a
breach in the last year of the Beast of the Earths reign. The Mount of Olives
shall cleave in the midst thereof. Here is the great sign foregoing the great
battle, wherein Christ will appear on his Churches side: the half of the Mount
of Olives shall remove to the North, and half to the South.

Observe here, there was a Union before the North and the South was united; and
now they are divided, the Mount of Olives is divided; but one delightful
Mountain in the World, and that divided! this is terrible. A great division in
the Church of God: those that were united in one covenant shall be broken and
divided; insomuch that Sermons shall clash against Sermons, and prayers against
prayers, and Fast days against Fast-dayes: it shall be a vast breach, for
there shall be a Valley toward the East and the West. The Chaldee renders it,
a very great Valley: and the Septuagint read it, a very great Gulf: so that the
North cannot pass to the South; nor the South to the North: There shall be an
irreconcilable breach made betwixt them; they shall prohibit any commerce or
trade with them; they shall be at as great distance in Opinion, Judgment, and
practice, as the Covenant is at a distance from the Engagement, or the
Engagement from the Covenant.

Covenanters cannot pass to the Engagers without perjury, and the Engagers
cannot pass to Covenanters without forfeiting their allegiance to their
acknowledged Masters.

This, I conceive, is the Valley that shall be made toward the East and West,
which must needs be Eastward and Westward when the Mount is divided; and half
removes toward the North, the other toward the South.

The Fathers, many of them, mis-interpreting this text, by giving a bare
literal explication of the words, differ therefore in the application: some
apply this text to Titus, and his Army's Exploits upon Mount Olivet. Others
faign, that 'twas then when God with his Angels fought for the Maccabees on
that Mount against Antioches. Others think that 'twas then fulfilled, when
Constantine fought against the Arrians; at which time, on this hill, the sign
of the cross appeared.

Hence (it may be) Theodoretus and Hierom conceive, that this hill was divided
into four parts like a cross; but these have but fabulous grounds for their
opinion. Zanche, Vatable, Lycanus, and many others, say 'twas divided but into
two parts; but I humbly conceive, that in a literal sense, Mount Olivet was
never divided into two.

Therefore the text is not to be understood literally, but figuratively, and
parabolically under these terms and Expositions, setting forth some eminent
place in the world, which is eminent for holiness and unity in Doctrine, and
Government, but unexpectedly rent, and miserably divided into two grand
parties, which shall be at so great and vast a distance in opinion and
practice, as it is impossible to reconcile them one to the other: the one shall
swear to maintain King, Lords, and Commons; and the other shall swear to
suppress King and Lords: the one shall swear to maintain true Religion in
Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship, and the other shall practice the destruction
of Religion in Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship, by a toleration of all
Religions, and supporting Popery; by taking away all Oaths offensive to Popish
Tenants, and all Statutes offensive to their persons and estates, and striving
to destroy sound steadfast principled Protestants, by imposing Oaths upon them
against their consciences, and by taking away their privilege of the Law from
them, so laying them open to all manner of misery.

By this you may see I am strongly induced to believe that the Mount of Olives
is England and Scotland, formerly united under one King and Religion, and under
one solemn League and Covenant.

That part of the mountain divided to the North, I conceive, is Scotland; That
part to the South I conceive (according to its situation from Scotland) is
England: betwixt these there shall be a great Gulf; a Gulf betwixt their
principles, so deep and wide, that all the World shall take notice of it.

If any man should doubt of Scotland being part of the Mountain of Holiness, in
regard of the base reproaches of late cast upon them, I Will desire that man to
read Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs opinion of Scotland, in a speech made at Guildhall,
London, October. 6. 1643.

Scotland, says he, is a Kingdom beloved and honored of God, by whom God will
do great things in the latter Age of the World; it is a Philadelphia, it is more
deeply engaged to God then any Nation in the World by Covenant, it is the most
reformed Nation under Heaven, it is the greatest Enemy to Antichrist in the
World, and the most successful, with whom God has most eminently appeared:
they are exceeding wise, exceeding just, and full of Christian love. This was
Mr. Jeremiah Burrough's opinion of the Kingdom of Scotland; and if he say it, I
hope honest Independents (if there be any) will believe it.

V. 5. And ye shall flee into the Valley of the Mountain, for the valley of the
Mountain shall reach unto Azal; yea, ye shall flee like as ye fled from the
Earthquake in the days of Uzziah King of Judah, and the Lord my God shall
come, and all the Saints with thee. This time shall be a time of great terror.
Hunc terrorem dominus praedicit, Luke 21. says Oecolampadius, where men's
hearts shall fail then for fear of the commotions which in this age shall come,
and ye shall flee into my Mountains. So Hierom reads it. For the Valley of the
Mountain shall reach unto Azal. Many of the ancient Interpreters read Azal as a
proper name, and so pass it by: So does Pagnine, Aquila, Vatible, and the
Chaldee: but Soman renders (Azal, usque adproximum, to some place near at hand.
Others (as Tygurine and Arrias Montanus) conceive it is meant some secure place,
where God did hide his Church from Antiochus his fury: but Hierom and Lyranus
expound it thus, That ye may flee into the Valley which lies betwixt Moriah
and Mount Zion, that was a secure place: for it was betwixt the City wall and
the Temple.

But others, more near the Hebrew text, interpret [Azal] usque ad separatum: so
Deodat speaking of Azal says it signifies a separation. So that the plain
sense of the text seems to be this, Ye shall flee into the Valley of my
Mountains, that is, Yea that are the sealed ones of the Lamb, that refuse to
worship the Beast, or his Image, or receive his mark, that is, subscribe his
Engagement; Ye shall flee into the Valley of my Mountains, that is, that place
or Nation which keeps my Covenant, and observes my statutes to do them, there
God will dwell where his Laws are observed, and his Ordinances maintained in
purity: but that Nation only in the World, this day, is Scotland: and the
reason why God will have them to fly to his Mountains, is in the next words,
For the Valley of the Mountain shall reach unto Azal, that is, The breach
betwixt the two Kingdoms shall reach unto a separation: It shall separate true
Subjects from Traitors, sincere Professors of Religion from Apostates and
Hypocrites, Covenant-keepers from Covenant-breakers, Sheep from Goats: Thus the
breach betwixt the Kingdoms shall make a separation in Persons, in Prayers, in
Sermons; in every thing there shall be a separation. In Cant. 2. 27. the Church
prays thus, Return my well-beloved, and be like a Roe, or a young Heart, upon
the Mountains of Bether: this word [Bether] seems to match [Azal.] for Bether
signifies a separation or division: Now on a Mountain of Separation the Church
Prays Christ to appear: it seems to me a prayer made for this day, for verse
4. It Is when the Jews that are obscured shall be converted, and ver. 15. when
Herericks shall spoil the Church; then in such a straight the Church prays
that on the Mountains of Bether, that is, In the divided distracted Kingdoms he
would appear for the Churches deliverance: it shall be a time of flying, a time
of hot persecution; but the only place for safety for the Saints, will be the
Valley of Gods Mountains [ye shall flee] is either Gods admonition to the
people that are on the South part of the Mountain, to flee into the North part
of the Mountain, assuring them, that in that Kingdom only safety will be found
for the Saints. Or else it is spoken by way of discrimination, to show which way
the true Saints of God will take: They will flee in their affections to the
other side; they will be on the Covenant side, and on their side which keeps
Gods Ordinances pure, and resolve to adhere to their Covenant: you shall in
this day know a Saint by his prayers, and his fasting, and his thanksgiving. A
true Saint will die rather die then keep a day of rejoicing for the overthrow
of the Saints: but the other party that slay the Witnesses, it is their duty,
they owe it to the Devil: therefore Rev. 11. they send gifts one to another,
and make merry, and why? Because they that would have prosecuted the ends of
the Covenanted-Reformation are overthrown: Nothing but a sincere Reformation is
a terror to Apostates, Hypocrites, and carnal professors: but now they being
overthrown, the Ingagers, the Worshippers of the Beast, make merry and send
gifts one to another, that is, keep Thanksgiving days.

But you may know a true Saint, he abhors it; he mournes and covers his face
with sackcloth; he flies in his prayers to the other side of the Valley, to the
Valley of Gods Mountain, his heart and affections shall be there.

Yea, ye shall flee like as ye fled from the Earthquake in the days of Uzziah
King of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 26. 16. There Vzziah after his good success in the War,
apostatized from his former good life; his good success made him
self-conceited, and turn Independent, that is, take upon him the Priests Office
as well as the Kings: He would be the only Saints in the Kingdom, by usurping
the Priests Office; the Priests being godly bold men, protest against him and
his proceedings, as against the written Law of God, against the Scriptures: but
that is all one to him, the impulse of his spirit was such, upon his good
success in his late Wars, that notwithstanding the Priests protest, he was
resolved to carry on his Design. Hereupon there grows a civil war, as 'twere,
betwixt the Covenant-keeping Priests, and the Covenant Breaking King: the King
hereupon resolved to murder the Priests that stood in his way and crossed his
Design, Et mox ut Rex minatus est mortem Sacerdotibus (says Josephus lib. 9.
cap. 11. Antiquit.) as the King was breathing out the threatenings of death
against the Priests, God, from Heaven, smote the King with a leprosy in his
face; whereby it appeared, that the new-created Saint was an unclean creature,
fit to be cast out of the Temple, and to be banished the society of men. This
man's wickedness brought a terrible Earthquake upon the Kingdom, such a one as
was, for its terror, never before known in Judea; it cleft the Temple in twain
(says Josephus) and before the City (in a place called E^ogie) the half of a
Mountain that stood to the Eastward, brake, and fell, and removed, for the
space of four stadia, so that the highways were stopped up, and the Kings
gardens of pleasure were wholly ruinated and disfigured: this Earthquake could
not choose but amaze and terrify the people, and make them flee out of their
houses.

Such a time of tribulation and terror it shall be when God comes to destroy
the Beast of the Earth, that takes upon him the Office of a Minister of the
Gospel, to teach and preach, publickely, Divinity: this Usurper that goes on
and persists in his wickedness and bloody attempts against the true Church, and
the godly Ministry.

Therefore it is said at the destruction of this Beast, Rev. 11. 13. That there
was a great Earthquake, and the tenth part of the City fell; and at (Rev. 16.
18.) the pouring out of the seventh Vial there was a great Earthquake. This
clearly shows us at what time we must expect these things, it is at the sounding
of the seventh Trumpet where are Earthquakes; and the next words make it more
clear, And the Lord my God shall come, and all the Saints with thee.
Oecolampadius thinks, that when God has ruined Antichrist, then the day of
judgment shall be: but says he, Quidam dicunt intercessurum tempus quoddam
inter regnum Christi, and Antichristi mill Annos; so that this is no new
Opinion: Of this opinion am I; for I believe before the Day of Judgment, and
after the ruin of Antichrist, there shall be 1000. years, as I shall make
appear (says Deodat) He shall come to destroy Antichrist, this is the time of
the seventh Trumpet, when Christ shall come on his white horse, and all his
Saints clothed with white linen, and riding on horses shall come along with
him, Rev. 19. and Rev. 14. 1. After the Beast of the Earth is measured,
numbered, weighed, and found too light, then follows Christ standing on Mount
Sion, with all his Saints with him: so in Dan. 7. 9. after Daniel saw the
little horn (which is this Beast of the Earth) immediately follows the Lord
Jesus, his Throne is set up, and thousands, and ten thousands ministering to
him, and in Dan. ^1. 45. When this Beast of the Earth (for it is the same)
pitcheth his Tents in the Mountain of delight of holiness, that is, that part
of the Mountain to the North, which is Scotland, there God shall ruin him: and
then immediately follows (Dan. 12. 1.) in the next verse, Michael, that is,
Christ shall stand up, who stands for the people, and there shall be a time
of trouble, such as never was since there was a Nation: at that time the Jews
shall be called out of the grave of sin and unbelief, to the lively knowledge
of the Gospel: These things are so clearly spoken of one and the same time, and
persons, that he that reads them seriously cannot but see they are all
Prophecies, foretelling the things that shall come to pass in this age of the
world.

V. 6. And in that day (that is, say many Interpreters, when Christ shall come
to destroy Antichrist) there shall be no clear light, but dark. Others read it
better (the light shall not be clear nor dark) to a word it is [the light shall
not be precious nor thickness] it shall neither be a time of precious light and
Gospel-knowledg, nor a time of thick darkness: It shall be a time of the
strangest uncouths condition to the Church as ever was: Magistracy shall be
laid aside, Ministers shall be persecuted, outlawed, banished, and all this by
the Saints, the men that pull down Antichrist (as they say) there is the
mystery, there is the sadness; men that hold the same principles of Religion,
that were baptized with the same baptism, that have fasted with the Saints who
are real Saints, that have communicated with them at the same Table, they
shall persecute the Ministry; these shall rejoice at the fall and ruin of the
Church; these men shall cry, at the affliction of the Just, Ah, ha, so we would
have it. Is not this a dismal day when one Parliament man shall imprison
another, and one Minister envy, and reproach another.

It shall be neither day nor light, light nor dark; men shall not know what to
make of the times: one shall say it is Evening, another shall say it is Morning:
another shall say it is Noonday: another shall say it is neither. One says (as
my fine Doctor that I deal with) that it is the morning of a glorious
Reformation: Behold how far it is carried on, even to the murdering of a King,
and blowing up of a Parliament. Another (and that justly from
Scripture-grounds) says, this mock-reformation is the slaying of the
Witnesses. Another says, in the grief of his heart, the Evening of the Gospel
is coming upon England, and God is carrying it into some other Nation: as God,
when the Jews rejected a Reformation, lost the Sunshine of the Gospel, and it
shined gloriously upon the Gentiles: so when Christ comes to call the Jews, the
Gentiles that despise that way of Christ's coming in a Reformation-way to call
the Jews, may justly have the Gospel taken from them; and the Ministers may
give that doleful farewell to England, that Paul gave to the Jews, Behold, we
turn from you, and go to the Gentiles: This is justly to be (I know not whether
I had best say hoped, or) feared; yet for my Countries and Kinsfolks sakes,
I Will say feared: but England is most unworthy, it has rejected a Reformation,
and I much fear the set-day: and God, by persecution (as fourteen years since,
by the Prelates persecution he did) is now calling his Ministers away to some
greater Harvest; for here they fish day and night, and catch nothing: they plow
and sow abundantly, but they reap no fruit: In New England the harvest begins
to increase upon those few Laborers hands, there the poor souls can weep out
a whole Sermon; and in the midst of their business, in their hard labor their
souls in the field can groan within them for wounding Christ: and here in
Old-England men despise the Ministers, and the message they bring, persecute
them, slander them, and use all violent means to drive them out of the Kingdom:
Really, I much fear, it is Evening with England: but what do I mean? I forget my
self, I am expounding.

It shall neither be light nor dark, that is, it shall be neither night of
despair, nor day of assurance, it shall be neither night of dispondency, nor
day of comfort. What shall I say? I will say no more; for I am confident every
man that lives, in these times, that is in his senses, and observes the times,
has a ready Comment upon this text. Oecolampadius refers this to Luke 21.
where the Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light; it may
be v. 7. represents the state of the slain Witnesses: but it shall be one day,
it is known to the Lord: By day is here meant a year, a Prophetic day; though
this Beast of the Earth reign three years and a half, yet he shall thus
tyrannize but one year, that is the comfort; he shall make a rent betwixt the
North and the South but one year; it is but one year that it shall be neither
light nor dark; and here is the comfort of all, in the evening of that day,
that is, in the later end of the year it shall be light, he shall tyrannize in
Scotland but one year. Now the great question is, what year this year is, when
'twill be: the Doctor says, this year. Though I cannot fiddle with the Doctor,
yet I Will keep time with him as near as I can. Does he say great things shall be
done against Antichrist about the year 1650? So do ^: But here the Doctor and I
shall run in discords: those whom the Doctor calls (I am confident against his
conscience) Antichristian, I upon sure and infallible grounds call them visible
Saints: that is, the Kingdom of Scotland, that now defend the Covenant-cause,
and a distressed lawful Magistracy, and a lawful rightly constituted
Ministry and Ecclesiastic Discipline. And those whom the Doctor calls holy
ones, the holy Heretics, and the holy Gunpowder Traitors, and the holy
Covenant-breakers, and the holy Apostates, (for they are visibly such to all
the world) those I call by their right names, as they appear to the world by
their actions, viz. the last bloody enemies of ^he Gospel Church, who in the
later part of the last times (as M. Tho. Goodwin says) shall arise and slay
the Witnesses; that is, a godly Magistracy and Ministry, who had finished
their testimony, and fitted all things for a complete reformation: these
enemies of the Church, I call them enemies, and these goodly painted hypocrites,
I call them so; I do not number them by their names, but I count them by their
actions, by what they do, not by what they say: and thence I conclude
infallibly, they are Antichristian, for by their fruits, not leaves, I know
them to be such; and (contrary to the Doctor) I do verily believe, that soon
after this-yeer 1650. God will raise up the Witnesses in Scotland, overthrow,
consume, and utterly destroy the Doctors holy Army, holy State, and holy
Commonwealth: And my reasons are taken partly out of the Doctors own mouth: for
about this time the Pope of Romes tyrannizing over the Church is expired; and
to go one step further then the Doctor, within six months, I conceive, after
the end of this year, 1650. the reign of the Beast of the Earth which slayes
the Witnesses is out, and the time of the Witnesses lying dead is out, and they
must rise, whose rising is the Beasts ruin; the rising of a lawful Magistracy
and Ministry will be the ruin of Democrary and Independency: For the battle
must be fought by lawful Magistracy and lawful Ministry, against Usurpers in
Church and State.

The Doctor has proved that the Popes time of tyrannizing is out in 1650. My
business then shall be to prove, that he that slays the Witnesses, his time is
out soon after the end of this year 1650 I have proved it already, I will
therefore only explain that part of Dan. 11. from v. 36. to the end, not
precisely every verse, but so much as may illustrate the tenent, that in all
probability immediately after the end of this year 1650. will be the downfall
of Cromwell and his Army, and his new government, which he has by his sword
erected. Observe therefore this, that Rev. 13. from verse the 11. to the end,
and Dan. 11. 36. to the end are spoken both of one Beast, and do both in the
same manner set forth his government, and tyranny, and bloody cruelty, and
success in his actions: therefore you read in Rev. 13. 14. of an image which he
makes men to worship, and in Dan. 11. 36. you read of the god Mauzzim that he
sets up: both these are one and the same thing, and signify a sword-power,
that this Beast shall set up: I have many learned Expositors on my side in the
interpretation of both texts, and some of the Fathers, with whom I fall full
jump in the explication; for they say that the Beast, in both places, is that
Antichrist that shall arise when the Roman Monarchy shall be destroyed, and
slay the Witnesses, and reign three years and an half: Now we must reckon the
beginning of this Beasts reign the time that he set up his god Mauzzim, and
exalted himself above all other government; and this was when he got the ships
at sea, the Forts, Castles Forces, Magazines, and whole power of the sword into
his own hands at land: This was done in the year, 1647. and about September or
October. In the same year, so that near about that time, we must begin the
Beasts reign; and then about the evening of the day, that is, the latter end of
that year, when he divides the two Kingdoms, the Beasts three years and an half
will be out: but mark what shall come to pass immediately before this year of
division, Dan. 12. 40. At the time of the end shall the King of the South push
at him, and the King of the North shall come up against him like a whirlwind,
with Chariots, and with Horsemen, and with many ships: In Zach. 14. 14. there
you have the Mountain divided into North and South: Here you have in this verse
the North and the South joined together, to overthrow the Beast of the Earth,
which has set up his God Mauzzim his Sword-power: This was clearly fulfilled
in the Northern Invasion, and the Southern Insurrection; I will not enlarge
here in so plain a thing: but what shall be their success? they shall be
overthrown by him, and he shall enter into the Countries, and shall overflow
and pass over: [He] that is, he that sets up the God Mauzzim, he shall overtop
both the Northern Invaders, and the Southern Insurrections: neither the King of
the North, nor the King of the South shall overcome him, he shall pass over
them, v. 41. He shall enter into the glorious Land.

I am of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs opinion, that Scotland is the gloriousest Land
in the world for holiness: therefore I think it is meant Scotland, that he
should enter; as he did, after he had defeated Hambleton's forces, he entered
the Kingdom of Scotland, and many shall be overthrown: Some read [and many
Countries shall be overthrown] but there is no such word as (Countries) in the
Hebrew: Therefore I humbly conceive it is better read, and many shall be
overthrown, that is, many noble families, many great persons, and many people
shall; but these shall escape out of his hand, Edom, and Moab, and the chief of
the children of Amon: the ancieut, and the latter Expositors, have mistook this
text, in allowing it only a literal sense, which the Holy Ghost intends not;
for by Edom, and Moab, and Ammon, are meant the Enemies of the Church, who
plead the same privileges that the Church pleads; as Esau was the eldest son
of Isaac by birth, but he sold his birthright, and became an apostate, and so
did his posterity, who were from him called Edomites: But these Apostates
pretended (as the Church of Rome does) that they were the true Church, because
they came from the eldest son of Isaac: and so Moab and Ammon, though most
abominable Idolaters, yet said, that their father was Lot, and they were the
true Church, though they were begotten in incest; as all Heresies and Heretics
are gotten by corrupting the Holy Word, and Truth of God; so that by Edom, and
Moab, and Ammon, that escape this Beasts clutches, may be understood Heretics
and Apostates: if so, how clearly does this point out of the Beast to us? or if
by Ammon and Moab, may be meant those murderers of the King, Traitors: for in
2 Chronicles. 24. 46. a Moabite, and an Ammonite, one of the chief of the children
of Ammon, conspired against the King and slew him, so that Apostates,
Covenant-breakers, Heretics, and Traitors, conspirers against the King, shall
escape him: wheresoever he comes, you may know this beast by his followers, for
none but such are protected by him, and beloved of him. By Moab may be meant
the malicious party who pretend religiously to curse the Church of God by their
hypocritical hirelings, such as Balam, who for a good place, or office, will
vilify that cause which they once professed to be a righteous cause.

V. 42. And the Land of Egypt shall not escape, that is, Ireland, which were
more bloody to the people of God, then Egypt to Israel: Egypt, that is, a
Kingdom full of abominable Idolatry: therefore Rome is called spiritual Egypt.

V. 43. He shall have power over the Treasures of gold and silver, and the
precious things of Egypt, that is, He shall be Governor of Ireland: for who
has power over the Treasury but the Governor? By Lybians and Ethiopians are
meant the common, sottish, and slavish sort of people, which will bow to any
body: these shall subscribe to him: But when he is in Ireland, what follows
next?

V. 44. But tidings out of the East, and out of the North, shall trouble him:
Holland is East, and Scotland is North from Ireland: now the Treaty in Holland
with the King, by the Scots shall trouble him.

V. 45. Tidings out of the East, and out of the North shall trouble him:
Ireland (the place where the Beast of the Earth shall be, that Witness-slaying
Beast) has Holland on the East of it, and Scotland on the North of it: Now
tidings from the North and East shall trouble him, that is, the King of
Scotland shall be in Holland, that is to the East of him, and the Scots in the
North call a Parliament, and send Commissioners from Scotland to treat with the
King in Holland; and so tidings out of the East, and out of the North shall
trouble him: This Treaty shall trouble him, and call him out of Ireland into
England, from whence he shall go with great fury to destroy and utterly to make
away many: He shall go with an Army resolving to destroy, and utterly to make
away the Covenanters in Scotland: and this is plainly set down in verse. 45.

V. 46. And he shall plant the Tabernacles of his palace: Some read [The
Tabernacle of the wrath of his judgment] so Brightman reads it. Others read it
[And he shall plant his Tabernacle Aphadno] keeping the Hebrew word entire.
Others there are that translate [Aphadno] and read the text thus [And he shall
spread the Tabernacles of his stables] This word [Aphadno] which is read
Palace, (though I know not why) Brightman very learnedly unfolds. This word
(says he) is compounded of three words, Aph, and Din, and the affix of the
third person Daleth, the wrath of his judgment; as if he should say, He shall
plant the Tabernacles of wroth, whereby he shall procure to himself judgment,
and everlasting destruction. Therefore Brightman reads it thus, He shall plant
the Tabernacle of the wroth of his judgment between the seas, in the Mountain
of holy delight, and there shall he come to his end, and none shall help him.
He shall pitch his Tabernacles in the Mountain of delight that is, in that part
of Mount Olivet to the North: On that Mountain, that is, in Scotland: there he
shall pitch his tent, that is, lead an Army into that Kingdom against the
Covenanters, and he shall pitch betwixt the seas in Scotland. This seems to
tell the place where this Beast shall be destroyed, it is betwixt the seas some
where in that Kingdom: and there shall he come to his end, and none shall help
him. Observe how this illustrates and confirms Zach. 14. 1, 7. the time of the
Rent betwixt the North and the South shall be but one day, that is, one year,
and in the evening of that year it shall be light. Now I am fully persuaded
that this is the year, I argue a posteriori from events: this year the tidings
out of the East, and the North, fetched him out of Ireland, and made him march
into Scotland, which made the great Rent between the two Kingdoms of England
and Scotland.

This year is that year which is neither dark nor light to the Church, it is a
gloomy day, no sun nor stars appear, to direct or comfort the Church. They know
not whether the sun be rising or setting upon them, paleness is in all faces,
it is a cloudy, sad, melancholy day; therefore we wait, hoping and longing for
the fulfilling of the promise; that in the evening of the day, that is, in the
latter end of the year, it shall be light: though the year speaks terrible
things against the Church, yet the end of the year shall speak comfort and
salvation to the Church. Or else it shall be in the Evening, that is, when all
is still and quiet, when the Enemies think all is their own, and when the
Church thinks the Evening of dark and sad desolation is coming on her. In the
Evening when the Enemies of the Church are lying down, have drawn the Curtains
of security over them, when like the glutton they begin to say, soul take thy
rest, eat, drink, and be merry, thou have enough laid up for many years; then
their unexpected desolation and utter ruin comes, then on a sudden the
seventh Trumpet sounds, and the dreadful cry is made, behold the bridegroom
comes, then shall Christ come with deliverance, for the Saints (when they were
even ready to dispond) with swift destruction against his Enemies, who were in
deep security, Observe how both Daniel and Zachary agree in this; for in Dan.
12. 1. there Michael stands up, that great Prince which stands for the
children of thy people, and then shall follow the time of great trouble to the
Enemy, and in Zach. 14. 5. the Lord shall come, and ver. 9. the Lord shall be
King over all the earth: the same with Rev. 11. all the Kingdoms (at the
sounding of the seventh Trumpet) in the world shall be the Lords: so that all
these places of Scripture prophesying of the sounding of the seventh Trumpet,
and the things that shall immediately precede the pouring out of the Vials seem
to tell us, that God will mightily appear in the raising up of a distressed,
persecuted, despised Magistracy and Ministry in Scotland, and give them
unexpected success against their Enemies, to the overthrowing of Popery and
Independency, and the establishing of the three Kingdoms speedily in a
Covenant-Reformation: Confident I am that Scotland is the place where the
Enemies of the Church shall be gathered together to destroy them; and most
confident I am, that there the Enemies that go against them shall be broken,
there will Christ appear for his Churches deliverance, and his Enemies
confusion: and this is one great argument with me (viz.) the great distress
and sad affliction that the Church at this present time is in: In England the
very foundations are cast down, and the righteous know not what to do; their
eyes are only up to God, the poor Church is drove up into a dispersed corner
of the world, it has lately had a sore and deadly wound in the defeating of a
stately Army; they have lost their chief City, they are banished from their
habitations; they have lost one of their chief Seaport Towns, and the chief
Castle and strongest Hold in that Kingdom; they have a potent, a bloody, a
subtle, and a resolved Army to encounter withal; they every day grow stronger
and stronger, and by their power and policy, infeeble and weaken the poor
Church in Scotland: by their policy they have bred division among the Scots;
they are but a little number that are called, and faithful, and chosen, and
that little flock are like to be surrounded with Enemies; for if the Pope and
his party can possibly incite any of the great family against the Kirk, they
will: and in great measure the Scots, this day, have experience of it: now when
they have enemies and dangers round about them, and are but feeble and weak,
and in the eye of the world, and of their Enemes utterly lost.

Then is the time, yea then, the set time is come for their deliverance: and
this I prove from Rev. 15. 2, 3. When the Church was delivered, which is spoken
of this time of deliverance from the Beast of the Earth: for they (ver. 2.) got
the victory over the Beast, and his Image, and his Mark, and the number of his
name; Now this is none other then the Beast that goes to pull down Kingly
Government, and set up his Image or Government, and make that Nation receive
his mark (i.e.) subscribe to his Engagement. Now when this victory is gotten
over the Beast (v. 3.) they sang the song of Moses Exodus 15. which was a
tryumphant song, after their deliverance from a potent, malicious, resolved
Enemy, that had the Church of God at the greatest disadvantage that might be,
for he had them all in a valley; on one hand the Forts and strong Holds of the
Egyptians; on the other hand, an unpassable Mountain; before them the deep sea;
and behind them furious Enemy, completely armed, and fully resolved utterly to
ruin them: Now in this distress the Lord looks upon them, and visits them with
a cloud, there was the visible power of God seen; and after that cloud came,
the Sea was divided, the Church was preserved, and the Enemy drowned; and then
Moses composed his song, which is altogether to magnify the glorious and
magnificent power of God, in the deliverance of his Church in so great a
straight, and destroy the proud and potent Enemy with so terrible and swift
destruction.

Now this song the Church must sing when God gives her victory over her
Enemies: therefore her deliverance shall be glorious, and her Enemies
destruction terrible, that is, that new song the Saints of God shall sing, Rev.
14. which alludes to the prophetic Psalm, Psalm. 98. where you have every thing
runs parallel with John's Vision, for there you have a new song, and the cause
of it, it is for a mavelous great victory gotten by Gods own Arm, in an
eminent manner, in the sight of the Heathen, ver. 2. and then at that time the
house of Israel, and the ends of the Earth see the salvation of God, as the
Angel, Rev. 4. 6. preaches it; and then ver. 4. there is a Hallelujah, ver. 5.
with the Harp, which the Harpers have, ver. 7. the sea roars, and the earth,
and the floods clash one against another: but ver. 19. the Mountains (of
holiness) rejoice, because he is come to judge the earth. Read the next Psalm,
it gives great light into these texts, to be fulfilled in these times: Be not
therefore discouraged (O ye Saints of God) be patient, be constant, be
courageous; be not faithless, but believe, when your affliction and distress is
greatest, then is your deliverance nearest, when your Enemies are most cruel,
most confident, most strong, most malicious, and most secure; then will Christ
come in the cloud, then will he appear on the white cloud with the sickle in
his hand to cut down your Enemies: blessed are you in this day that watch and
keep on your spiritual garments, for Christ will assuredly come, and he will
come as a thief, at unawares, unexpected: behold the time is at hand, your
temptations are great, the Devil is sifting you, and winowing you as wheat; it
is a day of tribulation, and of great sorrow; it is a day wherein your Enemies
rejoice, and make merry; it is a day of great rebuke and shame to the Church,
the enemies say, ah, ha, so we would have it, Edom's sons cry, down with the
walls of Zion, down with them to the ground. It was never a sadder day with the
Church of England, and Scotland, since the Gospel was preached amongst them,
then now. I dare appeal to all the Historians in the world, whether ever the
Gospel was so desperately persecuted, and so near to ruin, as now it is. Look
in England, and the very foundations of the Gospel are rooting up, I mean the
Doctrinal-foundation: Do I say only Doctrinal, nay, but I do affirm the
personal foundation of the Gospel is rooting up: Are not the Scriptures which
are the spiritual foundation of the Gospel, denied to be the Word of God? and
do not men set their accursed lusts above the Holy Scriptures, in maintaining,
that no more is Scripture then what their spirits close with? and is not the
Lord Jesus denied to be God, and the Son of God, and the second person in the
Trinity: and do they not affirm, that he is not the Purchaser of salvation for
the Elect? And to go a little further, are not the Ministerial foundations
(viz.) Magistracy and Ministry thrown down: was there ever more open villainies
committed against the persons and offices of Magistrates and Ministers then at
this day? How is the Magistracy trampled in the dirt, and their spoils divided?
How are Ministers imprisoned, banished, sequestered, and silenced? How grievous
and intolerable are the burdens that they lay on the poor Ministers bodies and
souls? They have taken away their estates, and so expose their poor families to
ruin: they impose a most unjust and unconscionable Oath upon them, directly
contrary to those lawful Oaths they took before; and for the not subscribing of
it (which no conscientious Protestant will do, or can do) they are outlawed,
shut out of protection, out of their livelyhoods, and exposed to utter ruin,
at the pleasure of any of the sons of violence: and what condition have they
put the Papists, those bloody and inveterate Enemies of the Protestants? What
becomes of the Laws in force against them? Are they not all repealed? What Is
become of those discriminating Oaths that molest the Papists peace in this
Kingdom? Are they not all taken away? and is not only the sincere
conscientious Protestant, the man whose estate, office, person, and family,
lies at the mercy of bloody Papists, and Gunpowder traitors? Who is so blind
as not plainly to see these things? and what conscientious Protestant so
secure, as not to feel it? And as for Scotland, though, blessed be the Lord,
there be a godly Magistracy and Ministry as yet standing, yet how near are
they to their fall? How great a blow have they received already? How many
enemies have they against them? The Pope and all his politicians in England,
Holland, Ireland, Spain, France are active against them; in England the whole
wealth and strength of it is employed to ruin the Kingdom of Scotland; in
Holland and France, the same Popish Politicians, are employed to raise
rebellion against Kingly Government; in Ireland the arch Rebels are in a
League with the Commonwealth of England, they having renounced Kingly
Government long before, were the first that owned the Commonwealth of England,
and gave them a Title; whereupon Colonel Monk made a peace with them: This
Colonel Monk is now as Major General of the Foot under Cromwell in Scotland,
Spain has owned this present power that cut off the King, for a Free State and
Commonwealth, and drives the same design to throw down the King of Portugal,
and France with England, yea, the Popes Agents in Scotland are active in
stirring up those Papistical Families in Scotland against the Kirks party, who
are the Covenanting party: It would be too long to tell how the Spanish Faction
(to say no more) prevails this day throughout Europe: the King of France who
denies the Popes temporal power, is like, by the Jesuited-State-commotions to
be overthrown: the King of Portugal is in a probable way to be overthrown by
the King of Spain: the Hollander which was the supply of Scotland for
Ammunition, since the Prince of Orange's death, is like, by their own civil
jars, to become a prey to the Spaniard, after designs betwixt England and
Spain are ripened; and poor England overflow with the Spanish Faction, who
cannot see all things cutting out against the Protestants, acording to the
Spanish Model, who cannot see that perfected, which was intended long since,
who sees not those dismal attempts against Magistracy and Ministry, now
completed and accomplished, which were intended, 1588. by the King of Spain's
Armado, against Queen Elizabeth, and by the Gunpowder Traitors against King
James. Something it is that makes the Spanish Court triumph; it is because they
have drove the Royal Family of England and Scotland into great distress; it is
helpless throughout the world; no Kingdom nor Nation lends that distressed
Family their helping hand: the Prince of Orange, the great comforter of that
Family, is taken out of the World: and the Queen of Sweadland snatched from him
by the Emperor. The English Nation are divided into Independents, Prelaticall
men, and Presbyterians for the most part; the Independent and Prelaticall Party
are engaged by Oath against the Magistracy and Ministry of Scotland; for they
all for the most part take the Engagement, they have only a few Presbyterians,
who are impoverished in their Estates, cast out of Office, and outlawed that
adheare to them, and they only in affection, all they can do is to fast and
pray, and power out their souls, both in public and private, for the
distressed Magistracy and Ministry of Scotland, this is all the help they can
afford them: France cannot help themselves, much less are they able to help
Scotland in their distresses. Now this day there is a vast and terrible Army
gone up against them; and if that Army should overcome, and ruin utterly the
Magistracy and Ministry in Scotland; the Protestant Religion would not have
any place in Europe to rest the sole of his foot on. I am informed also that in
New England, the same subtle Jesuited Saints that have blown us up in
Old-England, have put them also into miserable confusion and civil broils.
Judge now Christian Reader, how near the Church is to it is dreadful overthrow.
Now here is the comfort, these troubles and great calamities of the Church, are
the sure forerunners of the Church her great deliverance, the world cannot
believe this, and the reason is, because they have no true faith, nor patience,
though they talk much of it; an Hypocrites faith is not able to defend him in
such fiery afflictions, nor his patience able to go through such miery ways of
persecution, hypocrites many brag of their helmet and breast plate, but only
real Saints can show the shoes of patience and perseverance, and the shield
of faith in such times as these when hypocrites gracesare be jaded, the Saints
go on merrily, though hypocrites say it is impossible the times should turn, or
that ever the Covenant-Reformation should be carried son; and therefore
unworthy-timerous-professors now commonly ay, Truly we are in the dark, we know
not what to think: such a hypocrite sees if he hold to his principles he shall
be in the dark of affliction; and therefore he makes a stop, and turns back:
Another, more subtle in his hypocrisy, cries out for Brotherly-love, and
peaceable compliance: and he to follow after temporal peace, casts off the
paths of righteousness against his oaths and vows; the truth is, he is an
hypocrite that has not patience to walk in the thorny-stony-way of
persecution; but a real Saint has these two graces eminently shining in him;
he will not dispond nor murmr against God, or the Cause of God, though the
Cause of God, and the Defenders of it be under great reproach, and cruel
p^rsecution; he will believe in a persecuted, reproached, wounded, forsaken, and
crucified Christ, as well as in a glorified, and an exalted Christ: and then he
follows Christ patiently, through hunger, and cold, and disgrace, as well as in
the midst of prosperity and ease: he will be in the ship with Christ as well when
that ship is in a storm, as when it is in a calm, and all because he has a
strong faith in Christ: he knows that he can never sink so long as Christ is
with him: he knows it is for the glory of that God whom he serves, to bring his
people into the Valley of Achor, before he open a door of hope; it is true, the
times are now sad, and it is the blackest day now with the Church of England,
and Scotland, that ever was known or seen: but is this an argument with a real
Saint therefore to leave the Church? God forbid, a real Saint will trust in
God; yea, and die for the truth, though he kill me, yet will I trust in him:
and therefore, by way of admiration, the Holy Ghost says, Here is the
patience, and here is the faith of the Saints, and here are they that keep the
Commandments. There are without Apostates, Persecuters, Covenant-breakers,
Traitors, unnatural men; but here are they that keep the Commandments, here is
Covenant-keepers, sincere worshippers of God; holding fast to their principles:
Their graces shall in this age distinguish them from other men in the world by
their constancy in the truth, and their cheerful and patient bearing Christ's
yoke.

Now here is the comfort, as this day none shall be like it for affliction, so
none shall be like it for deliverance: This day, Jer. 30. 6, 7, 8. sets forth
the time of affliction, which shall come upon the Cdurch before the seventh
Trumpet which calls the twelve Tribes to believe in Jesus Christ.

It shall be a day of grievous sorrow for the present, such is a woman's in
travel, which is grievous, but short, and it brings abundance of comfort after
the sorrow: but v. 7. tells us what kind of trouble it shall be, it is a day
(i.e. a year) none has been like it, it is even the day of Jacob^s trouble:
now Jacob's trouble you shall read in Genesis 32. The good man was going from a
cruel-master with his wives, and all his substance, into Canaan; after he had
gone some days journey, his father-in-law pursues him fiercely with armed men;
but God delivering Jacob from that Enemy, the very next news that he hears is
that Esau, his brother Esau was coming with an Army against him: What a
straight was poor Jacob in, had he gone back, he had been made a slave of by
his cruel Father-in-law: if he went forward, his own brother that came out of
the same womb, and sucked of the same breast, would kill him, and take his
wives and all his substance: what a fright was he in at this time? Even so
shall the Church of God at this time, immediately before the seed of Jacob
return again to their own country: the Church of God which has been delivered
from an open cruel Enemy that persecuted her, shall on a sudden, and
unexpectedly, fall into the bloody hands of one that like Esau comes out of the
bowels of the Church; but it is an Apostate that for the pottage of preferment,
and worldly pomp, has sold himself to work all manner of mischief against the
Church: but here is the comfort in the same verse, yet the Church shall be
delivered from it: in the Evening of this day it shall be light to the Church
of God, and then follows the 12 Tribes conversion.

Q. But where shall this great deliverance of the Church be?

A. In Esaias 59. 18, 19. He will destroy with his fury (the Lord Jesus will) his
enemies in the Islands, so shall they fear his name from the West, and his
glory from the rising of the Sun, His lightning shall shine in the West when he
comes to destroy his enemies, Mat. 24. 27. and this he will do by a mighty
deliverance of the Church, for when the Enemies shall come like a flood
(against which there is no standing) then the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a
standard against him, or (nearer the Copy) put him to flight, and then the Lord
Jesus will call the Tribes of Israel, the twelve Tribes, to submit to the
Gospel: when man's power is not able to withstand the force of the Enemy, then
God arises.

Q. But after what manner, or by what means will God convert the twelve Tribes?

A. The Holy Ghost tells us, Esaias 49. 21, 22, 23. the whole chapter is a
description of the glorious Gospel-day when Christ shall deliver both Jews and
Gentiles from the Devils bondage, and Antichrists yoke, in v. 6. there is
Christ's Commission to raise up the Tribes of Jacob, God has appointed him for
that end, that he may call the scattered Tribes from the North, and from the
west, and from the land of Sinim: but the Jew shall say in his heart, Who has
begotten me these seeing I am barren, and desolate, a captive and a wanderer to
and fro, and who has nourished them? Behold I was left alone, whence are
these? This is the question that the Jews ask at the time of their beginning to
be converted, and brought from the North, and from the West, and from the Land
of Sinim. But observe the Answer the Holy Ghost gives, v. 22. Thus says the
Lord God, Behold I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standart
to the people, and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters
shall be carried on their shoulders: The meaning is, God will command the
converted Gentiles, the Ministers of the Gentile Church, and they shall hold
out the white flag of the Gospel of reconciliation by Jesus Christ (for that is
Christ's Standart) and this shall be the way of their conversion: but that is not
all, for in the next verse (v. 23.) and Kings shall be thy nursing Father, and
Queens shall be thy Nurses: converted Gentile-Kings shall invite the Jews into
their Kingdom, and give them leave fairly to bring in their scruples they have
against Christ, and appoint men to satisfy their doubts, give them leave
(which the Pope will not do) to read the New Testament, and compare Christians
principles with the, ir principles: For so the Prophet says, They shall be
converted they shall see eye to eye, that is, by the Eye of the Old Testament,
they shall see into the New; and by the Eye of the New, they shall see into the
Old Testament-prophecies fulfilled; so that the godly Magistracy those are
Kings, and the goldy Ministry, amongst the Gentiles, shall be instruments of
converting the Jews.

Hereupon my hopes and grounds are, that God will by affliction so mould and
frame the heart of the King of Scotland, and then raise him to so great a
power, as that he will not only be the great instrument of throwing down
Antichrist, but also a great instrument in converting of the Jews, in the
West Indies, and East Indies, where the people thirst abundantly after the
Word, but there are few to deal the bread of life to them. I have great hopes
that God will yet again, by an English Monarch, do mighty things against
Rome-Antichristian, and for the propagating of the Gospel: and my reasons are,
Because God chose the first Monarch in the world to be a Christian, and a
Defender of the Faith in this Kingdom. Lucius was King of England, and he that
God chose to make the Vicar (as Elutherius Bishop of Rome styled him) this was
Anno Christi, 180.

Abou 120 years after, God raised up out of this Kingdom a Christian Emperor,
Constantine, who was the Son of Hellena that beautiful British Princess.

This Constantine God made the great Instrument of throwing down the Heathen
Emperors, and turning the whole Empire from Paganism to Christianity, He freed
the Christians from their prisons, and saved them from being any more tortured
for Christ. Since that time Religion was never quite extinguished; but the
British people, notwithstanding their afflictions, kept their Religion amongst
them, after Rome apostatized from its primitive purity, so far as from
Rome-Christian to become Rome-Antichristian. We shall find in History, that the
English Monarchs were the first that opposed the Popes Tyranny. William the
Conqueror was one that showed himself an Enemy to the Popes pomp, and tyranny,
and usurpation. It may truly be said that the Normans despised and abhorred the
Popes wicked usurpation.

The Plantaginets curbed the Pope's insolency: The Tudars likewise unhorsed the
Popes. Observe here how the Tudars came in, Henry 7. married Elisabeth the
eldest daughter of Edward 4. and hereby unites the two Houses of York and
Lancaster: In the person of this King (says Sir Robert Naunton in his book
called Fragmenta Regalia) the royal scepter fell back into the current of the
old British blood, which by the invasion of the Saxons, and afterward by the
conquest of the Normans, had discontinued almost a thousand years; so that all
the German, Norman, Burgundian, Castalian, and French achievements, with the
intermarriages, which eight hundred years had acquired and incorporated, were
all brought back into the old royal line of the ancient British Christian
Kings. This being so (which I verily believe) as it is one of the remarkablest
passages in the world, so it is that which makes exceedingly for my purpose,
viz. That the Kings of England are the lawful Magistracy of England, and that
they are no usurpers, and therefore one of the Witnesses. This Henry 7. married
his eldest daughter Margaret to the King of Scots. The Tudars expiring in Q.
Elizabeth, the offspring of Margaret, who was matched into the royal Family
of the Stuarts, succeeded Q. Elizabeth in the English throne by a title clear
and unquestionable. Now as the Tudars unhorsed and banished the Pope, so the
Stuarts stabbed the Pope; so that as England had the first King that subjected
this Kingdom to Christ, and the first Emperor that subjected the Roman Empire
to Christ, and the first Kings that opposed Antichrist: And as King James was
the first that proved the Pope to be Antichrist, so his son was the first King
that ever was openly put to death for finishing his testimony against
Antichrist. Hence it appears, that as Monarchy before Christ was visible in
the Church from Adam until Christ, so it has been visible in this Kingdom
since Christ, from Lucius, in a Christian line of unquestionable succession,
unto this distressed King of Scotland, now persecuted by Antichrist. This King
was begot by a Protestant King, baptized by a Protestant Mininister, a Bishop;
he was born the heir of three Protestant Kingdoms, and is the successor of a
Martyr, who laid down his life for the maintenance of the Protestant Religion;
and this King has covenanted to maintain the Protestant Religion; all which
could never be said of any King before; and therefore my hope and trust is, that
King James his Grandchild shall be the King that shall throw down Rome
Antichristian, and be the great Instrument of making both Jews and Gentiles bow
down to a real reformation, especially when in all probability these three
Kingdoms are the Kingdoms where the Witnesses shall be slain by the usurpation
of a mean fellow, who shall arise and set up a new government, and take upon
him to be Lord of the three Kingdoms; this all the Fathers have told us, from
Dan. 7. 24, 25. and we see it fulfilled in our eyes. Now they say this vile
fellow shall reign but three years and an half, and then he shall fall with an
utter ruin. I have proved that in all probability it is this year that he shall
fall, and have showed from Scripture what probability there is of his fall in
Scotland, it being the mountain of delights, and no other Kingdom in the world
maintains such a lawful Magistracy, and rightly constituted Ministry, and so
real, right and glorious a reformation as Scotland does. It has been showed
also, what probability there is, from the time allotted to Antichrist, the Pope,
the Beast that keeps the Witnesses in sackcloth, to reign, which is 1260.
years, which time is up about, 1651. and then from the time of the Beast of the
Earth, the Beast that coms out of the bottomless pit, his reign which began in
1647. and continues three years and an half; so that it is probable his reign
will be expired in 1651. about the middle of this year, and then it is probable
from his actions; for he throws down a lawful and unquestionable Magistracy,
and then he most bitterly and violently persecutes the Ministry, which lawful
Magistracy and Ministry shall have a mighty victory over him, and so rise up
to their former dignity again; but immediately before this victory they must be
in an exceeding low condition, and in the eyes of the people of the world past
recovery. All this we have made out clearly from Scripture; and how* clearly
and manifestly these Scriptures are in part fulfilld, and hastening to be
accomplished, I leave to every soberminded man to judge; so that my merry Dr.
that is so confident of his holy Democracy, and holy Army, unless he can prove
them to be the slain Witnesses that were slain and persecuted by the Beast
arising out of the bottomless pit, and thrown down and worn out by the little
horn, Dan. 7. that rises and reigns over three kingdoms (where the Gospel is
purely professed) three years and an half, in which time he changes their
Laws and Customs: unless he prove them so, out of his own mouth we shall
clearly overthrow him; for p. 33. 34. there he undertakes to prove from Dan. 7.
14. and v. 27. that Monarchy shall be thrown down, and now it is on the tragical
stage for that end, and all to make way for Christ's visible Kingdom on earth:
This honor of throwing down Monarchy, and exalting Democracy, is given (he
says) to his holy ones, according to that text Dan. 7. 27. the kingdom, and
Dominion, and greatness of the kingdom under the heaven shall be given to the
people of the Saints of the most high.

Let me entreat the Reader to observe but the time when the kingdom shall be
given to the Saints, in Dan. 7. it is at that time (v. 8.) when the little horn
that rises after the other states subject to Rome, and plucks up three of the
first horns or kingdoms; observe, this the Doctor confesses is in the end of
the Roman Monarchy: if so (which is undeniable) then let all the world judge,
what little horn is lately rose to usurp three kingdoms, is not this text
visibly fulfilled in the sight of all Europe? But then observe, v. 9, 10.
Christ comes, (is in Rev. 10. 1, 2.) and in v. 11. this little horn was slain,
and given to the burning flame; it is the same with Rev. 19, 20. where he was
cast into the lake burning; and then v. 13, 14. Christ set up his Kingdom,
which is both a glorious and everlasting kingdom; and v. 24, 25. this little
horn is clearly described to be the Witness slaying Beast, who shall continue
three years and an half, and then immediately follows Christ, v. 26, 27.
coming forth to destroy this Beast, and then as in Rev. 11. all the kingdoms in
the world become Christ's, and Rev. 20. 4. thrones are set, and then the Saints
(i. e.) the Witnesses sit upon them; so that the meaning is not that Christ
will throw down Kingly Government or Monarchy in the Church, but that he will
raise a godly Magistracy and a godly Ministry to a higher degree of power then
ever before, and thereby the real Saints of God shall have greater freedom
then formerly. The two Witnesses shall go no more in sackcloth, but put on
white linen. It Is true, Usurpers and Tyrants shall be thrown down; the
Tyrannical Independent Monarcy of Rome shall be thrown down, and the
tyrannical usurped Democracy of England shall be thrown down, who give the
Beast of the Earth their power and strength, Rev. 17. 13. and with that
strength go forth against the Lamb; and the Lamb shall overcome them, for he is
the King of kings, and Lord of lords; that is his Motto, in Rev. 19. 19. When he
fights against this Beast, and overcomes him, it is one and the same battle:
these shall be overcome, and overthrown for ever: but the Witnesses though they
are slain, and the Doctor and all the Antichristian Rabble make merry, and keep
Thanksgiving days: yet they shall arise again, stand upon their legs, and
ascend in power and authority, and glory, above their Enemies. But why do I
stand to confute the Doctor when he confutes himself in his own book, in p. 9.
He approves that there was Kingly Government from Noah; for Sem he says was
King of Salem; and yet in p. 39. of the same book he accounts of Kings as
Antichristian, and says, that they that uphold Kings, uphold Antichrist: so
that by this account (as p. 22. confirms it, for there he uses this as a
motive to prase, because Monarchy is turned into Democracie) it seems
Antichristian power was in the World as soon as Abraham, if Kings be
Antichristian in the Church: But why do I say so much, when I have heard the
man within this these two years in a public Auditory, profess himself no Enemy
to Kingly Government or Monarchy, but only to the excess of Monarchy, and
tyranny of Kings: and yet here he puts on with all vehemence the people, to
praise God for the destruction of Kingly Government, and the promotion of
Democracie.

But why did I meddle at all with him who knows not what he says? For if we
begin with him, we shall find him in a gross mistake, he says in p. 2. that we
are now under the sixth Seal, and sixth Trumpet of that Seal; and under the end
of the fourth Vial of that Trumpet or the fifth.

Whereas the sixth Seal was opened, Revel. 6. 12. when Constantine the great
overthrew the Pagan Empire, and cast out of office all the persecuting Tyrants
both in Rome, and throughout the Roman Empire, which was at least 1300. years
since; and yet we are but under the opening the sixth Seal: whereas none of the
Trumpets sounded until the sixth Seal was past, and the seventh Seal was
opened, as is manifest by Revel. 8. 1, 2. And as for the time of the sixth
Trumpet sounding, it was (Rev. 9. 14.) when the four angels were let loose
which were bound in Euphrates, that was when the Sarazens and Turks began to be
eminent for their victories, and successes in War, which was about 700. years
since: and then he says we are under the fourth vial of the sixth Trumpet.
Whereas it is evident, that not one of the vials are to be powered out until the
7th Trumpet sounds, this I have proved already. I Will only add this, that
the seventh Trumpet is the Alpha and (...), of the vials, and that's clear from
these four Texts in Revel: 11. 15. There the seventh Trumpet sounds, and after
that, v. 19. the Temple of God was opened in heaven and then there were
lightnings, and voices, and thundrings, and an earthquake, and great hail, that
is, the vials of Gods wrath on his enemies. And in Revel. 15. 5. The temple of
the Tabernacle of the Testimony in heaven was opened, and after that the seven
Angels powered out their vials; so that the seventh Trumpet sounding before the
Temple in heaven was open, must needs be before the vials were powered out. Thus
the seventh Trumpet is the (...). And in Revel. 10. 7. compared with Revel: 16.
17. there when the seventh Trumpet sounded, the mystery of God should be
finished; and when the seventh vial was powered out, there came the same voice
from the throne, and said, It is finished: so that the seventh Trumpet both
begins, and finisheth the vials on the enemies of the Church. So that by this
you may judge of the Doctors soundness of judgment in a prophetic Truth.
Truly I do believe (excepting the Engagement) you shall scarce find in so few
words so many intellectual errors in any Heretics writing whatsoever, as in
these few words of the Doctors, that I have repeated. And as his thesis is,
such is his hipothesis; as are his premises, such are his conclusions,
exceeding absurd, and false; and therefore I leave him. Here I intended to
break off, but at I was shutting up, a Book came newly to my hand, called, A
Description of the History of Europe from 1650. to 1710. I do not censure the
Author, for he speaks modestly, and concerning the calling of the Jews; what he
speaks on Scripturall grounds, he speaks both learnedly, and judiciously. But
as for those Astrologicall predictions, no where grounded on Scripture, I hold
them dangerous foperies, and no more to be credited then an old wives fable, or
Lillies Almanac, there is one great mistake i^ it, which I find also in many
other learned Authors, and that is concerning the binding of Satan a thousand
years. This mistake of the Author makes him fall foul upon innocent Alsted and
Beucholclers, for Alstedius and Beucholclers, and several other learned men,
do hold that there shall be a thousand years felicity of the Church after the
Dragon is bound, and cast into the bottomless pit, they say, this time of the
Church her felicity shall begin about the year 1694. their ground for it is
from Dan: 12. 12. Blessed is he that comes to the 1335 days, i. e. years: Now
count from the time the daily sacrifice was taken away, which was (says
Brightman, and others) in the year 360. now add 1335. to 360. and it makes
1695. years. The most sound and Scripturall opinion is on these words of
Daniel, that at the end of the 1290. days, spoken of in v: 11 (which days are
at an end this year 1650.) then the Jews conversion shall be begun; and in
1695. they shall be settled in their own Nation, under one King, this is backed
with undeniable Scripture out of the old Testament, and the beginning of their
Conversion near 1650. is evidently demonstrated by Christ himself, in Matthew.
24. in Luke 21. in Mark. 13. in Revel. 11. and in many places in the Revel: as
Revel. 16. 17. and Rev. 1. 7.

Now because they say, that after the 1000. years felicity and tranquillity
of the Church, the war of Gog and Magog shall beg in; which enemies shall be
destroyed by Christ's coming to judgment: this opinion (says he that confutes
it) is far wide from the true mark. For, says he, the true number (meaning I
suppose, the time of the war of Gog and Magog must begin, Anno 1072. at the
Epiration of the former, meaning the thousand years binding of Satan, which he
holds to begin at the incarnation of Christ, and lasted a thousand years; or at
the destruction of the 2d. Temple by Titus, Anno 71. So that at the end of
1072. this Author says the fight of Gog and Magog must begin: this time, he
says, is termed to be a thousand years, and is to be understood of that time
that the world shall last after 1072 in page 7. he says, that the Devil, and
Antichristianity must be chained up in the dungeon of hell for a thousand years
after the incarnation of Christ; and then in the year of Christ 1000. must the
devil, and Romish Idolatry by the Popedom of Sylvester 2d. be let loose to
reign upon the earth, and tyrannize over the Church for the most part of
another thousand years, even till Anno 1709. and after that the fifth Monarchy
of Christ must be erected, as afterward he affirms.

But to refute in a word this gross mistake, we do affirm, that this opinion
is altogether groundless, and merely fantastic; for he brings not a word of
Scripture to confirm his opinion: nay, I must affirm it is altogether contrary
to Scripture. For, 1. he makes Antichrist to be in being from the incarnation
of Christ; which Antichrist in the Apocaliptick sense, was not in being till
390 years after Christ, not until the fifth Trumpet sounded* Revel. 9. 5. 2.
He makes Antichrist to be chained up a thousand years, and then to rise again;
whereas the Revelation testifies the contrary, that when he falls he shall be
cast into hell: Revel. 19. 20. out of which there is no redemption; and Babylon
shall fall like a millstone into the bottom of the Sea, which shall never be
recovered again. 3. He detracts from the time of Antichrists reign allotted by
the holy Ghost: for (Rev. 13. 5.) Antichrist was to continue 1260. years, but
this man allows him but 698. years, in all, in which he diam^trally opposes
the Scripture at concerning Antichrist. But concerning the devils being bound a
thousand years from Christ's incarnation, or 72. years after, this is so
apparently oppugnant to the Scriptures, that I do admire that any that has
read the Revelations should affirm it. Yet is it not this man's opinion alone,
but Brightman, Pareus Andreas, and several other Writers are of, or near the
same opinion.

Which opinion I prove is absolutely against plain texts of Scripture; as for
the first 300. years after Christ, the devil was so loose as that he sat in
the throne, the Roman throne, and murdered the Saints, until Constantine
came. Revel. 12. And then after Constantine the Devil was not chained, though
he were cast out of the Roman Throne. For Revel: 12. 13. 15. 17. after his
casting down he persecuted the Church, and cast a Flood of Arrian Heresy after
her, and he was wrath with the Church, and went to make war with her: so that
after Constantine he was not chained. For in Rev. 13. 2. there the Devil gave
the Pope his power, and great Authority.

Neither was the D^vill chained up, nor sealed in the bottomless pit
afterward, for if we look downward into Histories, we shall see the Popes the
Devils familiars, or the devil their familiar, how many of them were
Conjurors, and how frequently was the devil called to their greatest
enterprises? the devil was as twere sole Monark throughout the world, a great
while, from the year 500 to 1000. how did Ignorance reign throughout the world,
and afterward when the sight of the Gospel began to look through the Clouds
again, how did the devil and his Instruments bestir them to suppress that
light, by cruel persecutions, and so they have continued until this day,
Germany, France, Holland, England, and Scotland, at this day know how busy the
Devil is to overthrow the Church by heresies, to seduce them by temptations of
all sorts, to ensnare them, and by his inhumane Butchers with a potent hand to
murder the poor Church, so that I suppose no man will say that since the
Incarnation of Christ, the devil has been bound a 1000 years, no scarce a
thousand days, so that neither History nor Scripture hold out any such thing
as that Satan since Christ's incarnation hitherto, has been bound a 1000 years,
they are so far from it, that they absolutely prove the contrary, so that now
it falls happily in my way to discourse of that 6th. proposition which long
since I laid down, (viz:) that the 1000 years binding of Satan, and the 1000
years Reigning of the Witnesses, does not begin until the great Battle be
fought against the Beast, and the false Prophet.

It is clear from the Text, that Satan is not bound until the Battle be fought
against the Beast, and the false Prophet, Rev. 19. 20. And at that time Satan
is bound, for Rev: 20. 1. 2, 3. is coupled with a ((...)) to the former, to
show that the Beast, the false Prophet, and the Dragon, go to destruction at
one and the same time. Indeed Beza translates [(...)] deinde after that, I know
no reason for it, but in Bezas sense, I have this advantage, that he proves the
Devil is bound after the Beast, and the false Prophet are destroyed not
before, but the Beast and the false Prophet are not yet destroyed, therefore
the Devil has not as yet been bound; but I shall follow the vulgar
translation of [(...)] and read it [and] Rev: 20. 1, 2, 3. In the first verse
you have the Angel that binds him, who is discribed by his power, he has the
key of Hell, and a mighty chain that is irresistible force, this is none other
but the Lord Jesus, he that fought the Battle against the Beast, and the false
Prophet, and destroyed them irrecoverably, the same binds the Devil with an
inviolable chain, for a 1000 years, this binding with a chain is an expression
setting forth the glorious Conquest that Christ shall get in the fight over all
his Enemies, the Devil shall be bound in a great chain and cast into Prison,
and sealed up there, and an inviolable lock shall be hanged on the Prison door
for a 1000 years, v: 3. You have the end of his shutting up, it is that he
should deceive the Nations no more until a 1000 years be expired, and after
that he must be loosed a little season, hence you may know that the devils
kingdom is, and where it is, it is amongst the kingdoms professing the Gospel,
it is that of heresy, and blasphemy, and hypocrisy, and lies, and deceit.
Observe now what immediately John saw after the binding of Satan, v: 4. And I
saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them, and I
saw the souls of them that were cut off with the Ax, for the testimony of
Jesus, and for the word of God; and some certain Souls which had not worshipped
the Beast, nor his Image, neither had received his mark upon their forheads, or
in their hands, and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.

Three things this Text clearly holds out. 1. The seventh Trumpet sounding. 2.
The slain witnesses rising. 3. The Church her happy state on earth, after the
seventh Trumpet sounding, and the witnesses rising.

And I saw Thrones, and then sat upon them: and judgment was given unto them.
This John saw after (observe the time) the Beast, and the false Prophet, and
the Dragon were overcome. The same we shall find in Dan. 7. 14. 22. and 27.
There the little horn that v: 27. speaks great words against God, wears out the
Saints, and thinks to change times and laws, all which are given into his hand
a time, times, and the deviding of times, after which the Judgment shall sit,
v: 29. and shall take away his dominion, this Judgment (v: 22.) is given to the
Saints, in v: 27. the kingdom and dominion, and greatness of the kingdom under
the whole Heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most high,
this is the immediate consequence of the destruction of the little horn, which
we have proved is the same with the Beast of the earth Rev: 13. 11. and Rev:
11. 17. in Rev: 11. you find the same thing expressed, that hour that the
Beast that slew the witnesses, was with his party destroyed, (v: 13. [7000]
that is many thousand [men of name] that is of those that were numbered by their
name, or accounted Saints for their good success, and great repute that they
have gotten, by their Victories, or men that received the number of the beast
name in their hands and foreheads, the ingagers, when those were destroyed, the
same hour the Witnesses (v: 12.) arose, were called up, and ascended into
Heaven in a Cloud, though the expression differ, yet the thing intended in the
expression is the same, for it sets forth the high degree of exaltation, to
which the slain Witnesses should attain, they shall be above the reach of their
enemies both in glory and power throughout the world, at the same time when all
the kingdoms of the world are become the Lord and his Christ's, ver: 26. The 24.
Elders sit in their seats, and rejoice that Christ has received his kingdom,
and at the same time Rev: 19. v: 4, 5, 6. You have the same song, from the
Throne and the Elders, the meaning is, they keep Thanksgiving days, for the
rising of the Witnesses, this is all one with Dan: 7. 14. which is the
immediate consequence of the little horns destruction, for there the kingdoms
of the earth became Christ's, and here in the Text John saw Thrones, and
Judgment was given to them, rhat is to the Saints, now what Saints these are to
whom those Thrones are given, John in the next words declares, and I saw the
Souls of them that were beheaded, or (as Beza reads it) smitten with the Ax,
for the testimony of Jesus, here are two infallible marks whereby to know that
those that sit on these thrones, are the slain Witnesses; 1. By their
sufferings they are beheaded. 2. By their actions which was the cause of their
sufferings; It was for the testimony of Jesus, for finishing their Testimony,
Rev. 11. 7. that the Witnesses were cut off, this gives us a wonderful clear
Character of the slain Magistracy, which by the Ax and the Sword were removed
cut of the way, when they were resolved to root out Popery, and to establish
true Religion, then comes the fatal Ax and Sword, and removes these Witnesses,
this is so clear that he that will not be obstinately blind must of necessity
see it fulfilled in his sight this day, and positively conclude, That the
Magistracy of England is that Witness that was thus cut off, but then the
Ministry you shall see in the next clause. And which had not worshipped the
Beast, nor his Imagt, nor received his mark in their foreheads, or in their
hands. As the precedent clause sets forth the Magistracy, by their doings and
sufferings, so this clause seems to me, to describe the Ministers doings and
sufferings. Indeed the English translation seems to join it with the other,
because they leave out the word [(...),] or translate it not right, few of the
Latin Translations render it full enough, for it may well be rendered, as I
conceive, thus: and certain some who have not adored the Beast, nor his Image,
nor receives his Mark, These are those that suffered for not acknowledging the
Beasts of the earths God Mauzzim his sword power, his new erected Government,
they would not submit to his Government, nor subscribe to his Engagement, nor
pray for them, nor Preach for them.

These suffer for not subscribing to the Government set up, as the Magistracy
suffered for opposing the setting of it up, here is a clear description of the
two Witnesses, by their suffering under the Beast of the earth for this Image,
and number and mark, can be attributed to nothing but the Beast of the earths
new Government, and way of establishing it, so that this Text clearly tells us,
1. Who shall possess the Throne, viz: the Witnesses ri^ing. 2. When it is,
when the Beast the false Prophet, and the Dragon are overthrown by Christ, and
when the Witnesses arise up, and ascend above their enemies that slew them.

This time is called v: 5. The first resurrection for two reasons, first, to
distinguish this time from the day of Judgment, the last resurrection, for that
shall not be until a thousand years after this resurrection, (if in v: 7.) by
a thousand years be meant a definite time, which is disputable.

2. It is called a resurrection, because this is the time of the Witnesses
rising from their slain condition, and standing upon their legs again, Rev.
11. 11. A Covenant reformation, of Covenanting reformers shall stand up again
to the terror of all that oppose it, this resurrection of the witnesses alluds
to that of Christ, for as the Witnesses must be conformable to Christ in their
sufferings, so ^he d^y of the resurrection of the Witnesses shall produce such
like effects, for as after Christ's great and unexpected loud voice on the
Cross, there was an earthquake, and the Vale of the Temple rent, that the
holy of holies might be seen of all, and the day was also a dark day, so at the
slaying of the Witnesses, Rev: 11. 13. there shall be a great earthquake, and
loud voices crying, It is finished, it shall be a dark day, and the Temple of
the Tabernacle of the testimony in Heaven shall be opened, and the Jews shall
rise out of their spiritual graves of unbelief, as the forecited texts tell us.

And as at Christ's resurrection, an Angel appeared like lightening and his
raiment as white as snow, and Christ appears on the Mount with his disciples,
Math. 28. 16. And makes known his monarchical power, making his Disciples
Apostles, and sending them forth to conquer the world, so shall it be at the
Witnesses rising* the glorious Angel shall appear, the earth shall quake, the
Soldiers that slew the Witnesses shall quake: the Lamb and his sealed ones
shall stand on Mount Sion, and Christ's power by his Witnesses, successful
progress against his enemies, shall be manifest to the world. And to this I
might add another Reason why it is called a resurrection; because at this time
God will call the Jews out of their graves of unbelief, unto spiritual life by
subjecting them to the Gospel. As, Ezekiel. 37. 12, 13. in those two verses he
promises four times to call them out of their graves, v: 9. from the four
winds. And Dan. 12. 1, 2. after the Beast that sets up the god Mazzim is
destroyed in the mountain of holiness, that is, the Beast that sl^ys the
Witnesses is destroyed in that kingdom, where the Gospel Magistracy, Gospel
Ministry, Gospel ordinances, and Gospel purity is preserved, then immediately
follows the seventh Trumpet, where Christ stands up for the people; and at that
time the Jews shall be delivered, and they that sleep in the dust shall awake;
the Jews that have long lain in the dust shall awake, they shall be brought
from unbeleif to make profession of the Gospel. Though all shall not be
internally called to everlasting salvation, yet they shall all be called into
an external profession: so that in these respects I conceive this time of the
Enemies overthrow. And the Church her rising may well be called the first
resurrection after these three grand Enemies destruction within the Church; the
Church shall have a large time of freedom, from spiritual enemies, as from
Heretics, and Idolaters, and blasphemers, which are the proper subjects of
these three Arch Enemies. And after this large time of tranquillity, both to
the Jews and Gentiles, v: 7, 8. Satan shall gather both open and secret,
covered and uncovered Enemies, Gog and Magog in infinite numbers against the
Saints: And then v: 10, 11, 12, 13. comes absolutely the day of judgment: And
then the state of the Saints in perfect and eternal bliss, and happiness is
set forth in Revel: 21. but of the day of judgment, and the state of bliss,
I Will daily meditate, and forbear to write at this time.

There is only one Question that I intend to answer, and then I Will shut up this
Discourse, and that is, since the Beast of the Sea is at Rome, and has his
r^sidence there, and the Beast of the earth is now in Scotland, and the devil
is reigning thorowout the world, either by Paganism, or Mahomatisme, or Popish
Idolatry, or by Independencie, under which Banner he leads his troops of
Traitors, and squadrons of blasphemers, and Heretics, how shall all these be
overthrown at one set battle about this year 1651. since it is impossible all
these three Enemies shall be at the battle in person.

The Question is somewhat hard to be determined positively, yet this is clear
from the Scripture, that this great battle, Revel: 19. 19, 20. is that battle
that shall be fought by the Witnesses after they are risen from their slain
condition, and this battle is fought against the Beast that slays the
Witnesses, that is, the Beast of the Earth, that little Horn in Dan. 7. 26, 27.
and Dan. 11. 4, 5. and against the Beast of the bottomless pit, and his
company which makes merry, (Rev. 11. 10.) for the destruction of the Witnesses;
now how can it be said that when this Beast and his party are overcome, that
then the Beast, and the false Prophet, and the Dragon are overcome? A. 1. To
this we answer in two words. 1. They may virtually, and potentially all three
fall when one falls: so the whole hosts of the Philistines fell when Goliath
fell. 2. Then when this Beast of the Earth falls, all the three begin to fall,
and from that day never rise more; their chief plots and devices shall be
discovered, and broken, and their villainy shall be discovered to the whole
world, which shall make the ten Horns to hate the Whore, and burn her with
fire. Or who can tell but that at this battle the chief strength of the Pope,
the grand Heretics who are the devils Esquires, and the chief and grand
Traitors against the Laws, and Religion of England, may be all in that battle
overcome? Or thus, at three Kings in one person, by the Beast of the earth,
were overthrown, so the three grand enemies of the Church in that one person of
the Beast of the earth, may be overthrown. And to me it is very probable, in
Revel: 17. where John saw Rome in that year, when she was to go to destruction,
in v: 3. He saw the last Beast that did bear up Rome, and uphold her in her
pomp, the Beasts is called v: 8. the Beast that comes out of the bottomless
pit, to let us know that that Beast which slaies the Witnesses, bears up Rome,
when she is going to damnation: this Beast, v: 3. is called the Beast bearing
up Rome, because he slays the Witnesses that would have pulled down Rome, he is
called therefore a scarlet colored Beast, because of his bloody cruelty
against the true Church, and then he is said to have seven Heads, and ten
Horns; because he supports that City Rome, with seven Heads and ten Horns;
Popery by the Covenanteers had long ^ince been in the dust, but that he broke
the Covenanteers and their Reformation by his bloody treason, and his
blasphemous troops. So then as this Beast is said to bear up Rome, though he be
far distant from Rome, by his slaying Romes enemies; so Rome may be said to
fall, and the Pope may be said to fall; and the Devil who is said to be the
father of Heretics, and blasphemers may be said to fall, when he that has
supported them falls; And in this sense at this battle when this Beast is
overthrown, the Beast, and that false Prophet, and the Dragon may be said to
fall: and be sure of it, when the Witnesses have got their victories over this
Beast down goes Popery, and blasphemy, and heresy: so that though in the
downfall of this Beast of the earth it cannot be said, that the Pope, and the
Devil shall personally, and universally in their power be overthrown, yet it
may truly be said that virtually they are overcome, it may well and truly be
said, that the Pope and the Devil are overcome when this Beast is overcome;
because the Beast is the support of Popery, by which Romes pomp is supported,
and the support of Heretics and blasphemers, by whom the Devils kingdom is
upheld, has he not caused those to fall who went about to overthrow Rome? and
has he not granted a toleration to all Heretics to lord it over the orthodox
Christians? Who is so blind as does not see that he does support this day the
state, pomp, and Religion of Rome, and of the Devils kingdom; there Satan's
throne is where the Witnesses are slain. Rev. 2. 13.

In a word, it may truly be said, when the Beast of the earth is overthrown,
that then the Popes cause and interest, and the Devils interest, will with him
be overthrown in these three kingdoms: for who is it, but he that hinders the
Covenant-reformation, and if he shall by the Covenanteers (as I do undoubtedly
believe he will, when his three years and a halfs Reign is up) be overcome, be
assured that the rising Witnesses, prosecuting the ends of the Covenant, will
be the ruin of the Popes and the devils Kingdom in England. Indeed the Tenor
of the Covenant is nothing else, but to establish the Witnesses, and throw down
Popery and Heresy, that is, the Pope and the Devils kingdom. Shall I yet go a
little further, I am confident that when this Beast of the earth is overcome,
his cursed Hellish conspiracies with the Court of Rome, and the Court of Spain
to overthrow the Kings of Europe, that acknowledge not the Popes supremacy,
will be made so apparent, that all the Kings in Europe especially France, and
Portugal, and these three Kingdoms, England, Scotland, and Ireland, will both
abominate, and utterly reject the Romish Court, as a den of abominable Thieves
and Murderers; And I trust, utterly forsake that accursed Religion, which can
change it self into any shape, and pretend any interest on purpose to overthrow
kingdoms, and murder Kings.

Now put all these together, consider but from the time of the Popes rising,
when he got to be the head of Rome, to be independent, which (as on all hands
is concluded) was about the year 390. and consider but the time of the Beasts
of the earth, who rises out of Independency, and slaies the Witnesses in the
year 1647. consider how clearly the holy Ghost holds out the Beast in his
rising, in his government, in his time of duration and in the manner, and place
of his ruin: compare but Scripture with Scripture, compare Dan. 7. and 11. and
Matthew. 24, Mark 13. Luke 21. Rev. 11. the 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20.
Chapters, and Zach. 14. together with several other Texts in Ezekiel: and Isiah:
I say compare the several texts, as we have set them one with another, and
compare with these texts, the occurrences of these three years last past, in
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and from all it may be concluded (I would fain
say positively) probably, that immediately after 1650. is ended, when the Beast
of the earth, has ^aged a Prophetic day, (that is) one year in Scotland, then
comes the ruin of the Church her enemies, for then the Church of Romes time of
keeping the Witnesses in Sackcloath is expired, and the three years and an half
of the great Independent Beast, that shall slay the Witnesses is expired, then
he and his Poliarchy of Senators, who Reign as Kings, must go to their eternal
graves, and then the Witnesses must rise, and take possession of their seats
from which they were thrown, and the Covenanted-reformation by them must be
carried on to the utter destruction of the Pope, and his faction, and the
binding of the devil, and utter casting of him out of the Church with his
faction. All which the Lord of his infinite mercy through Jesus Christ for his
elect sake (both of Jews and Gentiles unconverted, and already converted)
hasten. Even so come Lord Jesus. Come quickly. Amen.

FINIS.

