A True TESTIMONY Of the zeal of OXFORD-PROFESSORS AND University-men Who for
zeal persecute the servants of the living GOD, following the example of their
Brethren of Cambridge.

ALSO The leudness of those two great Mothers discovered, who have brought
forth so many Children, and never had a Husband.

With A few words to Magistrates that persecute the Saints, calling them
vagabonds; to show them who are the vagabonds, and to take off their heat, who
are so much troubled, that they want the honor of a hat.

Richard Hubberthorne.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread-Eagle near the West End
of Paul's. 1654.

A true Testimony of the zeal of Oxford-professors and University-men, who for
zeal do persecute the servants of the living GOD From OXFORD the 26 day of the
fourth Month.
A Brief and true testimony to all the people, of the unjust and unlawful
proceedings of those called justices in Oxford, against two Nothern women who
in obedience to the Lord, came to Oxford, upon the 20 of the fourth Month, who
several days as they were moved of the Lord, passed through the streets,
colleges and steeple houses, declaring the word of the Lord freely. And upon
the 15 day being the first day of the week, were moved to go to a steeple-house
and when the Priest had done, one of the women began to speak in answer to what
was delivered, and in exhortation to the people. Then two of the justices cried
out, Take her away, carry her to prison; and they took them away, and carried
them to a prison called Buckerdo where only fellons and persons are committed
for murder and other heinous offenses, and secured. And on the morrow being the
second day of the week, some of the justices asked the Mayor, whether there was
no meeting appointed; the Mayor said, No, he knew no business they had that
there should be a meeting: the justice answered, There is two Quakers committed
to prison; the Mayor answered, Let these justices that committed them, if they
have any Law against them; let them act it upon them, if not, set them free;
and the said Mayor said further. That he had nothing to say against them; but
he said, that if they wanted food, money or raiment, he would take care, that
they should be supplied; so the Mayor left them and went about his public
employment, and would have no more do in the matter, nor act any thing against
them, but did rather think it convenient to leave it to them, to act according
to their wills, and he free from it himself. But upon further consideration,
and for the more satisfaction the Mayor went up where the Justices were to
examine the women, and that their cruelty might the more be made manifest, the
vice-chansellor of the University was sent for to come up before them, and then
they proceeded to examination: and the first Question propounded, was, What her
name was and the place of her abode, and answer was made to both; then they
asked, What their business was to Oxford, they answered, They were commanded of
the Lord to come thither, they asked, What to do, they answered To declare
against sin and ungodliness, which they lived in as pride covetousness, lust,
and all uncleanness, self-righteousness and all false worship, which both
Priest and people lived in* contrary to the commands of God; then they asked
them, How they knew they were called of God, they said, They knew the voice of
God, and that they were called of God.

And this is to be observed as a true testimony of these two servants of the
Lord, that they did neither beg nor steal, neither did they wrong nor violence
to any man; they coveted no man's silver, gold nor apparel; but because they
obeyed the word of the Lord, and did his work faithfully speaking the word of
the Lord in boldness against the deceits of the Priests and people* in the
streets, in the marketplace, in the synagogues, and in the colleges, clearing
and discharging their consciences, in the Lords work and service, freely
administering that which they had freely received from the Lord, of whom they do
receive their reward; for their reward is with them, and the presence of the
Lord God does accompany them, and for their obedience to the Lord, they receive
the shame of the world, as ever the servants of the Lord did, who were mocked,
buffetted and shamefully used, being tied together at John's College and
pumped, and kicked and buffetted, and thurst into a pool called Gileses pool,
so that they went into a remote place, to wash the dirt off their clothes.

And here both Magistrates, and Scholars, and they who pretend to be Ministers
of the Gospel, are the chiefest actors in this persecution, and so do make
themselves manifest to be in the same generation of the Scribes, and Pharisees,
and hypocrites who were ever persecutors of the righteous seed, whomever it
has brought forth: and so they fill up the measure of their fathers iniquities.

Again, as concerning the Justices being assembled, the Vice Chancellor being
the chief actor in this persecution, said, That they blasphemed the name of God
and did abuse the Spirit of God and dishonor the grace of Christ, and asked
the women, Whether they did read the Scriptures, they answered, Yea, they did;
then they asked them. Whether they were not to be obedient to the power of the
Magistrate they answered, They were obedient to the power of God, and to the
power as it was of God, their souls were subject unto it for conscience sake.

Well, said the Vice Chancellor, you profane the word of God and I fear you
know not God though you so much speak of him. And then they concluded, that
there was matter enough for their commitment and punishment, and wished the
women to withdraw; Consenting, that a paper should be drawn up for their being
whipped out of the City. And when the paper was drawn up, it was presented to
the Mayor to set his hand to it; but the said Mayor refused and said, He was
not willing to do it; but one of the Justices said, That it was the privilege
of the City, that if any vagrant were taken within the Franchises and liberties
of the City, the paper must be drawn up, That I such a one Mayor, have
committed such and such persons, and then it is to sealed with the office seal;
but the Mayor answered, That he would refuse both; then others said who were
zealous and thought they had done God good service That if he would not, it
should be done by them and was agreed upon that they should be soundly whipped,
and that for the present, because of the tumult, be put into the cage. And the
next morning their wills was performed, though with much unwillingness in the
executioner. Many other particulars might be mentioned of their sufferings,
afflictions and patience under reproachings, revilings slanders and false
accusations cast upon them, which is the portion of the righteous in the world,
as Christ said Blessed are you when men shall revile you, and persecute and
speak all manner of evil against you falsely, for my names sake: rejoice and be
exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven, for so persecuted they the
Prophets that were before you. Mat. 5. 11, 12. and says Christ, They shall put
you out of the synagogues; yea, the time comes, that whosoever kills you,
will think that he does God service, and these things will they do unto you,
because they know not the Father nor me. John 16. 2, 3 4.

And now both sons and daughters of the Lord comes to witness these things
fulfilled, and you Magistrates, Priests and people do fulfill the Scriptures
against the servants of the living God, as you have done against these.

And herein is made manifest your tyranny and persecution, the chief Priest,
being the chief actor in it, yet there was many in the City, that have so much
of the light of Christ made manifest in them, as to acknowledge them to be
servants of the living God, and to own them in their sufferings, and to confess
the appearance of Christ in them before men, and in love did accompany them out
of the City, and did own them in their persecution.

And this testimony is true to testify to all people and to all the world, the
cruelty of unreasonable men, and that the Mayor had no hand in any of this
cruel usage and persecution.

The names of the two women who suffered persecution for righteousness sake,
is, Elizabeth Heavens, and Elizabeth Fletcher.

Who are vagabonds discovered.
THis is the word of the Lord to all you Magistates, who calls your selves, who
persecutes the righteous and the just, which comes to declare the eternal truth
among you in your streets, and in your assemblies, as vagabonds.

Cain was the vagabond and the fugative, who turned from the commands of God,
and slew his brother, and so had no habitation in the Lord; so woe from the
Lord proceeded against him, and does against you who are in Cains way, in wrath
and envy; for says the Lord to Cain, If thou do well, shall not thou be
accepted? if not, sin lies at the door. So he turned from the command of God,
and did not well, and so was the vagabond and fugative. And all you that do not
well, but turns from the light within, which lets you see that sin lies at the
door, are vagabonds and fugitives.

The children of Israel which passed up and down and dwelt in their tents they
were no vagabonds nor fugatives. The Prophets of the Lord which passed up and
down, as Jeremiah who was sent to cry out against them, who bear rule by their
means. Jer. 5. And Isaiah which was sent to cry against them which fought for
their gain from their quarter. Isai. 56. And Ezekiel who was sent to cry
against them that fed themselves with the fat, and made a prey upon the people.
Ezekiel. 34. And Micah which was sent to cry against them that preached for hire.
Micha 3. And Malachy which was sent to tell the people their blessing was
cursed.

All these traveled up and down, yet were no vagabonds nor fugitives; but did
abide in their habitations in the Lord, and cried against them that were out of
their habitation.

And the Son of man that had nowhere to lay his head cried woe against them
that were called of men Masters, and that had the chief places in the
assemblies, and went in long robes; he was no vagabond nor fugative though he
gave his back to the sinister, and his face to be struck upon by such as were
vagabonds.

And he called his Disciples from their trades and callings, and sent them into
the Towns, Cities and Villages, and said, If they persecute you in one City
fly unto another; and told them they should be brought before rulers for his
names sake, and be beat, and scourged, and hailed out of their synagogues.

These were no vagabonds nor fugitives; but did keep their habitation.

And the Apostle Paul which said woe to him if he did not preach the Gospel,
which went up and down into the Synagogues on the Sabbath Day, and into the
Markers and Schools. He was no vagabond and fugitive, though he said, He had no
certain dwelling place. And certain vagabond fellows bound themselves under an
oath to kill Paul, as Cain did Abel.

And these are the vagabonds, that lived in envy and wrath.

Now all you Priests, Magistrates and People, who lives in envy and wrath, and
beats, and stones, and hales out of your Synagogues, you fulfill their words,
and are in Cains way, and murder; and not in Abels; and you are the vagabonds,
though you have great habitations in the earth.

And this I was moved of the Lord to write forth, that you might see your
ignorance, and may know what a vagabond or fugitive is, though they may be
great and have habitations in the earth. He is the vagabond and the fugitive,
that has no habitation in the Lord; but brings the curse upon the earth, and
for whose sake the earth is cursed. He that sins in envy is a murderer, and he
is of Cains genetion, and is the fugitive or vagabond.

Doffing hats worse then a heathenish vanity.
To all you that say the Scripture is your rule and touchstone to try withal,
and with it desire to be judged, proved and tried; with it you shall be judged,
proved and tried.
WHat example have you in the Scriptures of any Magistrate, King, or Ruler, or
Noble, or Judge, or Officer, that ever commanded any people which came before
them to put off their hats, and if they would not, set a fine upon them, and
send them to prison and tell them they disturbed them as you do when men stood
patiently by you; here you show it is your pride that is disturbed, and that
which acts contrary to the Law of God, which says, Thou shall respect no man's
person. Did ever Pharaoh King of Egypt, whom Moses went before, and Aaron,
command them to doff their hats? or did ever Pharaoh to Joseph command him to
doff his hat or fine him and imprison him if he would not? did ever
Nebuchadnezzar or Darius command any such thing to any, to doff their hats, and
fine them if they would not? did ever Herod command any to doff their hats
which came before him, and fine them if they would not? did ever Agrippa or
Festus fine any that came before them that would not doff their hats, or
imprison them? or any, of the heathenish Kings or Rulers in the Scriptures?
show one example, else you outstrip them all. Pharaoh who oppressed the
children of Israel was destroyed; and Haman who made a Gallows for him that
would not bow, on it himself was hanged. Nebuchadnezzar which made an Image and
would have others to bow, lost his kingdom. So show an example among all these
Heathens; else you may see, You exalt your selves far above them, and must have
their portion. And as touching the children of God who were in the truth whom
God exalted above the Heathen. Where did ever Moses who was a Judge over all
Israel, or any of his Rulers, command the people which came before them to put
off their hats, and if they would not fine them and prison them?

If you cannot find an example,

Oh blush, and be ashamed all ye Rulers of the earth, whose mind stands in
such outward traditions, and goes from the life of God within, which should
witness the perfect Law of God, which respects no man's person; and the faith of
our Lord Jesus Christ is without respect of persons. Where did ever Joshua or
Jephta, when the people came before them, command any to doff their hats, and
fine them or imprison them if they would not and told the people they disturbed
them if they did not doff their hats? Show one proof if you can, that they
acted any such thing else be ashamed, and let the practice of the Saints judge
you; and mind that which is according to the law of God, and give over your
trifles and traditions, which respects no man's person. Where did ever David who
was a King to all the people, or any of them that he was over, command any such
thing as to doff their hats and stand bare before him, and if they would not,
fine them and imprison them, and told, them they disturbed him? Where did ever
Solomon, who was in the large wisdom command any such things to the people
whom he was over, to doff their hats, and fine them and imprison them, and told
them they disturbed them if they would not? Show one example in all the
Scripture among the holy men of God; else let the life of all the holy men of
God judge you and confound you. Show any example among all the Heathenish
Emperors Kings, Princes Dukes, Rulers, or other Officers that the Scripture
speaks of, that commanded any of their people to doff their hats that came
before them; and if they would not, fine them and imprison them and say they
disturbed them; else you may see you are grown higher in iniquity pride and
ambition, then them all. Show me in the Scripture where ever Moses taught the
people to act any such thing; or show me any such thing in the Scripture where
ever the Prophets of God acted or taught any such thing; or show me in the
Scripture where ever any Minister of God, made by the will of God, acted any
such thing, or taught any such thing to doff their hats; else there was a fine
or imprisonment to come upon them; else with the life of the Prophets, and
Moses, and all the Ministers of God, and holy men of God, you are judged and
condemned to be in another practice, and out of theirs, and not in theirs, nor
in the life.

To the light in your consciences I speak, that with it you may see you despise
dominion and dignity, and respect persons, and would bring others to respect
persons, when he that respects persons, is convinced of the Law as a
transgressor. Here it is you that are not subject to the highers powers, which
are ordained of God.

This is given forth for the sakes of them that exercise their consciences
toward God and man, and cannot respect the person, nor worship that which is
to be condemned with that which exercises the conscience.

THe Word of the Lord God to you which are called the two Mothers in this
Nation, with them which do come from you, whom you have made Ministers: they
have told us, Christ Jesus has sent them: and we see now with the light which
comes from Christ, that they are made Ministers by the will of man, and Christ
Jesus sent them not, but their Mothers, as they call them. And they told us
that the letter was the light, when the letter says Christ is the light. Here
we do charge them, both they and their Mothers, to be liars, and to be
adulterated from the light, and know nothing but the outside: so with the light
they all liars are to be condemned for the lake, as it is written, The liars
must have their portion in the lake that burns. And they and their Mothers have
filled this Nation full of their lies: but with the light that comes from Jesus
Christ, which never changes, they are comprehended, and condemned to the lake,
liars. And they told us, (the sons and children that came from their mothers)
That the Bible was the Word: and the Bible says, In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was God. And here again, (with this light which comes from
this Word, which Word endures for ever, which was before paper and ink was, and
the Scripture was given forth) they are seen, and we do charge both the mothers
and their sons to be liars, and no Ministers of the Word: for they which were
Ministers of the Word, and eyewitnesses, took in hand to set forth a
declaration in order. So it is a declaration which the Ministers of the Word
set forth, which word was in the beginning, by which all things were made, and
upheld by the Word and power: and the Word became flesh, and dwelt amongst us.
And here thou that first as a Queen, and feast no sorrow, and have many
children, thy desolation is coming, and comed, and the loss of thy children:
thy skirts are seen, and thy nakedness appears; and thy leudness, and
whoredoms, and witchcrafts, and lies, do appear to all the children of the
light, who are in the light, that comprehends all the world, and reaches over
it.

and the children that are come from their Mothers taught us and told us, That
Hebrew, Greek and Latin was the original, and is the original, and such
learned men must open the Scriptures, and with the light which is eternal,
which is come from the Son of God, with it we do see that before Babel was, all
the earth was of one language, and then Nimrod the cunning hunter before the
Lord which came out of Hams stock the father of Canaan, who was cursed, he was
the beginner of the building of Babel, whom God confounded into many languages;
and we do see that Pilate which crucified Christ had his original Hebrew, Greek
and Latin, and set it over Christ, so with the light we may see them, Babylon,
building up and throwing down with their many languages which is confusion, and
their Mother the Mother of Harlots, which teaches them many languages, which
sits trimmed and deceives the Nations; but with the light which comes from
Jesus Christ, she and her Sons are comprehended, and they can go no further
then Babel which are Babylon; for with the light you are seen, comprehended and
judged with the word, which was before any language was, by which all things
were made, as is said before; and here you are hammered who are in many
languages with the word, which is as an hammer to beat you in pieces, and with
the word you are to be cut and divided asunder, for the word is as a two-edged
Sword, and the word is as fire to burn you up, who be in the many languages,
and to you all this is the word of the Lord, which does endure for ever, and
who are redeemed, are redeemed forth of the many languages, and is come before
Babel was. And the children which came from the Mother told us that sprinkling
Infants was the baptism, and the Steeple-house the Church, and of a Sacrament,
which there i^ no such Scripture. And so again here with the light that Christ
Jesus Christ has enlightened us withal, we see they taught us more lies, and so
with the light they are to be condemned, as I said unto you before; for the
light that gave forth the Scriptures, says the Church is in God, and with the
Spirit they were baptized all into one body, and was made to drink all into one
Spirit, with the light we do see and witness this praised be God, which has
separated us from this lying generation, which holds up these Mothers and their
Sons, which be teachers of lies. And they did tell us these Children that come
from their Mothers, that they were the Ministers of God, and his Prophets, and
his Messengers. Now with the light that comes from Christ, we do them all see
to be such, as be out of the truth, and such as the Lord sent Micah to cry
against, that are hirelings, and they that do not put into their mouths they
prepare war against them; they that do, to them they preach peace, and boast
and say, Is not the Lord amongst us? none evil can come unto us: Who be in the
evil and transgression, with the light that comes from Christ comprehended they
are, with which light the Prophets that saw Christ witnessed against such with
the same light, which lighr we witness made manifest, which never changes, with
which light all deceiters and deceits are comprehended, and with the light we
do see them that come from their Mothers, to be such as seek for their gain
from their quarter, as bears rule by their means, as seeks for the fleece,
which the Lord sent his Prophets to cry against, which were in the light, with
which light they saw Christ, which Christ has enlightened us with, with which
light we see the same as the Prophets did, which was witnesses of Christ with
the light. And so here we do see them to be the deceivers, who go into the
world, who uses their tongues and says the Lord says, when he never spoke to
them; and speaks a divination of their own brain, and follow their own
spirits, which are the dreamers, with the light they are all seen which never
changes, and with it which is eternal, comprehended: and to you this is the
eternal word of God. And those Sons that came from their Mothers told us they
were Christ's Ambassadors, with the light which comes from Christ which Christ
has enlightened us withal; we do see them to be holding up the figures in the
first Covenant, and their mothers to be liars, and they no Ambassadors of
Christ which takes Tithes of the people, and if they will not give it them who
witnesses the unchangeable Priest Christ Jesus, and deny the changeable, they
sue them at the Law, and cause them to be haled before Magistrates, Courts
Sessions, and put them in prison because they will not pay them Tithes. Here
you are declared to the whole Nation to be liars, and no Ambassadors of Jesus
Christ; for whom he sent forth, he sent forth freely and denied all oppression.
Here with the Scripture it self you are all judged to be out of the practice of
them that he sent forth.

And you that take Tithes of the people, and bring the Scripture for your rule,
as they that received Tithes in old time, which had a storehouse to put it in;
and them that did not bring their Tithes, and fill it, they robbed God, as said
Malachi. And the Priests which received the Tithes, the strangers, the
fatherless, and the widows, were to come within the Priests gate, and he was to
minister forth to the strangers, the fatherless, and the widows, that there
might be no beggar in Israel.

Now to you who receive Tithes I speak, who are neither Ministers of the
Gospel, nor Ministers of the first Covenant, but Juglers, as you call it, you
are made manifest to all who be in the light. Now if you say, Give Caesar his
due, which are hypocrites, and bring that for your cloak, for to hold up the
figure, the first Priesthood; that cloak will not you cover, but your nakedness
and whoredom from the Lord is seen with the light, which are all to be
condemned from the first Covenant and the second both, who are found in the
truth in neither. For the first Priesthood, who had a Storehouse into which
the Tithes were received, which the Priests ministered forth to the strangers,
widows, and, fatherless, a figure of the unchangeable Priest Christ Jesus, who
ministers out of the everlasting treasure. And whiles the first Priesthood was
standing, Storehouse and Tithes was preached up, it was before Christ Jesus
was preached up, and his resurrection. And when Christ Jesus was preached up,
the unchangeable Priesthood over the household of God, then the unchangeable was
confessed with them, and the changeable Priesthood, Storehouse, and Tithes,
was denied, disannulled, and of no effect. Which the deceivers of the world,
these mothers and sons, for their own ends, bring up Tithes again, and say they
are Ministers of Christ. But with the light which comes from Christ, we do see
who they are, and what they are that have told us these lies. So with the light
they are to be condemned, and their mothers, and their children, and their
proselytes that they have begotten; to the light in all your consciences, which
shall wi^ness me eternally, I speak, and you all condemn that hate it, and hold
up such things. And to you this is the Word of God, that you might see
yourselves, what you are.

And they have told us which came from their Mothers, that they were in Christ's
stead, and he sent them: but with the eternal light, which never changes, which
Christ Jesus has enlightened us withal, we do see them in the steps of the
Scribes and Pharisees, garnishing the Sepulchers of the righteous, building the
Tombs of the Prophets and Apostles, as whited walls, outsides, and sepulchers,
and graves; who bury the just, whose hands are full of blood, envy, and
hatred; which be such as are called of men Masters, and have the chiefest
places in the Assemblies, stand praying in the Synagogues, in the steps of the
Pharisees their fathers which were enemies to Christ, as you may read, Matthew.
23. And with the light that comes from our Lord Jesus Christ you are all seen,
and with it to be condemned: no cloak can cover you, but you are seen with all
the children of the light. Praised be the Lord God.

And the Word of the Lord God to all you who say that you are gifted men, who
say you are not made Ministers by these two Mothers, but you are experienced
men, pretending a gift, and you must exercise your gift; and you will have 40,
50, or 60, or 80 l. a year, more or less as you can get it, for your gift. Now
I charge you, in the presence of the living God, to be such as err from the
spirit as your father Balaam did, and are turned from the commands of God, as
Cain did: and you are the self-separation, whose fruit shall wither: you are
the clouds without water, the wandering stars, who receive the wages of
unrighteousness, who speak high swelling words through the lusts of the flesh,
which have men's persons in admiration because of advantage. You are the wells
without water, which say you are experienced men, and gifted men, and go and
sell your gift to the world: here again I do charge you in the presence of the
living God to be liars, dissemblers, and deceivers of the world, and contrary
to the Scripture, and never perceived the gift of God: for the elect you cannot
deceive, which have received the gift of God, which is perfect, which cannot be
bought and sold for money: so your gifts which can be sold for money, are not
received from God, but with the light which comes from Christ Jesus, which is
eternal, you and your gifts are to be condemned, which can be bought and sold
for money. You are them that separate your selves, sensual, not having the
Spirit. With the light you are seen, and your fruits which withers, and with it
which never changes, you and it are condemned. To that in your consciences I
speak, which never changes, which shall witness me, which condemns you, to you
this is the eternal word of God. And you that say ye are Ministers of Christ,
and declares against these two Mothers aforementioned, and her sons and
children, and you your selves such as are called of men Masters, have the
chiefest places in the assemblies, and stand praying in the Synagogues, which
our Lord Jesus Christ cried woe against. And you say the Scripture is your
rule; here with Christ's words are you judged and seen to be deceivers, that
deceives the world; but they who are in Christ, which cried woe against such,
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, as you may read Mat. 23. you cannot
deceive, and your teachers that say the Scriptures is your rule, and are
separate from these two Mothers and children before mentioned, and which say
you must observe the Commands of Christ and Ordinances, and are zealous of the
outward Commands, as the Jews was, and yet ye do not believe that Jesus Christ
inlightens every one that comes into the world. Here you and your zeal is to be
condemned, for it is without the knowledge of God: to it I bear record
eternally, and the Commands of Christ you know not, and with the light that
cones from Christ Jesus, you and your zeal is to be condemned, which is taken
out from the letter in that mind and nature which acts contrary to the
light; so you are in the state of the schism, whose mouths must be stopped.

FINIS.

