To all you Commanders and Officers of the Army in Scotland, especially: and to
all elsewhere.
WHO have been eye witnesses of the favor and kindness of the Lord unto you,
and have been partakers of many and great deliverances, who have seen the power
of the Lord going before you, and his righteousness being your rereward, when
they said in their hearts, you should become as a booty unto them, and as a
prey to feed upon, then the Lord appeared for his own name sake, and did lift
up a standard against them, and made them as driven stubble before the bow,
even when they swelled as Jordan, not that you might glory in strength, nor in
your own activity, but in him who taught your hands to war, and your fingers to
fight, even when you were but low, weak and unable, in your own sight, then did
he appear in his strengh, that none might glory but in him, whose arm has
brought Salvation, and has given your lives for a prey; And has raised up
many of you from low estate, even as from the sheepfold, to be Rulers of
thousands and hundreds, of fifties and tens. Consider the years past, and call
to mind the former days of old, and see where you are now, if you are not
degenerated from the first integrity, and fallen into the same practice, and
abomination as they were in, whom the Lord scattered before you, cast out as an
abominable branch; and do not think in your hearts that the Lord has given
your enemies into your hands, and made them tributary unto you, that so you
might glory in your strength, and grow up to the same abomination of the
Nation, and follow the lusts of your hearts, and swell up in pride through the
abundance of spoil and treasure. But it was well said by the Prophet, When
Ephraim spoke trembling he exalted himself in Israel, but when he offended in
Baal he died; and this was a commandment to Israel, that when they came into
the Land which the Lord gave to their Fathers, they were not to worship strange
Gods, neither to walk after the custom of the Heathen: What was the cause, do
ye judge, that God blasted the enemies in this Land, and turned their counsel
backwards, and their wisdom into folly, and made their Prophets fools, and
their Deviners mad? was it because you were more then they, or your strength
geater then theirs, let that in your consciences judge? Or was it because the
Lord was weary with the Oppression of the Rulers, who grinded the faces of the
poor, and with the Hypocrisy of the Priests and Teachers, and with the
false-heartednesse of the people, for every one dealt falsely and treacherously
with the Lord? And yet they were so proud, they could not be content herewith,
but as the mouth of hell is never satisfied, no more were they except all would
bow down to their King whom they would have set up, and the Priests for their
Calfe were so zealous, either must all submit to this, or else nothing but fire
and sword, and destruction on the right hand, and on the left was threatened,
but the Lord saw the pride of Moab, and considered it, and made her serve who
sat as a Queen; Not because, as I say, you were great, or mightier, or
stronger, but for his own name sake, and for making way for a further thing,
which many yet cannot see, even that his everlasting truth might find way and
be published, according to his own will, for the advancement of his own glory:
and he will declare it by whom he will, and where he will, and when he will,
though to the crossing of all men's wills; although some would hedge him up by a
Law made in their wills, or limit him to a time; and many shut his Messengers
out, and say as Amaziah the Priest of Bethel to Amos, this is the Kings
Chapel, or as some say a Garrison, or some prohibited place by a Law; yet that
which would limit the holy one must be made even with Earth.

Has the Lord cast them out, and has planted you in, and has he given you
Dominion over Provinces, Towns and Cities, which you builded not, that you
should walk in their footsteps, oh nay be sure of this the Lord will visit you
for these things; Are not many of you countenancing the Priests and Teachers of
this Nation, and upholding the same worship, which some of you in years past
would have been ashamed of, and are not you going to learn of them, and to be
taught by them, who before Dunbar, Prophesied all your destruction, and your
total overthrow, and delivered you up to Satan as Heriticks: and so were made
false Prophets, and tellers of lies in the sight of all their own Nation, and
also to your understanding: and were they deceived then, and false Prophets
then, and incendaries to imbroyl all the poor people of this Nation in blood to
fight for their imagined calfe Presbitery; and are they now become your
Teachers? O tell it not in Gath, nor publish it not in Askellon, least the
uncircumcised rejoice and laugh at your folly; Will you join to Baal, and serve
Ashteroth? oh let Baal plead for himself: And must these now be upholden by
the Sword, as the Ministers of Christ, and be defended? Will you suffer them to
put out your eyes, that they may make you grind like Sampson at a Mill? Are not
they all out of the Doctrine of Christ, and out of the practice of all Prophets,
Christ and his Ministry? Are not they time-servers, hirelings, greeedy of
filthy lucre, fierce, despisers of those that are good? Are not they wholly
without the life of godliness, and also quite without a true form? search the
Scriptures and see if they declare not against all such practices. Truly I may
say, as the Prophet said of the Priests of Jerusalem, Profaneness is gone out
from them into all Nations, for they have daubed with untempered mortar, and
luld people in security, and have cried peace unto them, when they have all
walked according to the Imaginations of their own hearts; in few words this I
say unto you, The helper and helped will both fall together.

Again, Another great evil is found amongst you, who sometimes have been
asserters of liberty, and have said, it would be great happiness to obtain
liberty of conscience, to worship God in Spirit and truth, as he was made
manifest; but now, when you are tried, you are setting to have your selves
worshipped with caps and knees, and in language, such as all the holy men of
God never owned nor knew, and have forgotten the rock from whence you were
hewn; have you not turned some of the Soldiers out of the Army, who have
jeoperded their sives in the time of the gretest straits in the high places in
the field, only for conscience sake, because they cannot submit to your wills,
nor give that to man which belongs to God, and this has the Lord against you.
Therefore all be warned in time, and take heed you swell not up in pride, and
walk lofty upon the mountains of arrogance, for pride goes before destruction,
neither learn ye the customs of them whom the Lord has brought down, lest
the same be your portion as theirs, and take heed of ease in the flesh, and of
doing violence to the honest, and them that fear the Lord amongst you, for then
you bear the Sword in vain, and are no Soldiers for God; but the Sword is to
be turned against the violent doer, and you ought to be an encouragement to
them that do well, but how far some of you is from this, the light of Christ in
your consciences will let you see. Let me tell you, the Lord has made some of
you instrumental to level the mountains without, and to cut down the rough
places which were not passable, see that you boast not your ^elvs against him
that hewd with you: for as I said before, this which is done is but a all
preparation to something further, which he himself will bring and is bringing
about, and that by weak things, and things that are not, see you despise it
not, and so loos the reward of all you have done, for not by might, nor by
power, nor by sword shield, or buckler without, but by his own arm will he
bring salvation, and exalt his own horn above all his enemies, and will bring
salvation to his own feed. And now oh be wise and resist him not in his way
lest ye be numbered amongst Transgressors, and your memorial wear out, and you
perish amongst them that gainsay.

Now he is bringing down the mountains within, and staining the pride and glory
of all flesh, and sifting the Nations, and all the chafe shall be blown away,
and all abominations shall be brought to judgment, and the dead great and
small shall arise, and every one shall receive according to his works, for he
is risen in his strength as a man of war, to wound the head of the Dragon in
the Sea, and to put a hook in the mouth of Leviathan, the old Dragon, and he is
come to bind him, and to chain him up that he deceive the Nations no more. And
this he will do, and is bringing to pass by the little stone cut out of the
mountain without hands, he will smite down the great Image of profession, and
make their carcasses fall with their Idols, that nothing but himself may
reign: that all may know that the most high rules in the Kingdom of the
children: therefore love justice, truth, and righteousness, and be not examples
of evil to the Nations, neither to your Souldery, nor open not the mouths of
the Heathen, nor strengthen the hand of evill-doers, least you fall together:
but all mind that which searches the hearts, and shows you sin, and will
preserve you out of it; if you (the light which comes from Christ which he has
enlightened you withal) mind, here is your teacher and leader present, and if
you hate it, it will condemn you, and all your actions together, and misery
will be the end, harden not your hearts against instruction, lest you perish
amongst fools, and there be no more rembrance of you.

Leith, 145 Month, called July 1657.
By a friend to righteousness and just power, FRANCIS HOWGILL.

