THE CAUSE OF STUMBLING Removed from all that will receive the TRUTH; and from
before the Eyes of the Wise men of LONDON: In a Treatise showing the difference
between the spirit of a man which is the candle of the Lord, and the light
which has enlightened every man that comes into the WORLD.

Also showing, that though there be diversity of Administrations, yet there is
not diversity of Lights and Spirits, by which they are ministered: And showing
by clear testimony what the more sure Word of Prophecy is, which the Apostle
Peter exhorts the people to take heed unto, until the day did dawne, and the
day star arise in their hearts.

Herein also is a false Hosanna, and a false testimony reproved; and a false
witness is rejected, and an untimely birth cast out, though for the time of
Travel it might have been a monster, being above two years; but in the end is
brought forth for destruction; the name of him which has so long traveled to
bring forth wind and confusion, is one known in the City of London by the name
of John Iackson; being by the truth of this following made manifest: That so by
every motion of the Spirit of Truth, and every testimony given from it,
Understanding and Knowledge of the Truth may be increased, in those that follow
on to know the LORD.

Given forth from the Lords servant, Richard Hubberthorne.

For this end was I born, and for this end came I into the world, to bear
witness unto the Truth,

Joh. 18. 37. Every one that is of the Truth hears my voice.

Spoylers shall come up out of the North, which shall spoil Babylon,

Jer. 51. 48. London, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1657.

THE Light is broken forth as the morning, and the health of the Nations is in
it, and is springing forth speedily, and the righteousness of the righteous
Seed is going forth before them, and the glory of the Lord is revealed to his
Seed, which now calls, and the Lord does answer, Here am I; and the Lord has
made, and is making his Seed as a watered Garden, and like a spring of water,
whose waters fail not; and is raising up the foundations of many generations,
that people may come to build again upon shat* Foundation which they have been
driven from, especially by their Pastors: for says the Lord, Many Pastors have
destroyed my Vinyard, they have trodden my Portion under foot, and made my
pleasant Portion a desolate Wilderness, and have made Gods Heritage as a
speckled Bird, the Birds round about are against her, and all the Beasts of the
Field come to devour, Jer. 12. 9, 10. And now is the Lord come forth against
these devourers, even as a Lion bereaved of her young ones: for the Lord will
not suffer the spoil of his Heritage no longer, but will dress his Vinyard
that it may bring forth fruit unto him: And now is the Lord casting out the
blind Vatchmen, and the foolish Prophets which have followed their own spirit,
and have seen nothing, and all such is the Lord casting out, and his
everlasting fire is he kindling amongst them: And now I hear a cry of torment
going through the Nation: Can any kindle a fire among Serpents, and they not be
offended and shut their stings? Can any touch the Vipers but they will smell
with venom? and when Scorpions are trodden upon, will they not show forth their
strength? Can that nature suffer death patiently? nay patience proceeds from
that Seed which slays the enmity, and destroys the man of sin; and
therefore as we have one Seed to witness for, so there is one to witness
against; and as it is the work of the spirit of God to approve the things that
are of God, so it is iis work also to reprove those things which is contrary to
sound Doctrine, to the end that every one may know as well what to reject and
deny as error, as what to own for truth and sound Doctrine; therefore of
necessity must every one be turned to the light which Christ has enlightened
them withal, that they may discern what they are to approve, and what they are
to reprove; and that judgment is true which stands in the light, and in the
measure of the spirit of Truth.

TO THE READER
MEN of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie; and the heart
of man is desperately wicked and deceitful above all things. Hear this ye wise
men and foolish; the more ye strive against the Lord, the more is your wound
made incurable; and the higher you rise in envy, always the deeper is your
fall in confusion. And now Christian Reader, whose heart God has opened to see
and behold the things that be eternal, and can truly discern of different
causes, and between the good and the evil, and between the light and the
darkness. This Book is sent forth in the pursuit, and after a Book called,
Hosanna to the Son of David, etc. by a namelesse Author, whose work indeed was
hardly worthy of an honest man's Name, though very subtly and craftily he
prosecutes his purpose, and traverses his steps full cunningly, as this worlds
wisdom could guide him, in which wisdom he cannot know or receive the things of
God; and therefore it cannot be expected that the things of God should be
received from that wisdom; and though he has confounded in his words his
description of the Light of Christ, sometimes speaking well of it, and
sometimes otherwise, and not knowing hardly whereof he has affirmed; his words
are so counfounded and mixed in his corrupt reason, in giving forth his
knowledge of the things of God, which he seems to be ignorant of, but only as
he has the knowledge of them from the Letter, by which no man can come to the
knowledge of God, nor of the things of his Kingdom without the revelation of
the Spirit of Jesus, and the opperation of the same spirit: But friends, the
testimony of God stands sure for ever, though men would confound it in their
own reason: And this is the testimony, That Christ lights every man that
comes into the world, which light is sufficient to lead every man to God, or
else to condemn every man from God; and this testimony is true, notwithstanding
all the opposition against it; and it shall abide sure for ever, though men
strive never so much in the gainsaying of it: And this is the testimony which
we have born and shall bear to the end, and who believes it, and who believes
it not, this is the hand of the Lord according to his pleasure, and to him we
leave it, and so we do, and must clear our consciences from time to time, while
the Lord gives us a being: And herein we are a good savor to God, and our
reward is with him, whether Israel be gathered or no, Isa. 49. And also this
namelesse Author, which is supposed to be one John Iackson, known in this City,
has taken some seeming occasion against us by searching our Books, and (as he
says) has found some contradictions in them, which may appear to be so to
his dark mind; yet in the sight of the spirit of the Lord that is truth which
he sees to be no other then error: However, this is sent forth for the true
information of peoples minds, that they may know that truth is bold and
confident, and that it is Armor which defends from all enemies, and gives
strength to answer the craftiness of men. And this same John Iackson has
showed himself now to be one with the common Priests of the world, for as they
have done, so has he; opposed the way and people of God, and with the very
same Arguments, showing that he is of the very same spirit with them, his
discourse and arguments being of the same nature as theirs are; yea, he has
showed himself to be of the very same spirit with all the open profane
wretches which does revile, and scorn, and abuse, in every town and country
the Lords people; and as they do so, so has he written with subtle Arguments,
to the very same end as they reproach and scorn, (to wit) in a derision, and
despising the way and servants of the Lord; so that his self-separation is now
seen what it is, to be a very cheat and hypocrisy, who while he professes a
separation from the world, does practice the very same wickedness, and is not
changed from them in nature, though he be in appearance: But what a poor work
has he brought forth in two years time? which he says his work has been as
Embres raked up in ashes, yet a work that gains no praise of God, nor very
little of the praise of any man: It seems he has hatched mischief upon his
bed, and brought it forth in the morning: Who would have thought but a wise man
in that time would have brought forth a larger piece, and more to purpose* I am
sure he might have made better use of his time in another exercise, then to
have writ against the servants of the Lord: It had been more honest for him to
have set his Pen to Paper, and studied to have given his testimony against the
pride, and drunkenness, and oppression, and whoredoms, and wickedness in this
great City. I say, it had been more honest, and liker a Saint, to have sought
the reforming of profaneness and wickedness that greatly abounds in this
City, then to have studied two years to bring forth his invented stuff against
a harmless and innocent people, which he, nor any, can justly charge with
evil, but as he has dug deep by his imaginations, in recollecting a
seeming-contradiction out of our writings, which is no contradiction, no more
then Christ's words are, who says, Except ye eat my flesh, and drink my blood,
ye have no life in you; and yet in the same discourse says, The flesh profits
nothing: and for Isaiah to go with the word of the Lord to Hezekiah, to tell
him he should dye and not live; yet in the same instant of time, told him he
should live and not dye: Would not John Iackson have counted these
contradictions? But what he has done in this, in sending forth a Book against
the Quakers, he has been so far from beating down sin, drunkards, and rude
scorners, and abusive men that he has fully strengthened their hands, and the
wickedst people in this Nation are very glad of his work: He has given them
matter to oppose truth withal; but his reward and theirs shall be both with
one hand, and he shall drink his portion in the same Lake with such whose:
hands he has strengthened; and let him know, and themall, God has established
us upon a sure Mountain, which the Gates of Hell and Death cannot prevail
against. So his work i^ counted of us, and cast by as our spoiled prey of
Babylons treasure, only this is sent abroad after it, in the pursuit of it,
which is not done with multitudes of words of man's wisdom, but in the plain
nakedness of innocent truth, which is more strength then all his Arguments of
guile, whereby he would deceive the people, but he can deceive none but such as
are deceived already; for all that are in the light, and in the truth, sees
beyond all that he can say, and are established where his word; can never reach
them, to take away their peace, or disquiet them; sor as I said, we are
established upon a sure foundation, and are tried and proved, and cannot be
blown away with any windy Doctrines of men, which begets into st^ffe, and not
into true sincerity of heart; but woe unto that man that works offense, and does
cast stumbling blocks in the way of the simple: And though the Lords people be
a suffering people, yet woe unto them that causes them to suffer: And though he
and some others in their spirits were elevated, thinking thereby to trample
upon the innocent by that occasion happening concerning I. N. which was not
suffered of the Lord to be as an occasion to destroy his people, but as an
occasion to try them, and to prove them, and thereby are they tried and proved,
and the more settled rather then confounded; and John Iackson, and such like,
may glory in such things for a moment because the appearance of it seems evil,
yet the Lord will make their glorying void, for the Lord has ways enough to
preserve his people, and this we have found in many needful times; and as
concerning this thing which was looked upon as a breach among us by many, yet
it is over, and truth stands a top of it, and the beauty of truth appears
through it all, and truth is more lovely when it is proved and purged: What if
the Lord suffer his to be lead and tempted for a season, let not the wicked
boast of this; sor though the righteous fall, he shall rise again; but the
wicked fall into mischief: But yet we learn something by this, what a great use
the devil has made hereof, and how many Books and lying Scribbles has been
sent forth about it concerning us, which are all counted by us no better then
the worst corrupted treasure that ever grew in Babylon; and the best of it is
but baubles to please vain minds, for men of sound understandings can take no
pleasure therein. And we see how by all means the Devil and his people seeks
occasion against the ways and people of God, and how glad are the wicked when
they get an occasion against the Lords people? and how do they glory in it, and
boast in it for a time, thinking that their hands are strengthened in a greater
boldness to do mischief? And John Iackson is one of those that takes pleasure
in these things, and he has managed his business with a great deal of craft,
but there is none that will praise him for it, except such whose wicked hands
he strengthens, and such as he must have stumblings after the way of the Lord
has been so fully manifested, and they receive it not, and they must fall and
be broken. And seeing that the wicked does take occasion, and seeks occasion
against the innocent, this will make many more watchful, and more circumspect,
and more to walk in Gods wisdom, and to deny their own ways, least offenses
come by them: And let him put off his Armor, and lay down his Weapon, and I
wish he may spend the next two years to come, better then he has done these
last; and that the little fire in the Embres may kindle, to the burning of his
corruptions, rather then into a blind zeal against the innocent people; and
what in this Book is written, is not to contend or strive for mastery, but to
clear the truth, and to remove all cause of stumblings from before the face of
all the upright in heart.

A Friend to all people E. B.
London, the third day of the nineth Month, 1657.
The cause of stumbling removed, from all that will receive the truth, and from
before the eyes of the wise men of LONDON.
MAny untimely Births in ages past and present has been brought forth, and the
work of such has always been to destroy the Heir, the seed which the Lord
has blessed, that so the Inheritance might be theirs, and so would thrust
themselves into the Kingdom; but they know while the seed of the promise is
alive, it keeps them out, and will not let them meddle with those things which
they are not born unto: For they are sons of Bondage, and children of
fals-hood, and must not be Heirs with the son of the free, etc. David out of
whose root the righteous seed did arise, the bright and morning Star, he saw
that seed in his days and was aware of them, and gave his testimony concerning
them, saying, in heart ye work wickedness, you weigh the violency of your
hands in the earth, the wicked are estranged from the womb, they go astray as
soon as they be born, speaking lies; their Poison is like the Poison of a
Serpent, they are like the deaf Adder that stops her ear, Charming never
so wisely: Break their teeth O God in their mouth, break out the teeth of the
young Lions, O Lord let them melt away as waters, that run continualy, when he
bends his bow to shoot his arrows; let them be as cut in pieces, as a Snaile
which melts; let every one of them pass away like the untimely birth of a
Woman, that they may not see the Sun, etc. Psalm. 58. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. And
again he says, behold he travelleth with iniquity, and has conceived mischief
and brought forth false-hood, Psalm. 7. 14. and so there was a traveling and
laboring before they could get their iniquity brought forth; as we have true
declarations concerning the ages past, how many have traveled and brought
forth wind and confusion; so likewise in this age by experience can we give
testimony of the like births which has been brought forth to the slaughter
amongst Babylons children, and here is one of the same birth born and brought
forth in this City of LONDON, to which I shall speak some thing at present,
although he conceal his name, yet the seed you shall know by its fruits; it is
one that would be reckoned amongst those children that in the Temple cried
Hosanna to the Son of David Mat. 12. 15. But the seed which David called Lord
is risen, and has rebuked the false voice, for it is not every one that cries
Lord, Lord, nor every one that cries Hosanna, that enters into the kingdom,
but such as hears the word of God and does it.

Now the testimony which this Author gives to that which after a long travel is
come forth, is this, that it has been in his breast two years and upwards,
while it at length is come forth as an untimely birth, or as that which is born
out of due time, laboring under the burden of being both unnecessary and
unseasonable.

Such a testimony as this seems to beget a wonder in the airy spirits of men,
as if a Monster were to be seen (what two years travel, and yet an untimely
birth!) and many such false cries is in this City, which enters into the
sensual part of men, and begets into the affections; but there is a seed risen
which has received from the father the spirit of Judgment, and understanding,
and it does not own things according to the report, nor Judge of things
according to their names in outward appearance, but has a measuring line given
unto it, and a true balance whereby voices, ways, worships, and testimonies is
tried before they be approved, and therewith shall this spirit be tried, and
voice which is come forth crying, Hosanna to the son of David, or a testimony
to the Lords Christ; which being truly weighted and searched, may prove a
testimony against the Lords Christ, which has enlightened every man that comes
into the world, in setting up man's spirit to be the light, instead of the Lords
Christ: But first let us consider, the burden under which this man has
labored, which is as he says, that which is both unnecessary and
unseasonable; first unnecessary, because the same has been before by better
hands; so it is not to be admired as a Monster, because it has already been,
and effected nothing: Secondly unseasonable, because those are already
resolved; that Jesus Christ is the true light which has enlightened every man
that comes into the world, which he would resolve, that the spirit in every
man is that light, and so according to this, every man must follow his own
spirit, instead of following the light which Christ has enlightened him
withal: Now this burden thus considered, which is both unnecessary and
unseasonable, having been in his breast above two years; all that have received
the spirit of Judgment, and knows the workings of the mystery of iniquity,
and can truly read the state of those which are filled with unrighteousness,
knows that this birth is cursed before ever it came forth, and it had been
better that it had never been born, nor brought forth into the world; for it
will be to the great agravation of his sorrow and misery which did conceive it,
and so long travel in it, and at last brought it forth; but among the untimely
births shall we reckon it, which never saw the ^un, nor never received blessing
from the Father, and happy shall he be that rewards thee as thou have
rewarded us; and happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy untimely birth
against the stones, Psalm. 137. 8. 9. Against this birth has the Lord ^^reched
forth his everlasting arm to dash in pieces, and this is not the first of
Babylons children which in this age, and in this City has been brought forth
to the spoil, nor the first which this man has brought forth, for he has
brought forth another without a name, which is both as unnecessary and as
unseasonable as this: And so from experience he may say, that it is both
unnecessary and unseasonable either to conceive, or bring forth any such thing
against the seed which the Lord has blessed; for there was never any as yet
which did strive against the Lord, or his anointed ones which did prosper;
neither shall to the ends of the earth.

So the burden of this man is searched, and Judged, and found not to be the
burden of the word of the Lord, though he thought it to be so, when in him he
felt the fire of enmity, boiling and bubling up within him, as in his Epistle;
But we have found it to be such a burden as the false* Prophets in Jerusalem
did see for the people, which was false burdens, and causes of banishment,
Lam. 2. 14. But if the fire of the Lord had been kindled in him, it would have
consumed this birth in the womb, before ever it had been brought forth.

But the hour is comeing and now is, in which the Lord is fulfilling his
promise according to the Scriptures, which says, that he will make Jerusalem a
burdensome stone for all people, all that burden themselves with it shall be
cut in pieces, though all the people upon the earth be gathered together
against it, Zac. 12. 3. And as this was spoken, so it is fulfilled, and
fulfilling, that the testimony of God may be sealed up among his children: For
now is the light risen with which the Lord Christ is gathering into the new
Jerusalem, the City of the living God, and now has many burdened themselves
with it: And so burdened, that they cannot tell how to unburthen themselves of
it: but to ease themselves of that burden which is ready to press them down,
they break forth into revileing terms, and un^avory speeches, and false
assertions against the light, and those that walk in it, and will deny both the
light and children of light to be spiritual: Some calling it natural light,
some calling it natural conscience, some created light, some the light of
reason and understanding; some old creation light, some a dim light, some the
spirit of man, and so burden themselves with it: and when they have both
spoken and printed such things to ease them of their burden, their burden
grows again; and so they do not cease to vex and grieve the holy spirit of God
from day to day, and when they have burdened themselves with the enmity
against the light, and the works of righteousness, proceeding forth from it to
the father, then they cry the burden of the Lord* the fire of the Lord within
them: But says the Lord to such, I will destroy that man and his house, and
the burden of the Lord shall ye mention no more, for every man's word shall be
his burden: for ye have perverted the words of the living God, of the Lord of
Hosts our God, Ier. 23. 36. Theref^re is the measureing line gone forth to
measure the false burdens, whereby they pervert the words of the living God,
with their own words and Imaginations; and unto those which ever were
reproachers of the way and people of God, the Lord says I will bring an
everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame which shall not be
forgotten* Ier. 13. 40. So this is written that no man should any more burden
themselves with the burdensome stone, wereby they will be broken to pieces if
they fall upon it: But that every one may come to it, that with it they may see
their false burdens, and the sin which does so easiely beset them, and may
cease grieving of the spirit of the Lord, while his spirit striveth with them;
and may come to know every man his own word which will become his burden, when
it returns again unto him: But the word of the Lord goes forth and returns not
empty, neither does it burden him which it goes forth from, when it returns
again unto him: Although the true burden of the word of the Lord be known in
many before it go forth from them.

Therefore then seeing that it is an untimely birth, and not that which is born
of the sprit which is come forth from him to whom I now am to speak. Now least
others being in the same blindness with him, think as he does, that it is a
true voice, or Hosana to the Son of David, or a true testimony to the Lords
Christ, I shall weigh his testimony, seeing that the true Voice is gone forth
both in the days of his flesh, and since, in which days he was truly declared
to be the light of the world, and the true light which lightneth every one that
comes into the world, Ioh. 1. 9. Ioh. 8. Now seeing that this Author has set
up another thing to be the light which has enlightened every man, then Christ,
viz. the spirit of man; I shall try this testimony according to the Scriptures,
whether it be a testimony of the Lords Christ, or a testimony against him, in
these things following, which are the Heads of his Doctrine conc^rning the
Light.

Concerning the LIGHT, what it is.

It is the spirit of every man which is in him, and without which he cannot ^e
a man, and is the Candle of the Lord, Prove. 20. 27. This spirit of a man is the
Reason of a man, or the Understanding of a man: What this Light does, it gives
him to know his Creator, and the end of his creation, (viz.) who made him, and
why he was made, also how he should answer the end of him that made him; and
that God set up this Light in man to see by, both whom he is to serve, and how
he is to serve him, together with the reason thereof, Because God made him. And
with this Light God has s^^ up a Law, which Law is called Light, Prove. 6. 23.
whereby the will and mind of his Creator is made known unto him, and he
sufficiently qualified to see it* understand it, etc. p. 7. It searches the
inward parts of the Belly: At first it moved upward, and it could look God in
the face and serve him: But now since the fall the Thief is got into this
Candle, and has dimmed the light; and covered the aspiring ascendan^ quality,
and now it burn^ downward, and discovers the things beneath, page 6. That it is
all eye; it sees all that is done, but does nothing, it neither likes, nor
dislikes; approves, nor disproves, but as it is in conjunction with a Law, page
10.

That it is the property of Light to make manifest, Ephesians. 5. 13. Page 29.

That it is not in the power of the Light, as it is in every man, so much as to
call any thing that is done either good, or ^vil, page 32.

That the Light did drive Adam from the voice and presence of God, so far is
the Light from leading up to God, that i^ drives ^^e soul from God, and keeps
him in the fall, page 53.

That it does not lead into all truth such as love it, and obey it, page 54.

Not does it reveal all truth to them that love it, and obey it: And that
neither the Light, nor the Law does convince of the sin of unbelief.

That the Lamp and the Light are convertable terms; Thy word is as a Lamp,
Psalm. 119. 105. and that the Light and the Law is one, page 30. So by this, the
Light, which is the spirit of man, or man's Reason; and the Law, and the word
which of that which is called a Testimony of the Lords Christ, we shall try it
with the former testimony of the Lords Christ, as it is written in the
Scriptures, which was given forth from those which were true witnesses.

First, As in answer to these things, there is not one Testimony in the
Scriptures, neither from Prophet nor Apostle, that ever said the Spirit of man,
or man's reason or understanding was the Light which every one that comes into
the world is enlightened withal: But the testimony of truth concerning those
which followed their own spirits, is this, The Lord sent his Prophet Ezekiel to
cry woe unto the fooli^h Prophets that followed their own spirits, and had seen
nothing, Ezekiel. 13. 3. Now they were not without the spirit of a man, for then
they could not be a man, as he says: now if they had the Spirit of man, and
Reason, and if this was all eye, how was it that they saw nothing, when he
says, It sees all things? so it is not a true testimony of the Light, nor of
the Lords Christ: But the spirit of man is the Candle of the Lord, and the Lord
having lighted it, then it searches the inward parts of the belly: And David,
who knew what the spirit of man was, and what a Candle was without light, and
what it was when it was lighted, he said, For thou will light my candle, the
Lord my God will enlighten my darkness, Psalm. 1^. 28. So if the spirit of man
be the Candle of the Lord, then whether does not Christ enlighten every man
which comes into the world? and whether is not that light Christ, seeing the
spirit is but the Candle, and that it must be lighted?

Another testimony of his is this, That it is the property of Light to make
manifest, Ephesians. 5. 13. but all things that are reproved are made manifest by the
Light, for whatsoever does make manifest is light, page 29. And again in page
3^. says, That it is not in the power of the light, as it is in every man, so
much as ^o call any thing which is done either good or ^vil.

Answ. Whether of these two contraries must men believe, whether the light is
able to make manifest whatsoever is reprovable; or, that there is no^ power in
i^ to call any thing good or evil? But by this all men may see that this is not
a true Testimony to the Lords Christ, nor to his Light, Never was there any
such Doctrine preached by any that cried Hosana to the Son of David, no^ that
did give testimony to the Lords Christ, That there is not power in the light to
call any shing done good or evil. Now let all who have received the
measuring-Line, and the equal Balance, weigh and consider, seeing the
Scripture says, Whatsoever things is reprovable is made manifest by ^^e Light:
Is evil deeds reprovable then? they are ^ade manifest, then you see them to be
evil deeds, lying to be an evil deed, swearing to be an evil deed, drunkenness
to be an evil deed, covetousness to be an evil deed, pride to be an evil deed,
whoredom to be an evil deed, false accusing to be an evil deed, gainsaying the
truth to be an evil deed, anger and wrath to be evil deeds, and these things
are reprovable, and as the light does make them manifest, so it reproves them,
and such are convinced of sin because they believe not in Christ, so that
unbelief is reprovable, and is made manifest by the Light. And whereas some say
That the Light does not reprove for the s^n of unbelief, that is false, for
unbelief is reprovable, and whatsoever things are r^proveable is made manifest
by the Light* but he that does evil hates the light, and will not bring his
deeds to the light, lest the light should reprove him, Ioh. 3. 20. And Jesus
said unto certain Greeks and people which stood by him, which objected against
his words, which was no Saints nor believers, While y^^ have the Light, believe
in the Light, that ye may be the children of Light, Ioh. 12. 36. Now he did not
bid them believe in that which could not reprove unbelief* I am come a light
into the world, that whosoever believes in me should not abide in darkness.
And Jesus cried, and said, He that believes on me, believes on him that sent
me. Also Ioh. 12. 44, 46. This Light was not man's reason nor understanding,
neither was it man's spirit that was the true Light which lighteneth every one
that comes into the world, Ioh. 1. 9.

Again, another false testimony concerning the Light, is this, That the Light
did drive Adam from the voice and presence of God; and so far is the Light from
leading up to God, that it drives the soul from God* and keeps him in the fall,
page 53.

Answ. This Doctrine is to turn the truth of God into a lie, and to call light
darkness, and darkness light, for there is no such testimony in the
Scriptures that the Light did drive Adam from the voice and presence of God;
but Adam says, I was afraid because I was naked, and I hid my self: It was
because he had disobeyed Gods voice, not because he was enlightened; for the
Scripture says, It is your sins that has s^parated you from God, it does not
say that it is the light which has separated you from God, or driven you from
him; this may well be called a damnable Doctrine, or Doctrine of Devils: Has
God sent his Son ^ Light into the world to drive the souls from God, and keep
them in the fall. Now let all consider and judge that ever knew the Light,
whether it be darkness, or it be light which drives the soul from God, and
keeps it in the fall. Now this Doctrine being compared with the Scriptures, is
utterly false; and there is few that profess godliness in this Nation that
can bear it, or approve of it; and for such as account themselves the highest
profession, and above forms, under the Name of Seekers, to publish such a thing
in print, here it appears that the best of men is but as a Briar, and the most
upright is sharper then a Thorn-Hedge; for the day of thy Watchmen, and thy
Visitation comes, now shall be their perplexity, Mi^. 7 4. Now here is a day
for trial, that they which can may try the spirits and doctrines whether they
be of God. Now I shall lay it to that of God in all, is it not the work of the
Devil to drive the soul from God, and to keep people in the fall? If so, then
it is not the work of the light which lighteneth every man that comes into the
world, is not this to call light darkness, to say that the light is so far from
leading up to God, that it drives the soul from God, and keeps him in the Fall:
What is that which leads man out of the fall, if the light keep man in it? As
this is contrary to Scripture* and to truth, so it is contrary to his own
words, as in page 7. there saying, That by the Light is the will and mind of
the Creator made known unto man, and he sufficiently qualified to see it, and
understand it.

Answ. How can these two stand together, That the Light drives man from God,
and keeps him in the fall; and again, That it makes known the will and mind of
the Creator unto him, and sufficiently qualifies him to see and understand it?
This cannot truly be called Hosana to the Son of David, no^ A Testimony to the
Lords Christ, but a Line of Confusion which is stretched out, wherein darkness
is come forth as a Cloud, and spreads it self over the earth, to darken peoples
minds from the knowledge and understanding of truth, by words without
knowledge; but his folly shall proceed no further unreproved and made manifest.

Another false Testimony concerning the light is this, That at first it moved
upward, and man could look God in the face, and serve him; but now since the
fall the Thief is got into the Candle, and now the Spirit burns downward, and
discovers the things beneath.

Ans. What is the nature of the Light changed? or is the Spirit so changed,
that before it ascended upward, and now downward? We shall try this according
to the Scripture, which says, Who knows the Spirit of man that goes upward,
and the spirit of a Beast which goes downward to the earth, Eccles. 3. 21. so
then if it goes downward it is the spirit of a Beast, and not the spirit of a
man: And here it is plainly evident that he knows not the spirit of a man from
the spirit of a Beast* so unfit to cry Hosana to the Son of David, or bear
testimony to the Lords Christ. But as for the Light which has enlightened man
that comes into the world, the fall did not change the quality of the light,
for the light is the same* as it was, but darkness cannot comprehend ^t,
neither knows how to give a true testimony of it, but confusedly speaks of two
lights, the one springing up with man in his natural birth, suitable to his
natural birth; and another light suitable to the new birth that is born of the
spirit.

This is a testimony which is not to be found in Scripture, to be two Lights
suitable to the two births, for he that is born of the flesh persecutes him that
is born of the Spirit, and God has put enmity between the two Seeds; but to
say that there is two lights suitable, and so the one natural, and the other
spiritual; the one of the earth, earthly, and the other of the Lord, from
Heaven, as the two births are, this is not a testimony according to truth, for
the light is but one, and the spirit of truth is but one; and the same spirit
which led the Saints which believed, into all truth, the same did convince the
world of sin because they did not believe in Christ, Ioh. 16. ^. And that light
which is the condemnation of the world, who love the darkness rather then
Christ, the same is the Savior of all them that believe; and one man loves it,
and another hates it, yet it is the same light, Ioh. ^. 19* but the Scriptures
bears no such testimony as that there is two lights in man, the one spiritual,
and the other natural; and for any man to say that the light of Christ is
natural, is blasphemy against the Son of God, and is a sin not easily forgiven,
and it is hard for such to find the place of repentance; for every one that
comes to repentance, must first come to the light which Christ has enlightened
them withal, and must know it to be spiritual, and confess it so, and with
this light come to discern the two births, the one from the other, and their
several natures; and how that the one birth is guided by the light, it being as
the eye, giving them to see what to speak, before they speak, and so keeps them
out of the worlds line, which is confusion* and as a Teacher, giving them to
understand what to do, before they do it, and so keeps them out of the
condemnation, bringing their works beforehand to judgment; and so their works
are wrought in God, who answer the light which they be enlightened withal; but
the light is not suitable, no^ according to that birth which is born after the
flesh, but condemns that in all its ways and actions, and is given to lead the
creature out of that nature, and out of that birth, into the regeneration, to
lead out of the deeds of darkness, and out of the shadow of death, into the
living inheritance, among those that are sanctified in Christ Jesus.

Another testimony concerning the light, relating to the two Covenants is this,
That as there was a new Covenant diverse from the former, the old, so there
must of necessity be another light to accompany it, diverse from the former;
that is, as then man's spirit, so now the spirit of the Lord, etc. page 35.

Answ. Ther^ are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit; and there are
differences of Administrations, but the same Lord; and there are diversities of
opperations, but it is the same God which works all in all, 1 Cor. 12* 4, 5,
6. Now all people is to know that there was a ministration different from the
administration of the Gospel, the new Covenant a different administration from
the old; but there is no necessity that it be ministered from another spirit,
nor from another Lord, nor from another Light; therefore to say, that because
the Covenants or Admini^^ration^ are diverse one from another, that therefore
it must not be the same spirit, but the one by the spirit of man, the other the
spirit of God, and that the light^ is to be diverse the one from the other,
this is a false Testimony; ^o^ ^^^ same spirit in which the Law was
administered, (the first Covenant) ^^ the same was the second administered, which
does make perfect according to the conscience. Now as all people is brought o^^
of their o^^ inventions and imaginations, and from following their own spirits,
to own the light of Christ which has enlightened them, they shall know the
diversities of Administrations, and the diversity of opperations, and yet but
one Light, and one Power, and one Spirit, and not as many lights as births, nor
as many spirits as opperations, not every Administration to have a diverse
light to accompany it? for though there be that are called gods, whether in
heaven, ^r in earth, as there be gods many, and lords many, but to us there is
but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him; howbeit there is not in
^very man that knowledge, 1 Cor. 8. 5, 6, 7. and though there be in the world
many lights, yet to us there is but one, him by whom all things was made, which
does enlighten every man that comes into the world, that in him all men might
believe; and as every one believes in this light, they shall know that man's
reason and understanding is not the light which every man is enlightened
withal, for some are unreasonable men, and some are void of understanding:
Neither is the spirit of man the light of the world, which does enlighten every
man that comes into the world; neither is any thing called the light of the
world (in the Scripture) but Christ; for says Christ, I am come a light into
the world, that whosoever believes on me should not abide in darkness, Ioh.
12. 46. Then spoke Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the world;
^^ that follows me shall not walk in darkness, bu^ shall have the light of
life, Joh. 8. 12. and again, I am the light of the world, Joh* 9. 5. And the
Messenger which was sent before his face to prepare the way of the Lord, and to
bear witness to the truth, said, In him was life, and the life was the light
of men, and that was the true light which enlighteneth every man that comes
into the world, Ioh. 1. 4, 9. And this is the light which in all ages,
generations, and under all Administrations the Sain^s did bear their testimony
in; and this light did never change nor alter, though ages and generations have
changed, and men have changed, and do change, and the minds of men change, and
their ways change, and their worships change, and forms and religions, which
are not according to the light which Christ has enlightened them withal, which
changes not, which as it is followed, will lead them out of those ways which
do change* which is not the living way, for the new and living way is one with
the light which every man is enlightened withal, which is every man's way to the
Father who follow it, and every man's condemnation who disobey it.

Another testimony concerning the first man Adam in his first estate without
sin, the sum of it is this, That as h^ was at first, that is, at his beginning
made s^, that is, without sin, for so was he made, Eccles. 7. 29. upright,
without crookedness, without invention, that this man, yea in his purest
naturals, cannot receive nor discern the things of the spirit of God* until ^e
i^ born of the Spirit, or from above, according* to Ioh. ^13. and 8. 3* 6. 1
Cor. 2. 14*

Answ. This Testimony is false, for the first Adam before the Fall, was the son
of God, Luke 3. 38. and did know and perceive Gods voice and power, and he knew
Gods command, That he should not eat of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil,
which if he did he should dye the death; for he was in Gods Image, and the Lord
spoke unto him, and he perceived it, and he had right to eat of the Tree of
Life which was in the midst of the Garden; and if Adam had continued in that
state there needed no Law have been added because of transgression, neither had
there needed any precept upon precept, nor line upon line, neither any Teacher
nor Instructor of the ignorant, for there had no death passed over to separate
God from his creature which he had made in his own image, and given him power
over all Creatures; but to say the son of God, in the image of God, without
sin, in uprightness and power, to say that he is sensual, having not the
spirit; or to say that he is the natural man that cannot receive nor discern
the things of the spirit of God, this is greater blasphemy then that which the
Apostle reproved, Rev. 2. 9. in those which said they were Jews, and were not,
but were the Synagogue of Satan; and all such whi^^ brings forth such mysts of
darkness and and ignorance to blind the eye in people which should see the
things of God in clearness, are to be reprovrd sharply, that they may be
ashamed, and no more bring forth that which is both unnecessary and
unseasonable, and contrary to truth, as John Iackson has done.

And further he adds, That the natural man which Paul speaks of 1 Cor. 2. 14.
and compares it with 1 Cor. 15. 44, 45. is not to be taken for the carnal
sinful man, but for a man in puris naturalibus, merely natural, page 37.

Let all therefore consider Paul's words, Which things also we speak, no^ in
the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches,
comparing spiritual things with spiritual: but the natural man receives not
the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither
can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 13, 14, But
he that is spiritual judges all things, yet he himself is judged of no man,
ver. 15. Now whether any man that has the spirit of God can judge that this is
not spoken of carnal and sinful men, or whether any by the spirit of God can
judge that this was spoken of a man in the pure nature, without sin; and let
all who have the spirit of judgment judge whether Adam in the image of God
without sin, did account the things of God as foolishness unto him; and if any
so judge, let them prove it, That in Adams innocence, without sin, the things
of God were foolishness unto him; or whether the Cross of Christ which Paul
preached was foolishness unto any but unto carnal and sinful men. So every man
I exhort to come to that of God in you, to know the Salt in your selves to
savor withal, that you may know that Doctrine that stands in the devised words
of man's wisdom, and not in the Power of God, which would turn the Truth of God
into a lie, and pervert the minds from the right understanding of the things of
God: But the day is come which has brought forth light, and knowledge, and
understanding to the simple, whereby they see the deeps which are covered with
darkness, and they come to see and comprehend men's wisdom, and their fountain
what it brings forth, for how should that which is unclean bring forth that
which is clean: So that now we do not only know the words of those which have
set themselves against the truth, but the Spirit and power from whence they
speak, and so in faithfulness bear our testimony against it, that the folly of
those may be made manifest unto all men who wilfully oppose the truth, and
their own selves through wilful blindness, and so count themselves unworthy of
eternal life, exercising their strength, wisdom, and knowledge to shut up the
kingdom of God against themselves, and others, laboring to keep all people
from the light in the darkness, as is made manifest in this Generation: How
many have set themselves to preach and print against the light which Christ the
way to the Father has enlightened every man that comes into the world withal?
But now has God the Father raised up his own seed according to his promise out
of the North to spoil Babylon, Jer. 51. 48. I have raised up one from the
North, says the Lord, and he shall come: from the rising of the Sun shall he
call upon my name, and he shall come upon Princes as upon Mortar, and as the
potter treads clay. Isa. 41. 25. The promised seed of the Lord is come forth,
and is spreading over the Nations as the morning over the mountains, and
blessed are they that receive their testimony, for from the wrath of the
Almighty shall they be delivered, their bread shall not fail them, and their
waters shall be sure, and their fountain shall never be empty, but plentious
Redemption shall they daily witness, and waters of life shall their thirst be
satisfied with, and all the noise of the Bruits shall not hurt them, for the
Lord is with them, therefore can they not be afraid, nor dismayed at that which
comes to pass upon the earth; now because light is risen, therefore is the
evil eyes offended, and have now turned their testimonies against the light, to
make people believe that it does the same works that darkness, sin, and Satan
does, which is to drive the soul from God, and keep it in the Fall, and that it
is not able to show the good or the evil of an action, to approve nor
disapprove, which is true of the darkness, but not of the light; For there is
nothing that does make manifest those things which are reproveable but the
light, neither is there any thing which does bring man from that estate where
he is driven from God, and lead him out of the Fall but the light, and so it is
time to come out from among all such, for all people that desire to know Gods
ways, lest they be partakers of their plagues, and there be none to deliver,
for many are hardening their hearts, in this day of Gods tender love and mercy,
and so evil do they requite the Lord, that instead of turning at his reproofs,
that they may find mercy, they are in their wisdom devising evil words, and
reproachful terms against the light, by which the Lord does reprove man for his
iniquity, and are exercising all their abilities to make the light even as
darkness, and would exclude the power of God from it: When as there is no man
that does receive power, nor wisdom from God, but in the light which Christ
ha^h enlightened him withal, therefore is Christ now preached as he declared
himself to be the light of the world, Ioh 8. and as his messenger declared him
to have enlightened every man that comes into the world, and this light is now
preached and witnessed to be sufficient to lead unto God all that obey it, and
to let them see that their works are wrought in God, Joh. 3. and is sufficient
to be the condemnation of all the world that ha^^ it, according to Joh. ^. 19.
And for our thus bearing witness of the sufficiency of the light, many are
^isen up against us, even sl^nderous tongues, such as the poison of Asps is
under; but the Lord has delivered us from them, and will manifest his strength
unto us, in bearing testimony to his light, and the power of it, against all
the powers of darkness, and overcome them; For God has given his power to his
own seed, the Children of light, and those that rise up against them, it is but
that they may be broken to pieces, For whosoever falls on ^his stone, they
shall be broken to pieces, and on whomsoever it falls, it will grind them to
powder.

Object. But some men say; That the light is not sufficient to lead unto God
those that obey and follow it; And for a proof, says, That Paul did not
disobey, but follow the light which was in him: And yet says, That he obtained
mercy because he did it ignorantly, which if he had disobeyed the light, he had
sinned against knowledge, so the light in him was either not sufficient to
discover to him the error of his way, or at least it did suspend its act of
enlightening him in the knowledge thereof; it checked him not, it convinced him
not, etc.

Answ. To say that Paul did not disobey, but follow the light within him, that
is false; For he followed his zeal in madness, and pers^cu^ing the Saints, and
followed his thoughts which were fals^, thinking that he did God service, and
thinking that he ought to do that which is contra^y to the light, and so kicked
against the pricks, instead of following that which did prick him; and as for
him in that condition, and the rest which persecuted Steven to death, though
they did it ignorantly, yet it was not because they were not enlightened, nor
because the light was not sufficient to have given them the knowledge of him
whom they did persecute, but because they did resist that which was sufficient
to have given them the knowledge. As Steven, a man ^ull of the holy Ghost, did
bear witness, saying unto Saul, and the rest, Ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised
in hearts and ears, ye do always resist the holy Ghost, as your Fathers did,
so do ye; which of the Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted, and they have
slain them which showed before of the coming of the just One, of whom ye have
been now the betrayers, and murderers, who have received the Law by the
disposition of Angels, and have not kept it: When they heard these things, they
were cut to the heart. So here is little ground in those for any to say they
follow the light within them, and to say that they was not enlightened, which
had received the Law, which is light, by the disposition of Angels, and did not
keep it. Here they disobeyed that which they had received, which was the light,
and did always resist the Holy Ghost which was able to have led them from
the^r disobedience, and stiffneckedness, and if they did persecute to death for
lack of knowledge, and so did it ignorantly, it was because they rejected
knowledge, and forgot the law of their God which they had received, as the
Priests did in Hosea 4* 6. and because they did forget the Lord, as those did
in Jer. 18. so it was not because they were never convinced, nor never
reproved, but because they would have none of his reproofs, for they would not
walk in his ways, neither were obedient to his law: But I say, Did not Israel
know? To Israel he says* All day long I have stretched forth my hands unto a
disobedient and gainsaying people, Romans 10. 21. Therefore let no more such
clamorous speeches come forth, as to say such have obeyed, and followed the
light within them; which if they had, then when God had called they would have
answered, and it could not have been said, they had been disobedient, which
when Stephen told them of their resisting of the Holy Ghost, and their
disobedience to the Law, which was light, his words did answer something of God
within them, when they were cut to the heart, and that which had disobeyed the
Holy Ghost, and the Law which they had received, that did stone him to death,
and th^rein they did kick against that which did prick them: But the light of
Christ is sufficient to lead all unto God which do obey and follow it; and
there was never any in all Generations from Abel unto this Generation, that
ever in such ignorance, and wilful impudency, Preach and Print against the
sufficiency of the light of Christ as in this age is brought forth; For as
others did reject the lesser, so these the greater; others did disobey that
which they had received from the disposition of Angels, and those, that which
is given by the Son of God, who says, I am the light of the world: He does not
say that the Spirit of man is the light of the World, nor that man's Reason is
the light of the World, as some have said; Neither did ever Christ say, That
his Light was insufficient, but did bid those which were of the world, believe
in the light, that they might be the Children of light, Joh. 12. 36. and did
tell such which were of the world, that the kingdom of God was within them, So
there was something in them which was of power; but such a doctrine is now
hated in the world, to preach any thing within man to be of power or ability to
guide or lead man to God, or sufficient to believe in: But the Scripture says,
The word of Faith is in thy heart, (which was the Word the Apostles preached)
to obey and to do it, and Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of
God: But how shall they Hear without a Preacher? But I say, Have they not all
heard? Yes verily, their ^ound went out into all the Earth, and their words
unto the ends of the World, but they have not all obeyed.

But again it is said in the false Hosanna, That the discovery of sin and
iniquity may be where the sound of Christ, as a door, as the l^ght, as the way
may not have been; and for proof says, it was so in the first man, that
measure and degree of light which discovered sin to him, was the Law written in
him.

Answ. He who is the light of the world, in him was life, and this life was the
light of m^n, and he is before all things, and by him all things consist; and
the first man Adam who was made a living soul, and wa^ the son of God, the
light that was in him, was the light of the son of God, while he remained in
Gods Image, and when he was fallen from Gods Image into transgression, that
which made manifest his transgression was the light which he was fallen from,
and God did never write his law in man's heart but there was a measure of
Christ: But men in ignorance and blindness pretend to be Ministers of
distinctions between the Law and Christ, whenas they neither know what they
say, nor whereof they affirm, nor seeing how it was added because of
transgression, till the seed should come ordained by Angels in the hands of a
Mediator, Gal. 3. 19. and as well ministered forth in the light of the Mediator;
For though there was, and is diversity of administrations, and of operations,
yet the same Lord, and the same Light, that Light in which the Prophets saw
Christ, and prophesied beforehand of the coming of the Just; was the same in
which the Apostles witnessed him come; and the same light which lets men see
their sins, is that which lets them see their Savior, and leads them from
their sins to Christ, as they are obedient to it. But to say there is the
discovery of sin and iniquity where the sound of Christ as a door, the light
the way has not been, this remains to be proved, seeing the Apostle says,
That the sound is gone into all the Earth, and the words to the end of the
world: Have they not all heard? Yes verily: That which makes manifest is light;
Is there light making sin manifest, and is there nothing of Christ, seeing that
his life is the light of men, and that men have no light but what proceeds from
his life? When was ever Christ and the light, which discovers sin, separated?
and where is that Scripture which says, That the sound of Christ, as a light,
has never been heard where sin and iniquity is discovered; but that which has
brought forth these things may well be called an untimely birth, which never
saw the Son, nor never knew the light which Christ has enlightened every man
withal which comes into the world, for a little of this fruit does manifest
that tree from whence it springs, and so we shall judge the tree by its fruits:
Another fruit from this tree is to give his testimony of the Law of Faith,
which is this:

How far the Law of Faith may be said to be written upon every man's heart, is
not given unto me to understand, only this glimpse I have of it, That it
appears to have had an influence upon the heart of man, by those sacrifices
which were offered up to God before the publication of the positive Law,
wherein as well Cain as Abel offered sacrifices, Genesis 4. 4.

Answ. This testimony does not proc^ed from the Word of Faith in thy heart, for
that would give an understanding how the Law of Faith is written in the hear^,
as well as how the Law of Works is written, and this thy glimpse which thou
says thou sees from the proposing of the Promise, and the influence which thou
says thou see upon the heart of man by the Sacrifices of Cain, as well as
Abel, offered unto God; if this thy pretended light and glimpse, which is so
far of Christ, be truly weighed and t^yed, it may prove but a vain vision, and
a divination of thy own heart; as all, who consider thy testimony of the law of
Faith, in saying, that the discovery thereof arises from what is without; and
that it had never been known, nor never thought of, nor never would it, or
could it rationally have come into the heart of man to have conceived such a
thing, but from the Declaration of God in his promise: Here it does appear
Faith is a Mystery to thee, and thy eye have not seen it, nor the ear heard,
neither has it entered into thy heart to conceive Faith in the working and
operation of it: And in that thou say well, that it was not given thee to
understand how it is written upon every man's heart; and thou had done well if
thou had not stretched thy self beyond the line of thy knowledge and
understanding, for thou thy self confessest that unto those first believers,
Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, Daniel, and the rest,
there was communicated unto them a Spirit of Faith, and a Light suitable and
proportionable, whereby they were enabled to behold Christ, who was the object
of their Faith: Then if it did arise from the Spirit of Faith within them, and
the light of Christ, who was the Author of their faith, it did not arise from
the Declaration of God in the promise without, so that the mystery of faith
which is held in a pure conscience is yet to be learned, which was witnessed
amongst the Saints: So when thou writes again of the Law of Works, or the law
of Faith, or the discovery which the Lord makes to his creature, under the
diversities of these administrations, keep back to the measure of the gift of
God, and then will thy testimony be no larger than thy knowledge, which is a
guilt has spread over many in these days; But this I say, Blessed is the man
which does not condemn himself in the thing which he allows, and which does
not destroy himself with the breath of his own mouth. But there is a Generation
which their own breath as fire shall devour them.

Again, concerning the Light which every man is enlightened withal, which is thy
stumbling block, and rock of offense, as it is unto all the rest whose deeds
are evil; Thou says, God has not anointed it to that work, nor laid the
weight of eternal Salvation upon the shoulders thereof, it being too weak for
that service.

Answ. Him has God anointed who is the Light of the world, and has
enlightened every man that comes into the world, and there is no work of
eternal Salvation wrought but in the light which every man is enlightened
withal, and this light is of him and from him which bears the sins in his own
body, and is not too weak for that service which the Father has given him to
do, and this light is Christ (and whereas some say, Has every man Christ)
every man has Christ to save, or to condemn him, and Christ is as truly the
condemnation of those whose deeds are evil, as he is the Savior of them that
believe; and as those that believe in the light are already saved by Christ, so
also those that believe not in his light which he has enlightened them withal,
are already condemned; and so Christ is near unto every one, to answer every
man's work according to the nature of it, whether he serve sin unto death, or be
found in the obedience of truth unto eternal life; for now is the day appeared
to try every man's work of what sort it is; and now is many offended because the
light is broken forth, and their eye is evil, because the Lords is good. But woe
unto the world because of offenses; if any have the spirit of a King, let them
search out the cause of the offense which is now broken forth amongst the
children of men, that the enmity which is in all sorts of people, of all
professions, should rise up together, and become a body, the wicked joining
hand in hand, preaching, and printing, and crying for unity, which they are
making up of enmity, that they may be strong against that which the Lord has
now brought forth in his light and power to be witnesses unto him in every
place wheresoever he does call them, witnessing forth his mercy and truth, by
which iniquity is purged out; and preaching the Gospel freely to every
creature, whereby they may come to the knowledge of the truth, that they may be
saved: But in the world it is so come to pass in these days, that he that can
but give reviling terms and hard speeches against the light which Christ has
enlightened every man withal, calling it natural, or insufficient; and if they
do but revile those which they call Quakers, and put this in the beginning of
his Book, then it passes with toleration, and have as good approbation from
the world as any of the Priests have for their Ministry: but if any man begin
to speak of the light within, and the anointing within, and the word of faith
in the heart, and of the mystery of faith in a pure conscience, and of the
sprinkling of the heart from an evil conscience, and of believing in the light,
as Christ said, such a one speaking of these things, and not directing his
speech in open reproach against them called Quakers, the peoples hearts will be
filled with jealousy, lest he be one. So that even the light is become a
reproach unto them, and their dirision daily, but the Lords hand is turned
against all such, and he is turning the wise men backward, and making their
wisdom become foolishness; For once there was a seeking after light in many,
that it might rise, and open the things of God unto them, and reveal the
mysteries of his life, whereby their souls might be satisfied; and now when it
is risen in many, and has brought forth its powerful effects; now the man of
sin has his time, and does prevail in many to make them believe, that it is
not the light which is able to save the souls of them which believe in it, and
does beget a spirit of jealousy in them which is stronger than death; and
begets a fear in them, which works torment: and many now does fear, and
are jealous, that that light is not the Christ which has enlightened them, and
every one which comes into the world, and this is the work of Satan in the
hearts of the disobedient, which as every one comes to obey his light, and to
answer his perfect love to them which is manifest in the light, that fear will
be cast out, and life will be given to that witness of God which once did
breath after his life, without which the soul cannot rest, nor be satisfied;
and this shall many come to witness, as the man of sin comes to be revealed,
which lets, and will let, until he be taken out of the way; and then shall
they see at what they have stumbled, and by what they have been overcome, and
then they will know that it had been good for them if they had walked i^ the
light of the Lord, instead of setting themselves against it, and as the light
it self by such before mentioned is denied, so the testimony which the children
of light give of it, is also despised, and contended against, as if it were not
to be owned for a Doctrine of truth, which doctrine of truth has been laid
often before people, and is yet once more, that they may consider, prove, and
try, and so believe, and so be able to give a testimony from the witness of God
in themselves.

First, We say that Christ is the light of the world, according to his own
words, Ioh. 8. 12. And again we say, That he has enlightened every man that
comes into the world, according to his words who was sent a Messenger before
his face to bear witness to the truth, and his witness is true, Ioh. 2. 9.
And as Christ has enlightened every man that comes into the world, so we say
to every man, warning both small and great to believe in the light, that they
may be the children of light, which was Christ's Doctrine to the world, Ioh. 12.
36. And now what Christ does and effects by it in those that believe in his
light, and follows it, which effects and opperations by the world is denied,
and by us is affirmed: some of the effects of it I shall mention, which is
opposed: as first, That it will not let those that are guided by it take Gods
Name in vain, but will draw them out of the Worships of the world, and keep
them in the fear of God, and to stand still in it is the first step to peace.
That it discovers things that are contrary to it. That it is their Teacher that
love it, and their condemnation that hate it, according to Christ's words, Ioh.
3. 19. That waiting in it will guide them to God, and show them the way to the
Father, as Christ says, No man comes unto the Father but by me, Ioh. 14. 6.
and no man comes unto the Father by Christ but as they are led and guided by
his light within them. That it op^ns all the Scriptures, and leads man out of
the fall, up to God; for him has the Father given to be a Leader and Commander
unto the people, and he leads them by his light. Another effect is, That it
convinces of all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and is a Teacher and
Director, teaching and directing in righteousness, purity, and holiness, etc.
And that the light is but one in him that loves it, and in him that hates it,
leading the one to God, from whence it comes, to receive eternal life, and
condemning the other from God because he obeys not the truth, that he might
be saved. And this is the testimony of truth which is now held forth, never to
be denied: But who has believed our report? even they to whom the Arm of the
Lord is revealed: And this is the way by which people may come to know the
truth of this testimony, by obeying the light which Christ has enlightened them
withal, thereby shall they know whether this Doctrine be of God, or whether we
speak of ourselves, and whether all those effects is not brought forth by the
working of Christ's light in them; and then they shall not believe only because
of our words, nor be envious against it because of others words, but will find
the testimony in themselves, which is according to the record which God has
given of his Son, and according to the testimony which we have given of the
light; and he that believes shall be established.

Now that which opposes this, is that which bears a testimony contrary to
Christ, who says, For this end was I born, and for this end came I into the
world, to bear witness unto the truth; and every one that is of the truth
hears my voice, Ioh. 18. 37. And this was his witness, and his Messengers
witness, That he was the Light of the world, and, That this is the true light
which has enlightened every man that comes into the world, Ioh. 8. 12. Ioh. 1.
9. And this contrary testimony which is brought forth is this, That it is the
spirit of man that is the light which has enlightened every man; and so going
about to prove the spirit of man not to be sufficient, under this would destroy
the sufficiency of the light of Christ. But the Scriptures never did give
testimony that the spirit of man was the light of the world; neither did we
ever say that this light was the spirit of every man, nor a natural light: And
therefore this man which has writ a Volume in proving a natural light, or man's
reason insufficient, let all people take notice what he contradicts, or
disproves by it; he does not by it contradict nor disprove any thing that we
have said, for we never did affirm that man's reason was the light; but he has
labored to contradict himself: He has set up an Image, and then glories in
breaking of it down, and from our words draws a false inference, and glories in
confounding it: And this is the general course of our opposers, to raise a
false proposition or conclusion from their own imaginations, and then
contradict it, and then cry, The Quakers contradicted, or confuted, and their
Doctrine disproved, and they irrecoverably slain; and many such cries is gone
forth in the world among people, like the noise of many waters.

To which I answer, Nay, they are not of such a birth that they are so easily
slain, nor of such a Doctrine that they are so easily disproved; for the
immortal birth is brought forth, unto which God has given wisdom and
understanding to be as wise as Serpents, and in their innocence is their wisdom
brought forth, which Seed inheriteth the strength of the Almighty: so though
they be permitted to fight and contend against the truth, yet to prevail is not
given them: Therefore in vain is the Net spread in the sight of any Bird, and
in vain do they exercise their strength against the Lords anointed; for this
which they have brought forth is but as setting of briars and thorns in battle
against the Lord or as if the untimely birth should strive against that birth
which is brought forth without deformity, to slay it, as those in former ages,
who were wiser in their generation then the children of light, sought to slay
the Heir, that the Inheritance might be theirs. In like manner do men now also
rise up against the life of the same Seed which is risen in the hearts of the
children of men, to slay it, that so they may profess the Scriptures in their
high swelling words of vanity, having men's persons in admiration because of
advantage: for if this Seed does live which the Lord has not only brought to
the birth, but also brought forth, it will stop that profession which stands in
the hypocrisy, and will quench that violence of fire in which that zeal flames
out, which is not according to knowledge: But the Seed is risen which inherits
the strength of the Almighty, which can bear all things, and suffer all things,
and will come to reign over all gainsayers; for all the high swelling words of
vanity shall come to naught, and truth shall be exalted over all, in the power
of the eternal Spirit, when blackness of darkness will cover all those
spirits, which have spent their strength against the appearance and
manifestation of truth; and those that now boast themselves in their
presumption against the servants of the Lord, and testimony of truth, Shall
come to be a servant of servants, even to the least in the kingdom of God*
before they have right unto that which they now profess, or before they be
counted worthy to cry Hosanna to the son of David, or to bear a testimony to
the Lords Christ; For he will have none such to be his witnesses, as deny his
light which he has enlightened every man withal: For the true witnesses bear
this testimony of Christ, That he is the true light, and is the light of the
world, which has enlightened every man that comes into the world, that every
man through him might bel^eve, and every one in whom this witness is found
true, is justified of God.

Another Accusation is against Richard Farnsworth, for saying, That Christ did
break the Passover with his Disciples, and herein he is Charged to want Light;
or, that the light in him was not sufficient in him to open this, and that he
did not discern between the Passover, and the Supper of the Lord: And likewise
is Accused, for calling that a Shadow, which the Scripture says was but to
show the Lords death till he came.

Answ. To call the Supper the Passover, does not demonstrate that he wants
light, neither that the light is insufficient, for the Disciples called it the
Passover which they prepared for him: and Christ called it the Passover which
he eat with his Disciples, Mark. 14. 12. 14. Matthew. 26. 20, 21, 22. and that
which they eat he broke: but it does not say, That he broke his bones, nor eat
his bones; yet he eat the Passover with his Disciples. And whereas he is
accused for calling that a shadow, and many now, in imitation, take bread and
wine, and call that the Lords Supper, opposing those that are come to the
substance, and witness the substance, eating that which is meat indeed, and
drinking that which is drink indeed; But this man which does oppose Richard
Farnsworth, and others, in these things, he ha^h the least reason to mention
this Supper, or the breaking of Bread of any, for others do call their breaking
of bread, and drinking of wine, the Lords Supper, because they practice it: But
this man does neither practice that as the Lords Supper, nor witness the
substance, so that this is the greatest hypocrisy, To contend about that, or
to accuse others, in denying of that which he himself denies the practice of:
So that this accusers doctrine and accusations wants both light and reason.

Another Accusation is against these two Writers, Richard Farnsworth, and
Francis Howgill, as if they should be in an unreconciled Difference; because
the one has affirmed, That the light of Christ is sufficient to open all the
Scriptures: And the other says, Thou that tells of opening Chapters or Verses
by meanings, thou never heard a word of Christ.

Answ. These are not Differences; for the light of Christ and man's meanings are
contrary: So for the one to say, the light does open; and the other to say,
man's meanings does not open, this is not contrary: So the confusion is turned
again to the Accuser, and does not belong to these two Writers: So the
ignorance of this Accuser is to be taken notice of, which would make people
believe things that is not: For if he write his Book for those that can neither
read, see, nor hear, his labor is in vain: and if he write it to those that
can read, see, hear, and understand, they will account it foolishness,
especially in this day, when the light of life is broken forth among the
children of men, to give them an understanding according to truth, for in this
day, he that keeps silence is reputed wise; and better is he that keeps
silence, than he that speaks, unless the spirit of the Lord give him utterance.

Another Accusation is against W. D. he speaking so such a one as is guided by
the Lamb, etc. saying, The light in thy Conscience, the righteous law, cries
through thy earthly heart, and brings it into judgment, etc. And then speaking
of the parable of the little leaven hid in three measures of me^l, that it
changes the whole lump into the nature of it self* so the little light that
shines in thy dark heart, is the powerful Word of Faith, and that the light is
the sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well to take heed until the day
dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts: And for these things he is Accused.

Answ. Those that are guided by the Lamb, do witness that the ^ight, the
righteous law, cries through the earthly heart, and brings it into judgment,
and will not accuse one for saying so; and as for speaking of the little light,
as Christ spoke of the little leaven; Was it no offense in the days of the son
of man to preach that the kingdom of heaven was like unto a grain of mustard
seed, or like unto a little leaven? And is it an offense now ^o preach the word
of Faith to be as a little light, or to preach the anointing to be as a little
light, in those in whom the light is little, does this also offend you? What
then if we should say, That Christ is the light of life, the son of
righteousness, and the glory and express figure of the Fathers substance in
some, and but as a little light, o^ day star in others, or in others as a light
before the day star arise in their hearts: Is not the light great in some, and
little in others? And is not Christ the same? May that only be called Christ
which takes away the sins? And may not that also be called Christ which
pierces through the soul, and reveals the thoughts of many hearts, Luke* 2.
35. May he only be called Christ unto whom the Father has given the Heathen
for his inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for his possession, who
reigns, and has all his enemies under his feet, and is not he the same as he
is descended into the lower parts of the earth, and which took upon him the
form of a servant? So therefore that none may err in their judgments concerning
the testimony which is given of Christ, and of his light, his light is more or
less according to his manifestation in every one, there being given to every
one a manifestation of the spirit to profit withal, and every one is to be
turned to the measure of their manifestation, to know and witness Christ in it,
though in many it be but as a little light, yet they are to be turned unto it,
while it is so, which as it does increase, and is enlarged, it may be called,
or declared under another name than little, as the kingdom of Heaven is not
always like unto a grain of mustard seed, nor as a little leaven, but comes to
rule in the children of men: And whereas the Accuser replieth against the
light, and against Christ to be the word of Faith; saying, Christ is called the
Word of God, Rev. 19. 13. but not the Word of Faith; and yet says in page 45.
That Christ is the Author and finisher of Faith.

Answ. If Christ be the Word of God, and faith come by Hearing, and Hearing by
the Word of God, then how is it that he is not the word of Faith, being that
word by which Faith comes when it is heard, and he being the Author of it? May
he not then as well be called the Word of it, as the Author of it, seeing he is
the Word by which it comes: but that all may understand what this word of faith
was which the Apostle preached, This was Christ, Romans 10. and they preached no
other Word to be the Word of faith but Christ, That whosoever believed on him
should not be ashamed: So that if the ignorance of Christ, and of the Apostles
words, were blotted out of the hearts of our Accusers, they would be silent,
and the daily reproach would cease.

And whereas it is affirmed by us, That the Light, or a measure of Christ
within, is a sure Word of Prophecy, or a more sure Word of Prophecy, as Peter
says, 2 Pe^. 1. 19. And whereas many are offended at this, and labors to make
people believe that this is the Writings of the Prophets which is the more sure
Word of Prophecy the Apostle speaks of, because he says, Knowing this first,
that no Prophecy of the Scriptures is of any private interpretation; for the
Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as
they were moved by she Holy Ghost, etc.

Ans. Now I shall make it appear that it was not the Writings of the Prophets
which was that more sure Word; as first, concerning that, here is one thing
held out to be a sure Word, and another thing held out to be more sure, as unto
those to whom it was spoken: And as concerning the first:

That which is held out to be a sure Word, is that which ^ame from the Father,
the voice which cam^ from the excellent Glory, saying, This is my beloved Son,
in whom I am w^ll pleased; and this voice which came from Heaven the Disciples
heard when they were with him in the holy Mount. This was a sure Word when it
was spoken, and when it was written it was a sure Testimony, as sure as any of
the Prophets Writings; for the Prophets did see that he was to come, and that
he that was to come was the well-b^loved Son of the Father, and they wrote this
down, and it was a sure testimony of Christ; and Peter, and the rest saw that
he was come, and did hear the voice from the excellent Glory proclaiming him to
be the Son of God, and when they had seen it* they wrote it down; and this was
as sure a testimony, yea a surer then the Prophets, and that which the Apostles
were eyewitnesses of, and did write down for truth, was as much ^^ be taken
heed unto as that which the Prophets declared; and this will all men of
understanding judge, that the Apostle Peter did not direct the people to the
Prophets words, to take heed to them because they were more sure th^n his own,
and more to be believed: But although the Apostles words and writings was
confirmed with more power and witness of the Spirit then the Prophets, and
both true, yet the Apostles Ministry unto those which did not see those things
which the Prophets saw, muchlesse those things the Apostles saw, no, not so far
as the dawning of the day, nor to the day star risen in their hearts, therefore
Peter dividing the word of God aright, says unto them, We have a more sure
Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that
shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star aris^ in your
hearts, 2 Pet. 1. 19. It was more sure for them to ^ake heed unto that which
was as a light shining in a dark place, till the day star did arise, and the
day dawn in their hearts, then the declarations from others without them,
decla^rd in words and writings; as thus for example, by experience; to such I
shall direct my speech, who cannon witness the day dawned, nor the day star
risen in their hearts, nor has heard the voice from the excellent Glory, to
such I say, That which I have seen and heard, the visions, power, and glory,
wherein I am an eye witness of his glory, and of his appearance, this I may
declare and write unto you, and you may believe it, But to such I say, It is
more sure for them to take heed to the light that shines in the dark place,
till they come to witness in themselves the day dawned, and day star risen,
and the Son of God made manifest in them, then to take heed to the words which
I have declared, though it be a true testimony; for the Apostle did not write
to himself, nor say that it was more sure unto him, bu^ unto them unto whom he
wrote his Epistle; for unto him no Word of Prophecy was more sure then that
which he had seen and heard when he was with Christ in the holy Mount. So this
may inform your understandings who have more desir^ to know the truth, then to
oppose it, and may put to silence the vain disputings by men of corrupt minds,
who are destitute of the truth, always corrupting the words of truth to oppose
the life of it, as many such there are in these days, which the Lord has, and
will rebuke sharply, that they may be asham^d; but all who are led and guided
by the light of Christ shall know the anointing in them, and the word of
faith, yea the Son of God: He that can receive it without offenc^, let him.

5. Obj. But he that has opposed us says in page 25. of his Book, in the
second part, That the dawning of the day is rather an evening then a morning.

Ans. Now let all which have but known a day and a night in the Creation,
judge, whether the evening or the morning be the dawnings of the day; or,
whether the day star be a forerunner of the day, or of the night; then it will
not be incredible which I have said before, that he calls darkness light, and
light darkness; but in such things our opposers will not receive a good report
from those which can give true judgment, and to such it is left to judge of
those things.

Obj. Again he says in page 35. That the spirit of truth was not a Comforter
to the Apostles, nor a reprover to the world before Christ was ascended; and
yet himself, to contradict himself, says, that he was in them before, and
dwelt in them, the same spirit, but not the same measure.

Ans. Here is Babylon at the height, fit to be pulled down, but needs little
answering, seeing that i^ answers it self, and for such reasons as these he
might well conceal his name: And if he could have put this off by hiding his
Name, for an Hosanna to the Son of David, or A Testimony to the Lords Christ,
then he might well have boasted, and have gloryed in his shame, as if there had
been no spirit of discerning in those he calls Quakers, nor others; but the eye
of truth is not yet so blind, but we know an evening from a morning, a night
from a day, and a lie from truth; and we know also that the disciples had a
measure of the spirit of truth while he was with them upon earth, and this
spirit did both comfort them, and did carry them on in obedience to his will,
and in the power of this spirit went forth into the world, and reproved the
world of sin because they did not believe in Christ, and the devils was subject
unto them by the spirit of truth that was in them, before Christ ascended, and
to this there is a Cloud of witnesses: So that this from him, filling his Book
with such things as these, is as if a man should fill a Ba^n with Chaff instead
of Corn, and deceive others with selling i^ for Corn.

Another contradiction of the same nature, is this, That the manifestation of
the Spirit is given (to no man for himself, but) to every man to profit
withal, to edi^ie, and build up, and do service in the body, as an hand, foot,
or eye, or some other member of the body, etc. and to contradict this, in the
next words says, Not that the spirit, or the manifestation of the spirit, is
given to every man, (i. e.) to every individual person, forasmuch as some men
are sensual, having not the spirit, therefore no manifestation thereof, page 17.

Ans. This is like the former, and so to be cast out with it, for his
distinction of words* between every man, and every individual person, will not
cover him; for where the Scripture says every man without distinction, that
is, every individual man and woman: And the Apostle says, But the
manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to profit withal, he does
not say, not to every individual person: And this also I say, and affirm, That
to every man is given a manifestation of the spirit to profit withal, and he
that profits with it, by it shall be justified; and he that does not profit
with it, by it shall be condemned, because he is an unprofitable servant, and
this truth shall stand when all confusion shall have an end, yet some are
sensual, having not the spirit.

Obj. Again, in despising the testimony from the measure of the gift of the
spirit of God, when they have spoken according to the measure, and could not
boast themselves above their measure, but in their measure witnessing the work
of God as it was fulfilled in them, such he scornfully reproacheth, saying,
What means those cracks and crannes in their knowledge, knowing but in part?
there is no pieces, nor parts, nor measures, nor degrees in absolute
perfection, but whosoever says he knows in part, he is short of perfection;
and whosoever says he knows perfectly, he knows not how perfect his
knowledge is, and the first of these is called a vain man, boasting of that
which is not, and of a false gift, and is like clouds, and wind without rain.

Ans. Herein is Paul's Doctrine (as well as ours) declared against, to be but as
cracks and crannes, and a vain boasting of a false gift; for Paul says, We
dare not make our selves of the number, or compare our selves with some that
commend themselves, but they measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing
themselves with themselves, are not wise: But we will not boast of things
without our measure, but according to the measure of the Rule which God has
distributed unto us, a measure to reach even unto you; for we stretch not our
selves beyond our measure, not boasting of things without our measure, that is
of other men's labors. Now this measure of which he thus spoke, was in Christ,
so in perfection; and there is parts and degrees in Christ, and so in absolute
perfection; for so far as every man is in the measure of the gift of God, so
far he is in Christ, and so far his knowledge is perfect, and abiding in this
he abides in that which is perfect; and as he glories in this, he gloryes in a
true gift, and none shall make this glorying void.

Obj. And whereas John Iackson says of those that say they have but attained
in measure, he calls that the bleeting of the sheep, and the lowing of the
Oxen, which declares plainly that they are not at home, they are not in the
City, but have certain miles to travel before they arrive.

Ans. This is a false interptetation, as I shall leave it unto all of
understanding to judge; for the bleeting of the Sheep, and the lowing of the
Oxen, did signify Saul's disobedience unto the commandment of God, for which
the Lord did reject him: But when Paul said he knew in part, and prophesied in
part, and would not boast above his measure, this did not signify his
disobedience to the Lord, but contrariwise his obedience, and that he was in
Christ Jesus: so this was not as the bleeting of the Sheep, and lowing of the
Oxen, neither did it show that they were not in the City; for Paul testifies
of the holy Brethren which he was a Minister unto, That they were come unto
Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to
an innumerable company of Angels, to the general Assembly, and Church of the
firstborn, which are written in heaven; and t^ God the Judge of all, and to the
spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new
Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling. Now let him that have thus accused,
show how many Miles these had to travel before they came to the City; and
whether was any parts, measures, or degrees in these: or whether there was
absolute perfection without any measure or degrees of it? and whether Paul was
not come so far as these unto whom he preached wisdom, even among those that
were perfect: and might he not in that estate say that he would not stretch
himself beyond his measure? But this I say, None are true witnesses of
perfection but those who know their measure, and abide in it: and likewise,
those that call the witnessing of the truth in a measure of the spirit, the
bleeting of the Sheep, or the lowing of the Oxen, such never knew perfection,
neither yet presses after it, but would keep all others from it, by despiteful
terms against the measure of the spirit which leads unto it: But the day is
come, and the light is risen, which has found out and discovered all the
cunning craftiness of men, in which they go about to deceive the hearts of the
simple, and beguile unstable souls; but the elect Seed is risen which it is
impossible to deceive; for it is not the Scripture-words which men may take and
speak in the hypocrisy, which can darken our knowledge, no^ any way hinder the
testimony of truth in those which have received it in the power of God, only
with such things the blind may lead the blind, and with such things they may
strive to keep others out of the kingdom which have not tasted of the good
word of God, neither are brought to know a measure of God in themselves,
whereunto to be obedient; but I see the Lord is opening a way for such to come
out of the pits which they have been led into, in opening their eyes, and
letting them see that their Watchmen is blind, and that understanding is
departed from them, even from their Leaders, and the counsels of God is
departed, even from the ancient* and the people is even like to perish for want
of vision, because they have not seen for themselves, but their Teachers have
seen for them vain visions, and lying divinations, and prophesied lies, causing
the ignorant to believe them; but the Lords hand is stretched out against such,
and is stretched out to gather his own Seed from such, to bring them into the
fear of the Lord, which is the beginning of wisdom, and into the knowledge of
the holy, which is understanding, Prove. 9. 10. which understanding is a
Wellspring of life.

Another seeming strength risen up against us, is the conceit of the discovery
of a schism in the body, as if the Band or Girdle which bound up the body were
broken, and as if there were now a character brought forth amongst us, showing
a variety of persons, doctrines, and practices, and as if the testimony of our
being of the body of Christ, from the unity in the body were ceased, and as if
the Heads were divided, and a^ for proof, instances G. F. to I. N. I N. to G.
F. I. B. to I. N. and as if it were not person, but party, which some wonder
at, admiring and waiting to see the Lords counsel and pleasure in it.

Ans. All those that wait to see the Lords counsel and pleasure, and his wisdom
in this thing, shall see it, and be satisfied, and it will for the time to come
be more for the confounding of those that watch for iniquity, then any way for
confirming them in iniquity, and by that which God has done, and is doing,
shall the Girdle and Band of our love be made stronger, and in this shall the
sight of our enemies fail, and become blindness, for their thoughts is not as
Gods thoughts in these things, neither their eye as his eye, for he saw a
better thing for us in these things then they have imagined, for that which
they thought wrought for evil, has wrought together for good unto those that
stand in Gods counsel, who always waits to see those works which stands in his
wisdom, contrary to man's reason; for that which they thought did break, that
has bound; and that which they thought did separate, that has united
together; so that there is not a difference nor dividing of Heads, not in
persons, nor in parties, nor in doctrines, nor in practices, but the same unity
in the body, in the faith, in the seed, in the covenant, in one heart, and one
soul, one way and worship of God in the spirit is now as much, or more then
ever before witnessed, so that God has cut off occasion from those that seek
occasion, and has taken away the cornerstone that the wicked thought to build
upon; and hereby has God tried, and discovered, and brought to light that
which lay in the bottom of the deepest pits; for God has brought in this his
day, many things forth, to try and prove those who said they were his people;
and those that a few days since seemed to be like Lambs, do now manifest
themselves to be in the nature of Lions, and ravening Wolves; and those that
pretend to wait for the coming of Christ in power, and had the Name of Seekers,
they are now found to reject his coming, and to be such as watch for iniquity
in those among whom Christ is come; and now they are turned backward, and now
drink up that which they had vomited up; for now if they could but find any
iniquity among such as God has made known the glory of his power among; or if
they can but suppose or imagine any such thing from false conceptions and
conclusions, this would be a sufficient ground to them to print a Book upon,
and publish it abroad, and but that the Lord has been on our sides, well may
we say, when all sorts of men and religions has risen up against us, by their
violence had we been consumed, for the powers of darkness, and all the diverse
worships of the Beast, are now more joined together then ever, and the deepest
subtilty of the Serpent is now at work in his members, to devise ways, and
change the Laws and times, whereby the spirit might be quenched which God has
raised up in his children, whereby a mighty cry is gone forth through the
Nations against the mystery of iniquity, where it works, both in the root and
the branches of it; and now is the burden of the Beasts of the South felt as
truly as in the Prophets days, Isa. 30. 6. from whence comes the young and
old Lion, the Viper, and fiery flying Serpent, and now does the mighty and
terrible cry of the spirit of the Lord go forth to the men of this generation,
as it went forth before time to the Egyptians, concerning this which the Lord
has wrought, (your strength is to stand still) and if this counsel of the Lord
be by you received, you shall know more of the ways and workings of the Lord
with his children, and that all things which the Lord has done is for the
furtherance of the Gospel, and that those which are approved may be made
manifest; what a strong ground of occasion would the envious one have thought
he had, if he had come among the babes in Christ who were met together at
Corinth, hearing Paul say that there was divisions among them, and said that
there must be heresies among them, that they which are approved may be made
manifest, 1 Cor. 18. 19. and this was no character that God had broken them
without hands, no^ that he had made their profession of unity of no force, but
through this manifestation he did work schism out of the body, that so there
should be no Schism, Rent, Heresy, nor any such thing in the body; and this
thing was not that the enemies of God might glory against the truth; and if any
labor to seek occasion against the holy Brethren, and say they are divided
into Heads because two eminent men of them withstood one another, as concerning
eating with the Gentiles, viz. Paul and Peter; to such I say, he that gathered
at first into unity, is the Healer and Repairer of such breaches; and they may
profess and witness as much unity after this as ever before.

And th^se three which the envious one has mentioned to be at difference in
Doctrine and practice, viz. G. F. J* N. and J. B. the unity in the life and
power of God in them, and in their Doctrine and practice shall stand for a
witness, and for a condemnation against all the accusers: and now seeing that
their occasion is taken away, their accusations may cease; and if such Prophe^s
be deceived, then let them consider who has deceived them, I the Lord has
deceived that Prophet. Therefore what would such a Prophet think of the
Apostles words when he says, There must come a falling away first, that the
man of sin may be revealed? Would he, or could he judge this a ^haracter that
the day of of Christ were at hand, or that through such things the power of it
should be made more manifest? or that those among whom these things were
wrought, should be thereby the more united? To believe this will bring men even
to their wi^s end, it being so contrary to their thoughts and conceivings, and
this may w^ll con^ound their wisdom, and turn them backward, and bring them to
question the truth of all that which ever they have written, spoken, o^ acted
against th^se whom the Lord has manifested his power and work among, contrary
to their judgment and discerning; for the ways and workings of the Lord is
deep, and his secrets are with those that fear him, and not with those that
despise his appearance, and speak evil of that they know not; and the Lord will
yet work greater things in the earth, that such may be confounded.

And what will such say, if the words of Daniel the Prophet be fulfilled in
these days, saying, And some of them of understanding shall fall to try them,
and to purge, and to make them white, ^ven to the time of the and, etc. Dan.
11. ^5. Does not God he^eby try men, and try their spirits, and try their
discernings; should any in such cases judge before the time the Lord make it
manifest, for this cause will God bring such into judgment* Therefore I say
unto you, that your strength is to sit still and let the Lord alone, and let
his people alone, and let him work his own work in his own way, and presume not
to be his counselor, for who have known the mind of the Lord? let such as
have, dwell in it, and preserve knowledge, so shall they always abide in
strength, and power, and Union with the Lord, and one with another; and men
shall yet know for all that has been, that we are his Disciples, because we
love one another; and none shall make our glorying and rejoicing in the unity
of the spirit, and in the love of God, void; but it shall abound more and more
to torment the spirit of enmity which would break it, or accuse us for
professing of it, but over that spirit we are in the Lord.

But what if some should rise up, even from among our selves, speaking perverse
things, and draw Disciples after them, and go out from us, as they did from
among the Apostles, that it might be made manifest, that they were not all of
us: Ought this to be laid to our charge? Or, ought the way of God to be
accused; because of such things, to be Heresy, or Schism? If this seem to you
an evident token of perdition and of error, yet to us of Salvation, and that of
God. And we are assured that we are of God, having the witness in our selves,
yet not bearing witness of our selves, for there is one that bears witness of
us, even the Father which is in Heaven, and his witness is true, being unto us
a seal of assurance.

Therefore from henceforth this is a Warning to small and great, that they no
further proceed in that which is both unnecessary and unseasonable: For this I
say unto all such, that it is unnecessary and unseasonable, to seek to persuade
us, that the truth is error, or that the light, which every man is enlightened
withal, is the spirit of every man, for that is not according to the record
which God has given of his son, nor which the son has given of the light; but
blessed be that day, and blessed for ever be that power in which a seed is
brought forth, unto which the Father ha^^ given ^ ^^u^ testimony in which they
shall never be confounded, which abide faithful, for great is the mystery of
godliness, God manifest in the flesh, and against this manifestation is the
power of darkness risen up, and all the messengers and ministers of Satan under
all Forms and professions, has joined themselves together to make their arm
strong against the Son of righteousness; his righteous life, and righteous
ways, which now he is bringing forth, among his children; but out of the mouth
of Babes, has God ordained strength, against which all the powers of darkness
cannot prevail; and unto which strength all our enemies must bend, and bow, and
come for salvation; For that which now the leaders of the people, have set
themselves against, when they have finished their course, and the anguish comes
over their souls, then will they confess, That it had been well if they had
loved the light, and walked in it, which they have so long hated, and despised,
with those that walk in it; and all those which have exercised their strength,
to shut others out of the kingdom of God, by their Preaching, Printing, and
false Accusations, they shall know that while they serve sin, they are free
from righteousness, and do keep others from it; But the time is coming, that
their mouths must be stopped, and the Lord w^ll cause his everlasting
righteousness to spread abroad, as broad Rivers, and streams, unquenchable, and
nothing shall hinder it; and this is the day in which the Lord will try those
that dwell upon the earth, as he has tried many, and measured them by a true
Line, and has found them deceitful, although they have made profession of his
name, and of his words, for a cloak for their iniquity; But now the light is
come into the world, and there remain^ no more cloak for their sins, nor hiding
place for their iniquity.

The End.

