The common SALVATION CONTENDED FOR, And the Faith which was once delivered TO
THE SAINTS. OR, An Answer to a Book called a plain answer to eighteen Queries
of John Whitehead, put forth by William Kays, who calls himself Minister of the
Gospel at Stokesly; Wherein he has perverted the faith once delivered to the
Saints, and pleads for those things which the Scripture declares against, and
so he is made manifest, not to be a Minister of the everlasting Gospel, but
preaches another Gospel.

The Queries laid down, and the substance of his Answer, with a Reply to his
Answer.

By one who is a friend to all, who wait for the appearance of Jesus Christ
without sin to salvation, known to the world by the name. FRANCIS HOWOILL.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold, at the
Blackspread-Eagle, at the West End of Paul's.

The common SALVATION CONTENDED FOR, And the faith which was once delivered TO
THE SAINTS.
FIrst, as to the Title of thy Book, thy plain answer as thou calst it; thou
art plainly made manifest to be among the false Prophets, and the Scribes and
Pharisees, and the false Brethren, which the Lord sent his true Prophets to bear
witness against, and which Christ cried woe against, and the Apostles exhorted
them who were in the faith, to turn away from: and art one that is gone out
into the world, separated from the light, from the life, from the practice of
all the holy men of God, who spoke forth the Scripture, as they were moved by
the holy Ghost; had they declared against all these things that thou art
pleading for, like Demetrius, and yet thou will tell of the Scripture being thy
rule, thy rule shall try thee, and thou shall be laid to it* and it will
condemn thee, and the life of all the Saints, and the practice of them who
dwelt in the light, will bear witness against thee: thy hidden mysteries which
thou speakst, are seen by the invisible eye of God, and thy deceit, and thy
adding to the Scriptures, and thy perverting of Christ's words and thy
imaginations upon their words, who dwelt in the light, and one day thou shall
witness the Lord who is just, will plead with thee for it, when by thy serpents
wisdom, which is in the curse, and in the disobedience, and thou pleadst
expressly against Christ's own words, and holdst up the types which was in the
first Covenant, and yet wilt not act according to the first Covenant, and so
art one that denies Christ the substance, the everlasting Covenant the oath of
God; and yet calls thy self a Minister of the Gospel, thy Gospel he and all
that knows his voice will deny thee, and it who teaches for doctrine, the
traditions of men, and sets up an image of many mixtures, that all may fall
down and worship, which thou have built and set up in thy sensual carnal
wisdom, and would have all to worship the image of the beast, that sits upon
many wa^ers; but the Lord i^ risen to cut it down, and stamp upon it, and grind
it to dust, and the whirlwind of the Lord shall blow it away, and thou and all
who has worshipped the Beast shall be broken by him who is set for the rise
and fall of many in Israel, and all those things that thou have set up in thy
carnal mind, and calls them the Ordinances of God; shall become as the broth of
abominable things, and as the slaying of a man, and all who worship their own
imaginations, both the circumcised, and the uncircumcised will the Lord cut off
together, for the Lord is arisen to plead with all the enemies of Zion, and his
sword shall be fatted with the blood of the slain; for profaneness is gone forth
from the Teachers of this Nation, who abide not in the doctrine of Christ to
the ends and costs thereof, and the Lord is grieved, and the earth shall
disclose her blood, and the slain shall no longer be covered, but the deceiver
of the Nations shall be cast forth, and great shall be the lamentation of the
Merchants of Babylon and Iesabel that has slain Prophets, now is suffered to
prophecy, and many are deceived by her witchcrafts, but she shall be cast into
a bed of sorrow, and she shall be dashed in pieces; and the dogs shall lick her
blood, for behold he is risen who is King of Kings, and he makes war in
righteousness, and his name is called the Word of God; and out of his mouth
proceeds fire that shall consume the men of the earth, and all who have not the
Image of the Father written in their foreheads. The fire is kindled already in
the earth, and the slain is great, and many shall gnaw their tongues for pain,
and shall be consumed to ashes; and he will plead with all the false Prophets
and Merchants in Babylou as in the valey of Iehosaphet and his wrath is kindled
as in the days of Gibin, and the Heathen shall all perish by the edge of the
sword, lamentation and howling, and woe and sorrow, and bitterness shall come
upon all who have professed his name and his words, and yet put him to open
shame, and denies the end of his coming, which is to redeem his people from
their sins, and to present them unto God without spot or wrinkle, which many in
this generation, teachers and people are pleading for sin, and yet say Christ
is made manifest, but this answer all such shall have, depart workers of
iniquity.

I. Query. Whether thou have the same eternal infallible spirit that gave forth
the Scripture, yea or no?

Answ. Thou says thou dare not conceal to bear witness with thy conscience
that thou have in some small measure the same spirit which was in the Saints,
yet an infallible spirit thou can not own, and calst it a Popish tenent, and
thou says Christ had such a spirit that did not err; and further, thou says
if any Minister as John in the Revelation shall wander, yet the Lord can is he
has a mercy unto his people, make the people to receive nothing but wholesome
doctrine.

Reply. Here thou have made thy self manifest unto all that thou have no
measure of the spirit, neither great nor small, not of the same spirit which
was in the Saints, for the spirit which the Saints had, was the spirit of
Christ, which is the spirit of truth, and infallible, and led them into all
truth, and this Spirit thou blasphemer calls a Popish tenent, and so accuses
Christ and the Saints: Was it one spirit which dwelt in the Saints, and another
spirit that Christ had? and here thou speakst contrary to the Scripture, as
many as are the Sons of God, are led by the Spirit of God, and they that have
not the Spirit of Christ, are none of his; and all who walked in the spirit,
and were led by the spirit, were led out of pollution, and the lust of the
flesh, and out of error, and out of all deceit; and they had received the
anointing, which was truth, and no lie, and it guided them into all truth: and
here thou would divide the Spirit of Christ from the Saints; and here thy
spirit is made manifest not to be that spirit which was in the Saints, and
which was in Christ; but thy spirit is fallible, that says, that infallible
spirit disgraces the Ministry; such a Minister thou art, that a fallible
spirit, and a spirit of error is thy glory: and therefore I say that spirit is
not distinct from the Saints, which was in Christ, but one; there is one spirit
by which all the Ministers of Christ were guided, and they were Ministers of
the Spirit which was infallible, and true, and eternal, and bore witness of him
who was true and eternal; and thou calst this a Popish tenent, art raised out,
and judged by the Scripture not to have the same, and so art no Minister, nor
witness of the infallible eternal spirit, but speaks in thy own name: And thou
art accusing John, that he did wander, (as John did in the Revelation thou
says) and so would make John a wandering star like thy self, which Jude speaks
of, who art fallen into the earth out of the firmament, and so would bring
reproach upon him, who witnessed the Spirit, and was in the spirit, and dwelt
in it; but thy shame is made manifest, and now the eternal spirit is witnessed,
which is infallible, and they will receive thy doctrine no longer, for it is
not wholesome, but contrary to the Scripture.

II. Query. Whether thou know the rules of Christ, and whether thou were
immediately called by him, to be a Minister or Pastor of the Gospel, yea or no?

Answ. Thou says so often as thou have the word rightly divided in opening of
the same in any Chapter or verse, so often thou have heard the the voice of
Christ, and thou say thou do not deny the reaching of the spirit to be an
extraordinary voice of Christ, and that thou have heard, and so thou witnesses
an immediate call, and yet thou say our imperfect actions being made perfect
by Christ, thou witnesses an immediate call.

Reply. Thou that tells of opening Chapters or Verses by meanings, thou never
heard the word of Christ; and I say unto thee, as Christ said to the Pharisees,
which had Moses and the Prophets, they had neither heard his voice, nor seen
his shape, and they which have not the word abiding in them, never heard his
word; and therefore if thou never hear of God or from Christ, but what is
written without thee, thou never yet heard his Word, the Word of God endures
for ever, Chapters and Verses endures not for ever; but thou art made manifest
when thou can not hear what is already writ, nor receive it, nor understand
it without meanings; and therefore brings their words down to thy reason, and
calls that the Word of God; and thou calst the teachings of the spirit the
extraordinary voice of Christ: where reads thou in the Scripture, of an
ordinary and extraordinary voice of the spirit? and here be a witness against
thy self, in thy answer to the fourth Query, the fourth page of thy book, to
say thou had not known the spirit, nor the anointing but by the Scripture, and
the Scripture is not the spirit; and here thy immediate call is the like, that
which is visible and without thee, is not immediate; and here thou art tried,
that thou know nothing at all but by hearsay, and so thou art a fall
witness, and thou says our imperfect actions are made perfect by Christ, when
that which is perfect is come, imperfection is done away, but that which thou
calls thy imperfect actions he comes not to be perfect, but to destroy, but to
thee is a mystery.

III. Query. Whether the Word thou preachest, is the same from the beginning
which thou have heard and seen, and have been taught immediately by the
Revelation of Jesus Christ, yea or no?

Answ. The Word that thou preaches is so muth the same thou says from the
beginning, as a River is the same that runs continually from the fountain; and
as God is pleased to appear in his outward administrators.

Reply. He who is the fountain is eternal, which was in the beginning, and
before all things, and endures for ever, and they who witness him and preach
him, and have seen him, and tasted of the water of life, which they were
witness of, John the first, but the River which thou drinkest, is as the brooks
of Teman, spoken of in Job, and shall be dried up, and as Euphrates that shall
be dried up, and the Kings of the East shall pass over it, and the time is come
already, blessed be the Lord for ever, but thy fountain at the best is but the
letter without thee, that was since the beginning, and thy old Authors, and thy
carnal wisdom, which is in the curse, and this is thy highest seize, and
thy administrations; if thou had not had the letter without thee, thou had
not known such a thing, and then where had all thy preaching been, as in the
fourth page of thy book, thou may remember that thou said thou had not
known God, but by that others have left upon record; and therefore cease from
thy divining, for thou can not witness what thou speak, but as thou
stealest others words

IV. Query. Whether ever any shall grow up under thy Ministry, that they shall
that no man teach them; and whether thou own the anointing, or had known there
had been such a thing, if the Scripture had not spoken of it, yea or no?

Answ. Concerning thy Ministry, there is no such promise thou say made to
any man's Ministry.

Reply. Here thou have manifested thy Ignorance of the Ministry of Christ, for
they turned many from darkness to light, and from Satan unto God, and it was
and is the very end wherefore the Ministers was sent forth, for the perfecting
of the Saints, and to lead them from imperfection to persection, and a persect
man in Christ Jesus; and they were sent out for this end, and are now sent out
to direct all minds, and the Apostle labored and traveled, that he might
present them without spot or wrinkle unto God, and in that thou says, there is
no promise to the Ministry of man, in that thou say truly, but they which
were Ministers of the Gospel, they neither were learned of man, nor had it from
man, and so thou acknowledgest thy Ministry to be of man, and so art not a
Minister of Christ, but of Antichrist; and thou says if the anointing should
only teach, there would be no flock, here thou art blind and knows nothing; is
not Christ the anointing, and Christ's sheep hear his voice, and he puts them
forth, and goes before them, and he leads his flock like a shepherd; but
thou that preaches: for hire, and divinest for money, and they that follow thee
are not of this flock: and as concerning thy knowledge of the anointing, thou
says thou may say as Paul said of sin, he had not known sin but by the Law,
so thou had not known the anointing, had not he Scriptures declared it, and
thou say without it there is nothing to be known, here thou blind guide,
thou puts the Scriptures in the room of God, and would exalt it above God,
and have made thy folly manifest that thou never knew the anointing but by
hearsay, and if thou have not had their words, who witnessed the anointing in
themselves, thou had not known whether there had been such a thing, and thou
that knows nothing but without thee, knows nothing at all, and yet the
Scripture is able to make wise unto salvation, and perfect the man of God
through faith in Christ Jesus, but of the man of Gods estate thou know
nothing of, who art pleading and holding up those things which the men of God
witnessed against.

V. Query. Whether thou own Christ to be the light of the world, and has
enlightened every one, yea or no?

VI. Query. Whether thou own the word of John 1. 9. where he witnessed Christ
to be the true light which enlightneth every one that comes into the world?

Answ. Thou says thou think its not amiss to declare that Christ is not
only the light of the world through Revelation but in works of miracles, and
meritorious sufferings, and as he gives to all creatures the light in their
Creation.

Reply. Thy thoughts are vain and not as Gods thoughts, he is but one, who is
the light of the world, and in him is no darkness at all, the light is but one
and the same light in which he lives, the same light the Saints lives in, who
are guided by him who is the light, and the light is but one in him that loves
it, and in him that hates it; the one he loves it, and the other he hates it:
and thou that art making distinctions of the light, art divided from the light,
and so makes many lights by thy imaginations, and so perverts the Scripture.
And where readst thou of meritorious suffering of Christ in the Scripture; nay,
thou art so ignorant of him who is the true light, and has not so much as a
form of sound words: and where reads thou of such a distinction of natural and
spiritual light in Christ, thy rule shall try thee, and thou shall be judged by
it, for in thy serpents wisdom thou would darken the counsel of God, and
rent the Scripture in pieces by thy imaginations, and thou never knewst what
the light of Christ was, and never shall comprehend it with all thy
distinctions, and though the world is in darkness, yet the light shines in
darkness, but this is a mystery, and sealed to thee, and therefore thou would
give thy meanings upon their words who were in the light.

VII. Query. Whether it is not blasphemy to call the true light of Christ which
enlightneth every one that comes into the world a natural light, and whether
they do not deny the Scriptures, that say that every one is not enlightened with
the true light, yea or no?

Answ. Is light by just consequence and not otherwise called natural, so the
light may be called supernatural, which is properly called Christ's light, and
thou tells of ordinary lights.

Reply. Thy consequences are denied, thou art in the Philosophy and vain
deceits: where reads thou in Scripture of a natural and supernatural light? and
where reads thou that the light which is in every creature is ordinary light,
and ^^ thou goe^t on to prove that there is two lights in Christ; and that the
light of Christ is natural and spiritual, and so would make two Christ's: is
Christ spiritual? and is that which is his light natural? a natural man
understands not the things of God, but the light which comes from Christ which
is but one, not divided, but is spiritual, it leads to an understanding of the
things of God, and that which may be known of God is revealed in man, but thou
art ignorant and blind, and cannot comprehend it, that which is natural is
carnal, and so thou would make a carnal Christ, as one like thy self
affirmed, who called himself a Minister of Christ, but he that loves the light
is led up out of darkness, to the light of life, and he that hates the light,
its his condemnation, and he is but one that judges and saves his people from
their sin: and in the last part of thy answer, thou say thou acknowledgest
the light of the Law of Christ to be more or less in the light of nature; here
again thy ignorance is made manifest, Paul said, the Law was spiritual, and the
Law of the spirit of life in Jesus, had freed him from the Law of sin and
death; was that natural? is Christ spiritual, and his Law natural? for shame be
silent, and speak not of the Law, it is holy; is that natural? and thou speaks
of putting the light of Christ under a bushel, and some that destroy Christ's
light; thou blind Pharisee, thou art he that puts the light of Christ under a
bushel, that walks in those things, and pleads for those things which they
declared against: and thou art he that goes about to destroy Christ's light
which is pure and eternal, and calst it natural and supernatural, when the
light is but one, and thou that would divide the light, art divided from it,
and walks not by it, and so art in darkness till now: and thou says further,
that as Christ is pleased, he can by the preaching of the Gospel open thine
eyes, and turn them from darkness to light: here again thy shame and thy
nakedness appears: have thou professed thy self a Minister of the Gospel, and a
teacher, and are thy eyes unopened? yetart thou yet unturned from darkness unto
light? then darkness speaks and wrote the book, and darkness cannot comprehend
the light, and would thou be judging of the light, and of Christ, that is yet
in darkness? for shame own thy condemnation, for what thou have done in
speaking in the name of the Lord, he accepts no such testimony, nor the
testimony of them that walk in darkness, and not in the light; and he will
judge thee, who is the light, for perverting the truth in thy dark mind; and
thou confesses that thou art blind, and thine eyes are not yet opened; then
how can thou declare of him, whom thou have neither seen nor heard, and here
be a witness against thyself?

VIII. Query. Whether the true light of Christ, which enlightneth every one
that comes into the world, which discovers all the deeds of darkness, is not
sufficient to lead all those that love and follow him into holiness and all
truth, seeing Christ who is the light says that those that follow him shall
not abide in darkness, but have the light of life?

Answ. To this thou answers, Yea, it is when it is revealed; and in thy answer
to the third Query, thou says there is nothing that can be known but by the
Scriptures, and so here thou lies in confusion and Babylon, and puts the letter
for the light of Christ, and so art blind indeed, as thou confessed thy eyes
were not opened, and thou was not turned from darkness, and thou says Christ's
light when it is revealed is sufficient, the light which Christ Jesus has
enlightened every one withal, is made manifest, and convinces of all
ungodlyness and worldly lust; yea, he which is the Comforter convinces the
world of sin, as the Scripture witnesses; neither is their any other light in
the world that convinces the liar, the swearer, the drunkard, but that light
that comes from Christ, and this is the condemnation of them that hate it, and
that which declares against unrighteousness is righteous, and that which shows
sin is holy, and thou that calls this natural, thy eye is blind, and thy
understanding is darkened, and thy ear heavy, and so can neither hear, see, not
understand it; now the natural man understands not the things of God, but the
light of Christ in every man's conscience understands by it what is not of God,
and by it he comes to see sin, that it is against God, and therefore I am a
witness against thee, and against all the hirelings in the world, that by the
light, which a measure is given to every one, that he that loves it, It leads
to the the light of life, and though the light shine in a natural man, yet it
is not natural, but seven seals, and upon this, to the serpents seed, and he
that hates it, and disputes against it, shall never know it, and thou says,
whosoever has this light of Christ, may see to obey Magistrates and Ministers
Lords day, worship, fasting, praying, singing, as well as to avoid blasphemy
and profanness, Magistrates we obey in the Lord, and all their just commands,
but we deny flattery and deceit, and respecting persons, but honors the power
that is of God, and that which is acted by them which is not of God, we suffer
for conscience sake, and resists not, but all that thou obeys is without, in
slattery and deceit, and has men's persons in admiration, because of advantage;
and Ministers of Christ we own, who are sent of God, and honors such, but thee
and all the hirelings and imitaters, Ianes and Iambres like, we deny, and are
bold to declare against you all, who walk contrary to the Saints, and that
which you call your rule, and are a generation of hypocrites, and your rule
shall judge you all, and thou art tried by it, when all along thy answers, thou
pleads against the Scripture, and adds thy meanings, and God will judge thee
for it, and thy shame shall be made manifest to all; the day of the Lord we
own, blessed be that day; but it shall burn as an oven, against all deceivers
and hypocrites; and false Prophets, and this thou shall know and witness; and
baptism, and watching, and fasting, and praying, and singing, this is
witnessed, the same that ever was, and the power of godliness, but we deny
thee, and all such as go and baptize, and then preach repentance to them forty
years after; and fasting; thou might have been sparing in this, pull out the
beam, I speak to thy conscience: how often have thou fasted, and crossed thy
lust, nay all is too little, hay and corn, Calves, Lambs, Eggs and Swines flesh
and all is to little for you, but you are still at a want, and removing from
one place to another, for filthy lukre, and makes merchandise of souls for
dishonest gain, and sues men at the Law, as many can witness in the North of
England, and casts those in prison that they call their flock, and so you are
as ravening wolves, greedy of your prey, and as foxes in the desert, that
devours all that resist you; and then cries they are not subject to the
Magistrates nor Ministers; and then says the labourer is worthy of his hire,
and brings this for a cloak, when as they never hired you, and yet you seek
wages of them, you do not work for, to maintain your luks: Howl ye Caterpillars
and Cankerworms, that devours the earth, and spends your time in the lusts of
the flesh, and yet accuses others, and as for thy prayers they stink. God hears
not sinners, and while thou lives in this nature, pleading for those things
which the Scripture declare against, and thy songs shall be turned into
lamentation and howling, the dead cannot praise, nor the blind, and thou says
thou art blind and deaf; what have thou to preach, or pray, or sing; and so
cease thy gainsaying, the hand of the Lord is against thee, and the Scripture
was not given out for thee to prattle on, and for those things thou calls
ordinances, thou had not known such a thing, as in the answer to the fourth
Query thou confessest, and so let shame cover thy face, and let thy mouth be
stopped, and all flesh keep silence, for what is known without, leads no^ ^o
God, but that which may be known of God is revealed in man, Romans 2. and the
time is come, Iesable that has slain the Prophets, shall be cast into torment,
and she shall prophecy no more, and by the light which thou sets all naught,
shall thou and all the inchanters and diviners be confounded, to it shall all
Nations how, for he from whom it come, is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who
makes war in righteousness, and is now coming to cut off all by the edge of the
sword, who has prophefied lies in his name, and caused men to abhor the
service of the living God.

IX. Query. Whether the end of begisting and sending forth Ministers; is for
the perfecting of the Saints, and for bringing them up to his measure or
fullness, yea or no?

Answ. Yea.

Reply. Here thou thy self, shall be a witness against all the Ministry which
long has been in this Nation, for verily it is so far from perfecting of the
Saints, that openly the Ministry pleads against it, and cries out of those
that witness it to be in error; and here thou shall stand as a witness for the
truth, against thy self, and against all thy Brethren.

X. Query. Whether any shall grow up under thy Ministry, to a perfect man, to
the measure of fullness, and stature of Christ, yea or no?

Answ. Thou say, speaking of thy own hearers, they are at age, ask them, and
try them whether there be not some that will not avoid to answer thee; to which
I do Reply, It may be some of thy hearers might be as impudent in speaking lies
against their own conscience, as thou art in writing against the Commands of
Christ; but that in their conscience, to which I desire to be known, and to the
upright principle in them, to which I desire to speak, will not witness that
under thy Ministry, they have attained to perfection, but are yet learning
under thee, and never able by thee to come to the knowledge of the truth; and
that which is of God in them, shall witness against thy Ministry, that it
perfects none into holiness, and into the Image of God; and thou say thou
hopes we may see in the Epbes. 4. 13. Concerning the fullness of the stature of
Christ; and further, by faith, then all our defects, imperfections and sins are
not imputed, as thereby God may apply the righteousness of Christ, whereby we
may see no transgression in Jacob; we are, and all Believers must come to the
measure of the perfection of Christ.

Reply. What Paul spoke to the Ephesians we know is true, but what is this to
thee, and those who are out of Paul's way and life; in the way of the false
Prophets, and of the Scribes and Pharisees, and the defects and imperfections,
and sins, must lie upon your own head, for Christ will be no cloak unto you in
your iniquities, to cloak your hypocrisy and deceit; if you had faith, then
should you be purified from Imperfection; for faith is perfect, and so are all
that live by it: and for thy word apply the righteousness of Christ, it is not
the language of the spirit of God, which gave forth the Scripture; for the
righteousness of Christ is not to be applied to the head of the wicked, nor to
cover wickedness, but to destroy it; but where sin stands, it will be imputed:
for God cannot acquit the wicked, and he that sins is not of Jacobs seed, but
of Esaus, and the righteousness of Christ is not unto that birth, and thou and
all thy Believers, who art in defects and imperfections, and in your sins, art
in the stature and measure of Cain and Ishmael, and not of the stature of the
same God; who art free from all unrighteousness, and defects, and imperfections.

XI. Query. Whether they be not Ministers of Antichrist, and never were sent of
Christ, that deny perfection which they are sent of Christ, to bring unto, yea
or no?

Answ. Nay, they are not. Reply, here thou have manifested the ignorance and
confusion, who in thy answer to the nineth Query, said it yea, it was the end
of sending faith, the Ministers for the perfecting of the Saints; and now then
say, they are not Ministers of Antichrist, which denies perfection, and so
speaks a plain contradiction, and so out of thy own mouth shall thou be
condemned; and let all whose eye is open, see and behold thy deceit and
blindness, and so also manifest thy selt, that thou was never sent of Christ,
who has brought up none to perfection, But say they are not Ministers of
Antichrist, that denies perfection, and yet says the Ministers of Christ was
sent to that end, to bring up unto perfection; and further thou say, that
exhorting the world to look to the light that is within them, they shall never
come to perfection, none must think or imagine

Reply. Here thou have uttered Blasphemy, and quite contrary to Christ's own
words, who says I am the light of the world, he that follows me shall have the
light of life, and this is perfection; and be it known unto thee, and unto all,
that no other light we direct or exhorts unto, but the light of Christ within,
which is sufficient to lead to perfection as Christ himself says his light
leads to the light of life all that walk in it, and thou says contrary and so
speaks-against Christ, and would make his light imperfect, and not able to lead
to perfection, and part found an enemy to him, and may stop thy mouth for
shame, who art ignorant of the Scripture; and whilst thou professes it, art
found both walking and speaking contrary to it.

XII. Query. Whether he that is born of God, do commit sin, yea or no? and
whether he that commits sin is of the Devil, yea or no?

Answ. He that is born of God is exhorted to repent; and may be deluded, and
thou affirmatively says that those that are born of God may sin, as all the
Saints have experienced.

Reply. Here thou more plainly have showed thy self to be a perverter of the
Scripture, and one that speaks contrary to it; for he who is born of God, is
the Image of God, and needs no repentance, he which was born of God was
commended by God, and not exhorted to repent, as that Scripture which thou have
named, Rev. 2. shall witness: but he which was fallen from the birth-born of
God, was exhorted to repent; and thou say he that is born of God may be
deluded, and the Scripture says it is not possible that the elect should be
deceived: and here again thou speaks contrary to the Scripture, and thou say
affirmatively, that those that are born of God may sin: and here again thou
speaks contrary to the Scripture, which says, he that is born of God cannot
sin: Now let shame cover thy face, and let thy own conscience convince thee,
that thou art a perverter of the Scripture to thy own destruction, and so art
unlearned, and without true experience, for that experience, and those Saints
which thou speaks of, which experiences that which is contrary to the plain
words of Scripture, which was the experiences of true Saints, is damnable
experiences, and servants of the Devil, and cannot be believed by them who are
true Saints, and have true experiences, according to the working of the holy
Ghost in them: and further thou say that Scripture, 1 John 3. 8, 9. may be
hard to be understood, yet taking good notice, the truth is easily reconci^ed,
and thou say, this is his meaning, that the child of God sins not after
the similitude, manner, or measure, or nature that the devil and his reprobates
sins, and so to make good what thou say thou have added to John's words, his
seed remains in him (whereby he shall repent him of his sin, this last thou
have deceitfully added, as also have added after the similitude, manner, or
measure, or nature, that the Devil and his reprobates sins, let all seareh the
Scripture, and see if John speak any such thing, and so gives thy sensual
meaning of John's words, quite contrary to what he spoke: for further, he said
he that sins is of the devil, and never knew God; and thou affirms, he that is
born of God, which know God may sin, and so divides the Scripture, and adds thy
own imaginations unto it; and so thou may read thy portion in it, God will
add all his plagues unto thee, and truth needs no reconciling, for it is in
verity, and cannot be understood by thee, who art unlearned, and therefore thou
wrests it: and further, thou say a child of God being renewed through
Gospel-repentance, sins not devil like unto death or damnation.

Reply, O thou blind Pharisce, a child of God needs no repentance and all sin
is of and like the Devil his image, the Scripture says he that sins is of the
Devil; thou say contrary, and speaks of sin not to be like the Devil: and
here again art speaking contrary to the Scripture. And further, thou say
thou do say that the child of God as he sins, is of the Devil, not that the
Devil can claim him for his, or that he is in the possession of the Devil, for
your gift is of Balaams nature, and not of the nature of Paul's, and so your
reward will be as Balaams, and not as Paul's, who inherits the everlasting
treasure for ever. And further, thou say, but as to the point of taking
Tithes, which in respect of darkness and prejudice, some Saints are herein
unsatisfied: and thou say we understand not our selves in judging from the
Apostles example, except we could prove by Scripture, that the Apostles might
have had Tithes, or those Ministers which were like Timothy and Titus, settled
in a parochial way in their quarters, might have had Tithes given them, and yet
refused them.

Reply. They which are satisfied that they are Ministers of Christ which takes
Tithes, are indeed in darkness as thou speaks, and unto all that fear God,
taking of ^ythes whether in paying or receiving, will be prejudice: and be it
known unto thee, and unto all such that we do understand our selves in judging
thee and all such; to be Antichrists, and deceivers and false Prophets, who
acts and upholds those things which the deceivers and false Prophets acted in
former generations; and in seeking for your gain from your Quarter and in
making merchandise of people through covetousness, you make it manifest that
you are such, and so in the light which was in the Prophets, and in the
Apostles, we see you, and by it we judge you, and by the example of the
Apostles you may all be condemned; who never took Tithes, nor sought for their
gain from their Quarter, nor made merchandise of any through covetousness, as
you do: and we tell thee plainly, it is as true as the Scripture, for by the
same Spirit we speak, that none of the Ministers of Christ nor his Apostle, did
take Tithes or wages of the world for preaching, and this we can prove by the
Scripture, that the Apostles refused to take that which they might have had,
which was offered unto them, and herein they shall judge you, who not only
takes what men give you willing, but compels some to pay against their will:
and that Timothy or Titus, or any of the ministers of Jesus Christ, was never
settled in a parochial way in Quarters, we do deny it, and does charge it upon
thee, to be a false accuser, and a slanderer, and a liar, upon Timothy and
Titus, and would make them as bad as thy self, and the rest of the false
Prophets, and here let thy own conscience condemn thee, for believing the holy
men of God, and speaking that of them which they were not to cloak and uphold
thy own deceits and abominations: and further, thou say till then the light
of the Apostles that took whatsoever was given them, satisfies thy conscience
to praise God for the Magistrate that does freely give it unto thee, and then
brings the Apostles words, they that preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel.

Reply. The light in which the Apostles lived, by which they were acted, will
for ever condemn thee except thou repent; for by their example thou art judged
already as it is manifested, thy conscience is blinded by the god of the world,
and not satisfied by the light of Christ which was in the Apostles, for if the
light of the Apostles acted thee, then would thou be found in their steps, but
be witness against thy self, that thou art acted by that spirit which acted the
false Prophets, and false Apostles, being thou art found in the same steps,
making merchandise of people, and preaching for hire as they did; which of the
Apostles had any Law from any Magistrate, to compel men to pay Tithes to them,
show this by the Scripture if thou can, or else be a witness against thy
self, that thou lives not upon the Gospel? For I know if you had not a Law to
compel men to maintain you, the Gospel which you preach, and the people to whom
you preach, would starve you for maintenance; this Scripture we own, and do
witness, they that preach the Gospel shall live of the Gospel, and does,
without running to Magistrates to receive order from them, to compel men to pay
them.

XVI. Query. Show me by the Scripture where ever any of the Ministers of Christ
did give David's Psalms to be sung of the people in a rhyme; and if not, thou
acknowledgest that thou art in the inventions and traditions of men, raised out
from them all.

Answ. In thy answer unto this Query, thou brings many Scriptures to prove
singing, some of which does not at all prove any singing, and none of them will
prove the singing which thou pleads for; which is a great company of proud and
covetous, and earthly minded persons, to sing David's words which they cannot
witness, but are enemies to the life of what he spoke; for the world cannot
sing praises unto God, but you by your traditions cause men to sing lies, that
they are not puffed in mind, and that the Law of God is dear unto them, and that
every night water they their bed with tears, when as they never witnessed these
things, though all this was true in David; and as for that Scripture 2 Chronicles,
29. where it was commanded of the Priests to sing the words of David and Asaph;
this was under the Law, a figure, as the Priests was a figure: and from that
Scripture you may as well prove the offering of sacrifice, as singing; but thou
makes manifest thy ignorance and blindness hereby unto all the simple, and many
other Scriptures thou brings, and the example of Christ and his Disciples, and
the example of the Churches, which will not at all prove the singing of your
assemblies, which is only by tradition and invention we do deny, and bear
testimony against it, that it is not the singing to the praise of God, but God
is dishonored by it, and it shall all be turned into howling and bitterness,
and the time is at hand wherein the Judgments of God shall be revealed against
it, for in the eternal light it is discovered to be abomination unto God, and
instead of singing you shall howl and lament, the Lord has said it; and a
great deal more rabble of stuff thou have written to prove thy deceitful
practice, which I forbear to answer, as not worth naming.

XVII. Query. Whether that woe which Christ pronounced against the Pharisees,
who were called of men Masters, had the ceief place in the Assemblies, and
stood praying in the Synagogues, do not abide upon thee, who art called of men
Masters, have the chief seat in the Assemblies, stands praying in the
Synagogue? or how will thou justify thy self in these practices, seeing Christ
is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, who cried woe against them that
lived in them?

Answ. Thou say thou does not fear the woes pronounced against the
Pharilees.

Reply. It is because thy heart is hardened, and thy mind is stiffnecked and
rebellious, for as sure as Christ is the same for ever, the same woe will be
thy portion as was theirs, which acts those things which they acted, contrary
to the command of Christ: and further, thou say Christ, his Prophets and
Apostles and as well as thy self, were called Masters, and Sirs.

Reply. Christ was called Master, and here he approved it, and so he was, and
is, even the one Master of all the Saints; and their being called Master will
not justify thee in thy Pharisees steps: for he says, Mat. 23. Be not ye
called Master, and thou mani^ests thy self to be an enemy to Christ, who brings
Scripture against his commands, and this I ask thee, or any, whether you dare
justify that to be of God, which Christ expressly commands contrary either in
your selves or others? and though some have erred herein, yet this will not
justify thee in thy Pharisee steps; for Christ did plainly describe the
Pharisees to the Desciples, by their walking, and we find thee, and the rest of
thy Brethren, complete in their steps, by the same spirit as Christ did we cry
woe against you; and as sure as Christ is the same for ever, it will come upon
you: and further thou answers, as concerning thy preaching and praying in a
pulpit of wood in the Synagogue, thou art no more then Christ, his Prophets and
Apostles; who did preach in the Synagogues to be condemned:

Reply. Yea, thou art in the Pharisees steps, having the chief seat in the
Assembly, and art to be condemned by the same which condemned the Pharisees.

And whereas thou have brought many Scriptures to vindicate thy Pharisee like
action, none or them will justify thee nor thy action; and thou have belyed
the Prophets, and Christ and his Apostles, for they had not the chief place in
the Assemblies, which thou would go about to make appear they had, and so would
make them as bad as thy self, and the Phasees, but let all search the
Scriptures which thou have named; and as for that where Ezra the Scribe read
the Law in a Pulpit of wood in the street, will not justify thee except thou
will own thy self to be a Scribe and Priest of the Law as he was, and so deny
thy self to be a Minister of the Gospel: this was not in a formal customary
way, but at a particular time, and to a particular people, and he is not an
example to the Ministers of the Gospel, for they went up and down in Towns, and
Markets, and Vilages, preaching to every creature, which is our example, and
not Ezra: and as for the other Scriptures, they will bear witness against thy
action, for not one of them does prove that either-Christ or his Apostles had
the chief seat in the Synagogues, but sometimes they went and declared against
them, and sometime they were hailed out and persecuted in them, as we are: and
thy manner or action in the Assemblies, is according to the Pharisees, and not
according to the Apostles, thou makes a trade to get money by thy action, and
they did not so, but freely what they had received from God they declared, but
thou sels thine for money, and upholds an Idols Temple which they bore witness
against, as the Scripture bears witness, and here thou have wrested the
Scripture being unlearned, to thy own destruction, and where is thou speaks of
feeding the flock of Christ, I answer, they who are the sheep of Christ knows
thy voice to be the stranger, and will deny thee and thy food which feeds dead
minds with the dead letter, and then make a prey upon the people, as the false
Prophets did, and thou art raised out from all the holy Prophets and Apostles,
art in the steps of the false Prophets, and Scribes and Pharisees, and false
Brethren, thou speaks of our profaning the Temples, and basely contemning it:
to which I answer, we bear witness against the Idols Temples of the world,
which God is dishonored in, and Baal worshipped, and do say God dwells not in
Temples made with hands, and no other ways we profane it nor contemn it, but as
the Apostles did, in witnessing forth the Substance, and denying the figure:
and further, thou say that as Christ did, so thou do acknowledge to be
called Master, Minister, or Pastor, and do likewise Christ like, own in
sincerity and humility, to stand praying in the Synagouge.

Reply. Here thou art impudent and shameless, who acknowledges thy self to be
called Masters, absolute contrary to the command of Christ, and so art to be
condemned with the Pharisees, and as for Ministers of the Gospel, and Pastor of
the flock of Christ, thou art none: for thy fruits does make thee manifest, and
being found out of the doctrine of Christ, and of his Apostles, art to be
Judged by their life and Spirit; and that Christ stood praying in the
Synagogue, which thou say, I declare against thee here to be a liar, for in
the Scripture thou can not prove that Christ stood praying in the Synagogue,
and so have belyed him; and have added in this answer to the Scripture, as thou
have done in the twelfth Query; and so thou may read thy portion, plagues
will God add unto thee, and as for sincerity and humility, thou who pleads for
that which the holy men of God witnessed against, may be ashamed to profess
sincerity and humility, and thus thy answers are replied unto, and thy shame
laid open, and thy portion read, even the breath of the Lord will kindle thy
torment, who has slandered Christ and his Apostle, and would make them as bad
as thy self, and the liars portion must thou have, the mouth of the Lord has
spoken it.

XVIII. Query. Whether they be not Ministers of Antichrist that do practice
those things that Christ cried woe against? and whether they be Ministers of
Christ, that though their subtilty go about to justify those practices that
Christ forbad and cried woe against, yea or no?

Answ. Thou say if thou know any goes about subtly to justify these
practices, it were well it were put out of a query.

Reply. For the Information of the simple it was put forth, and that thou might
be made manifest, and I put it out of all question, and say that they are the
Ministers of Antichrist that practice those things that Christ cried woe
against; and thou art seen to be one of them, that has declared thy self
openly to all that shall read thy answers, that all thou has written was in
subtilty, and thou goes about to justify that which Christ cried woe against,
as is manifest pleading for Tithes, and denying Christ come in the flesh, and
pleads against the words and commands of Christ, and to be called of men
Master, and for standing praying in the Synagogue, and calls it Christ like,
let shame strike thee in thee face, and I challenge thee to prove where Christ
stood praying in the Synagogue; did he act those things that he cried woe
against, and so thou would make him like thy self a dissembler and an
hypocrite; but thou judges out of thy corrupt imaginations, and he will judge
thee for it: and thou says thou in charity ought to judge me to contend for
the faith; and in thy answer to John Whites conclusion, thou says he Pope like
commands thee to answer; and further, thou says he required thee in his one
name, what confusion thou lies in, and forgets what thou speaks thy heart is so
full of deceit: and thou further says, he ought to abound in charity, to think
no evil, and to die to all causless jealousies and contempt against professors,
thou would not have deceit judged neither in thy self nor others, but would
build up, and be daubed with untempered mortar, and it is beyond jealousies
that we have of thee, and all profession that stands in that nature, when your
profession is contrary to the doctrine of Christ, and now possess not what you
speak, and therefore makes hypocrites by your preaching, and to profess that
which they possess not.

And in thy conclusion, thou says John Whitehead, let me tell thee plainly,
that thy words being far from the meek spirit of the Apostles, I beseech you
brethren.

Reply. The Apostle never said I beseech you brethren to such as thou art, who
acts those things that he declared against, and suffered by thy generation, as
we do now, hailing, mocking, buffeting: and thou that art joined to a harlot,
would thou be called a Brother, and thou says thou should not have answered
these Queris, if it had not been to answer the command of God, and the teaching
of the Spirit; the command of God thou never knew, who art pleading against
Christ's commands and the Spirit thou knows nothing of, who confessed in the
fourth page of thy book, who confessed thou knew nothing but by the Scripture,
and the Scripture is not the Spirit; and here let all judge of thy blindness,
and thou says thou have answered without adding or diminishing the Scripture,
let all thy writing be a witness against thee, in thy answer to the twelfth
Query, and in thy conclusion thou says thou would not draw arguments from, and
fetch guns out of a castle, to turn them against the same place; this shall
stand for thy self, and let all judge whether thou have not fetched arguments
and Scriptures to uphold thy trade of divination, and has pleaded against
Christ's own commands, and sets one Scripture against another; and thou would
have distinctions to stand, because the holy Ghost says, this he spoke
concerning the Temple of his body; but where is that Scripture that says this
was said not of the material Temple? that is thy own word, and so thou cannot
but twine, and wrest, and pervert, for if thou did not, the whole Scripture
would bear witness against thee; and thou art accusing that thou heard him
press, casting off ordinances, we know what thou calls ordinances, even
beggarly rudiments, sprinkling Infants, singing others condition, and when you
read puts them on, and when you sing puts them off, and standing praying in the
Synagogue, and would accuse Christ as thou have done, in thy answer to the
seventeenth Query, and coming to an Idols Temple; and hear thee speak an hour
or two, what thou have raised up by thy imagination from the Scripture all the
week, and then cry hear the Word of the Lord, and these and such like are your
ordinances, but God will plead with thee, and all that offer strange fire, and
all your sacrifice God is weary of, and therefore cease to pervert the way of
the Lord, lest thou be cut off within thy gainsaying, and perish with the
uncircumcised.

FINIS.

