A LETTER TO THE EARL OF PEMBROOKE Concerning the Times, and the sad condition
both of Prince and People.

The Land mourns because of Oaths. Printed in the Year, 1647.

To the Right Honorable Philip Earl of Pembrock, and Montgomery, Knight of
the most Noble Order of the Garter, and one of His Majisties most Honorable
Privy Counsel, etc,
My Lord,
THis Letter requires no Apology, much less any pardon, but may expect rather
a good receprion, and thanks, when your Lordship has seriously perused the
contents, and ruminated well upon the matter it treats of, with your second and
third thoughts, which usually carry with them a greater advantage of wisdom:
It concerns not your body, or temporal estate, but things reflecting upon the
noblest part of you, your soul, which being a beam of Immortality, and a type
of the Almighty, is incomparably more precious, and renders all other earthly
things to be but bables and transitory trifles. Now, the strongest tie, the
solemnest engagement and stipulation that can be betwixt the soul and her
Creator, is an Oath. I do not understand common tumultuary rash oaths,
proceeding from an ill habit, or beat of passion upon sudden contingencies, for
such oaths bind one to naught else but to repentance: No, I mean serious and
legal oaths, taken with a calm prepared spirit, either for the asserting of
truth, and conviction of falsehood, or for fidelity in the execution of some
Office, or binding to civil obedience and Loyalty, which is one of the
essential parts of a Christian. Such public oaths legally made with the
Royal assent of the Sovereign from whom they receive both legalitie and life,
else they are invalid and unwarrantable, as they are religious acts in their
own nature, so is the taking and observance of them part of Gods honor, and
there can be nothing more derogatory to the high Majesty and holiness of his
name, nothing more dangerous, destructive and damnable to humane souls then the
infringment and eluding of them, or omission in the performance of them. Which
makes the Turks, of whom Christians in this particular may learn a tender piece
of humanity, to be so cautious, that they seldom or never administer an oath to
Greek, Jew, or any other Nation, and the reason is, that if the Party sworn
does take that Oath upon hopes of some advantage, or for evading of danger and
punishment, and afterward rescinds it, they think themselves to be involved in
the Perjurie, and accessory to his damnation: Our Civil Law has a Canon
consonant to this, which is, Mortale peccatum est ei prastare juramentum, quem
scio verisimiliter violaturum; It Is a mortal sin to administer an Oath to him
who I probably know will break it; To this may allude another wholesome saying,
A false Oath is damnable, a true Oath dangerous, none at all the safest. How
much then have they to answer for, who of late years have framed such
formidable coercive general Oaths to serve them for engines of State to ^y
battery to the Consciences and Souls of poor men, and (...) the assent of the
Sovereign, and opposed (...) to fo^^er Oaths they themselves had taken: these
kind of Oaths the City has swallowed lately in gross, and the Country in
detaile, which makes me confidently believe that if ^ver that saying of the
holy Prophet, The Land mournes for Oaths was appliable to any part of the
habitable earth, it may be ^o^^plied to this desperate Island.

But now I come to the maine of my purpose, and to those Oaths your Lordship
has taken before this distracted time, which, the world knows, and your
conscience can testify, were diverse; They were all of them Solemn, and some of
them Sacramental Oaths (and indeed, every Solemn Oath among the Ancients was
held a Sacrament:) They all employed, and imposed an indispensible fidelity,
Truth and loyalty from you to your Sovereign Prince, your Liege Lord and
Master the King: I will make some instances: Your Lordship took an Oath when
Knight of the Bath to love your Sovereign above all earthly Greatures, and for
His Right and dignity to live and die:

By the Oath of Supremacy you swear to bear faith and true allegiance to the
Kings Highness, and to your power to defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Preheminences and Authorities belonging to His Highness.

Your Lordship took an Oath when Privy Counselor, to be a true and faithful
Servant unto Him, and if you knew or understood of anymanner of thing to be
attempted, done, or spoken against His Majesty's Person, Honor Crown, or
Dagnitie, you swoare to let, and withstand the same to the uttermost of your
power, and either cause it to be revealed to Himself, or to others of His
Privy Counsel: The Oaths you took when Bedchamberman, and L. Chamberlain bind
you as strictly to His Person.

Your Lordship may also call to memory when you were installed Knight of the
Garter, (whereof you are now the oldest living except aK. of Denmarky you
solemnly swore to defend the Honor, and Quarrels, the Rights and Lordship of
your Sovereign: Now the Record tells us that the chiefest ground of
instituting that Order by that heroic Prince Edward the Third was, that he
might have choice gallant men, who by Oath and Honor should adhere unto him in
all dangers, and difficulties, and that by way of reciprocation he should
protect and defend them; Which made Alfonso Duke of Calabria so much importune
Henry the Eight to install him one of the Knights of the Gatter, that he might
engage King Harry to protect him against Charles the Eighth, who threatened then
the conquest of Naples.

How your Lordship has acquitted your self of the performance of these Oaths
your conscience (that bosom record) can make the best affidavit; Some of them
oblige you to live and dye with King Charles, but what Oaths or any thing like
an Oath binds you to live and die with the House of Commons, as your Lordship
often gives out you will, I am yet to learn: Unless that House which has not
power as much as to administer an Oath (much less to make one) can absolve you
from your former Oaths, or happily by their omnipotence dispense with you for the
observance of them. Touching the Political capacity of the King I fear that
will be a weak plea for your Lordship before the Tribunal of heaven, and they
who whispers such Chimeras into your ears abuse you in gross; but put case
there were such a thing as political capacity distinct from the personal,
which to a true rational man is one of the grossest Bulls that can be, yet these
sorementioned Oaths relate most of them merely unto the Kings Person, the
individual Person of King Charles as you are His domestic Counselor, and
cubicular Servant.

My Lord, I take leave to tell your Lordship (and the Spectator sees sometimes
more then the Gamster) that the world extremely marvels at you more then
others, and it makes those who wish you best to be transformed to wonder, that
your Lordship should be the first of your Race who deserted the Crown, which
one of your Progenitors said, he would still follow though it were thrown upon
a hedge: Had your Princely Brother been living he would have been sooner torn
by wild horses than have banded against it, or abandoned the King his Master,
and fallen to such gross Idolatry as to worship the Beast with many heads. The
world also stands astonished that you should con^ederate to bring into the
bowels of the Land, and make Elogiums of that hungry people which have been
from all times so cross and fatal to the English Nation, and particularly to
your own honor: Many thousands do wonder that your Lordship should be brought
to persecute with so much animosity and hatred that reverend Order in Gods
Church which is contemporary with Christianity it self, and whereunto you had
once designed, and devoted one of your dearest Sons so solemnly.

My Lord, if this Monster of Reformation (which is like an infernal Spirit
clad in white, and has a cloven head as well as feet) prevails you shall find
the same destiny will attend poor England, as did Bohemia which was one of the
flourishingst Kingdoms upon this part of the earth; The Common people there
repind at the Hierarchy and riches of the Church, thereupon a Parliament was
packed where Bishops were demolished, what followed? The Nobles and Gentry went
down next, and afterward the Crown it self, and so it became a popular
confused Anarchicall State, and a Stage of blood along time, so that at last,
when this Magot had done working in the brains of the foolish people, they
were glad to have recourse to Monarchy again after a world of calamities;
though it degenerated from a successive Kingdom to an Elective. Me thinks, my
Lord, under favor that those notorious visible judgments which have fallen
upon these Refiners of reformed Religion should unbeguile your Lordship, and
open your eyes: For the hand of heaven never appeared so clearly in any humane
actions: Your Lordship may well remember what became of the Ho^hams, and Sir
Alexander Carry who were the two fatal wretches that began the War first, one
in the North, the other in the South; Your Lordship may be also pleased to
remember what became of Brooks the Lord, and Hampden, the first whereof was
dispatched by a deaf and dumb man out of an ancient Church which he was
battering, and that suddenly also, for he fell stone dead in the twinkling of
an eye; Now, one of the greatest cavils he had against our Lyturgie was a
clause of a Prayer there against sudden death, besides the fagge end of his
Grace in that journey was, that if the design was not pleasing to God, he might
perish in the action: For the other wiseaker he be-sprinkled with his blood,
and received his death upon the same clod of earth in Buckingham-shire where he
had first assembled the poor Country people like so many Geese to drive them
gaggling in a mutiny to London with the Protestation in their Caps, which has
been since torn in flitters, and is now grown obsolet and quite out of use.
Touching Pym and Stroud, those two worthy Champions of the Vtopian cause, the
first being opened, his stomach and guts were found to be full of pellets of
blood, the other had little or no brain at all left in his skull being dead,
and less when he was living: For Hollis who carried the first scandalous
Remonstrance (that work of night, and the verdict of a starved jury) to welcome
the King from Scotland, and was the first of the five Members who were
impeached by his Majesty, he has been since, your Lordship knows, the chief
of the Eleven Members impeached by themselves, but with this difference, that
they had justice against him, though the King could get none: But now this St.
Hollis with the rest are a kind of Runnagates beyond the Seas, scorned by all
mankind, and baffled every where, yea, even by the Boors of Holland, and not
daring to peep in any populous Town but by owle-light.

Moreover I believe your Lordship has good cause to remember that the same
kind of riotous Rascals which rabled the King out of town, did drive away the
Speaker in like manner with many of their Membsps, amongst whom your Lordship
was fairly on his way, to seek shelter of their Janissaries: Your Lp must needs
find what deadly fewds fall daily 'twixt the Presbyterian and Independent, the
two fiery brands that have put this poor Isle so long in combubustion. But it is
worthy your Lordships special notice how your dear Brethren the Scots (whom
your Lordship so highly magnified in some of your public Speeches) who were at
first brought in for Hirelings against the King for them, offer themselves now
to come in against them for the King: Your Lordship cannot be ignorant of the
sundry clashes that have been 'twixt the City and their Memberships, and 'twixt
their Memberships and their men of war; who have often waved and disobeyd their
commands: How this tatterdimallian Army has reduced this cowed City, the
cheated Country, and their once all-commanding Masters to a perfect pass of
slavery, to a true asinin condition; They crow over all the ancient Nobility
and Gentry of the Kingdom, though there be not found amongst them all but two
Knights; and it is well known there be hundreds of private Gentlemen in the
Kingdom, the poorest of whom, is able to buy this whole Host with the General
himself and all the Commanders: But it is not the first time, that the Kings
and Nobility of England have been baffled by petty companions: I have read of
Jack Straw, Wat Tyler and Ket the Tanner, with diverse others that did so, but
being suppressed it tended to the advantage of the King at last; and what a
world of examples are there in our story, that those Noblemen who banded
against the Crown, the revenge of heaven ever found them out early or late at
last.

These, with a black cloud of reciprocal judgments more, which have come home
to these Reformers very doors, show, that the hand of divine justice is in it,
and the holy Prophet tells us, When Gods judgments are upon earth, then the
Inhabitants shall learn justice.

Touching your Lordship in particular, you have not, underfavor, escaped
without some already, and I wish more may not follow; your Lordship may
remember you lost one Son at Bridgenorth, your deer Daughter at Oxford, your
Son-in-law at Newbury, your Daughter-in-law at the Charter House of an infamous
disease, how sickly your eldest Son has been; how part of your House was burnt
in the country, with others which I will not now mention.

I will conclude this point with an observation of the most monstrous number of
Witches that have swarmed since these Wars against the King, more (I dare say)
then have been in this Island since the Devil tempted Eve; for in two Counties
only there have been near upon three hundred arraigned, and eightscore
executed; what a barbarous devilish office one had, under color of
examination, to torment poor silly women with watchings, pinchings, and other
artifices to find them for Witches: How others by a new invention of villainy
were connived at for seizing upon young children, and hurrying them on
shipboard, where they were so transformed that their Parents could not know
them, and so were carried over for new schismatical Plantations. My Lord, there
is no villainy that can enter into the imagination of man has been left here
uncommitted; no crime from the highest Treason to the meanest Trespass but
these Reformers are guilty of. What horrid acts of profaneness have been
perpetrated up and down! the Monuments of the dead have been rifled! Horses
have been watered at the Church Font, and fed upon the holy Table! Widows,
Orphans, and Hospitals have been commonly robbed, and Gods House has been
plundered more then any! with what infandous blasphemies has the Pulpits rung,
one crying out, that this Parliament was as necessary for our Reformation, as
the coming of Christ was for our Redemption: Another belching out, that if God
Almighty did not prosper this Cause, 'twere fitting he should change places
with the Devil: Another, that the worst things our Savior did, was the making
of the Dominicall prayer, and saving the Thief upon the Cross. O immortal
God, is it possible that England should produce such Monsters, or rather such
infernal fiends shaped with humane bodies! yet your Lordship sides with these
men, though they be enemies to the Cross, to the Church, and to the very name
of Jesus Christ; I Will instance only in two who were esteemed the Oracles of
this holy Reformation, Peter's, and Saltmarsh; The first is known by thousands
to be an infamous, juggling and scandalous villain, among other feats he got the
Mother and Daughter with Child, as it was offered to be publicly proved; I
could speak much of the other, but being dead, let it suffice that he died mad
and desperate. These were accounted the two Apostles of the times.

My Lord, it is high time for you to recollect your self, to enter into the
private closet of your thoughts, and summon them all to counsel upon your
pillow; consider well the slavish condition your dear Country is in, weigh
well the sad case your liege Lord and Master is in, how He is bereaved of His
Queen, His Children, His Servants, His Liberty, and of every thing in which
there is any comfort; observe well, how nevertheless, God Almighty works in
Him, by inspiring Him with equality and calmnesse of mind, with patience,
prudence and constancy, how He makes His very crosses to stoop unto Him, when
His Subjects will not: Consider the monstrousnes of the Propositions that are
tendered Him, wherein no less then Crown, Scepter, and Sword, which are things
in-alienable from Majesty, are in effect demanded, nay they would not only have
Him transmit, and resign His very intellectuals unto them, but they would have
Him make a sacrifice of His soul, by forcing Him to violate that solemn
sacramental Oath He took at His Coronation when He was no minor, but come to a
full maturity of reason and judgment: make it your own case, my Lord, and
that is the best way to judge of His: Think upon the multiplicity of solemn
astringing Oaths your Lordship has taken, most whereof directly and solely
enjoin faith and loyalty to His Person; oh my Lord! wrong not your soul so
much, in comparison of whom your body is but a rag of rottenness.

Consider that acts of loyalty to the Crown are the fairest columns to bear up
a Noblemans name to future ages, and register it in the temple of immortality.
Reconcile your self therefore speedily unto your liege Lord and Master, think
upon the infinite private obligations you have had both to Sire and Son: The
Father kissed you often, kiss you now the Sun lest he be too angry; And Kings,
you will find, my Lord, are like the Sun in the heavens, which may be clouded
for a time, yet is he still in his sphere, and will break out again, and shine
as gloriously as ever; Let me tell your Lordship that the people begin to grow
extreme weary of their Physicians, they find the remedy to be far worse then
their former disease; nay, they stick not to call some of them mere
Quacksalvers, rather then Physicians; Some go further, and say they are no more
Parliament, then a Pyepowder Court at Bartholomew-fair, there being all the
essential parts of a true Parliament wanting in this, as fairness of
elections, freedom of speech, fullness of Members, nor have they any head at
all; Besides, they have broken all the fundamental rules and privileges of
Parliament, and dishonored that high Court more then any thing else: They have
ravished Magna Charta which they are sworn to maintain, taken away our
birthright, and transgressed all the laws of heaven and earth: Lastly, they
have most perjuriously betrayed the trust the King reposed in them, the trust
their Country reposed in them, so that if reason and Law were now in date, by
the breach of their Privileges, and by betraying the double trust that is put
in them, they have dissolved themselves ipso facto I cannot tell how many
thousand times, notwithstanding that monstrous grant of the Kings, that fatal
Act of continuance; And truly my Lord, I am not to this day satisfied of the
legality (though I am satisfied of the forciblenesse) of that Act, whether it
was in His Majesty's power to pass it or no; for the law ever presupposes
these clauses in all concessions of Grace, in all Patents, Charters, and Grants
whatsoever the King passes, Salvo jure regio, salvo jure coronae.

To conclude, as I presume to give your Lordship these humble cautions, and
advice in particular, so I offer it to all other of your rank, office and
orders, who have souls to save, and who by solemn indispensable Oaths have
engaged them to be true and loyal to the Person of King Charles. Touching His
political capacity, which fancy has been exploded in other Parliaments
(except in that mad infamous Parliament where it was first hatched) and Acts
passed that it should be high and horrible Treason to separate or distingnish
the Person of the King from His Power; I believe, as I said before, this will
not serve their turn at the dreadful Bar of divine Justice in the other world:
Indeed that Rule of the Pagans makes for them, Si Jusjurandum violandum est,
Tyrannidis causa violandum est, If an Oath be any way frangible, it is frangible
for a Kingdom; We find by woeful experience that according to this maxim they
have made themselves all kings by violation of so many Oaths; They have
monopolized the whole power and wealth of the Kingdom into their own hands;
They cut, shuffle, deal, and turn up what trump they please, being Judges and
parties in every thing.

My Lord, He who presents these humble advertisements to your Lordship, is one
who is inclined to the Parliament of England in as high a degree of affection
as possibly a freeborn Subject can be; One besides, who wishes your Lordships
good, with the preservation of your safety and honor more really then He whom
you entrust with your secretest affairs, or the white Jew of the Upper House
who have infused such pernicious principles into you; moreover, one who has
some drops of blood running in his veins, which may claim kindred with your
Lordship: And lastly, he is One who would kiss your feet, in lieu of your
hands, if your Ldp would be so sensible of the most desperate case of your poor
Country, as to employ the interests, the opinion and power you have to restore
the King your Master by English ways, rather then a hungry foreign people, who
are like to bring nothing but destruction in the van, confusion in the rear,
and rapine in the middle, should have the honor of so glorious a work,

My Lord, So, humbly hoping your Lordship will not take with the left hand what
I offer with the right, I rest Your most truly devoted Servant.

FINIS.

