AN ANSWER TO A PAPER; CALLED, A Petition of one Thomas Ellyson, late Shepherd
of Easingion in the County of Durham, to his Highness the Lord Protector of
England, Scotland and Ireland, and to all Emperors, Kings and Princes through
the world.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1654.

AN ANSWER TO A PAPER: CALLED, A Petition of one Thomas Ellyson, late Shepherd
of Easinton in the County of Durham, to his Highness the Lord Protector of
England, Scotland and Ireland, and to all Emperors, Kings and Princes through
the world.
THere are many in the County of Durham that know that thou have been a
Shepherd lately enough, and see thee what thou have been, and where thou have
been, and where thou art now; and knows thee to be one in nature with those
Shepherds which the Lord sent Ezekiel, Isaiah and Jeremiah to cry against, who
feeds themselves with the fat, and clothes themselves with the wool; and that
thou art one of those Shepherds that cares not for the sheep, and art in the
nature of one of those Shepherds which the true Prophets cried against, which
were as evening Wolves, and as Foxes in the desert: And for the simples sake, I
am moved to lay open thy deceit, that thou art one of those Foxes thou speaks
of, which has fire in their tails; and thou are made manifest to be of old
Cains nature, that old murdering spirit; and with thy flattering titles which
thon gives to men, and has men's persons in admiration because of advantage,
and thou art born after the flesh, the son of the bondwoman, who art
petitioning to men that they may abuse their power, and exalt themselves over
the heritage of God; and thou that would have Laws to bind the consciences of
men to walk after thy will, thou art Antichrist, and thou that art petitioning
the Powers of the earth to make Laws to limit the Holy One of Isral: But
blessed be the Lord, the day is come that thou and all deceivers persecutors
and flatterers is discovered; and many sees thee among Majestrates, that thy
spirit is the same that would command fire to come down from heaven to have
destroyed them who would not receive them.

First, Thou says That Moses, who was a Commander over all Israel, that he was
appointed to bear the people in his bosom as a nursing father; and thou says,
thou art a crier for the remembrance of those things, that all might be carried
in their arms now; and thou goes on and tells them that God will require the
Government of his Church at their hands.

Rep. Moses, who was faithful and true over the house of God, who was a figure
of Christ, he did receive the Law from the mouth of the Lord, he acted in
righteousness; and when Elead and Madad prophesied, he was not angry, as thou
art; but desired that all the Lords people were Prophets; and all who wait upon
the Lord, to receive the Law of God from his mouth now, and walk in the same,
they have the same spirit, and they will not limit the holy One: But thy cry
that thou call for is, that thou would have them who are in Moses stead,
as thou says they are, for to limit the holy One. And thou art the deceiver
the Apostle speaks of, which is gone into the world, who would persuade the
Majestrates that they must govern the Church; and so thou would have this
generation of Rulers to be dashed in pieces as all the generations have been
before them, in exalting themselves in the seat of Christ: when as the Prophet
says, The government is upon Christ's shoulders: and the Scripture says, He
alone treads the Wine Press: And therefore whosoever will assume unto
themselves; to govern the Church by an outward, visible; carnal Law, shall be
as sure to be broken as all the rest. The Church is in God, and is invisible;
and that which is visible and natural cannot make any law to bind that which is
unlimited: but they if they do go about to limit the holy one of Israel, and
would set themselves in his seat of Judgment, and take away his glory which he
will not give to any; and all such as have made any laws in their own wills to
limit sons and daughters, they have all been broken as the Scripture witnesses
every where: and therefore let all Governers in England, Scotland, and Ireland,
and all the world to whom thou writest, take heed how they set themselves in
the room of God, and lay yokes upon the necks of them who are free by the Son,
and are brought by the power of the Lord from under the breach of all righteous
Laws, or transgressing any holy, and which is just: for the law is for the
lawless law not for them who are in righteousness, but the law is for the
transgressors who are in unrighteousness and they are those that act by that
Spirit which dwells in thee, who would levy troops for the Innocent; and art
wroth, and thy countenance falls like Cain and hates thy brethren, and would
have a law made over the conscience, and would have the Powers of the earth to
abuse their power, in turning their swords against them who live in
righteousness, and declare against unrighteousnes.

And further thou go on and tellest them, this was a law given to Adam, and
so thou pervertest the Scripture by thy imaginations: Where read thou of
such a law given to Adam, that he compelled his family to religion? And further
thou say, Which care of government is in great neglect in this Nation; upon
respect to tender consciences, sundry Sects and sorts of Schismatics are
suffered unsuppressed, and they sacrifice to Dan and Bethel. And thou go on
and tellest the Nobles, that it lies upon their score that they should suppress
them.

Ans. That which was given to a particular family or people, which was for its
time, is not everlasting. So any that takes up any rule without them to act by,
acts not by precept, but by tradition in their own wills, God abhors that. And
thou bring in the Old-Covenant which was given to a particular people the
Jews, but now the Priesthood is changed, and the Law is changed; and as for
thy* law which thou would have the Governors of this Nation to make for
suppressing of Sects and Schismatics that worship at Dan and Bethel, and thou
say this is charged upon them. But thou might have told them who they had
been, and where Dan and Bethel is, lest they be mistaken as thou art, that calls
darkness light, and light darkness. But all that thou art troubled at is this,
that the light of Christ in the conscience should have liberty; and here thou
art he which is born after the flesh, and art that Egyptian thou speaks of,
which persecutes the righteous seed. It is true, there are Sects and Schisms
too many, and Opinions, they stand all in one ground, and thou and they come
out of one land, Babylon is the land of your nativity; in the light you are
seen, that thou and they are turned from the light of Christ, and so are gone
into sects and opinions and imaginations, and all the powers without in the
world cannot suppress the root from whence these flow, none can overcome the
root from whence heresies and opinions come. And therefore, vain Shepherd and
blind, cease thy divining: Those that thou woulst have suppressed, are those that
break bread from house to house, and meet together in the name of the Lord, as
the Saints ever did, and this thou call Dan and Bethel, because they will
not come to an Idols temple where all the deceived in the Nation worship an
unknown God. I say unto thee, thy Steeplehouse, thy Idols temple which God
never commanded, where all liars, and fighters, and swearers, and night-birds
and Scriech-owls meet, and call it the house of God, and where they speak
naught but the imaginations of their own hearts, and call them the ordinances
of God, and it the Church, that is Dan and Bethel. And as for the Magistrates
which thou tellest they ought to suppress the false Prophets, thou might have
declared who they had been. But for the honest-hearted Magistracy and people,
I shall declare a little when they came in, and who they are. Christ says,
many false Prophets shall arise; and Paul, Peter, John, and and the rest, they
saw them come already then, many Antichrists, deceivers, and then they came in
as the Scriptures witness, and they have deceived the Nations since; and Christ
says, by their fruits you shall know them; and they are such as he cried woe
against, which laid heavy burdens upon the people, and such as were got into
Moses seat, and were called of men master, stood praying in the Assemblies, and
had the chiefest place in the synagogue; and Peter says they followed after
covetous practices; and Jude says they went after the error of Balaam for
gifts and rewards; and Isaiah says they sought for their gain, for their
quarter; and Ezekiel says, they were such as fed of the fat; and Zachary says
they were as evening wolves; and Paul says they were covetous men, heady,
highminded, and lovers of pleasure, and fierce despisers of those that are
good, aad had a form of godliness, and they were witches that turned them back
to circumcision, and false Prophets when the substance was come. And are they
not so now, who sue for Tithes, maintain the first Priesthood, and bewitch
people, and deny Christ come in the flesh? Now let all judge where these are,
many in the North taking away the peoples Cows, their pots and kettles, and
b^dding, and one Priest sued one for two pence, and two in Yorkshire sued one
for one penny, and another for a penny halfpenny; and these are they that call
themselves Ministers of the Gospel. Shame, shame, blush, houl you Caterpillars,
the hand of the Lord is against you. And yet I would not have their lives taken
away, as thou would have theirs that thou callst Sectaries: but to that in
thy conscience I speak, which will let thee see that thou have a busy mind,
and abidest not in the doctrine of Christ, but art amongst the false Prophers.

And thou and the rest of them which are Merchants, and tradest with other men's
words, which must have your Gospel and your Worship defended with swords and
Staves, and the power of the earth, you are they that spread nets at Mispeh and
Tabor; for its neither in Jerusalem nor this Mount, but they that worship the
Father, worship in spirit and truth, and thou that woulst confine God to a
place, to a day, to a time, and have him bound by a Law and the Saints how they
shall worship him: thou art carnal, and thy petition carnal, and all who have
any honesty in them or light, will see thee to be in the generation of the
Pharisees, that said they had a Law, and by that law he ought to die.

And whereas thou art comparing thy self and the Priests of Newcastle and
Durham to Sarah the Mistreis, and them who oppose you to Hagar.

Answ: Sarah never brought forth sons of Bondage, as you are, but you are truly
Hagar the Egiptian who g^nders unto bondage for you and all the children that
ever you have begotten or brought forth, are in bondage till now, and the Lord
has raised up a people out of the Dust, to confound you and your wisdom, and
to declare against your profssi^on in laying heavy burdens upon the people,
and taking their money for that which is not bread and be ye all ashamed ye
high Oaks, ye fat Bulls, ye Diviners, that cannot maintain y^u Gospel with all
your parts and wisdom that you boast of, against those contemptible things in
your eyes, but you must run to a carnal Sword, or to a Justice of Peace, or
Constable to preserve you, or to have them imprisoned, stocks and mockings, and
reproaches, this is all we have or expect from the Powers of the earth, because
we speak the truth: Be ye ashamed, and lay your hands upon your mouths; what
Gospel is this they have preached? what Worship is this you give unto God that
must be defended with clubs and Staves, and Stocks and whips, stoning and
haling before Magistrates, and yet thou would have them accounted Ministers
of the Gospel, they who were Ministers of the Gospel their weapons were not
carnal but spiritual and they were mighty through God, but the mightiness of
this generation lies in the Magistrates sword to defend them, and drive the
people to pay them money for naught. And therefore let all Magistrates consider
in this Nation and elsewhere, that you be warned how you make any laws against
the innocent, and how you uphold those that Christ cried woe against, and such
as the Lord sent his Prophets to declare against, lest that come upon them
which the Prophet spoke, that they that help and them that are helped shall
fall together.

And whereas thou further flatte^s them, and tells them that they are in the
room of Abraham for ordering the house of God, to see that the seed of Isaac be
inheritors, which is like to be deprived by the Egyptian brood.

Rep. My defire is, that they may be guided by the spirit of Abraham, who
denied his country; and if they walk in the light, they will be like him, and
will see that things be ordered in the Nation in righteousness. But if they
will take take thy word who is the Isaac that thou would should inherit, thou will present them Ismael. But is it not the Inheritance of Tithes and
Augmentations, and to have people to fall down to worship the Image that they
have set up? that is it thou would have ordered: For who are of Abraham, are
of the seed which the promise is to; and such you stir up the Magistrates by
your slatteries, and lies, and the people to have a law to keep them in
bondage; and so to them that dwell in the light, he sees it is the Egyptian
that thou would have to inherit.

And further, thou art telling of some that profess high seize; which
has put the Kingdom in confusion and a flame, and thou say they ought not to
suffer the preaching of the Word to go down, nor the Sacraments to fail.

There is profession enough in the Nation, but little possession; and all who
profess high things, and do not possess them, are hypocrites. And now blessed
be the Lord, Christ is come and made manifest, which is the highest attainment;
and he comes not to send peace on the earth, but a sword, and he shall confound
the mighty and the lofty, and they that have lived at ease shall be poured from
vessel to vessel; and now is war proclaimed betwixt Michael our Prince, and all
the inhabitants of the earth, and all inchanters and deceivers, and all such as
have made merchandise of souls, are now made manifest; and now the nations are
angry, and the men of the earth are afraid, and now Gog and Magog compasses
the Camp of the Saints about, and the Beast upon which the Whore rides, and the
false Prophets, and as many as have traded with the beast and the whore are
troubled for her sorrow is coming in a day, and all the powers of the earth
cannot nor shall not uphold her, for she shall be made desolate and burned with
fire; and now thou and the rest of the merchants are troubled, and are
petitioning to the powers of the earth to uphold you: I say unto thee, and unto
all that(...) join themselves against the Anointed which is now appearing, who
was dead and is alive, and lives for evermore, You shall all be broken, and
your eyes shall consume in their holes: Gather your selves together, howl ye
Caterpillars, strengthen your selves, build up your batteries, cast up your
mounts, for a mighty and a terrible one is coming up against you; his voice is
as the roaring of a Lion, he is greedy of his prey, he shall devour at once,
and he is bringing about his determination to cut off every one that withstands
him, and no weapon formed shall prosper; the eternal word is preached, and the
Angel is flying through the midst of heaven with the everlasting Gospel, and by
it shall Antichrist be consumed. And because this Gospel is declared and
preached and witnessed, thou art angry: But that which thou calls preaching the
Word, is nothing but thy own imagination. This they have preached long enough,
and what has it done, all your divining? None has been turned from his
iniquity. And as for thy Sacrament, thou wast complaining of the Popes
Emissaries, and here thou art one. Thou may return thy word back from whence
thou had it: and all who come to witness the word and the preaching of it;
and the body and blood of Christ which is the Saints communion and the supper
of the Lord, will deny all your enchantment, and all your cankered rusty
wormeaten divination; and all powers which seek to uphold this which was and is
abomination to the Lord, they must partake of her plagues; let all consider God
has overturned all the powers that have pretended to establish Religion by a
law, when as they have but established a form, a husk, and so Satan has crept
into that; and all the Priests in this Nation have they not transformed into
every image what way soever Authority and the powers of the earth bend, and so
have made merchandise, and sold that which is not bread, and so have deceived
the people.

And further thou say, The Apostle requires them to mark them that cause
divisions diligently. And thou goes on and teckons up many that have been
polluted in Religion, and thou says he will cast her into a bed of torment if
they do not repent.

Rep They who are turned from the light of Christ, are turned into division;
and they that have not the same spirit by which the Apostle spoke that said so,
are divided from Christ, and from the body, and from the Saints, and are in
contention. And here I charge thee and all the Priests in England, that you are
divided from Christ, and turned from the light, who prophecy for hire, and
divine for many, who go in long robes, who are called of men moster, who have
the chiefest place in the assembly, and stand praying in the synagogue, who go
to law with your hearers, and who give meanings upon the Scriptures, who add
and diminish, who speak but that which you have gathered from other men's words;
there does sects and opinions, strife and division arise. And here thou art
marked by many in the County of Durham, praised be the Lord, to be one that is
divided from the light, and causes division, who took away four Oxen for five
pence halfpeny; and so they have turned away from thee, and all who stand in
that nature wherein thou stands: And therefore thou art petitioning that thou
might have a law to bind us under thy witchcraft, wherein the Nations have been
deceived. And it is true, God has overturned Kings, and Princes, and Dukes,
and Earls, and Emperors, for the sake of his chosen ones; and all they who have
made an image like the true God, and like the Gospel, and have made a decree,
and whosoever now make a decree that any shall fall down to worship any thing
which is contrary to the light of Christ in the conscience, God has hewed them
down, and he will hew them down who go about to limit the Holy One who is Lord
over all, and who will have dominion over the consciences of men; and the time
is already when Jesabel is to be cast into a bed of torment, and all who commit
fornication with her, whether they be Kings, Emperors, Dukes or Earls, they
shall all go down with the Dukes of Edom into the pit, and with the rest of the
uncircumcised, and the Saints shall rejoice in their overthrow.

And thou says, there is yet little does appear in England, but the old Beast
under new habits acts his old tragedies; and thou tells of Satan's arrows which
are brought into the Nation; and thou tells of Kanters and Quakers, and Seekers
and Creepers, creatures new come from the pit; and thou say they resemble
Sampsons foxes which burn up faith bred by hearing the word preached.

Rep. What have thou and they that call themselves Ministers of the Gospel
preached, and cried Reformation, and have sided with all men's wills, and
flattered all the Governors and Governments that have been changed diverse times
within these ten years, have you got nothing done yet, but have travailed and
brought forth nothing but wind and divifion and contention, and one of
supplanting another? and have you tried one another, and proved one another,
and every one preached up what he would have had, and have you brought naught
to pass? what shameless Reformers are ye? Can you not maintain with your
Commissions and all your petitioning for Gods Ministers for the North; and you
had your desire, they came as thick as locusts out of the South; and cannot you
all with your preaching preach down those contemptible creatures that thou
speaks of? And as for Ranters, I deny both thee and them, for thou and they
spring both from one root. And I am one thou calls a Qiaker and Seeker; and
blessed be the Lord for evermore, that ever I was found worthy to qear the name
in truth; for they that seek shall find, and they that wait shall not be
ashamed. And thou blind Shepherd, thou might as well have uttered forth thy
venom at David, Daniel, Jeremy, and the rest of the holy men of God, and have
said they came out of the pit. Thou proud blaspheme^, God will plead with thee
for deriiding the power of the Lord; and thou ars that Fox thou speaks of, that
would be devouring and have all consumed, that thy corrupt sensual filthy will
might be satisfied: And as for faith, thou never came to the faith of devils,
who believe and ttemble; and thy faith and thy ordinances, which are but
imaginations and traditions of men, the day is discnvered that shall burn them
up and consume all, and you shall be left naked add bare, and have nothing to
cover your nakedness, but you shall be as a stink and a proverb.

And whereas thou says, they preach down Ministry and means, and all but
those that have knowledge miraculously infused; and thou art offended, because
we declare what the Prophets were when they were called to prophecy; and what
the Apostles were before they went to preach, and thou gathers thy conclusions,
that they will send Princes to beg as well as the Ministry, and thou says,
nothing was more strongly charged upon Israel, then suppressing of false
Prophets; and thou says, shall not Christian Princes also be zealous to
suppress them that would devour the flock of Christ.

When will thou cease thy lying and slandering, the Ministers of Christ we own
and love, which has not been, nor are not Ministers made by the will of man,
and such have turned away from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
to God, and such a Ministry we honor; but all those who stand is man's will we
deny, and are bold to affirm that they run, and never were sent, and therefore
they do not profit the people, and all thy means, and thy mediate choice which
is carnal we deny; for none either by you or it, ever had their minds changed
from darkness to light, but only brought into a form a husk, a shadow, and made
hypocrites to profess what they were not; and as for thy miraculous infusion, I
deny thy words, but this I say, none knows the Father but the Son, and he to
whom the Son reveals him, and that Gospel that we preach, we neither received
it of man, nor from man, but by immediate Revelation, and unto this the
Scripture witness: I know Prophets and Ministers of Christ which was Shepherds
and gatherers of Summer fruit, and husbandmen at the plow, and the same call as
ever was: God is not bound up to your trade of Divination and Study and by
these which are base in your eyes shall you be confounded, and be broken as a
potters vessel: And for thy conclusion, that we may send Princes to beg, we
deny; we do not dispute who rule, whether he be a shepherd or a husbandman, we
know he that fears the Lord is guided by the light of Christ, he will walk and
act in righteousness, whether he be a Prince or a Plowman; and God is no
respecter of persons, nor we respect no man's person, as thou flatterer does,
but we honor the power that is of God, and are subject to it for conscience
sake, we are not wrangling about the earth, we are redeemed out of it; and as
for Naash thou speaks on, who would strike out the right eye of Israel, thou
shall stand for thy self; for it is the true Israelite in whose mouth there is
no guile, and the Jew inward that thou would not only strike out the eye, but
also cut off their heads; and who they are that do devour the flock of Christ,
they are Wolves and deceivers, such as I spoke of before, that abides not in
the doctrine of Christ, read tay self there and own it.

And thou goes on further and Petitions the noble Princes to consider, that the
Anabaptists have mightily prevailed in this Nation, and thou wonders that the
Governors have not suppresst, and thou bringst an old Story to accuse them with
out of Germany, That they had plurality of Wives, and this thou says is like
to destroy the Nation.

Rep. Thou art Ismael the son of Hagar, thy hand is against every man, and Cain
is the root from whence thou sprang, for thou have murder in thy heart, and
would command fire to come down from heaven to destroy, and knows not what
spirit thou art of, and as for the Anabaptists prevailing, here thou have made
the shame of your Ministry appear, that it has had no more effect upon the
peoples minds, that they have not bin established, and so they have run after
every wind of doctrine; and thou would have the Magistrates to make the people
live still upon wind: And as for thy Story of Germany, concerning the Baptists,
I have great ground to believe that thou and thy Author may as well belie them
which thou never knew, as to lie upon those which are nearer at hand; but if
they acted any such thing as plurality of wives, let them bear their own shame,
do not accuse the innocent; truly, I know no such Baptists in the Nation, and
it is no more accusation upon them, then if thou should accuse the disciples
with Judas; and this thou layest upon the Magistrate to consider, lest the
Nation be desroyed; filthy busy mind, troubling thy self and others with old
Stories raked out of the pit to accuse others with, when as there is no such
thing that is owned, and all who fears the Lord denies such, and I deny them,
and they and all who act in uncleanness: And thou goes on and shows, as thou
has stolen from other men's words, from the Prophets and Moses, that the
judgment of the Lord was against all Idolaters and falls Prophets and dreamers,
and how they and them that served strange gods were to be put to death.

Woe unto them says the Lord, that steals my Word every man from his neighbor,
and say, thus says the Lord, when as the Lord has never spoken unto them;
thou have stolen other men's words, and shall be judged by thy own mouth, and thy
own law, that thou never had the word of the Lord made manifest, nor never did
the Lord speak to thee, but what thou have gotten; and therefore thou art that
falls Prophet, and art that dreamer; and he that has a dream, let him tell a
dream, and he that has the word of the Lord, let him speak it; now them that
speak the word of the Lord from the mouth of the Lord as the true Prophets did
and do, then thou calst to the Magistrates to put them to death: And as for the
worshippers of strange gods, many in the county of Durham, and many other
places, let them declare whether they worshipped any but a strange god at a
distance, and went after dumb Idols, even as they were led while they followed
the Ministry which was never sent; but now is the Lord made manifest, and the
strange Gods are put away and broken, and the false Prophets are seen, and the
Prophet is raised up which Moses spoke of, and whosoever hears not his words,
shall be slain with a sword.

And further thou tells the Magistrates, That if any hypocrite shall presume to
speak a word in the name of the Lord, which he has not commanded, Even he
shall dye, and it is an old statute unrepealed.

Rep. If thou knew what thou spoke, thou have given sentence against thy self;
I charge upon thee in the presence of the living God, that thou never heard his
word, nor spoke his word but in thy own name; and I charge it again upon thee,
when did he ever speak to thee; that spirit by which the prophets of the Lord
spoke thou do deride, and calst it a miraculous Insusion, and so thy spirit
is another and not the same. And that it is an old statute thou shall know,
that thou have spoken in thy own name, and what thou have learned by Tradition;
but in Christ all the law and the Prophets is fulfilled and all statutes who
comes to witness him; he is the lawgiver, judge and king, and all is fulfilled
as he comes to be witnessed, and all strange gods put away, even the Idols of
gold and silver, and all false Prophets by him comes to be seen, judged,
condemned and slain; and thou that would put it upon the Magistrate without to
kill men by a law, and so to usurp the power which is given to the Son, and so
make them guilty of innocent blood, thou art a murderer. And now to the
further, who must judge of the false Prophets, of heresy, schism, and
blasphemy; I know thou denies Revelation and the rest of the priests in England
who trade with other men's words, and I know thou dare not say thou art
infallible, and thou has not discerning of spirits, the Apostle exhorted them
who dwelt in the light to try the spirits, but he bad not them who are led by
the prince of the air, and were children of disobedience as thou art, of a
covetous earthly mind, he bade not them to try, nor them who were carnal; and
therefore stop thy mouth, thou cannot discern a lamb from a dog, nor a kite
from a dove; and let all Magistrates who fear the Lord, either in this Nation
or elsewhere take heed how they judge of heresy and blasphemy: not that I am
ignorant, but that there is heresy and blasphemy, but that none can judge who
they are, but who have an iusallible spirits therefore it is now as it has
bin, many have suffered as heretics, as Christ for a blasphemer, and the
Apostles as setters forth of strange gods, and were persecuted to death, and
many do and are like to suffer by this spirit that dwells in Thomas Elison and
therefore all you who are Magistrates, that sit as Judges and Rulers, take heed
what you do, and take heed of zeal without knowledge, for so Paul persecuted,
and so the Jews slew Christ the heir, and so many would have their will
satisfied, but thou must be judged by all who dwell in the light^ and thou that
sit as Judge over another, see that thou be judged in thy self; for to take
your knowledge and dir^ction from such as these men, in stead of planting you
will be destroyers.

And thou art offended at some that hold forth new lights and gifts, which thou
say the word of God never taught us. Rep. All who are taught by the word
which is eternal are guided in one light, for the light is but one; and this is
no new lighr but the same that ever was. But thou that calls the letter the
light, and the word, thou art blind, and art a hater of the light from which
the Scripture was declared. And in the conclufion thou begs, that Scholars and
Universities may be preserved for the breeding of able Ministers to preach the
word and hold out the Sacraments; and this is the sum of all that thou and the
rest of false Shepherds may be carried in the bosom of the Magistrates, and so
preserve you, and destroy all that oppose you. As for Lrarning, it is natural,
I own it in his place; but that it makes and breeds able Ministers, I deny it,
and all those Ministers; for many filthy frogs and unclean spirits have come
out of the Universities, that have spread over the Nations as Locusts without a
King; and all their Preaching and their Sacramencs is carnal, and all their
ability that is got by their trading leads people to be seven fold more the
children of the devil. I speak whaj I was a witness of wnilc I followed the
chiefest of them. And therefore I say unto you who are Governors, hold not that
up which the Lord has cursed; for that which is natural cannot lead up to God;
and therefore be ye all warned that you turn not back to build again that which
God is destroying, and threw out the King and Bishops, and one Parliament after
another, and one power after another, because they would needs limit the Lord o
way to walk in. And truly God will pour you out from vessel to vessel, till you
be emptied of all, and till you give him all power and honor to rule over his
Church and people, that they may serve the Lord in freedom of spirit, and not
in the flesh; and if any walk dssorderly, and break any righteous law, and walk
in the flesh, them execute your law upon, there is your place: But that yyu
should prescribe a way for God to walk in, he cannot, he will not be bound; and
you that go about to limit him to any visible appearance, shall be broken to
pieces, for his glory he will not give to another:

London, 30 day 7 month: This was I moved of the Lord to write in Answer to
Tho. Ellison's Petition, and to the Magistrates. A Lover of all those that wait
for the redemption of Israel; called after the flesh Francis Howgill.

FINIS.

