The Happiness of a People In the Wisdom of their Rulers DIRECTING And in the
Obedience of their Brethren ATTENDING Unto what Israel ought to do: RECOMMENDED
IN A SERMON Before the Honorable GOVERNOR and COUNCIL, and the Respected
DEPUTIES of the Mattachusets Colony in New England. Preached at Boston, May.
3d. 1676. being the day of ELECTION there.

By WILLIAM HVBBARD Minister of Ipswich.

Exodus 18.21. Moreover thou shall provide out of all the people able men, such
as fear God, men of Truth.

Romans 12.1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is no
Power but God.

Psalm 44.15. Happy is the people that is in such a case, yea happy is that
people whose God is the Lord.

Ubi Ordinis defectus ibi exoriuntur in aere fulmina, in terra commotiones, in
Mari inundationes, in corporibus Aegritudines, in urbibus, Seditiones, in an
imabus peccata, Ordo continet Coelestia, terrestria, Ordo est in
intelligibilibus, Ordo in sensibilibus, Ordo in astris, Ordo in omnibus. Naz.
BOSTON, Printed by John Foster. 1676.

TO THE HONORABLE John Leveret Esquire Governor of the Mattachusets Colony,
Together with the rest of the Honorable Council of Magistrates of the said
Colony.
WHereas it has been customary and commendable in former and less curious
times, it seems in this critical age, not only expedient, but necessary to send
such discourses as the ensuing abroad into the world under the shadow and
protection of some Worthyes, whose countenance and authority may defend them
from any malevolence they may be incident unto: wherefore the following Sermon
being by providence now called forth into public view, I am necessarily
emboldned to dedicate it unto your Names, not knowing to whom the patronage of
it does more properly belong. As it is a favor from you, I may the better
expect it in that you gave the first occasion to any Elucubrations of mind
about it: As it is any testimony of Observance from me, none may better then
you deserve it. I never intended any further publication then the preaching,
lest such Crambe bis cocta might not relish well in the Palates of this curious
Age, so plentifully furnished with all varietyes of Wisdom and Knowledge; but
for their sakes who by the exigence of the Times, and present distress of the
War, were denied the opportunity to be of the Auditory, I have condescended
to make it Legible. I shall not insist upon any Apology aebout the Subject
chosen to treat of, it giving so fair an occasion to speak of all the most
important duties that either Rulers or People can be concerned in whatever
juncture of affairs should come upon them. It cannot be denied but in the
latter end of the former year, the wisest amongst us were under sad
apprehensions concerning the issue of the present troubles that were then come,
and daily coming upon us, in regard of the Rage of the Heathen so far let loose
against us, and those that were concerned in the Election of Magistrates for
this present year, were ready to fear they might bespeak the persons on whom
the next Election should fall with the words of the prophet, Thou have
Clothing, be thou our Ruler, and let this ruin be under thine hand. But
Thanks be to Almighty God that has verified that ancient Proverb of the
Hebrews, to our late experience, Cum duplicantur lateres, hinc venit Moses: And
as Israel was never brought into greater Streights then a little before Pharaoh
and his Host were to be drowned in the red Sea, so has it in a sense been with
our selves. There could not but be a very sad face of things in Israel, when
their first King had by his ill Steerage and bad Conduct of affairs, after a
long Tempest of War shipwreck himself, his Family, all his Kingdom in that
fatal Battle on the mountains of Gilboa, But he whose sole Prerogative it is to
bring good out of evil, ordered that disasterous Calamity to become an
occasion to usher in the greatest prosperity that ever that Nation enjoyed
either before or since that time. For as God when he had a purpose to exalt his
people to be the Head of the Nations amongst whom they lived, and not the
tail; he infused a spirit of Counsel and Wisdom into the minds of their
Leaders, Instructing them to find out the right and ready way of their future
peace and tranquillity; together with a spirit of Love and Obedience in the
People to attend thereunto. It is a good O men unto Israel when the Government
of the Tribes falls into such hands as have Understanding in the times to know
what Israel ought to do; it will then be no hard matter to persuade their
Brethren to comply with their Commands. As every season of a man's life carries
its particular duties along with it, so does every age of the World bring with
it particular duties as the work of that Generation; As it concerns every
judicious Christian to know the one, so it does every Head or Leader of the
Tribes to be acquainted with the other: as also prudently to observe the fit
season and peculiar manner of acting for the performing such duties upon which
narrow point depends the success of al humane affairs and undertakings. Because
to every purpose there is time and judgment, therefore is the misery of man
great upon him, faith Solomon, i. e. Because time and Chance happens to them
all, the sons of men that know not their times, are taken as Fishes in an evil
net. If any thing be found hinted in the following Discourse, that has any
tendency that way, or may become an help thereunto, as it is all I aimed at so
shall I rest abundantly satisfied, if what is humbly offered in that kind, find
favorable acceptance with your selves or others. As for the times in which,
and the place where our Lot is cast: although in many respects we may say with
the Psalmist, The Lines are fallen to us in pleasant places, and that we have a
goodly Heritage, yet must we own, that what with the imperfections of our
minds and Wills, and what with many other temptations that ly before us in the
work of our Generation concurring therewith, we have met with a sufficient
degree of ^ffliction and trouble, enough to balance our hearts, and keep us
from being exalted above measure: yet need not this be any Remora, or hindrance
unto us, in the present duty and Service we are called unto, there being no
reason to be rendered why we should not walk together in Unity, Love and Peace
in those things whereunto we have attained, because in some others, and
possibly those of less moment, some may be otherwise minded. Concerning which
minute and lesser Differences, I shall not presume here to offer any thing,
tending to make the least alteration in any of your judgments, being fully
persuaded that in all the main and essential matters of Religion, both of Faith
and Order, as well as righteousness, you are all of one mind and judgment, and
will all both jointly and severally exert your most strennous endeavors, for
the promoting the honor and Glory of God, and the good of those under your
charge; In which endeavors if you shall persist, it may be hoped that as
hitherto God has owned your selves, as well as your Predecessors, to become as
a wall and defense to his vineyard here planted, so there may be still found of
you that shall help to build the waste places, and raise up the foundations of
many Generations; and that you (notwithstanding the present Combustions) shall
be called the Repairers of the Breach, and the restorers of paths to dwell in.
It is possible you may be importunately molested with the clamours of these or
those, to make this or that change in your course, to gratify particular men's
humors, of which you need take no more notice then the skillful Pilot at the
helm uses to do of the cries of the unskilful, fearful Passengers that
think that course will ruin the vessel, which is the only way to preserve it.
There is an old Fable, that when there happened a great contention about the
weather, those of the high Countries complained that they were almost burnt up
with drought for want of rain, and those of the valleys said they were almost
drowned for want of Sun-shining days: Jupiter sent them word by Mercury the
weather should be as it had been. Possibly some under your Government are as
ready to complain of too much restraint, as others are of too much liberty. I
humbly conceive, you cannot do better, then to let things be as they have been
heretofore, so to countenance and encourage those that fear God and work
rightiousness, but sharply to rebuke and timely to repress whatever is contrary
to sound doctrine, or apparently tends to hinder the power of Godliness, and
progress of true Religion, with all other profaness or unrighteousness, that
under the shadow of your Government we may lead quiet lives in all godliness
and honesty, yet keeping in mind the wise caveate of our Savior, that in
gathering up the tares you root not up the wheat also. It is one great part of
the unhappiness of this life, that neither wise nor good men are all of one
mind, but yet all due care had need be taken, that differences be made neither
more nor greater then they are, or carried on with such Animosity or
bitterness, as should prejudice the interest of Religion, or welfare of the
Commonwealth. Yea possibly the differences in our minds that occasion most
disturbance arise only from that which they call (...) so as if things were not
strained at both ends further then the equity of the Rule will allow, all might
well hold together, when the overstraining of things is often times ready to
break all to pieces If God in whose hand our times are, and who sets the bounds
of our habitations, shall as he has begun, go on to perform his whole work
upon his people, and send such rest unto his Churches here, that the Answer to
be returned to the Messengers of the Nations shall be, The Lord has founded
our Sion, and that the poor of the people shall trust in it. How can it better
be improved, then by taking care that the Churches under your care in this
Jurisdiction may be edified, walking in the fear of God, that the Lord our God
may be with us as he was with our Fathers, that he may not leave us nor forsake
us, nor our Posterity after us. Which to effect, I humbly conceive, there is no
way more probable, then by interesting them as much and as soon as may be, in
all the privileges that Christian Religion allows, and as they grow up, to
engage them thoroughly and seriously in all the duties it requires; to take care
that it be done by those whom it more immediately concerns, is certainly a duty
in special incumbent on your selves. To this end I may commend to your
Consideration, the Political Fathers of the Country, the example of Abraham,
whom we find both approved and rewarded of God for commanding his children and
his household after him to keep the way of the Lord, and to do Justice and
Judgment, that the Lord might bring upon him that which he had spoken of him.
If he were not much mistaken who said it was morally impossible to rivet
Christian Religion into the body of a nation without Infant Baptism, by
proportion it will as necessarily follow that the neglect or disuse thereof,
will as directly tend to root it out. How far the Command given to Joshuah by
God himself to circumcise the Children of Israel, i. e. to take order that
Circumcision should be used again among the people (by that means to nowl the
reproach of Egypt from off the Children of Israel) may be looked upon as
obliging to your selves I shall not now say, ye doubtless if what was written
or happened to them was intended as matter of example and admonition to us, upon
whom the ends of the world are come, some use may and ought to be made of such
Declarations of Gods will. Whatever Indulgence may be judged needful to be
used to some that may be of different apprehensions, I have adventured to say
something in the following Discourse, for clearing the duty of Rulers in
matters of Religion from mistakes, and stating the bounds of moderate
Toleration (so far as the time allotted for such an exercise would allow) not
so much for direction to your selves, as for the information of others who by
their too much rigidness on the one hand, or laxness on the other, may be ready
to obstruct the Churches peace, but not promote the purity of Gospel Worship,
placide contra sentientem far is no small piece of Christian prudence, the
want of which I fear has done much hurt in this poor Country, as well as in
other reformed Churches. Dissenters in Religion being not much unlike the
Seditious in the State, who by fair means may be gained, but by too much
severity are apt to run into uncurable opposition and obstinacy. It must be
owned for your future Honor that much has been done by you to carry on the
work of God in this Generation, yet may it be feared that his words will be
found too true, (a man much employed and approved by your selves, while he was
conversant in this world) that unless many things were done for the further
settling of the matters of Religion amongst us before this Generation went off
the Stage, they that came after would have cause to say, that their
Predecessors had left much of their work undone.

Thus craving your acceptance of this my small mite, which I am willing to cast
into the Churches Treasury, under the countenance of your Authority, I shall no
further trouble you this way. I have made no material alteration in any
expression, nor addition of any thing but what was intended to have been
spoken, if time would then have given leave.

The Lord fill you all with the Spirit of Wisdom and Counsel, and make you as
the men of his right hand, whom he has made strong for himself, and grant you
may be found like David, who being chosen to be the Shepard of Gods Israel fed
them according to the integrity of his heart, and guided them by the
skilfulness of his hand, which is the Prayer of,

Your humble Servant W. H.

SOme Faults have escaped in the Press which the Reader is desired to correct
by reading. In p. 4. l. 28. head for Decades. l. 29. Decades for heads, p. 5.
l. 19. best for bear. p. 7. l. 30. several for general. p 9. l. 6. read
residence p, 17. l. 23. immersed for emersed. p. 18. l. 16. badges for bodies.
p. 19. l. 9 and 20. l. 36. Apologue for Apologus. p 27. l. 25. leave out, here.
p. 22. l. 23. our worst for or worse. l, 21. vigor for rigor. l. 23. peccatur
for peccat. p 33. l. 13 Isacks for Isreal's. p. 37. l. 26. fifth for first. p.
39. l. 14. for have hate. p. 40. l. 13 tardus for territus. p. 43. l. 27. booty
for body. p. 45. l. 18. rights for rites. l. 32 wars for way. The like errors
in spelling or pointing, may be helped by them that read, as where each is
printed for such. p. 56. l. 36.

1 Chronicles. 12.32. Of the Children of Issachar, which were men that had
understanding of the times to know what Israel ought to do, the heads of them
were two hundred, and all their Brethren were at their Commandment.


IF ever those words of Wisdom, Proverbs. 8.15. By me Kings Reign, and Princes
decree Justice, were true of any of the Kings and Princes of the Earth, they
were true of David, who in his public, as well as private capacity approved
himself a Man after Gods own heart; leaving an unimitable pattern to the Kings
of all succeeding ages, both of piety in obeying God and of wisdom and justice
in ruling over men: as if the Book wherein Samuel wrote the manner of the
Kingdom, had been perfectly transcribed in his life and Government. It was not
undeservedly therefore, that after so large an edition of the whole Hystory of
the Acts, and Reign of David, in the two first Books of the Kings, such a
considerable addition should be made to that part of the Hystory, which
concerned his entrance upon his Kingdom, in this twelfth Chapter of the first
book of the Chronicles, where we have the triumphant manner thereof at large
described, being attended therein with a great Host as it is called, ver. 22.
like the Host of God: from which verse, to the end of this Chapter, it is very
remarkable how the Penman of this sacred Chronicle, like some Divine Herald,
is Marshalling the respective bands of the said Host, under the particular
Banners of their several Tribes, assigning unto each, some distinct Character,
as a special badg of honor according as they best deserved, either for the
skilfulness of their Captains and Leaders, the number and valor of their
followers, and willingness or readiness in both, to promote the design in hand,
which was the turning the Kingdom of Saul unto David.

Amongst the rest of the Tribes, as they are here ranked in this Chapter,
special notice is taken of the Tribe of Issachar, of which Tribe although no
great matter had been foretold in the Prophetical Benediction, either of Jacob
or Moses, yet is there here in the Text a very signal testimony given, both to
their piety and prudence, to their unity and magnanimity, any of which cannot
be conceived, but to tend more then a little to the successful carrying on that
great affair which now they had in hand: so as at that time, what Solomon says
of his virtuous Woman, Prove. 31.29. might very fitly have been said of the
Tribe of Issachar, many daughters have done virtuously but thou excellest them
all.

In the words of the Text there are four things very obvious to the view of the
observant Reader.

1. The Distribution of the whole Tribe into its integral parts or constituent
Members, as to their political order, viz. the Heads and the Brethren; of which
two united together consisted the body of the Tribe, as is here employed.

2. The qualification of each part, fitly disposing them to a regular
performance of the duty incumbent on either, for the good of the whole. 1.
Wisdom, in those that were the Heads, described both by its specification,
understanding of the times. 2. By its application, to know what Israel ought to
do. 2. Willingness in the Brethren, to attend the advice and counsel of their
Leaders, they were at their Commandment.

3. The regular and orderly proceeding of each part, the which is necessarily
employed in the words; that when the heads of the Tribe had counseled and
determined what was needful to be done, the Brethren were ready to put their
resolves in Execution. It was not in Issachar, as Anacharsis the Philosopher,
sometimes complained of the tumultuous proceedings in the popular Commonwealth
at Athens, that wise and grave men deliberated on things, but fools and mad men
resolved thereof: but at this time in Issachar, the body of the people were
ready to put in execution what those who had understanding in the times judged
needful to be done.

4. The entire unity of the Tribe amongst themselves, declaring the unanimous
consent of the whole; in that it is said, all their Brethren were at their
Commandment, sc. at the Commandment of the two hundred which were the Heads,
which does justly advance the gallantry of the Action of the tribe of Issachar
in this affair, above that of any of the rest of the Tribes by the same
proportion, by which our Savior preferred the bounty of the poor Widow above
all the rest of the Contributers; for as she put into the Treasury all which
she had, so does this Tribe send all their whole Stock to increase the Host of
David: which if they were not so many thousands as some of the other Tribes
might send, yet seeing there were none that staid behind, it was for want of
number, but not of good will, if they did not equal or exceed the rest of the
tribes.

I shall only paraphrase a little upon the words, to give the sense and meaning
of them, before I commend any thing from thence to our present consideration.

Of the Children of Issachar, these were the descendants of the fifth Son of
Jacob by his Wife Leah, whose Lot as it seems to have fallen in one of the
richest, and most fruitful soiles of the whole Land of Canaan, so was it more
likely, as was foretold in Jacobs blessing to dispose the Inhabitants, by
reason of the robustickness of their body (an ordinary effect of the fertility
of of any soil) to couch down under a double burden of tribute then by any
valor of their minds, to shake off the servile yoke. It may then not
unseasonably here be demanded how it should come to pass, that this Tribe
should answer this honorable character given of them, whereby they may well be
thought to have at this time had the precedence of all the rest of the Tribes,
both for their civil prudence, and military Discipline, as well as care of
Religion. The reason given by some Interpreters seems not sufficient to salve
the knot, viz. of those who say, that being given to Husbandry, that occasioned
them to be more curious observers of times, and seasons; but nothing appears,
why that may not as well be alleged of most of the other tribes, whose
fruitful hills, and fertile, vales required alike prudent observation of
times, and seasons for their c^lture: God in nature having appointed a time,
and a season for every work and purpose that is to be done under the sun;
wherefore if it may be lawful to make conjectures in things of this nature, it
may more probably be conceived, that this Tribe by its natural situation
bordering upon the enemies country, or upon the account of its fertillity,
being more desirable, might thereby become more obnoxious to the invasions of
their neighbor enemies, the Philistines, and so might either become the very
seat of war, or a through-fare of military expeditions; and so by long
experience of the Calamityes and service of War, they might become as well
expert in managing the affairs of War, as serious in the pursuit of the means
tending to promote a settled, and lasting peace. It is commonly said that
experience is the Mistress of fools, yet without any diminution of their
praise be it spoken, who attain wisdom at an easier rate^ It is often observed
that they are, or prove the wisest of all other men, who have been trained up
in her School: those impressions last the longest, that have been made by the
deepest incision. Hystorians say of this Tribe, that it was a land thirsty of
blood, a place where many fatal battles, had, before this time as well as
after, happened to have been fought: as that of Gideon in the valley of Jezreel;
the late slaughter of Saul and the Israelites on the mountains of Gilboa, the
victory over Benhadad and the Syrians near Aphek, with some others, all happening
within the confines, or near the Borders of the tribe of Issachar. Possibly
many bloody Skirmishes had also been fought during the reign of the former King
within their precincts, whereby the People of this Tribe had been
experimentally taught the miseries and calamities of war, that are usually
produced or prolonged for want of wisdom, and skilful conduct in them that
have the chief command. They being conjoined in one common misery, they might
the more easily be united in one common remedy, viz. the advancement of a more
meet person to the chief place of Rule and Government in the Nation, one
approved by their own experience for his skilful and successful managing the
affairs of War as well as warranted by the call of God, and therefore more
likely to promote the welfare and tranquillity of their own, together, with that
of the rest of the Tribes of Israel. For before this time, David was known to
have behaved himself wisely among the Servants of Saul, as one that knew how to
go out, and to go in before the People.

The Heads of them:] there was amongst the People of Israel as it were a
threefold Commonwealth, as the learned Sigonius speaks in his Treatise of the
Commonwealth of the Hebrews, one was that of the whole People, of whom first
the Judges, afterward the Kings were the chief Heads and Rulers. The other was
of every City, which had its Head or chief Ruler; as we read in several places
of the Scripture, as Judge. 9.30. 1 King. 22.36. 2 Chronicles. 34.8. The third was
that of every Tribe, which had its Head or chief Ruler, 1 Chronicles. 27.16. 2 Chronicles. 19.11. called the Prince or Head of the Tribe: under whom were the chief
Heads or Rulers of every Family in that Tribe: For as every Tribe consisted of
several Families, unto one of of which might all the descendants of that Tribe
be reduced, so was some one person, either by the eminency of his Gifts, or
dignity of his Birthright, usually advanced to be the chief Ruler, or decades
of that Family, according to the distribution of the People into so many Heads
according to Jethro's advice, Exodus 18.21. At this time it seems there were two
hundred Heads of the chief Families of the Tribe of Issachar, in whose wisdom
and integrity the rest of the Tribe had such confidence, that they were willing
to refer the managing of all their civil Affairs, and great concernments to
their prudence and discretion, engaging themselves to be ready to put in
execution whatever should by their joint consent be determined and agreed upon.
So sweet was the accord between those Heads, and their Brethren, that they
seemed like one entire body, animated and directed by one and the same Spirit
and Principle of life and Wisdom.

That had understanding of the times:] Noting all that Wisdom that belongs to
Rulers Divine and Humane: For by times we are to understand things done in
those times, by a metonimy of the adjunct. And for the word understanding, it
is expressed by two words in the Hebrew, yet not unfitly translated by one,
according to the use of our Language: the one seems to note the act of the
mind, in way of simple apprehension: the other the act of the judgment, in way
of accurate consideration dijudicating of the time and season with other
circumstances, discerning when all things are laid together in the balances
what does preponderate, and so most needful to be attended: this expression,
Esther. 1.12. is interpreted by knowing law and judgment, and such are there
called wise men; according to which notion Solomon tells us that a wise man's
heart discerns time and judgment, Eccl. 8.5. both the thing which, and the
time when it is to be done. The Hebrew word here and elsewhere translated
understanding, means the same with that which in Latin is called Prudentia, or
recta ratio agibilium, s^ knowing the right reason of things that are to be
done; it comes from and has a near cognation with a word that signifies to
build. A wise man that has any design to bring about, is like an Architect,
who first frames in his mind an Idea of that which he purposes to erect,
whereby he may foresee how one piece must depend upon another, and accordingly
provide such materials, as will bear suit together, for the carrying on his
fabric: for, as one says well, they are not the wisest men that know most,
but they that know what is most useful and proper to bring about the design
they have in hand: nor can a man be thought rightly to understand a business
that does not see through the circumstances, it is clothed with: for many
times the circumstances may much alter a case; often times it comes to pass,
that those things which considered in themselves, and of their own nature seem
most directly tending to such an end, yet falling in conjunction with other
things, produce a contrary effect. Thus are the most probable means often
disappointed, being prevented by time and chance, which they wanted wisdom to
foresee, for want of which foresight great is the misery that men bring upon
themselves and others: yet is not a superficial wisdom sufficient for this
purpose: many may be deceived by a plausible appearance of things, into which
they have not a through insight and discerning. By a mistake of this nature
Absalom and all the heads of the people that were with him ruined themselves
and one another, and so were overthrown, not having understanding of the times
in that juncture of affairs: The Counsel of Ac^it^phel says Hushui is not good
at this time, which in all those days was as the Oracle of God, and was so in
that exigent, if it had been discerned by the heads of the people then present
as to the design they had in hand: no doubt but at that time David's Prayer (to
which the Almighty said Amen) was to take place for the turning the Counsel of
Achitophel into foolishness: but according to Man, the ruin of Absalome and
his party proceeded from their not understanding of the times which made them
neglect the good counsel of Achitophel, as it is called, 2 Samuel 17.14.

To know what Israel ought to do,] By Israel we are most commonly to understand
not the person, but the posterity of Jacob, who were more frequently styled
after that honorable appellation imposed on him after his wrestling with, and
prevailing over the Angel, then by that name he received from the casual event
which happened at his birth, whence he was called Jacob. But in this place by
Israel we are by another Trope (as often elsewhere) to understand, the holy
people in covenant with God, separated and distinguished thereby, from the rest
of the people of the world, which is emphatically to be noted here; for as
Wisdom is properly the knowledge of the right way to the best end, so is the
end that Israel ought to aim at, far differing from that which the rest of the
World design to themselves, consequently the means or wisdom that must be
improved for that end must be far differing also, as neither flowing from the
same fountain, nor resting on the same Principles or Foundation, but altogether
Eccentrick thereunto. To give an instance suitable to the occasion before us,
the end of civil policy or Government in the Rulers of this World, is, that Men
may live peaceably and quietly one with another; therefore looking unto no
higher end, no wonder if they pitch upon no other means, then those that seem
most probable to bring about that end, viz. attendance unto those Rules of
Righteousness and ways of honesty, that are known by the light of nature,
called jus gentium or jus natural. But the end that Israel ought to aim at,
is, that men may lead a quiet life in all godliness and honesty, as Paul
speaks, 1 Timothy 2.2. which one Text were enough to confute all those that would
debar civil Rulers from intermedling in matters of Religion: but how far they
may and ought to interpose their authority in things of that nature, there may
be occasion to speak more afterward, by Gods assistance.

Otherwise it would follow, that the Magistrate is only to take care, that men
may live quietly and peaceably one with another, whither they live honestly or
no: but by the Apostles Rule, if the Magistrate is to take care that they may
live honestly, as well as quietly and peaceably, he must in like manner see
that they live godlily as well as honestly: which necessarily implies, that he
ought to take care for godliness, in the observation of the first Table, as
well as for honesty in the observation of the second.

Further also, where the end that Israel aims at may be coincident with that
which is aimed at by the rest of the world, yet may not Israel take that
liberty to compass that end, which others of the World may, at least use to do;
for Israel must not do evil that good may come thereof: For as the Apostle
James says, the wisdom that descends not from above is earthly, sensual and
devilish, such as men's ends are, such will the means be which they make use of
to bring about those ends: yea often times worldly men will make use of very evil
means to bring about a good end. The Rule Israel ought to walk by is to suffer
rather then to sin: so our Savior Christ tells his Disciples what is that
custom of the Gentiles, but will not allow them so to do, Mat 20.25, 26.

In the particular case before Iss^char, and the rest of the Tribes of Israel
at this time, it was not difficult to know what they ought to do; if they did
but consider the call of God in anointing David to be King, as well as the
qualifying him with Royal gifts for that purpose, which considerations alone
could not be counterballanced by all the allegations on the behalf of the house
of Saul, which was now rejected of God, which Abner knew to be true, as he
confessed afterward, although he set himself to uphold the contrary Faction.

Their Brethren were at their Commandment,] in the Hebrew, it is, they were at
their mouth. The mouth being the Organ designed for the forming of words, where
by to express the conceptions of the mind, it is often put to signify Words, or
Commandments that are uttered thereby, as it is here translated in the Text.
Hereby is noted the unanimity and sweet agreement between the Heads and the
People of this Tribe, as if one Spirit had run through the whole body thereof.
An happy presage of good success in the business they had now in hand, if the
rest of the Tribes were in like manner affected, as is very probable they were
in a great measure. This Spirit of unity and obedience, being most exemplarily
found in this Tribe of Issachar: the strength also of their courage and
resolution is necessarily implied here; as if they were ready to adventure
their lives in whatever service they might be put upon, like the Soldiers of
the Centurion in the Gospel, who were always ready to come, or to go, or to do
whatsoever their Commander should put them upon. If any should ask, whither the
knowledge of what Israel ought to do, is intended of the Heads of the Tribe
only, or of the Brethren also? I answer, of both, according to due proportion:
that which the Heads of the Tribe advised unto, was apprehended by their
Brethren as most behooful for their several good, accordingly they are with
meet courage and resolution of mind ready to put the same in execution.
Guidance belongs to their Leaders, Obedience to their followers, whose wisdom
it is to obey rather then dispute the Commands of their Superiors.

The words present us with as perfect a pattern, and as complete a model of a
well tempered principallity, or commonwealth, as any where we meet with in all
the sacred Hystory, and that in these four respects, 1. As to the beauty of
their Order. 2. As to the Wisdom of their Conduct. 3. As to the Unity of their
Counsels. 4. As to the Strength of their Courage and Resolution.
All which I shall endeavor to make out, before I commend any thing to your
thoughts by way of Application. These are as four Elements to the political
World* where these do all meet, they will make any part of the earth a
Paradise, like those four Rivers that watered Eden: It must needs be a
flourishing state, where may be seen due order in the constitution of a
Government, and administration thereof, True Wisdom in the Rulers, Entire Unity
in the people, joined with meet Courage for the execution of the prudent
commands of their Leaders: of such a place it may be said, that it is
beautiful as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible and.c. Cant. 6.4.

In the first place I call it the Beauty of their Order; and so it is, whether
we respect their Constitution, or their Administration. Vbi Ordo dominatur,
says Nazianzen, pulchritudo splendescit: that is, where Order prevails,
Beauty shines forth. It was Order that gave Beauty to this goodly fabric of
the world, which before was but a confused Chaos, without form and void.
Therefore Job, when he would set out the terribleness of the grave, and the
dismal state of death, he calls it, the Land of darkness, and the shadow of
death without any Order. Job. 10.22. For Order is as the soul of the Universe,
the life and health of things natural, the beauty and strength of things
Artificial. When the prophet Isaiah, would describe a place designed to
destruction, Isa. 34.11. he says, the line of confusion, and the stones of
emptiness shall be stretched over it. The better to understand this we may
consider, what Order is? The Schools tell us, it is, Parium, impuriumque sua
cuique tribuens l^a, apta dispositio. Such a disposition of things in
themselves equal and unequal, as gives to every one their due and proper
place. It suited the wisdom of the infinite and omnipotent Creator, to make the
world of differing parts, which necessarily supposes that there must be
differing places, for those differing things to be disposed into, which is
Ordhr. The like is necessary to be observed in the rational and political
World, where persons of differing endowments and qualifications need a
differing station to be disposed into, the keeping of which, is both the beauty
and strength of such a Society. Naturalists tell us that beauty in the body
arises from an exact symmetry or proportion of contrary humors, equally mixed
one with an other: so does an orderly and artificial distribution of diverse
materials, make a comely Building, while homogeneous bodies (as the depths of
waters in the Sea, and heaps of sand on the Shore) run into confused heaps, as
bodies incapable to maintain an order in themselves. So that it appears,
whoever is for a parity in any Society, will in the issue reduce things into an
heap of confusion. That God who assumes to himself the the title of being the
God of Glory, is the God of peace, of Order, and not of Confusion, 1. Cor.
14.33. compared with ver. 40. He is so in his Palace of the world, as well as
in his temple of his Church: in both may be observed a sweet subordination of
persons and things, each unto other. As for his Temple of the Church, whither
we consider the Sanctum Sanctorum, the Holy of Holyes, or the middle part, or
the outward Court: a distinction of order may be observed in all. Look we into
the third heavens the high and holy place, as a royal Pavilion pitched by the
Almighty for the recidence of his Glory, although it be furnished with
Inhabitants suitable to the nature of that celestial throne, yet are they not
all of one rank and order; there are Cherubims as well as Seraphims,
Archangels as well as Angels, Thrones and Dominions, as well as Principalityes
and Powers. There are also, as in a middle rank, the Spirits of just men made
perfect: though no unclean thing may enter in, yet have they not attained their
perfection in Glory, but do yet expect an addition of Glory: but in the outward
Court, as there are diversityes of gifts, so there are of places, and order:
some that are to rule and go before, others that are to be subject, and to
follow. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves. Heb.
13.17. If we shall but descend and take notice of the firmament, the pavement
of that glorious mansion place, although it be the roof of this lower world,
may we not there see, one star differing from another in glory? There is placed
the Sun, the lord and ruler of the day, as well as the Moon, that rules the
night, together with the stars, as the common people of that upper region, who
yet do immediately veyle their glory, and withdraw their light, when their
bridegroom comes forth of his chamber. In the firmament of the air, may we not
see the lofty eagle in his flight far surmounting the little choristers of the
valleys? The like disproportion who observes not amongst those creatures that
take their pastime in the deep waters, or that range upon the high mountains,
hunting for cheir prey? And has not the same Almighty Creator and disposer of
all things made some of the sons of men as far differing in height of body one
from the other, as Saul from the rest of the people, than whom he was higher
from the shoulders upward, or as much as the sons of Anak did excel Zacheus in
procerity of stature. And are not some advanced as high above others in dignity
and power, as much as the cedars of Lebanon the low shrubs of the valley? It is
not then the result of time or chance, that some are mounted on horseback,
while others are left to travel on foot. That some have with the Centurion,
power to command, while others are required to obey. The poor and the rich meet
together, the Lord is the maker of them both. The Almighty has appointed her
that sits behind the mill, as well as him that rules on the throne. And herein
has he as well consulted the good of humane nature, as the glory of his own
wisdom and power: Those of the superior rank, but making a supply of what is
wanting in the other: otherwise might not the foolish and the ignorant be like
to loose themselves in the Wilderness, if others were not as eyes to them. The
fearful and the weak might be distroyed, if others more strong and valiant, did
not protect and defend them. The poor and the needy might starve with hunger
and cold, were they not fed with the morsells, and warmed with the fleece of
the wealthy. Is it not found by experience, that the greatest part of mankind,
are but as tools and Instruments for others to work by, rather then any proper
Agents to effect any thing of themselves: In peace how would most people
destroy themselves by slothfulness and security? In war they would be destroyed
by others, were it not for the wisdom and courage of the valliant. If the
virtue and the valor of the good did not interpose by their authority, to
prevent and save, the vice of the bad would bring mischief enough upon places
to ruin both, else why is it so frequently intimated in the latter end of the
book of Judges, that in those days, when there was no king in Israel, but
every man was left to do what seemed right in his own eyes, that these and
those enormityes brake forth, that violated all Laws, and offered violence
even unto nature it self? Judge. 17.6. and. 18.1. and. 19 1. and 21.25. Thus if
Order were taken away, soon would confusion follow, and every evil work,
James, 3.16. Nothing therefore can be imagined more remote either from right
reason, or true religion, then to think that because we were all once equal at
our birth, and shall be again at our death, therefore we should be so in the
whole course of our lives. In fine, a body would not be more monstrous and
deformed without an Head, nor a ship more dangerous at Sea without a Pilot, nor
a flock of sheep more ready to be devoured without a Shepherd, then would
humane Society be without an Head, and Leader in time of danger, which in a
difficult case the Gileadites are forced to acknowledge, when they flee for
refuge to Jep^hah, that mighty man of valor, to be their Captain and Head, to
save them from the band of the children of Ammon, whom a little before they had
cast off, as an eye sore and superfluous branch of their family, not worthy to
enjoy any part of inheritance amongst his brethren.

The like must be acknowledged concerning the order of Administration, as has
been already said concerning the order of constitution, whither in the church
or state. The order of Solomon's household, was an astonishing sight to the
Queen of Sheba, as well as the Wisdom of his other contrivements. 1. King.
10.5. The Apostle Paul rejoices to behold the order of the Church of the
Colossians, as well as their Faith. The same Apostle gives a special direction
to the Church of Corinth, that all things be done decently and in order, (...)
alluding to the administration of Rule in an Army marshalled in its several
ranks, under the wise conduct of skillful Leaders, then which nothing can be
more comely or comfortable to themselves, and terrible to their enemies. On
this account it seems to be, that such severe Animadversions have been made
upon all occasions on the violaters of Order, mark them that walk disorderly,
says Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.11. and have no fellowship with them. And in another
place, he wishes they were cut off that troubled them, no doubt by their
disorderly acting. This is the first Command with promise, sc. the observation
of the Order established by divine appointment, betwixt Superiors and
Inferiors. No wonder therefore that when the people of Israel were ready,
instead of punishing the disorder and rebellion of Corah, and his company, to
countenance the business, God himself steps in to quiet the Tumult, and by
Moses his mouth tells the present offenders, and in them all others of the like
stamp, that as they would make an innovation in the camp, so he himself would
make a new thing in the earth, that it should open its mouth, and at once,
without any further trial or delay, swallow down and devour those presumptuous
offenders, that had attempted to violate the order God himself had so newly
established in the Camp. Behold ye dispisers of order and Government, and
wonder, that God whose glory it is to be styled, long-suffering, Patient and
slow to wrath, is so quick in punishing this sin, as to prevent any future hope
of mercy by Repentance, to those so notorious breakers of Order. What were this
but to Chaos the world again, and to make Instabilis terra, innabilis unda? God
w^l therefore have after ages to read the greatness of this sin, in the
dreadfulness of the punishment thereof. The earth is not willing to bear
offenders of this nature, as we may see by the instance of the old world, whose
inhabitants when they fill the earth with violence, they are cut down out of
time, and carried off the earth with a flood. Absalom that rebellious wretch,
the earth is not willing to bear such a burden: yea hell it self is as it were
disquieted by them from beneath, For that Kingdom of darkness is not without
its order, without which it could not subsist, as our Savior argues, if Satan
were divided against himself his kingdom could not stand. And this is the
first thing worthy our observation, in this excellent Platform of Polity. The
second follows which is,

2. The wisdom of their Conduct. Their Heads had such understanding of the
times, as to know what Israel ought to do.

In a curious piece of Architecture, that which first offers it self to the
view of the beholder, is the beauty of the structure, the proportion that one
piece bears to another, wherein the skill of the Architect most shows it self.
But that which is most Admirable in sensitive and rational beings, is that
inward principle, seated in some one part, able to guide the whole, and
influence all the rest of the parts, with an apt and regular motion, for their
mutual good and safety. The wisdom of the Creator was more seen in the breath
of life, breathed into the Nostrils of Adam, whereby he became a living soul,
then in the feature and beauty of the goodly frame of his body, formed out of
the dust, as the Poet speaks, Os homini sublime dedit -- The Architect of that
curious piece has placed the Head in the forefront, and highest sphere, where
are lodged all the senses, as in a Watchtower, ready to be improved upon all
occasions, for the safety and preservation of the whole. There are placed those
that look out at the windows, to foresee evil and danger approaching,
accordingly to alarm all the other inferior powers, to take the signal and
stand upon their guard for defense of the whole. There also is the seat of the
Daughters of music, ready to give audience to all reports and messages that
come from abroad: if any thing should occur or happen nearer home, or further
off, imparting either fear or evil, or hope of good; Their work is immediately
to dispatch messages through the whole province of nature, to summon all the
other Members together, to come in and yield their assistance to prevent the
mischief feared, or prepare for the reception of the good promised, or
pretended, as the nature of the case may require. Thus are all orders wont to
be dispatched and issued from the Cinque ports of the senses in, and about the
head, for the benefit and advantage of the whole body. Very fitly therefore in
the body politic are the rulers by way of allusion called Heads. And in case
of inability to discharge those functions, such societies may not undeservedly
be compared to the Palmists Idols, that have eyes but see not, and have ears
but hear not. Suppose the hands be never so strong for action, or the feet
never so swift for motion, yet if there be not discretion in the head to
discern, or judgment to determine what is meet to be done for the obviating
of evil and danger, or procuring of good, it will be impossible to save such a
body from ruin and destruction. If the Mast be never so well strengthened, and
the Tackline never so well bound together, yet if there wants a skilful Pilot
to Steer and Guide, especially in a rough and tempestuous Sea, the lame will
soon take the prey, as it happened a little before this time, in the Reign of
Saul, when the Philistines had so often harressed that Country, and placed
their Garrisons in the very heart of the Land, and not long after, when in the
days of Rehoboam, who had shields enough, some of Gold, with other weapons of
War, many thousand stalls of Horses, with Horsemen proportionable to manage
them, yet for want of wisdom and understanding in the head of that rich and
populous Kingdom, how soon is it become a prey to the first assaylant, as
afterward also in the days of Joash; when there was but a small company of
the Syrians that came against him, a great Host was delivered into their hand,
and all through that ill conduct of the Head of that Kingdom.

But by the way, here we are to mark, according to the sense of the words
already given; under the wisdom of conduct, or understanding of the times, to
know what Israel ought to do, is necessarily comprehended piety before God, as
well as prudence amongst men, according to the received rule of Scripture
Language and Phrase, where as Divines use to say, verba sensus denotant
affectum cordis: therefore understanding to know Isreal's duty, requires a great
deal of divine skill and spiritual wisdom attained by Faith in Gods promises,
diligent reading of the precepts of his Law, fervent and frequent prayer for
divine assistance, by which means David became wiser then his Teachers, yea,
was accounted wise as the Angel of God to discern good and bad, and to know
all things that were in the earth. It was by a special Law required of God that
the King in Israel should have a copy of the divine Law, written out (by his
own hand, say some of the Rabbines) and kept by him, that he might read therein
all the days of his life, Deuteronomy. 17 19.20. that from thence he might receive
direction how to govern his Kingdom, so that according to the excellent pattern
before us in the Text, it is requisite that the Heads and leaders of Israel,
should be versed in Divine, as well as in humane Law. Therefore we find, that
when Solomon, after he was advanced to be the chief Head and Leader of Israel,
when he had his Option granted him of God, could not ask any thing so well
pleasing to God, and so needful to himself, as wisdom, or an understanding
heart to judge the Israel of God, and to discern between good and bad. As
herein had David his Father before him approved himself, as a meet Shepherd
over the flock of God, in feeding of them according to the integ^ity of his
heart, and guiding them by the skilfulness of his hands, Psalm. 78. ult. That is
he guided them by his counsel, and preserved them by his power, in which two
branches is contained the sum of a Rulers office. And though in many cases the
rule is very plain and easy, and he that runs, as is said, may read what
Israel ought to do; yet things may be often times so circumstanced in Israel,
that it is no easy matter to know what Israel ought to do: many times the
right way lies in a very narrow; the Channel may run between two dangerous
precipices on either side, so that a man who has not great understanding,
Incidit in syllam volens vitare charybdin. A Ruler may often times run into one
or more evils, and it may be great ones too, that intended only to avoid some
lesser one, yea sometimes he that resolves to keep the middle of the Channel,
yet for want of insight and experience, not making allowance for emergent cases
and difficulties, not easy to be foreseen, may by the setting of the Current
be shipwracked on the opposite Shore: ( Si tempora, and rerum status ita
circumvolvantur, ut administrandi ratio, cum illis consentiens, sit bona,
faeliciter omnia contingent; at si tempora et res ipsae mutentur, poribit, qui
in agendo rationem non mutat. As said that great Italian Politician)

A fitter Instance of which dangerous error cannot be given, then that of
Josiah; who yet was one of the best Rulers that ever headed the Kingdom of
Judah, for he, to prevent a lesser inconvenience of having his own Kingdom
(that lay between the two great Kings of Assyria and Egypt) made the seat and
field of War, denies liberty to the Egyptian to pass through his Kingdom, and
so opposing him in an hostile way, is overcome and slain, and his Kingdom
spoiled by him: it proving the most fatal Battle that ever was fought by any of
the Kings of Judah, and which made way to the final overthrow of the Kingdom,
and following Captivity of the People. So great mischiefs often times do attend
the want of understanding to know what Israel ought to do. Rehoboam also and
his people did both strangely ruin themselves by a contrary extreme in this
kind, in not understanding of the times to know what they ought to do, to avoid
the danger which either of them feared. The King was afraid of being mated by
his Subjects, puts on a garb of greater Majesty then was usual in his
countenance and words, at that time, when a condescending carriage, with more
mildness and gentleness had been more necessary, and in all probability, had
saved both his Honor and his Kingdom: on the otherside, the people acted by
the same fatal and precipitant counsels of rash and unadvised persons, to avoid
the heavy yoke of the house of David, as they conceived, advanced one of the
Servants of their former Kings, whose little finger proved indeed (as the other
proudly speaks) heavier then the loins of the two former Kings, for the
Kingdom was not able to stand long under the weight thereof, but was soon
crushed and ruined by the tyrany of the succeeding Kings of the ten Tribes. The
consideration of such dangerous consequences, might obviate the heady and
tumultuous humors of many, who upon the least discontent against their Rulers,
for want of success, or the like, think of nothing less then of removing them
out of the World, or out of the Government at least, and substituting others in
their room, which if they should accomplish, possibly might entangle them in
the like, or a worse mischief then that which they expected to be delivered
from, as many have found by sad experience. Often does the remedy prove worse
then the disease. Infaeliciter agrotat eui plus mali venit a medico, quam a
morbo. As good to have no King in Israel as to anoint a Bramble over the rest
of the Trees. In the present exigent before us in the Text; the case appeared
difficult a good while. There was Abner the Captain of the Host of Israel, with
the Son and Heir of the former King, engaged on the one side; David and a few
of his Servants and followers on the other: yet to those that had understanding
of those times, it does at the last manifestly appear what Israel ought to do.
Saul had outed himself of the Kingdom, by asking counsel of the Devil how to
continue it in his family, who were therefore justly rejected of God; David was
by a special mandate from God chosen to be King in his stead, which Abner and
the Captains of the Host can readily acknowledge, when prejudice and
self-interest is laid aside and Conscience but permitted to speak. The Kingdom
belonged unto David, not only in regard of ability and fitness, but also in
point of right and title, as being the person designed of God for them to
choose; yet is it something long before the people are willing to understand
it. Though wisdom be always too high for a fool, as Solomon speaks, yet in
the darkest times that ever befell the Israel of God, they that will do the will
of God may by inquiry, study and prayer come to know what it is. However it
does hereby appear of how great concernment it is, for the Heads in Israel to
know what Israel ought to do, least otherwise they be drawn to do, that which
in Israel ought not to be done. Gideon was a wise man, that judged Israel with
great approbation of God and man, yet out of a superstitious conceit, will
needs make an Ephod, which thing ought not to have been done in Israel, what
followed? All Israel went a whoring after it, and so it became a snare to
himself in his family, and to Israel also.

The body of a people are not much unlike the body of waters, which are not apt
to move of themselves, if let alone in their own receptacle, but as they
receive an impression from a foreign Element, or a power that is above them:
and things that are soft and flexible are susceptible of diverse, yea contrary
impressions. David by an insinuating and melting speech bowed the hearts of all
the men of Israel as one man. They that have such interest in them, had need
know what they ought to do, seeing they may make them do almost what pleases
themselves that are their Rulers: for Absalom had bowed them as well as David,
though it were the wrong way. All men's hearts are not in their own keeping;
wise men can easily find keys that will open the Cabinet and take away the
Treasure; for it is said, Absalom stole away the hearts of the men of Israel.
Thus in things of the greatest moment, it is easy for Princes, and Leaders,
and Heads of the Tribes to draw them that are their bones and their flesh, as
David speaks to be of their mind and to engage in their quarrel, be it right or
wrong. Many Instances of the like kind may be given out of profane as well as
Sacred Hystory, for the sea of examples of this nature is withous bottom,
whereby it will be found most evident, that those who are the Heads and Leaders
of any people may easily engage them in their own quarrels to their ruin and
destruction, as often as otherwise.

Thus did Jeroboam, Ahab, Jehu and others persuade the people of Israel, after
their own example, to embrace the abominable idolatry of the Calves which
brought inevitable and fatal ruin upon the whole Kingdom of the ten Tribes,
as well as upon their own families. Cato was wont to say of the people of
Rome, (and it is as true of any other sort of people) that they were like
sheep, in that it was easier to drive or lead a whole flock or multitude of
them, then any one single creature amongst them. By all which Considerations it
is manifest that things are no where like, so succesfully to be carried on as
where they who are concerned in the leading of Church or state, have such
understanding of the times, as to know what Israel ought to do.

3. The third thing considerable in this unparalleld pattern of civil polity
is the unity of their Counsels. That which in this juncture of affairs before
us in the text, was apprehended as most meet for Israel to do, is by the joint
advice and counsel of the heads of this tribe propounded, and by the whole body
of the people consented unto, and approved, such a rare pattern of unity is
seldom found in our times. Let a body politic be never so well proportioned,
as to its constitution, and form of government, and never so well furnished with
wise and able men for its conduct and guidance, yet if the several members be
not well tuned together, by a spirit of love and unity, there will never be any
good harmony in their Administrations. Where the whole multitude is not of one
heart, and of one mind, as was said of them in the Acts. Chap 4.32. there will
appear little beauty or strength, and no success in any of their motions. In
the beautiful System^ of the world, which yet is compounded of sundry
Elements, and those of differing qualityes one from the other, yet is there
such a necessary and mutual connection between the parts, that they are all so
firmly knit one to another, that it is altogether impossible to make any breach
in their union: rather will those several bodies forget the propertyes of their
own nature, then the^e shall be any Chasma or Vacuum amongst them, which would
tend to a dissolution of the whole. Thus in the body politic, where it is
animated with one entire spirit of love and unity, and settled upon lasting and
sure foundations of quietness and peace, all the several members, must and will
conspire together to deny, or forbear the exercise of their own proper
inclinations, to preserve the union of the whole; that there be no Schism in
the body, as the Apostle speaks: Therefore where the higher bodies in Church or
state, cannot descend (and that of their own voluntary inclination without
forcible compulsion) and the lower and grosser ones cannot ascend up to meet
the other, any man may easily read the destiny of such a society, It had been
much better for Rehoboam to have denied himself, and become the servant of his
people, and subjects for that one day, rather then to have made them his
enemies, if not his lords (for they were the greater Kingdom) for ever after.
David was forced to yield to as much as that came to, if not something more,
when he complains, the sons of Z^viah are too hard for him, rather then to make
a breach between himself and his men of war, in that difficult time, when
himself was yet weak, and the Kingdom not firmly or fully settled in his hand.
David was wise as an Angel of God, to know what he had to do; and does not
connive at their sin, although he does for that time forbear to execute the
punishment, leaving things to a more convenient season. Jerusalem, says the
Psalmist, is builded as a city that is compact together: when the parts of a
building are so artificially framed one into another, that they are as it were
cemented, and knit together by a vital spirit of love, the more weight is laid
upon them, the firmer and stronger they grow: but where they are disjoynted,
one part helps to weaken, and overthrow the other. Cyrus is said to have
overthrown the impregnable city of Babylon, by drawing the great channel of
Euphrates, into several small rivulets, which, had they continued in one main
stream, he could never have done. It is not the storms and tempests, though
never so boisterous, while they are on the outside, or upon the surface of the
earth, that make any commotion therein, but the vapors that are insensibly
gotten into its bowels, that make it quake and tremble. It is not the outward
force and violence that ruins a commonwealth, so much as a spirit of division,
and contention arising from jealousies, prejudices, and animosityes from within
themselves, which does most dangerously threaten, and most certainly foretell
its destruction, as our Savior himself speaks, an An house or Kingdom divided
against it self cannot stand. The swift ships that are driven by the fierce
winds, or carried with the raging waves of the sea, yet so long as they who sit
at their helmes are united in their counsels and endeavors, most commonly do
avoid the danger of shipwreck, being turned this or that way, upon occasion,
at the will of the governor, but if they who are to manage them cannot agree
amongst themselves, they may easily be emersed, and whole navies of them become
but ludibrium Ventorum. Unity of Counsel is one of the chief foundations of
civil Polity: But if the foundations be dissolved, what can the righteous do?
but mourn in secret, when they foresee, but cannot prevent the miseryes that
are coming upon a factious, divided and self-destroying people. It was a sad
time in Israel, when one half of the people followed Tib^i the son of Ginath;
the other half followed Om^i; whence might necessarily be inferred the
destruction of one side or of the other, as soon after came to pass in that
people. Or else may endanger the ruin of the whole, as too often has been
seen in the world, that when lesser societyes have been divided amongst
themselves, they have but the sooner become a prey to a stronger power. Which
if it had not been experienced in most of the states, and societyes of the
Christian world, and in all the latter, as well as ancient revolutions of the
nations; where any order of Government, either civil or ecclesiastical has
been established, might have been exemplifyed by particular instances. Faelix
quem faciunt etc. happy are they that can take warning by the harms they have
observed in preceding times. Such divisions, especially in the Church of God,
are in a great measure to be ascribed to the policy of Satan, who endeavors by
all ways and means to foment divisions, amongst those of the Church, by that
course to ruin them, while in the mean time, he provides for the quiet of his
own Kingdom, the world. God also may be said to do it, being provoked by the
pride and tyranny, with other wickedness of the sons of men, judicially to
mingle a perverse spirit in the midst of a nation, and suffering their princes
to be deceived, and to deceive their people, as the prophet speaks of Egypt.
Isa. 19.13, 14. Causing them to err in every work thereof as a drunken man
staggereth in his vomit. But the meritorious and procuring cause of those
ruinous and destructive counsels arises from the weakness or wickedness of a
people themselves: It being observed as one of the blessings God was pleased to
cast in to some heathen states, as a reward of their wisdom and prudence, with
other moral virtues, viz. their long peace, and flourishing prosperity upon the
earth. It is much to consider, that all Asia can agree together in the worship
of a Diana, and the Image that fell down from Jupiter, while one single Church
in the city of Corinth cannot long hold together in the worship of the true
God, nor retain the rites of his worship, and the regular use of the sacred
bodies of love and unity, without such shameful divisions, and scandalous
breaches, as they are sharply rebuked for by the Apostle, in both his Epistles
to that Church, imputing the root of those divisions to the lusts of the flesh,
Are ye not carnal, and walk as men? 1 Cor. 3.3.

But this being a matter of so great concernment for the good and welfare of
Societyes whither Christian or civil, it may not be amiss to enquire into the
true grounds and reasons of such Unity, or the way how it may be brought about.
The first and principal is, a clear discovery of the right way of their peace
and prosperity, it being taken for granted, that this is, or ought to be the
end that all Societyes generally aim at, sc. a quiet possession of what they
already have, with enlargement of their prosperity, if attainable, But if there
be no agreement in the means that seem most directly to tend to that end, but
that apprehensions are divided about that, they may be as much divided for
ever: For at this time, and a little before, the Israelites were taken with a
fond desire of a Kingly Government, yet not being at an agreement amongst
themselves about the person, or the manner of his Government, they were divided
into factions till their minds by sad experience came to be convinced, that
David was the person, not only called, but qualified of God for that great
service. which Amasa expresses in the name of the rest of the Tribes, Thine are
we David, and on thy side thou son of Jesse, so that nothing can be supposed
more directly to tend to the creating and maintaining, unity in the counsels
and affections of a people, then clear convincing light, and a demonstrative
evidence, that what is propounded, is ^he direct and proper means to bring
about the end generally aimed at; othewise, it will be said Scinaitur incertum
studia in contraria vulgus The poor man by his wisdom, says Solomon,
delivered the city. And the wise woman of Abel saved the city by propounding so
meet an expedient, as gained acceptance in all apprehensions. Otherwise it may
fall out as Solomon says, Ec. 10.15. the labor of the foolish wearyeth every
one of them, for they know not how to find the way to the city. Where wisdom
is wanting to direct men's actions, labor will be endless, and the issue
mischief, or disappointment at the best. When once the people of Rome were
ready to mutiny upon quarrel that fell out between the Citizens of the higher,
and those of the lower rank, Menippus healed the breach by a wise Apologus of
the contention between the belly, and the members in the body natural, which
carried such a convincing evidence along with it, that all parties at variance
were soon agreed about the way of their own welfare. The like wise medium was
propounded by Jotham, in the ninth of Judges, but it could not be attended,
because God had sent an evil spirit amongst them, as the text there speaks.

2. The mutual interest that the members of the same Society have in the
affections of each other, gives great advantage to promote this Unity, if duly
considered. There was no small argument in the words of Abram used to Lot, Let
not us fall out, for we are Brethren. Nature leaves a strange instinct upon
those of the same kind, even amongst the bruit creatures to defend one another,
and to revenge the injury done to their own kind: such inclinations use to
work more strongly with those that are endued with reason. The joint interest
of people in the same family, nation or religion, tends much this way: Joab
could not have used a more pathetical argument to his brother Abishai, then the
mention of [our people, and the cities of our God.] whereby to engage him to a
mag^animous combat with the common enemy; as also the promise of mutual
assistance each to other, and no doubt the preceding exhortation to
magnanimity, took the firmer hold on either of their hearts to consider their
near relation each to other. David engages much on this account, For my
Brethren and Companions sake, I will now say peace be within thee, Psalm. 122 8.
On the other hand, when the minds of persons, are either leavened with pride,
or discontented, or their spirits imbittered with jealousies or prejudices
against each other, it cannot but much hinder this desired Unity. When the envy
of Ephraim, and the ve^ing of Judah shall cease one toward another Isa 11.13.
they may the more easily subdue all other of their enemies.

3. This comes to pass by the prudent and condescending behavior of those that
are leaders of others, who by their discreet behavior may do much to maintain
Love and unity in Societyes, for want of which often times it is miserably lost.
The soft answer pacifieth wrath, and the soft tongue breaks the bone, says
Solomon. Gideon by a mild and gentle answer prevented a quarrel betwixt him and
the Ephraemites, which afterward upon the like occasion brake forth into a
bloody war, in the days of Jeptah. David bowed the hearts of all the men of
Israel as one man, by an insinuating speech as by his discreet behavior in
former times he won the hearts of all Saul's servants, notwithstanding that
inveterate prejudice, envy and malice of their master against him. Duro con
duro non sat bon muro, say the Italians; a firm wall will not be made up of
hard stones, without the mixture of some more yielding matter to cement them
together. That may easily be drawn by love, that will not be driven by a mighty
force. The rigor of a Command may be much sweetened by the gentleness of the
expression. Paul, though now the aged, will rather for loves sake beseech, or
entreat a favor of Philemon, then enjoyne a duty. Moses his calling the
Israelites Rebels, was more like to increase the Rebellion of their wills
against God, then any way alter that evil disposition of their minds. Joabs
peremptory adjuring of David, although in that exigent, it gained the present
end he aimed at, yet it for ever after lost his interest in his Sovereigns
heart, the harshness of the words being harder to be digested then the matter
contained in them. Many times also the difficulty of a message is much sweetened
by the courteous disposition of them that bring it, as the third messenger sent
by the king of Israel to Elijah, seems to find by experience. Rehoboams yoke
had not seemed so intolerable, if it had with more gentle words been imposed;
wherefore following kings choose rather to express their non-assent to the
demands of their subjects by an Advis^ra^le Roy, then by an harsh and absolute
refusal. When Themistocles once told the Adriens, to whom he was sent to demand
tribu^e, that he would bring two mighty Gods to overcome them, Love and
Eloquence, it was replied to him, that they had two mightier then they, sc
Poverty and impossibility, or else very probably the other might easily have
prevailed. This way of procuring unity and peace is as much seen in matters of
Religion, as in things of another nature, where as a late Author truly says,
by passionate, hot and eager Disputes peace is always lost, and truth is
seldom or never found.

4. In the fourth and last place, This is brought about by the influence and
assistance of Divine Grace, so disposing the wills and affections of men that
unity and peace are thereby both procured and preserved. For if God be provoked
to send an evil Spirit, as he did betwixt the men of Shechem, and the house of
Millo, the wisest Counsels shall not prevail, as at that time was delivered
them by Jotham a very sage Apologus, yet it could not prevent that wicked
conspiracy between the men of Shechem, and Abimelech, for God had purposed by
that means to punish them both, so that a mutual fire is kindled, whereby the
men of Shechem and the house of Millo are devoured one by another: when a man's
ways please the Lord, his very Enemies shall be at peace with him, much more
easy it is to expect that such may obtain peace one with another, when God is
styled the God of love and peace, it is therein employed not only that he is the
approver of those Blessings, but the Author and Giver of them. It was
prophesied of Solomon's Reign, that there should be an abundance of Peace, and
so it was fulfilled, till God stird him up Adversaries, which put an end to his
peace: So as if God will give a Commission to any Instruments, to take away
peace from this or that part of the Earth, it may not be expected, to continue
longer there; for he will either mingle a perverse spirit amongst their
Counselors, as was threatened to Egypt, or hide the Counsels of peace from the
eyes of the People, or their Leaders, whence they may be dashed together to
their mutual destruction and ruin.

4. The fourth and last thing considerable in this exact pattern of a civil
state, is the height of their courage and resolution. It is a sign of great
prosperity and success in any enterprises, when the Brethren are valiant and
resolute in the execution, as their Leaders are wise in their conduct. That
obedience to the commands of their Superiors, is intended in a great measure,
in the Text, I deny not, but what might be required here of that nature, may be
gathered from what was said under the Head of order, treated of in the first
place. In this place therefore I shall confine my self, only to that of their
courage and resolution, which though in the last place to be spoken to, yet is
not the least thing considerable in a flourishing state: for otherwise through
the cowardice and slothfulness of a people with other vices attending thereon,
after ages may easily lose all that riches, wealth and honor, which the
wisdom and valor of the preceding have obtained: as may be seen in the days
of the Judges that succeeded Joshuah, and of the Kings that succeeded David and
Solomon. Hyram concludes the prosperity of Israel from the wisdom of David,
and Solomon his successor; to be sure, when wise Leaders are attended with
valiant people, it is easy to foretell the prosperity of such a nation. The
very name of David and his mighty men that were with him, though weary and
weak-handed (as Achitophel wisely suggested) was enough to fright Absalom and
all the men of Israel from pursuing their advantage: I shall here therefore
take occasion to discourse somewhat of that eminent virtue, so necessary for
the flourishing of a people, disposed into a well ordered polity. Valor is an
inward virtue of the mind enabling us to persist in our duty notwithstanding
the difficulty or danger thereof. They are not a little mistaken, that think
nothing is required to valor, but a daring confidence to fight. ut non pena
martyrem, sic nec pugna fortem, sea causa facit. It is a lawful striving as the
Apostle tells us, that deserves the Garland, we must know therefore, that there
are four ingredients necessary to the constitutioo of a valiant mind.

1. The first is magnanimity, or greatness of mind, when the Spirit is raised
to such a degree of courage, as not to stoop to low, and mean things, though it
should be to compass some seeming great adventage. It was the commendation of
the worthies of God, that they accepted not of deliverance, sc. upon low and
base terms, which may be imposed by Adversaries. Paul will rather die then make
his glorying void: a valiant mind will rather lay down his life then keep it
upon dishonorable terms. If the men of J^besh-Gilead, or Ahab afterward, had
accepted of their lives or peace, upon the ignominious terms offered by the
supposed Conqueror, it had been a thing unworthy of the Israel of God. Nor will
Nehemiah lose his honor, as he was Governor, by fleeing to save his life in
an hiding place of security. So neither does Christian humility require a man
to stoop to any thing, unbecoming his Faith and Profession. Paul that can yield
to any thing for the honor of God, and good of others, yet will yield to
nothing, nor give place for an hou^^ to them that will lay a snare for their
liberty. And in another case of a civil nature, the same Apostle, although no
Soldier, but of Christ Jesus, stands upon his honor, and the privilege of
his freedom, when he is not fairly treated according to the dignity of a
Roman. Is it lawful to scourge a Roman? such was Paul's humility as an Apostle
of Jesus Christ, that he can be content to receive forty stripes of his own
Nation, yet has so much magnanimity that he will not yield to receive one of
an Heathen, where he has a civil right to plead an exemption. Such magnanimity
becomes the Israel of God, as was said of Gideons Brethren, that each one
should resemble the Children of a King. If it be said, that in such a case a
man can do no other good, then to show his will; it may be said, in magnis
voluisse sat est, in matters of great moment, it is enough if a man shows but
the resolution of his mind.

2. A second ingredient, is Confidence or boldness, not to be afraid of the
danger or evil supposed, though it should be death it self. It seemed Joab and
Abner were followed with valiant men, when they can so readily lay down their
lives, at the command of their Captains. The Righteous are bold as a Lion,
says Solomon, not afraid of danger, though never so great, either felt or
feared. David will not be afraid though an Host should encamp against him,
Psalm. 27.3. Fear is an embondaging affection but the true Israel of God are
called unto liberty, therefore it becomes not them through the fear of death to
be subject unto bondage: it was a notable spirit of valor that discovered it
self in that English Captain, under his King in France, who being sent to
discover the Enemies Camp, and his numbers, was no whit discouraged (by the
great disproportion that might be observed betwixt themselves and the enemy)
but returned this answer, That there was a very great many of them, enough to
kill, enough to take Prisoners, and enough to run away besides, all which came
to pass soon after, according to his confident presage. There has been an
extraordinary spirit of Courage, that some of Gods people have been endued
withal, when Gods Spirit was said to come upon them, as upon Sampson, Judge.
14.15. when he met a Lion, and Judge. 15.14.8. when he smote the Philistines hip
and thigh; and David, when he engaged with Goliath, or Jonathan and his
Armor-bearer engaging against the Philistines, and undertaking a whole Garrison
of them at once. Thus when the Spirit of God does in any eminent manner excite
and stir up, or actuate that innate valor of their minds, they are and will be
enabled to do great things. Many a man's courage would serve him to fight very
valiantly were he but assured to come off with victory or success, at least
without loss of life: but true valor argues such a confidence of mind, as
enables a man to look Death in the face in cold blood, as we use to say, and
not to be daunted with the countenance of that King of Terror. As was seen in
Joab, 2 Samuel 10.12. who is resolved to behave himself valiantly, leaving the
issue and success to God, to do what should seem good in his sight. Why should
not every true Israelite having the same cause, the same spirit of Faith, the
fame promises, have experience of the same courage and confidence of mind in
their measure.

3. In the third place, Patience is also requisite, enabling them quietly to
bear with all the evils they may meet with by reason of the diuturnity of the
Act. If thou faint in the day of adversity, says Solomon, Prove. 24.10. thy
strength is but small. It is observable, that God never brought about any great
matter of moment, for the salvation of his people, but he called the Instruments
therein to the exercise of great patience before it were accomplished; so that
in their experiences, they must say, Qui cupit optatam cursu -- Multa tulit
fecitque etc. At Isreal's first coming out of Egypt, God would not carry them by
the way of the Spies, though that was nigh, (a journey of a few days) lest
they should faint and be discouraged when they see war. And as afterward God
would try Gideons Army, before he would call them forth to war; for when that
Generation that came out of Egypt upon trial, manifested such untractibleness
and impatience under the hazard and difficulties of war, God saw meet to lay
them wholly aside, and train up their posterity by degrees to inure and
accustom them to bear the difficulties and hazards thereof. Amongst David's
small number that followed him while he was at Ziglag, one third part it is said,
was so faint, that they could not go over the Brook Bezor, but they were not
denied their equal proportion in the spoil, which showed their tarrying behind
proceeded not from the want of valor in their minds, but from weakness in
their bodies, which are but jumanta, or vehicula animorum: so that patience
under evil, is very necessary for a Soldier.

4. In the last place Perseverance, whereby we endure unto the end. This is a
law in the civil as well as spiritual combat, that there must be holding out
to the end, without which the Crown is not to be expected. It was one part of
the Sacramentum militare, by which the Roman Soldiers were wont to be listed
of old, not only that they should not be unwilling to dye for the
Commonwealth, and engage to do whatever their Emperor should command, but
that they should never forsake the Camp while there was need of their service.
And to this principle was all their success in their Wars to be ascribed: that
they were unwearied therein, of whom it was truly said, that though they were
saepius in praelio, nunquam in bello victi; though they lost many Battles, yet
their valor was so great, that they would never yield to adversity. Moses will
not allow the two Tribes and an half to sit still after their own inheritance
was cleared of the Enemy, till they had also helped to put their Brethren into
the possession of theirs, Numb. 32.6. And in the 78 Psalm, the Psalmist
complains of the Children of Ephraim, that they turned back in the day of
Battle, like a broken Bow. A true spirit of valor will always stand bent to
the same mark, not deceiving those that trust thereunto. The courage of David's
mind held good after his body grew faint and weak, whereby we see that
perseverance is the property of a valiant mind, as well as confidence or
patience.

Application.
These four Considerations premised, offer a seasonable word of Advice to every
one that is come hither this day. As John the Baptist was furnished from that
measure of heavenly wisdom he was endued with, to give a satisfying answer to
several that came to him with this question, What shall we do? Luke. 3. ver.
10, 12, 14. So may any wise Scribe instructed to the Kingdom of God, from this
text be supplied to give an answer to every person here present, and met
together upon this solemn occasion, that shall enquire, what they shall do, in
reference to the business before us: I presume there is none here present, but
will be found in one of these three capacityes, either of an Elector, or one
elected, or a Subject under the charge of those who are like to be continued
in, or chosen to the office of an Head or Ruler in this our tribe. each one may
from the premises, hear something spoken unto him in the language of that
Capacity wherein he stands before the Lord this day.

For order sake, I shall in the first place address my self to speak unto you
that are met here as Electors. There was joy in Israel when the Tribes were now
met together to establish the Kingdom in the hands of David, as is said in the
last verse of this Chapter. By proportion this day was wont to be a joyful day
unto us, being as it were the solemnizing of the Birthday of our little State,
the renewall of our Government, with all our civil privileges. The Advice I
shall present you with at this time is by way of Caution in the words of the
Apostle, Gal. 5.13. You are now called to the exercise of your civil Liberty
(wherein much of your other libertyes are bound up) Use not your liberty for an
occasion to the flesh, but by love to serve one another. Those that do but
seriously consider, how much the honor of God, as well as their own good and
welfare is concerned in the regular, and conscientious proceeding in this
business of Election, cannot but have a solemn awe upon their hearts in this
work, and judge that the putting a Solemnity upon the grandeur of the day, is
the least part of the service thereof. I might here mind you, that although it
uses to be accounted ore^o the highest civil privileges a people can enjoy,
to have the liberty to choose their own Rulers, and not to be imposed upon in
that kind; yet if this matter be not carefully looked unto, so as to be both
prudently and conscienciously carried on, it may become an occasion of the
greatest bondage; as has been too sadly verefied almost in all the elective
states and kingdoms in the world. The fatal instance of Absalom makes it
appear, how easy a matter it is to court a well meaning people into such a
false conceit of liberty, as may end in the ruin both of Electors and Elected.
As was seen in the person forementioned, as in Abimelech and his Tribe long
before. For they were upon the Election of a King. Certainly if they were
accounted cursed deceivers, that having a male in their flock, shall vow and
offer to the Lo^^^ corrupt thing, Mal 1.14. what may we think of them that
being called (...) of their Brethren with the supreme power of Rule and Go^
(...), ((...) ^f the highest service for the glory of God and good of men) she
(...) with fact on or prejudice, or biased with self intere^, (...) as to
choose persons to such a service, as are neither (...) acceptable to wise men;
or in in their choice to (...) those that are, I mean not to attend the
directions given by God himself, Exodus 18.27. Able men fearing God etc. Yea it
is expressly commanded them, Deuteronomy. 17.15 Thou shall in any wise set him ^^ng
over thee whom the Lord thy God shall choose: whom is God said to choose, but
those whom he has not only called but fitted for such office by the gifts of
wisdom and grace, which were wont to be signified by the holy oil used to be
powered on them. God does in these days mediately seem to point at such to rule
as he was wont of old immediately to call forth to such service. What ever
strange concurrence might be observed in the person of Saul, between the
rashness of the people to enforcing Samuel to the present choice of a king, and
the rashness of the king in most of his enterprises (which proved a bad Omen
from his first anointing) whereby at last he ruined himself, and many of his
people) yet was be furnished with extraordinary gifts, as soon as he was called
to the exercise of his government. It may still be expected in a true sense,
that a divine Sentence should be in the mouth of the King, and Ruler in Israel.

I will not here engage in any dispute whither it it be either necessary, or
convenient for a free people to use their liberty in often changing their
Magistrates or chief Rulers. Concerning inferior Officers, such as are
Fiscalls and Treasurers, whose places (by reason of the profit they usually are
attended with) are more liable to temptation and corruption, there is no matter
of danger in their change. Wise Hannibal, while he was Praetor at Carthage, got
an Act from the Senate for the changing of such great Officers every year,
having observed how ready they were all to hold together to the obstruction of
justice, and oppression of the people. But for the supreme Rulers, of whom one
says well, that quasi cor Reipubliae, quod mutare non expedit, i. e. that
being as the heart and vitals of the Commonwealth, it is not expedient to run
an hazard in often changing of them. Another speaks to the same purpose, That
unless a Country be very full of skillful and expert men, by often changing
their Rulers, the Government will fall into the hands of rude and ignorant
Mechanics. But where the wisdom of any Country has by long experience, seen
cause to continue the same Rulers, they had need be well advised, that should
promote any innovation, especially in any difficult Juncture of affairs: It
cannot but be dangerous to put the helm into the hands of an unexperienced
P^lot in a tempestuous or stormy season. In such cases it is most an end found
true, as the Spaniards say, the evil that is present, is better then the good
that is to come; for so many times a small inconvenience and infirmity, is
charged into an unsufferable evil. The people of Israel, no doubt would soon
have found the little finger of Absoloms vices, heavier then the loins of all
David's Infirmityes. It was good Counsel which a wise man of Capua once gave
his fellow Citizens, that before they cut off the old Senators, they should
find new ones that were better to place in their room, which when upon trial
they were not able to do, they were easily persuaded to continue the former in
place. Let wisdom and knowledge be found in our Electors, as well as in our
elected Rulers, and that will be the stability of our times, and the strength
of Salvation. Our Election is the foundation of our Government. A small and
inconsiderable error in the Foundation, may put the whole Building much out of
order. As in the body natural, a defect in the first conc^ction is seldom
helped by the second, so will it be found in the body politic. And in all
ages, such as are the Rulers, such will be the people both in Church and state.
Therefore how does it concern those that have an oppertunity in their hands,
not only to keep it, but to improve it and manage it aright, for the upholding
and maintaining good order and discipline, both in Church and State; For if I
mistake not, any man may make both a true prognostic, and diagnostick of the
athletick State of your people, through the whole order of your Government, both
eccleastical and civil, by your Elections, and the quality of the persons you
choose into places of trust, be they Superiors or Inferiors; in things sacred
as well as civil.

I am bold to speak the more on this hand, that I might imprint upon all your
minds, that are any way concerned in Election, a conscientious care of your
duty, and faithful discharge of the trust committed to you. It was one of the
last requests that Moses made unto the God of the spirits of all flesh, just as
he was ready to resign up his charge, that a man might be set over the
Congregation, which might both go in and out before them, that the
Congregation of the Lord be not as sheep that have no sheheard, Number. 17.16.17.
Lest they should there by be left to wander every one after his own
immagination, and so degenerate into corrupt and foolish ways to their own
destruct on. I am not ignorant that the lot of this days Election is in a
great part cast into the lap, the disposal thereof from the Lord we expect to
know by and by: but I speak for the future, and in way of caution to take heed
to our Elections, for our (All) depends upon it. It was a sad presage of evil
times approaching upon Jerusalem, when the people were driven to such miserable
shifts, as to shroud themthemselves under the skirts of unmeet persons, only
for the sake of meat and clothing. Is^i. 3.6, 7. for they are the things lest
requisite in him who is called to be an Healer, A poor and wise child, is
better then an old and foolish King, says Solomon, Eccless 4.12. And for a man
to be put into the Priests office, not qualified thereunto, only to eat a
morsel of bread, may prove a curse to the place, and people, as well as to that
person, as was pronounced against the Family of Eli, 1. Sam. 2.36.

If any should here expect that a character should here be given, how to judge
of such men as may be accounted meet to be heads or leaders of Israel, the text
is a full description, such as have understanding of the times to know what
Israel ought to do; and they who are such do discover themselves, or may be
distinguished from others by these qualifications.

1. The fear of the Lord, and the love of Righteousness. The fear of the Lord
is the beginning or chief part of wisdom as the text tells us. He that is not
wise for himself or for his own soul, will never be wise for the
commonwealth. They that are not of Israel, will not much care to know what
Israel ought to do. David that was a companion of them that fear the Lord, is
easily induced to seek the good of all such, Psalm. 122.8. What Plato said of
Philosophers, we may say of the men that fear God, (which is the best wisdom)
who wished that they were the only kings, or that kings were only such. David,
owned by God himself to be a man after his own heart, was the standard by which
his Successors were measured: amongst whom you will find, that to do that
which was right, was rather a diminution then otherwise, unless it could be
added, with a perfect heart, as did David his father. So, as to know or do
that which is right, unless it were out of integrity of their hearts, and
conformity to the mind of God, does not in Gods account denominate a man wise,
or one that knows what Israel ought to do. God may make use of the common gifts
of the spirit, or natural endowments of men unsanctifyed for the good of his
people and often does when the Government is by providence unavoidably devolved
upon them; but it may be questioned, whether a people can expect a blessing
under Rulers of their own voluntary choice, whose piety may upon certain and
good grounds be suspected, or denied, whatever their other qualifications may
be.

2. Humane Learning in conjunction with the former. Such as by the benefit of
natural parts Experience, Education, and study, have advantage above others to
be acquainted with the affairs of the world abroad, as well as with the Laws
and Customs of their own people at home. For seeing persons of that alloy have
generally the chief managing of affairs in other Nations, as much of that as
may be had, cannot but be necessary for the better ordering the affairs of
Israel. It was no doubt some advantage to the officers of Hezekiah, in their
treating the messengers of the Assyrian, that they understood the Syrian tongue
as well as their own. It may be presumed that no man, unless a We^e^n
Sceptick, ever did account Moses less fit to be a Leader unto Israel because he
was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, a man mighty in words and in
deeds. Nor Paul the less fit to be an Apostle, because he spoke with tongues
more then all the rest of the Apostles. Yea it appears that upon that account
he is called a chosen Vessel, the better qualifyed to be a Doctor to the Gen^s.
And if J^ptah had not had understanding of the times, sc. the knowledge of
things done in forepassed times, as well as in the present, it may well be
questioned whither he had been so fit to have been an head of the G^leadites as
afterward he proved: if he had not been able to have disputed with arguments of
reason, as well as weapons of war, he could not have managed the quarrel so
succesfully as he did. The chief Leaders of Israel before he Kings, were called
Judges, a potiori part; though the chief part of their work usually was to be
Captains of their wars, yet they received their title from their power of
Judging, which certainly required skill and knowledge of the Laws, by which
they were to judge, which how well it could be attained without help of humane
learning. I do not understand. It was well replied by an officer of State to a
Nobleman, that made small account of learning in the education of his son,
(aiming at no higher learning then to be able to ride an horse, or fly an
hawke) that if it were so, then Noble men's Sons must be content that mean men's
children should govern the Kingdom.

3. Constancy or steadiness is another property of a wise man; at least of one
fit to be a Leader of others. Not but that a wise man may sometimes change his
mind, and his wisdom may lead him so to do: Sometimes we say, secundae
cogitationes sunt meliores, but to be of a fickle, unconstant mind, is the
character of one, as Jacob said to Reuben, that will never excel: He is
unstable as Water, which is, neither easy to be kept in any bounds, nor
observant of one constant motion, but apt to change upon every occasion.
Instability in our ways, is an argument both of want of faithfulness before
men, and of sincerity before God. Homo quadratus is the fittest to manage a
trust: That is the figure that stands surest; wise men that act upon
principles, are like an House built upon a foundation that will not turn aside
by a sudden and violent storm. Skeptical men, none knows where to have them,
they will not be bound to be of the same mind on this morning, that they were
of on the last night: Solomon therefore advises to fear God and the King, and
not to meddle with them that are given to change, Prove. 24.21. These are
Inquieta ingenia of Quick silver tempers, that are never quiet in any place,
yet would always be uppermost, which are observed to be the most dangerous in
any state. A wise man always sails by the same Compass, though not always by
the same wind. Particular actions may be changed upon occasion, though the same
mark be still aimed at.

Moderation is another property of wisdom, for if peace and truth be the best
end, that all ought to aim at moderate and pacifick ways and principles, that
run not in extremes, are certainly the directest ways that lead thereunto.
Therefore it is observed that men of moderate and peaceable tempers, are both
the wisest, and most useful men in all Societies, Extremes are alway^s
dangerous: for as the Philosopher says of virtue, that it lies in the middle
between two vices, as the extremes are opposites on either hand, so may truth
generally be found in the middle between two Errors. Some men think they can
never run far enough from that they hate, whereas wisemen can see as dangerous
a precipice of error before them as that which they left be^ind them. This is
too too evident in most of the controversies which have been bandyed for, and
against in our times. In most of which he that has taken the least view of the
managing of such controversies, will find that men of rigid and severe
spirits, have missed both of peace and truth, the design of all good and wise
men. Thus did the Donatists in Africa, and the Novatians about Rome of old, who
separated from all other Christians, save those of their own persuasion, till
at last, there were none left either to join with or separate from, the
spinning of thread too fine, does but draw the wool beyond the staple, and will
never hold in the weaving. Thus has it been found in these last days of
Reformation, the Religion of many proving like precious Liquor, too often
distilled, till at last all evaporates into mere fume: some that could not be
content to keep company with their honest minded Brethren, in the middle Kegion
of revealed Truth, (the most wholesome practical points of Doctrine) have soared
so high aloft that they have as well lost themselves, as those they pretended
conscience to depart from, whose root is rottenness, and their blossom gone up
as dust, as the Prophet speaks, Isai. 5.24. The Apostle Paul gives this caution
to the Romans, to be wise to sobriety (...). which words have an elegancy in
the Greek, not easy to be expressed in our Language. Romans 12.3.

Pareus observes in his time, that they who did nimium (...) sectari, did more
hurt then good in the Reformation of the Church, Matthew. 23.

It is that which highly commended the wisdom of Basilius Magnus in those
times of controversy, in which his Lot did fall, that his moderation lead him
to abstain from some expressions in the controversies then stirring (with great
freedom and boldness used by others) that he might not be the envy of words
and phrases, draw upon himself, and in him upon the Church of God, an
inevitable, and unnecessary danger. As a great Divine of ours notes out of
Gregory Nazian. "If the like wisdom and Moderation had been observed in those
that earnestly contend for truth, so as not to load the truth they maintain
with hard and severe (though it may be true) expressions, that beget more
obstinacy in the Adversaries, and it may be suspicion in the weak, or
unresolved looker on; differences amongst men might be more soberly composed
and the truth with more assurance entertained, Dr. R. on Psalm. 110. p. 372.

The words of the wise says Solomon are heard in quiet, more then the cry of
him that rules among fools, i.e. A wise man that speaks without clamor, noise
or contention gains more credit to his words by the weight of the matter, then
another can do by the obstreperous noise and loud sound they are wont to be
uttered withal.

The like wisdom does moderation discover in things of a civil nature; where
many times the rigorous exaction of the strict letter of the rule of Justice,
proves unjust in the issue, and most unprofitable to the Cumini sectar himself,
or his instruments. According to the usual saying, summum jus est summa
injuria. The Duke of Burgundy began a quarrel with the Switzers about the Toll
of a load of Calve-skins, wherein he lost his life, and all his treasure.

5. Peaceableness is another property of Wisdom; which ought to be esteemed by
the tendency it has toward the obtaining the great end, that all ought to aim
at. sc. the honor of God, and good of Societies, which is much more promoted
by peace, then by the proceeding of force. The Woman of Ab^l whom the Scripture
commends for her wisdom, discovered her wisdom by her peaceable Counsel. The
poor wise man saved the City, by wise counsel, not by weapons of War, Eccles.
9.15 when a great King came against it, besieged it, built Bulwarks against it.
There is nothing more easy then to begin a War, as nothing more difficult then
to manage it aright, or bring it to a good issue: therefore is peace in a wise
man's eye a rich booty. Contention says Solomon, is like the breaking forth of
water, therefore his advice is, to leave off before it be meddled with, Prove.
17.14 D^lc^ b^llum inexpertis, is a true saying, i. e. War uses to be welcome
to none, but those that never made trial thereof, as I fear New England may
find by woeful experience, which will leave a reflection of the deeper guilt, if
any have had any needless hand in the inviting of such an unwelcome guest into
the Country. But I judge charitably of the present Auditors, and dare not
censure others.

It was the spirit of David, one wise as the Angel of God, and no mean Warrior
neither, I am for peace, but when I speak they are for War, Psalm. 120.7. It
seemed then David used not Wars but when necessity forced him thereunto.

In matters of Religion, who is it that gains by Contention: it is the duty of
every Christian to contend for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, but they
ought (...) as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4.15. least otherwise, the loss of love
is more matter of grief then the truth we suppose we have gained is matter of
rejoicing, like them that angle for small fish with a golden Hook. Not that any
truth of God ought upon any pretense to be undervalued, nor any precept of God
be counted little, but every thing is beautiful in his season, where the urging
of some truth of less moment, may certainly endanger the breach of peace, which
is a greater good, I know not, but it might with more acceptance have been
forborne, for we know our Savior Christ did not, nor the Apostles after him, at
every season declare such Truths, as the Hearers were not capable to receive.

For all necessary and fundamental Truths, we cannot be too resolved in
Contention for them: But for Opinions of less certainty and moment, where wise
and good men have always needed a latitude, wherein to differ and turn aside
one from the other, it can be no part of wisdom to be too eager or rigorous
about them, some with the Disciples, Luke 9.54.55. are ready to think he
deserves no less then to be destroyed by fire from Heaven, if he follows not
them, whom yet our Savior justly reproves for giving too much way to their own
Spirits.

6. Condescension, may in the next place be added, as another property of
Wisdom. Humility, the ground of condescension is nearly allied to wisdom,
both are the procreant causes of great Blessings to the Sons of men, Prove.
22.4. The wisdom that is from above is gentle, easy to be entreated. No man
ever thought that Abraham was the less wise, because more willing to yield in
the controversy between him and Lot. Those parts of the natural body that are
the most yielding are the stronger and most useful, were all the other members
of our body as hard, and as stiff as the Bones, how uncomfortable would our
Actions and motions be. If any find it better to break then bow, they may
thereby gain some reputation for their wilfulness but not for their wisdom.

This must always be understood of things lawful and expedient to be yielded
to, else Moses the meekest man upon Earth, will not bate an hoof, nor Paul the
most humble of all Christians, will not yield, or give place for an hour; both
which in other cases could deny themselves, and yield very far.

7. Deliberation, is the last property of Wisdom which I need mention, it can
hardly be thought to consist with Wisdom to do any thing rashly in matters of
moment. Temerity of Counsels argues rather height of folly and pride then depth
of wisdom; for in so doing, we should lay aside Reason, our most faithful and
best Counselor, and commit our affairs into the hands of passion and
affection, or worse, cum res transit in affectum, perit omne judicium: they
loose their wisdom, that suffer themselves to be transported with passion.
Deliberandum diu, quod semel statuendum, it had need be a long time deliberated
upon, that is to be appointed for ever after. For although our statutes be not
unalterable, like those of the Medes and Persians, yet that which is maturely
agreed upon at the first, will stand in the less need of alteration or
abrogation: the frequency of either of which abates much of the rigor of the
Laws, and honor of the Lawmakers. Many things in humane affairs admit not of
second thoughts, notwithstanding they are generally known to be the best. In
bello non b^s ^ccat: therefore says Solomon, with good advice make War, and
manage it likewise with the same care, lest there be no room to play an after
game. And wise men a^^u^ it the best way to put as little as may be to
peradventure. A man of understanding, says Solomon, Prove. 12.27. is of an
excellent Spirit; the Hebrew word is of a cool Spirit. Sedatus animo, slow,
deliberate composed, not hot which makes men quick and sudden in their
resolves. Theodosius that famous Christian Emperor, noted for great wisdom
also, did that on the sudden in a passion, that he had cause to repent of ever
after. To be flow to wrath argues great understanding in the wise man's account,
Prove. 14.29. It is reported of Heraclius the Treasurer of the said Theodosius,
that giving so far way to his passion; as when the Saracens, who were hired by
the Emperor for the war came to demand their pay, he refused payment, and
instead thereof; passionately called them Arabic Dogs, which so incensed them
that they immediately set up their own B^nnets, which gave occasion to those
infernal Locusts that came first out of the bottomless pit, to overspread the
face of the Christian World, miserably tormenting the Inhabitants thereof, for
an hundred and fifty years, where by the way may be noted, hard words are the
worst kind of pay, can be made to such as venture their lives for the service
of the commonwealth. The same befell Rehoboam, whose hard, proud and haughty
words, were answered by a shower of as hard stones, that fell heavy on the
bones of his officers.

But to return, much deliberation in public affairs, specially if the case be
about matters of moment, is rarely found a disadvantage. As was said of that
old Roman, Fabius Maximus. Cunct ando restituit rem, he repaired that by
deliberation, and prudent delaying of matters, which some others had almost
ruined, by their precipetant and heady adventures. The like deliberation is of
use in the enacting, as well as in the executing of all civil Constitutions
and Decrees: Therefore wise Lawyers have been always wont to account Laws of
difficult Terms, and doubtful event, had need be deliberately thought upon,
before they be enacted, or put in execution. Isreal's best venison was that
which was longest in preparing.

2. The second branch of the Application may respect those honored persons,
who are like now, or hereafter may be called unto, or continued by this days
Election in the place of Government, as Leaders of this our Tribe. I shall crave
leave to suggest thus much unto you from the words of the text, what God does,
and man may justly expect from you, sc. That you be found such as have
understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do. The title here
given, is a sufficient intimation thereof. The rest of your Brethren here
present, are but inferior Members of that body, of which you are the Head,
instruments subservient to your direction and guidance. The foot moves not, the
hand is not lifted up without the order and command of the head. You are the
pins on whom hangs all the glory of the house of Israel, therefore it behooves
you to think of the charge that lies upon you. We look upon you in this your
capacity, like the four and twenty Elders, casting their Crowns at the feet of
him that sits upon the Throne, and ready to receive them only by his
appointment, as intending only to honor him therewith, and not your selves.
They were wont to say amongst the Senators of Rome, viderint Consules, ne quid
detrimenti capiat Respublica, i. e. it is the care of the Consuls, (who had the
executing part of the power of the People put into their hands) to see that the
Commonwealth receive no detriment: I may, yea must add this further to your
selves, ne quid detrimenti capiat Ecclesia, i. e. you are as well to see that
the Church under your charge and care receive no damage or disadvantage.
Consider the extent of your Commission this day to be sealed unto you, both by
God and his people. Know therefore,

The concernments belonging unto you in reference to Israel, are either
Ecclesiastical or Political, the latter are Civil, Military,
so that as you see, they are threefold, Sacred, Civil, and Military, I shall
briefly as the matter will allow, touch upon all three in their order.

1. The sacred, or Religious concernments of Israel are under your care and
conduct. Imperative as they say, though not Elicitive. I need not take up time
(it were not to spend but mispend it) in proving, that civil Rulers have to do
in matters of Religion. That Text alone, Mat. 22.37. were enough to prove it,
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and
with all thy might, etc. Love is ready to summon in all the powers and
faculties within its reach, to attend the will of him whom it loves, as its
last end, it was said by the Prophet, the Merchandise of Tire, shall be
holiness to the Lord, may it not as well be said, that the Magistracy of Rome,
as the Merchandise of Tire, was to be Holiness to the Lord. The Scepter of the
Man child, by virtue of his subordination to the Lord Jesus, was to rule all
Nations with the Rod of iron, as it is said, Rev. 12. If any should say, the Lord
Jesus does not need the help of the Civil Magistrate to carry on his Kingdom,
I answer, although he does not need it (for he did carry on the work of his
Kingdom when all the civil Magistrates of the world were combined against it)
that will not excuse Magistrates for nonperformance of their duty when ever
they are empowered thereunto: To all such it may be said, as Mordecai said to
Esther, who knows but thou art come to the Kingdom for such a time as this;
but if any desire further satisfaction in this point, they may consult the
learned discourses of all Protestant Writers upon this Subject, whether
Lutheran, or Calvinist, Gerhard, Grotius, sundry Episcopal learned Divines of
our own Nation, as well as those of our own place, and persuasion, treating of
this Subject, specially Mr. Nigh, his learned Defense of the lawfulness of the
Oath of Supremacy, and power of the Civil Magistrate in Ecclesiastical Affairs,
and subordination of Churches thereunto, whom I the rather choose to instance
in, because he has extracted the quintescence and marrow of all our modern
Divines, whether of the Episcopal, or other persuasions, and one also never
suspected of, or condemned for, deviating, declining, or receding from former
principles by him self taken up, which it may be others as innocent, are yet
not altogether to free from the suspicion of: that so it may appear that all
sober Divines do jointly agree in this conclusion. Nor is this Doctrine any new
upstart invention, but a Truth owned by the Doctors and Fathers of the Church,
as they are called in Constantines time. That first and famous Christian
Emperor, was wont to say of himself that he was (...) as others were (...) Yea
Paul himself declare it not only to be his judgment but the mind of God
himself, in those direct and plain Texts of the Epistles to the Romans, Chap.
13.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. 1 Timothy 2.2. And Peter also in his Epistle Chap. 2.13: But
to prevent any mistake here, by speaking more particularly about the civil
Magistrates Power and duty concerning matters of Religion, it may be reduced to
these three heads. 1. The establishing the true Religion where it never was. 2.
The maintaining and upholding of it where it is. 3. The reforming it where it
is grown corrupt.

1. Concerning the first of these; It is made by learned and judicious Writers,
one of the undoubted Rights of Sovereignty to determine what Religion shall be
publicly professed and exercised within their Dominions. sci. what in their
Consciences is most agreeable to the word of God, and the divine Law. What
reason can be rendered why the Popish Religion is professed only in Spain, the
Lutheran in some Kingdoms and Provinces of Europe, the Calvinists in others;
an indulgence granted in some Kingdoms to differing professions, but that the
chief Rulers, Kings or Princes of State are this or that way affected? Why else
do we in New England that profess the doctrine of Calvin, yet practice the
discipline of them called Independent, or Congregational Churches, but because
the authority of the Country is persuaded, that to be most agreeable to the
mind of God.

This is not to be understood, as if it were to belong to civil Rulers to
obtrude upon the Consciences of their Subjects and people, the profession of
what doctrine or Religion they please; but that no persuasion in Religion can
orderly become the public profession of any people or person, without liberty
first obtained from the supreme Rulers of the Nation. For it is a most certain
truth, as Lactantius speaks, there is nothing so voluntary as Religion, which
without the wills consent is nothing. Another says also, he that is compelled
by law to serve God in this or that way serves not God but his prince. The work
of Rulers is therefore re^ her to keep men from doing evil then to compel
them to do good. Thus did the first Christian Emperors of old, shut up the
Idol Temples, not suffering their subjects to walk on in the practice of their
former abominable Idolatryes, but not compel them to embrace the Christian
Faith. As did Ezekiah and Josiah before break down the Grove and other Idols,
not allowing their people publicly to commit Idolatry, and if they did compel
those of their own nation to attend the Celebration of the passover and the
like, it was because that worship was (...) literally enjoined that people, and
they were to be cut off that did omit it. But under the Gospel the Worship of
God is more spiritual, and requires Faith in the heart before the service of
the outward man can be acceptable. Now Faith is a persuasion wrought in the
heart, not engendered by outward compulsion, as says Gregory, Nova et inaudita
est illa praedicatio, qua verberibus exigit Fidem. But more time need not be
taken up in speaking to that, which is taken for granted on all hands.

2. In the second place therefore, the same power is necessarily required to
uphold and maintain the true Religion, which was at first to establish it, that
is to maintain the public profession thereof. Creation and providence are the
issues of the same Being and Power. If the true Religion had not been publicly
professed without the countenance of the civil Power, it is not like to be
professed longer then the same power will give allowance or Command or
encouragement. Now this is or ought to be done,

1. By taking care that public Ministers be sent forth to preach the word of
truth, administer the Sacraments, and celebrate all other rites and Ordinances,
that do concern the true Religion. Thus did Jehosophat, in the 2. Cron. 17.7,
8, 9. So did the ancient Christian Emperors by their Laws and Edicts, with
other civil Constitutions. The Church by some is compared to hangings, the
Commonwealth to the walls; the Church is the fruitful Vine, the Commonwealth
the prop that supports it.

2. By providing maintenance, and other suitable encouragements for such
Ministers in all their administrations, according to the Apostolical practice
Act. 6.24. and precept 1. Cor 9.5.6, 7, 9. etc. For it will necessarily hold,
that if Ministers by divine Institution may expect maintenance and
encouragement, who should take care to see it done but the Rulers of Christian
commonwealths. God always allotted a portion for those that ministered about
holy things, both before the Law, and under the Law. Abraham as a man of war
paid tithes to Melchizedek as a public Minister of God in that place, where he
obtained his victory, They will have an hard Task that will undertake to prove
that Tithes in some sense are not moral, as may be seen by the learned
Mountagues discourse against Seldom about that Subject. But it is sufficient
for our present purpose that those Texts under the New Testament conclude it a
moral duty, with many other that might be cited, to take care they be
maintained,

3. By setting up and encouraging the Schools of Learning, for he that wills
the end is supposed also to will the means. It is not meet that the Israelits
should always go down to the Philistines to sharpen their weapons, which they
are to use in fighting against the enemies of Gods Church, or for whetting
their tools they must use in tilling Gods field. Christian Emperors of old
were wont to adorn Christian Temples with the Spoils of the Gentiles. Julian
complains that the Christians beat the heathen Philosophers with their own
weapons, therefore did he subtly contrive to deprive the Christians of the
benefit of Schools, and other means of humane Learning, thinking that to be
the likelyest means whereby to overthrow the Christian Religion. It Is true that
the defect of Learning in the Apostles was supplied by the extraordinary gifts
of the Holy Ghost, but since those gifts are ceased, because other ordinary
means may be sufficient for that end. God made Manna to follow the children of
Israel from heaven, till they had opportunity to sow and reap in the land of
Canaan, after which time the Manna ceased. While Israel was without a teaching
Priest, and without a Law, they were also without the true God, 2. Chron. 15.2.
while the Scriptures were locked up in an unknown Language, how can they be
opened without the key of humane Learning, or rightly divided without the study
of the Workman, as the Apostle speaks. 2. Tim. 2.15. Of old time they had
Colleges and Schools of Learning, of which Elijah and Elisha were Presidents,
and Overseers. What advantage the reformed Churches have had by their Princes
and States erecting Schools of Learning in their several Dominions, is so
well known that there needs no more to be said about this Argument. What
considerable benefit this place has already reaped, and as it is hoped may
further receive by this one College in the Country, founded, and hitherto
carried on by the pious care and religious endeavore of our former worthy
Leaders, and other liberal Benefactors, is sufficiently demonstrable to the
view of the World.

4. By the calling of Synods or Councils, as need may require to discuss
points of Religion in controversy, and to hear matters of differences and
determine them, and be of use when ever there is want or truth or peace in the
Churches. Some are ready to attribute too much to the power or use of Synods,
which make others, or the other hand ascribe too little to them. For although
civil Rulers are not absolutely tied up to their determination further then
they are grounded upon the word of God. As if the secular powers were always
bound to submit to the decrees of the Ecclesiastical Senate, as is practiced in
the Church of Rome, yet if orderly called, and duly managed, of what great use
they have been in all ages, and still may be, the experience of all times can
abundantly testify, as the learned Crakenthorpe in his elaborate discourse
about the first general Council has fully evidenced; nor can it ever be made
out, that any general Council, where all the Requisites essential to such a
Council were found, have erred in their decrees about any matter of Faith, or
fundamental Article thereof, as the same Author does assert.

For although what Grotius says cannot be denied, that the Sovereign power is
not tied to the judgment of Physicians in the case of a wound, nor of a
Geometrician in the measuring of Land, yet is he much mistaken that from thence
shall infer, that the civil power need make no use, or can receive no benefit
or direction about such cases in question, before he gives his final
determination in and about the same. The priests lips should preserve
knowledge; and of old they were in all arduous and difficult cases to repair to
the Priest, and to the Judge that should be in those days. Deuteronomy 17.9.12. By
proportion of that Text, it is no hard matter to gather what is the use and
benefit, and what the power of Synods in a christian state.

5. By preventing the spreading and growth of corrupt Doctrine and heretical
Opinions: I confess it is not easy to hit the joint in this controversy yet
for the satisfaction of their minds, that may need or desire, I shall adventure
to say something to this question, and that in this order, laying down some
propositions that may by degrees lead unto a meet conclusion about Toleration
or Suppression of differing Opinions: for some men will call that Religion
Heresy, in which good Christians are bound to worship the God of their
Fathers: Therefore all that formerly has, or at present does pass up and down
the World under the name of Heresy, Schism or corrupt Doctrine, is not
without due ground, so to be judged and condemned. I shall not here entertain
you with any sharp invective, or declaiming against a boundless toleration of
all Religions, least it should be an insinuation; that some here present are
inclined that way, which I believe there was never any occasion given to
suspect.

1. In the first place therefore, I shall lay down this as an undoubted
Position, that it is scarce possible to give any general rule about Toleration,
that will suit with all times and places, but much must be left to the prudence
and discretion, and religious care of Civil Rulers. A weak body, as some have
said, ought not to suffer that out of charity to another which a stronger may;
and it may as truly be said, that a stronger need not to suffer that which a
weaker must, which some say, was the case of Holland, with the rest of the
united Provinces, who have softened the sharpness of all differences about
Religion found in other places so troublesome, by a more general freedom for
the exercise of differing Religions, or differing persuasions about Christian
Religion, or connivance at them, then other States judged meet, that they might
thereby gain the more hands to strengthen themselves against their common
Enemies.

The rule given by some others, that whatever may consist with the interest of
Religion and safety of the Commonwealth, is too indefinite: For if the Civil
Rulers will say that then it is not safe to allow any to dissent from the
public profession established by Law, what shall become of the weak and
infirm, they must of necessity be driven to suffer shipwreck of their
Consciences, and of their lives and estates, it being impossible that all
Consciences can quietly submit to the Religion of the state. Doubtless as much
tenderness as may should be used out of pity to the infirmities of men's
understandings, seeing in many things we sin or offend all. That golden Rule
laid down by our Savior is of excellent use if it were attended, Alteri ne
feceris, etc. to do no otherwise to others then we would they should do to us
if we were in their condition. And indeed it may seem not only unchristian, but
very unreasonable, to deny that to others which our friends and our selves
have, or may desire, or need from others, a special Law of Humanity toward
strangers was given by God to the Children of Israel, from the consideration of
what had been their own case in Egypt before.

2. Such Opinions in Doctrine, or professions and practices in Religion, as are
attended with any foul practical evils as most Heresies have been, ought to be
prohibited by public Authority, and the broachers or fomenters of them
punished by penal laws, according to the nature of the offense, like other
fruits of the flesh. God never appointed a Sanctuary for Satan, nor City of
Refuge for presumptuous offenders. As Joab was taken from the Horns of the
Altar, whether he was fled, so let all such heretical transgressors, that fly
for refuge to the Altar of their Consciences; seeing their practices and
Opinions argue rather searedness, then tenderness of Conscience, and therefore
such weeds justly deserve the exercise of his power to root them up that bears
not the Sword in vain. The deeds of the Nicholaitans, every good Christian, be
he an head or member of the Christian state, ought to have, and endeavor the
extirpation of such roots of bitterness out of the Garden of God.

3. Any Doctrine undenyably tending to the disturbance of the civil state,
ought to be suppressed, and the public profession, yet by civil Authority
forbidden, and the disobedient to be proceeded against, as wholesome and meet
Laws provide in such cases, for Salus populi est suprema lex; the safety of the
people is the supreme Law our Savior neither preached nor practiced sedition,
no more should any of his followers: his command was to give unto God the
things that are Gods, and to render to Caesar the things that are Cesars, Mat.
22.21. Therefore for all known incendiaries in Church or state; such as are the
Jesuits, Munsterian Anabaptists, Wolves in Sheeps-cloathing, Devils in humane
shape, who ever pleaded for their exemption from penal Laws, but those that
are, or would, if they might be like unto them. Likewise all such as expose the
religion professed by the countenance of public Authority to vulgar contempt
may justly fall under the same condemnation: concerning these as well as the
former, I may say to the civil Rulers of the Country as David said to Solomon,
in another case, Thou art a wise man, and know what thou ought to do unto
them, 1 King. 2.9.

4. For simple Heresy, or misbelieving any truth in Religion, though
fundamental, if not seditiously or Blasphemously held forth, there seems
neither rule from the word of God, nor reason from the nature of the thing, why
any should undergo capital punishment. Nor does it appear to be the judgment
of the best Protestant Writers, that they should be so proceeded against. They
that desire to understand more of this Subject may peruse the Writings of the
most judicious Professors of Divinity in the famous Universityes of Protestant
Nations, whither Lutheran or Calvinist, as may be seen in the Common places and
Disputations of Gerrard, Vostius. Amesius and others. The Law in Deuteronomy. 13. will
not reach the case, which seems to respect Apostasy or Blasphemy rather then
heresy simply considered. Yet, as one says, men cannot be too cautelous and
wary how they make others in that damnable Series seriously and solemnly
professing the contrary, yea by experience it has commonly been found that
such proceedings have in the issue tended more to the advantage of error, and
prejudice of truth then otherwise..

The Magdeburgenses and Osiander tell us in their centuryes, what was the
success of capital punishment infl^cted upon the Priscillianites, hac ratione
haerisis haec magis confirmata, quam extincta fuit. As they speak out of
Sulpitius Severus, sc. that Heresy (in it self abominable and odious enough)
was rather confirmed then extinguished thereby: some have thought there has
been no better effect of the same course in following times. ad judicium
sanguinis, said Luther, territus sum, etiam ubi meritum abundat; Luther wanted
no fervor against false doctrine, yet was slow to consent to sanguinary
punishment, left occasion be taken thereby in following times to slaughter the
innocent sheep of Christ, as came to pass amongst the Jews of old, and since
among the Papists. Yet notwithstanding there is no doubt but the civil power
may and ought to non-licentiate him that shall take upon him as a Physician to
prescribe to the people poisonous Drugs instead of wholesome food or physic,
although they may not punish him that shall declare that to be his opinion,
unless he offend the Laws by his irregular manner of so doing. Doubtless they
that are nursing Fathers of their people, ought as well to prevent poison as to
provide bread for them: which seems to be all that was intended by the
authority of the Country in the Laws formerly made against Heretics. If the
owner or keeper of the Vineyard shall make a thorn hedge about it, if any man
by violence breaking in, shall wound or destroy himself, where will the blame
be found, in them that made the hedge so sharp and strong, or in them that
attempted without leave violently to break in? Those heretics, says Voetius,
that shall deny the fundamentals of the Christian Religion, Arrians and
Socinians, Conventus little nec publici, nec privato-publici sunt ferendi, if
with public safety they may be forbidden. Their religion, as he speaks being
little better then refined Mehumitanisme, directly tending to the destruction
of souls.

It was a notable Stratagem Amphilochius used to convince Theodosius the
Emperor, of his duty in suppressing the Conventieles or meetings of the
Ar^ians. The good Bishop refused to salute the Emperors son, newly also
created Emperor, which Theodosius his father taking ill, as if he had
forgotten his duty, whereupon, the said Amphilochius returned upon him with
these words, " vides, O Imperator quam aegre ignominiam filii tui patiare, imo
vero illis, qui in illum insultant, vehementer sucoenses: credere igitur mihi
ve^im, hujus Vniversitatis Rectorem Deum, eos qui contra filium suum unigenitum
loquuntur Blasphemias, itidem detestari et tanquam ingratos erga Servatorem et
Patronem suum odio prosequi, i. e. Thou see O Emperor, how hardly thou art
able to bear the reproach done to thy son, yea thou art vehemently offended
with them that insult over him, I would have you believe me, that God the Ruler
of this Universe does in like manner detest them that speak Blasphemies against
his only begotten son, and does hate them as very ungrateful to their Savior
and Deliverer. Whereupon the Emperor forthwith enacted a Law, that forbad any
assemblyes should be held by the heretics.

5. In the last place, for those Opinions which are inconsistent with the truth
of Religion, and power of godliness, and where those that profess them may in
charity be supposed to have in them aliquid Dei, as Calvin, or aeliquid
Christi, as Bucer was wont to say, the case is far otherwise. For though I
would not be understood to plead for a Toleration of the least evil, (for all
error is in it self a fruit of the first sin, and part of the curse) any
further then necessity requires there should be an allowance made for humane
infirmityes in this state of imperfection. That which is wanting says Solomon,
cannot be numbered, as that which is crooked cannot be made straight. Yet why
there may not be an indulgence, or connivance at them that in some things (not
fundamental) may not be so far persuaded of the truth of every thing professed
or practiced in the Religion established, as to join with others in all outward
acts of worship, being in other respects orderly and peaceable, but desire to
worshsp God according to their own persuasion, I understand not. Paul was
permitted to dwell quietly in his own hired house, no doubt but that he
worshipped God, according to the Institution of the Gospel. Act. 28, 30. For as
Magistrates and civil Rulers should not Gallio like, let truth and error run
together in a race, catch it who can; so neither should they Gyant-like strain
up all under their power to their own measure, or bringing them down to their
own size, as was said of Procrustes, that used so to deal with his Guests. It
seems not equal to force all others to keep our Pace. Besides, they may be
thought to dispute under too much disadvantage, when they know all the
Arguments of their adversaries will conclude in Ferio whatsoever the medium may
be. Or to what end should men be put to produce either Scripture or reason to
confirm the Religion they profess, if as Jacobus Acontius says out of
Tertullian, they can expect no other Answer, then from the executioner or
officer of Justice.

3. The third and last branch of the Magistrates care about Religion, is to
reform it when it is grown corrupt, or is in tendency thereunto.

In clearing of which I need not stay long, this part of their power so
undeniably following upon the other two ex natura rei. To whom does it belong
more properly to repair the house, then to them that first laid the foundation
and set it up. As the first famous Kings of Israel prepared the matter, and
erected the Temple of God (...) Jerusalem, so the following Kings took it to be
their duty to repair and put it in order again.

Solomon put out Abatha^ as an unmeet person from the office of the priesthood,
no reason can be rendered why the Kings and Princes of our times may not do the
like if the case be the same, or if the like unworthiness be found in the
persons of them that minister about holy things. Idolatry was suppressed by
Asa, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah and Josiah, and the worship of God restored to the
first Institution. What has been done by Christian Emperors and Kings in all
former ages to our present days, is well known by the History of those times,
by the Laws, Edicts and Constitutions left upon Record, enacted by their power.
But still we must keep in our minds, that the power so exerted by the civil
Magistrate, supreme o^ subordinate, is to be understood, cumulative not
privative, so they that take it to be their duty to abolish Catholicorum
Hierarchiam, do not in the stead thereof establish Poli icorum (...) Uzz ah
must not meddle with the exercise of the Priests office, although he may and
^ught to require those that enjoy such offices to perform their duty. As Paul,
or the Collossians may or should exhort Archippus to fulfill the ministry he
has received in the Lord to fulfill it The Magistrate may require, and
command it, and prevent the corruption of the Church, by removing such, and
substituting others in their room, and in their stead.

2. We are in the next place to consider of the political concernments of those
who are the Heads of Israel, the which are of two sorts, Civil or Military. i.
e. take care it be done by them whom it concerns.

1. For the civil concernments of the Le^ders in Israel, there are exigen^s in
reference to this as well as the former, that require much prudence and skill
to know what Israel ought to do in and about the same.

There are two things principally to be attended here, 1. The moderation of the
civil power to a due Temperament. 2. The faithful improvement of it for the
public good. For the first, it is very true which a learned person observes,
that power is a l^quor very apt to overflow, i^ what vess^l soever it is put,
unless it be temp^red with a due proportion of Wisdom and Goodness, and is apt
though never so necessary in it self, to prove pernicious and destructive to
them that are concerned in it. It is very observable that God gave Israel Laws,
Judicial as well as Ceremonial, leaving as little as might be to the
arb^triment of civil Rulers. And that has been the continual care of prudent
Law givers, to abate the height of Sovereignty by a meet Temperament of some of
the inferior Sort. Such were the Ephori at Sparta of old, the Tribunes at
Rome, and the Delegates of people in most modern Kingdoms and States, as well
as amongst our selves. And it is noted by a very judicious Interpreter, that
when the people of Israel would not be satisfied without a king, God ordered
Samuel to write the manner of the Kingdom in a Book. 1. Sam. 10.25. "That is
the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom to temper Monarchy with a liberty
befitting his own people, and with equity toward a Nation, which of its own
free will did choose a King, and with a benignity of Government of Brethren of
the same race, to withstand the abuse of an absolute power, which the peoples
blind desire might have caused the new King to have run into, As Diodate speaks
upon that Text

As for the improvement of this power, the titles given to such Rulers in the
Text, and other places of the Scripture, as a sufficient intimation of the duty
of those that are called to the exercise thereof,

As they are heads, so they ought to go before the members of the civil body by
their pious and grave examples. as well as by their prudent Counsels, and their
just and wholesome Laws: for it is true which one has longum iter per praecepta,
breve and efficax per exempla, examples of Rulers are always observed to take
more place with their people then their precepts. Posterity will as much honor
the p^e^y of him that left a good pattern of honesty or bounty, as they will the
wisdom of him that left a good body of just and useful Laws. And some Princes
have inherited the title and surname of good and liberal, as well as for other
perfections of wisdom or justice. This way also is more fruitful in the
propagating and increasing virtues, Author est b^norum consequentium, qui bonum
relinquit exemplum. As on the other hand a people are apt to be leavened and
hardened in vice by the evil example of their Governors. Have any of the
Rulers believed on him, as they speak i^ John? you know David would not yield
to an unequal Distribution of the body, although thereby greater advantage
might have accrued to his own person, by which self-denying example, so good a
custom; or standing Law in Israel had its first original. We know also how
much benefit has followed such Examples in Nehemiah and others, who have been
a means to provoke others to the like acts of goodness and charity by their
practices.

They are as Pillars that uphold the Foundation of the state, which in a sense
may be said to be built thereon. David complains of the dissolution of the
state in those times, before he was called to bear up the pillars of it. Rulers
indeed if they are built like arches, that clasp in all round together, the
more weight there is laid upon them, the firmer they stand, but being
disunited, or not joynted in well together, they weaken the authority of each
other and hasten the ruin of the whole. It was noted of Themistocles and
Aristides, who always had their private quarrels at home, that when they were
sent abroad upon public service, they never carried their particular co^tests
b^yond the bounds of their own Country: a commendable pattern for others to
imitate. who as they are called also, Corner stones ought carefully to
endeavor not only to keep up, but unite the whole building together.

They are the Watchmen set upon the Gates of Jerusalem, to descry danger afar
off, which has its truth in reference to civil Magistrates, as well as
spiritual Watchmen, by the consent of the best Interpreters.

It is not safe to give false Alarms, because it may occasion true ones to be
the less regarded; nor yet to give an uncertain sound, for who then can be
prepared for the Battle? yet in such cases a godly jealousy should not be
complained of, if a Watchman shall cry an Enemy, when a Friend comes, he
ought more to be commended for his care, then blamed for his error, as some
have said.

They are nursing Fathers to Israel, and Physicians to Gilead; it is the office
of the head, not only to prevent the evil that may befall the other members of
the body, but also to heal it: And therefore they must be endued with much
patience to bear with the frowardness of those to whom they stand so related.
Neither must they heal the wound slightly, for fear of the smart, for sometimes
it will fall out that impatiens aegrotans crudelem facit medicum.

They are Lawgivers, to prescribe wholesome Laws and Rules of Living; the
Fountains of Justice, whence flow the streams that refresh and make fruitful
the heritage of Israel. Yea, Magistratus est animata Lex, a Ruler is a living
Law. The Law, says one, is an heart without affection, a mind without passion,
a treasurer to keep what we have, and a steward to distribute what we ought to
have. But it had need be considered that the life and virtue of Laws lies in
their execution, therefore the making of more Laws then need or can be
executed, may weaken the authority of them that are in force, and necessary to
be attended. Yea it is found by expeience that lenity in the executing of
Laws, is more hurtful then severity. The best way to keep an instrument in
good tune, is to leave the strings upon a sharp, they being naturally apt to
fall of themselves. And mankind is continually bent to declining. And
Politicians use to account violation of Laws, not so hurtful as
non-execution. In this sense he that is slothful in his work is brother to him
that is a great Waster, Prove. 18 9.

They are Lords, as well as Lawgivers. Nothing more truly denoting Lordship,
then a power to give Laws. No debt is more justly due then Homage tribute to
the Lords of a people, which if it were freely paid, need not be exacted; where
we are required to render to God the things that are Gods, in the same clause
it is added likewise, to Caesar the things that be Cesars. Yet the less of the
dead fly of covetousness that is found in the ointment, the more precious will
the savor thereof be found. A wise citizen of Genoa once told an Agent of the
Duke of Millayn, to whom at that time they of Genoa were Subjects, that they
should deal with their Tributaries, as men use to do with the herb Bazil,
which being gently stroked, yields a pleasant savor, but being pressed, sends
forth an unsavory smell.

In fine, they are Gods, whose wisdom and goodness they ought to imitate as
well as his power: He by his wise providence maintains a sweet harmony in the
whole world, though made up of contrary Elements; all which notwithstanding
peace and concord is maintained in the universe, by a wise and equal
temperament of those several qualities.

There need be no exact enquiry into the crotchets of this or that persons
particular fancy, so they be ordered to keep in tune with their companions.

There is a Town in Germany called Mindin, which the Hystory of that Country
tells us, it received its name, from an agreement in that place betwixt the
Emperor and some of the neighbor Princes; the name signifying mine and thine.
It were well for the Christian world if there had been an occasion to build
more such like Cities; but this iron age has been more successful, or rather
fatal in pulling down the old, then in building up new Cities. It were the
presage of happy times at hand, if once there were a good agreement established
between the power of the Rulers, and liberty of their Subjects, that neither
might increase upon the others rites and liberties. Thus much of the civil
affairs relating to the Heads of Israel.

2. In the second place, the Military concernments of Israel call for no little
prudence and skill, sometimes as much stress and difficulty is found here as in
the former. Intricasies may be so interwoven, that it may prove very difficult
to know what Israel ought to do. The Church is sometimes compared to a Lilly
among Thorns; there will need Gloves of iron to handle such thorns and pricking
Briars. These may want also as well courage to know how, as wisdom to know
what to do. Dolus an virtus -- yea sometimes God may be provoked to vex a
people with all adversity. He may raise such a tempest in a Nation, as both
head and Members may be at their wits end, not knowing what to do. Hence it
has been found in former times, that no manner of persons ever gained more
interest in the hearts of People, then those that have manfully undertook, and
successfully accomplished their wars. Gideon is a Judge by Gods Election, and
might have been a King by the peoples but David must be a King by the call and
consent of both. In former times, none were Kings but such as had been
Captains, they being accounted the fittest to govern a People in time of peace,
that had led them, or saved them in time of War. That valiant achievement of
Saul against the Amonites reconciled him to all his People with the highest
degree of acceptance, and stopped the mouths of all the Sons of Belial that
were opened against him, at his first call to the Kingdom. Yet will it be
found a truth, what that warlike people of Rome were wont to say, Parvi sunt
foris arma, nisi est consilium domi. I shall only therefore here crave leave to
commend some considerations to your acceptance on this account, as are obvious
to them that have had the least acquaintance with the sacred Hystory.

1. It is never safe to take a Dog by the ears: so Solomon tells us, Prove.
26.17. that is to meddle with an unnecessary strife, or begin a War without
just ground. This is one part of the power of the Sword, which as the
Magistrate bears not in vain, so neither must he take it in vain. for he that
so takes the Sword, as our Savior speaks, Mat. 26.52. may expect to perish by
the Sword: there is nothing more necessary then self preservation; and our
friends as our Country are part of our selves. Noc is actual confederation
always necessary for taking up Arms in the behalf of our friends, as appears
by the Instance of Abraham and Lot, yet had there need be great care had, that
an unnecessary war be not undertaken, for the War is on one side an heinous
evil or Murder, on both it is a Judgment.

2. War ought not to be made without good advice, Prove. 20.18. and 24.6. which
is to be understood as well of the managing, as of the first engaging in a War.
Josiah by over hasty resolves engages himself and his people in a fatal War,
which proved the ruin of both. It Is true, when a Nation or people are ripe for
a judgment, God does judicially bring it upon them, yet according to the
mediate causality, it may be the imprudencies, indiscretion, and want of Faith
in Gods promises, not asking counsel at Gods Oracle, that may be the immediate
cause. David though he had always managed his war with the greatest success,
yet he may seem the most timorous warrior in the World, but it was from an
holy fear; he never daring to enter or begin a Battle where he was not sure of
God to be his Second, or rather his Leader, Therefore we find that he made
more use of Gods Ephod, then of Goliahs Sword. Gideon though in Gods account a
mighty Man of valor, yet to his own sense seems a very fearful and weak man,
because his dependence was upon Gods word, more then his own valor.

3. Offer violence to no man, Luke. 3.14. a necessary rule for all men of war
to walk by; so then we must not do wrong to the innocent be they Indians or
English. David was in a temptation to do wrong to the inocent in Nabals
family, by having the sword in his hand, but he blessed God for the advice sent
him in the mouth of a woman, which prevented his unsheathing it against the
innocent.

4. Let not him that puts on his harness boast himself as he that puts it
off. 1. Kings. 20 10.11. It is not the wisest way to divide the Bears skin,
before the bear be killed. They that overcome before they begin to fight, never
may have cause to boast of their victory. Upon serious thoughts the sad losses
and slaughter that have befaln this poor Country, in the present war, can be
imputed to nothing more then to the contempt of our enemies; or overweening
thoughts of our own skill and courage. It is never good to despise a small
enemy.

5 Let them that undertake a War first sit down and count whither they can
with ten thousand, deal with them that come against them with twenty thousand.
Luke. 14.31. The Israelites in the wilderness, and the Jews in Jeremiahs time
will needs stand it out with their enemies, and try the battle, when they have
neither promise nor probability of success. The advice which once Herennius in
Italy gave to his Countrymen is very considerable, the substance of which was
that they should deal courteously with their enemies (some of whom they had at
that time in their hands) if they feared ^h^y might not safely destroy them,
and thereby draw upon themselves the hatred of a people too hard for them.
Sometimes it may be much better to ask Counsel at Abel, and end the matter
without blood, then to let the young men (as Abners phrase is) play with the
sword, which may prove bitterness in the end. Sometimes a victory will scarce
countervail the charge or the hazard and difficultyes it may be accompanied
with, which made a Prince once return this sorrowful reply to one that did
congratulate his Victory, that such an other would have undone him. Such is the
solemn Dispensation of God to our selves in the present war with the Indians,
that we must say, the God of our Salvation has not answered us, but by
terrible things in righteousness. And we may commend it to posterity, as
sometimes was said by the Historian multo sanguine ac vulneribus ^a victoria
stetit i. e. we must write upon it, that our victoryes have cost us much blood
and many wounds. But the Almighty the Lord of Hosts can turn New-Englands
B^n^ni into a Benjamin, which he grant for his mercyes sake.

6. Wisdom is better then weapons of war, for wisdom delivered the city when
the strength of the Inhabitants failed. And wisdom will direct when the iron is
blu^t Jo^b deserved to be captain more for his conduct then his courage, though
he were not defective in the latter. And may it not be said of many of our
young men, that have to sadly fallen by the edge of the Sword of late, that it
was for want of something else, more then for lack of courage.

It being observed eminently how the old inmate valor of the English nation
still lives in their posterity of which Com^es once said, that there was no
nation more greedy of Battle, nor more impatient of delays that way then the
English.

As Arrows in the hand of a mighty man, so are Children of the youth, says the
Psalmist, psalm. 127.4. and the prophet Zech. 9.13. speaks of fi^ling the bow
with Ephraim, now the reason why the Arrow misses the mark most usually is, in
not taking right aim, or in not sending forth the Arrow with meet strength.
Our Children blessed be God, have not been afraid to speak with the Enemy in
the Gate, yet has death strangly found them unawares, not allowing them
liberty to bid defiance to their Enemies, sheltered by the covert of the woods,
while themselves lay in open view of danger.

7. Looking up to God, who is the Lord of Hosts, he turns the scale of victory
to which side he pleases. He taught David's hands to War, and his fingers to
fight, he was a man of War from his Youth, experienced in all feats of Arms,
difficulties of Wars, hazard of Battle, and danger of secret Ambushments, yet
was he always fearful of encountering until he saw God marching before him in
the head of his Army, 1 Chronicles. 14, 15. He was designed of God to cut down the
Trees of the Wilderness that overshadowed the Vine brought out of Egypt, which
never thrived nor became very fruitful till David had the pruning of it, or the
dressing of the Ground where it was planted.

Those that are Leaders of Israel, whether in things Civil or Military, have
need of one other gift also besides wisdom and courage, and faith in Gods
promises, viz. Patience, that after they have done the will of God, and served
their Generation, they may expect their reward from God, and not from men.
David so found it that upon every occasion his people were ready either to fall
from him, or arm against him; which made him bless God for keeping him from the
strivings and tumults of the people, as well as from the raging of his Enemies
Qui regit, said Luther, signum est in quod Satan omnia jacula dirigit.
Magistrates are as the Butts against which Satan casts all his Arrows. However,
it is their duty to continue constant in their service: and if they, after all
their labor, and difficulties, and hazards of all sorts, wherein they may have
ventured their lives far for the good of others, they come to be crowned with
Thorns instead of Laurel. It is no more then what the chief Captain of our
Salvation underwent before them. But thus much may suffice for the second
Branch of the Application, respecting such as may be called to supply the place
of heads in Israel.

3. The third and last respects the people in general, or who ever are as
Subjects under the care and conduct of the heads in Israel, to all of whom I
may say, in the words of our Savior, Luke 10.37. go and do you likewise, Here
is a complete pattern in the Text. Do you all say as Hush (...) said, His and
theirs will we be whom God and his people, by this days Election shall
continue in, or call unto the place of Government in this our Tribe. God in his
Providence, has in a way of subordination cast you under the charge of such
heads, as have understanding of the times to know what Israel ought to do, the
inference is both very cogent, and very natural, be you at their command. You
are called to do, not dispute the lawful commands of them who are over you in
the Lord, and that by your own choice. A notable General once going out of
Rome, and making a speech to the people, as the manner then was, before his
departure out of the city, among other things told them, that if any of them
thought themselves wise enough to manage the war, they should go along with
him to assist him by their counsel, or else rule their tongues at home, for he
should manage things not it may be, to their expectation, but as he saw
occasion. It is observed in the history of the flourishing Commonwealth of the
Romans, that much of their success could be ascribed to nothing more, under
the overruling hand of divine providence then the strict discipline and
observation of order amongst them, both civil in the Commonwealth in time of
peace, and military abroad in the time of war. One reports of a Soldier
under Augustus, that in the prosecution of a battle, being about to slay one of
his enemies that then was in his power, hearing a retreat sounded, forbore,
using these words, malem obedire Duci, quam occidere Hostem, accounting the
glory of obedience to his Commander greater then that of victory over his
enemy. Here were a large field to expatiate in if time and other occasions
would give leave to let the discourse run on that subject, but considering in
regard of the present distress of the war that has lain so long upon us, that
something may be expected from me on that account, either to search after the
cause, why all this great evil is come upon us, or by propounding something by
way of remedy, I shall in the next place apply my self to speak something as
God shall assist, that way.

The time was not long since, that we in New England might have said with Job,
the eye that saw us, whither of friends or foes, was ready to bless us, or envy
our prosperity, and might be ready to say as Balam sometimes did, (when his
eyes were opened) as the beholding of the tabernacle of God amongst us, in the
midst of the Standards of our four united Colonyes, encamping round about, How
goodly are thy tents O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles O Israel? Surely there is no
divination against Jacob nor enchantment against Israel. When the Candle of God
shined upon our head, by whose light we walked through darkness. We washed our
steps with butter, and the rock poured us out rivers of oil, as Job speaks.
When God first brought this vine out of another land where it might be much
over shadowed, he cast out the heathen, and planted it, he caused it to take
deep root, and it was ready to fill the land; the hills began to be covered
with the shadow of it, its boughs began to look like goodly cedars: it might
have been said in some sense, that we sent our boughs to the Seas, and our
branches to the rivers: But now we may take up the Lamentation following, Why
are our hedges broken down and the wild boar out of the wood does waste it, and
the wild beast out of the field does devour it? It is burnt with fire, it is
cut down, we perish at the rebuke of his countenance; yet is he the Almighty,
we have looked up to him to behold and visit this vine, but he seems not as yet
willing to look down upon us, he seems only to look on, not willing to engage
in our quarrels, as a wayfaring man that turns aside for a night, as a mighty
man that cannot save. May we not expostulate further with the Psalmist, The
heathen are come into thine inheritance, O God, The dead bodies of thy
Servants, some of them have they given to be meat to the fowls of heaven, the
flesh of thy servants to the beasts of the earth, Their blood have they shed
like water, and there is none to bury them. How long Lord, will thou be angry
for ever, shall thy jealousy burn like fire before thou pour thy wrath upon
the heathen that have not, and will not know thee, nor call upon thy Name? How
has the Lord covered our Sion with a cloud in his anger; how many men and
women here present may say, we are the men and the women, the persons that have
seen affliction by the rod of his wrath. Here is one like old Jacob ready to
say, his gray hairs will be brought down with sorrow to the grave, and that he
shall go mourning thither after the children of his old age. There is another
with Rachel. weeping and will not be comforted, because her children are not:
they are gone into captivity never to return, or removed into the other world
by the sword of the enemy. Does not many an one sit solitary in widdowhood,
that before might take much content in the husband of her youth; that now of
the children which they brought into the world, have none to take them by the
hand. Surely affliction does not spring out of the dust, nor does trouble arise
out of the ground: Doubtless there is some root of bitterness, whence this Gall
and wormwood of affliction has proceeded, After this and that time of seeking
God, we looked for deliverance, and behold trouble came. Many sad troubles have
befaln us in former years, and now one of the sorest is come upon us, the
Sword, and that of a cruel enemy, which uses not to be drawn upon Gods own
people till lesser chastisements have proved ineffectual. But some may say for
what great evil is it, that God has thus changed his hand toward us, and what
may be the cause of this great Anger?

I shall offer my thoughts in a few words.

1. In the first place I can presume none reflect upon the constitution of our
Government, either in Church or State. Wise Master Builders have laid the
foundation of the Building, a better who can desire to be laid, either for the
liberty of the people, or just power of them that rule? Were not our
foundations laid with Sapphires, and our stones with fair colors? Was not the
pattern in the mount, the rule that was attended in the laying of our platform
of Order? Was there any Temptation upon the minds of them that were concerned
in that work to swerve there from to the right hand or to the left. Or if any
disposition, or the least inclination had been discerned that way, had you not
power to have laid those aside and placed others in their room and stead? Much
might be said here if there were need.

2. If you enquire into the succession of our Leaders, and succenturiation of
the persons called to supply the room of them that having served their
generation, are now fallen asleep in the Lord. Have they not acted according to
former principles, and showed the same spirit of Faith and Holiness Zeal for
Gods glory and purity of worship, the same love to God and his ways? Have they
built hay or stubble upon the Foundation formerly laid? It has always been
the humor of those that follow to be ready to complain of the present age
wherein they live, which Solomon checks as proceeding from want of judgment,
Eccless. 7.10. Thou inquire not wisely concerning this matter. Every age does
not yield a David nor a Solomon. Yet it is observed, things went well in Judah
in Rehoboams time. 2 Chronicles. 12.12. so long as the ordinances were duly observed
about Gods worship, good judgment and justice executed, and in many of the
Princes and people good things were found. Much more was this to be
acknowledged in the reign of Asa, and Jehosaphat, though of them it might be
said, non nulla desiderantur. yet they aimed at the best pattern in Sincerity.
Their hearts were perfect with the Lord their God, as was the heart of David
their father. Possibly some upon every Check and frown of providence against
us, may be ready with Saul to call for the Lot to be cast, and will be too
forward without a perfect Lot, to say the cause is in Saul or in Jonathnn, or
in the people. Or else add there is some Achan in the camp, and Jonas in the
Ship, that must immediately be made a sacrifice to divine Justice, as they may
misconceive. We must not lie for God, and need be careful we do not entitle
divine Providence to the mistakes of our minds, and make God speak that by his
providence, which never entered into his heart. Of many outward changes it is
most certain, that we can know neither love nor hatred thereby. Some men may be
ready to say, there is too much indulgence toward men of corrupt minds, and
it is to be feared in some of our Rulers too. It is two to one if some do not
say the contrary. For we know what animadversions have been made by men of
other persuasions, none had need give any occasion to such misconstructions of
Gods hand, by an ungrounded suiting of times with events. Were it not a more
probable way for us to know our own duty, (that is the surest way to know the
mind of God concerning our selves) and engage to do it, letting alone those
things wherein possibly we may not be all of one mind: Forgetting therefore
those things that are behind, as the Apostle speaks, let us set upon those
things that are before us, wherein we are all agreed upon our duty, leaving the
other to the decision of further light and after times. Deus et dies revelabit.
A divided language hindered the building of Babel, and forced the undertakers to
desist. as the Poet expresses it, one says make that rope fast, the other lets
it fly. How then can we conceive it should tend to build up Sion. No doubt but
an unguided and indiscreet zeal in many to promote, or profess their opinions
in the most public manner, has done much mi^chief in the world. And possibly
a like error to suppress them, by undue means has done some. Let no man's
good be evil spoken of, Peradventure some men might have let fall their
opinions or errors, as the Traveller did his cloak, if they had not been too
boisterously and rudely set upon by their opposites. If we find cor bonum and
honestum, as one said of Swenkfeld, though there want caput regulatum Calvini;
we should not cast away the gold because of the dross mingled with it. Although
they are in a great error that out of love to the wine, swallow down the dregs
after it, yet they are in a greater that refuse the good liquor because of the
Lees in the bottom. The best wheat has its chaff. God may reveal more of his
mind to those that differ from us as well as to our selves, could we but have
patience to wait his leisure. And we should the rather commiserate the
infirmityes of other men's understandings, because our own are not as yet
arrived at perfection. So much modesty becomes every Christian, as not to
condemn all he does not understand, so neither to call for fire from heaven
against any that may differ from him. Nor is every one to be taxed as a party
in the case, that is not so forward as another to call for a civil sword, to
end the controversy. Possibly some in the world have already experienced the
verification of our Saviors words, in this sense, they that take up the sword
shall perish with the sword. Paul tells us Romans 14.5.6. he that keeps or
regards the day, regards it to the Lord: He that regards not the day to
the Lord he does not regard it. All man's Consciences are not enlightened in the
same degree. Were it not better to debate the cause with our neighbors, with
those we dissent from, and not so pe^emptorily to entitle Gods truth to the
private apprehensions of our selves, or our own party, in such cases where
possibly the whole truth is not revealed; such proceedings it may be, do but
embolden disengaged slanders by to complain of both, as befell Beza, and
Erastus in their contest about Lay Elders.

4. It cannot be denied but that these corruptions have too too many abounded
amongst us that usually are concomitant, with long peace and outward
prosperity. Standing waters are more apt to corrupt and grow putrid. The best
tempered blades are apt to abate of their edge by disuse or to be eaten with
rust. But are not all scandalous evils been witnessed against by Authority both
Civil and Ecclesiastical, by executing wholesome Laws, and Church censures: are
not evil doers removed, that all Israel may hear, and fear, to run into
presumptuous evils? and are there not many hopeful buds springing up amongst
the rising Generation, on whom that blessed promise, Isai. 44.3. begins to take
place, I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my Blessing upon thy off
spring. Is there not sound in them a great readiness to give up themselves to
the work and service of their Generation. Such as have offered themselves
willingly, and have not loved their lives to the death. You have had Presidents
of your Colonies and Colleges, that have been bred or brought up in the
Country; Has not God in a great measure been ready to make good what he has
spoken by the Prophet Amos I will power of my Spirit upon your young men. And
chosen of such to be Nazarites, is it not thus? If any think I am too long upon
this Theme, they may consider the readiest way to obtain a return of the like
favor, or a continuance of the former, is, thankfully to acknowledge what is,
as well as what has been. He that has done this, can do yet more. God is but
waiting for an opportunity of our thankfulness and humility to turn his face
toward us that we may be saved.

5. Gods providential dispensations toward his People ordinarily hold a
proportion with his former promises: God is ordinarily wont to be with his
People, while they are with him: for although he may out of his absolute
Sovereignty turn aside out of the ordinary road of his dealings without giving
us an account, as he did with Job: And with the whole Church, Psalm. 43.17. All
this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee, nor dealt deceitfully in
thy Covenant, and Gods dispensations toward his Elect in their particular
persons are more various; yet as to Provinces and people that profess his Name
God does usually suit his dispensations with the ways of his people, in all
ages it has been so, specially under the Law: under the Gospel, God has been
pleased to order events something otherwise: though still it is found a truth,
that Godliness has the promise of the life that now is, and that which is to
come; yet may it be observed, that in the primitive times, when was evidenced
the great pourings out of the Spirit, may be greater then ever shall be again
till the general Resurrection; there were never sadder calamities that befell
the people of God in all former ages. Herein was God pleased to discover the
power of his Grace, in not suffering the Bush to be consumed, though the fire
was increased seven fold, even by that admirable way of manifestation of the
faith and patience of the Saints was the World convinced of the truth of the
Gospel, that he who was in them that professed it, was greater then he that was
in the World which opposed it, in that all the World could do, they could not
put a stop to the progress of Christ's Kingdom. Their hearts were then raised
to so eminent a degree of holiness and piety, (being refined by that fire of
persecution from their Dross) that they could discern the least buddings of
sin, and the first rise of any worldly lusts, which made them ready to condemn
themselves under those several fiery Trials in the Furnace of affliction
(wherein they were Gods chosen Jerusalem) as if those judgments of the Sword
of persecution, were only occasioned by some defection in their sincerity, and
^or want of upright walking with God. And sure, there might be cause even for
that virgin and pure Church to condemn themselves for some spots or wrincles in
their garment which is abundantly evident in those expressions uttered in the
Epistles to the seven Churches in Asia: so that their afflictions through the
admirable concurrence of divine providence might happen for correction, as well
as for temptation and trial. If we of this Country, the many Churches here
seated, should look our faces in the Glass, may not we have cause to take up
the like complaint concerning our selves, which they often did, or were bound
to do, Rev. 2.5. They that shall wisely and seriously consider the several
ingredients in this cup of trembling (we have been made all to drink of more or
less) may give a near guess at the disease either we have labored under, or
are running into. It uses to be a rule with the Divine Physician as well as
others obstare principiis, and venienti occurrere morbo. If any dare be
confident to say, they are not far gone of some dangerous Spiritual malady it
self, what if God will have his Servants in the first planting of the Gospel in
the West, have some experience of the like changes with them in the East parts
of the World? or cause it to befall us as it did Nehemiah in the building of the
Temple after the return from Babylon, that they were forced to carry the Weapon
of War in the one hand and the Trowel in the other.

And what if it should be found that Israel has sinned, and it is as yet hid
from our Rulers, as well as from our selves? there has been some things
objected against the proceedings with the Indians; both in times foregoing as
well as later, relating both to the present war, and former peace, of which it
were sad if there were cause to say, Haec dici potuisse, and non potuisse
refelli. But I intend not to meddle with things out of my line, or above my
Sphere. Therefore leaving those things that are yet latent or doubtful, and
come to those things about which we may all agree, I fear, that as before it
has been said by some, God has a controversy with New England, so now that
the rod of affliction, has not only budded and blossomed, but brought forth
its fruit, may we not all conclude, that there are some matters of offense,
that God has against us, that notwithstanding all threatenings, and solemn
warnings both by the word as well as by the works of God, could not be reformed
Therefore God was not willing to lay aside his quarrel against us. And for this
and that transgression would no turn away the punishment of New England. I
shall instance but in two things, as to my own observation, most likely to
render us obnoxious to such severe animadversions from the Almighty, and wherein
we have been, as I apprehend, most apt to offend, 1. Spiritual Pride. 2. A
Spirit of Worldly-mindedness: wishing, that whatever else has been reckoned
amongst provoking evils by other hands upon like occasions; might seriously be
considered and amended.

That which leads me to pitch upon the two forementioned evils, as the
procuring cause of these sad corrective dispensations of God toward us, is
because it is most probable, that it is something, that lies as a worm at the
root and vitals of Religion, threatening and endangering a great decay, and
withering of the power of godliness, that neither civil not ecclesiastical
censures can reach, which is the matter to be reformed, some secret heart
evil, that is likely to bring a Consumption upon the very vitals, and power of
Religion; and such are those two premised evils. For the first of these, viz.

1. Spiritual Pride, it is ready to hide it self like Saul amongst the stuff,
being too often found mingled with good things and commendable virtues, vitia
caetera in peccatis ipsis, superbia in ipsis recte factis timenda, pride is often
to be found in things well done. This sin has that advantage, that it is not
only consistent with, but is apt as it were to spring from our very graces. and
good works, or arise among them, as Tares were found in the field where wheat
was at first sown, and also found growing; men may accidentally come to be
lifted up, upon the consideration of their gifts, parts, privileges, yea
graces and duties well performed. Pride, though no weed else, was found in
Paradise it self, no wonder then if it should be found in the best Churches
upon the Earth.

2. Spiritual pride is an evil, the very best of Gods Children are incident
unto, witness David and Hezekiah, in whom it did not only bud but blossom, and
Paul the very chief of the Apostles, in whom it had some kind of root, and
might have budded, if it had not been nipped by the thorn in the flesh, sent
him in mercy from God, that he might not be exalted above measure, and so fall
into the same condemnation of the Devil.

God will rather have his people poor and humble, then rich and proud, rather
pent up in a corner, then roomthy, and swollen with pride, rather distressed and
oppressed, then enlarged to wandering and security; yea if it be but to prevent
the prevailing, or the appearance of such a distemper. Sero medicina paratur,
etc. therefore God will prevent the first rise of evil in his people; that
there may be no spot found amongst them, so unbecoming his Children.

3. Spiritual pride is a sin very provoking and offensive in the sight of God
He will hold such at a distance, it is not the spot of his Children. David's
Murder and Adultry shall sooner be pardoned without public penance, then his
spiritual pride. There is be compelled to make a public confession and
recantation of this evil, when he sees the Angel standing with a drawn Sword
over Jerusalem. What h^ve these poor sheep done, let thine hand be against me,
and against my fathers house, 2 Samuel 24. Nor can Hezekiahs pride be passed by,
till he humble himself greatly, and all Jerusalem with him, 2 Chronicles. 32.26. Yea
Paul himself shall be buffeted, as well as feel the thorn in the flesh, for the
removal of the badge of this offensive evil.

4. This is not the first time that this sin has been putting up head in
New England, and solemnly testified against in this place; sed verbum sat
sapienti.

5. There may be cause to fear, yea and to declare also that spiritual pride
is too evident in New England at this time; notwithstanding all complaints and
humbling providence of God in former times. Not to make any mention here of
that effeminate childish pride in habit, attire (which it is much the grave and
prudent example of the Sober, and wiser persons, the restraint of the heads of
Familyes cannot reform without the help of civil Laws) and that in those of
the meaner sort, where it most reigns and is most offensive. Let all things be
done decently and in order. What ever the pride of any mean persons may prompt
them to think, whatever is not according to order; is very indecent; sc. for
the peasant to equal the prince, or imitate him in garb or in gate, or for the
handmaid to emulate her mistress. Will not this occasion the base to behave
themselves proudly against the Honorable, a forerunner of sad confusion
breaking in upon a degenerating people. Isa. 3 Kings Daughters were of old
threatened for their strange Apparel, which it may be did not much exceed some
of our days. Soft Raiment is the cognizance of Kings houses, not the badge of
pilgrims and strangers Familyes. Yet had the children of princes and Kings
daughters their ornaments which it was not customary for others to imitate. The
prudent husbandman uses more to be delighted in the busy, active yet sable
Be, then in the gaudy Butterfly, which it may be ranges all over the field to
get only fine colors wherewith to paint her wings, from those flowers whence
the other diligent creatures fetch both wax and honey, wherewith they both
build their houses, and furnish them with provision, to feed themselves, and
refresh their owners, while the other are but the object of childrens sport.

Let all due testimony be borne against this kind of pride, so abounding; but
it is another sort, spiritual pride, that is so offensive in the sight of God,
and is indeed the root whence the other springs, with many other heinous evils
that are apt to provoke the Lord to jealousy: and which is the sin of the
professing part of the Country as well as of others: which is but too evident
in the conceitedness of men's gifts of their privileges, liberties and Estates,
whence is apt to proceed elateness of mind, haughty looks, supercilious
contempt of others, needless separation from, rigid censures of men equal to,
if not better then themselves; implacableness, with other each like disposition
of mind. This is the root from whence spring all those scandalous breaches,
sharp contentions, paroxismes of division; for only by pride says Solomon,
Prove. 13.10. comes contention: from this fountain springs those bitter strifes,
in Towns and Churches, that prove like a noli me tangere, that admit of no
healing or remedy, but like some incurable disease convert the means applyd
for the remedy to increase the malady.

Disorders of all sorts spring from hence, and that in every respect; for hence
it is that Leaders are not good enough to command, and that Followers are too
good to obey; the Centurion in the Gospel found no such difficulty in his way,
I say to one go and he goes, of them that are under me, to another come and he
comes; yet was he a man under the authority of others, as himself
acknowledges. This was of old a presage of ruining dissentions in old Rome,
Pompeiusve parem, Caesarve priorem, quis far potest. when there are such
Chasmaes and hiatus's in the superior or inferior parts of a state, they are
sad Omens, portending ru^ne. The observation of the fifth Command, that first
Command of promise, as was said before, leads the way to the due observance of
all the rest. Were you not afraid to speak against my Servant Moses? God was
never reconciled to that proud, stiff-necked unsubdued Generation that murmured
and rebelled against Moses and Aaron, but consumed them in the Wilderness. From
this root of bitterness also proceed those other evil fruits of Jealousies,
Envy, etc. not that holy Jealousy, or fear concerning others, the Apostle had
over the Corinthians, which he calls a godly Jealousy lest Satan should
beguile them. This is nothing but a regular fear lest any thing should disturb
the peace or violate the purity of what we love: But the other is an ungrounded
fear lest others should out-doe us, or be preferred before us; not willing
others should stand by us or near us, attended with a kind of hatred if they
d^e. This pride also is the root of the evil affections of Envy, which is like
salt water, which makes the streightest thing seem crooked that is put into it.
This is a great vanity, of which the wise man complained, that for every right
work a man should be envyed of his neighbor, which yet springs from this root
of pride. Some entertain such an opinion concerning themselves, as they
conceive nothing can be well done if they have not an hand therein, whereas
Paul is content and rejoices that Christ is preached though himself be shut up
in prison, that the truth is at liberty though himself be in bonds. This spirit
of pride maintains that office of Lying, which was complained of not long since
in this place, detracting from, or defrauding of others. Hence also is that
Self-willedness, that spirit of revenge whereby some cannot bear to be opposed,
but must be chief, and will have their wills though they turn evrey stone.
Tantaene animis coelestibus irae. But with too many as he said it is true, mors
mihi pro regno. This spirit of wilful Revenge was it, that brought that sore
scourge of God upon some parts of the Christian world, for it made some that
could not, as the Poet speaks, flectere Superos, Acharonta movere, that they
might be revenged on those, from whom they might have received some lesser
injury, for it called the Saracens and Moors into Spain, from whence it could
never be recovered again in seven hundred years. This opened the Gates of Buda,
that impregnable Bulwark of Hungary, to let in the Turks, that some might have
their wills of their Christian neighbors and friends, to revenge a private
injury with a public and perpetual mischief. Thus this pride of men's hearts
will make them turn Indians, that they may be revenged of their Brethren. Abram
will rather recede from his right then contend with his Brother, when the
Cananite and Perizzire was then in the land. O my soul come not thou into their
secret: unto their assemblyes be not thou united, mine honor, for in their
anger they slew a man, and in their self-will they dug down a wall Genesis
49.6. This is the first of the two grand evils amongst us as it is to be
feared.

2. The second is like unto this as to its secret and prevailing nature, and
alike odious in the sight of God, sc. That spirit of Covetousness and
inordinate love of the world, that is so inconsistent with the love of the
Father. This sin lies as a Bar of separation betwixt God and his people; ye
cannot serve God and Mammon. This is a lust that will drown men's Souls in
perdition, 1. Tim. 6. much more their Bodies and estates. This is apt to choke
the fruit of the most hopeful Soil; direct Idolatry, and Apostasy, no wonder
therefore it is called the root of all evil. Yet does this sin slily insinuate
it self into the heart of the forwardest Professors, and is ready to speak to
them as the Serpent did to Eve, has God indeed said you may not meddle with
this or that desirable fruit of the world. This is a sin apt to ly in wait for
and easily ensnare a Reforming people. This will not be the first time that it
has been ready to bane Reformation, as may be seen Hag. 1.5. for it may stand
with the highest outward form of Religion, Church membership, pure Worship, and
the strictest kind of discipline, witness the Pharisees that were so strict
observers of the Law, and as touching the righteousness thereof, blameless. And
Judas that carried the Bag, yet was a pentioner of Satan, though outwardly in
the visible Kingdom of Christ, yea in his Family, yet as little suspected as
any of the rest. What complaints have been made against this sin in the Church,
and Laws made against it in the Commonwealth, yet still it lives and hides it
self as if there were no coming at it. It lies secretly lurking in the hearts
of Professors, and is brooded by pretense of one thing or other Necessity,
Frugality, Sobriety etc. Saul can put a specious pretense not only of civil
prudence, but of Religion also, upon his covetous, practice and way, expressly
contradicting the Command of God. The Balances of deceit were in the hand of
Ephraim, with a secret love to oppress in his Merchandise, yet who can find any
Iniquity in his Dealings, that were sin? Hos. 12.8. How are men's desires apt to
be enlarged after the world as hell and their hearts unsatisfied as the grave,
that makes them able to devour widows houses, yet never say it is enough. They
that first came over hither for the Gospel could not well tell what to do with
more Land then a small number of acres yet now men more easily swallow down so
many hundreds and are not satisfied. If they be but never so little
straightened, they must remove where they may have room enough; that can part
with a good neighborhood, and the the beautiful heritage of Church communion,
or Gospel Worship, to pitch with Lot in the Confines of Sodom. There was a sad
curse laid upon Jerecho the city of the Moon, an emblem of this lower world,
which reformed churches should trample under their feet; that whoever should
build it again, should lay the foundation thereof in his firstborn, and set up
the gates thereof in his youngest son, which it is well if some men's hearts do
not misgive them, as if the hand of God that has been writing bitter things
against us, has not amongst others written some such thing as this. Is not
this to set up new Gods? Is it a wonder then that we find war in our gates. God
is knocking the hands of New England people off from the world, and from new
Plantations, till they get them new hearts, resolved to reform this great
evil. These things may seem harsh, yet when the Lord is crying aloud in his
providence, who can forbear speaking in this kind. The Lion has roared, who
will not fear, the Lord has spoken, who can but prophecy A^ 3.8 Nivard in
Burgundy once told his fellow brethren, Bernard and Guido, (who had newly
renounced the world, and entered into Monasteryes, telling their other brother,
that they had left him all their earthly poss^ssions) that they had made no^
equal division, taking heaven for themselves, and leaving him what was here
below, It may be God has observed some of his children here doing the
contrary, too ready to exchange the Kingdom of heaven for earthly possessions
and therefore says he will undo that bargain, as we use to do the molish
bargains of our Children. If this be the guize of New England, or that there
appears any disposition that way, It is no wonder if God our great Landlord,
lays his arrest upon our tillage, and strains for his glory, as our divine
Astronomer tells us in the prognostic of this present year.

Thus honored and respected in the Lord, you that are the Heads and Leaders of
our Tribes, I have endeavored to set before you the two great Evils that I
humbly conceive may most probably be looked upon, not as the least of the
procuring causes of these chastisements; in letting loose the rage of the
Heathen against us, so far as any deserving cause may be found in us.

God tells his people of old, that he will move them to jealousy by them that
are no people, and provoke them by a foolish nation, i. e. by those whom they
despised and most contemned. Deuteronomy. 32.21. How have we been too apt to speak
contemptibly of the Indians, as if one of us could drive hundreds of them; It
may be it has been so in former times, when God put the dread of us upon them
that were round about us. Sampson after his Delilah enchantments, thought to
have done as at other times, but he wist not that God was departed from him.
There is a great deal of odds, when God is with his people, and when he is
against them. Providence have seemed strangely to work against us, but it may
be to humble us and prove us, that he may do us good in the latter end. God
may have other ends also that he aims at in these solemn Dsspensations, that
do not yet appear: and when he has performed his whnle work upon our Zion, he
will punish the stout heart of our enemies as we trust,

One other end that God may have, may be to teach us War, as was said Jud.
3.2. at least those that knew nothing of it before, which in a Sense is true of
most of us. The knowledge of any thing that is gotten by experience is quite
another kind from that which is acquired by other means. We knew nothing of
the practick of war, we should never have learnt by all our Trainings and
Artilleryes in former times: and it is well if they have not taught us
something else, which God is now unteaching us. We see now plainly that it is
one thing to drill a Company in a plain Champagne and another to drive an enemy
through the desert woods. Yet Gods Israel need not be discouraged, God may be
in the midst of us, though we do not yet so manifestly discern him as we wish
for, and is going up with a shout Psa. 45.7. He uses to sit as a Refiner over
his fire. And when he has prepared the Soil by ploughing and harrowing he
will cast in the precious Seed. Light is sown for the righteous, and joy for
the upright in heart. They that sow in tears, shall reap in Joy. God does not
at any time willingly afflict the Children of men, but at no time over afflict
them.

If you enquire what remedy may be prescribed against the two forementioned
evils, feared to be too far grown, or growing upon us: I shall at present
advise but to this one Catholic remedy; and that is Christian charity, there
is a medicament which they call Vnguentum Apostolorum so named from the number
of the ingredients, this I now mentioned may more properly be so called, but
rather the example and authority then the number of the Apostles, who in their
writings as well as their Lord and Master in his Doctrine did so much insist
upon it, Above all these put on charity, Col. 3.14. Charity is the fulfilling
of the Law; so as if that had been duly attended in our hearts and lives, as
well as in our professions, it would have at first prevented the miscarriages
of our Churches, and may on that ground be the most likely means to heal us and
revive things amongst us, to their primitive state of purity and perfection,
for when did iniquity abound, but when the love of many began to wax cold. When
a learned man in the former age once read some part of the Gospel, he suddenly
broke forth into these words, aut hoc non est evangelium. aut nos non sumus
evangeli^i, so may one say of our times, when he reads 1 Cor. 13. aut hac non
est charitas; aut nos non sumus charitate imbuti. The genuine race of this
heavenly plant is almost worn out of knowledge in the world. Paul complains in
his time that all men sought their own things, and none the things of Jesus
Christ: what would that holy Apostle say, that had the care of all the Churches
still lying upon his heart, if he were alive and present amongst us in this
generation.

If I had the tongue of Men and Angels, and but one hours time to speak unto
you, I could not better improve it, then by pressing upon you a conscientious
care and endeavor to exercise and practice this excellent grace, this most
christian virtue, which might be thought a superfluous thing thus to press, as
one not long since expressed, did we only know the Gospel and not the lives of
them that profess it.

And I seriously affirm, I know no way else to advance the name of Christianity
to its pristine glory in the world. The flourishing beauty of this heavenly
grace, was that which did so strangely metamorphose the visage and face of
things at first in the world, when was fulfilled that of Isaiah, that the wolf
and the lamb should dwell together, and the leopard lie down with the kid. It
was the verdant luster of this divine grace, that turned the rough and barren
wilderness of the world into a fruitful Carmel, or fragrant Sharon. When the
Christian World had first put on this precious attire of Charity, the smell of
its Garments were like Lebanon, as a field which the Lord had blessed. This
spirit turned Shevir and Hermon those Lions dens and mountains of Leopards,
into the holy and peaceable mountain of the Lord, where was found nothing that
should hurt or destroy. But alas when this terras astraea reliquit, when this
spirit of love began to decay; then did iniquity and unrighteousness break in
upon the Christian world like a torrent that carried all before it. Then did
the Churches Sharon return back into the wilderness again, and then the
excellency of Carmel began to shake off its fruits. Then did they nothing but
hurt and destroy in all Gods holy Mountains: then was the Temple of God become
a den of Thieves, a cage of ravenous and unclean birds, and so has continued
ever since, and so is like still to remain, till the times of the Gentiles be
fulfilled and the years of Antichrist be run out, unless a mighty spirit of
Grace be poured upon the World: For ever since the fatal feuds and dissentions
paganized and degenerated Christendom, as one not unaptly tells them, are
become the scandal of the Mahometans in the East, and we the pretended
reforming Protestants of Europe, the divided sects of Luther and Calvin are
become, if not the scorn of, yet less tremendous to those at Rome. And we may
have great cause to fear, that the decay of this Grace in New England, has in
a great measure been the procuring cause that has brought this black Cloud
upon the beautiful face of our Sion in these ends of the Earth. Paul complained
in his time of a great decay of Charity, even where other gifts abounded: he
tells the Corinthians they were carnal, and walked as men, not for want of
other gifts of knowledge which puffed up but for want of charity, which only
edifies: in those times he found but few Timothies that cared for the good of
others, but many Demasses that fought their own good, and many Diotrephers that
sought their own exaltation, and pre^erment, with the under valuing and
contempt of others: could Christians but be persuaded to put off this private
selfish worldly Spirit, and put on humility, and charity, and man fest a
public Spirit; how would it again revive the glory of New England Churches.

We have many complaints amongst us, could we but get our hearts stored with
this Christian virtue, it would prove as a Balm out of Gilead, a sovereign
remedy against all our troubles. This Grace of charity in the complete and
perfect exercise thereof would heal all our divisions, reform all our vices,
root out all our disorders, make up all our breaches. This would cure all the
morellianisme, and libertinisme in the Brethren of New England Churches; and it
would cure also all the Prelacy, and Presbyterianisme in the Elders of the said
Churches: we should presently then have better thoughts one of another, for
love thinks no harm. So for other Maladies and Distempers in our minds, or
distresses in our outward Estates, Charity would be like the Widows Oil, that
would never cease running till it had filled all the vessels. This would pay
all our debts, and defray all our public charges, This would relieve all our
distressed friends, it would answer all the necessities of Church and State.
This would feed all our poor, and clothe all our naked Brethren, and support
all our Widows and Fatherless ones. It would maintain all our Ministers so,
that they who preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel: and this would at a
more honorable rate, and without repining afford the bread of the Governor.
In a word what would not charity do of this kind: public Faith has in
several ages been bankrupt, but public charity never was yet. The Churches
Treasury of the primitive times, that was supplied only with this spring of
charity was never drawn dry. Yea although the primitive christians were to
encounter with all kind of adversity, they conflicted with Famine and
Nakedness, with all kind of wants, yet was their Treasury never wasted. All the
powers of the Earth were combined against them, and of Hell too, yet it never
failed: I tell you if we could set up such a Bank of Christian Charity in
New England, it would prove a richer Storehouse then all the Spanish Mines or
Banks of Venice, or Amsterdam. This would make such an equal distribution of
the things of this life through the whole Camp of Israel, that he who gathered
much should have nothing over, and they that gathered little should havo no
lack: for this with contentment would make godliness the greatest gains to all
that traded therein. Then would one Christian Brother, Neighbor and Friend,
assist and strengthen each other, and all endeavors would be firmly engaged to
promote the common good.

Thus Honored, Reverend, much respected and beloved in the Lord I have
endeavored to commend something to your consideration from these words,
speaking first unto you all in your several and distinct capacities, and at the
last have attempted to bind you up all together in one bundle with the Bond of
Charity, that bond of perfectness, could all the heads and Leaders of our
Tribes be twisted together by the Spirit of love, it would make a threefold
Cord that could not easily be broken: it would make our Forces how weak soever
in themselves become an host like the host of God, though not in numbers, yet
in virtue and power against which our Enemies should not be able to stand up.
Were our Jerusalem thus compacted together, the Gates of Hell with all their
instruments would never be able to undermine it, or prevail against it. Sed hic
labor, hoc opus est. It must be from him, who has the seven Spirits in his
right hand, whence this Spirit must be expected. The time and the work of the
Day commands me to have done, and indeed I have but little more to add, which
is only thus much;

It was the observation of a wise Statesman in the former age, concerning that
famous and flourishing Commonwealth of the Romans of old; In republica Romana
cives erant utilissimi, and optime compositi, qui aut consules populo favebant
aut tribuni in parts senatus inclinabant, i e. The Commonwealth of Rome never
flourisht so well, as when those in the highest place of Authority were wont to
favor the interest of the Peoples Delegates, and on the other hand, when the
delegates of the people were most apt to incline to the Rulers to maintain the
dignity and authority of all such. By proportion I may add, it would tend not a
little to the advancing a Christian state, where Elders of Churches are very
tender of the liberty of the Brethren, and the Brethren likewise are regardful
of the office, power of their Elders; where the elder people do encourage the
younger with their gentle and courteous behavior, as well as with their grave
Examples, and prudent Counsels; and the younger sort of people are ready to
reverence the aged, not behaving themselves proudly against the ancient, where
the rich are liberal bountiful and compassionate to the poor, and the poor are
likewise thankful and respective to the other, and always will when they meet,
be ready to bless each other in the name of the Lord, as Boaz and his Reapers
in the field. When those of Zebulun have cause to rejoice in their going out,
and the Children of Issachar dwell quietly and live comfortably together in
their Tents at home, calling the people to the mountains to offer the Sacrifice
of Righteousness. When one does joyfully gather the fruits of the Earth, as the
other shall suck the abundance of the Seas, and of the treasure hid in the
Sands. How good and how pleasant would it be for any one to see the Heads and
Brethren of each of our Tribes, thus to dwell together in Unity? doubtless it
would be as the precious ointment on the head of Aaron our high Priest, as the
dew of Hermon, and that which descended on the mountains of Sion, when the Lord
commanded his Blessing even Life for evermore.

FINIS.

