AN Addition or Postscript TO THE VINDICATION OF THE ESSENCE and UNITY OE THE
Church-Catholick visible, And the Priority thereof in regard of Particular
CHURCHES.

In answer to the Objections made against it, both by Mr Stone, and some others.

By SAMUEL HUDSON, Minister of the Gospel at Capell in Suff.

Ecclesiam teneo tritico and palea plenam, emendo quos possum, tolero quos
emendare non possum: fugio paleam, ne hoc sim, non aream, ne nihil sim.

Aug. Ep. 48. contra Don. LONDON, Printed by J. B. for Andrew Kembe, and are to
be sold at his shop near S. Margarets hill in Southwark, and by Edward Brewster
at the Crane in Paul's Churchyard, and Thomas Basset under Dunstanes Church
Fleetstreet, 1658.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Christian Reader!
THis second impression of the Vindication of the Essence and Unity of the
Church-Catholick, visible, etc. came to the birth altogether without my
knowledge of the Stationer, or his intention, and without his knowledge of me,
and mine intention: and it was so far passed in the Press before I knew of it,
that there was no recalling of it. I had another Copy of it almost ready for
the Press, wherein I had given answer to M. Stone, and some other opponents in
their proper places in the Book.

Also I had obliterated the name of my ancient friend M. Ellis, who had written
in opposition to my first Thesis upon this question, and had left out all
personal reflections upon him, to which I was in a manner, necessitated in my
former impression to vindicate my self; and therefore I must crave his
indulgence for this impression, the coming out where^^ (so as it is) being
wholly against my mind. The Book having met with some opposition, and that in
Print, from some reverend brethren, I thought not fit to let this impression of
it pass into the world, without taking notice of what was objected against it,
and therefore am constrained to play an after-game, and to add these few sheets
as a Postscript thereunto.

I have not as yet, met with any thing in print, which should cause me to alter
my judgment about the main subject of the Book, and yet I dare not say but some
passages in it, may be carped at, and are liable to exceptions against; for I
am but a frail man, and see but in part, and so am subject to err, as well as
others; yet am willing to be reclaimed in whatsoever I mistake at any time, and
would not willingly be misled, much less mis-lead others.

The subject is something knotty and difficult, and not apt to be understood by
every Reader, and therefore let him that reads consider it well, that so he
may understand, and not pass a censure rashly upon it before he understands it.
That the Lord would guide thee and me into all truth, is the prayer of Christ's
worthless servant,

SAMUEL HUDSON.

THE VINDICATION OF THE Essence and Unity OF THE Church-Catholick visible, etc.
SInce the first publishing of the same, which was 1649. has met with various
entertainment amongst men, according to the various judgments of the readers
thereof; as Books of polemical subjects, such as this is, use to do. From some
it obtained acceptance and approbation, from others it met with improbation,
and opposition. Two things especially have been opposed therein. First, the
being of an universal visible Church, which is the subject of the second and
third Chapters of this Vindication, and the former Chapter proving it by
Scripture, the latter by arguments and reasons. Secondly, the integrality of
the universal visible Church, handled in the fourth Chapter is opposed. The
essence or being of it, is opposed lately in print, by some Ministers in
Norfolk and Suffolk, in their answer to Jus Divinum Ministerii Evangelici, set
forth by the Provincial Assembly in London, and to Vindiciae Ministerii
Evangelici, set forth by M. John Collings of Norwich. But because this was not
the main scope of their book, only they lighted upon it in their Epistle
Dedicatory; I shall leave them to their proper opponents, and only answer to
what they say in their Epistle concerning this subject. The integrality of the
universal visible Church has been opposed by M. Stone, a reverend Minister
and teacher to the Church of Christ at Hartford in New England, and my ancient
acquaintance. And this was in a tractate, called, A Congregational Church is a
Catholic Church; which came forth in print, 1652. To whom I never intended to
return an answer in any particular Treatise, partly because I saw his book was
only a logical Lecture, and of so abstruse and sublime a subject, that as it
was little taken notice of, so it was less understood by any, but those
scholars that were versed in those studies, and so must mine answer have been
also. And partly because he only or chiefly opposed the arguments which I set
down in my fourth Chapter, and dealt not with the whole book, or the main scope
of my Vindication, or question: and therein also opposed only those arguments
which I brought against M. Ellis, which were taken from principles and grounds
which I knew M. Ellis granted, which was warrant sufficient for to me use them,
though M. Stone granted them not. And in them also M. Stone mistook my meaning,
for by my denying the universal Church to be a genus, I did not deny it to an
existing genus, or genus in actu exercito, which M. Stone argued for; for I
knew though it were an integral, it must be of one kind or other, but I denied
that it could put on the notion or consideration of a Church in genere. So,
that my question about the integrality of the universal Church was no whit
impaired by his arguments, though they had all been granted, only those
arguments taken necessarily from principles granted by M. Ellis might have been
invalidated thereby. And partly because I saw that M. Stone did implicitly
grant what I contended for, which was, that the universal Church is not the
genus of particular Congregations, in that he assigns another genus to them
in the frontispice of his book, and upon the top of every page in his book, and
that is Congregation in genere. But I intended that if ever this vindication
should again com to the Press, I would have explained my meaning more fully,
and that I meant by genus Church in genere, and not the integral nature of the
genus that existeth in individuals, and so to have inserted an answer to M.
Stone in that my fourth Chapter, which now I am prevented in, by this
surreptitious coming forth of this second Edition without my knowledge, and
therefore I have added this Postscript. I first therefore shall clear that
there is a Church-Catholick visible.

Some of our brethren which have lately written, tell us that a particular
Church is a particular company of Saints in mutual union, for mutual worship
appointed by Christ for the glory of God, and the edification of their own
souls, and the good of others. I intend not to carp, but shall give as candid
an interpretation as may be of their words. I suppose by Saints they mean
visible Saints, Saints by dedication and consecration, and not absolutely of
Saints by regeneration, for as they have no certain rules to judge thereof in
others, so also they can never be sure they are in a true Church, but will
still be scrupulous in their communion, and cannot dispense or communicate in
faith, but doubtingly. They are also very tender in expressing the form, or as
some will have it, the Cement of this particular society, and therefore have
left out the word Covenant, either explicit or implicit: and so I hope they
intend to let in parochial Congregations into the definition, though not
independent, for there is such a mutual union among them.

For mutual worship, I suppose they mean joining in public worship, and not as
we speak of mutual duties between man and wife, to be performed to each
others, but worship performed by them jointly to God, But I marvel that this
definition mentions not any relation of this particular Church to some officer
or officers to whom they should subject themselves, and by whom they should be
taught, edified, and governed, and who should be Gods mouth to them, and their
mouth to God. I am loath to be too bold or peremtory in guessing at their
meaning: but happily it is because they intend to put the keys of discipline into
the body of this Congregation, which can exercise them without officers, or
because they can set up un-ordained private members to preach and pray among
them, and so make up their mutual worship also without an officer or
Ambassador of Christ, to whom is committed the word of reconciliation; for
indeed that is the scope of their book, though they do acknowledge that there
ought to be such officers: or happily they feared to be unchurched again by the
death of such an officer, if they had put him into their definition. They say
also that the end of this mutual union is for the edification of their own
souls, but that must imply them all truly converted; but I mervail that they
make no provision in their definition, for the education, instruction, and
conversion of children born members of their Congregation, and servants of
their members, seeing by Gods appointment, and the usage in Old and New
Testament, the parent or master brings his whole family into covenant as well as
himself and a part of the Ministers office is to go to the lost sheep of the
house Israel, to convert unconverted persons, as well as edify converted. They
say nothing also of their mutual inspection and watching over one another, for
which this way is so highly cried up above others: happily it is because their
members dwell so far remote, in so many parishes, that they see it is impossible
to do it.

"They grant an universal company of Saints, in a reformed sense, comprehending
every individual Saint-member thereof, whether formed into fellowship or
unformed: but as Saints, not as Churches of Saints.

I acknowledge it is true the particular visible believers are the matter of
the universal Church, whether formed into Congregations or no, for that is but
a secondary accidental relation that betideth them, and enters not into the
essence of their Christianity.

It is true, their particular membership of this or that Congregation coms by
their union with it; but were they not members and subjects of Christ's
political visible Kingdom before any such union, and initiated into it by one
of his officers, yet not as a particular officer of a Congregation, for none
are baptized into a Congregation but as by an indefinite officer of the
universal visible Church of Christ: And an indefinite officer in relation to
his employment, and general object, is equivalent to a general, and that is the
prime relation of a Minister, and that to a particular Congregation is
secondary, as it consists of a parcel of the universal Church, over whom he
takes especial, actual, constant, care and charge.

"They say the World is universal, of which all creatures are a part, yet did a
man stand where he might see all Countries, and all crearures, he should see
but a particular world; really particular, but intellectually universal.

Answer. If by particular world, they mean in relation to a general world, it
is not true; for one particular cannot make up an universal; and there was
never any world but this one. But if by particular they mean an individual
integral world, it is true, and that is it which I contend for in this
Vindication; that the universal or Ecumenical Church cannot put on the notion
of a Church in genere, but of a great individual integral: and so both the
world, and universal Church are, whether a man stands where he can see them or
no: they are integraliter universale as Ames calls the universal Church.

"It is true that they say, did a man stand where he might see all the
Corporations, and all particular civil societies of men, he might acknowledge
the general nature of Corporations existing in either of them (or the integral
nature rather, and from them all abstract a general nature) and yet deny an
universal Corporation, consisting of them as parts thereof.

But this comes to pass because the several Corporations or polities are
constituted by several Charters, granted from several sovereigns, under several
laws.

But the universal Church has but one Charter, from one sovereign, under the
same systeme of laws, and the officers indefinite, officers in reference to
their imploiment to which they are called by Christ, and may exercise the same
toward any of the subjects of that whole Ecclesiastical body, as they have
opportunity, and a call: which the officers of the several civil Corporations
cannot do.

They answer that text, 1 Cor. 12.28. God has set in the Church first
Apostles, secondarily Prophets, etc. which is usually brought to prove an
universal visible Church, by paralleling it with what is said ver. 18. God has
set the members every one in the body. And if that will not conclude a
Catholic body, neither will the former conclude a Catholic Church.

I answer, the difference between them is great: for the several bodies, though
they may have a general consideration and notion put upon them, or abstracted
from them rather, of body in genere, yet are they not united together into one
individual body by any external bond, they are not integrally one, but only
generically or specifically one. But the universal Church is united into one
body by a visible external bond, yea bonds of the same Sovereign, the same
Laws, the same Covenant, the same Initiation and enrowlment, and the same
indefinite Officers over it. And this is the primary consideration that coms
upon it, before any particular distinctions into Congregations, which consist
of parcells of that great body. And therefore that which the Apostle says,
ver. 27. ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular, is meant, ye are
of the body of Christ, or part of the body of Christ, not the whole, for Christ
has but one body, in the same respect, and ye are particular members thereof.

They bring diverse arguments against an universal visible Church.

Argu. 1.
Their first argument is, because every part is incomplete, not having the power
of a whole in it; but every particular Church rightly constituted has in it
the power of a whole Church; therefore it is not a part.

Ans. It is true, every part has not the extensive power of the whole, it has
the compleatness of a part, and no more. Every civil Corporation is called a
body politic, and it is complete according to the constitution of it, but this
hinders it not from being a member of a greater body politic, viz. the Kingdom
or Commonwealth whereto it belongs. So every particular Congregation has
the compleatness of a particular Church in it, but still as it is a part of the
whole Church, which is the political Kingdom of Jesus Christ on earth. It is an
integral or whole in reference to its particular members, but in reference to
the rest of the Church it is but a member.

Argu. 2.
Again they say, that every whole is really distinct from every part, and from
all the parts collectively considered. They are constituting, that is
constituted.

Ans. So I may say of all the visible believers in the world, they may in
consideration be distinguished from the whole, and all the members of the body
from the whole, because they constitute it: but they being all the constituent
members joined in an unity make up the whole constituted Church or body: and
therefore that argument was no better then a fallacy. For I can say the same of
all the members of a Congregation both public and private, they are distinct
from the whole, for they are constituent, and that is constituted: but as they
are united they are one constituted Congregation; so are all the visible
private Christians and Ministers united, one universal visible Church: In
consideration indeed they may be distinct, yet by political conjunction in the
political Kingdom of Christ they are one whole.

Again they say, there is no universal meeting to worship God, Argu. 3.
therefore there is no universal Church.

So neither is there ever a meeting of all the subjects of a Kingdom or
Commonwealth to do homage or service to their Sovereign, but they all obey him
divisim in their places, Answer.
or some smaller conventions, and yet they are a whole Kingdom or Commonwealth
nevertheless.

Object. But the word (...) is never used either in a civil, or sacred sense,
but propter conventum: and coetus est a coeundo.

Answ. (...) properly signifies a calling out, and not a calling together: And
in a sacred sense it signifies a people called either out of the world, as the
invisible Church is, or from Idols as the visible Church is. The members
thereof are (...), persons called out; and (...) and (...) are conjugata, and
they relate to, and argue one another. The particular Congregation is rather
(...) in the strictest sense in reference to their meeting together, then (...).

So (...), whence the Scottish word Kirk, and our English word Church comes,
properly signifies the Lord's people. And this notion betideth people not
primarily because they are of this or that Congregation, but because they are
of the Kingdom of Christ, and have given their hand to the Lord. And the word
coetus and congregatio more properly respects them that as they meet together
in an Assembly. Heathens may coire come together, even into a sacred Assembly,
but because they are not (...) called from their Idols to Christ, they are not
part of the Church, though they be parts of the Assembly.

Argu. 4.
Again, they say, there are no distinct office^s appointed for such a distinct
Church, therefore there is no such Church.

Answ. Though there are no distinct officers of the universal Church besides
the officers of particular Churches, or ordinary Ministers of the Word, yet
every Minister has an indefinite office, which stands in relation to his
employment, which he may put forth any where in the whole Church, as occasion
serves, and he has a call thereto, which is equivalent to a general office.

Every Minister of the Word has power in actu primo to dispense the Word and
Sacraments, to pray and bless the people in any sacred convention, though the
members of that Assembly be not members of any one particular Congregation, and
though the Minister himself be not fixed to, or set actually over any
particular Congregation. And that meeting shall be a sacred convention, not only
in respect of the Ordinances or Minister, but in respect of the members of it,
because they are all the Lord's people (...) and (...), in the proper and
primary sense, and he the Lord's Ambassador designed to that employment. The
body of the whole Church being so great, and consisting of persons of several
Countries, and languages, and under several civil governors, happily at variance
between themselves, it was not convenient, nor scarce possible to have any
constant ordinary actual officers of the whole, but that is salved by their
habitual power of office, which may be drawn forth any where into act as
occasion serves.

Argu. 5.
Again, they say, there is no Church greater then that which has the power to
hear and determine upon offenses committed in the Church, but that is
particular, Mat. 18.17. which place say they, if it means the Congregation,
it excludes all other, if it means any other it excludes the Congregation.

Answ. I shall let M. Parker answer this argument, who says in Pol. Eccl. lib.
3. p. 355. though he held particular Congregations the prime Churches in
reference to Synods, yet grounds the more general or greater Assemblies for
discipline upon this text, per gradationem, and per sequeiam ratiocinandi and
per consequentiam, as I noted in my vind. 163. And this appears by the
gradation in the text from one to two or three, and from two or three to the
Church, and if the Church cannot end it, as sometimes they cannot, then by the
like manner of reasoning it is to be referred to a greater number of Elders
convened.

For doubtless Christ did not mean by Church the body of the Church, but the
Elders, for the body of the people never had any right of judicature among the
Jews, nor in the Christian Churches, though I suppose some of our brethren
would infer so from this text. And it is very probable that our Lord Christ
speaking to the people of the Jews, spoke to them in their own dialect, of
Courts then set up, where there were appeals from the three Judges to 23, and
from the 23 to the Sanedrin or seventy one Elders. For Christ had not then
instituted any Christian Congregations or jurisdictions; and if Christ had
spoken of what was not in being as the people he spoke to could have no relief
thereby, so they could not understand him. Now if primarily he meant the three
Judges or Rulers of the Synagogue, yet that did not exclude the 23, and if he
meant primarily the 23, that did not exclude the Sanedrin; so in Christian
jurisdictions, which for the general nature were to be like the Jewish, though
not in every particular circumstance, the bringing a cause to a Congregationall
Eldership excludes not the Classis, nor the Classis a Provincial Synod. Though
the Jewish polity was not long after to be pulled down, and the Christian to
succeed, yet it was not then pulled down, but stood jure divino, though many of
the persons in those offices were corrupt, and the people as yet were bound by
Gods law to make use of them, and be determined by them. Our Lord Christ sends
the cleansed Lepers to the Priests to offer for them, though they were
generally wicked. And in his sermon, Mat. 5.22. he clearly alludes to their
present judicatures.

Afterward the same Authors except against the definition of the office of the
Ministry set down by the Province of London, in their Jus Divinum etc. Because
they make it a relation to the whole employment of the Ministry. But whether
you call it right or power, or authority given them by commission, or what
general nature or notion can be put upon it, it is certain it was in relation
to the whole employment of the Ministry, as they well clear it up. That was the
subject wherein they had power by their office or sunction to deal, and be
exercised in. To them was committed the word of reconciliation. And therefore
the Ministerial office is set out in Scripture thereby, Luke 1.2. Act. 6.4. 2
Cor. 3.6. 1 These. 3.2. as I noted more at large in vind. 233. And though there
must needs be an object, viz. persons to whom they are to administer the Word,
yet that object in their commission is not set down in Scripture to be
particular Congregations only, but go teach all Nations and baptize them, etc.
and lo, I am with you always to the end of the World, Mat 28.19, 20. And go ye
into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature, Mar. 16.15. And so
likewise administer the other Otdinances to them when you have made them
capable of them.

And the Argument which those Brethren insist upon from relaeta is of no force;
for though as they are particular Ministers of such a flock, indeed that
particular relation cease, if the flock cease etc. but the general
relation to the whole remains, so that there is a correlate object still as
long as there are any believers that stand in need of edifying by their office,
or any mere visible believers, or their children or servants that stand in need
of instruction, exhortation, reproof, or internal conversion, etc. And if all
those should cease, yet they shall find objects for their Ministry, as long as
there be any reasonable creatures under heaven; as M. Norton in his answer to
Apollon. page 81. well observes, where he says, that when they preach to
heathens it is a ministerial act in regard of the dispenser and administrer.
Habent Ministri potestatem Ministerialem non Ecclesiasticam erga universum
mundum, and erga omnem creaturam. And therefore he pleads that the Ministers
have Ministerial power in modo debito erga omnem Ecclesiam, Or else says he,
the heathens should be in better case then the neighbor Churches, if it were
Ministerial preaching to them, and not to neighbor Churches. He says, no duty
of Ministerial acts of office in other Churches is to be denied, p. 82. so it
be regulated.

When Paul and Barnabas were called forth by the holy Ghost, Act. 13. and sent
out with fasting and prayer, and imposition of hands to go to the heathen; was
it a Ministerial work which they performed, or a Chari^ative? If a Ministerial
work of their office, then not only the particular Congregation, or the
universal Church, but the very heathens are the object of the Ministerial
office, as it is an office.

The Scripture speaking so indefinitely of the office of the Ministers, under
the name of Ministry, makes it appear that their office related to the
employment or subject thereof, and not only to a few persons in Congregational
Covenant, or particular mutual union with them. See Act. 20.24. and 21.19. Romans
12.7. 2 Cor. 5.18. Ephesians. 4.12. 1 Timothy 1.12. And has not the Minister the same
subject and object that the Ministry has, seeing the Ministry is committed to
him.

If a Minister of the Church in England should baptize a converted Jew, Turk,
or heathen, he does not do it as a Minister of a particular Congregation, or of
the Church in England, but as an indefinite Officer of Christ, to whom he has
committed that employment: and so the office reaches that forreigner, not as a
member of the Church in England, for so he never was, and happily never will be,
but as a new subject added to Christ's visible Kingdom.

Secondly, I shall show that the universal Church is an integral, and not Church
in genere.

But before I enter upon this Chapter, which has been opposed in print by M.
Stone a reverend Minister in New England; it will be requisite for me to
premise something in general, and then answer his particular Objections against
the several arguments as they lie in order.

It was mine unhappiness to fall into the hands of two reverend Divines, whose
principles of Logic, and especially concerning Genus, were different from each
other; and so while I proved the universal Church to be no genus according to
the principles and express grants of the former in his Vindiciae Catholicae
which I cited, who was an Aristotelian; the other understanding genus in
another sense, being a Ramist, opposes my arguments, denying the Aristotelian
principles, which the former went upon and granted, whereas it was sufficient
for one to prove the universal Church not to be a genus by his own principles
whom I answered.

So it fares with me, as I have seen it with a Country man in a crowd, who
being stricken a box on one ear, and turning himself to see who struck him, and
to defend himself on that hand, was stricken by another on the other ear, and
so was fain to turn again to defend himself on that side also. M. Ellis took
genus to be a logical or metaphysical abstract non-existing notion, as he
acknowledges in print, and upon his own grant: I dealt with him; M. Stone
takes genus to be an existing being, appearing, and showing his face in every
individual, whether we see it or no, and thereupon disputes against my
arguments, otherwise then M. Ellis could have done, and so puts me upon a new
Vindication, by denying the principles upon which my arguments were built,
which principles the former granted freely. If I had thought the word genus
would have met with such opposition, I should have set down my meaning more
warily, and for genus have set general, or in genere, or in general
consideration, which was my meaning, and so he whom I answered understood it,
and M. Stone might have seen that was my meaning also. The paucity of words,
and multitude of things is the cause why the same word is used for many things,
and so is taken in a different sense, and so it falls out in the word genus,
for sometimes it signifies a Stock, Lineage, Parentage, Kindred, or Family as M.
Stone in his Tractate, p. 2. from Act. 4.6. and Phil. 3.5. notes. And sometime
it is taken for that common nature which existeth in the individuals, as humane
nature in Peter and Paul, and animal in man and brute, etc. And sometime it
signifies an abstract notion arising from this community of nature, or a thing
in genere, or general consideration, and in that sense M. Ellis took it, and so
I formed my arguments in his own sense. But concerning the existing genus which
M. Stone speaks of, I cannot see how it can agree with the definition which
himself gives of it out of Ramus; which is, Genus est totum partibus, i. e.
speciebus essentiale.

For that which does exist, existeth in some individual, and there is neither a
totum or whole, nor essential to the species. It is not a totum, for Totum est
quod habet parts: indeed it may have its parts, that is members, as it is an
integral, but the parts of a genus are his species. The existing animal that is
in Peter is not a generical whole, for it is but a part of Peter, and has no
species under it. The truth is, it is an essential part of Peter, for whereas
totum continet suas parts, that animal in Peter is wholly contained in Peter,
and holden there by Peter's form; and as soon as Peter's form left him, that
animal was gone. Again, totum est majus qualibet part, but Peter is major hoc
animale, he contains the animal and more than it. Hence Downam upon Ramus
says, hinc apparet genus speciei and totum and partem esse, totum quidem
praedicatione, and communi significatione, qua species continet: pars vero si
ad constitutionem respiciamus.

Now the giving essence, or being essential to a thing respects the
constitution in every existing thing. Boethus also says, Genus in divisione
totum est in definitione pars. Species contra, in divisione pars est, in
definitione totum. Neither is that genus that existeth in an individual
partibus i. e. speciebus essentiale, for it gives its essence to that
individual, and has no influence upon any others, when those men and brutes
that are now alive die, then die those physical existing genus's indeed, but
the logical abstracted genus of them dies not: the physical individual genus's
are renewed by generation, but the logical genus of them is not generated but
abstracted, and is the same from the beginning of the world to the end: it ever
was, and ever will be a true axiom, homo est animal rationale.

Here M. Stone helps himself with a distinction of genus in actu signato and
actu exercito, p. 7. I know not well what he means thereby, or how he will
apply it to the cause in hand. But Scheibler in his Metaph. l. 1. c. 14. art.
5. says, Apprehenditur res in actu signato, cum concipitur sic, prout communi
definitione signatur, and sub proprio signo i. e. nomine apprehenditur. In actu
exercito apprehenditur cum concipitur aliquid non communi, sed particulari,
dimisso communi nomine. So that it lays aside his common name and notion of a
genus in actu exercito, and is but an integral under it. Jacob. Martin. in
disput. 2 metaph, these. 60. says Actus signatus vocatur a singularibus
abstractus. Actus exercitus est actus in singularibus multiplicatus i. e. in
individuals and integrals under that kind. And further Scheibler gives this
instance to clear it. Genus praedicatur de specie. Hoc verum est, loquendo de
eo in actu exercito, non in actu signato, hoc est genus praedicatur de specie
non sumendo communes notiones, sive nomina generis and speciei, sed
particularia exempla, which particular examples are the integrals under that
kind.

But this distinction will not help him; for if genus in actu exercito be not a
totum or whole, but a part, and be not essentiale speciebus but only uni
individuo, then it is not genus. If the definition and notion of genus cannot
agree to it, it is not genus. The definition of integrum agrees to every
example of an integrum, it is a whole made up of his members, but the
definition of genus agrees to none of those which he calls examples of genus.
In that it wants or loses its universality, it wants and loses its genus
and its difference or form: for the very essence of genus (by his logic) is to
be a whole, and to give essence to its species. It has but a piece of the
genus, and a piece of the form: it has integram naturam generis, non
universam, as M. Stone says p. 4. and Richardson out of whom he had it says
the same. Then if it has only the integral nature, and not the universal, it
has it not as it is a genus, but as it is an integral, for the nature of genus
lies in the universality, which the individual has not. Though there be an
Ens, substance, body, and animal in Peter, yet they are as individual as Peter:
and the Ens, substance, body, and animal in Peter, differ every way as much as
the humanity in Peter differs from that which is in Paul, or as Petriety
differs from Pauliety, or Socratiety from Platoniety, to use his own
expressions. Socrates consists of hoc Ens, haec substantia, hoc corpus, hoc
animal, and hic homo; and so all these kinds are under contraction and
individuation. Quicquid est in Socrate singular est. Fonsec. Metaph. Take all
the individuals of one sort that ever were, are, or shall be in the world, and
you cannot make one totum universale of them, but by abstraction, and actu
praecisionis and denudationis, and so by the mind you may draw them to an
unity, and make a totum of them, for there is a foundation laid in the
individuals for such an abstraction, but no formal general nature or unity; you
must divest them of their existence, and individuality first. There is not Ens,
or substantia, or corpus, or animal in genere, or general consideration
existing in any one man, or in all of them, but as they are abstracted. Plato
non est homo in genere etc. Put many sticks together, and you may make a faggot
or cart-load of them, but not make wood in genere, yea, put all the wood in the
world together, and you may make a great heap and integral of them, but you
cannot make wood in genere, but by mental abstraction, and that a man may do
from a little as well as a great deal. Genus is another thing then all the
individuals gathered together. Genus is not by conjunction, apposition, or
aggregation, but by abstraction. Peter or Paul may say, this is my entity, my
substance, my body, mine animal, my humanity, as well as my Petriety, or my
Pauliety.

It is true a man may abstract, and as it were cut out a genus or general
nature out of the individuals, and consider that alone because there is a
foundation for it, and a potentiality, so a workman when he sees a piece of
Timber may conceive in his mind, that if such and such parts were hewn and
plained or carved away, there would be an Image of the Virgin Mary, or a
crucifix, etc. yet no man will say that there are any such existing Images
there, for then it were fit to be burnt. So the Chimist says, that Sal,
Sulphur, and Mercury are in every thing, and boasts that he can extract honey
out of album graekum, but they are not formally there, but may possibly be
extracted by the dissolution of those things; so by mental dissolution or
abstraction a man may fetch a genus or general out of individuals, but it is
not formally in them. It cannot be denied but the object of the understanding
precedeth the act of it, but it never finds it existing, but it is contracted
by an individual, and to draw forth the general nature, the understanding
pareth off the contracting differences by abstraction, precision, or
denudation. Apprehenduntur universalia, non apprehensis ullis particularium
differentiis. Fonsec. Metaphys.

But I conceive that there is a great difference between animal genus and
animal in genere, between an existing genus and that thing considered in
genere. The individual animal existeth, but animal in genere existeth not but
in the understanding. There is existence in every thing, but where dwells
existence in genere? Concretes exist, but where do abstracts exist? I will not
contend whether universals be entia realia, or entia rationis, because there is
a foundation for them in ente reali, but they are not formally one but by
abstraction.

Indeed in reference to other genus's a genus is capable of numerical unity;
Ens is one genus, and substance is one genus etc. but in reference to
particulars existing under them, you cannot say there is one genus in Socrates,
and another in Plato, for numerical unity in the strictest sense is proper to
individuals as integrals.

But I will not contend with M. Stone about these notions of existing or
extracted genus's, I shall leave it to younger heads which have been more
lately versed in those studies. But if you take genus, for the existing
physical, political, mathematical, or artificial genus's as M. Stone does, then
it is impossible to deny any thing in the world to be a genus, for it is of one
kind or other. And by that notion every integral is nothing else but a cluster
of genus's bound together by the last individual form: and so we may make every
thing not only a genus, but a heap of genus's; and so a man has more genus's
in him, then he has limbs, senses, and faculties. For there is Ens, substance,
body, vivens, and animal besides humanity: and then every limb, and sense, and
faculty, have limb, and sense, and faculty kind in it.

There is head kind, and foot kind, and arm kind, and leg kind, etc. and
after his constitution, he is dressed up with nothing but genus's from head to
foot. And by the like reasoning every thing should be as full of genus's as
ever it can hold. M. Stone could not think that I did deny this sort of genus
to be in the universal Church, for I clearly expressed so much Vind. p. 82.
"Indeed if you consider this society or religion, it is a distinct kind in
regard of the Author, laws, qualifications of members, but in reference to its
members, it is an integral. If this be all that is meant by totum genericum
existens it may pass without any damage to this question. So the several
companies in London are distinct from other companies, yet in reference to
their own members they are integrals, and in reference to the whole City they
are parts, i. e. members.

But all this dispute on which side soever it be cast, hurts not my question at
all, though it may seem to strike at this Chapter of arguments, which were
taken from grounds which were granted by him against whom I then argued, we
both by genus meant a thing in genere, or general consideration, and to that
sense I framed my arguments, and then comes M. Stone and disputes from an
existing genus in actu exercito, that has neither the genus nor form of a
genus in it, and he strikes at my aguments by that which is not ad idem. If M.
Ellis's genus and M. Stones were put into a syllogism, there would be four
terms, for they are not the same, and had I argued with M. Ellis from an
existing integral genus, he would have thought me wild. And therefore this is
but a logomachy about the word genus, one takes it in one sense, and the other
in another. I clearly laid down my meaning in the explication of the question:
for chap 1. sect. 3. I gave different senses of Catholic or general. "First,
the Orthodox Churches were called catholic Churches. Secondly, the Patriarchs
Vicar general was called catholic. Thirdly, Catholic is taken for a logical
second notion abstracted by the mind, comprehending diverse different species
under it (in which sense M. Ellis took it.) Fourthly it is taken in the same
sense that we use to take Ecumenical, and I took the latter sense, and
therefore put Ecumenical into the terms of the question: and said there, that
in the question in my sense the Church-catholick existing on earth at the same
time is compared with particular Churches existing at the same time also, page
11. 12. And in denying this Catholic Church to be a genus, I took genus in the
third sense as M. Ellis did.

And I shall a little more plainly set it down now. The question is, Whether
the whole company of visible believers in the whole world, which is the one
visible Kingdom of Christ on earth, and is usually called the Catholic or
universal Church, being considered in respect of the particular visible
believers in the particular Nations, Towns, or Congregations, be the genus of
them, or a great integral whereof they are but members. Here was the hinge of
the question handled in this chapter. And the thing that made the doubt was the
diversity of the use and signification of general and particular. For sometime
general refers to species and particulars under it, and then it is called
genus, or that thing in genere. And sometime general is taken for a large
integral, as when we speak of a general Court in a Corporation, and a general
summons, a general meeting, a general muster, a general humiliation, a general
pardon, our general calling, a general Covenant, the general judgment, etc.
These phrases are not meant of these things in genere, for they are so many
individuals, but in respect of the extent of the subject or object of them. And
you may as well make the general Covenant a genus or Covenant in genere, as the
general Church to be a genus or Church in genere. It is called the general
Covenant, not because it is Covenant in genere, but because it reaches all the
members of the Church, and they are entered into it; and so the universal Church
is called general, not because it is Church in genere, but because it is made
up of all that are entered into that general Covenant, in the whole world. So
that as the general Covenant is one individual Covenant, so the general or
universal Church is one individual Church or society, whereof particular
Congregations contain but parcells of the members.

And sometimes particular relates to a general, as a particular man, a
particular horse, to man or horse in genere, or the general nature of them; and
in this sense it is true, Omne particulare habet suum generale. But sometime it
relates to an integral, and signifies a member; as a particular room in a
house, a particular street in a Town, a particular ward in a City, a particular
drop in a measure, a particular sand in a heap, a particular man in a Town or
Family. And so we say the particulars in a bill, or sum, or bundle, so many,
and then sum up all in general so much: the particular Brigades or Regiments in
an Army so many, and then cast up the Army in general so many. Now because all
the visible believers in the world, both Officers and private Christians are
called the general, and in that sense the universal and Catholic Church, and
those that live in several Countries or Congregations are called particular
Churches; the question is whether general or universal as it is given to the
whole Church or political Kingdom of Christ on earth signifies a genus or
Church in genere, or an integral: and whether the particular Churches are to be
accounted species of that general, or members of that integral.

But then coms M. Stone and neither affirms nor denies the whole visible
Church to be either a genus or general, or an integral; nor the particular
Churches to be either species or members, but starts a new hare, and says,
that a Congregational Church is a Catholic Church. That is to say, as I
conceive, because every particular Church is a Congregationall Church, and
Congregational Church may be predicated of every particular Church, therefore
Congregational Church is the genus of them all. He dared not make the whole
Church to be a genus of the particular Churches, and he would not make it the
integral.

And whereas I had proved chap. 2. that there is an universal visible Church,
and that it is one, I expected that either it should have been denied that
there is such an universal Church, or that it is one, or if it be one, then to
have it declared whether it be one generically, or one integrally and
numerically; but M. Stone waves them both, and says, a Congregational Church
is a Catholic Church, and so puts a surreptitions question in the room of it.
Whereby he does implicitly grant what I affirmed, that the whole universal
Church is not the genus of the particular Congregationall Churches, but Church
in genere or general notion.

It is true if we refer a street, or ward in a City, or a Brigade or Regiment
in an Army, to Street, Ward, Brigade or Regiment in genere, they are
particulars under such generals; but if we refer them to the City or Army
whereof they are parts, so they are members. So if we refer particular
Congregations to Congregations in genere, they are particulars; or, if you will
have it so, species, or individuals rather of Congregations in genere, but if
we refer them to the whole Church they are members thereof. And it cannot be
denied but particular Congregations may, yea must bear relation unto both.

And by the same way of reasoning that he makes a Congregational Church to be a
Catholic Church, a man may make a particular Church an individual Church, a
Church that is one numerically to be a Catholic Church, for all these may be
predicated of every Congregational Church, and that essentially as they are
such. And so a man may say an individual man is a Catholic man, an individual
horse a catholic horse, an individual house a catholic house, an individual
eye a catholic eye, an individual foot a catholic foot, because individual
may be predicated of all these, and that essentially as such. And so we may
make hic homo to be the genus of all the men in the world, because it may be
predicated of every man. And so we may set individual, and unum numero above
Ens the highest genus of all, because every Ens is individual and unum numero,
if it does exist. And so genus shall be a pretty Proteus. Omnia transformat
sese in miracula rerum. And every man shall be an individual particular general
Catholic man.

There is a second thing about which M. Stone bestows much pains in his book
to invalidate this chapter, and that is to prove that individua are species. I
am not willing to contend with him about the logomachy, and the rather because
though it crosses something said in this chapter, yet it invalidates not the
cause at all.

That there is an essential predication of that which Logicians call species
infima, and he genus infimum upon the individuals, so that it does the office
of a genus thereunto cannot be denied, and therefore as it respects the
individuals it is called species praedicabilis, as the other, as they respect
the superior genus are called species subjicibilis, Burgersd.

For the Logicians carrying the name species no lower then abstract natures
which have some universality in them, though the lowest that may be and nearest
individuals, did not account individuals to be species, for though universals
may be distributed lower and lower into less universals; yet are not, in their
opinion distributed into species singulares, or into several integrals, which
are a totum of another opposite nature. But they conceive genus to be natura
universalior sub qua alia minus universalis continetur Keckerm* and species to
be natura universalis alteri universaliori subjecta: and the lowest species to
be that which has obtained the lowest and utmost perfection among the
universals ultimum universalium. And indeed there is a difference between
species and individuum. Quamvis species conservari potest in uno individuo,
genus tamen non potest conservari in una specie, Burgersd. 45. So that as M.
Stone confesses that animal was not a complete genus until man was made, yet
man was complete as soon as Adam was made.

Again, they say that species (...) perfectior est genere, sed individuum non
est (...) perfectius sua specie, i. e. man is more perfect in regard of essence
then animal, that is, has a further perfection added to him then was in
animal, yet Socrates is not more perfect in essence then man in general. The
species has the integral nature of the genus, and besides that it has an
essential difference perfecting it, and thrusting it on a degree further, but
the individual has no such essential difference added to the lowest species to
perfect that, or thrust it on further, but the species essentiam ejus absolvit;
it has nothing but individuality and existence added, whereby it becomes an
integral; there is no essential perfecting part found in one that is not found
in another, but only the soul and body of Peter is not the soul and body of
Paul. And for ought I know he may make the animal, substance, and Ens in Peter,
differ as much from the animal, substance, and Ens in Paul, as the humane
nature in Peter from that which is in Paul, seeing they are all alike under
contraction, as well as the humane nature, and so make several species of them
also.

Genus is like a Bell that ringeth out, and strikes on both sides, and so Ens
or being in general strikes double, it is either primum, vel a primo ortum; a
primo ortum is double, substantia, vel accidens; substantia is double,
corporea, vel incorporea sive spiritualis; corporea is double, simplex, vel
mista; mista is double, vivens, non vivens; vivens is double, vegetativa, vel
sensitiva; sensitiva is double, homo, vel brutum; and then you are fallen as
low as universals go, which the Logicians commonly make the lowest species; and
then the Bell, as it were falls into a single touling of individuals, which are
strokes of the same side, and man sounds Peter, Paul, John, Robert; so that
the peal of genus's that struck double before, at last when they are fallen as
low as they can fall into a single chime, strokes on the same side: and
individuals differ no more from one another, then single strokes of the Bell
one from another.

Genus bears twinns which are opposite, nay contrary one to the other, and so
struggle in the womb, like Esau and Jacob, of two contrary natures, hairy and
smooth, but the lowest species bears only single Children of the same nature.

If a man in his mind travells from Ens or being which is the highest genus, he
finds it divide presently into two opposite ways, one as it were on the right
hand, the other on the left, viz, substance and accident; if he will trace the
one way viz. substance, he finds it presently divided again into two opposite
ways, viz. Corporeal, Spiritual; if he traceth Corporeal, he finds it divide
again immediately into simple, and mixed; if he traceth mixed, he finds it
divide into that which has life, and that which has none; if he traceth that
which has life, it divides immediately into vegetative and sensitive; if he
traceth sensitive, it divides immediately into man and brute, now if he will
trace man, he finds him no more to divide as the former into opposite
perfecting differences, thrusting that nature on further, but he goes on from
generation to generation, still the same in kind and essence, like a right on
path, that goes further and further, but divides not into cross paths. Or to
make the similitude more full, it leads him out into a plain or heath where
are many ways to ride a breast in, but they all come from the same head, and
lead to the same town: and these are the individuals which proceed from the
lowest species, but divide not into lower differing perfecting species. So that
though they agree with other species, in that they are comprehended by
something more general, and that is predicated on them, yet they are not
predicated upon any inferiors; they may be cut in pieces into members, but not
distributed into further perfecting distinguishing essential forms.

So that call individuals, species, or what you will, yet you see they are not
like other species.

And to prove them to be species, M. Stone makes them not diversa quae sola
ratione dissentiunt, i. e. though all men have humane nature, yet they are not
the same: But opposita quae re and ratione dissentiunt. And truly if it were
ever true of men, it is true in our age, where almost every man is opposite to
each other; Quot homines, tot sententiae. But this is not an essential but
accidental opposition. And though he cannot make them contraries, Quorum unum
uni opponitur, yet he makes them Disparata, Quorum unum multis pariter
opponitur. By reason of their distinct forms and essences: well, be it so, but
then he must make two or three kinds of Disparata. For formerly we were wont
to account things that are under diverse genus's to be disparata, as homo,
arbor, lapis: or intermediate different species under the same genus, as
yellow, blew, green, red, under color, as M. Stone acknowledges, p. 26. But
by this opinion the several yellows, blews, greens, and reds, are each of
disparata to themselves, and so are opposite to themselves though dyed in the
same fatt at the same time. And by the same reason he may say that every thread
of a cloth both warp and woof of the same cloth are opposite colors, and every
punctum of every one of those threads are of an opposite color. I should rather
have said that they are similia, and that unum multis pariter assimilatur,
potius quam opponitur. But I shall let him enjoy his notion, because it hurts
me not. He yields the consequence of this opinion p. 23. that there are so
many species of water, wine, or milk, as there are drops of them in the whole
world; and so a hundred thousand species of water in a pail full of water, and
these have all opposite essential forms, and yet are similar; which is as much
as to say, they have similar, opposite essential forms, Gravia bella fratrum.

But what if the individuals be species, yea so many genus's, yea comprehend a
bundle of genus's in the belly of every one of them, as by this Logic they
must. Will this be any hinderance that many of these individuals may be brought
into one integral?

Suppose every brick has brick-kinde, and body-kinde, and substance-kinde, and
Ens-kinde in it; yet may not an hundred thousand (...) bricks make one
brick-house; and a hundred thousand (...) ^ake one tiled roof; and a thousand
pieces of timber make one timber-house; and many individual men be in one
family, one town, one army, one Kingdom, or Commonwealth? So may many
individual visible believers be in one Congregation, and many Congregations of
them be in one Classis, and many Classis in one Province, and many Provinces
be in one Nation.

And all the Christian Nations in the world be one universal visible Church,
and that be an integral.

When the first Gospel Church (which might be called general or Catholic in
contradistinction to the National Church of the Jews; and because then the
partition wall between Jew and Gentile was broken down, and the commission
issued forth for teaching all Nations and baptizing them) grew too big to meet
in one place for all Ordinances, it divided it self into many less Assemblies,
called, though improperly and at second hand, Churches, yet then this division
was of an integral into its members, not of a genus or general into its species.

I acknowledge the matter of the visible Church militant universal, or visible
Kingdom of Christ on earth, to be the particular visible believers, and the
external form thereof to be their joint submitting unto Christ's regiment and
laws under his Officers where they dwell, but this whole Church when it comes
to be divided, it is considered according to the places where those members
dwell, either in England, Scotland, Ireland, or New England, etc, and so
receive particular denomination from those places; but this division is of an
integral into its members, as the parts respect the whole, and of adjuncts into
their subject places if they be considered in reference to the places wherein
they are contained.

Look at the Church in genesi, says M. Cawdrey, vindic. vindiciarum, 72. and
the single members are the causes thereof as an integral, but look on it in
analysi, in the distribution of it into Congregations, and so it gives essence
unto them, and they are parcells of that greater integral. Though in the
constitution of an integral the parts are before the whole, as the essential
causes thereof, yet in the distribution the whole is before the parts, Cawd. p.
82.

And whereas I had proved that the universal (...) is not a genus or Church in
genere, because it does exist, or has an individual existence of its own,
which a thing in genere has not, vind. p. 79. l. 8. To this argument M. Stone
answers, by affirming that genus does exist. But when he comes to prove it, he
proves only that the integral nature of the genus does exist in the
individuals, and leaves us from them to abstract the genus, which is an
universal, but proves not that the universal does exist any where, but in the
mind of man, or Angel. Now as it does exist in the several individuals, it is
contracted, and is an integral, and must be loosed from his contraction by
abstraction, before it can be a logical genus, or that thing considered in
genere.

This is as if he should say, as it is an integeal it is a genus, which he
confesses differs very much. There is that which may be abstracted, but it
does not exist as abstracted but as contracted. So I may in my mind consider a
prisoner that is bound with many chains, without his chains, and so a freeman,
but I dare not say he existeth a freeman. I can abstract a man from his
riches, learning, piety, nobility, that is endued with them, but I cannot say
he existeth so. Where a thing in genere, or general notion, or general
consideration does exist, but in the understanding, I, as yet know not.

Moreover as such a nature does exist in individuals, it is manifold, but as I
have abstracted it, it is but one. As it does exist in individuals each differ
from other (as M. Stone acknowledges) ne and ratione, and by his own Logic
all those individuals are opposites, and so dissentanies, now dissentaneum est
quod a re dissentit, but one is not a dissentanie, much less an opposite to
itself. Now genus is one, because it is totum quod habet parts.

Therefore you must divest it of existency, before you can consider it as a
genus, or general, or thing in genere.

And to apply it to the whole Church in reference to the members of it: the
whole Church has an existence of its own, as an integral, being individuum, as
Ames confesses, but as M. Stone's genus has no existence, but in the species.
The existence of the whole Church resulteth from the conjoined existence of the
members, but the existence of a genus is abstracted from the species. The whole
Ecumenical visible Church has no species or individual Churches under it,
whereof it is the genus; but is made up of individual visible believers, and
then divided into several pieces or parcel, which we call particular
Congregations Like a piece of ice divided or marked out into many little
pieces; the great piece of ice is not the genus of them, but the integral, and
they are the members. Though the whole Ocean were frozen it would make but a
great integral, and the several parcels thereof members.

But it would not be the genus of those parcells, for ice in genere is the
genus. A pail of water is not the genus of the several drops that are in it,
but is an integral, and they are members, but water in genere is the genus. A
heap of sand (though there were no more sand in the world but that) is not the
genus of the particular sands in it, but sand in genere. So the universal
Church is not the genus of particular believers, but believer in genere, nor of
the particular Congregations, but Congregation in genere.

And whereas I had said in my second Argument vind. p. 79. l. 30. that Quod
habet parts extra parts est totum integrale. M. Stone denies it to be a true
definition. I answer I had it out of Burgersdicius p. 47. and I conceive he
defines it so in opposition to that which he calls totum essentiale, quod
constat ex materia and forma, for there the parts do mutuo se pervadere, and
loco, and situ non differunt, as the soul and body in man, but the parts of an
integral qua integral do differ in both. But to make the Argument past his
exceptions, I shall change only one word, and in that change only express
Burgersd. his meaning more clearly. Quod habet membra extra membra est totum
integrale, sed ecclesia universalis visibilis habet, etc. Ergo. The universal
Church has its members one distinct and several beside and without each other,
whether you consider them to be particular believers, which are the prime
members, or Congregations, etc. which are secondary.

And whereas I had said in my third Argument that the whole Church is made up
of the visible believers in particular Congregations, and of such as are not
fixed members in any particular Congregation, vind. p. 80. l. 17.

M. Stone answers, That individual Christians which are not members of any
particular Congregation, are not formally political Church Members. Now if by
political Church Members he means actual members of this or that particular
Congregation it is true, but they are political members of the Church-Catholick
visible, for they have taken Christ to be their King, and his laws to rule
them, they are enrowled by baptism, and attend on Christ's Ordinances, and
subject themselves to his Ministers, where they become, though some occasion
may not suffer them to be fixed in a particular Congregation. They are
political members of Christ's visible Kingdom primarily, by being members of the
Church-Catholick, the membership in particular Congregations is secondary, and
but accidental to the former. He says they are members materialiter non
formaliter, because they are not confederate. But I answer, they are
confederate i. e. in Covenant with Christ the head and King of the Church, and
confederate with the members in the general Covenant, into which they are
entered, and any other Covenant or confederation to constitute a political
Churchmember I find none in Scripture, neither scrip nor scrawl. And I
conceive all Congregational confederations and Congregations, to be but
accidental to the universal Church, by reason of the numerosity of its members,
for could we conceive that all the members of the whole-Church could meet in
one place, and partake of the same numerical Ordinances orderly, the meeting in
several places should cease.

The woman of Canaan which M. Stone instanceth in, by being a visible Saint and
believer, though she was not forma^ly thereby a member of the Jewish Church, as
he says, yet was she a member of the Evangelical Church, and that completely
if she were baptized, if not baptized, then but incompleatly, and materialites.

The place which is brought by M. Stone to prove the Apostles to be fixed
members of the particular Church in Jerusalem; Act. 1.2.3.13.14. proves it not,
but only that they abode in Jerusalem until the coming down of the holy Ghost
at Pentecost, to enable them to discharge their Apostleships, but then they
traveled over the world, and joined in Ordinances with the Churches which they
converted, as Officers administering both word and seals, and were no more fixed
members of the Church of Jerusalem, then of any other Church where they became.
They were never dwellers at Jerusalem, but men of Galilee, only stayed a while
at Jerusalem upon occasion.

And whereas I said in my fourth Argument, that the Church universal is not
genus, or Church in genere, because it has accidents and adjuncts existing in
it as its own, vind. p. 80. l. 28.

M. Stone affirms that a genus is capable of inherent accidents as its own,
p. 35. and more largely p. 21. with a wonder at me for that opinion. But I must
cleave to mine opinion, as I meant it, for all that he has said against it.
For I have proved that we must divest the integral of the genus from its
existence, before it can be a genus or thing in genere, and divesting it of
existence we must necessarily divest its adjuncts from existence also. Now as
animal in a man furnished with all his adjuncts and accidents does exist, it is
integrum animal, it is not animal in genere. It is true we abstract the proper
accidents with the nature, and say they belong to that nature primarily, as
visibility to humane nature, but visibility existeth only in on integral man.
No man ever heard homo in genere laugh. And in a Logical abstract sense I
granted vind. p. 106. as much as M. Stone contends for; but if homo in genere
does not exist, visibility in genere does not exist neither. But the
Ecumenical Church is not Church in genere, neither does M. Stone think it is
Church in genere, and yet p. 35. he does grant a Church in genere, and says
that the particular Churches are species of it. Now should Church in genere,
and Ecumenical or Catholic, or Synholick Church, as M. Stone calls it p. 40.
in which sense I took it, and it is usually taken, be brought into a Syllogism
together, there would be four terms.

Again, whereas I said in the prosecution of this fourth Argument, that the
universal Church cannot be a genus or Church in genere, because it is capable
of being major and minor, of greater or less extent, vind. p. 81. l. 11. To
this M. Stone answers, that a genus is capable of being majus and minus in actu
exercito. Mankind is capable of increase, virtue shall increase at the calling
of the Jews: and sin may increase, because the particular virtues and vices may
increase.

I answer, the question is not about genus in actu exercito, for that properly
is not genus, but an Integral under that genus.

And there is no more put into the definition of man then animal rationale, now
there are hundred Millions of men in the world then there was when there was
but one man: so there is no more put into the definition of Church in genere
now it consists of Millions of visible believers, then there was when it had
far fewer members, the Integral is enlarged indeed, but not Church in genere.
Though a Giant be major homo, yet he is not magis homo, and though a dwarf be
minor homo, yet he is not minus homo.

So for virtue and vice there is nothing more put into the definition by the
increase of them, and therefore they have no other definition then they had at
the lowest ebb; now the definition explicates the essence of the thing. The
habits of virtue and vice may grow stronger, but gradus non variant speciem,
they may be in more subjects, but that varies not the species neither. So that
genus being unum, consistit in indivisibili: take away either animal or
rationale and you spoil the definition of man: and so you can add nothing to
the essence of it more then is in it, unless you put a further perfecting
distinguishing essential form, and so make a new species below man. The
majority or minority of a thing respects the members, and so is ascribed to it
as an integral; either continuous magnitude as in man or brute, or discreet as
in species, by the multiplication of members, and this is the case of the whole
Church, it may grow greater or less as the members are multiplied or decreased.

Also whereas I said in the prosecution of the fourth Argument that the whole
Church is not a genus, or Church in genere, because it is mutable and fluxile,
which are accidents of an Integral only, vind. p. 81. l. 24.

M. Stone answers this Argument by affirming that genus may be mutable, Totum
genus plantarum and brutorum is mutable and fluxile.

I answer, that the Integrals under each of those generals is mutable and
fluxile, but still the genus of them, or things in genere is not so.

There is nothing taken out of the definition of it by the change or death of
the individual Integrals under those generals, nor nothing added by the renewal
of more.

Object. It may be objected, that in this sense no Integral is mutable neither,
because the definition of it is not changed, though the individual Integral be
changed or perish, and be extinct.

Ans. I answer, That every individual Integral is an example and instance of an
Integral, and has the definition of an Integral belong unto it, but every
individual existing genus, or genus in actu exercito, as M. Stone calls it, is
not an example of the genus, much less the thing in genere, for the definition
of genus, cannot agree thereto, seeing a genus is an universal, and that is but
particular, yea an individual of, or under that genus, and so is but an
Integral. If any essential part of an existing Integral be changed then it is
not an Integral of the same kind it was, and so the peculiar definition of it
must be changed, yet still it is an Integral.

There cannot in propriety of speech be an example of the same genus, because
it is but one, but there may be many examples of Integrals under that genus,
and they indeed are mutable and fluxile, as they are Integrals that exist. How
can an individual man be an example of genus humanum, since, by his own logic,
it is but the lowest species, and species est pars generis, and pars est quae
continetur a toto, therefore a part cannot be the whole, nor an example of the
whole. And to speak properly, if you would give an exampl of a genus, you must
give an example of an universal, not of an individual e. g. Ens is a genus, and
substance, and accident, and spirit, and body, and animal, etc. considered in
the general nature of them. And if you will call individuals species, then is
man in general consideration a genus, but you must not bring an individual man
to be an example of man in genere, which is an universal. I say, an individual
is no instance of an universal, it has integrality in it, but no universality.
Vniversalia sunt perpetua quae per se ipsa nec gignuntur nec intereunt. Fonseca
Metaph. l. 5. c. 28.

And whereas I had said vind. p. 81. l. 36. in prosecution of the same
Argument, that the whole Church is not a genus, or Church in genere; because it
is measured by time and place. M. Stone says p. 11. that genus as well as
integrum is an existing thing measured by time and place.

I answer, that the integrals of such or such a kind, or under that general,
are indeed measured by time and place; but the kind considered in genere is not
so. My question was, whether the whole Ecumenical Church existing at the same
time, be Church in genere, or a great integral consisting of many members.

But how particular time and place comes to take a measure of Church or man in
genere; I as yet perceive not. As it was not drawn from the universal Church of
one or two or ten ages, so it is not measured by them: so that though this or
that Church cease, yea all the members of the whole Church that are now
existing should dye, and the whole Church consist of new members, yet Church in
genere cease not, neither is altered, unless you will say that the whole time
of this world takes a measure of it, because it shall exist in this kind no
longer then this world endures. Though individuals under a genus be Corporeal,
yet the universals of them non sunt ex iis corporeis quae per se loco and
tempori subjecta sunt, ut per seipsas digito designari possunt, says Fonseca,
Meta. l. 5. c. 28. qu. 2. They are only individuals, and so Integrals that are
tied to hic and nunc.

And whereas I had proved the whole Church to be an Integral because there is
admission into it, nutrition and edification of members in it, and ejection of
members out of it, vind. p. 82. l. 13. "M. Stone says p. 9. that a genus is
capable of admission, nutrition, and ejection. Animal admitted man and beast
under his wing. A man at birth is admitted into mankind, so is a lion and a
horse into their kind when they come into the world, and by death are
excommunicated out of that kind.

I answer, the Integrals of such a kind are admitted and ejected, but not the
universals; every Integral must be of, or under one kind or other: If indeed
there were a new creature made, differing in kind from all creatures that ever
were made, then were there a new genus admitted into the world, or if any of
the former kinds were quite destroyed, then were a genus ejected indeed. But
by adding the word members admitted, nourished, edified, or ejected, this
Argument is put beyond his exceptions: and this is the case of the whole
Church, there are members continually admitted and edified, and sometime by
censure ejected, therefore it is an Integral; for member and Integral are
relata.

And whereas I said in my sixth Argument, that the whole Church militant on
earth at the same time is not Church in genere, because it is capable of
Officers, and had once actual Officers over it, and has still Officers that
are indefinitely and habitually i. e. in actu primo Officers to the whole,
vind. p. 82. l. 23.

"M. Stone answers, that a genus may be capable of Officers. Every complete
Ecclesiastical society or Church is furnished with Officers; But Boston
Congregation is a complete entire Church, or a complete Ecclesiastical society;
therefore Boston Church is furnished with Officers, p. 36. And this be
endeavors to make out, p. 33. And there he tells us, that an individual Church
is a species, as it respects Church in genere under which it is comprehended,
and yet as it contains members it is an Integral.

"Hence it is that every individual Church contains members, because it is an
integrum, and yet it is a species as it stands in reference to a Church in
genere. Hence also a Church in genere may be said to have members and Officers
in it, not considered under the nature of genus, but because the species
specialissima contains members, it is an Integrum.

And whereas I had said a genus is not capable of Officers, he answers: "It is
true in actu signato, but that which is genus comprehending the species and
individuals which contains members, may in that respect be said to comprehend
members and Officers.

Ans. I am glad to see M. Stone at length find out the notion of a Church in
genere, a Vine in genere, a body in genere; I hope it may prove a clew to help
us out of this Labyrinth. But how does this vine in genere give essence to the
individual vines, or this Church in genere give essence to the particulars, or
this body in genere give essence to the individuals? Surely not by generation
(except by generation in genere also) but because the entire nature existing in
an individual vine, Church, body, gives essence to it; so that it will follow,
that the entire Integral existing nature comprehended under these kinds gives
essence to the individuals, and not those natures in general consideration, or
in genere. And therefore either Ramus has not given us a right definition of
genus (as some better Logicians then I conceive) or else he gives a definition
only of an existing integral nature of a genus, which is only an Integral of
or under such a genus, and so has passed by the topic of a thing in genere,
or general consideration in abstracto.

But then I argue, that if that which is genus comprehends the species and
individuals which contain members, may in that respect be said to comprehend
members and Officers, then the genus and integrum are all one; for the genus
has members, yea, principal members, even Officers as well as integrum, says
he. But here M. Stone helps himself with a distinction, and says, this is
not as considered under the nature of a genus, but because the species
specialissima contains members as it is an integrum. And I desire to make use
of the same distinction also, and say, that the Officers are not Officers of it
as it is a genus, or as it is considered in genere, but as it is an integrum
under such a genus. And so let me strengthen all my former Arguments against
which he has so much excepted, by his own distinction, and say, that the
existence of the whole Church, the having membra extra membra, the having
existing accidents, the being majus and minus, the being mutable and fluxile,
the being measured by time and place, the admission, nutrition, edification,
and ejection of members, and the doing, actions, and operations, betide to the
whole Church, not as considered under the notion of a genus or Church in
genere, but because it is an individuum, and so an integrum under such a genus.

The same existing thing being considered in several respects, may be a cause,
an effect, a subject, an adjunct, a consent any, a dissentany, an integrum, and
a genus in M. Stone's sense, in actu exercito, but it cannot be that thing in
genere. The whole universal Church in reference to society or polity in general
is a species or individual, but in reference to its members both private and
public, it is an integrum.

But before he leaves this Argument, he adds a suppliment to make his answer
full, page 36. viz. "That there are no habitual Officers in the Church, all
Officers in the Church are actual, habitual Officers are non ens possibile,
quod non est, sed potest esse.

I answer, that they are all actual Officers* and might, if they were able and
had a call, officiate in any part of the Church; and do actually serve the
whole Church, by admitting members into it, and watching over a company of the
members of it in their own places, and administering Word and Seals in many
Congregations, yea Counties, and sometimes many Nations, but exert not the
exercise of their power to the extent of the whole Church actually, in every
part of their office.

So Justices of the Peace for the County do not ordinarily execute their Office
in every Town of the County, and yet have power by their Commission, if they
could do it, and had a call thereto. But as watchmen in particular wards do
safeguard the whole City as well as their particular wards, though they stand
not in every part of the City, and are called the City watchmen; so do Christ's
Ministers serve the whole Church in their particular places, though they cannot
reside, or act in every place of the whole Church, but could do it in regard of
the extent of their office and commission, if they had ability of body and
mind, and a call or opportunity. I mean not by habitual power that which is
never drawn into act, but the power in one officer is not drawn into act in
every part of the Church, nor in every part of the exercise of his office. And
the let is not any want of power by their office, but want of ability in
themselves, and of call and opportunity in the several places. And so they
divide that full execution of their office among the officers, and spiritual
watchmen of this City of God, and some take care of some places and members of
the whole Church, and others of other actually, for order and covenience sake,
and their better edification.

And whereas I had said in my seventh argument vind. p. 84. l. 8. That the
whole Church is an integrall, because it has actions and operations of its
own, for a thing considered in genere is not capable thereof.

"To this M. Stone answers, that a genus is capable of actions and operations
of its own, because operatio sequitur esse, and omne ens agit. A genus has
properties and qualities, and therefore can act; where there is no (...) there
can be no (...), but that is the end of all being p. 21. 22. It is true says
he, the Church-Catholick has actions and operations of its own; and that it
exists and acts its individualls, yet his properties are his own, and so
likewise are his operations. p. 36.

I answer, that these actions and operations are properly the operations of the
integrall under that genus. Now because all the integralls of that kind have
those operations, therefore they are attributed in notion to that genus, and
said to belong thereto, but that thing in genere opperates not, but in the
individualls or integrals under it. But the whole Church may, as I there
proved, act in one and the same individual act, as a City or Kingdom may do,
therefore it is one integrall. A genus or general may act, as it may be said
to have members which are the instruments of actions; but as himself
confesses, that though the members be in the genus, or comprehended under the
genus, yet they respect it not as a genus, but as an integrall, so I say the
operations are the operations of such an integral of such a kind, and not of
the genus as a general. The general in abstracto works not any (...) or
(...) (except notionall) but the integralls work them.

And whereas I proved in my eight argument. vind. 86. l. 8. that the whole
Church is one integrall, by the several appellations given to it in Scripture,
as Body, (...) Kingdom, tabernacle, house, building, temple, army, sheepfold,
wheat-field, etc.

"M. Stone p. 33. says, that these and such appellations are indeed firstly
and properly appellations of an integrum, having analogy to totum integrale:
but says he this totum integrale is species specialissima, or every
individual Church being species specialissima, is also an integrum, and
contains members, and the genus comprehending all his species under him, it
comprehends the individuals with all their members under it, or within it
self. Hence those appellations which are given to an individual Church are
given to the Church in general, etc. If a Church be a body, then this or that
individual is a body, and all the members of it are (...), one and the same
body, of one and the same Corporation.

I answer, that then it will follow that the whole Church is firstly and
properly an integral, of or under such a kind, viz. Society, or polity,
because those appellations are firstly and properly meant of that, and of
particular Congregations but at second hand.

For first men are drawn into that, and into Congregations as a secondary and
accidental thing, containing but parcels of the members of that great society,
or polity. It is clear that (...) is not meant in Scripture of a particular
Congregation, but of the whole Church consisting of Jews and Gentiles entered
into the Kingdom of Christ.

We find not a particular Congregation called the body of Christ, for then
Christ should have innumerable bodies, who has but one, in the same kind, and
that fitly joined together and compacted by that which every joint supplyeth,
Ephesians. 4.16. which M. Hooker, as I said before, calls the external political
Kingdom of Christ. Neither are particular Congregations called the Kingdoms of
Christ, for then he should have many Kingdoms, in the same respect, whereas the
Church militant is but one, consisting of many members. And Christ tells us the
wheat-field is the world, and not particular Congregations. If a King has many
Kingdoms, Cities, or Armies, though he speaks of things that concern them all,
and all alike, he does not say my Kingdom, City, Army, but Kingdoms, Cities,
Armies. If a man has many fields, houses, floors, netts, loavs, and speak of
that which concerns them all, de does not say my field, house, floor, nett,
loaf, but in the plural number, as of many: so would Christ have done if he had
spoken or meant it primarily and intentionally of many Churches or
Congregations, but he binds them up in the singular number, because he meant
but an Integral by all those terms, and the particular Congregations are but
parcells thereof; And differ no more, then when a cart-load of wheat is put
into diverse sacks, whereof every one contains several parcels of the load,
because it could not conveniently be all put into one, which though severed is
accounted as, and sold for one load of wheat, and when it is shot out makes but
one heap. Or as a great common field divided by several meers or baulks, or a
great meadow into several acres by dools, or marks, and so one man cutts and
tends one acre, and another another, but these hinder not the integrality of
the whole, much less do they make the whole meadow the genus, and the parts of
it the species: so neither do the accidental and secondary differences between
particular Congregations hinder the integrality of the whole Church, much less
make that the genus, and them the species.

A ninth Argument I brought to prove the whole Church an Integral, was from the
several words which the Scripture uses to express the union of the members
of the whole Church together, as added, builded together, fitly framed
together, compacted, all the body by joints and bands knit together, etc. vind.
p. 87. l. 18.

To this Argument M. Stone, p. 36. gives the same answer, that he did to the
former Argument.

But it is clear that the phrases are meant of the whole Church primarily and
immediately, and not of particular Congregations.

This adding, joining, jointing, and building of the converted ones is first to
the Kingdom, Body, and House of Christ, and there is no other essential form
added to them beside Christianity, by being severed out partiatim, by parcells
into several Congregations; that is a most accidental thing to them as
Christians, brought in by convenience, and necessity. Particular Congregations;
are but as several ridges in a wheat-field, which hinder not the integrality of
the whole field at all. As the dwelling of several men in several Towns in a
Kingdom or Commonwealth, which Towns contain only some parcells of the
subjects of that Kingdom or Commonwealth hinders not the integrality of the
whole, though they be under particular officers for civil affairs: no more do
the deistinction of visible Christians, into several Congregations under
several particular officers for Ecclesiastical affairs, hinder the integrality
of the whole Church. First, men are subjects or denisons of the Nation or
Kingdom, and then have liberty according to their conveniences to live in what
petty society they please. So, etc.

Though a man should have several houses in never so many Counties or Towns,
and at sometime or other resort to them all, and dwell for a time in them, yet
this varies not his membership of the Kingdom or Commonwealth, being merely
accidental to that relation. So, etc.

It cannot be denied but that the several Congregations are integrals in
reference to their own members, and so is any village in reference to the
inhabitants, but in reference to the whole Church or Kingdom of Christ they are
members, as the villages are of a Kingdom, or Commonwealth.

How many bodies politic, and societies in a Nation are members of the greater
body politic and society of that Nation? so many less bodies Ecclesiastical
make up the greater body Ecclesiastical in a Nation; For it was foretold that
the Kingdoms of this world should become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his
Christ, Revel. 11.15. The Ecclesiastical polities in converted Kingdoms, are
said to be commensurable to the civil. And by the same reason all the
Christians in all territories on earth make up the whole Church or whole
visible Kingdom of Christ in the Christian world, because it contains all the
members thereof, who are Christ's subjects.

And whereas M. Stone says, p. 37. that Baptism is a privilege of a political
member, as Circumcision was a privilege of the members of the Jewish Church,
Genesis 17. Those Act. 2. were admitted into the Church, and then baptized.

Answ. It is not said, they that were admitted into the Church were baptized,
but they that gladly received his Word were baptized, verse 14. so that
Baptism admitted them into their first relation, and that was into the visible
Church.

Neither can it be absolutely said that Circumcision was a privilege of the
Jewish Church, for the second person, Ishmael, that was circumcised was not of
it, nor any of the other Children of Abraham, by Keturah, nor Esau, and yet
were circumcised. Can we think that Job and his friends so eminent for piety,
and who sacrificed to the true God with acceptance were uncircumcised?

And were all those nations among whom they were chief men, if not rulers,
which were of Abraham's posterity by Keturah, and of Esau's stock, heathens,
uncircumcised? The very name of Elihu shows the contrary, which signifies my
God is Jehovah. So that it is more then probable that there were religious
persons and Countries after Abraham's time, beside the Jews, if not before them,
as M. Baxter has well observed in his treatise upon Infants Baptism, and these
no doubdt were circumcised.

It Is true Religion did not very long continue among them, as among the Jews,
but God would not have cast off them, if they had not forsaken him.

I grant that the seal of admission is to be given to none but such as are in
covenant with God. But what covenant? The general divine covenant, or the
particular humane covenant? Surely into the general covenant with God. The
many thousands bapttzed by John, and Christ's disciples, and the three thousand
in Acts ^ were indeed in covenant with the national Church of the Jews before
baptism, because the Church was then National, but by this new signs they were
admitted into the Evangelicall Church by a new and Catholic seal, to which
their former standing gave them no right. And though as M. Stone, says
Obsignation with the initial seal of Baptism implies confederation, and
admission into the Church, yet it implies not confederation with this, or
that, or any particular Church, or admission into it. Though Saul was baptized
by Ananias at Damascus, yet was it not as confederate either with the Church at
Jerusalem, or Damascus whereof he had been a bitter persecutor, but as a
Convert to Jesus Christ,

And though happily Cornelius Acts 10. might be confederate with the Jewish
Church, being a Proselite, yet we know of no such confederation of his kinsmen
and near friends mentioned verse. 24, who were Gentiles, and yet were all
baptized. Neither do I think there was any implicit covenant to bind the
Jewish Church together, or the Proselites to the Jewish Church, besides the
divine general covenant with God, and yet for ought I know it had been as
requisite for the members of every Synagogue as for particular Congregations
now, seeing they were liable to censures there.

With what particular Church were the Samaritans, and Simon Magus confederate
Act. 8.12? who were a little before bewitched by Simons sorceries, yet upon
Philips preaching unto them, and their conversion unto Christ, they were
baptized both men and women; the witch, and the bewitched.

Surely Samaria was not confederate with Jerusalem, they did not love one
another so well: neither was there any instituted Church (as the new phrase is)
as yet in Samaria: neither was it a Congregationall Church, but the whole City
with one accord: neither were there any particular officers set over them then,
neither could they enter into a particular Church covenant, as it is called,
until they were baptized, the general covenant must precede the particular,
and therefore were in no capacity to choose any officers over them, and yet
they were baptized, and therefore baptism is no privilege of a particular
political Churchmember, but of the general. And with what Church was the
Jaylour as Philippi and his rude family in covenant? Act. 16.33. who was a
ruffianly heathen. Yet being converted at midnight, was baptized the same hour
of the night, without asking leave of the Church there, if there were any.

And for this particular covenant, though M. Stone says p. 37. that it is a
covenant not only between man and man, but also between God and man* But
quojure? where is the institution of it, or any hint of it in Scripture? It may
be a promise before God, but not between God and them; but between the people
among themselves, and between the people and their Minister. The first and
general covenant is between God and man, and is of divine institution, but the
second and particular is but humane and prudentiall, and therefore cannot
divolve any such privilege upon people unless the Lord had instituted it to
that end. The universal Church is the whole political visible kingdom of
Christ on earth, and the visible believers are the matter thereof, and these
believers are converted, or, at least, initiated into it by Christ's officers,
not under the notion of particular officers, but as Christ's Ministers and
Ambassadors, to whom is committed the word of reconciliation; and are bound by
their general covenant to believe what God has revealed, and obey what God
has commanded. As a Denison of England is bound to obey the Laws of England,
by being a subject thereof, and then these subjects are placed in several towns
under particular civil officers, but no particular covenant is required of
them to make them several villages, which for ought I know is as requisite as
a particular Church covenant. And those towns consist of English subjects, but
they are not bound to the laws, because members of those towns, but because
subjects to the sovereign power of the whole nation. So Christians are bound to
perform obedience to Christ in all their relations and places, as subjects to
Christ, and not by a particular covenant, except Christ had instituted any
such, as between man and wife, and there they are bound by both.

M. Stone brings two Aenigmaticall places to prove this covenant to be
between God and man. Zech. 11.7.10.14 Of beauty and bands. And Isa. 62.5. As a
bridegroom rejoices over his bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee: and
as a young man marries a virgin, so shall thy sons marry thee. But I can find
no evidence or hint in either of these places for a Congregationall Covenant.
No nor in all the instances that are usually given, viz, Gods Covenant with
Abraham, but we know that was the general covenant between God and man, and
not Congregationall. And the covenants made in the days of Asa, Jehoshaphat,
Hezekiah, Josiah; Nehemiah, are nothing to the purpose, for they were not
Congregationall, but renewalls of their National Covenant with God, and they
were the Church of God before they renewed this covenant, and not constituted
by the renewall of it.

Neither does Act. 9.26. which is alleged some, prove it. It is said indeed
that when Saul was come to Jerusalem, he assayed to join himself to the
disciples, but they were all afraid of him, and believed not that he was a
disciple. But this joining him to the disciples, was to have comunion and
society with them, and not to be a particular Church member there. It is not
said he assayed to join himself to the Church, as a member, but to the
disciples, much less is any particular covenant mentioned there.

But as if one that was known to be an Apparitour, or Pursevant, or Persecutour
in the Bishops days should assay to join himself with private Christians in
converse, or some private meeting, they would be afraid of him; so was that
case. But before that journey to Jerusalem, ver. 15. it was showed them, and by
Christ to Ananias that he was a chosen vessel to bear Christ's name before the
Gentiles and Kings, as well as the children of Israel. And therefore might not
join with the Church at Jerusalem neither as an officer or private member.
Neither is it mentioned to which of the Congregations in Jerusalem he assayed
to join himself, whereof no doubt there were great store, seeing they had not
great public houses to meet in, but private houses only, but it was to the
Disciples or Christians there.

Others bring a proof for this way from Isai. 42.16. I will bring the blind by
a way that they knew not, I will lead them in paths that they have not known: I
will make darkness light before them, and crooked things straight. But this
will not prove it, but may as well serve for any way that men can fancy. They
may as well prove themselves blind by this text, as prove a Congregational
Covenant from thence.

Others argue that Church-relation is not a natural relation but a voluntary,
and therefore must be by a Covenant or mutual agreement.

A man say they will be my brother or kinsman whether I will or no, because it
is a natural relation, but it is not so in this relation.

I answer, so a man being born within the Church will be a Churchmember by
federal holiness, and so a brother in a spiritual sense whether I will or no,
being in the general Covenant. O! but say they, how can a woman become my wife,
or a man become my servant, but by a voluntary Covenant? Ans. no more can a man
or woman of age be a Christian, or member of the whole Church, but by being in
Covenant with Christ the husband and Lord of his Church, but what is this to a
Congregational Covenant between member and member? Do servants when they enter
into a family, or soldiers into a band or troop, make one covenant with the
master or captain, and another with their fellow servants, and
fellow soldiers? If happily they should covenant together to be faithful in
their places, and helpful one to another, and this should tend to the great
advantage of the master, or captain, and benefit of each other, yet this is not
that which makes them that masters servants, or that captains soldiers, but
the covenant with the master, or captain. Neither does any master or captain
require any such secondary covenant between his servants or soldiers, and yet
it is a voluntary relation, they enter into, but it is voluntary in respect of
the master and servant, the captain and soldier, not in regard of the
fellow servants, and fellow soldiers, that falls in necessarily.

O! but it is voluntary what particular members I will join withal in a
particular Congregation, I may choose of what particular society I will be a
member.

Answ. so I may choose in what Town in a Kingdom I will dwell, but I must take
the inhabitants thereof to be my fellow-neighbours necessarily.

So all the Churches of Christ ever took the Christians cohabiting with them
within the civil bounds, to be their fellow members of those Churches.

The Church of Jerusalem consisted of the Christians inhabiting in Jerusalem,
and so it may be said of Corinth, Ephesus, Philippi, etc. they did not pick and
choose some out of one vicinity some out of another. If any were heretical or
scandalous they had censures to remove or amend them.

Now our civil bounds for Towns and Vicinities have been anciently set for
civil transactions, and cannot be by particular men altered, but by authority,
and if all the inhabitants within those limits be in the visible covenant with
Christ and under his seal, and have public houses or Churches, as they are
ordinarily, but tropically called for public worship, and a maintenance
appointed out of the revenues of those Towns to maintain a Minister over them,
and have a Minister of their own set over them, to whom, and his predecessors
the Christians of that precinct have from generation to generation submitted in
the Lord, and enjoyed Gods Ordinances from them, I cannot see how without
breach of order, and removing the ancient landmarks, and introducing
confusion, any particular member either of that Town or Church can of their own
heads alter this, and pick Church Members whom they list, and where they list,
and bring them into a particular Covenant to make a new particular Church,
under color to make a pure Church.

I believe all the Church Members in Jerusalem, Corinth, Philippi, etc. were
not really godly, but many only externally, and many very loose, and guilty of
foul faults, 1 Cor, 11. Tit. 1.16. 2 Timothy 3.5 Phil. 3.18, 19. Jude 12.13, 16.

Yet they did not leave them out, and institute new Churches of choice members,
but sought to reclaim them. I scarce think all the members of the Churches in
New England are really godly, or so judged of their Pastors or fellow members,
and yet they do not pick the good from among the rest, and make new Churches of
them, but keep the particular Churches still answerable to the civil bounds. It
is a bad way of cure to cut off the sound members from the diseased, and unite
them together in a new body.

It Is true the civil bounds are heterogeneal to the Church, but so they were in
Jerusalem, Corinth, Ephesus, etc. and yet they bounded them then, and
denominated them, and so they do still in New England; and so the several
showers are to the several Seas, yet they bound and denominate them also.
Indeed if Towns and Churches were to be constituted, they might have other
bounds and quantities allowed them, and so might the Towns in New England have,
for there is no precept left in the word to limit either of them, but the
Churches would be comprehended in those towns: this is not to measure Churches
by the acre, as some foolishly object. But we have both precept, example and
necessity requiring that the Churches should be in a vicinity, and not
scattered abroad, so as the cannot conveniently meet together publicly on the
Lords day, or watch over one another.

Yea, say some, if Churches were rightly constituted at first, we ought not to
separate from them, or gather Churches out of Churches, but ours were not so.

Ans. There are three things that I hear objected against our constitution of
Churches: First, that it was not voluntary, but forced by authority.

Answer, The members were not forced from heathenisme to christianity, but they
became christians many generations ago voluntarily, for ought I know: and for
reforming of them, their predecessors, or successors, either from Popery,
which was a spiritual leprosy over-spreading the Church, or any other
superstition, and reforming of them by authority and compulsion, I think it is
no more then the Magistrate might, yea ought to do, and the godly Kings and
Rulers in the Old Testament did, and were commended and blessed for doing. Indeed
a man cannot regularly compel a woman to be his wife against her will; nor a
man compel another to be his servant, or apprentice, but if they have once
bound themselves by marriage, promise, or indenture, they may compel them to
hold so, and to obey and reform themselves. So is the case between Christ and
his visible Church.

Secondly it is objected that we are not fit matter for a Church, and therefore
not fit to be made Churches, or to be joined withal.

Answer, was there not as unfit matter in the Jewish Church before Christ's
coming, and yet the Church for the essence of it was the same then and now? yea
was there not as unfit matter in the Churches in the Apostles time at Corinth
and Phillippi etc? see the texts before named, and tell me if we have worse
matter then there was, and yet what the Gospel there says, it says to them
that are under the Gospel. Give an instance of any man or woman that ever
professed belief in, and subjection to Christ in all the New Testament that
ever was denied admission into the visible Church, or that was cast out merely
for want of the power of godliness. The Apostles instructed, informed,
reproved, and sought to amend them, and if they were heretical, or notorious
and obstinate, excommunicated them; and that we allow and could heartily wish
were still done, and hope may in due time.

Does a shepherd turn the diseased sheep out of his flock quite, and feed only
the sound ones? no, he is to strengthen the diseased, and heal the sick, and
bind up the broken, and bring again that which was driven away, and seek up
that which is lost, Ezekiel. 34.4. Indeed it is requisite he should separate the
scabbed and diseased from the rest for a time, lest they infect the rest, and
then having cured them to put them together into the same fold. Ministers are
sent to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, as Christ commands, Mat. 10.6.
and not to feed the sound ones only that went not astray: and what manner of
people Christ meant by those lost sheep, I need not tell you, such I believe as
many in our age would have passed by, as the Priest and Levite did the wounded
man in the parable, or counted goats rather then sheep.

Yea but the members of the Churches in the New Testament that grew so corrupt,
did not appear so at their admission into the Church.

Ans. We know they were new Converts to the faith of Christ, and immediately
admitted by baptism, even by thousands of a day, and that when they were men
grown, without any strict enquiry of the truth of grace in them, and without
any waiting for experience of their godly conversation.

Philip baptized Simon the Sorcerer after his profession of his belief in
Christ, who yet was in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, and of all
men one would have thought he should have been well tried first, but was not.

And the Apostle says of some members in the Church of Corinth, that they had
not the knowledge of God, he spoke it to their shame. Surely if they had had it
at their first admission into Church, they would not have lost it afterward,
under the Ministry of their teachers. Indeed they might corrupt in manners, or
in judgment, but not lose their knowledge, and grow sotts.

But there is a great deal of difference between a Church at the first
constitution of it, when possibly they may pick choice members, as they did at
first in N. E. when they went over thither, men converted by the Ministry in
Old England before they went thither; and a successive Church in after ages,
which consist of a new generation, and seed of the former, aetas parentum pejor
avis, tulit nos nequiores, mox daturos progeniem vitiosiorem. The Churches
succeeding the Apostles age were not so pure as in the Apostles times, and yet
then they were bad enough: and I fear the succeeding Churches in N. E. will not
prove altogether so pure and eminent for sincerity of grace and holy
conversation as their first were; and yet our brethren do not hold that corrupt
members in such a successive Church does unchurch them; and alas that is our
condition in this nation, the Lord in mercy reform and amend us.

Thirdly it is objected against us, that we are not rightly constituted,
because we want an explicit Congregational covenant, and so the true form.

Answer, Thus you see I am enforced to return to speak of the Covenant again.

But I answer, that all our Brethren for the Congregationall way do not
unchurch us for want of that; and I think I may clear our Brethren in N. E.
from that aspersion: and some of our Brethren at home who have lately written,
require but a mutual agreement for joint worship of God, and I am sure that
may be found in our Congregations, and both have been, and might be more, but
for these new scruples put into their minds.

For my part I am not against an explicit Covenant in our Congregations, but
wish they were as willing to it, as they are in many places willing to come to
an agreement with their Ministers for their tithes, if they can get advantage
thereby, as most what they do abundantly. For by such a covenant, I conceive
they should be more bound to their Ministers, as well as their Ministers to
them, and it might happily be a means to cause them to submit the better to our
instructions, reproofs, admonitions, inspection and discipline; but I dare not
stamp jus divinum upon it, neither do I find any hint of it in Scripture or
primitive times, and therefore cannot believe there was any: but that they
stood bound by their general Covenant to submit to the Ministers that were set
over them in the Lord, in their several places. Neither dare I think it is that
which gives people right to Gods Ordinances, nor that it can divolve such a
privilege upon the members that enter into it, to invest them with the power
of the keys, to admit members, make officers, to invest and divest them, and
have all Church power radically in themselves.

I know M. Stone does not make it the form of a particular Congregation, but
the Cement rather; but truly as it is used or abused rather, by many about us,
I fear it will prove but untempered mortar. For first people are so eager of it,
that some people will join with Antipaedobaptists, Millenaries, and fifth
monarchy-men, or any sect so they may but be in a covenant. Secondly, it is
raised up as a partition wall between them and all the rest of the Churches of
Christ (though they be in implicit covenant, and agreement together, and with
their Pastors) so that they will not communicate with them, though never so
religious, reformed, and eminent Congregations, nor suffer any of them, though
never so godly and so acknowledged by them to communicate with themselves. They
will not baptize any of our children, nor suffer us to baptize any of theirs:
nay they will not so much as stay to see any of our children baptized, if they
be occasionally at a Lecture where any such child is to be baptized, though
they know the parents be very godly, and the Minister be godly that is to
baptize them, and though there be nothing offensive in the manner of
administration of Baptism, but run out, as if the Church were on fire over
their heads. Thirdly, as it occasioneth the breach of many marriages that else
would be suitable, so it many times causes great breaches after marriages
between man and wife, even to the antichristianizing, or at least to the
unchurching one of another, and causes jarrs and alienation of affections, and
vain janglings and disputes, and unchristian heats and animosities instead of
sweet Christian love, unity, and communion, and mutual edification. Fourthly,
it exceedingly hinders family duties, that they can neither join so cordially
together in prayer, having such sinister thoughts one of another, nor yet in
Catechizing of their families; nor calling over the Word publicly taught, or
calling children and servants to an account for what they have heard publicly,
because one runs to one Town to the public Ordinances, and another to another,
and one draws some of the family one way, and the other another. Fifthly it is
used as a means to enthral the members that are entered into it, so that though
they marry out of that Town, or remove their dwellings out by necessity or for
convenience, and dwell never so far distant from them, yet must they remain
members of that Congregation, and may not join with any other Church, without
their leave and dismission, which they will not give, except that Church with
which they would join be constituted, or instituted, as the new phrase is, by
an explicit Covenant, as sad experience has proved: nay, are not permitted to
join with a Congregation, though never so eminent for godliness and
reformation; no, not though the person acknowledges, not only the Minister to
be godly and eminent, but also the instrument under God of the work of grace in
him formerly.

Yea it is accounted no less then spiritual adultery to depart from them after
they are thus joined, without their dismission, which they will not give,
except to a new instituted Church of the same kind.

If it be such a snare, it is good for single persons to keep out of that bond
until they see how and where God will dispose of them by marriage: and for
married persons to get as long leases of their farms as they can, and keep
their yoke-fellows as long as they can, for if they dye, they lay a great bar
in their own way against a second marriage, except to one of their own Church,
or one of like constitution. I do not conceive that God ever bound any man or
woman to such inconveniences, only they must not marry, but in the Lord, says
the Apostle; nor yet do our brethren in New England put any such yoke upon the
Disciples necks, as far as I understand; neither do I think a brother or sister
is in bondage in such a case, but this use or rather abuse is made of this
Covenant by some in our Country.

It is a harsh censure which M. Sam. Mather, a young man as I hear, has given
against such as are not of his judgment in this point, in his preface before
M. Stones Book, "As if the dreadful revenges of God, either for personal
pollutions, or for sinful compliance with former devices, or ways of men in
the things of his house, or for secret contempt of the simplicity and power of
the Gospel, are gone forth in penal blindness, and other blasting strokes, upon
the souls of some in these times.

As if this were the very pattern showed in the Mount, and the very fashion and
form of the house showed to the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 43.10.11. as is there
intimated. But we pray you is it a pattern revealed in the Word of God, or by
inspiration only? If it be set down in the Word of God, we beseech you be
pleased to show it unto us, and point us to the texts of Scripture that hold it
forth: we hope some of us desire to fear and serve God in truth, as well as
among you. How many worthy Martyrs, Ministers, and eminent Christians have dyed
for the faith, and in the faith, and gone to heaven, before either M. Mather,
or this Covenant were born; were they all stricken with the dreadful revenges
of God in penal blindness and blasting strokes? I believe our brethren will not
say so.

And if this Church Covenant has no better effects elsewhere, then it has in
these parts, as I showed before, truly it were better it never had been
devised, or were made Nehushtan.

M. Stone calls the Universal Church, Totum genericum existens, as M. Hooker
did also in his book; of which I said vind. 40 that it is nothing else but
integrum similare. But I do acknowledge that though totum genericum existens may
be integrum similare, yet is not always so. It is so when all of that kind that
existeth is bound together in one copula or bond.

As if all the Sand in the world were on one heap, or all the Gold in the world
were of one lump, they were integralls.

Or if there be such a bird as the Phoenix, it is totum genericum existens, and
yet it is an integrall. But if there be no such bond, then it is not an
integral* yet they are not that thing in genere, nor the genus of all that
kind. But the universal visible Church, though it be totum genericum existens,
i. e. all of that kind of society or body that existeth, yet it is an integral,
because it is bound together by an external visible bond, yea bonds, as has
been showed before; and that Covenant with God in Christ, and the seal of
Baptism, which makes them of that kind completely, makes them also of that
integral, ea formali ratione, and they cannot be of that kind, except they
enter in as members of that integrall.

I acknowledge also that the instance of the nature of a flock not reserved in
one sheep, or of a Corporation reserved in one man, mentioned vind p. 79, which
M. Stone puts me twice in mind of, was misplaced and misapplied there; for the
flock is not the genus of sheep, nor the Corporation of the men in it; but both
flock and Corporation are each of them integrals, and so is the whole Church.

M. Stone also finds fault that I said vind. p. 78, that that which existeth
in the individual is ipsa causa materialis individui. If he like not that
expression, let him take the former mentioned but three lines before it, it is
pars essentialis individui, for it goes to the constitution of the essence of
it, but it is not the genus of the integral, or that thing in genere.

And whereas I said vind. p. 216. that I do not mean that the universal Church
is first in regard of constitution of the whole political Kingdom of Christ
by aggregation and combination, because the particular Congregations must exist
before they can be combined and aggregated. I now declare that the first matter
of the universal Church are particular visible bleleevers, that are drawn into
the general Covenant, and these are secondarily combined into particular
combinations, and so the combinations of Congregations in the universal Church
is not the first combination, but a secondary, and in the distribution or
analysis of the Church-Catholick, they are accounted members of the
distribution, but in the genesis or constitution, the particular members are
first constitutive.

I shall also be willing that the eighth way whereby the whole Church may be
accounted the prime Church, namely cognitione sive noscibilitate perfecta,
mentioned vind. 218. 219. and 253 may be left out, because it is more proper to
a genericall nature then an integrall: and so may be said of the Church as it
is a kind of society differing from others, rather then as it is an integral
consisting of members, for there the members are first considered.

And to M. Stones objection against what I said vin. p. 219 and 220, that the
priority of the Church-Catholick in respect of the particular, is like the
priority of a Kingdom to the parts of it, or of a Corporation to the parts of
it, which said I is not meant in a mathematical or techtonicall consideration.

I answer once again, that the members of the universal Church which are the
particular visible believers, are, as it is an integral, in consideration
before the whole, because the whole is made up of them, as a kingdom of all the
members of the kingdom, and all the towns in it are made up of the members of
the kingdom, and so are all particular Congregations of the members of the
universal Church; and in the distribution of the whole into parts there the
whole is considered first, and then is distributed not only into particular
members, but into combined members dwelling in several Countries, or less
secondary combinations, and so even those secondary combinations may be said to
make up that whole, for of such parts as the whole is distributed into, of such
it is also constituted.

But the particular Congregations are made up only of such as are members of
the whole Church, and they are entered into that body, before they are
considered as members of the petty several societies.

And for the unity and priority of the Catholic Church. M. Cotton upon Cant.
6.9 p. 191. has this passage. "The Church is one, i. e. at unity or brotherly
love one with another, as one body, though scattered into many places, as
England, Scotland Germany, etc. in all Christendom. Some Churches are more
chaste, mild, and unspotted then others, even of the same Country* and yet such
are but few, and though few, yet at entire unity as one body. The only one of
her mother, the choicest one of her that bare her. In the Hebrew phrase, says
he, the whole is the mother, the parts are the members. The true Catholic
Church of Christ is the mother of all the reformed daughters, and these
daughter-Churches that are most chaste, and mild, and undefiled they are best
esteemed, and best beloved of the mother Catholic Church.

Whence we note, that there is a Church-Catholick, and that particular Churches
are the daughters of that Church, and these daughters are parts and members of
that one body, and therefore not species, and this must consist of the same
nature that the members do which constitute it, and so be visible, else I know
not what sense to make of M. Cottons words.

It seems very strange to me that whereas the Scripture speaks so much of
the Kingdom of Christ, the Kingdom of God, the Kingdom of his dear Son, and
Christ's everlasting Kingdom, and of the amplitude thereof from sea to sea, and
from the flood to the worlds end, that all this should be nothing else but a
Kingdom in genere, or a general Kingdom in a Logical notion, comprehending none
but a few particular Congregations, consisting of 7. 10. 20. 40. or 60. persons
therein, united in an explicit Congregational Covenant, and no universal or
large integral Kingdom whereof they are but members or parcels.

As if a King should be famous for a large and glorious Kingdom, and when all
coms to all, it is nothing but a few little Islands that stand independent at a
distance one from another, and have no other union together but that they are
all ruled by the same King, and are as so many petty kingdoms under him, having
nothing to do one with another, but only to live in love and peace together. I
conceive this is a very great eclipsing of the glory of Christ in his Kingly
office and honor. I should listen after the interpretation that our brethren
give of Act. 8.3. and Gal. 1.13. of Readiness persecuting the Church; and Act.
2.47. of the adding of people to the Church; and 1 Cor. 12.28. of God's setting
Officers in the Church to be meant (...), if the Scripture did not so
abundantly speak of the unity and amplitude of the Church, and bonds whereby
all of that sort are bound together in an Integral. But for my part I cannot
see how it is possible for a man to enter completely into that (...) or kind,
but he must withal enter into that Integral, and that this Integral must
receive not only several Congregations, but even whole Christian Nations, and
even single persons converted, though they should not be joined in any
particular Congregations. I should have added many other things, but that I
would not exceed the bounds of a Postscript, and the Press stays for this.
The Lord guide us into all truth.

FINIS.

