A true Separation between the power of of the Spirit, and the imitation of
Antichrist.
The difference between the precious and the vile, between Saints and
Professors, between the power and the form, between the wise virgins who are so
indeed, and them who have gotten the name, but want the power.

TO all you separated ones who profess a separation from the world, and to be
come out of the worlds worship, and are gotten into the highest form and
profession, but the earthly nature is yet standing in you, and therefore all
your forms and religions which is set up in that nature, is ignorant of the
living God, and of the pure religion which the servants of the Lord live in,
who are unspotted with the world, who walk in the pure light of Christ which
shines into the conscience, in which light you are all seen, and your
profession is discovered to be but a form of words gathered up into your
earthly wisdom and comprehension from the letter which they spoke forth who
lived in the life* and all you who are wandered from one mountain to another,
and have forgotten your resting place, and are turned out from the light of
Christ in the conscience, which should guide your minds and stay them upon God:
And all you who are settled upon your lees, and have builded your nests on high,
you are seen and made manifest in the light of Christ, to be out of the life of
what you do profess: you who are building Tabernacles of the Saints words to
shelter your selves in having their words in the form and in the letter which
they spoke from the life and power of the Spirit which was in them who spoke
forth the Scriptures, and so you cover over your deceit with the words, and so
live at ease and careless, being got up into a carnal security, and carnal
peace settled in your carnal minds; but now the day of God is dawning, and the
light of Christ is risen, and has shined into our hearts, and in it we do see
that your bed is too short and your covering is too narrow, and you must now
all be turned to your own and out of the Scriptures which are theirs who live
the life, and the life of the Scriptures we do witness to be fulfilled in us
according to our measure, and so by the life you are made manifest, and to us
clearly seen who walk in the light to be out of the gate of truth, and your
prefession is seen to be but a form of words, and is dust, and dust is the
Serpents meat, and by it the Serpents nature is fed in you, and the Serpents
wisdom and the Serpents head must be bruised, which is yet whole in you who
are righteous in your own eyes; but all your righteouiness is filthy and is
abomination to the Lord, whose mind is turned from the light of Christ within
you, into the polutions and into the liberty of the flesh, a and so take
liberty to walk after your own ungodly lusts, and the flesh is defiled, and
your minds and consciences are defiled through the lusts of uncleanness.

Now as Concerning Virgins,

I am moved and commanded of the Lord from the word of the Lord, which yet
lies upon me to you-wards who have taken upon you that name, but know not the
Virgin state, to you I speak from the Lord, and to you I clear my conscience in
the presence of the Lord, to you who have had a light shining within you, and
have had the prophesies opened in your minds by the light, the light I own
which did open the things of God, and gave you a sight of them, and in this
light you have seen something of a fire which should should burn up the man of
Sin, and all the lusts of the flesh, and all lusts of uncleanness, but you did
not abide in this light to have these things fulfilled in you; but your minds
turned from the light, and so the filthy lustful nature got up again, and the
earthly will got up again, and now the light is veiled in you, and now from the
dark mind and earthly wisdom you talk of being passed through the fire, and
through the death, but the fire of the Lord is yet to be revealed from heaven
upon you, to burn up and consume your wisdom and knowledge in which you are
exalted, and from which you speak high swelling words of vanity, beguiling
unstable souls, drawing them into lightness and liberty, and a carnal joy,
and so keeps them from the Cross, and from obedience to the light of Christ in
the conscience; and by this light which you are disobedient unto, by it you are
judged and condemned, and all your actions from that nature which is turned
from the light in the conscience which did once let you see a sight of those
things, and by the unquenchable fire must that nature that now rules in you
suffer and be burned up, which is got up to boast of great things, promising to
your selves and others liberty when as your selves are servants unto Sin, and
bondslaves to Corruption.

And all you who in the light have had openings and prophesies opened in your
minds of the virgin-state and of purity, but not waiting in the light which let
you see these things, which light is within, and shined in you for a season,
and this estate you should have waited for to have been fulfilled within you;
but your minds going forth from the light, are turned into the imaginations and
imitations, and now the adulterous mind is got up again, and ruluth over the
pure, and you have not kept your virgin, and you are the foolish virgins, who
have only the name, but your light is put out, and you want oil in your lampi,
and the adulterous nature which is full of fornication now reigns in you, and
the Prophet is slain within you which prophesied of these things, and the light
darkened which let you see such a condition there was to be enjoyed, and now the
imitation is got up in the place where the light shined, and the Inchanter, and
now by your inventions and imaginations form to your selves a virgin estate,
contrary to the light of Christ, and contrary to the Spirit of God, only from
imitation in your wills, and so being sensual separate your selves, and do act
in your own wills, and now divide and separate between the husband and the
wife, and he that is bound to a wife amongst you, seek, to be loose, and then
you say you are separated from the beastly lust, and so form a separation which
is but outward and carnal, but are full of lusts, uncleanness in the heart,
and there is no separation in you, for you are turned from the light of Christ,
which should separate you from the lusts of the heart, for he that lusts in
the heart, has committed adultery though he be not joined to a woman: and here
you are out of the Doctrine of Christ, and on of the light of Christ, which
pu^ifieth the heart from all lusts, and conceivings of lust and begetting in
the lust, and so you act in your will and inventions, making a separtion
outwardly in the flesh, but the heart full of lusts and uncleanness within.
Now a Virgin is pure, and kept from all pollutions, and from all lusts of the
flesh, and lusts of uncleanness, is not defiled nor polluted, but is kept pure
in the light of Christ, and they are not defiled with women, and they are
virgins who are redeemed from the earth, who follow the Lamb, whose garments
are undefiled; and the virgin state we witness who love the light of Christ
which is pure, and does keep our minds pure, and the pure water we do witness
which the Scripture speaks of, by which we are washed from all filthiness of
flesh and spirit, and the light of Christ we walk in, which is our guide and
teacher, which will not suffer lusts to reign in the heart, nor any adultery to
be committed, for in the light it is all judged and condemned, and all who love
the light and walk in it, they are led out of all adultery and fornication, and
they come to witness the virgin state. Now if a virgin marry she has not
sinned, but to you this is a mystery whose minds are without, turned from the
light into a sensual separation only in the will, forbidding to marry, which
is honorable in its place, and the bed undefiled, but whoremongers and
adulterers God will judge. Heb. 7. 4.

Now in the presence of the Lord I speak, and from the light of Christ, to you
all who are married, and who are unmarryed, and to the light of Christ in you I
speak; and your minds being turned to it to be your teacher, loving it, and
walking in it, it will teach you that have Wives, to be as though you had none,
and to use the World as though you used it not, and them that buy, as though
they possessed not, and will lead you into singleness of heart and mind, and
out of carefulness: Now there is a difference between a Wife and a Virgin, but
I speak not to feed any man's comprehension, but that every one may wait upon
the Lord in the light of Christ for a clear distinction and to come out of the
destraction of your minds and out of your Imitations to mind the light of
Christ within you which will draw your minds within to be tanght of the Lord,
and out of all the Lusts of the flesh, which all they live in who are turned
from the light into the Imaginations and Imitations, and so are ignorant of the
Scriptures and of the spirit which spoke them forth. Therefore I say unto you
who through your vain Imaginations, separate between man and woman, and say
that there should be no begetting nor bringing forth after the flesh, and so
looks without being turned from the light into the Imaginations, and evil
thoughts Judges, to you, I say, have you not read that he which made both Man
and Woman at the beginning, made them male and female, and they were no more
twain but one flesh, what therefore God has joined together let no man put a
sunder: now to the light of Christ in all your Consciences, I speak, which
lightshines in darkness but the darkness comprehends it not, but all who do love
the light to be taught and guided by it will lead you out of your
Comprehensions and out of your own wills from which your Imitations are formed,
and will let you see that you are out of the Virgin estate for your Lamps are
not trimed, neither are you obedient to the light in your Conscience which
leads unto Christ and gives entrance to the bridegroom, but you whose light is
gone out and have not been obedient to it, which has shined within you and you
are they who are slumbering and dreaming in your Notions, thoughts and
Imaginations, you filthy dreamers who has defiled the flesh, and the night is
upon you and now is the Cry in the night, he that has an Ear to hear let him
hear, for now is the bridegroom coming, and they who wait in the light do hear
the voice of Christ, and they come to witness his presence and do enter into
the bride chamber, but you, whose minds is turned from the light you are shut
out as the foolish Virgins though you would be owned by them who walk in the
light, but can have no fellowship with you who hate the light and walk in
darkness, for light has no fellowship with darkness, and here you are shut out
from the children of light and from Virgins, for Virgins are chaste and sober
minded, but you who have the name but not the power you are rude and wild and
live in lightness, and wantones, and folly which the saints was redeemed from,
and so you are without in the world among the dogs and swine wallowing in the
mire minding earthly things, and are enemies to the Cross of Christ and live
without the fear of God.

And you who say you are redeemed from the Cross, and are come out of the fear
into the love, silence flesh before the Lord for that speaks in you, which
never knew the Cross of Christ, but is for destruction, and is to be condemned
by Christ and the cross of Christ, when it coms to be known, is to the
crucifying of that nature which speaks and acts in you, who lives without the
fear of God, and out of the love of God you are; for they who love God keep his
Commandments: what love of God is there in you, that do not the things which
he commands you, nor does not walk in obedience to the light of Christ in your
consciences, which he has enlightened you withal, which says, Thou shall not
be proud; now thou that live in pride, what love have thou to Christ: Christ
says swear not at all, now thou that swearest, breakest the commands of
Christ, and hates the light of Christ in thee, which says, Swear not at all,
and so thou art out of the love of God, and out of the love of Christ: the
light of Christ tells thee thou should not lie; now thou that do lie loves
not Christ, but art in the curse and in the flesh, for he who loves and tells a
lie, has not part in the kingdom of God: Now if you love the light, it will
not suffer thee to lust after earthly things, nor mind earthly things, nor love
the world, for he who lusts, and he who loves the world the love of the
Father is not in him; and loving the light, it will not suffer thee to fashion
thy self according to this world, nor to respect persons, for he that
respects persons, transgresses the law of God, and disobeys the light in the
conscience; and he that takes the name of God in vain, transgresses the law of
God, and disobeys the light in the conscience, and does not love God, for he
that hates the light hates Christ, and this light is the condemnation of him
who hates Christ; and by this light you are made manifest to be out of the love
of God which you talk of, and are Enemies to the cross of Christ.

And you which have had experiences, and now talk of them, and your minds being
turned from the light of Christ, which wrought experience, into the experience;
your experience is dead, and is become an Idol, that which wrought the
experience, I own to be of God, but you not abiding in that which did wound,
and torment, and plague the beastly nature in you, so that nature got up again,
and the deadly wound of the Beast was not healed, and now the earthly will and
wisdom now stands in you, and so you are got from under the Judgments of God,
and from under the Cross. And now you tell of what experiencies you have had,
and what ye have passed through, but are old and dead, and cannot witness any
present workings, and present power; for that which now speaks in you of the
experience is not that which wrought the experience, but that which now speaks,
is that which was judged and tormented when the experience was wrought, and now
the witness being slain which did once arise in you, now you make merry and
rejoice over the witness, and now you are at ease, and take liberty in the
flesh, and so feeds that which is for Judgment, and must now be judged by the
Just, who have turned out of the way from the light of Christ in you, and so
all that you have known or passed through is not accepted, for you must be
brought back to the entrance to the light in your consciences, that in it you
might see where you turned out of the way, and so lost your guide, and so are
backsliders being turned back again into the earthly nature, and now by the
light of Christ which your minds are gone out from, which light shines into our
hearts, by it we see you walking in darkness, and from your earthly wisdom
telling of old experiences which once in the light you saw; but this light will
now condemn you for turning from it, and being disobedient to it, for now is
the true light arising and risen, by which the world shall be judged in
righteousness, which will bring you under Judgment; and a day of trouble shall
come upon you, such as never was from the beginning of the world, wherein all
you must be judged who live without the fear of God, and are got into a carnal
rest and security, and into a fleshly liberty, and say whatsoever you do, it is
not sin, and that you cannot see sin, and so your eye is blinded, and you hate
the light of Christ in you, which should let you see your sins, and so you are
yet in your sins, and cannot witness any redemption by Christ, nor through
obedience in the Cross, and so whatsoever you do profess in words, or what
experience soever you have known or passed through, all your profession I deny,
and all your experiences who do not now experience the daily cross of Christ,
nor do not walk answerable to the light in your consciences, for by it you must
all be judged, and all your joy and carnal rejoicing in your fleshly liberty,
shall be turned into sorrow and bitter lamentation, the Lord of Host has
spoken it, who will perform his word.

The word of the Lord to all you who do wait for, and expect to see a Christ
come without you, with a carnal eye; and to see an outward power and outward
signs and miracles to be wrought without you whereby the world shall be
convinced, and gainsayers convinced, and those things you look for carnally to
be fulfilled without you, and so are the adulterous generation, which seeks
after a sign, and there shall be no sign given you but the sign of the
Prophet Jonah; and as Jonah was 3 days and 3 nights in the whales belly, so
shall the son of man be 3 days and 3 nights in the heart of the earth. Now you
whose winds are without, looking for outward things, your waiting is in vain,
for you never came to see the things fulfilled, nor brought to pass which you
wait for: Therefore to you I say, turn your minds within, to the light of
Christ, to wait in it, that you may know the things fulfilled within you: for
the coming of Christ is within, and that which convinces of sin is within,
the light of Christ, in the conscience, and this being hearkened unto and
obeyed, it gives power against sin, and this power we witness made manifest
within us, and this power we have received from Christ which does convince the
world of sin, and by this power the gainsayers are convinced, and this is the
same power as ever was, and the same Christ as ever was; and the same eternal
words of God we do witness which was in the beginning, which word is Christ;
and we do speak it forth in his own power, as we have received it; and this
word of power we have, which makes the Devils to tremble, and makes the
Heathens to rage, and by it marveilous works are wrought; for now do the blind
see, the deaf hear, and the lame walk; and they who many years have walked in
darkness and trouble of mind, and terror of conscience, and under many
infirmities, who have spent their time and money upon Physicians and Parish
Priests, and have not been healed or cured, are now restored and healed freely,
without money and without price; and the Lepers are cured, and the Leprosy is
taken away, and the poor receive the Gospel* and this we witness to be
fulfilled in us, and in the world where this Gospel is, and where it has been
preached; and this is the everlasting Gospel which is now preached, which we
are witnesses of, and Ministers of according to our measure; and this Gospel is
not the Letter, for many poor souls who have been many years in trouble, and
found no peace nor satisfaction, have had the Letter and it has administered no
comfort unto them though they have applied the promises to that which was
wounded yet they have not been eased, but are still in trouble til Jesus
Christ's glad tidings did appear, who is the Gospel, and the glad tidings; and
they who witness him come and made manifest, they do witness a freedom and
deliverance out of this condition, which they could not do while their minds
was without, looking for a Christ without, and for a power without; and to find
life from the Letter without, and this we witness to be but a dead Letter, and
did give us no life at all, but we were kept in darkness and blindness while we
called the Letter the light, and the Letter the word, and the letter the rule,
but now the true light has appeared, which lets us see that Christ is the
light which lights every one that comes into the world; and in this light we
see that God is the word and not the Letter, for the word was in the beginning,
but the letter was not in the beginning, and in this light we see that the
Letter without us is not the rule, but the spirit which gave it forth, and this
spirit is within which is our rule, and brings us to walk according to the
Letter which was spoken forth from the Spirit, which was their guide and rule
which spoke it forth, for the prophecy came not in old time by the will of
man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost; and the
same speaks now in Sons and Daughters as they are moved, and do witness the
Scriptures to be fulfilled in us, and Christ to be in us which you look for
without you, and this power which does convince of sin within, and the word is
within in the heart; by which word we are sanctified and made clean, and we do
witness the Virgin state, and are Virgins, and do follow the Lamb, and are
redeemed from the earth; but you we deny to be Virgins, and whose minds are
without, turned from the light of Christ which is within, and shines in the
conscience, which should exercise your conscience, but your minds being without
in the earth is defiled with the earth, and your experiences are defiled being
adulterate from the Lord, and are no saints nor Virgins.

This from the spirit of the Lord I was moved to declare and publish abroad in
the world, that those who are wise in their own eyes in the earthly wisdom,
professing high things as to be Virgins and Saints, may by the light of Christ
in them, see themselves to be yet living in their own conceits, taking liberty
in the flesh to walk in the lusts of it.

And that all simple hearted ones may be turned to the light of Christ in them,
to be taught by it, and may not be deceived by such who profess much in words,
but has brought forth no fruit to God, but seeks to draw out the mind of the
simple ones, who seek after the truth into a liberty in the flesh; and for your
sake who are simple do I speak, to the light of Christ in you, which shall bear
me witness before the Lord, and will convince all who have it.

A servant of the Lord for your sakes, and in love to all your souls, desires
that all your minds may be turned within to the true Teacher, which will lead
into the feat of God giving heed unto it. RICHARD HVBBERTHORNE.

FINIS.

