AN HUMBLE ADVISE TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD MAYOR, THE RECORDER, And the
rest of the JUSTICES of the Honorable Bench.
To the goodmen of the Jury, and at the Sessions House in the Old-Bayley,
London, in behalf of Mr. John Bidle, Prisoner in Newgate.
SInce with the Aged there is Wisdom, and with gray hairs discretion, it were
a sin to doubt your readiness to hear, and aptness to consider, what the
meanest has to offer, by way of clearing your passage in so dangerous a road
as you are entering into, if you shall proceed to the Trial of this learned
Lamb like Christians, Mr. John Bidle.

And though for other causes experience may have fortified your judgments, so
as Advise may seem presumption, yet in that you have cause to doubt and to
fear, that you are pressed with these or the like snares, through the subtle
lyings in wait, by which many holy, innocent, and precious men's lives have
(even in this place) been causelessly taken away. So therefore when you read the
Books of the Martyrs of the Primitive times, and of those in the bloody days
of Queen Mary, or of the lesser sanguin days of Queen Elizabeth, you rejoice
with exceeding joy as you run over these sad stories; finding none of your
Predecessors hands in those bloody Councels or proceedings, and would not for
to gain the world be your selves guilty of the like. Let therefore your
proceedings be with circumspection, lest before you are aware, you are entangled
past hopes, and do the things you have so much loathed in others.

And though you may all stand clear in this matter in the sight of God, both in
the present and for all future times be pleased, according to your several
places, to consider what those things are, wherein persons in the like places,
and in the like cases, have been usually misled, and it will appear in all
times, as in the present, that the first evil which attends the Magistrates to
incite and stir them up against conscientious persons, is the mistaken or unin
formed zeal of Prosecutors, (of which no time was ever wanting) who having got
an ordinance, or Act of Parliament, the Decree of a Council, or Assembly of
Divines, declaring such or such opinions to be Blasphemous, Heretical, or
Schismatical, think they need no more for their warrant, but presently fall to
their business, watching and spying over the works and writings of
conscientious persons. Thus having by an uncomely or unhandsome kind of
diligence gotten something, which they suppose Parliament Laws judge Blasphemy,
instantly they run therewith unto the Magistrate, crying out Blasphemy,
Blasphemy, never such Blasphemy since the world was created, name the persons,
the place, the writings, and cry out for Justice, which in their sense, is a
present seizure, and imprisonment of the person thus cried out on.

What a strait now in this case is the Magistrate in, if he enquire after the
Justice of the Law, or the nature of the opinion against which Blasphemy is
cried, or after the peaceableness of the Party, or his responseableness or
readiness to appear, if he incline to send gently for him, and use not the
utmost rigor his authority can warrant; he likewise for his mere ingenuity and
humanity herein, incurs the censure of favoring Heretics, Schismatikes, and
Blasphemers, so as the Magistrate, even against his own inclinations, is as it
were surprised, and enforced by importunate elamors, to deal with godly
peaceable people oftentimes, as with the most notorious Thieves, Harlots, and
Murderers, sending for them by like Warrants, and no nay, but Bail must be
refused, sent to the same infamous prisons, as this Mr. Bidle to Newgate, to be
tried for his life as a Blasphemer.

This is the first evil the Magistrate is liable to in occasions of this
nature, and is the cause of all succeeding evils, and being so, how necessary
is it for all Honorable persons in Authority to stand upon their Guard against
such dangerous assaults as these, which if yielded unto, in the end draws on
them that fearful sentence, James 5. 6. Ye have condemned and killed the just,
and he does not resist you; a heavy sentence, and due to too many of your
Predecessors in this place, for want of a timely and conscionable consideration
of the dangerness of the thing they had in hand, God evert it from your
Honorable Society.

All agree that it is best to kill temptation in the bud, and therefore to be
provided against these clamorous onsets, is the best part of prevention, to
which end it is requisite to be skilful in the conditions of these, (viz. Mr.
Thomas Underhill, Luke Faune, Nathanael Webb, and George Calvert) and the like
Informers also in the true nature of Blasphemy, and to be able to distinguish
of opinions, and to try them by some more certain Touchstone, then by the
imperfect Vote of Parliaments, Synods, Councels or Assemblies, al which have
most grossly erred, frequently condemned Truth for Error, nay established Error
by a Law, and suppressed the most certain Truths, by which the most righteous
and godly in this Nation have under pretense of Law, which is grievous
injustice been banished, imprisoned, tormented, and murdered.

As to the condition of these Informers, how good an esteem soever some may
have of them, yet they are very like unto those tumultuous persons in Acts
16.19. who caught Paul and Silas, and drew them into the Market place unto the
Rulers, and brought them to the Magistrates, saying, These men, being Jews, do
exceedingly trouble our City, and teach customs which are not lawful for us to
receive, nor to observe, being Romans. Here was a specious pretense, as if the
trouble of the City lay heavy at their hearts, and set the men to complain; and
it is like enough the Magistrates believed them to be well-meaning people,
zealous of the good and quiet of their Country, nor ever had been otherwise
understood, but that it pleased the holy Spirit of God, for discovery of such
Hypocrites, and for forewarning all Magistrates against such clamorous
deceivers, to demonstrate in the 16. v. that the true cause of their complaint
was the loss of their gains, which they wickedly made out of the Damsels evil
Spirit of Divination, whom Paul cast out. Whereunto agreeable is that also of
Demetrius, in Acts 19. where their gain by making shrines being in danger to be
taken away by Paul's Doctrine, he and his Accomplices sticks not by his clamors
to put the whole City into an uproar; so you see it is no new thing, for fear
of loss, and hope of gain, to move the Springs of the heart with a wicked
suggestion, when the tongue and face speaks nothing but Religion and public
zeal; and if the ways of Informers in all former Ages were looked into, even
from the Persecution in the Primitive times, to the times of John Huss, Jerome
of Prague, William of England, and throughout all the days of Queen Mary, Qu.
Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles, (through all which times, more or
less, there was persecution for Conscience) it was grossly manifest, that fear
of loss, and hope of gain, were the only or chief motives to all the Informers,
so as at best it renders these suspected, and they may be as guilty as any of
the former, though they themselves perceive it not, for the heart is deceitful
above all things, nor does any thing benum the conscience, and blind the
understanding so much, as fear of loss, and hope of gain.

And if these men's ways be thought on, it will be more then probable, that they
are not clear in this matter, being for the most part Booksellers; it is known
that Books of Divinity are their chiefest sale, both in Sermons and other
Treatises, and that they buy, and sometimes pay dear for their Copies. Now the
opinions which are charged upon Mr. Bidle, are cross and contradictory to the
grounds of their most staple Copies, and to the main part of their sale, and
consequently threatens their gain: Is there not then a strong provocation upon
their spirits to withstand such Doctrines, and to take up the same course to do
it, by stirring up the Magistrate to imprison and put to death such
Blasphemers, for less they cannot call him, to have him effectually silenced.

If it be not thus, why of all sorts of men that daily have heard and read Mr.
Bidles judgment, without trouble or regret of mind, nay (though not of his
judgment, yet honoring and highly esteeming of him for his manifest piety of
life and great learning) why should the Traders in books be so violent against
him, as that nothing but his life will satisfy them? Why have not some of
those who often hear him? Why not some of the private Churches, that are most
of them opposite in judgment? Why have not they persecuted him, and in
detestation of his opinions forced him before the Magistrates, so to prison and
persecute him to the death? Do they all of them, and all other conscientious
people want zeal to God, to Christ, and to the holy Spirit, to set them on?
Nay, why startle they not, but on the contrary, diverse of the gathered
Churches, and other well-affected persons, petition his Highness appear against
his molestation, and earnestly press for his liberty; but because they know
whatever his judgment is, the way to make him of another belief, is not by
imprisonment or fear of death, (Christ nor his Apostles having left any such
rule) but by admitting the points in difference to be freely disputed and
examined, and as the noble Bereans, to search the Scriptures, whether those
things are so or no* Some what must be the matter that these Booksellers thus
bestir themselves above others, wherefore it is the best and safest course for
the Magistrate upon such strong presumption, to provide against the worst, and
to conclude them at best but dangerous Informers, most pernicious counselors,
and not in the least to be swayed by their specious pretenses of zeal, but to
suspect all their suggestions, as proceeding from covetous and corrupt hearts;
for were they indeed so sensible of Christ's Honor as they would be thought,
certainly you would find them first purging their own shops of all kinds of
Popish, and wanton scurrilous books, invented purposely to corrupt and vitiate
youth, or if they can excuse themselves herein, which some will not credit, yet
they cannot but know such as those are thick and threefold sold round about
them, and yet their zeal burns not that way at all, the reason whereof, what
can it be, but that it opposes not their way of gain, else would not they
offer one Petition more in behalf of the Protestant cause, for the suppressing
such Books, and the imprisoning such persons as writes them, who nautiate
youth, and has no pretense of Conscience from the Word of God to shelter them,
but that, I say, it hinders not their way of gain, as they understand M. Bidles
Books, Doctrins, or Opinions do, which makes them so maliciously zealous
against him, and to let the others go scot-free.

Magistrates were they thus rightly informed of the condition of these
informers, and thus strongly armed against such clamorous zealots, they would
not so suddenly, nor so reproachfully dispose of the persons of men fearing
God, as throughout all former times was lamentably done, and somewhat too much
in Mr. Bidles case; they would then have time to deliberate upon the matter,
before they sent a man to prison, they then, no doubt, would exercise their own
judgments, as Christians, and see what is alleged against any man, and deal as
becomes Christian Magistrates, according to the known and revealed Word of
Christ manifested in the holy Scriptures.

Which word of Truth, being not yea and nay, as Parliaments, General Councels,
Synods, and Assemblies have all proved in the most material points in Religion,
as your Honors, the Bench, and Jury cannot but effectually know: For one
Council determining that the Son of God was the most high God, another Council,
as namely that of Ariminum, consisting of no less then four hundred Bishops,
decrees point blank *as we are wont to say) against the former, that the Son of
God was not the most high God, but a distinct Essence from him, and subordinate
unto him. This instance, amongst many, have I produced, to show the mutability
of Councels, as also to show how cautious you should be of putting to death a
learned man for that opinion, which so many learned and famous men, not only
have been, but still are in the world of his opinion, as you shall hear, if you
enquire of those who have been in Poland, Holland, etc.

This blessed unerring rule, (viz. the holy Scripture) to Conscience, being
sincerely looked into, it will impartially discover, both to Judge and Jury,
what M. Bidles opinions are, and how he is to be dealt withal concerning them,
without a single ear given, whereunto the Laws of Parliaments may so on cause
you all to be most grievous transgressors of the Laws of God, and to be more
guilty in his sight, before whom one day you must all be judged, then those
Prisoners you condemn. Whatsoever therefore the Law of the Lord says to your
understandings in this case of M. Bidles, let none by no arts draw you from
enquiring into the Seriptures for satisfaction in every particular.

In which enquiry, though your Honor, Mr. Recorder, and the whole Honorable
Bench are all highly concerned to look unto it, that you may acquit your selves
before the judgment seat of Christ, and be able to render an account with joy.

Yet you good men of the Jury are more nearly concerned to be exact and
faithful therein, for it*s your Verdict, your guilty or not guilty, that saves,
or destroys his life, which you are mainly to note, and to lay to heart, and to
be all along mindful of it, that if you pronounce him guilty (which God defend)
you do not only find him guilty of speaking such or such words, or of writing
and publishing such or such Books, but in pronouncing him guilty upon either of
the Indictments, you pronounce him a Felon, and deservedly to die; so that
unless in every one of your consciences he appears worthy to die as a Felon,
you are in conscience bound to pronounce him not guilty, otherwise you may be
his destroyers before you are aware, to your perpetual grief and anxiety of
spirit, for so it befell the Jury that were the Tryers of M. Vdall, a worthy
Minister of Gods Word in Queen Elizabeth's days, he was Indicted for High
Treason, in making and publishing a certain Book against the Government of the
Bishops, and though there was no direct, but a scambling shadow of a proof, and
though the Books duly considered, contained no color of Treason or other
crime, no more then M. Bidles of Felony, but such as the times since have
proved as true as Truth its self, yet the Jury not thinking in pronouncing him
guilty, they had pronounced him guilty of Treason, and to die as a Traitor,
supposing they had only declared him guilty of making the Book, hereupon they
brought him in guilty; but when after the Judges sentence of death against him,
which they never in the least intended, that they found what they had done,
they were confounded in themselves, and would have done any thing in the world
to have revoked their Verdict, when alas it was too late, and therefore you are
to be exceeding careful in this main particular; never to pronounce him guilty,
unless your consciences are first satisfied he ought not to live, but to die as
a Felon, which is altogether impossible, if you shall seriously and
deliberately weigh all circumstances touching the man and his opinions.

For first, as to the man, he is so free from being questioned for any the
least blemish in his life and conversation, that the Informers themselves have
been heard to admire his strickt exemplar life, full of modesty, sobriety and
forbearance, no ways contentious touching the great things of the world, but
altogether taken up with the things of God revealed in the holy Scriptures,
wherein his study, diligence, and seize have been so great, that his
knowledge therein is of as ready use as a Concordance, no part thereof being
named, but he presently cites the Book, Chapter, and ver. especially throughout
the Books of the New Testament, where all the Epistles he can say by heart out
of the Greek Tongue, and withal can read the Greek in English, and the English
in Greek so readily, as a man can do the mere English, so carefully has he
been rightly to understand them. As to the Justice and integrity of his heart,
his ways have manifested, that he would not dissemble, play the Hypocrite, or
deal fraudulently with any man to save his life; such is he certainly, as is
known to very many persons of worth and credit in London, so as he is far from
being such a Monster as many have believed him to be, through the uncomely and
unchristian-like clamours of his Accusers.

For his opinions you have heard at large, and frequently with what he is
charged not to believe, be pleased to be so just to your selves and him, as to
give ear, and seriously to note what he professes, and is known to believe,
there being a cloud of Witnesses ready to testify that he makes it his glory
to confess with his mouth the Lord Jesus to be his Lord and his God, according
to the Scripture, John 20.28. to be his Savior, Acts 5.31. and by him does
believe in God, who raised him from the dead, and gave him glory, 1 Pet. 1.21.
Having set him at his right hand, Angels, Authorities, and Powers being made
subject to him; and that he is made unto us of God, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption, 1 Cor. 3.30. That he is the only begotten Son of
God, and to be honored as the Father, John 5.23. that it is he that is ordained
of God to be Judge of quick and dead, Acts 10.41. that he is the Author of
eternal life to all those that obey him, Heb. 5.9. that there is no other name
under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved, Act. 4.12. that his
Blood is the Blood of the new Covenant that is shed for many for the remission
of sins, Mat. 26.18. and that he is able to save them to the uttermost that
come unto God by him, Heb. 7.25. How then, or upon what ground can any man
justly term him a Blasphemer? he conceives to be according to the Scriptures;
if further then this he understands not, and for want of understanding
perceives not the Scriptures, do maintain Christ the Son to be coequal,
coeternal, and coessential with God the Father, and thereupon should deny
Christ to be the most high God, shall he be put to death for it? Surely none
can suppose a man of so much learning, discretion, and piety, can do this
maliciously, with full purpose to dishonor the Lord Christ, whom he so much
trusts in, and honoreth, as is before expressed; nay, can it be supposed, but
that he who attributes so much honor to him, as those Scriptures forecited
manifest, would with all his soul render him all whatsoever by any other
Scriptures he understood to be his due? nay, the least measure of charity may
very readily admit, that if such a pious man as he is deny him any part of
honor, that he does it, because he conceives that granting of it would be to
his dishonor, and that he did believe he would be much displeased to have it
attributed unto him; shall this fear, and wariness in him find (admit that it
were evidently an Error in his judgment) no lower title then Blasphemy? and for
this, will nothing satisfy the Informers but his life? What thoughts have
these men of the Lord Christ, that came not to destroy, but to save men's lives?
that will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax; that called
not the Sadduces Blasphemers, nor Heretics, nor denounced judgment upon them,
either of imprisonment or death, no though they came to tempt him, though they
denied the Resurrection, and said, there was neither Angel nor Spirit; yea so
far was our most merciful Lord Christ from so harsh a spirit, that he says,
John 12.47, 48. If any man hear my words, and believe not them, I judge him not,
the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last day: and
rebukes those, Luke 9. 54. who through a rash unadvised zeal, (much like what
at best appears in these Prosecutors) that would have called for fire from
heaven to have consumed the Samaritans, saying, Yo know not what spirit you are
of; a sentence worthy to be written in letters of Gold, in every place of
Judicature in the world, but especially in the hearts of all men trusted; as
you are, with the lives of men.

Turks and Infidels are allowed, in order to their conversion, to ask any
questions concerning God, Christ, or the Holy Spirit, to affirm, or deny, as
they see cause, without being termed Blasphemers for so doing, yea, rather pity
their mistakings; nay the Jews that speak such opprobrious language of Christ,
as is not fit to be repeated, denying not only his Godhead, but his most holy
and heavenly Conception, yet are they not imprisoned, nor Indicted for
Blasphemers, nor molested, but suffered to live quietly amongst us, for which
way else shall they ever be converted to the Faith of Christ? Why then is it so
heinous a thing in M. Bidle to say he does deny this or that opinion of Christ,
to that end it may be proved by Scripture? Why does not some zealous person
show him wherein he is mistaken, without calling him a Blasphemer? Will it
suffize to quit a man from the guilt of such an ignominious appellation, to
believe every article of the Apostles Creed, if it will, it is then most
certain this good man Mr. Bidle, believes all and every Article thereof, in
every respect, as they are there expressed? If this will not suffize, but that
Athenasius his Creed must in every circumstance be believed also, or those that
cannot understand it, and consequently cannot believe it in all points, shall
be deemed Blasphemers, by most, assuredly it would be thought too harsh a
judgment; for do you but observe with what satisfaction, with how much
alacrity the conscience closes with the former saying, I believe in God, the
Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and in Jesus Christ his only Son
our Lord, which was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary,
suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried, descended into
hell, the third day he arose again from the dead, and ascended into heaven, and
sits at the right hand of God, the Father Almighty, from thence he shall
come to judge both the quick and the dead: I believe in the Holy Ghost, the
Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the
Resurrection of the body, and the life ever lasting. There being no Particle of
this Belief, (as Mr. Bidle uses to affirm) but that even in speaking, it
presents a plain place of Scripture to the mind for proof thereof.

Whereas in reciting that of Athenasius, (which was the ground of that
Ordinance of the Lords and Commons, in making it Blasphemy to affirm so, and
so, concerning Christ and the Holy Spirit) what infinite doubts and scruples do
arise? as where it is said, For there is one person of the Father, another of
the Son, and another of the Holy Ghost, but the Godhead of the Father, of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost is all one, the glory equal, the Majesty coeternal;
such as the Father, such is the Son and such is the Holy Ghost; the Father
uncreate, the Son uncreate, and the Holy Ghost uncreate, the Father
incomprehensible, the Son incomprehensible, and the Holy Ghost
incomprehensible; the Father eternal* the Son eternal and the Holy Ghost
eternal, and yet they are not three eternals but one eternal; as also there are
not three incomprehensibles, nor three uncreated, but one uncreated. and one
incomprehensible; so likew se the Father is almighty, the Son almighty, and the
Holy Ghost almighty; and yet there are not three almighties, but one almighty,
etc. And in this Trinity none is before nor after another, none is greater or
lesser then another, but the whole three persons be coeternal together, and
coequal, etc.

It is true, most men of years living in this Nation, have through breeding and
custom been formerly used to recite this Creed, as what they did believe, but
how few there were that did truly understand it, that is, that did truly
believe what they said, and seemed to believe, you can now very easily judge;
nay how glad would al ingenuous Christians be, that these difficulties might
without danger be clearly discussed, by strength of Scripture, that so men
might no longer have things run in their mind, as believed by them, which in
deed and in truth they do not understand, nor are able to render a reason of
the hope that is in them, touching many of the particulars, which is no better
then hypocrisy and gross superstition, for though men may hide their hearts
from men, yet from themselves, and from God they cannot hide them.

Now because Mr Bidle has labored in this work, to enquire how these obscure
difficult expressions in this Creed are proved in Scripture, which he takes
for the foundation of his faith; and because he has not been contented to take
up other opinions concerning God, according to the current of Interpreters of
our times, but still ground himself upon the Scripture, for this cause only is
he now a prisoner, and for no other; for this cause, and none other, does his
Accusers, the Informers, deem him unworthy to live.

But it is hoped with you he will find a much more charitable and Christian
esteem, for what at worst can be alleged against him, or what can warrant the
taking away of his life.

For admit the words or Books should be fully proved against him, and that you
should think such Accusers and Witnesses worthy of belief, when not the glory
of God, or of Christ, but their own gain has set them on.

Admit that men's lives may be taken away by an Ordinance of the Lords and
Commons, out of time of Parliament, which will not be granted, England being to
be ruled by Acts, not Ordinances, so as therein also the foundation fails, for
he is tried upon no other but an Ordinance. Again, suppose the Ordinance, Law,
there is nothing of obstinacy expressed in the Indictment against Mr. Bidle,
without which he does not offend against it; but were the Ordinance in force,
it directs the prisoner to be Indicted the next Goal delivery, but M. Bidle was
not Indicted till the second Goal delivery, after complaint and imprisonment,
wherefore the Ordinance is not pursued, but the time prefixed elapsed. Yet
further, admit there were an Act, and in force, yet that a Parliament can be
trusted in matters of Religion and Conscience, the Scripture never warranted,
men cannot trust, because they must obey, not what Parliaments establish, but
what the Scripture says to their particular Consciences; so as if Parliaments
understand the Scriptures one way, and you another, whether are you to yield to
their sense or your own? whether are you to believe and worship as they direct,
or as you judge your selves directed by the Word of God? so that the making of
Laws by Parliaments in matters of Religion, Faith, and Gods Worship, which God
never did, and men cannot trust them withal, so that although this Ordinance
were an Act, and were not annihilated by the instrument of Government, as
indeed it is in Mr. Bidles case, you could not with innocent consciences find
him guilty upon it. If Mr. Bidle be not protected by the instrument, none are;
for you will find it evidently intended by the 36. 37. and 38. Articles, which
say thus:

36 That to the public profession held forth, none shall be compelled by
penalties, or otherwise, but that endeavors be used to win them by sound
Doctrine, and the example of a good conversation.

37 That such as profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ (though differing in
judgment from the doctrine, worship, or discipline publicly held forth) shall
not be restrained from, but shall be protected in the profession of the Faith,
and exercise of their Religion so as they abuse not this liberty, to the civil
injury of others, and to the actual disturbance of the Public Peace on their
parts, provided this liberty be not extended to Popery or Prelacy, nor to such,
as under the profession of Christ, hold forth and practice licentiousness.

38 That all Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, and clauses in any Law, Statute, and
Ordinance to the contrary of the aforesaid liberty, shall be esteemed as null
and void.

Mr. Bidle now professes Faith in God by Jesus Christ, and that truly, not
notionally; and as the compilers of the instrument by their words show us they
did intend: As for Popery, Prelacy, teaching or practicing licentiousness, so
free is he from these, as none taxes him with it, How then can it be, that his
differing in judgment from the doctrine, worship, or discipline publicly held
forth, should exclude him any more then any other man in the Nation from
protection in the profession of the Faith, and exercise of his Religion, since
he no way abuses this liberty, to the civil injury of others, nor does any
thing to the disturbance of the public Peace on his part, but on the contrary,
demeaneth himself peaceably and quietly, as becomes a Christian, and exhorts
others to do the like.

The true sense and meaning of these Articles, or of the intention of the
Lawmakers thereof, you can no otherwise know, from any person or persons
whatsoever, so as to be satisfactory to your consciences, but from the words
and expressions themselves which do most evidently and plainly afford M Bidle
protection from all Laws and Ordinances before made, and from all kinds of
trouble and molestation.

As for proving any the opinions alleged against him to be Blasphemy in the
Scripture sense, is impossible to be made appear.

It is true indeed by the Law of Moses, a Blasphemer was to be put to death,
and you hear often that Scripture urged, to incite you to judge such to death,
as are at any time indicted here for Blasphemy; but you are to be aware of
Scripture misapplied, there being no speedier way to misery and destruction,
Christians being not to be swayed in their judgments and consciences by the
rule of the Law of Moses, but by the precepts and examples of Christ and his
Apostles: Yet if Mr. Bidle were to be tried by the Law of Moses, unless it do
appear, that by the Law of Moses, these things, or words, or books in the
Indictments are declared to be Blasphemies, or such crimes, as for which men
ought to die (which that declares not) there would be no ground at all from
thence to proceed against him.

And as for any warrant from the New Testament, you have heard already how
gently Christ himself dealt with the misbelieving Sadduces; as also with those
that would not receive his Word, and how he reproved such as would have had
fire from heaven to consume the Samaritans; so as from thence nothing will ever
justly be raised to endanger his life in your hands, nay, not to countenance
his least molestation.

For let the utmost that can be urged from these places, by the misapplication
of which, many a well meaning Judge and Jury man has been in this place misled,
to the sad destruction of many innocent men fearing God, for the days are
still in remembrance, and will never be forgotten, whenas Parliaments were so
unchristianlike busy in making Laws in matters of Religion, touching Faith,
and the Worship of God, that amongst other snares laid to entrap good men's
lives, they enacted to this effect, That whosoever should deny the very Body
and Blood of Christ to be really in the Bread and Wine, after the words of
Consecration, should be put to death, as being an Heretic or Blasphemer.
Whereupon diverse Informers of those times set themselves, and were by the then
Clergy secretly put on, to lay in wait, and gather up such words, as rendered
enquiring Christians, which were willing to be satisfied of the truth of so
strange a mystery obnoctious to their cruelty, most of the Informers being
Booksellers, whose trade was sure to fail, in case this mystery, of which their
Books were full stuffed, should be proved but a delusion, bestirred themselves
to purpose, halling and driving multitudes before the Bishops, who soon
sentenced them, and turned them over to the civil Magistrates, to be put to
death for Blasphemy and Heresy.

Where by the way, your Honor, and the Honorable Bench, and especially you good
men of the Jury, are to observe with what reverence, nay, with what adoration,
this error, this the grossest error in all Popery, (as Mr. Bidle uses to call
it) was every where believed, and no marvel whenas Parliament Law had made it
death to dispute or deny it; and then how here in England, where liberty of
debating and disputing this mysterious point has been long time admitted; this
gross error has been wrought out of most men's understandings, (which
effectually shows the real necessity and benefit of freedom in dispute, and
arguing of all points, none excepted; and what enemy to the truth those are,
this Christian liberty) yet still to this day, where Laws of State govern in
matters of Religion, and where conscience and discourses are overawed with Laws
of Imprisonments, Banishments, and death, as in most of the Popish Dominions
they are, there this gross error, which now through Gods mercy appears to
every considerate person one of the greatest and most palpable mysteries of
iniquity, is nevertheless admitted, and received with the same, if not higher
respect and admiration then ever, which shows also of what Tribe and Kindred
they are, that would have settled here again in this Nation a coercive or
constraining power in matters of conscience, belief, and the worship of God.

And truly, whilst you have this mysterious point of the real presence of
Christ's Flesh and Blood in the Sacrament, and cannot but wonder how it should
enter into man's heart to be believed, it being so expressly contrary to every
ones perseverance, tasting therein very Bread, and very Wine, even after the
words of Consecration. whilst you have this in mind, and through how many
difficulties, and impossibilities, and wrackings of the understanding by
Sophismes and subtle arguments, men were made to believe, that they did believe
the real presence to be there, when it was impossible for any, though they said
they did so much as to understand it, for so gross an error did never appear a
reality or truth to the understanding. Be pleased, whilst your thoughts are
thus employed, to reflect upon the opinions which are charged upon M. Bidle,
which for more easy consideration present themselves in this form, That he is
indicted as a Blasphemer, for denying the Unity in Trinity, and the Trinity in
Unity, that the Father is the most high God, the Son the most high God, and the
Holy Ghost the most high God, and these are not three most high Gods, but one
most high God. This any man may affirm he believes, and most men do affirm
they do believe it, and it is like the Informers would not scruple to swear
they do believe it, as those of the former times, no doubt, would have sworn,
they both understood, and believed the real presence in the Sacrament; but
dealing clearly and conscientiously with your own hearts, Is not this a mystery
most difficult to be understood? Can any thing be more mysterious? Do you
imagine that one of an hundred understands it, who yet through fear of the Law,
and awe of death, says he believes it? Is any point in Christianity more
obscure in Scripture? Why did not Athenasius affix those places of Scripture to
his Creed, upon which he grounds his judgment; whereas in place whereof, he
gives you only this for proof, That as we be compelled by the Christian verity
to believe, what in this his Creed he affirms ought to be believed, so, says
he, are we forbidden by the Catholic Religion to acknowledge whatsoever he
therein denies. Now you know the Real Presence was a long time here taken for a
main part of Christian verity, and men were interdicted and forbidden, under
pain of death, to deny it by the Catholic Religion; (for the Church of Rome
was thought to be no less then the Catholic unerring Church) so as this his
Christian verity, and this his Catholic Religion, are in these times of
enquiry but slender proofs, and may very well admit of dispute, and a demand of
plain Scripture proof to prove them, and it is a very hard case if men for
argument sake may not deny any thing Athenasius therein affirms, or affirm any
thing he therein denies, the purpose and intention being to see what Scriptures
can be brought for full proof of the things disputed; nay, if any conscientious
Christian shall really think Athenasius mistaken in his mysterious opinions,
what offense is it to declare his thoughts, and to deny them? Every one knows
by pro and con truth comes to be established, it is only error that requires no
arguments or disputations, but that of Law, and the Sword on its side,
unhallowed weapons to combat with error, truth being ever Vanquisher where
those odds are not: It is not denied, that the most mysterious opinions may be
true, but it must be only Scripture that proves them so, and then if freedom of
dispute and argument be allowed, the more these truths are opposed or denied,
the clearer the truth ever appears, truth being like that house built upon
the Rock, that stands the firmer for being assaulted; error like the house
built upon the Sand, which had need keep opposition far from her by the out
works of Law, and threats of death, for so you see it speeds best and continues
longest, as that abominable error of the Real Presence, which whilst hedged
about by Authoriry and Law, was with the slightest arguments, and even with
Scriptures abused, able, and did even in this place deprive many of Gods dear
ones of their liberties, yea of their very lives, by the most cruel tormenting
deaths their malicious Prosecutors and Informers could devise.

An Heretic he was that denied the Real Presence, that the Parliament Law
enacted, and an Heretic or Blasphemer must be put to death, that also the
Parliament took care for: They also made the poor besotted superstitious people
believe, that it suffized not, except the Scriptures warranted it; and
therefore they never failed to urge the Scripture in Titus 3.10 11. A man that
is an Heretic after the first and second admonition, reject, knowing that he
that is such is subverted and sins, being condemned of himself: So then, say
they, (as some will not fail to apply it to M. Bidle) the Prisoner at the Bar
is an Heretic, why? for he denies the Body and Blood of Christ to be really
and corporally in the Sacrament; so such an one is a sinner, and perverted from
the Christian verity, and from the Catholic Religion, and is condemned of him
self: Yes, says the Archbishop, it is impossible but he must condemn himself,
his evil is so palpable, only he is obstinate, and will not acknowledge or
confess it: Well then, what is to be done with such an Heretic? Why, the
Scripture says, after the first and second admonition reject. We and our
Clergy have admonished him often and again, to forsake his wicked Heresy, yet
still he persists, therefore is to be rejected, that is, say they, and the
ignorant seduced Juries of those times believed them, let him be put to death;
yea, say they, the Scripture is plain, Gal. 5.12. I would they were even cut
off then trouble you: which though every conscientious Christian knew in the
Apostles sense never intended more then an Excommunication, as does also the
forecited reject; yet these false counterfeiting Apostles never failed to
interpret, a cutting off by death. But to strengthen these further, they urge 2
Pet. 2.1. with great vehemence against the poor innocents, But there were false
Prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false teachers among
you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that
bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. This nail they drive
home into the Saints Temples, crying out, These are they that deny the Lord
that bought them, for they deny him to be corporally present in the Holy
Sacrament, away with them to fire and faggot, for they bring upon themselves
swift destruction.

And this place of Scripture was so violently urged in the late Parliament
against Mr. Bidle, and made, or seemed to make so deep an impression in the
very zealous part of them, that they were even ready to Vote upon a swift and
sudden death, and were very hardly withheld from it, nay, had done it, but
that the more conscientious amongst them replied soberly, that this place of
Scripture could not possibly be applied to M. Bidle, it being evident that he
was so far from denying the Lord Jesus Christ to be the Lord that bought him,
or from denying him to be the Messiah, the Christ, the Redeemer, that all the
writings called his, and his discourses, did manifest that he did believe in
his heart, and confess with his mouth the Lord Jesus to be his Lord and his
God (as before is more largely expressed) which if it shall please you to
consider, together with what in the third ver. is said of the false Teachers,
viz. and through covetousness shall they with feigned words make Merchandise of
you, ye will find it reaches not Mr. Bidle in the least, none in the world
being more free from the loathsome sin of covetousness, or from making
Merchandise of any, every one that knows him, knows that he having food and
raiment, is therewithal content, and that he (if any one in the world)
accounts godliness with content, the greatest gain in, so as when all the
whole Scriptures are searched for matter against Mr. Bidle, let them be but
impartially considered, and they will appear no more in justification of his
molestation imprisonment, or further punishment, then they were in approving
the barbarous cruelties inflicted upon those former sufferers.

So that upon your serious consideration of all things, it cannot be doubted,
but that Mr. Bidle is as safe, whilst your Christian consciences thus rightly
informed, stand between him and death, as if he were at his own disposing, and
being so through your godly care of him, you will acquit your selves as wise
and discreet Christians in the sight of God, and stanch that innocent Blood,
which has violently been let run formerly in this place upon like occasions,
and free both your selves, your posterity, and this Honorable City from
Judgments and plagues due for the same. Now the God of peace, that brought
again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through
the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good work to
do his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

