The Humble Petition and Desires OF THE Commanders, Masters, Mariners, Younger
Brothers and Seamen of the Shipping belonging to the River of Thames (whose
names are subscribed to the number of 558), PRESENTED To the Right Honorable
The LORDS and COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT, on Thursday the 29 of June, 1648.

Together with all their Transactions concerning a Personal TREATY with His
MAJESTY: And their undertaking for the timely reducing of the revolted SHIPS,
etc.

John Kersey, Clerk of Trinity-House.

With deliberate Answers of the LORDS and COMMONS suitable to the importance of
the said PETITION.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Henry Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

London, Printed for George Lindsey, and are to be sold at his Shop at
London-Stone, 1648.

THE HVMBLE TENDER and Declaration of many well-affected Mariners and Seamen,
Commanders of Ships and members of the Trinity-House, living in and about the
City of LONDON,
Presented to the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the said Trinity-House the
21 of June, 1648.
IT is humbly offered by us whose names are here underwritten, being Mariners
and Seamen, That there may be forthwith a Petition drawn in the behalf of
Seamen and Mariners, and presented to the Honorable Houses of Parliament:
wherein our humble desires may be represented for a personal Treaty with His
Majesty, as the only remedy for the present distempers of this distressed
Kingdom, and the reducing of the Shipping revolted from their trust. And that
it is humbly conceived by us, that we are obliged and bound, according to the
Protestation and solemn League and Covenant formerly taken by every of us, to
maintain and defend with our lives, powers and estates the true reformed
Protestant Religion, his Majesty's Royal Person, Honor and Estate, and also
the power and Privileges of Parliament. And we do further declare, That if it
shall appear that any of those revolted Ships shall endeavor to impede or
hinder the Kings personal Treaty with his two Houses of Parliament, that we
will unanimously endeavor with our lives and fortunes to bring them to condign
punishment, according to our Covenant and Protestation formerly taken as
aforesaid.

Witness our hands the day and year abovesaid. Subscribed by 90 eminent
Commanders and Seamen as aforesaid.

To the Right Worshipful the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the
Trinity-house of Debtford STROND:
The humble Petition of the younger Brothers of this Corporation, and the other
Seamen taking charge, whose names are subscribed to the Petition annexed.
Shows,
THat they having a deep sense of the manifold miseries this Kingdom is like to
suffer by reason of the many Armies now on foot, and the revolting of the
Fleet, which might be prevented as we humbly conceive, in case the Honorable
Houses of Parliament would be pleased to admit of a speedy personal Treaty to
be had between his Majesty and them, which is the sum of all the pretenses of
all those at this time in arms against the Parliament, as also of the Fleet: We
therefore the Petitioners being not of the least concernment, nor the least
concerned, do earnestly desire that you will be pleased forth with to join with
us in presenting the Petition herewith delivered to the Honorable Houses of
Parliament; and that you will likewise be pleased to appoint some one of you to
speak unto our Petition at the time of the delivery thereof, whereby the Houses
may be informed how many poor in and about London subsist only by the
sea-trade, who, if once necessitated by want, will know no government.

That it cannot be imagined that the Seamen of England, who are as it were in a
Fraternity will be drawn to fight one against another, since both pretend and
desire one and the self same thing: The desire of a Personal Treaty by the
revolted ships, being no other then is earnestly desired by the generality of
all the Seamen.

The enlarging of all which we leave to your greater wisdoms and experience.

And we shall pray, etc.

TO The Right Honorable The LORDS and COMMONS now Assembled in PARLIAMENT:
The humble Petition of the Commanders, Masters and Mariners of the Shipping
belonging to the River of Thames, whose names are here-under subscribed;
Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioners have to this time faithfully assisted (according to
their Oaths and several undertakings) in the defense of this Kingdom, and for
the preservation of His Majesty and both Houses of Parliament, in their just
Rights and Privileges, wherein they have cheerfully adventured their lives,
and spent much of their estates: And your Petitioners cannot but acquaint this
Honorable Assembly, that they had of late more then hopes, that since His
Majesty's evil Council were removed from him, and no face of an enemy
appearing to obstruct, That by the settling of his Majesty in his just Rights,
this miserable distressed Kingdom might have enjoyed a happy and lasting Peace:
But to the great terror and unspeakable grief of your Petitioners, they find
themselves in a far worse condition then ever, unless by the great wisdom of
this grave Assembly it be timely prevented; for (when we consider the manifold
dangers now upon us, and the long time like to be spent before a Personal
Treaty is like to be had) we may justly fear the utter ruin of this once
flourishing Kingdom, especially considering the many Armies already on foot in
the several parts thereof, besides the late falling off of the Ships, which we
cannot look upon but as a business of the greatest danger which has yet
happened: for besides that its a laying flat of our strong Walls, whereby we are
exposed to all foreign Invasions, the loss of Trade will be of such
consequence, that we shall not need to fear a second ruin, nor can your
Petitioners conceive any way how those Ships may be reduced, when their
pretense is that the Peace of this Kingdom may be settled by a Personal Treaty
with his Majesty, which your Petitioners are bold to offer to this honorable
Assembly, is the sense of all or the greatest part of the Seamen of England.

Wherefore they most humbly pray, That there may be a speedy Treaty had, with
his Majesty, for the settling of the Peace of this Kingdom, and that in the
mean time his Majesty may be entreated to remove to some one of his Houses,
which may be most convenient, where he may be with honor, freedom and safety:
And your Petitioners shall be ready with their Lives and Fortunes, to assist
the honorable Houses of Parliament against all those that shall oppose the
same; To all which your Petitioners humbly beg a gracious* and speedy Answer.
Subscribed by 468 Mariners and Seamen, the major part whereof are the most
eminent Commanders belonging to this Port of London and River of Thames. TO THE
RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT,
The humble Petition of the Master Wardens and Assistants of the Trinity-house;
SHOWING,
THat whereas they have received a Petition from the Younger Brothers of their
Corporation, as also from many well-affected Seamen, Masters of Ships and
others, therein expressing their desires to present their humble Petition unto
this Honorable House, we do in all humble manner show our great apprehension of
the many distempers both by Sea and Land, occasioned by the fomenting of a
discontented party, who daily take up Arms against the Parliament and Kingdom,
which, if not timely prevented by the mercies of God, and wisdom of Parliament,
is like to engage the Kingdom again in a most bloody War, both by sea and Land,
to the endangering of the long expected Peace of the three Kingdoms, the loss
of Navigation, the obstructing of Trade, and the utter ruin of many thousands
of Families, relating as well to Marine as Land affairs, whose whole
subsistence depends upon trade, to and from this Kingdom.

In consideration whereof, they humbly pray This Honorable House to take the
Premises into their grave Wisdoms, and that a present Personal Treaty may be
had with his Majesty, which we humbly conceive, under God, is the only means
for settling a well-grounded Peace both in Church and State: And by which, with
the blessing of God on your endevors, the present distempers may be removed,
and the Kingdom again restored into a flourishing condition: For which we, with
the whole Kingdom, shall have great cause to acknowledge the Lords great mercy,
and our thankfulness to this Honorable Assembly, for all their unwearied pains
for the good of these almost undone Kingdoms; and as we have ever showed our
selves willing, with the hazard of our Lives and Fortunes, to preserve the
Parliament, so we shall be always ready to the utmost of our powers, according
to the Protestation and solemn League and Covenant, to assist them in all their
just undertakings, against their and the Kingdoms enemies: And pray etc. Die
Jovis, 29 Junii. 1648.
THe Lords have commanded me to return unto you their hearty thanks and
acknowledgements, for the good affections you have expressed to this Parliament
in many former occasions, as well as in this Petition now presented: And to
your desires therein contained, for the settling of a wellgrounded Peace, the
Lords neither are, nor shall at any time be wanting to use their utmost
endeavors for the happy and most speedy effecting thereof.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

Die Jovis, 29 Junii. 1648.
THe House has read the two Petitions presented by you to them; One of the
Master Wardens and fellowship of Trinity-house; the other of the Commanders,
Masters and Mariners of the Shipping belonging to the River of Thames; and a
third presented by the Younger Brothers of your Corporation, and others, to
your selves* And as this House calling to mind your former faithful assistance
in this Cause, so likewise by your Petitions they find your readiness with
your Lives and Fortunes to assist the Parliament in all their just
undertakings, against their and the Kingdoms enemies, according to the
Protestation and Solemn League and Covenant. And in answer to your desires of a
Personal Treaty with his Majesty for settling a well-grounded Peace both in
Church and State; The House has commanded me to let you know, that they have
the same fellowfeeling with you of the Kingdoms suffering by War, and the
manifold dangers that must necessarily ensue thereupon, and to assure you that
they do really desire, and shall faithfully endeavor to obtain a safe and
well-grounded Peace: And in order thereunto have spent a great part of this
last month in considerations of Peace, and have made some progress therein:
And for the more speedy dispatch of what further remains to be done, the Houses
have appointed a Committee to consider what the King has formerly offered, and
what is further to be offered to the King, for his satisfaction, for settling
of a speedy and well-grounded Peace, and to consider of time, place and other
circumstances for convenience of address to be made to his Majesty, which
Committee are met, and are enjoined with all possible speed to make Report to
this House, whereupon they intend so effectually to proceed, that by the
blessing of God a safe and well-grounded Peace may be speedily settled; And
they doubt not, but what they have done and shall do herein, will be fully
satisfactory, as to your selves, so to all the welaffected Seamen of this
Kingdom; And for your good affections to the Parliament and Kingdom, manifested
by your former actions in the late War, and in your expressions and engagements
in your present Petitions, they have commanded me to give you thanks.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

