The Royal Joy. OR, A SERMON OF CONGRATVLATION Upon the five first Verses of
PSALM XXI.

Made upon the occasion of the first News of the PROCLAMATION of CHARLES II.
King of Great Britain; Brought to His Majesty in the Town of BREDA, the 21. of
May, in the Year 1660.

Preached at the Walloon Church of the said Town, the 23. of May, the day
before His Majesty's departure: By ANTHONY HVLSIVS, Pastor of the said Church.

LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Anno 1660,

TO HER HIGHNESS THE PRINCESS ROYAL.
MADAM,
THis Sermon which I make bold to present to your Highness, bears upon its
Front, THE ROYAL JOY, a Title given unto it by the Text; but we bear another
upon the front of our hearts, viz. THE POPVLAR JOY. The Kings Joy bath been
made the Subject of the Public Joy: It has chiefly appeared upon the
Countenances of all your faithful Subjects of the Town of Breda, in an
extraordinary manner, there being none of our Inhabitants but has given the
marks of a cordial Applause, upon the first report of His Majesty's
Restoration, with an excess of joy, and I dare say, with as strong expressions
of rejoicing, as might have been uttered by the most affectionate of his own
Subjects. And I may truly say, Madam, that it is not the present time of
prosperity, which has given us the first impressions of this inclination
toward that worthy Prince; it is of an older date, and had its beginning
together with the knowledge we had of him: We never saw him coming in, or going
out of this Town, during the time of his Affliction, but we made Vows for his
Deliverance; yea, and we would have carried him upon his own Throne, had our
strength been equal to the motions of our hearts, and could the effects have
been answerable to the tenderness of our affection, which has had a not able
increase, since the time Heaven has favored us with the accomplishment of our
desires, and has chosen this Town to be the place where His Majesty has
received the news of his Proclamation, where his Subjects have resorted in
crowd to render him their Devoirs, and where even our Sovereign Magistrates the
Lords States General and Provincial of Holland, have personally appeared to
express unto His Majesty the sense of the singular satisfaction they received
by seeing such an happy day.

It is true, Madam, your Highness has been the occasion our Town has received
such an Honor, and therefore we do acknowledge you as the second cause of it,
and the Instrument in the hand of God; yet we do interpret it as a benefit of
God, whereby he has been pleased to reward the part we have taken, out of our
affections, in the calamities of that Prince; that as for a long time we have
sympathiz'd with him, so we should be the first sharers of his comfort and joy.
I cannot think, Madam, that any one would be so unjust toward us, as to envy
us such an advantage, since it is justified even by the example of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who was pleased that Mary Magdalene (to whom the Town of Breda
may be compared upon the present occasion) should have the first share of the
glad tidings of his Resurrection, which she received from his own mouth, as a
reward of her cares and fears for him, wherein she had excelled above all his
other friends and kindred. The Custom of our Ancestors, who rendered their
memorable actions, even the days of their Funest Battles, famous by the names
of the places wherein they had happened, does give that right to our Town, that
this so remarkable action of the Divine Providence, which is one of the most
signal wonders that ever were celebrated by the Histories of the past ages,
ought to be published under its name: Blessed be therefore that august day,
wherein His Majesty being in the midst of us, has received by an unanimous
accord, the Homage of his Subjects. Let it henceforth be called, THE DAY OF
BREDA: Let it be, under that Name, the Object of the Admiration of all the
Christian Kings and Princes; let it shine even to the most remote places of the
Barbarous Nations; let it be ingraved with the Steel in our Records and
Memorials, that for ever it may be the subject of the Discourses of our
Posterity.

But that which we do esteem above all, Madam, is the admirable goodness and
sweetness, wherewith His Majesty has received the visits of all sorts of
persons: Those affectionate and reiterated protestations and promises be has
made to our Sovereign Lords the States, as also to our vener able Magistrates,
to the Pastors, and to the other persons, both Political and Ecclesiastical, of
this Town; Of the sincerity of his affection toward the true Reformed
religion, and toward all the Protestant Princes and States, and chiefly
toward the States of these United Provinces; promising unto them the
continuation of the affection his Ancestors have showed unto them; and
particularly, Of the favorable remembrance and good will he would still keep
for the Town of Breda, where he had received the news of his restoration, and
known the effects of the inclination showed to his Person and to his Subjects.
That language, Madam, has ravished our spirits, has filled our hearts with
joy, and our mouths with vows and acclamations. We have gathered it with our
own ears, as the expressions which the Spirit of Peace had dictated to His
Maiesty's mouth, which will make us hereafter cast our eyes upon that Excellent
Prince, as upon a mighty Organ reserved by God for the present times, and
raised, in his blessing, to be a balance and an Equilibrium for the public
tranquillity throughout all Europe.

And our Inhabitants, Madam, have also expressed a singular satisfaction of the
gracious content his Majesty has been pleased to show be has received of
their cordial affection and weak services they have been able to render to
those that belong to your Royal House. And we pray your Highness to believe,
that if the noise of our Muskets and Canons thundering from our Bulwarks, at
the departure of his Majesty, could not accompany him further then a little
beyond our gates; that of our Vows and prayers to God for his prosperity, will
follow him to his very City of London, and will contribute to the setting of
his Crowns upon his head. These are the truest proofs of our affection, which
your Highness does ever recommend unto us, as often as we have the honor to
wait upon you, viz. those of our prayers to God for your Highness and your
Family. And truly, they are the most material and the most pure ones, and which
give stronger impressions then all others; for they do ascend to the place of
origin, viz. Heaven, and bring down from thence abundance of blessings upon
earth; whereas all others do vanish in their pomp and apparate, and most part
cannot bring any advantage to the object thereof. Which consideration has put
me in mind of the matter of this Sermon pronounced upon the same day we
prepared to take our leave of his Majesty, and conceived our public vows for
the prosperity and the happy success of his Voyage. Now our Flock desiring of
me some copies of it, to keep an eternal memory in their families of such an
illustrious Occurrence, I made bold, Madam, most humbly to crave the protection
of your Highness, under whose sweet and favor able Government it is maintained;
being besides doubly interessed in the subject which gave occasion to this
Sermon, both in regard of themselves, and in regard of his Highness the Prince
of Orange, which is the object of our delight, and upon whose face the Royal
luster of his Majesty does also shine. And although this small work be not
answer able to its illustrious subject, yet your Highness's goodness, whereof
we have an infinite number of proofs, does assure me you will cast a gracious
eye upon the Author's intention, and out of your clemency will bear with his
defects. In the confidence where of, I do continue my vows to the Sovereign
King of Kings, that be may be pleased to pour his most precious graces upon
your Highness, and all your Serenissime Family, and to conserve their Luster
upon Earth, and make them Triumphant in Heaven: Having no other ambition but to
express, with all the imaginable respects, how much I am,

MADAM, Your Highnesse's Most humble and most obedient Servant and Subject, A.
HULSIUS.
From BREDA, May 24. 1660.
THE ROYAL JOY. THE TEXT.
Psalm 23. v. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1. The King shall joy in thy strength, O Lord, and in
thy salvation how greatly shall be rejoice! 2. Thou have given him his hearts
desire, and have not withholden the request of his lips. Selah. 3. For thou
preventest him with the blessings of goodness; thou set a crown of pure
gold on his bead. 4. He asked life of thee, and thou gave it him, even length
of days, for ever and ever.

Welbeloved Brethren in our Lord Jesus Christ!
THis town, which formerly has been the Stage on which Tragedies of War,
Pestilence and Famine, and of Bloodshed have been acted, is now become a
Theater of Joy and Magnificence: A Theater whereon an Action is now acted,
which has the whole World for Spectators. It is not a representative action,
such as are the Comedies and Enterludes, wherein men do represent such
qualities as they really have not; but it is a real action, such as were our
former Tragedies, wherein the Persons are really and indeed such as they
represent. The chiefest and Sovereign Actor here is the GOD of Heaven, who as
he does show himself wonderful in all his works, so he does it most
particularly in this. You see your Town full of Illustrious persons, of Lords,
of Princes, and of Sovereign Magistrates: You see therein a KING, formerly
dispossessed of his Throne, and now settled again thereon, to the astonishment
of all the World: You see the Subjects recalling their lawful Prince, out of
mere affection, without constraint, without violence, without effusion of blood
You see therein your Sovereign Magistrates bringing their Vows and
Congratulations to the King and to his people: You see the fair and loving
apparences of a perfect correspondence, and of ^n universd content. Upon the
whole we may with truth pronounce the sentence of the Psalmist, Psalm. 118. This
is the Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. For, as many objects we
see, so many wonders, and so many expressions of the admirable providence of
God; and we may with reason s^y, that this Town has never seen such a day, nor
is like ever to see such a one to the worlds end. Let us speak of it in
public, for it is a work which is done in public, and it foundeth to the very
extremities of the earth: Let us speak of it in the house of God, since it is
the work of God: Let us speak of it in blessing, since God has wrought it, not
in wrath, as he sometimes wrought here, but in his grace; Let us speak of it in
the day of our rest, since he has done it for the settling of the peace and
rest of his Church. Let us therefore call this day, The day of the Lord; and
let us say yet with the same Psalmist, This is the day which the Lord has
made, let us rejoice and be glad in it. But let S. Paul tell us the occasion of
that joy, 2 Cor. 6. It is now the time accepted, it is now the day of
salvation. A day of salvation indeed, and an accepted time: A day of salvation
for the King; a day of salvation for his people; a day of salvation for the
true Reformed Religion; and an accepted time for our State and for us all
together. Both the joy, and the ground of it, are found in our present Text,
which has for an object two general parts. I. A joyful King. II. The cause of
his joy, viz. His salvation and deliverance. And this cause is more largely
deducted, 1. By its Author and principal cause, which is the strength of the
Lord. 2. By its secondary cause, or the means whereby the King has obtained
his deliverance, namely, his hearts desire, and the prayer or request of his
lips. 3. By its effects or the proofs of his deliverance, which are, I.
General, That he has prevented him with the blessings of goodness. II.
Particular, viz. I. The setting of the Crown. II. The lengthening of days. This
is the division of the Text.

But it is to be observed, that this place is one of those that can admit of
three senses ordinarily applied to the holy Scriptures. I. The literal sense.
II. The mystical sense. III, The accommodated sense. The literal is that which
is immediately and properly the intention of the holy Ghost, be it found either
in simple and proper words, or in figurative terms. The mystical sense is that
which is known to be the secondary intention of the holy Ghost, and has no
place but in Types only. 1. When the thing spoken of is found accomplished in
some subjects, which was a Type or figure of Christ, or of his Church. 2. When
what is said to belong to the mystical sense in one place, is found to
appertain to the literal sense in another. Whenever any of those two
conditions is wanting, the mystical sense is not admitted, and we ought singly
to adhere to to the litteral, which then is to have place alone, without
looking therein for any secondary intention. We might illustrate this by
Examples, but the present occasion does not permit it. The accommodated sense
is never under the intention of the holy Ghost, as to any particular place, but
only as to the whole scope of the whole Scripture, and is left to the liberty
of the Expositor, who may draw out of it all manner of moralities for the
public instruction, so as he keep within the bounds of the Analogy of Faith
grounded upon the word of God. We say then, that as to the literal sense, our
Text belongs to King David; as to the mystical sense, it belongs to the Kings
of Kings, our Lord Jesus Christ; and as to the accommodated sense, it belongs
to this Kings Who is the Present subject of the public admiration; And we
shall, with the assistance of the grace of God, expound by that triple sense,
keeping still within the division already made of it.

I. The Literal sense.
THe Rabbines among the Hebrews do expound that Psalm two ways. Some upon the
ground of the History, do apply it to King David; others upon the ground of the
Prophecy, do apply it to King Messiah, as R. David Kimchi upon the Psalms does
witness: We do embrace both these Expositions, referring it to King David in
the litteral sense, and to the King Messiah in the mistical sense, as we have
declared. It is a Psalm of Thanksgiving, which David makes unto God, the
subject whereof is not expressed in the Title; but if we consider the Contents
and the matter of it,, we may easily conjecture that he has sung that
acknowledgment unto God, about the beginning of his Reign, after the time of
his affliction: The Crown had been designed for him upon the second year of the
Reign of Saul, when he was anointed by Samuel the Prophet to be King in Israel;
but he could not enjoy it during Saul's time, who persecuted him from place to
place: So that he has been the object of all manner of adversities for the
space of nine or ten years; namely, until the death of Saul, at which time he
was anointed the second time, and was exalted upon the Throne at that time
then, when God had accomplished the days of his calamities, and had delivered
him from the hands of his persecutors, and had set the Crown upon his head, he
composed that Psalm of Thanksgiving unto God.

1. You see then therein a Joyful King, yea, and greatly rejoicing. The
original Text expresses two Verbs, whereof the one signifies the joy of the
hearts, and the other the joy of the forehead, viz. when it shows it self by
the outward gestures, as does ordinarily an excessive joy. And truly that of
David ought to have been of that nature, considering the notable change of his
condition from one extreme to the other, from the extremity of calamity to the
extremity of luster and glory. But there are two sorts of joy in the Kings and
Princes of this world, an evil and carnal joy, and a joy which is good and
approved of God: Their carnal and bad joy is, when they do rejoice alone, their
Subjects not being partakers of their joy: Such was the joy of Ahashuerus, and
of Haman, Esther 3.15. The King and Haman sat down to drink; but the City
Shushan was perplexed. Such is also the joy of all the Tyrants, who do forget
Tyberius his lesson, which permits indeed to shear the sheep, but not to flay
them: But David's joy was a joy rebounding upon the foreheads of his people. The
near conjunction that is between the King and his Subjects, as between the head
and the members of the body, can suffer no alternative as to their rejoicing;
if it be just, it is reciprocal: That of the King cannot hold without that of
the Subjects, nor that of the Subjects without that of their King. The Kings
being exalted upon their Thrones, are as the Sun in Heaven, which is not seated
in that high luster, that by the splendour of his beams he might dazzle the eyes
of men, but that he might communicate his light to the Stars, and his heat to
the Earth, and give to all the Creatures he does illuminate, a pleasing aspect,
and a smiling look. The Psalmist does signify so much, v. 7. Thou have made
him most blessed for ever. It is a property which does accompany the good
Kings, to be made most blessed, not only for a passive blessing, relating only
to their own persons, that they might acknowledge themselves blessed by the
Dominion and Power they have upon the people, but for an active blessing also
relating to the people, that they might likewise acknowledge themselves to be
happy and blessed by the good and wise conduct of their Kings: So the joy
becomes reciprocal, and is approved of God, when it is limited by that joy of
the people, viz. when the people is partaker of the joy of their King, and the
King is sharer of the affliction of his people. That that of David has been of
that nature, it has appeared in all his actions, carrying himself toward his
Subjects, as a Faithful Shepherd toward his Sheep, for so also he calls them,
2 Samuel 24. when he presented himself with his whole Family to the edge of the
sword of the destroying Angel, to cause the plague of the people of Israel to
cease.

II. The Cause of his Joy has been his Deliverance, the greatness whereof may
be known by the two aforementioned extremes, viz. the preceding calamity, and
the present felicity. He had been wandering the space of nine or ten years,
hunted and persecuted from one place to another, no rest in any place, every
where exposed to a thousand dangers and ambuscadoes: And as St. Paul faith, 2
Cor. 11. That he has been in perils by his own Countrymen, in perils by the
Heathen, in perils in the City, in perils in the Wilderness, in weariness and
painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in
cold and nakedness. This King has gone through the same Fortune, not finding
any safe retreat, pursued by his enemies through the Wilderness, betrayed by
his own Countrymen, discovered in the Towns of the Philistines, often
compelled to disguise himself to escape and flee in the middle of the night, to
retire into the Dens and Rocks: Yea, sometimes he has been brought to such
necessity, that for want of Victuals, he has been forced to eat the Shewbread,
consecrated unto God, and has subsisted by the Presents sent him by Abigal, a
virtuous woman. See 1 Samuel 21. and 25. etc. God having then delivered him
miraculously from all those dangers and inconveniences, having settled him King
in Israel, having put the Scepter into his hand, and the Crown upon his head;
see whether he had not cause to call that a remarkable deliverance, and so be
exceedingly joyful. But he is not content to acknowledge himself delivered; he
shows us further, the Author, the means, and the effects of this deliverance.

1. The Author of his deliverance is the Lord, who by his strength had exalted
him; therefore he does not say, my deliverance, but thy deliverance. As if he
should say, that it was not a deliverance obtained by his own dexterity and
conduct, or by the strength of his arms, as it has often happened, that by
victorious arms and bloody battles, illustrious men have made to themselves a
way to the Crown, and have conquered Kingdoms. But David does attribute his
deliverance solely to the strength of God. And indeed he was proclaimed King
after Savls death, by the mere affection of the people, having had no need of
compelling them by his arms to yield him obedience. And truly those kinds of
deliverances that come immediately from the hand of God, are the best; and the
Scepters which God puts into the hands of Princes without shedding of blood, as
David had his, are far more excellent then those they do snatch themselves by
violence of arms. And that for four reasons. 1. The joy for it is purer, and
more universal. In the violent Conquests, the joy of the Prince and of the
people cannot be so perfect, but they must needs see some afflicted Widows that
have lost their Husbands in the Fight; some Children crying and lamenting the
death of their Fathers; and some Fathers and Mothers weeping for the loss of
their Children. But such Conquests as come immediately from the hand of God,
are not subject to any calamities of that nature. 2. The Peoples approbation is
more manifest. The violent conquests are often against the people's good will,
who submit themselves to the yoke, not willingly, but out of necessity. The
contrary is seen, when the people themselves, by the direction of the sole
providence of God, who has the hearts of men in his mighty hand, does set
their Prince on the throne. That cannot be done but with a general applause,
and with all the visible apparences of a flourishing and peaceable Reign. 3.
The confidence and trust that a Prince so delivered and exalted, puts in his
God, is greater, when he does acknowledge with humility, that it has been the
right hand of God which has done that wonder, without contributing thereunto
his own power and industry. You see that in David, Ps. 20. Some trust in
chariots, and some in horses, but we will remember the name of the Lord our
God. And Ps. 44. I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me;
but thou shall save us from our enemies, and shall put them to shame that hate
us. 4. His luster is the more eminent: His subjects look upon him as upon the
mirror of Gods favor, and do with obedience submit to his scepter, seeing it is
God who causes him to reign. His Enemies are afraid of him and do fly from
him, learning to say with Balaam, Numb. 23. The Lord his God is with him, and
the shout of a King is among them. His Neighbors do honor him as Gods
Anointed, and do seek his amity and alliance, as did Abimilech King of Gerar,
Genesis 26. coming to the Patriarch Isaac, who told him, Wherefore come ye to me,
seeing ye hate me, and have sent me away from you? Abimelech answered him, We
saw certainly that the Lord was with thee, and we said, Let there be now an
oath betwixt us, even betwixt us and thee, and let us make a covenant with thee.

2. The Means whereby David came to that felicity, has been his hearts desire,
and the request of his lips, that is, his ardent Prayers. The Communion he has
had with God during the time of his affliction, is known by the Titles of
several Ps^lms. He composed 3. at that time when he was flying before Absalom
his son, the 34. when he was expelled by Abim^lech; the 52. when he was
discovered unto Saul by Doeg the Jdumean, the 56. being taken by the
Philistines at Gath, the 57. and the 142. in his flight from before Saul,
hiding himself in the Den; the 59. when Saul sent to kill him, the 63. being in
the Wilderness of Judah; the 102. is a Psalm of complaint made by him unto God
in his extreme perplexity and distress. All these holy meditations do testify
the Piety of that King, and show whom he had recourse unto in his calamity,
viz. to God, who has also heard him at length, and has granted him the
desires of his soul: For Prayer is the Key, and opens that which is shut by
men; and Godliness has the promise of the life that is now, and of that which
is to come. But it is to be observed, that among all the expressions used by
him in his Psalms, not one can be found, wherein he directly demands the
Kingdom of Israel, or shows the le^st token of impatience for the long
continuance of his afflictions; but he does merely represent the state of his
c^^^mity, and with an admirable temper of trust and patience, does refer all to
the providence of God, and prays only for the support of his grace, and for
the peace of his Church: Thereby teaching us, that it is not the least of Gods
graces, when he is pleased we should suffer for his glory, that we be able to
refrain the desires of our hearts, and the expressions of our lips, that
nothing that is irregular may escape from them, that may tend to the
dis^dvantage of his service, and of the obedience we do owe unto him. He
teaches us likewise which are the true Prayers, viz. such as do proceed from
the desires of the heart, and the attention of the soul, before they be
expressed by the lips: Otherwise they are as the founding brass, or a tinkling
cymbal, i. Cor. 13.

3. The Effects and the Proofs of his deliverance have two parts. The I is
general, and does consist in being prevented with the blessings of goodness.
God, in delivering of him, has prevented him two several ways. 1. As to the
time, 2. as to the means. 1. As to the time: For he had only asked life, to
escape safe out of the hands of Saul, who persecuted him unto death: And
behold, not only he delivered him, and preserved his life, but also he
prevented him with a blessing he expected not yet, viz. that Saul being killed
in the Battle against the Philistines, the door was opened to him to the Crown,
and he not only found means to breathe a little from his troubles, and to live,
but also to live securely, long and happily. 2. As to the means, no doubt but
David thought he was to conquer the Kingdom which God had promised to him, by
strength of Arms; but God prevented him in that thought, and not only made him
Master of the Towns, but also of the hearts of his subjects: For it is said, 2 Samuel 2. 4. And the men of Judah came, and there they anointed David King over
the house of Judah. So does God hear the prayers of his own children, giving
them ordinarily more then they do ask. The II. particular end is, I. The
setting upon him the Crown, Thou set a Crown of pure Gold on his head, viz.
the Crown of Saul, which was brought to him from the Battle, 2 Samuel 1.10. By
which words the Royal Dignity wherewith God had honored him is signified. Note
that he faith, God had set on him that Crown, and not men, nor he himself. True
it is, that men are those that set Crowns on the heads of Kings; but when God
does not put his hand to it, they are not well set. He is that great Master,
who alone does understand the Trade and the Art of setting Crowns, who can so
well settle them on the heads of Princes, that they keep firm and will not
fall. Men may meddle with it, but without the heavenly favor and assistance,
they cannot succeed well therein: As experience has showed it in all ages,
that Crowns either usurped, or unjustly snatched, set on by Sedition and
Rebellion, have fallen with those that went about to wear them: For it is too
heavy a burden, and not to be born by every one, but by such only as God calls
thereunto, and in bles for it. 2. The lengthening of days; Thou gave him
length of days for ever and ever. The years of the life of David amounted to
seventy, and those of his reign to forty: For he reigned seven years in Hebron
and thirty three in Jerusalem; a lengthning of days considerable enough, which
he durst not hope for during the time of his persecutions; but at the beginning
of his reign, by the gift of Prophecy, he promised it unto himself. And what
has been wanting, as to the perpetuity of it mentioned here, has been made
good by the lengthning of days of eternity in heaven above; which is the true
life of the faithful. But this seems rather to belong to the Mystical sense.

II. The Mystical sense:
FRom the Literal sense we come to the Mystical. David was the Type of Jesus
Christ; and therefore what is said of the one, may be referred or applied to
the other; yet still observing that general rule, that the mystical sense takes
only place in such matters wherein the thing is verified in both, that is to
say, that what is taken mystically in one place, be found literally in another
place, as we have declared before: So that all the parts that cannot be
perfectly verified in the Antitype, do remain solely appropriated in the
literal sense to the Type, without pasting to the mystical sense. And mutually
such as cannot be verified in the Type, do remain solely appropriated in the
literal sense to the Antitype, without passing to the mystical sense: For then
the Holy Ghost does propound the literal sense in figurate words, the Type
being set down for the Antitipe. Upon this account let us expound this Text, as
all others of the like nature: But at this time we shall only trace the
introdnction of that relation between the Type and his Antitype: For our Lord
Jesus Christ being the ordinary subject of our meditations, the more large
deduction of that matter is often enough made upon other occasions.

I. The joyful King is the King Messiah, not he of the Rabbines, a mere carnal
and imaginary Messiah; but Jesus Christ the object of all the ancient Types and
Prophecies. This joy is great, since the subject of it is great, it is
perfectly pure, suitable to the holy Soul of Jesus Christ, which is not
expressed by outward gestures of exultation, as that of men, which is more
carn^l. It is communicative: for that King knows of no other joy, but such as
is common to his Church; yea, he rather came to the world for the joy of his
people, then for his own, Luke 2. I bring you good tidings of great joy which
shall be to all the people. Matthew. 1. For be shall save his people from their
sins. And what he faith John 11.15. I am glad for your sakes, we may apply it
to the end and aim of his exaltation.

II. The Cause of his joy is the deliverance of the state of his exinanition,
and of the sufferings both of his soul and body, Es. 53.8. He was taken from
prison and from judgment.

1. The Author of his deliverance is God, who through his strength has exalted
him, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. According to the working of his mighty power, which he
wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, etc.

2. The Means is his hearts desire, and the request of his lips: The prayers of
Jesus Christ during the time of his humiliation, have been frequent; and
although he had the revelation of the eternal Decree of God touching himself,
yet he has prayed unto him for the accomplishing of it, John 17. Father
glorify thy son, that thy Son also may glorify thee.

3. The proofs of his deliverance are likewise obvious. 1. Also the general
part, that he has been prevented with blessings, has rather been true in the
Type, then in Jesus Christ; for to speak properly, he has been prevented with
no kind of blessings in the the state of his exaltation, neither for himself
nor for his Church, which before he had not fore seen and foretold: And in that
point, as in many other, he being God and Man, and Mediator between God and
men, ought to be distinguished from all others. 2. As to the particulars. 1.
The setting on of the Crown, yea, and of a Crown of pure Gold: it signifies
here the Royal Office, wherein he wears a Crown that surmounts, and is more
excellent then the Crowns of all the Kings of the earth: For God has highly
exalted him, and has given him a name which is above every name, etc. Phil. 2.
Far above all Principalities and Powers, and might, etc. and has put all
things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all things to the
Church, etc. 2. The lengthening of days, even for ever and ever, is rather
verified in Christ, then in David his Type, Romans 6. Christ being raised from
the dead, dies no more, death has no more dominion over him. Es. 53. He shall
prolong his days; who shall declare his generation?

III. The Accommodated Sense.
IF we compare the example of that King who is the present subject of our
admiration, with King David, as to those things we have spoken of him, we shall
find them extremely like one unto the other. We do not intend here to fall
upon Panegyricks and praises of the virtues and excellent qualities of that
Prince, it being a thing neither suitable to our persons, nor to this place,
which is the Chair of truth and simplicity, and not of flattery. But our design
is only to show you that admirable conformity that is between those two Kings,
and to pray God for this, that he might be pleased to grant him the grace to
acknowledge that his deliverance comes from him alone, as you see he has done
unto David.

I. The joyful King is KING CHARLES, Second of that name, lately Proclaimed by
the favor and grace of GOD, KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE AND IRELAND,
DEFENDER OF THE TRUE FAITH, THE LAWFUL HEIR OF THE CROWN, FROM THE VERY DAY OF
THE DEATH OF CHARLES THE FIRST HIS FATHER OF GLORIOUS MEMORY. If David has
greatly rejoiced, even unto exultation, I leave it to you to judge whether this
King has not had reason to rejoice too, his fortune having been like unto that
of David. Although we have been told, that when the first news came to him of
it, no kind of alteration upon his face, nor any motion in his spirit was
observed. The reason of it is, because cause the violent shakings of the
calamities happened to that Prince one upon another during such a long series
of years, have r^ised his spirit above all earthly things, to look on them all
with an equal countenance, and have taught him to show himself immovable to
the attempts of either the good or bad fortune: As the iron, the end whereof is
hardened in the fire by being often put therein, whether you try it upon a
stone, or upon a mass of gold, it remains still inflexible. But that
commendable moderation could by no means hinder him from receiving in his soul
a very sensible satisfaction of the singular grace of God to him, in inclining
the hearts of his Subjects to their duty toward him, nor from expressing a joy
suitable to the due acknowledgement of that incomparable benefit of God.
Likewise, there is no doubt but that the joy of that Prince is a lawful joy,
and approved of by God, it being mixed with that joy of his Subjects, whom we
see to be as joyful for having yielded themselves to their lawful King, as the
King himself may be joyful for being restored to his Subjects. From whence we
conceive this good Omen, that since it is God who has raised this joy, it will
remain ever common and reciprocal for the time to come, such as his faithful
Subjects could never be so happy as to take these ten or twelve years bypast,
when all the joy was confined in the breast of an Usurper of the Kingly
Dignity, and of those of his faction, which filled the Kingdom with violence,
the Political Government with confusion and disorders, and the Church with
Sects and Heresies, the smaller fort of the people being oppressed, and the
great ones carrying their heads to be cut off upon Scaffolds: Judge ye what may
then have been the joy of honest men, when none durst open his mouth in the
behalf of the good Cause, without incurring the crime of High Treason, not
against the King, but against an Usurped Authority, and without exposing
themselves to the loss both of life and estate. Therefore do you represent unto
your selves the joy and the action of that people, to be like to the joy of
those Northern people, who for six months together having not seen the sun,
as soon as they spy the first dawning of the day above their Horizon, after a
long and thick darkness, they run to meet that fair Planet, and climb upon the
mountains, to be illuminated by his beams so long hidden from them; and as the
joy of the Tribe of Judah returning from Babylon, Psalm. 126. When the Lord
turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream; then was our
mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing.

II. The cause of his joy, is his deliverance; which we may say to have been as
great as that of David, for it goes from one extreme unto the other, as well as
his. But I am dispensed by many considerations from making here unto you a full
Narrative of the calamities and sad travels of that Prince during the twelve
years of his banishment: And the chiefest reason of my silence therein, shall
be my ignorance. For although we have had often the honor to see him in this
town, and upon those occasions we have heard with much sorrow of heart several
relations of his adversities; yet knowing all these only by hearsay, and the
certainty and the circumstances being unknown to us, it is not proper for us to
say any thing of that here. Besides, it being a day of rejoicing, it would not
be convenient to wrong our selves so much, as to deprive us, by such melancholy
discourses, of those chaste pleasures, whereunto our Bonfires, the ringing of
our Bells, and the shooting off our Canons do invite us, in the admiration of
Gods wonders in the deliverance of that Prince. Add thereunto, that the little
we have spoken of David's afflictions, not being taken out of any Sermon, but
only one of the Books of Chronicles, it would be in vain for me to undertake to
comprise in a Sermon limited by the time of one hour, all the sad occurrences
of above twelve years time, whereof your posterity will see hereafter many very
voluminous Histories, no less remarkable then those of former ages. It may for
this time suffice, you see in this town before your own eyes an Object, which
an hundred years hence (if the world continues so long) will be the subject of
Table and Journey-discourses, and so much admired as now adays the most
illustrious men, celebrated by the Histories, may be by us. A Prince of the
most illustrious Blood in all Europe, of an extraction merely Royal of the
Father and Mothers side, dispossessed of his Inheritance, banished from his
Country, abandoned by his own Blood, wandering among Foreign Nations: who was
accounted to be forgotten of God, because out of the Worlds memory, whose
manner is to turn its back to Adversity, though innocent, and to adore nothing
but Prosperity, although never so guilty. But who has been miraculously
delivered from the reproach, and restored into the possession of his Ancestors,
contrary to all humane apparences.

1. The Author then of this deliverance cannot be other then God, whose hand
and strength only has wrought that wonder. So that this King may very well say
with David, Thy deliverance, having gotten it not by the strength of his arms,
but by the only direction from above: God having put into his hands the bodies
and the hearts of his Subjects, who were as wandering sheep seeking their
shepherd. An example, wherein it seems God has undertaken to give a public
check to the unworthiness of our age, for a memorial and an instruction to
posterity; that the Great ones of this world having forsaken the just cause of
that Prince, He himself alone has been willing to show he is the Protector of
innocence, who raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts the needy out
of the dunghill, Ps. 113.7. Yea, he has so wrought therein, that he has
showed it was his own work, and not of men, taking from them all pretense of
partaking in that glory, that that Prince might be beholding to him alone, and
not to any foreign force, which would have rendered the deliverance so much the
less illustrious, and the conquest the less glorious. Glorious was the conquest
of the Earl of Richmond (afterward Henry the Seventh) when he went out of
Normandy with a small Army into England against Richard the Third, Tyrant, a
Murderer, and an Usurper of the Crown, and won the Kingdom with the loss of an
hundred men only, the subjects wishing nothing more then to be delivered from
the hand of the Tyrant. But the deliverance of Charles II. has been Divine,
who has conquered without fighting or losing one man: God alone having fought
for him with invisible arms, not against the bodies, but against the souls of
men, making them subject to his obedience.

2. The means has been, his hearts desire, and the request of his lips. Let
him go to sea, who will learn to pray, faith the proverb. No doubt but that
Prince, in the midst of the vast sea of his calamities, among so many storms
that went over his head, being destitute of all supply from men, has had his
recourse unto the Lord, the only support of the afflicted souls, and said often
with David, Out of the depths do I cry unto thee, O Lord! and with queen
Elizabeth, when she was carried from the Tower of London to the prison of
Woodstock, by order of queen Mary her sister, Be merciful unto me, O God, be
merciful unto me, for my soul trusts in thee; yea in the shadow of thy wings
do I make my refuge, until the calamity be overpast. In a word, the Lord has
heard the desire of his heart, and has rewarded his persevering piety in the
profession of the Reformed religion, which he steadfastly kept in his heart,
notwithstanding wait has been often laid to his conscience, during the years
of his banishment among the enemies of the Truth: deceitful promises could not
shake the stedfastness of his spirit: Yet he has been forced to swallow down
the blame with the calamity, as if he had been unfaithful to God therein. But
experience has showed the contrary, that although he was surrounded with the
thick clouds of Idolatry, he has ever preserved the purity of the worship of
God in his family; as a most learned and most orthodox Divine, among his
Domestics, an unreproachable witness before God and man, has assured us. Yea,
and the event does now show us the contrary. David faith, Psalm. 66.18. If I
regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. So, had this Prince had
any thought tending to the disadvantage of the Worship of God, and of that
flourishing Church of Christ in his Kingdoms, the Lord would not have heard the
desire of his heart. But he has heard it: And therefore let us conclude that
his conscience and his affection to the truth of the holy Gospel remained pure
and sincere, as he has also protested in the midst of us. A mighty argument to
prove that God honoreth such as do honor him, and are faithful to his service.

3. The proofs of his deliverance are likewise manifest. I. In general, God
has prevented him with blessings. The world did imagine that new Form of the
Government of those Kingdoms to have taken root; that the wound of that
Revolution was now consolidated, and that the ugly skar it had contracted,
could not be opened but by the edge of the sword. But God's thoughts are not as
men's thoughts: As the Heavens are higher then the earth, so are the ways of God
higher then the ways of men, Isa. 55. Who untying and unfolding all those
difficulties, has opened to this Prince a door whereat he hoped not to be able
to enter, when he thought upon the way of Arms; wherein the Grace from above
has prevented him, showing him a surer, an easier, and a safer way for him and
for his people. II. In particular. 1. He bath set a Crown upon his head; yea,
and three Crowns are designed unto him. And what is more, it is God who sets
them on his head, who by his mighty hand raises the hands of his subjects to
set them, with an unanimous consent, upon his head. Wherein his providence is
yet more admirable, then it has been in the example of David, sithence the
Crown of Saul, taken up in the battle, was brought to David by an Amalekite, 2 Samuel 1. after the same manner as that of Richard the 3. of whom we have spoken
before, was set on Henry the 7. his head in the Battel-field; both by
anticipation: Whereas to this Prince it is offered after a mature deliberation
of all his States. To David it was presented, he being in the Kingdom; to this,
he being yet abroad. David was only proclaimed King of Judah, at the beginning
of his reign, for the other Tribes adhered yet to the son of Saul for two
years: But this is proclaimed King of all his Kingdoms, without any opposition.
2. The lengthening of days shall be the crowning of that admirable work of God,
which as David, by the gift of prophefie, promised unto himself, so do we wish
it to this Prince by our vows and prayers.

INSTRUCTION.
SOme might here say the same that sometimes one Sheba the son of Bichri said,
2 Samuel 20.1. We have no part in David. the interest of this King and of his
Subjects, is not our interest; their joy is not our joy, who live under, and
depend on other Magistrates, and therefore have nothing common. I answer, it is
true, that as the Sea does divide us, so there is a diversity of Politic
Government between us. But there is another union besides that of the bodies,
viz. that of consciences, whereby this Prince and his people do acknowledge
themselves to be tied unto us, and our Sovereign Magistrates and their Subjects
do acknowledge to be tied unto them. There are two several ties that bind us
to our Superiors, each Nation to their own; but there is one only tie that ties
us all to the King of Kings, our Lord Jesus Christ: as several lines drawn from
the circumference of the circle, do meet all in the center which is in the
middle; so Jesus Christ and the purity of the holy Gospel is our common center
wherein we meet together, as members of the same body, as Subjects of the same
King, as Citizens of the same Spiritual Commonwealth. So we have part in David,
so this King and his people are near related to us: our interests are common,
our joys common, our advantages common, our losses common. And upon this
account we pour this day our Prayers for that Prince,

That God the pleased to accomplish in and for him the excellen work be has
begun: That be will lead him in his journey, and bring him safe into his
Kingdom, to incline the hearts of all his subjects to him, that all of them,
none excepted; may embrace him as their Father and Deliverer: so to settle his
Crown upon his Head, that it may never be shaken hereafter. To strengthen him
against all foreign forces: to protect him against the designs of his enemies,
against all dangers and inconveniences, and to give him a flourishing and
peaceable Reign; that being made a joyful and contented King sitting upon his
Throne, he might all the days of his life acknowledge the Author and the manner
of his deliverance, Religiously remember the gracious Protection of god, during
the long tempest of his calamities, and the wonders he has wrought for his
restoration: That be might keep a holy correspondence with the State of these
United Provinces, as his Ancestors have done, and might show the first effects
of his acknowledgement, by a fervent zeal to the repurgation of the Church of
Jesus Christ, of all those Sects and Heresies that have crept into that
Kingdom, and have been the supporters of Rebellion during the times of
confusion: Therein imitating David King of Israel, whose first care was at the
beginning of his Reign to take order that the Ark of God might rest in an
honorable and decent place. And the Queen, Elizabeth of glorious memory, who
begun her Reign by the Reformation of the Church, which was then deformed by
the Tyrannical zeal of her sister Queen Mary; who upon those steps have made
their Reigns happy and peaceable, the one of forty, and the other of forty five
years. We wish unto that King the same ardor for the glory of God, and a
lengthening of days beyond that. And that having long and happy worn the three
Corwns upon earth, the King of Kings be pleased to set the fourth upon his head
in heaven.

God grant him that grace.
A SPEECH made to the KING in the Castle of BREDA, BY ANTHONY HULSIUS Pastor,
In the Name and in the presence of the Consistory of the WALLOON Church.
SIR,
WE know this day by experience, that it is God who makes Kings, and does set
Crowns on their heads. The example of your Majesty does afford us a very clear
proof of it, which causes the admiration of the whole world, and fills with
joy and content the hearts of your faithful Subjects. We who have the honor of
seeing the presence of your Majesty in the midst of us, in this happy
conjuncture, are partakers of their joy, and have this day blessed the name of
the Lord for it; giving thanks to his fatherly providence, that having pulled
down a Protector raised upon false grounds, he has been pleased to restore the
true Protector to his People, and Religion to its true Defender. And as your
Majesty has showed your patience in receiving the Vows and Congratulations of
three of the Colleges of this Town, that came before us: We most humbly pray
your Majesty to have the same goodness for the fourth and last, namely, that of
the Governors of the Walloon Church, who come to prostrate themselves at the
feet of your Majesty, and to offer you the four Vows or Prayers they do make
for your Prosperity, viz. A Vow of Piety, a Vow of Felicity, a Vow of Wisdom,
and a Vow of Justice, which are the four eminent qualities of your Glorious and
Illustrious Ancestors. The Piety of King Edward the VI. the first truly
Reformed King, both as to his Life, and as to his Faith, and the first Reformer
of the Kingdom of England. The Felicity of Queen Elizabeth, who according to
the testimony of her successor, King James your Majesty's Grandfather, has
surmounted in prudence and happiness of Government, all the Monarchs of this
world since Augustus Caesar. A Lady who has tried a fortune like to that of
your Majesty, who was taken from the Prison to the Crown, and by a wondrous
temperature and mixture of Courage, Prudence, Severity and Meekness, was made
the object of the love and fear of her Subjects, and the miracle of her age,
during the space of forty five years. The Wisdom of King James, whose mouth was
the Oracle of the Learned men of his time. The Justice of King Charles the
first, of glorious memory, your Majesty's Father, a meek and just Prince, whom
I have had the honor to see upon his Throne, and to pass a part of my life
under his peaceable Reign, until the time of the late unhappy confusions; which
your Majesty having now surmounted by the grace of God, and that fatal storm
being now over, we see abundance of new blessings from above, coming down upon
your Majesty's person, who by the vexations of this age having gotten a temper
fit for the Government, and being besides endued with the high qualification of
your glorious Ancestors, will in these later days bring again a golden age, for
the comfort of your Subjects, and for the tranquillity of the Reformed Church of
Christ, not only in your Dominions, but also in these United Provinces, yea,
and through the whole world. We hope so much by the Divine favor; and in that
confidence we pray the King of Kings to give to your Majesty an happy entrance
into his Kingdom, a long and healthful life, a flourishing and peaceable Reign,
a glorious Posterity, and after this life, the Crown of eternal life. These are
the Vows,

SIR, Of your Majesty's Most humble, and most obedient Servants, The CONSISTORY.

FINIS.

