THE HUMBLE PETITION OF The Commons of the City of LONDON IN Common Council
ASSEMBLED, To the Honorable, The Commons of England IN PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED.

With a NARRATIVE of the Proceedings of the Court of COMMON-COVNCEL: And the
VOTE of the House of Parliament, and their Answer thereupon.

Together with Colonel Titchborn's SPEECH, made in the Honorable House of
Commons at the delivery of the said Petition and Narrative.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Petition and
Narrative, and Answer of the House thereunto, and Vote thereupon, be forthwith
Printed and Published:

H: Scobel, Cler. Parl. D. Com..



London, Printed by Peter Cole, at the Sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil,
at the Royal Exchange, Jan. 16. 1648.

blazon or coat of arms of the City of London

Die Lunae, 15 Januarii, 1648.
THe House being informed, That diverse of the Common Counsel of the city of
London were at the door, they were called in, and Col: Titchburn, in the name
of the Commons of the city of London made a short preamble as follows:

Mr. SPEAKER,
THe Commons of the city of London in Common Counsel assembled, have appointed
these Gentlemen, with my self, to present their humble Petition to the
Honorable House this morning, I shall spend none of your precious time in any
preparatory speech, hoping our Petition will speak for it self, were it not
that some part of the Title is absent from this Petition, which does usually
attend this Honorable House in Petitions of this nature; nor shall I speak to
the cause of such an absence, because the Court it self has in a short
Narrative given this honorable House some account thereof, which I have here,
to present with this our Petition; only this, give some account, why we could
not in judgment and conscience defer the presenting this Petition: First,
Because the matter of it, as we humbly conceive, contains in substance that
which many of us has ventured our lives for, and all of us our estates in a
measure beyond proportion. Secondly, In regard of the season, we being sensible
that our staying hitherto might without a very favorable interpretation from
this Honorable House be accounted slowness in our duty, and if we had yet
forborne, to have begot a jealousy that we have lost our first love: But give
us leave to say, That we stand here with the same truth of heart, and public
Principles, which we first engaged withal in this public cause; only herein
we confess to differ, That the great experience which God has given us in this
Seven years time, has begotten more light in us, by which we have a clear
understanding of persons and things, whereby we are advantaged, and the more
resolvedly fixed to live and dye in the maintaining of this public cause with
this Honorable House.

This Petition speaks our Desires, the Narrative our Grievance, both which we
crave leave to present to this Honorable House.

To the Honorable, The Commons of England assembled in Parliament: The humble
Petition of the Commons of the City of London in Common Counsel assembled,
SHOWS,
THat seriously weighing those unspeakable toils, difficulties, dangers, and
temptations, in every kind, wherewith you have been hotly assaulted for many
years together, by the powerful influence whereof, many great pretenders to the
public interest have been wrought off from the same; And withal, considering
that all these, notwithstanding you have stood like a mighty Rock, firm and
constant to your Trust, and are now acting after such a Rate as our dead hopes
break forth with triumph from their Graves, We cannot but with enlarged hearts
bless the God of Heaven for you, and (if it were possible) in the hearing of
the whole world, proclaim our thankfulness to you for the same.

And apprehending, That the Non-Execution of Justice, the Intrusting of the
Militia, and Navy in the hands of Neutralists, unfaithful, and disaffected
Persons; the great decay of Trade, the protecting of many men's Persons and
Estates from the due course of Law, and the unsettled condition of this Nation,
are some of the great and principal Evils under which the hearts of thousands
of your friends (yea the whole Land) groan; We humbly pray,

1 That as you have begun to advance the Interest of unpartial Justice, so you
would vigorously proceed in the Execution thereof upon all the Grand and
Capital Authors, Contrivers of, and Actors in, the late Wars against the
Parliament and Kingdom, from the highest to the lowest; that the wrath of God
may be appeased, good men satisfied, and evil men deterred from adventuring
upon the like practices for the future.

2 That the Militia, Navy, and all Places of power, may be put in the hands of
none but such as by a constant and uniform tenor of their words and actions,
have approved themselves faithful unto you, and the just rights of the Nation.

3 That with all convenient speed you would think upon some effectual course
for the recovery, and increasing of the almost lost Trade and Manufacture of
this City and Kingdom.

4 That no Privilege whatsoever may exempt any from the just satisfaction of
their due debts.

5 That having by your Votes of the 4th of this instant January, Declared, That
the Commons of England in Parliament Assembled, have the Supreme power of this
Nation; you would (as far as you are able) endeavor the settling thereof upon
foundations of Righteousness and Peace; In the maintenance, and prosecution of
which Votes, and of these our just and humble desires, We are resolved to stand
by you to the uttermost of our power, against all opposition whatsoever.

A Narrative of the Proceedings of the Court of Common Counsel, held in
Guild Hall London the 13 of Jan. 1648. humbly presented by Order of the said
Court, To the Honorable, The Commons of England assembled in Parliament.
A Common Counsel being lawfully summoned to meet at eight of the clock in the
morning, upon the day above written, We Commoners of the city of London,
Members of the said Court, in obedience to the said summons, and for discharge
of the Trust reposed in us, made our appearance at the usual place of meeting
for the said Court about the time appointed: About eleven of the clock the Lord
Major, accompanied only with two of the Aldermen, took the chair; We then
desiring the Lord Major, that the Acts of the last Court might be read
according to the usual course of the said Court, and for the further
confirmation of the said Acts, could not obtain the same (though earnestly
desired for above an hours space; after which, some Members of the said Court
(being part of a Committee formerly chosen by the said Court) tendered a
Petition thereunto to be read and considered of; which Petition being the same
now presented to this Honorable House, was drawn up by them in reference to an
Order of the Court, and received the approbation of the major part of the
quorum of that Committee; and though it was often and earnestly pressed for a
long time by the major part of the Court that it might be read, to receive the
sense of the Court, yet the Lord Major wholly refused to suffer the same, or
that the question should be put whether it should be read, yea or no: After the
fruitless expense of many hours, another question being drawn up, the major
part of the Court required it to be put to be decided according to the Right
and custom of the court; and being denied therein, declared how unjust, and of
what a destructive nature to the being of the Court, such a denial would be;
yet notwithstanding the Lord Major with the two Aldermen departed, and left the
Court sitting, to the great grief, and general dissatisfaction of the same.
Being thus deprived of our ordinary assistance for our proceedings, we did then
require and command the common-Sergeant and Town Clerk, Officers of the said
court, to stay in the court and put the question; both which they
contemptuously refused, and left the court sitting likewise. Whereupon, in
discharge of our Trust, and in our tender care of the common good of the city
and Kingdom, we did stay and remain a court, wherein was thrice read, debated
and voted (Nemine contradicente) the Petition hereunto annexed, to be as this
day presented to this Honorable House.

Having given this Honorable House this brief, but true Narrative of part of
our sufferings for eight hours at least, in the breach (as we conceive) of our
undoubted Rights and Privileges; and conceiving the like obstructions would
render our meetings in council altogether fruitless; for public benefit and
service for the future, We are forced to appeal to this Honorable House, for
such considerations hereof, and directions herein, as may make the Commons of
London, in Common council assembled, useful to the ends for which they were
chosen.

Which Petition and Narrative, after the Petitioners were withdrawn, were
read, and were Entitled, The humble Petition of the Commons of the City of
London in Common Counsel Assembled: A Narrative of the proceedings of the court
of Common council held in Guild hall London, the 13 of January, 1648. Humbly
presented by the Order of the said Court, to the Honorable, the Commons of
England Assembled in Parliament.



Die Lunae, 15 Ianuarii, 1648.
REsolved upon the question by the Commons in Parliament assembled, That the
Commons of England in Parliament assembled do Declare, That the Petition this
day presented to the House, and Entitled, The humble Petition of the Commons
of the City of London in Common council assembled; together with a Narrative
thereunto annexed, of the proceeding of the Court of Common council held in
Guild hall London, 13 January 1648.

And presented by the Order of the said Court, to this House, may, and of
Right, ought to be entered in the Books, and among the Acts of the Common
Council there.
The Petitioners being again called in, Mr. Speaker by command of this House
gave them this Answer, The House has read your Petition and Narrative, and
commanded me to return you this Answer, as to the Common Counsel of the City of
London, and so owned by this House.

They take notice of the extraordinary good affections, long sense, and often
expressed by many particular persons, if not by every Member of your present
Body; especially of that true and public Principle, which carried you on to
the framing of this Petition, and to your going through with it,
notwithstanding the opposition and withdrawing of your Major and Aldermen.

I am withal to tell you, That the House does fully approve of your Acting and
Resolving by your selves, as a Common Council in case of absence or dissent in
the Major, or Aldermen, or both together: and they do give you very hearty
Thanks for your free and cheerful tender of your Assistance to this House: And
you may assure your selves, That the Service you offer here, shall always, by
Gods grace, be made use of to the advantage of the English Nation, and therein
of the City of London: In order whereunto, they have Resolved to take the
several Contents of your Petition, and of your Narrative, into serious and
speedy Consideration; and have appointed a Committee for that purpose.

FINIS.

