An Humble ADDRESS OF THE Provincial Synod, OF FIFE IN SCOTLAND. To His most
Sacred Majesty, After the Receipt of His most Gracious LETTER, to the several
Presbyteries of the Church of SCOTLAND.

Directed to the Right Honorable the Earl of Lauderdale, Gentleman of His
Majesty's Bedchamber, and Lord Secretary of Scotland, to be by him presented
to His most Excellent MAJESTY.

LONDON (...)

C R
royal English blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON
DROIT

An Humble Address of the Provincial Synod of Fife in SCOTLAND.
May it please your Lordship,
HAving received the double of a Letter sent from his Majesty with our brother
Mr. James Scharp, to the Presbytery of Edinborough, communicated by them, by
his Majesty's desire, to the several Presbyteries of this Province (as it was
also to other Presbyteries within this Kingdom) and by these, referred to this
Assembly, because of the near approaching of our meeting, for some return to
be given thereupon. And the same being read, once and again, in the public
audience of the Assembly, we were so, to our great comfort and joy, affected
with his Majesty's gracious resolutions, therein expressed, in order to the
matters of God: That, as we could not but break forth into joyful thanksgiving
to God in His Majesty's behalf; So judged we it our duty to express our sense
hereof to your Lordship, His Majesty's Secretary, which we humbly desire your
Lordship will be pleased, as convenience may serve, to make known to his
Majesty.

WHen it seemed good to the Lord God, whose ways are all holy and righteous,
for the iniquity of the people of these Lands, to permit the power of
rebellious, and ungodly men, so far to prevail, as to the expelling His Sacred
Majesty out of His Kingdoms, and from the government thereof: This was, to us,
the taking from us the breath of our Nostrills, and the shadow, under which we
were to have lived among the Nations. And we did find it indeed to be so, by
many sad and bitter oppressions, and confusions, as well in civil interests, as
in matters ecclesiastic, which followed thereupon, under, and by the
domination of the Usurpers, and are so notoure to the world, that we need not
trouble your Lordship by taking up your time with a rehearsal thereof. As soon
as His Majesty returned, and entered again into his Kingdoms, we found, a
reviving: especially by that most Royal, Christian, and Pious Proclamation,
issued by his Majesty, the very next day after His first coming to His Royal
Palace of White Hall, against unchristian heart-burnings, and revilings amongst
His Christian Subjects and against profaneness, and debaucht ryotings. This,
as it was a clear evidence, that the Lord had sanctified His Majesty's
afflictions to Him, and given Him his Judgments, and Righteousness; So was to
us a strong ground of joyful hope, and assurance, that the righteous shall
flourish in His days; And that wisdom, and knowledge, shall be the stabilitie
of his times, and strength of salvation: And that the fear of the Lord is his
Treasure.

But now this His most Sacred Majesty's gracious Letter, has fully quickened
us, and set us, and this Church upon our feet; And is as the Lord were saying
to us. Fear not, peace be unto you, be strong, yea, be strong. As it is matter
of great peace to our consciences before God, by whom Kings do reign, that in
these bypast times of trials, and tentations, we have through the grace of
God, according to our measure, sympathized with our King in his sufferings, and
continued constant in our affection, and loyalty to His Majesty, as our only
rightful Sovereign under Almighty God: So it is no small matter of comfort,
happiness, and rejoicing to us, that His Majesty has been graciously pleased
to declare His assurance of, and good satisfaction with the (...) of the
generality of the Ministers in this Kingdom, as to this. And as we do verily
believe, that for the generality of the Ministers of Scotland, there is real
cause why His Majesty might well be so persuaded of them: So it is to us great
grief and affliction of Spirit, that any in this Kingdom, of what station, or
calling soever, have, in the time of trial, under whatsoever pretenses, swarved
from that Duty, and Allegiance they owed to his Majesty: wishing that God may
grant them repentance, and forgiveness of that grievous sin, so hateful to
God, and so opposite to the principles of our holy Profession.

But our hearts were filled with joy, beyond all, for the grace of God bestowed
upon His Majesty, and his abundant goodness tovvard this Church; by inclining
His Majesty's royal Heart to resolve, and, for assuring his people, graciously
to declare it to be His resolution, by the grace of God, to discountenance
profaneness, and all contemners, and opposers, of the ordinances of the
Gospel; to protect, and preserve the Government of this Church, as it is
established by Law, without violation; to countenance in the due exercise of
their Functions, all such Ministers, who shall behave themselves dutifully and
peaceably (which, indeed, becomes men of their calling, and for our selves, we
trust, through grace, shall ever be our sincere endeavor to do) as also to
take care that the Authority, and Acts, of the general Assembly of St.
Andrews and Dundee, in the year 1651. (wherein the peace of this Church, and
the reputation thereof, in the eyes of all Churches about us, are so much
concerned) be owned, and stand in force, until another general Assembly,
promising graciously withal, that he will call another, as soon as His
Majesty's affairs will permit (a blessing which the sad affects that this
Church has sustained by the want thereof, through the oppression of Usurpers,
makes us the more to long for, and will render the more sweet to us.) My Lord,
we cannot express, how great obligations, we are sensible, does lie upon our
hearts, to bless the Lord our God, who has set up such an hedge of royal
Authority about this Church, and the matter of Religion among us, a people so
unworthy, and misdeserving. And what addition we do find these His Majesty's
Gracious, and Pious resolutions, make to all the other Bonds and Engagements,
Natural, and Divine, we are under, to study to approve our selves faithful,
loyal, and loving Subjects to His Majesty. If now, when the Lord has procured
to us such a shadow, and assurance from His Sacred Majesty, that we may live
under Him a quiet, and peaceable life, in all godliness, and honesty, any
should yet labor to create jealousies in the minds of people, it were high
wickedness, and ingratitude, to be abominated, both against God, and the King.
We do heartily homolog at the resolution of our brethren, hinted in his
Majesty's Letter, not to meddle without their Sphere; and are resolved, by the
grace of God to do accordingly, in our respective Judicatories, and every of
us, in our particular Stations, judging it very aliene from our Calling, and
contrary to the clear revealed will of our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, to
intrude into, or entangle our selves with meddling in matters that are not
Ecclesiastic. We will also, according to our duty, whereunto we are so
straightly bound by the Command of God, and the tie of our Allegiance, and so
deeply obliged in gratitude to his gracious Majesty, endeavor, as is competent
to us, to promote His Majesty's Authority, and interests with His Subjects,
against all opposers: And shall, in the way allowed to us, take notice of all
such, as shall in any way transgress the limits of their Calling, by
endeavoring to corrupt the people, or sow seeds of disaffection to his
Majesty. And, as we esteem it a singular mercy that we may expect His Majesty's
favor in our Calling, and Work, (trusting that our Lord will furnish us with
wisdom, and grace, so to carry our selves in all the managements thereof, that
we shall not deserve the withdrawing of His royal favor, and encouragement
from us) so, it being the will of God, that prayers and supplications be made
for all men, in special for Kings, and all in Authority: And His Majesty being
such a King, who himself, is so piously, and affectionately desirous of our
prayers (which makes us confidently hopeful, that our Addresses to the Throne
of Grace in his behalf, shall not be in vain) we shall not fail, as the
Spirit of the Lord shall help and enable us, to pray, in public, and private,
that our Almighty gracious God may multiply grace, mercy, and peace upon His
royal heart; pour out blessings upon His Throne, and Government; preserve his
Person long to reign, a Nursing Father to the Church of Jesus Christ, in his
Dominions, Amen.

My Lord, We humbly beg leave to trouble your Lordship with this one word more.
We do heartily bless the Lord in your behalf, for the good offices, we are
certainly informed, your Lordship has done at this time for this your mother
Church. And we assure our selves, your Lordship will continue, and abound more
and more in so good a work. We verily do think and look on it as a special
mercy of God to this Church, that such a Son of hers as your Lordship, a Person
so eminently gifted and enabled of God, so well principled, is come to such
place and trust about his Majesty, at such a time as this. Your Lordships
improving the advantage thereof in so pious a service, will be acceptable to
God, be honorable to, and bring a blessing, we doubt not, upon your Lordships
Person, and Noble Family. That so it may be, shall be the earnest prayer of.

Right Honorable, Your Lordships very Humble Servants the Ministers, and
Elders of the Synod of Fife.
Mr. George Hamilton Moderator in Name,
and by the Appointment of the Synod Mr. George Ogilvie Clerk.
Kirkaldy, 4. October. 1660.

