The Humble Advice, and tender Declaration, or Remonstrance of several
thousands of men fearing God, in the County of Durham, Northumberland, and the
adjacent parts of Westmerland and Cumberland, with the North part of Yorkshire;
To the Lord General Monk, and those with him.
My Lord,
SOme Reports of late confirmed by your Lordships Letters to the Speaker, the
Lord Fleetwood, and Lord Lambert, in print, followed with a Declaration since
in print, the sight and sense of which, makes our hearts tremble to think, that
you, who as brethren with the rest of the Army, have gone hand in hand to
hazard your lives for our Liberties, should now appear to fall out for the want
of a right understanding each of other; did you but see how the enemy does
triumph with your Declaration, or Letters, in their hands; and what fresh blood
seems to be gathered in their hearts from your threatening to lose your blood
against your brethren; and how that none but enemies to our dear bought
Liberties triumph in this, sure you would lay your hands upon your hearts, and
judge that your proceed cannot be of God, and that God will not prosper you in
a design of this nature, to throw away all that Liberty and freedom at one
cast, which so many years vast treasure and blood has purchased by Inch-meal.
We are also sadly grieved to hear the reports of the Malignant spirits, some
crying out, Monk was always true to his old Master, and now he will seasonably
serve him; others crying out, The brethren of Iniquity have set each others
house on fire, and we will stand by and warm our selves; you cannot believe how
these few days and nights, since your Letters were seen, what roaring and
ranting has been amongst the enemies of our Liberties; what heart-breakings
and tears they have caused in the hearts of them that fear God. As you have any
pity to the preservation of these Nations, take a second and more serious view,
as of the grounds of your resolutions, so, of the bloody effect that your
design unavoidably will cause, if you persist in it. You cannot be ignorant,
that in all these strange revolutions, God is carrying on a design, and how
never none prospered that stood against it, though under specious pretenses of
a just ground, witness Sir George Booth and his party, crying up Parliament
privileges. Would you be one that sides with God in his design? It is not a
probable way to answer Gods end by imprisoning his instruments, and
countenancing his enemies. If any change be admirable, that is, that those good
men that not long since were objects of your favor, are now under your frowns.
It Is a sad beginning-work, to imprison so many godly men, as we hear you have;
for, though some thousands of us differ from some of them in some small matters
in the form of worship, yet we judge they with us are children of one Father;
and such, that he has, and we trust will favor in this sad day. Alas, what
would you have your brethren do? would you have the fruit of their Repentance
to have been a willing putting their necks under the yoke of slavery so long
fought against, and have led us to have done the same, viz. a willing
submission to be deprived of the Liberty of petitioning Parliaments, and judged
Traitors for so doing, when as it is the proper and true birthright of all
Englishmen? Do you judge that repentance of any evil should cause them to stand
by evil, and set open the floodgates of ruin upon the Liberty of the people
of these Nations, which unavoidably must have been, if their practice before
mentioned had not been stopped? It was a sad violence to the people and Armies
liberty, for the Parliament to Vote out so many noble Assertors of our Liberty
in one day, and we are credibly informed so many more were designed to be so
dealt withal within a few days. What would the end have been? Oh, unheard of
practice! and for opposing of this, shall your brethren and friends be
accounted your enemies? Will you call every check and stop to unjust proceeds,
a force upon a Parliament, especially when it arises from some personal
animosity and ambition in some few men in Parliament? Or can your standing by
such men in such a practice, be a true asserting of Parliament-priviledge, or
the fundamental rights of the people? But part of our comfort is our hopes,
when you understand it is not a part, but the whole Army that does this; and
that it was not a personal advantage, but a public necessity, that did put a
force upon the Army, to put a check to these men in Parliament, you will soon
change your minds, and put an end to our enemies hopes, and turn our sorrows
into joy. Alas! should men there have their Liberty to do what they will, how
soon would the spirit of the people run into the Parliament, and the spirit of
the Parliament into a King, and his spirit into Tyranny? Where is then our
Liberty so long prayed and fought for? If you will but set all prejudice aside,
and consider, That if you and the Army fall out about this business, thus
stated, as our State stands, and as the spirits of people are now disposed, the
forementioned evils unavoidably will come upon us. All which we humbly beg, you
would seriously and seasonably consider: And we further entreat, that you would
put a candid construction upon our thus interposing, and tendering the poor mite
of our advice. The Lord in whom is our strength, knows we do it not out of any
evil design; but as poor Abigails, whose sayings hereafter may be found
seasonable and such, who dare not but empty to you our hearts, before we take
up Arms in standing by the Army, which we judge in conscience we are bound to
do, hazarding our Lives, and our All with them, whom God has so highly
honored. But we trust the Lord, will so change your hearts, that we shall never
have cause to lift up our hands against you, in standing by them; but if we do,
we have faithfully declared our grounds, and done our duty, and could no
otherwise do, lest you should judge the hearts of all Gods people were with
you. We remain

Your friends, so far as you are friends to God and the Good Old Cause.

London, Printed by Henry Hills, dwelling next door to the Peacock in
Aldersgate street.


