The Humble Address of the Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns of Sir
William Courten and Sir Paul Pyndar, late of London, Knights; and William
Courten Esquire Deceased, together with their Creditors and Legatees, and other
Proprietors and Adventurers with them to the East Indies, China and Japan,
Faithfully represented to both Houses of Parliament, Prorogued to the 26th. of
January 1679.
Manifests,
Sir William Courten the first Discoverer, Planter, and Fortifier of the Island
Barbados at his own proper Costs and Charges, to the value of 28000 l. sterling.
in the years 1627. and 1628. taken from him, against all natural Right and
Property.
I. THAT in contemplation of the many and great Services and Sufferings of the
said Sir William Courten and Sir Paul Pyndar for the Crown of England, in the
times of King James, and King Charles the First, his Majesty that now is, was
most graciously pleased in the year 1661, upon the Humble Petition of the
Proprietors and other persons interessed in this Address, to recommend their
Just Debts, Damages and Demands from the East India Company of the Netherlands,
and other Inhabitants of Holland and Zealand to the States General for
satisfaction and reparation, more especially for the spoils of the two Ships
the Bona Esperanza and Henry bona adventura of London with their Lading, upon
Trading Voyages on the Coast of India in a time of Peace.

II. That in pursuance thereof several Memorials were given by Sir George
Downing, Envoy Extraordinary from his Majesty to the said States at the Hague,
and so insisted upon by his Majesty and chief Ministers of State at White Hall
in conferences with the Ambassadors Extraordinary from the States General, that
it was Covenanted and agreed by the XV. Article of the Treaty concluded at
Westminster in the Year 1662, that Satisfaction and Reparation should be made
for the said two Ships and their Lading, to the persons interessed and injured,
according to the Proofs made in the Court of Admiralty.

III. Whereupon several Orders of the Council Board were sent to Sir George
Downing, to require a speedy and exact performance of the said Article, who
with the Proprietors used their endeavors for the space of two Years in vain,
the East India Company of the Netherlands refusing to be brought to any Account
for the said Spoils and Damages, notwithstanding the Express Agreement in the
said Treaty.

IV. Then the persons interessed made fresh applications in the year 1664. to
the King by Petition for Letters of Reprisal, according to due form of Law, who
referred the whole matter to Dr. Exion Judge of the Admiralty, Sir Robert
Wiseman his Majesty's Advocate General; and Sir William Turner, Advocate to his
Royal Highness; whereupon a Report was made, that the Damages arising by the
said Spoil did amount unto the Sum of 151612 l. sterling. Then a Warrant was
directed to them to prepare a Bill fit for his Majesty's Royal Sig1nature,
wherein two special Clauses for continuation of the Grant were contained, the
substance whereof are as follow, viz.

V. And further we do hereby Declare, That it is Our Will and Pleasure, that
this our Commission shall remain in full force and power, to all intents and
purposes until the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, shall by virtue thereof have taken, seized and
recovered from the States General and their Subjects the Sum of One Hundred
Fifty One Thousand, N. B. That Sir Edmond Turnor his Name being used in trust
for other persons, he never Acted therein, but leaves the Execution of the
Letters Patents to the Persons concerned.
Six Hundred and Twelve Pounds Sterling, or shall otherwise receive
Satisfaction of the said Debt by Composition with the East India Company of the
Netherlands, notwithstanding any Treaty of Peace whatsoever, hereafter to be
made between the King and the States General.

VI. And further Our Will and Pleasure is, That this Our Commission shall
remain and be in full force and power to the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George
Carew their Executors, Administrators and Assigns by virtue thereof to
apprehend, seize and take so many more of the Ships and Goods of the States
General, or their Subjects, as beside the said Sum before mentioned shall
countervail, satisfy and pay all such Costs and Charges as shall from time to
time be laid out and exspended concerning the same: A perfect Copy of the
Patent at large being hereunto annexed.

VII. That the Lord Chancellor Hyde being made Privy to all the Transactions
and Proceedings in this Affair desired a Conference with Sir Jeoffry Palmer his
Majesty's Attorney General, and Sir William Turner together, concerning those
two Clauses aforesaid, before they passed under the great Seal of England. Then
Dr David Budd attended at the said Conference with a Praecedent under the Great
Seal of England against the Spaniards in a Case of the like Nature concerning a
Spoil and Depradation upon the Ships and Goods of Mr. Pawley and other English
Merchants.

VIII. After long debate of the said matter, the Lord Chancellor Hyde was fully
satisfied, that it was very consistent with the Laws of Nations, and the Laws
and Statutes of England for those two Clauses to pass in the said Grant for
Reprisals, as they were worded for a Debt so ascertained upon a spoil. It being
practicable in all times of Peace and Common Amity between Princes and States
to put Letters of Reprisal in Execution. And that the States General and the
East India Company of the Netherlands were more particularly Obliged to take
Notice of the continuation thereof, being often admonished of the same before
hand.

IX. That nevertheless a seeming suspension was made of the executory part of
the said Patent by the Treaty at Breda in the year 1667, before any
satisfaction or reparation was recovered or received by the Proprietors or
persons interessed, who did forbear pro tempore to put the said Patent in
execution, until a more seasonable time and opportunity might offer. The States
continuing in Wars and Troubles with other Nations and Kingdoms, and Traded in
English Bottoms, or under the Color of the King of Great Britains Allies.

X. That in the year 1671. new Differences being arisen between the KING and
the States General, the persons Interessed in this Humble Address, Exhibited
their Petitions de novo to his Majesty in Council, for Satisfaction and
Reparation in the Premises, whereupon a Reference was made by Order of the
Council Table, to a select Committee of Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, to consider thereof, and to Report their Opinion what was sit
for his Majesty to do therein, (for the Petitioners Relief;) who Reported, that
in this Case, concerning the Spoil of the two Ships aforesaid, the only Debt so
Liquid dated and confirmed under the Great Seal of England. It was just and
seasonable for his Majesty to insist upon entire Satisfaction and Reparation
for the same, from the States General and their Subjects, notwithstanding the
Treaty at Breda; as by the Original Report, Signed the 29. of June 1672. ready
to be produced appears.

XI. That in pursuance of the said Report, his Majesty was graciously pleased
to Order in Council, that special Instructions should be sent to the Lords
Plenepotentiaries and Ambassadors, Treating with the French King and States
General, to insist upon Satisfaction and Reparations accordingly. And further
his Majesty (reflecting upon all those circumstances he lay under in this Case)
sent his Letters Express under his Sign Manual, to the said Lords
Plenipotentiaries, intimating to them, that in any Treaty or Treaties which
might happen to be made with the States General of the United Provinces,
Provision should be made for satisfaction of the said Debt and Damages, farther
signifying that in this Case, his Majesty's Care should be to protect his
Subjects, in their Just Rights, as well as to assist them in the Recovery
thereof.

XII. That soon after, in the year 1673 A separate Peace was made at London,
between the King and the States General, whereby the Treaty at Breda was
confirmed, with all former Treaties (excluding France) in Consideration of
Eight hundred thousand Patacoones to be paid to his Majesty, at four yearly
payments by the States General, without any other notice taken of Satisfaction
or Reparation for the Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona Adventura or any of the
Orders, Reports, Instructions or Letters Patents, wherein his Majesty's Justice
and Honor are so often repeated.

XIII. Then several of the Proprietors and Interessed, made new Applications to
the King and States General, on behalf of themselves and many Families of
Orphans and Widows concerned therein, for some proportion of the Patacoons,
toward Reparation of the said Debt and Damages, but answer was made them, that
the States of Holland and two English Ministers of State, had procured the Earl
of Darby, Lord High Treasurer of England, to move his Majesty to Assign 600000
of the Patacoones to the Prince of Orange, upon account of an old Debt
contracted in Holland by Prince Henry Frederick, for the late King Charles (the
said Pattacoons continuing at Interest in the States Hands) the other 4th. part
of the Pattacoons being ordered to be received by Alderman Backwel, toward
Repairs of Windsor Castle, and other services, so the Bona Esperanza and Henry
Bona Adventura were left in statu que, without any regard or consideration had
of the Seven Millions of pounds Sterling, raised by Parliament, upon account
of the Subjects Reparation, whereof a Months Tax of 120902 l. 15 s. 8 d. was
granted to the Duke of York, for his Heroic Courage and Conduct at Sea, and
30000 l. to the Kings Guards, or of all the Prizes taken by the Kings Ships, or
the Money Granted for the Princess of Orange her Dowry, English Ships and Goods
Condemned as Prize, in the several Admiralties of Holland, Zealand and
Friesland, in the last War amounted unto the vallue of three Millions and half
Sterling money.
or of the Tenths of 1500 English Sips ( Dutch Prizes in the last War) due to
the Prince of Orange as Lord High Admiral, or his other advantage of
advancements by that War nor even of the vast Sums owing to the Proprietors and
Interressed (in this humble Address) for Moneys advanced and disbursed by their
Ancestors toward the ordinary charge of the Crown, before the year 1640. Yet
all these Memorials were not sufficient Motives to the Ministers of State, who
kept the Kings Conscience and Treasure of the Nation (to be mindful of the
Honor and Interest of the King and Kingdom) but suffered those Patacoons to be
kept out of England, which ought to have gone toward satisfaction of the Bona
Esperanza and Henry Bona Adventura, that have made such a sound in most parts
of Christendom, and will still Echo to the Heavens; until Justice be done.

XIV. That after several other Proprietors and persons Interessed in diverse
other Actions depending at Law for many years together, in the ordinary Courts
of Judicature in Holland and Zealand, upon obligations, civil Contracts in
Trade and Commerce, and Bills of Exchange, for several Sums of Money, amounting
in all to 147028 l. Sterling, against Jacob Pergens, of Amsterdam, the Heirs
and Executors of Sir Jacob Cats, Sir Peter Courten, Peter Boudaen, David
Goubard and others, most of them being ready for Sentences and Determination;
The States of Holland against all common Right, in the year 1676. sent their
Express Orders to the Judges of the Inferior Courts in Amsterdam, the
Provincial Courts of Holland, and Supreme Court of Judicature at the Hague,
that they should refuse to do any manner of Justice therein, upon pretense that
all the particular Actions of Englishmen were Extinguished and Discharged by
the Treaties aforesaid, under the notion of Offenses. Injuries Damages and
Losses. A Praecedent of that dangerous consequence (if permitted to pass under
such forced Interpretations) that no Englishman can be safe in his Estate and
Property, that Trusts any Money or Goods into the Hands of Hollanders or
Zelanders.

Wherefore we your most humble Appealants, having sought after relief in all
other Courts and Counsels, at home and abroad, without any Remedy or Effect,
do most humbly pray, that our Rights and Properties may be assertained and
preserved by judgment of Parliament, and that some seasonable means may be used
for their Redress and Reparations upon such several Recommendation of both
Houses to his Majesty, as may be consistent with the Justice of Parliament and
the merits of your most greived and oppressed Appealants respective Causes.

William Courten Esquire Grandchild and Heir of Sir William Courten. Thomas
Kynaston Merchant, surviving Partner with Sir William Courten. Gilbert Crouch
Gent. one of the Executors and Assignee of Francis late Earl of Shrewsbury. Sir
Edward Graves Barronet. Richard Harrison Esquire Sir Thomas Wolstenholm Barronet.
George Carew Esquire Administrator of Sir Paul Pindar. Elisabeth Whitaker,
Executrix of Charles Whitaker Esquire James Boeve Merchant. Bazilla Lloyd,
Executrix of Sir Peter Vanlore. Mark Fletcher Merchant. Sir Thomas Davis Knight.
Thomas Norton Merchant. Thomas Coppin Esquire on the behalf of themselves, and the
rest of the Proprietors and persons Interessed and concerned.



