The humble PETITION OF The Gentry, Ministers, and Freeholders of the County of
York assembled at the Assizes there holden.

Presented to His MAJESTY the 5. of April 1642.

Together with His Majesty's Speech at the presenting thereof.

And His gracious Answer thereunto.

YORK: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty:
And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL.

1642.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
The humble Petition of the Gentry, Ministers, and Freeholders of the County of
York, now assembled at the Assizes there holden.
Most humbly shows,
THat, although the piercing anguish of our Souls, proceeding from the general
distractions of this Kingdom, be eased by the comfort of your Majesty's Royal
Presence, and gracious Confidence in the Affections of this County, which has
filled our Hearts with Hopes, and our Tongues with Joy, yet the fellow-feeling
of the passionate Sorrows, and heart breaking Apprehensions which overwhelms
the other parts of this afflicted Kingdom, do enforce us (after the humble
tender of our Lives and Fortunes, for the Safety and Assurance of your
Majesty's Royal Person, Crown, Honor and Estate, just Prerogative and
Sovereignty, in any capacity wherein we may serve your Majesty according to
the Laws) to follow that Sacrifice of bounden duty, with our earnest Prayers
and Petitions, which shall not cry in your Princely Ears for help to
almost-ruined Ireland, nor implore your Majesty's Concurrence for the
propagation of the Protestant Religion, and suppression of Popery, since your
Majesty's Gracious Declaration of your Self, in those particulars, renders it
an unpardonable Crime to desire further Assurance, or Addition to your
Majesty's own words, Sacred before God and Man; But emboldned by your Royal
Resolution declared, to take away not only the just Fears, but also the
Jealousies of your loyal Subjects, and enforced by that infallible Oracle of
Truth, That a Kingdom divided cannot stand. We, from the center of every one of
our hearts, most earnestly supplicate* That your Majesty (being most
interessed in the flourishing State and Union of your Dominions, and by long
experience in Government, best acquainted with Prevention of Dangers, and
Remedy of Evils) will be graciously pleased to declare such fit Means and
Expedients as may take away all Distances and Mis-understandings betwixt Your
Majesty and Your great Council; to whom we will also address our selves for
such endeavors, on their parts, as may beget in Your Majesty a confidence in
their Councels, and that blessed Union so necessary to this perplexed Kingdom,
and most desired by us, and all Your Majesty's loving and faithful Subjects.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray for your Majesty's long and prosperous
Reign, etc.

50 Aprilis, 1642. His Majesty's Speech to the Sheriff, Gentry, Ministry, and
Freeholders of the County of York, when they presented to Him their Petition.
Mr. Sheriff, and Gentlemen,
I Believe you expect not a present and particular Answer to your Petition,
because it is new unto Me: Only in general I must tell you, That I see by it,
that I am not deceived in the Confidence I have in the Affections of this
County to my Person and State; and I assure you that I will not deceive your
Confidence which at this time you have declared in your Petition, to have in
Me: And I am glad to see that it is not upon mistaken Grounds, as other
Petitions have been to me since I came to this place: Concerning which, let me
observe unto you, That my Answers were to clear those mistakings; for I never
did go about to punish or discourage them from petitioning to Me in an humble
way, though the subject did not agree with my Sense; Albeit within the memory
of man, people have been discouraged, and threatened to be punished for
Petitions.

I observe that your Petition is so modest, that it does not mention any
particular for your own good; which indeed I expected, as knowing that in some
particulars you have great reason to do; and therefore, that you may not fare
the worse for your Modesty, I will put you in mind of three particulars, which
I conceive to be for the good of this Country.

The first is concerning your trained Bands, to reduce them to a lesser number,
for which, I confess to stand engaged by promise to you, which I had performed
long since, if I had been put in mind of it: And now I tell you, Show me but
the Way, and (when you shall think fit) I shall instantly reduce them to that
Number, which I promised you two years ago.

The second is, That which is owing to this County for Billet-money; The truth
is, That for the present I cannot repay it; Only I will say this, That if all
the Water had gone to the right Mill (upon my Word) you had been long ago
satisfied in this particular. And so I leave to your discretions which way you
will advise, and assist Me to comply with the Engagements to you in this point.

The third is, That for which I was petitioned as I came up the last year, both
by the Lord Major and Aldermen of this City, and likewise by diverse others of
this County, as I went Southward; And that is, concerning the Court of York.
And first let Me tell you, That as yet I know no Legal Dissolution of it, for
hitherto formally there is nothing come to Me, either directly or indirectly,
for the taking of it away: therefore I may say, It is rather shaken in pieces,
then dissolved. Now my Desire is, in compliance to what I answered the last
year unto the several Petitions delivered to Me upon this subject, That you
would consult and agree among your selves in what manner you would have the
Court established, most to your own contentments, and to the good of all these
Northern parts, in such a Legal way, as that it may not justly be excepted
against; and I assure you, in the word of an honest Man, that you shall not
blame Me, if you have not full satisfaction in it.

Within a day or two ye shall have a particular Answer to your Petition, which
shall be such ^ One as I am confident will give you good satisfaction, and put
you into such a way, as, I hope, may produce good effects to the good of all
this Kingdom.

HIS MAJESTY'S ANSWER To the aforesaid Petition of the Gentry, Ministers, and
Freeholders of the County of YORK. At the Court at YORK. 7. Aprilis 1642.
His Majesty, according to His Promise made to you at the delilivery of this
Petition, has commanded me to subscribe this His Answer.
IN the first place, He is glad to see, That what you say concerning the Relief
of His distressed Subjects in Ireland, and the Propagation of the true Religion
amongst us, against all Superstition of Popery, is only to show your
Confidence in his princely Word; wherein He again has commanded me to assure
you, That He will neither deceive your trust, nor wrong Himself so much as not
to be uery punctual in performance of the Engagements He has already made
concerning those particulars, which besides the performance of His Word (which
He holds most deer unto him) his own Inclinations naturally induce Him unto.

Now concerning the Prayer of your Petition, His Majesty does graciously
interpret, That your desiring Him to declare such fit means and expedients as
may take away all Distance and Misunderstandings betwixt His Majesty and His
great Council, is no otherwise then to have the more authentic ground, and
the better direction which way to carry your selves in your Addresses to the
Parliament for that effect. And therefore His Majesty assures you, That not
only the best, but (as He conceives) the sole way for this good Understanding
between His Majesty) and His Parliament (which He assures you that He no less
desires then your selves) is, That the Parliament will take His Majesty's
Message of the twentieth of January last into consideration speedily,
seriously, and effectually; and that the Militia of this Kingdom may be settled
by Act of Parliament, according to His Majesty's explanation of His Answer
concerning the Militia, which He made in the Answer He returned to both Houses,
upon the Petition presented to Him the 26. of March last. And therefore His
Majesty desires you,to take those Answers and that Message into your serious
Consideration, and thereupon to proceed (according to the (...) in your
Petition) in (...) to the Parliament, as (...) judge fittest for the good (...)
^his Kingdom, and the expressions of your Duty and Affection to His Majesty's
Person and State.

Signed by Master Secretary Nicholas.

FINIS.

