^HE HUMBLE PETITION OF THE Common Council Of the City of LONDON; Presented to
the High Court of PARLIAMENT On Saturday the 24 of September, 1659.

LONDON, Printed for John Clark, at Mercers Chapel in Cheap Side. 1659.

To the Supreme AUTHORITY Of the NATION, The PARLIAMENT Of the Commonwealth of
ENGLAND. The humble Petition of the Common Council of the City of London
Shows
THat this City has taken notice of a Vote of your Honors of the second of
this Instant September, Importing your pleasures; that John Ireton the present
Lord Mayor of this City, do continue and execute the office of Lord Major of
London for the year ensuing, recommending it to the City of London, to see the
same done accordingly; Touching which your Petitioners do not at this time
apply to your Honors out of any exception to the Honorable person therein
mentioned, but in tenderness to our Ancient Charters, Customs and
Privileges, (a breach upon which would exceedingly hazard, if not totally
destroy the peace, good order and happiness of the most ancient and
well-governed City (we had almost said) in the world: but surely (we may say)
in this Nation, when as the Multitude of Inhabitants in and about it is
Considered.

Our Government stands upon two strong supports, The laudable Customs of it
(time out of mind) and several very ancient Charters which have been Confirmed
by sundry Acts of Parliament; and in them these are Essential; That the Mayors
of the City aforesaid, be Chosen by the Citizens of the same City; That the
Mayor of the said City remain not in his office above one year together: And
that the Supreme power of the Nation may be fully satisfied in our Choice, we
are to present him there for approbation, which we cheerfully submit to, and
assure our selves that amongst those several very worthy persons whom God in
his good providence has given us in succession, there may be Chosen such a fit
person for the year ensuing, as will be serviceable to the peace and safety of
the City and Nation, and acceptable to your Honors.

In the Consideration whereof, we make this our petition, persuading our
selves, that no Alteration willbe made by your Honors, in our so Ancient good
and peaceable Customs and Charters: Especially, when we call to mind the long
peace and Happiness this great and populous City has enjoyed under this
Government; And that the disturbance of it though but in the minds of men, may
prove dangerous thereunto; As also the great love and correspondence that this
Election has maintained in all times between the Mayor and Citizens.

But when we look into the records of Parliament, and our own Courts, What
acknowledgements, promises, and Engagements this City has received from your
Honors, we might well abhor our own disingenuity, if we should fear a breach
of our Charters, or Custom^s, or any Mark of hardship or displeasure from your
Honors: for we find the 13. of January 1643. Both Houses dstinctly make great
acknowledgments to the City, with assurance never to desert it, but to make it
their greatest Care to watch all opportunities to advance the honor and
happiness of the City, which under God has been the principal means of
preserving the Parliament. The 6. of May 1644. A Committee from both Houses
signify their sense of the Cities readiness to assist the Parliament upon all
occasions, and that therefore the Parliament is likewise ready to express
their gratitude to the City, in the most Essential manner and way they can find
out. And therefore being about to make Propositions to the King in behalf of
both Kingdoms, they offer it to the Common Council to think of some
Propositions to be prepared in behalf of the City, for the honor safety and
good of it, and that the Parliament will present them to his Majesty.

Accordingly the City prepared Propositions, of which one was for Confirmation
of all the Charters granted to this City; and of all Liberties, Customs, and
Privileges; notwithstanding Non-user, Misuser or Abuser: That they shall not
be drawn out of the Liberties to war without their own consent.

The 18. of May 1644. The Commons acknowledge it an especial Blessing of
Almighty God, that their Endeavors have been so well understood, and accepted
by this famous City; without whose Constant affections and assistance they
could not have brought their great work to the hopeful Condition, wherein by
the mercy of God it then stood.

That the City have demonstrated their adherence to the House of Commons by
Action in times of greatest difficulty, and have therein spent their dearest
blood, and vast sums of Treasure; omitting no possible supplies of purse or
person.

That they (the Commons) will never forget the great encouragement they then
received (by a Petition) from the City.

And in return for their great affections, the House of Commons do declare,
They will in a most peculiar manner be mindful of the merit of the City, which
upon all occasions they shall acknowledge, and will endeavor for to requite.

The fruits of all which, we do persuade our selves, Can never be wanting to
this City whiles your Honors that made them, have power in your hands to make
them good. And we hope the Common Enemy both to you and us, shall never have
Cause to rejoice in this, that our City should want the benefits of your
Engagements to us in the days of your and our Streights, Much less, loose any
of our former Privileges by your hands in the days of Peace.

And therefore in a deep sense of the Cities Concernment therein, and the duty
Incumbent on us, and all Freemen of this City by virtue of our Oaths, we do
most humbly pray, that your Honors would lay no restraint upon the peoples
free Election of our Mayor; And that our ancient Charters, Customs, Rights,
and Privileges in this and all other things may be Continued to us.

And we shall ever pray, etc.

