Confusion Confounded: OR, A firm way of SETTLEMENT settled and CONFIRMED.
WHEREIN Is Considered the REASONS of the Resignation of the late PARLIAMENT, AND
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A Lord Protector.

Qui [Augustus] cuncta discordiis civilibus fessa, nomine principis sub
imperium accepit. Tacit. LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, and are to be sold at
his house at the sign of Sir John Old-Castle in Py-Corner, 1654.

Considerations upon the Resignation of the late PARLIAMENT, AND Establishing of
the present Form of Government BY A LORD PROTECTOR etc.
THe former Parliament, as it was the birth of abundance of pangs and throws of
State, so it sat down in such a time, and was guided by such a spirit, and
encountered such accidents, that it was easy to foresee that Providence had
designed them to somewhat extraordinary; And indeed it proved no otherwise, for
the secession of the King brought them upon extremity of Counsel, and in the
management of the unhappy war, there wanted not either prudence or animosity,
which God was pleased to smile on with happy success, and giving in the
strength of the Nation into their hands, to put them also in a capacity of
settling our Liberty upon so right a foundation, that it should not easily again
be shaken. But as it happens in all things humane, to be corruptible, so it
fell out in this great Body, (and all Governments may well be said to be
artificial men) that though it rose as a Giant in the morning, and ran its race
swiftly before noon, yet sitting long after, it grew Chatharrick and lazy, nay
diseased and troublesome. Hence had it so many gripings in its own bowels, two
or three Phlebotomies were ineffectual, and the last extremity and refuge was
taken, which caused at length the dissolution of this assembly, which if you
will either consider for the strange mutations within it self, the grand
enterprises that it happily undertook, the wonderful alterations it has
brought in these Nations, (not to mention what influences it may have over all
Europe) a man may truly say it was one of the most famous, fortunate, wise
Assemblies, amidst so many difficulties and perplexities, as ever was.

Their dissolution as it afforded much reason of thought to the speculative,
regret to those related to that Power, and a kind of a bitter joy to the
remnant of the malignant party, so it proceeded from such reasons as might
certainly in the safety and reason of State justify the action. For indeed
though God was pleased to own their Counsels, so far as to produce many
glorious events from them, yet their power at length like a standing water
growing corrupt* and they declining from their primitive vigor and purity, and
withal growing distasteful to the people, who began to perceive with regret
that they were unwilling to deliver up their Powers, as they had declared, and
was expected, there was an inevitable necessity of doing somewhat for the
public safety. Add to this, that the Bill which they had prepared, was
circumstantiated so as gave but very little hopes of bettering the people by
that provision, and the greatness of Liberty that was left in Election, could
assure us of nothing else but hot confusion, and a desperate revival of
oppressed factions.

But these things were upon that occasion more fully handled by several pens,
who sufficiently cleared the necessity and justice of that great alteration,
which as it necessarily brought the Power immediately into the hands of the
Lord General and the Army, (in whom it was effectively before) so it put them
to a considerable debate whither the exercise of this Power should be
transferred. They saw that the people (things so standing) were absolutely
incapable of that Power which was naturally theirs, and that it had been but to
put a sword into a mad-mans hand. They were not willing to change the form of a
Commonwealth which they had bought with so much blood, and therefore after the
fullest debate, it was resolved to dispose the Power into the hands of such
sufficient men, and that for a time, as might with godliness, honesty and
ability, discharge the Supreme trust, heal the distempers of the Nation, amend
the errors of their Predecessors, and settle the Peace of the Nation upon such
a Base as should not be shaken.

This number of men meeting together, and being commissionated from the Lord
General, after a great many (si famae creditur) inconsiderable debates, voted
themselves a Parliament, and so declared themselves, and began to act
accordingly. But it was soon seen that those great expectations that brought
them thither would prove abortive: For Division, which is the murtheress of
Councils, appeared very briskly in their very dawn, and there was a party
headed, whom nothing could please, but the wildest and most extravagant
devastations possible. The main pretense was Religion, or according to their
odd and fanatic Notions, the setting up of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, a
consideration which, though it found acceptance with some grave and sober
Inquirers, yet must needs be of so different a nature from that which is
expected from these men, that there cannot be two things more disagreeing. To
say nothing, that they not agreeing in the grounds of the notion, or the wanner
of it, would certainly in their consequences arrive at the greatest Asustacies,
that it were impossible for the Christian Magistrate to support his sword in
the midst of such confusion; Not to mention that such notions as these,
proceeding from ill made brains, and disturbed fancies, strongly tinctured with
an hypocondriack melancholy, not bringing any assurance out of the word, or any
other sign that they proceed from the Spirit of light, if they become once
Magisterial, oblige us to quit our Discourse, our natural reason, our
experiences drawn even from common sense, the means God has ordained to direct
us in civil matters, and to follow those Wills-with-Wisps, or ignes fatui of
revelation and pretended spirit.

From hence I believe it rose (though I cannot but conceive abundance of
conscientious and discreet men joined with them upon other grounds) that they
voted none capable of place, who was not Godly, a word of that latitude, that
it signifies all things to all men, different religions having brought men into
such a high distemper, that men do now accustom themselves to reckon it
according to what themselves judge and opinion, not according to the
conversation and practice of another; So it was easily perceivable, that those
Gentlemen that were so forward in it, were not without design to seclude such
other as were not of their Cloth. But if we consider this a little more
strictly, we shall find that it was neither Politic, nor indeed Rational. Not
Politic, since all States of the world choose such Ministers as are the most
fit, though many times of different persuasions, provided always they had not
some outward scandal, and were qualified with such abilities as became their
employments. For it is not every raw and untutored head that is fit to serve in
the affairs of a State; Nay in ordinary business of life, when we want any
thing necessary, we resort not to any Tradesmen, for that they are of such or
such an opinion, or so or so more pragmatical than their Neighbors, but we go
where we may find things more convenient and cheap for our purpose. Not
Rational, since it forces the parties suing to a strange piece of immodest
hypocrisy, to desire a man to certify of their godliness when it may be their
own hearts sting them and tell them the contrary; and engage the party
certifying to a strange presumption, to give testimony of a man's heart, which
is the seat and root of godliness, and of a man's actions (and that positively,
whereas all Laws do only admit testimonies of that nature, negatively) whereas
many of the most horrid Crimes may be committed in the dark, and it is the nature
of guilt to avoid as much as she can the eyes of men. But we shall have
occasion to speak more of this hereafter, and that upon occasion of a subject
that relates more to it.

This consideration was of such importance and influence, that it seeemed the
matrix of many other consultations, which were very eccentrical to the public
welfare. The Law was looked on as a noisome ruinous building, not capable of
repair or alteration, but fit to be pulled down to the very ground. Propriety
was struck at, nay which is matter of sad wonder, upon the account of Jesus
Christ, the Ministry was to be demolished etc. All which gathering strength and
heat in debate, as the stirring of the wind increases the fire, it came to such
a pass, that without a wild confusion and devastation, such Counsels were not
permitted to proceed. And therefore since they were ready to pull down the very
rafters of our Peace and Liberty, and seemed not much to care what they set up
in stead thereof, Those Members whom greater sobriety and prudence restrained
within such due limits as became sober Patriots, thoughr it not fit to mingle
any more with them, but rather to resign the Power into the hands from whence
they had received it, and by such retirement elude such wild and pernicious
Counsels.

Therefore when they had upon Saturday December. 10. before, past a Vote, which
struck at the very root of the Ministry, they raised not small apprehensions,
that the consequences thereof might have proved very pernicious.

Now the business, to put the Reader in mind, stood thus. The Committee for
Tithes after a long debate agreed upon a report of several branches, which they
presented to the House, the first whereof was, That several Commissioners
should ride through the Nation, in six circuits, and joining with other
Commissioners in the several Counties, should eject all profane, scandalous,
or insufficient Ministers, and place able and fit men in their Rooms. This
because it intended to uphold the Ministry, and that all was not to be laid
wast, and the poor souls be either forced against their light, to deny their
Ordination, or else with their wives and families be forced to poverty and
famine, so that in a little time we should not have seen the face of
Christianity among us, past in the Negative, which with other circumstances
occasioned so much trouble, as we have mentioned before, to the wisest and
ablest men, that they the Monday after declared the incapacity in which they
were in to accomplish those great ends for which they were brought together,
And therefore they were resolved to return their Powers, which with a joint
consent of the major part, arising with the Speaker, without any force or
compulsion they did, and so repairing to White Hall, they resigned their
Authority into the hands that gave it.

There were indeed a small number (under 40. which was the Quorum) who indeed
had the zeal, resolution or indiscretion (I cannot tell well what to call it)
to remain in the House, and refused to depart. What their ends of staying there
were I know not, they pretended it was to seek the Lord, others, that looked
nearer into their actions than they had a mind to be seen, say it was to raise
up a faction, for otherwise they would not have taken it so ill, that Col. Goff
should desire them to be gone, for why should they not depart when their
Assembly was by resignation, dissolved since they were but a degree above a
Conventicle, and that place famous for the entertainment of so many venerable
Assemblies, was not so fit for them as Mr. (...) house, where most of their
maginations were formed and shaped?

Now because what we have said is general, and in manner merely narrative, we
shall descend to those particulars which the Author of the Narrative quotes
from the mouth of an Honorable Member, as his Reasons for Resigning, as also
take a view of the Glosses the Narrator puts upon them, with this Remark at the
first, that all interests are taken in, but the despised ones of Christ, which
ought not to be let pass, in regard that this pretense is fundamental with
them, and therefore would be a little shaken.

How precious every soul is to Christ that by Faith and true Repentance lays
hold of him, all must needs imagine that know what he became and suffered for
us; Now to become Christ's is to become humble, patient, meek, long-suffering,
not to engage in vain wrangling and abstruse theories, which the soul only
gnaws upon, not feeds on, or hot bickering about opinions, either new or
indifferent ^^ the essence of Religion, but in a hearty love and acquiescence
of our Savior, a steadfast endeavor to do good to all men, practice integrity
in our vocations, and a due submission to the higher powers. Whosoever practice
otherwise, though they prophesy, though they speak with the tongues of men and
Angels, they cannot be said to be of Christ.

Now for these men that boast themselves so much of this glorious title (a
title that assures all peace here, and felicity hereafter) though it were grand
uncharity for to say they had not absolute reason to pretend so much to that
precious cognizance, in regard there may be many good and pious souls among
them purely misled, yet that their ways ought not to be closed with, and that
they seem not person fit to be trusted with the reigns of any Government, and
that very probably they build upon the sands, may partly appear out of these
following particulars.

1. That strange principle of theirs in insisting for a Liberty of Conscience
for themselves, and yet by this Liberty of Conscience understanding and
endeavoring such a one as will not leave any other persuasion but themselves
to their own freedom. This may evidently appear by their common discourses at
Black Friars, by their pulling down of Antichrist, Forms, Orders, Ordinances of
Man, and setting up the Kingdom of Christ, which is in plain terms the
plucking up of all Ecclesiastical and Civil policy, saying all waste that they
might enter and devour at pleasure; and it is to be supposed that these men
that have so much hardiesse as to make enmity and detestation to all kind of
Forms, if they could depose them, must needs set up their own, which being such
a Tohu Yahbohu, what an advantageous alteration it would be, it is easy for any
man to judge.

2. For those Chymaerical discourses of the fifth Monarchy, that they as Saints
should inherit the Earth; that the Kingdom of Christ should be set up, and all
earthly power be broken to pieces like a Potters vessel, is such a Tenent, as
cannot consist with the very being of a civil Magistrate. But as it makes them
Tyrants, Oppressors, Robbers, etc. so it gives a fair pretense and color to
any tumult whatsoever, when the ulcer is grown ripe enough and fit to break.
The passages at Munster are too known to need here particular mention, we shall
only note this, that as they are extremely passionate after Novelties and
Curiosities, so being of the shortest sight, and the coarsest taste, they the
soonest embrace them be they never so ill-favored, but especially matters of
Religion, which though false, yet aided with a little imposture, carry a
certain dazzling awe and splendor with them, that the people who are easily
fired with harangues even in common businesses, enflamed once in matters of
Religion, break out like a violent conflagration and destroy all before them,
but especially, how dangerous it may be not only to the Magistrate, but the
very peace and being of a people, when these principles, not only simplY oblige
their Consciences, to enjoy their own opinion, though it were to undergo
persecution, but their consciences enforce them to seek after tyranny and
domination over the other, as an effect, reward or privilege of their belief.

3. Though by their own axioms they quit the use of Reason, which is the
natural light of the world, set up in a man's mind, yet they make themselves
infallible and peremptory, and consequen^ly impose an observance upon whatever
they say, be it never so infirm, or unsolid; which how destructive it would be
not only to all discourse, but order life, is too evident to be demonstrated.
Hence come these strange speeches of hearing the word of the Lord, of Visions,
of the Lord speaking within them, etc. when many times notwithstanding their
pretenses, the things they utter seem to abhor from common sense.

4. Their common hate and detestation to the persons of all men of other
belief, excluding them not only from all places of Trust and Honor, but as
much as in them lies from the very benefits of life, which what a sweet and
Christian meekness it shows, is apparent; so that it is easy to judge what
reason they have to cry out for the pulling down of Antichrist, since nothing
in the world can be more Antichristian than to force the consciences and beings
of other men under their own sway and domination.

5. By drawing all Politic debates into matter of Conscience, that is
confounding them with matters of Divinity, they not only raise up an
insupportable* Tyranny upon all Experience and good Induction, but by this
means necessarily hedge in all business to them and their partisans, for they
will tell you he is only fit to judge or rule that has the Spirit, and they
will only judge him to have the Spirit, who is a sure Assertor of their
Faction, and upon the next turn, you will have, That every Civil debate shall
be turned into a Religious, the Statute Book (the long experience and caution
of our wise Ancestors) shall be thrown out of doors, and men shall come into a
Senate to consult of Politic Emergencies with Bibles in their hands; Not but
that I esteem the reading of that inestimable Book, but that I believe God left
it with us, rather to teach us the way to Heaven, than for any instruction of
Government to particular Commonwealths, which differing in Form and Temper
from Judaea, can never be fashioned to those Customs, Government being only
sacred as Government, not in concreto, as this or that Government.

This is a small part of what might have been observed of them ever since their
first rise; but because my business concerns only the latter actions of some
men, and it is a Topic of another profession, and that I could not attend
those admirable Lectures at Blacks friars, nor get any perfect account thereof,
and for that I would be loath to deliver here any thing I doubted, for certain,
I shall at the present dismiss it, saying only this, That ambitious and
seditious men never think they spread their nets fairlyer than when their
pretenses are very high and promising, and yet they themselves pretend to be
sufferers in the attempt. Hence it is, the Narrator calls them the despised
ones of Christ.

We have touched at a few reasons why these despised ones of Christ, (as they
call themselves) were not, nor ought not to be taken in, and yet that the
despisers of Christ were taken, which the Narrator so positively denies, we
shall have occasion to insist on in its proper place.

For his exclusive instances, that they were not taken in, these Gentlemen
would be acquainted, that every Re-publick, that is to say, the Supreme Power
in any Government, ought in all judgments and rewards to be blind and
inflexible, not only in deciding matters between man and man, but also in
returning to its own immediate subjects or Officers such dues or claims as they
are justly engaged for, and this with the same easiness that a private man
would do that is able, or should otherwise be compelled unto it. For bring once
a distrust between the Commonwealth and the people, (and distrusts in these
cases are occasioned by nonperformance of promises) you at once enfeeble their
hands, and make their purses, unless it be by compulsion, unserviceable to you;
whereas a gentle way of imposition, performance of promises, or equal
gratification, makes every private Counter a part of the public Treasury. And
indeed this is a duty incumbent upon every Commonwealth, whose main interest is
merely to do justice; for though her spleen by this means may not swell so
mightily, yet the whole body is in better health, fitter for exercise and a
longer life. And certain it is, that God Almighty seems to bless moral Justice
in several Nations with large felicity and duration. This thought St. Austine
once had about the continuation of Rome, and whether it also may not take with
the Turks at this day, is too nice for my scrutiny.

Secondly, if the Commonwealth ought to be so rigorous to its self in
discharging it self not only to Foreiners of all Compacts and Debts, how much
more tender ought it to be in preserving to its own subjects that which is
justly theirs? For whether it be as was said of old, that man was naturally
sociable, or as a learned Modern has said, that he is compelled into Society
merely for the advantages and necessities of life, certain it is, that admit
any man without protection of what he at preseut enjoies, (unless it come to to
be determined by Law, which is but the regulation of the force of a Country)
and either his next or strongest neighbor, if not punishable, shall dispossess
him, and consequently there shall be nothing but war and confusion in that
place. Now if men in the state of Nature find Propriety a thing so sacred, so
useful, what shall we think of Commonwealths, whose great design it is to
better men, that is to say, to lead them to that civil happiness jointly, which
they could not arrive at singly? how ought they to be careful in this point?
for it the wisest States have been so careful, that even in Taxes (which are
necessary to be paid for the due preservation of the whole) such a due
Modetation has been used, as that no more should issue out of the purse of the
subject than should merely conduce to that End; and Rome it self, after the
conquest of Perseus by Paulus Aemilius, out of the Treasury then gotten freed
the people for many years, as not thinking fit the Public should command a
private purse without eminent necessity and danger; It holds a fortiori, that
taking away particular proprieties is matter of more injustice and unsafety in
a Politic Body.

Thirdly, how unfitting is it for a Common wealth, without any consideration or
other provision at all, to dispossess any persons of their particular
livelihood, whether it be by office or profession, and that without any
provision at all made for the setting up somewhat else in the stead thereof, or
to say better, reforming of the old?

Certainly a man's office or profession, (provided always it consists with the
public welfare, and be not oppressive to the people) is as much propriety as
any other whatsoever.

Having promised thus much, I shall now descend to the particular instances of
the Narrator, which when we have perused, we shall confront with somewhat
necessary to be mentioned about the late change.

As to the Soldiery, whose pay they would have stopped, by hindering the passing
of the Bill for Assessments, the Narrator says it was moved indeed (nay it was
highly urged) in order to the abatement of the Tax, and in regard of their
great estates and little hazard and pains, that the chief Officers would serve
the Commonwealth freely as the Parliament did. But that this was a mere design
to disunite the Army, and break them in pieces, and make them odious to the
people by Free Quarter, may easily appear by their endeavors and discourses of
changing Commanders in the Army, or to say more properly, advancing men of
their own principles, which how dangerous it is to the very being of the three
Nations, cannot but be acknowledged, when it is considered what a number of
Enemies we have to deal with, and that our protection under God lies in their
hands, which by this means would be weakened. But as it happens in all civil
debate, that sly and ambitious factions discover not the main at first, but
endeavor to creep in by insinuations and plausible pretenses, so these people
would under the pretense of inequality of Taxes absolutely stop the Bill,
whereas reformation (if any such needed) might be made in convenient time, and
the Soldier not be forced at the present to starve, plunder, or disband. As to
what they object, of the small pains, and great Estates gotten by Commanders,
(though some have not gotten so great Estates as they might have done, as may
be instanced, were it without offense) it seems they are very apt to forget the
hazards and toils that these men have undergone for that pay, and that even in
the midst of their perils and action how little they received or pursed, and
now when the Lord has honored them with Triumphs, they must in a manner be
laid aside, and debarred of their pay, which has put on (a man would think)
the nature of a reward now, rather than an entertainment. Some shadow of reason
indeed there had been for this motion, if they had trifled and delayed a war
as is commonly seen beyond Seas, and was at first practiced by their
Predecessors here in England, the better to salve their own avarice, and to
keep their employments a foot. But they behaved themselves otherwise, their
courages surmounted the difficulties and rigours of the coldest winters, and in
midst of the bitterest frosts and sharpest tempests they were seen, besieging,
skirmishing, pursuing and doing all those actions which might be expected in a
campaign, so that their victories were thick, and the fury of the wars in our
bowels soon blown over. Their memorable things in Scotland and Ireland are
such, as they have done more than our Monarchs could do in many Centuries of
years, and yet these men, after all these merits, notwithstanding their pay at
the present is reduced to the lowest it reasonably can, and holds no proportion
with the rates established abroad, that which remains must be taken from them;
But it seems the Gentlemen that made that objection concerning their great
estates, did not look upon that part of the wallet which hanged behind their
backs, for rhere were many members there, who had estates very different from
what they had had 15. years since, and not a few of them had either one or more
offices that might well amount to the pay of a Colonel. But these men that are
Moles when they are to consider themselves, see as sharp as Eagles when they
come to survey others. But perhaps they may have somewhat of the nature of the
Cockatrice, and coming to be made see their own visages, abhor them and burst.

We have seen how well the Narrator has acquitted himself of the first
particular, we shall come now to his second, which is the taking up of the
Cavaliers Interest in the Case of Sir John Stowel, which is very disingenuously
and maliciously interpreted to be a compliance with that party. For Sir John's
part, though he were an eager, and severe pursuer of the Kings Interest, yet if
we shall look upon his sins and torments, they will not be found very
disproportionable. He has been several times brought to the Bar for his life,
and he lay many years in prison, he has lost the profit of a very fair estate
for many years together, though he were comprised in the Articles of Exceter,
(upon which the High Court of Justice would not take away his life) and ought
to have been permitted to compound, which he did also endeavor, but could
never obtain. Certainly there were some Ahabs at that time, that had a mind to
his Vineyard, for otherwise he could never have found such strange and
dishonorable opposition. Nay even at last, when the Court of Articles whom the
Parliament made in a manner Judges of themselves (as to relieve in particular
cases, where there might be occasion by the rigor of some general Act) after
hearing the full and large debate of the whole matter, adjudged him within the
benefit of the said Articles, the same party in the House prevailed to suspend
the proceedings of that Court. But that Parliament dissolving, and the Court
proceeding according to their duty, the late Parliament made an Act to confirm
their Purchases, and that out of a very strange reason, viz. that the former
Parliament had ordered a stop, and they did it but to quiet the possession to a
sort of Godly Purchasers, whereas they should have bethought themselves, that
if the former Parliament had done an Act of injustice, it was their duty and
profession to reverse it, not to confirm it. Nor indeed can a Parliament, though
a Supreme unlimitted Court, enact any thing against right Reason, or common
Justice, but it is ipso facto void, they being trusted with the peoples safety,
not with their ruin. Nor is that restitution in specie or value any thing; for
what Justice can there be to take away an Estate due unto a man, and give him
another not half so good and commodious, or not half so much worth? Justice is
rigorous and extreme, and will be fully satisfied, or else she is not satisfied
at all; And though in her punishments she may sometimes turn to injury, yet in
distribution she loves to be full and exact.

There can be doubtless no one thing makes either a better way for conquest in
winning a people, not for securing of it by preserving their affections,
nothing that makes a Commander more honorable, more assures and secretly
blesses the Soldier, than a faithful and an inviolate keeping of promise with
an enemy. This is it indeed that gives reputation to Armies, and makes them
flourish, while the hearts of the others tremble. This is that indeed, which as
it is the ligament of humane amity, so it is the bridle and restraint of their
enmity, lest it turn into rage and bestiality. This all Nations, from the most
civil, to the most barbarous, have with all religion observed; judgments and
plagues upon the breach of it are frequent in all History, and yet we that
profess the high principles of Christianity, must do things, no body knows why,
which most Turks would scorn and detest. If States will be awanting to perform
the faith of their Armies, they must either expect to be served by faithless
men, (for what honest man will promise that which he shall not be in some hopes
to perform?) or else breed scorn and despair in their enemies, who having men
accounted false to deal with, will account it their greatest safety to expect
none at their hands, and thence choose rather to endure desperate and obstinate
sieges, which how dangerous and fatal they have been to many thriving wars,
cannot and need not be here exemplified.

Thirdly, for the removal of the Chancery, and total alteration of the Law,
etc. Whether this were not ground enough (had there been none else) may be
judged from a short consideration of the Nature of our Laws (as they now stand)
and a due remembrance of what happiness and security our Predecessors enjoyed
under them. The Law of England (as it now stands) is either Statute Law, Common
Law, or Custom, Statute Law is but the edict of the Supreme Magistrate,
commanding or forbidding this or that thing; This relates either to the
Government of the State in general, preventing or redressing particular crimes,
or making such due redresses, as cannot be made by the ordinary constitution of
Government. The Common Law is recta ratio, in the determination of Justum
between parties, holy and inviolable as the Laws of Nature and Reason, and
though running in a municipal chanel, yet as old and venerable as Reason it
self, which it is, only reduced to practice, and as unalterable, since Reason,
under never so many shapes, is still the same; though in some circumstances and
proceedings there may be just cause of alteration. Custom is the particular
usage in such a Liberty, place or manner, different, not contrary from either,
subordinate to both; How these men may contemplate a better establishment, is a
matter which as yet I see not any search satisfied with, and till they produce
a better, I shall acquiesce in not raising objections against what I see not
how I can rationally object. But under this Law (the forms whereof have altered
according to the Constitutions of the several Governments) have we flourished
ever since we have been a people, and some men of greater abilities and leisure
have so amply made it appear, as well to its constitution, use and end, that I
shall not interpose with those excellent men, but refer to their own mouths.

Now since it is the weakness, or incapacity of men, that they can provide no
Law against all emergences and contingences, and that the wickedness of humane
nature is too subtle for the most cautious and severest preventive Justice,
there will follow a necessity in case of frauds, concealments, surprises,
cheats, and the other effects of vulgar wickedness, to appeal to the conscience
of the Commonwealth.

Hence is it, that in several particular cases there is occasion of relief, yet
such, as by only mitigating the rigor of the positive Law, may relieve the
subject, without making a general Law, for otherwise, Laws would become
innumerable. And if we complain of the number of Laws at present, and those
made upon general resultances, we should certainly find them insufferable, if
they once came to be formed out of particular cases. Now this conscience of the
Commonwealth (as I may call it) being as it were deposited with the Great Seal
in the Chancery, is not only that which relieves and benefits the severity and
rigor of the Common Law, but is indeed the womb of all our Laws and
Proceedings. which must necessarily stop and suspend, upon the taking away of
that High Court. Not but in the practice of the Court (which being a Court of
Equity, cannot be so strictly bound up as the Common Law) there may happen very
many delays and foul practices; but it is a very great error in men to argue
from the abuse of a thing, against the being and constitution of the thing it
self; as if a man ought to be murdered, because he has a disease, and should
be put out of pain. But the constitution of the Court, (though somewhat as to
excess of Fees, and corruption of practice might be remedied) is such, as
without an invaluable damage to the greatest part of the subjects, cannot be
altered, and some of late have so largely and particularly considered, that I
shall say no more of it in this place.

For the profession or the Law, however it now become to be looked a squint at,
yet it is that which has been, not only highly reverenced by our own
Ancestors, but was the common road of advancement and honor in Greece and
Rome. And if we observe, in this Nation the Professors of it have found Gods
blessing very eminently fall down upon them. How many great and noble families
are there that flourish to this day, nay very few of them, as has been
observed by a great man, have dyed without children or intestate? Nor indeed
wants there not some reason of it; for being commonly the choicest men, culled
out of the Gentry, brought up under the best education, ariving at the capacity
of their profession, with long time, study, charge and experience, it is no
wonder, if becoming the ablest men for the service of their Country, wealth and
advancement wait on them; and what an equitable thing it is, for to dispoyl a
man of his Profession, when he has spent his portion or fortune (the study of
the Law being so chargeable and so tedious, for I dare say, it costs most men
1000l. before they receive 10 s.) and what a discouragement it will be to all
worthy education, may be judged by any man, that calls his Sense and Reason,
not his Humor, into Counsel.

Fourthly, the fourth is about matters of Presentations, which that party had
voted a way from their Proprietors. This the sober party of the House, not
unjustly apprehended to be a dangerous assault upon Propriety it self, and
therefore gave it as one of their inducements of resigning their Power. This
says the Narrator, takes in the corrupt Gentry, and is a fair bait for persons
of all sorts. We have said before how much it concerns the Commonwealth as a
party to do justice to all men, not only by satisfying her own engagements,
but in preserving to every man what he is already possessed of. Now if
Advowsons be not matter of right, I know not what is, and if he to whom justice
is to be done be not to be looked upon whether he be good or bad, honest or
corrupt, but whether his claim to such or such a thing be equitable or no, I
see no reason, why the Gentry, for being suggested only to be corrupt, should
be deprived of that which is so justly theirs. It Is true indeed, that as was
prudently proffered, it were not amiss to set up some way, where by there might
be a scrutiny made into the qualities and fitness of the persons presented, but
instead of an accidental inconvenience, to run upon a positive and absolute
mischief, is me thinks but a strange way of caution. For suppose Presentations
of private persons were taken away, either the Church doors must be shut up, or
else it must devolve into some higher Power, which is more inconvenient than
the former. For men of business set at distance cannot so particularly look
into the lives and humors of men, But receiving only some slender
Certificates, or the report of some trivial examination, pass it for the most
part, (pro forma) upon him who has the first intelligence, the best horse, or
surest friends. Whereas men of the Country have nearer occasions of Trial and
inspection, and for the most part, even for their own Interest, choose the
ablest men, which the others cannot be so careful of, or are not so much
concerned in. I rather mention this, for that it has been observed by a grave
person, that even the Universities, between whom by the Statute of Jac. the
Presentations of all Papists are divided, Present for the most part very
hastily and unadvisedly, without either considering their own right, or the
value of the Person; Nay not seldom, prefer the most ignorant and dronish
fellows on purpose to be rid of them. But this was but a limb of the main
design, and here they dealt like the Fox in the fable, that first desired to
put his foot in, that he might indeed afterward bring in his head and his
whole body. For if the right of Presentations had once been taken away, the
next business we should have heard on, would have been Impropriations, then all
other Tithes, and after that consequently the Ministry, and for ought any man
knows, private Estates; How dangerous these men are, may by this easily be
seen, and what fine Conclusion will follow such Propositions of theirs if they
were but suffered to run on. So that the Narrator has little reason to say,
that this is to take in the corrupt Gentry, and that it is a bait for all sorts,
when, as we said before, it is a preventive piece of Justice, and persons of all
sorts indeed may come in time to be miserably concerned in consultations so
heady and dangerous.

For the business of Tithes, which have gained this Post, had been the next
they had taken, though I cannot for my part vote with them who say they are
Jure Divino, yet as to the Jus humanum, and the propriety of them, that great
Ornament of our Nation, Mr. Seldom, some years since, and some learned
Gentlement of the long robe, who had occasion to argue it before a Commit for
that purpose, have so demonstrated, that he must either be very unintelligent
or pervicatious, that remains unsatisfied. And therefore what a confusion it
would bring to divest Proprietors of what was legally their either by descent
or purchase, and how it is more Antichristian to pay tithes, when once
established by Law, than to pay a Fee-farm, I see not, and what a present way
it were to silence the whole Ministry a short experience would teach. Nor is it
less strange that designs aiming at so much confussion should be so cunningly
and orderly laid.

Fifthly, for the Vote of the Ministers, which we have touched at before, It is
that which they seemed most to stand on. That it was thought a way to establish
a national Parochial Ministry, consisting of Popish names of Parsons, Vicars
and Curates, and also that oppressive burden of Tithes, that it looked rather
like making up a breach in the Kingdom of Antichrist, than pulling it down.
By this you clearly see,

First, that all form of Ministry is here damned as Antichristian.

Secondly, upon these grounds, the Ministry must be dissolved.

Thirdly, here is a breach m^de for all men, never so unfit or incapable, to
undertake that great and weighty work; for if they pretend but to be anointed
for the work of the Ministry, (the Narrator bringing no touchstone) they must
be received.

Fourthly, there will arise innumerable contradiction, quarrels without end,
and Religion shall perish by her own Divisions. For my part, as I hold
conscience too sacred a part, (being as a man may say, Deputy-Judge within us)
to receive any force, so, in some particular Truths, when they are violently
apparent, it cannot without repugnancy and reluctance disobey; nor do I know
any that nearer concerns her, than obedience to the Civil Magistrate, in
matters purely Civil. Now whereas there are two Calls to the Ministry, the Call
and touch of the Spirit within, and the admission from without, though it
cannot be said that every man of the second qualification is of the first, yet
in regard that men's faiths are seen by their works and lives, and that for
orders sake, the abilities of every man for employment should be examined, it
is but necessary and convenient, that there should be an outward and visible
way of calling and admitting unto the Ministry. For Uniformity, (which in the
main, though not in circumstantials, ought as near as could be to be preserved)
hereby stands not in so much danger, and Peace and Discipline the better
flourish. Not that any man will say, a man is the more a Minister for the
Imposition of hands, but that it is merely a Civil sanction and admission for
orders sake. And therefore, it is a wonder, why these men should scruple so
much at these names of Parsons, Vicars and Curats, when they are imposed meetly
by the Municipal Laws of the Country, and relate not to the person, but to the
maintenance of the man, all these three being one Minister severally endowed.
If this design could have come to pass, the good men of the Universities might
have shut up their study-doors, and have gone to plow, for the next business we
should have heard of, should have been, the words Master, Warden, Principal,
President, Provosts, etc. had been also Antichristian, and the Universities, as
part of that Kingdom, be pulled down, learning which is the root of Civility
rooted up from amongst, and Gotthish Barbarism and Tyranny suffered to
over-master us, and all this under that horrible pretense of that pure divine
and ineffable Spirit to which men would entitle their own particular humors
and imaginations, a course so horrid in it self that I cannot but shrink at it,
so uncertain that there is no relyance on it, so dangerous, that it may
introduce all confusion that mankind is capable of. Not but that I believe that
God to his beloved ones frequently sheds the rays of that heavenly Sun, but
then they work sweetly and strongly and in order, and bring forth effects quite
contrary to those as must necessarily follow such pretensions as we have
touched at, these being only mutual flames between God and the soul, whereas
in Civil things, he leaves us to circumstances, sense, experience, and the
judgment of our reason.

For that which the Narrator professes of the sincerity of their Hearts, and
the building up of Sion, I have not much to say, if by Sion, he mean the fifth
Monarchy which we have mentioned before; and for the sincerity of a man's
intentions, when his actions must needs center clearly contrary, is a business
that I understand not. Nor can I much agree with him in his last observation,
That the difference never began to appear so effectually in the House, as it
did upon seeking the Lord, and bringing Bibles in their hands. What their
intentions were I know not, and for the business it self shall not much dispute
it, but only say thus much, that if these were pretensions the better to carry
on their designs, and to engage some of the more inconsiderate, there was
Hypocrisy enough in it; If they were really intended, it seemed they were
answered but with very unlikely returns; what or whether any members were
convinced by such means or no, I cannot tell, nor list to enquire. For since
they are reduced to their first matter, I am very willing to shake hands with
them and bid them farewell.

They being thus dissolved, and consequently the Commonwealth left without
tuition, the Power being absolutely and visibly in the Army, and the condition
of the Nation being such, as that it was neither timely nor convenient to call
a Parliament, it was moved to the Lord General both by several good men,
interested in the Nation, and Officers of the Army, to assume the protection of
the three Nations. This burden for the good of them was he willing to
undertake, has received and may it prosper. So that now the Government is
established in a Lord Protector and Triennial Parliaments, as may appear by a
form of Government, etc. and will in all probability with the mercy of God,
conduce to the establishment of the quiet and prosperity of this people. But
because some men may be unsatisfied with the present constitution, and either
out of spleen and ignorance make objections against it, I shall before I take
leave of the Reader, fix only a remark or two; for to say all things, and
answer all objections, must be the work of a volume and a pen more able.

Let us then consider how impolitick and dangerous a thing it is for to have a
Supreme Legislative Power always sitting, and exercising it self. For such
great Assemblies, like high Medicines, should be used very seldom, or but upon
great extremity, otherwise they lose not only their virtue and vigor; but
grow dangerous and contemptible. Besides, Assemblies of this nature are only to
make Laws, not to execute them, for being unlimited, they are not so fit to
judge as inferior Courts; nor is it reason to take away without evident
necessity from any man, the benefit of the Laws already established. It is to
be added, that the ends of their Calling being principally two, the making of
Laws, and imposition of Taxes, it is impossible to imagine any Nation can be so
constantly and perpetually vicious or ill-setled, as to need a perpetual making
of Laws, or so wealthy as to be able continually to be Cajoled into Taxes.
Neither is it impossible, that men coming to know one another, may make
factions; nay, do many exorbitancies to keep their Power in exercise.

The Government of a Nation may without force or noise be ealy transferred from
hand to hand, and the Public Peace still preserved, whereas if the force of a
Nation come once to be divided within it self, there follows no small danger,
if not absolute ruin to the whole. And therefore it is more prudence in any
Citizen to comply with such changes and variations, than by endeavoring the
re-establishment of the old, or setting up of a third to tear the body of the
Nation in pieces, by interesting the sword in such dangerous divisions.

And if a Swallow fall not to the ground without the will of the great Jehovah,
we may well say, that the mutations of Commonwealths (which are of so vast and
large concernment to mankind) must have much more of his particular will in it,
which when he declares by visible successes, revolutions above the reach of
man, and the effects which could not have been produced by any humane Power, it
were a strange stubborness not to comply with them, since, as his will is
secret to himself, and above the search of man, so his Power is such, that he,
who is in his hands, as clay in the hands of the Potter, is not able to stand
before him. For he said very truly that uttered this, In se spuit, qui spuit
adversus Olympum.

FINIS.

