The Humble Petition of diverse Inhabitants of the County of Hertford, who have
faithfully adhered to the Good Old Cause. Presented to the Parliament, by Dr.
Barber, with many Freeholders, and other Inhabitants of the said County, May
13. 1659.
Together with the Parliament's Answer thereunto.
SHOWS,
THat we are deeply sensible how much the Cause of God in this Nation has
suffered, for some years past, by the Apostasy of some persons, which at the
first were great Assertors thereof: strong endeavors being used to introduce a
Personal Interest, and to center in a Monarchy, after the cutting off the late
King; notwithstanding a Commonwealth was so happily settled, without a King or
House of Lords: And the better to accomplish this their Design, many faithful
Officers in the Army, and other places of Trust in the three Nations, which
could not comply with them therein, were (as we conceive) without Law or
Justice speedily displaced, and many of them committed to prison, to the fading
of the hearts of the good people, and encouraging of the Common Enemy.

Now seeing the God of Heaven, who makes it manifest, that He rules in the
Kingdoms of Men, has put it into the hearts of the Officers of the Army, to
give glory to God, in acknowledging their wanderings from righteous and equal
paths, have thereupon judged it their Duty, to invite you to re-assemble, and
proceed in the exercise and discharge of your Trust, we cannot sufficiently
acknowledge the goodness of GOD, in calling together this Renowned Parliament,
hoping that God will make you the Instruments of healing Our Breaches,
restoring paths to dwell in, to take off all Yokes, and to let the Oppressed
go free; And we are the more encouraged, (in our hopes) by your late Worthy
Declaration you have already made, wherein you resolve (through God's
assistance) to endeavor ^he settlement of this Commonwealth upon such a
Foundation, as may assert, establish, and secure the Properties and Liberties
of the ^^ople, in reference unto all, both as Men and as Christians, and that
without a Single Person, Kingship, or House of Peers,

We most humbly pray, Militia of the several Counties of this Commonwealth, in
the hands of such persons, as have faithfully adhered to the Good Old Cause, in
opposition to Monarchy, Name, and Thing. In pursuance of which, We shall to the
uttermost of Our power, with Our Lives and Estates, engage in your just defense
against all Opposers.

And your Petitioners shall pray.
Friday the 13th of May, 1659.
THe House being informed, That there were several Hertfordshire Gentlemen
attending the Parliament at the Door, they were called in, and presented a
Petition, which, the Petioners being withdrawn, was read; And is Entitled, The
Humble Petition of diverse Inhabitants of the County of Hertford, who have
faithfully adhered to the Good Old Cause. The Petitioners were called in And
Mr. Speaker by Order of the House, returned them the Answer of the House in
this manner, viz.

Gentlemen,
THe House has read your Petition, and do find in it Expressions of very good
Affection; they have commanded me to tell you, That upon the Foundation upon
which they now stand, for which they bless God that has brought them hither
they do intend to go on, if it please God to set the Topstone as formerly they
have laid the Foundation. And to You that have expressed your good affections,
here they have Commanded me to tell you, That they give you hearty thanks for
your expression thereof.

Jo. Phelps, Clerk of the Parliament pro tempore.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Brewster, at the Three Bibles, near the West End of
Paul's, 1659. May.16.


