A BRIEF RECEIPT MORAL and CHRISTIAN, AGAINST The Passion of the Heart, or Sore
of the Mind, incident to most, and very grievous to many, in the troubles of
Enemies.

BEING One single Sermon by I. H. Minister of Froome.

Published at this rate by it self, that any who need it, may have it.

For the ease and benefit especially of the more tender, weak and melancholy;
who feel these arrows stick in their spirits, but know not the way of plucking
them out, or asswaging the pain of them.

Have mercy on me O Lord for I am weak: O Lord heal me for my bones are vexed.
Psalm. 6 2. London Printed for E. Blackmore, and are to be sold at the Angel in
Paul's Churchyard 1658.

Christian Reader.
AS there are diseases, infirmities and hurts in the body, so are there in the
mind, where we feel them too, as sensibly, I wish I could say, we did not. And
as we seek out to those who have skill or experience for remedies, and do use
many, in the one, it is pity if we be quite defective, in the other. It is
true, every Physician will not fit every disease. A man may be good for one,
that is good for nothing in another. Nor will every word administered to the
weary by the tongue of the Learned, or the prudent which is better, reach his
wound and bring oil to it. What is said, but gives not refreshment. It is not
words that heal a soar, a Medicine. A man must have felt, studied, tried, and
passed what he speaks, that speaks to the heart, in the anguish of another.

There are two ways, and let me tell you, but two I think, whereby the Soul
when it ailes any thing is helped. The one is, when it comes to be persuaded,
that that thing which troubled, or, vexed it, is not evil, or so evil, but
well for it. This cure is perfect. The other way, when it cannot but take the
thing to be evil, and grievous, is by diversion, or withdrawing the mind or
thoughts from it, to other things that are pleasing, and so wear it away.
Veneranda malorum oblivio quantum sapis! The later of these may serve where the
spirit is more airy, or the grief light, but when the impression has sunk
deep, and the temper is melancholy, these thoughts will, return and the first
way only is left for us.

Now there is none thing in the World, which is a Catholicon, or Universal
means, let the malady be whatsoever it will, so far as it lies in the mind, for
the accomplishing this; but it is a certain thing that is hard to come by, very
hard to be had; and that is Faith, to wit when a man, that has sincerely and
unreservedly given up himself to the service of Christ, does believe most
steadfastly according to that promise, To, 8.28. that all things shall work
together for his good. Let such a man be vexed or troubled, grieved or
afflicted, his ease is at hand, and that too complete. For then I say are all
our vexations perfectly cured, when the mind comes to see that to be good,
which it thought to be evil. Now faith makes the man see this, that all these
things shall certainly work for the best to him. Let Faith come the Mountain is
removed, when before the Grassehopper was a burden, and a hair a weight.

But alas! as our Savior foretells us, Luke 18.8. where shall we find such a
Faith, constant, and uniform, as this is, even almost in the Earth? There is
another thing then must be forced to help us here, to supply Faith's office, as
that is wanting, in this work, and that is, our Reason; which as it makes
various efforts upon the affections, so has it a various success. For I find
that although in some passions, that do rise from more considerable causes, as
to be moved at the death of Friends, some huge losses, and the like, which
Reason judges to be equal, and at first sides with them. It bears a great
stroke in the Soul, so that as soon as the brunt is a little over, the
affections hearken to it, and are allayed by it: Yet in some others, that meet
happily more closely with our complexions, and so are not less pungent when
there is less cause of them, the matter is not so great, but the mind is more
engaged, and Reason thereupon opposing the same, and checking our selves from
the beginning, for the very rising; the affections here come not so soon to be
ordered, but mutinying rather, look upon Reason, as it were a party against
them which the more it chides and upbraids them, the more are they but
exasperated, and fling away from it, so that they will not, and cannot be
persuaded, and wrought upon by it; but those things which do vex them coming
hereby more to be pondered, do pierce, and stick the deeper in them.

If this lays us not bare, I do mean, the more we come to see it unreasonable
for us to be moved, so much as we are moved, in many cases (so impotent is
passion, so touchy infirmi^y) the more it moves us, to be thus moved, that we
ought not, and are, and cannot help it. Nay indeed while reason goes contrary,
our passions appear weakness, and what is weakness we are willing to hide,
and then the passion which vent should let out, concealment keeps in, and
foments to its height. Men's intus agitat vulnera et semet dolor accendit. And
here it is true the evil it self lies in the fancy, more than the things; yet
does not the telling this presently cure us, though at the first glance this
may sometimes do something; but the very knowing that it is but our fancy, when
we poar more upon it, afflicts us more desperately, seeing the smart is not the
less, and the cure, we find but the harder for this. For when we might get the
things to be changed, yet how shall we get off the evil in the mind? The matter
may be gone, and passed away, yet the impression remains, in our own
imaginations.

Not that we are lest though, without all remedy, while it is good to know the
worst, for God has made every thing that is in this life, subject to change.
Time is an herb of Sovereign virtue. And as our joys and comforts are mutable,
so are our griefs and our vexations. Blessed be his goodness for his. If our
Faith then do fail us, and our reason cannot serve us, yet God can help us. The
Lord can offer advantages both, and give the occasion how they shall work. For
I perceive though our passions indeed be irregular, they have some guide and
way of their own, and (to arm at least near as the thing is) when our Reasons
reason will not prevail, our passions own reason; will get the hearing, and if
we can tell then, how to wind in with them, it will yield satisfaction.

The subject of the ensuing penfull of Notes, written out by me at t he request
of a reverend neighbor at first, but importuned to the press by another, who
for some matter in them belike that has affected him, will not be denied, is
about these commotions or vexations of mind, as it is engaged, and diseased
with Enemies, which are many times even the most soar, the most bitter, the
most lodged, of any. And it is humbly supposed, there are some things here
(particularly about the end) that if they be considerately applied by
enlargement of the same, on the mind, which I advise to be done, as the
plaster is to be bound on to the soar, they may do good happily here and there
to some Spirits, that are raw and tender, and have the feeling of these things.

I must confess if I did not believe this my self, and that upon my own
experience, who am such a poor weak creature, as some of these passages will
show me to be. I should be loath, to let a Sermon thus Solitary, and perhaps as
sorrily, pass from me. But indeed, there is one affair long since in my life
private, and past, unto which it has been originally owed, and more lately
paid. The dealings of some have been bitter to me, and I have born it after a
sort, though with much failing, as I have here prescribed to others. I will say
no more, but I have found my peace in these things. And blessed be God that my
part is done, the rest is with him, So that I do me thinks set up this as
Samuel did his Ebenezer, even as my stone of remembrance that hitherto has the
Lord helped me. And now Lord what wait I for? my hope is in thee Psalm. 39 7.
Is. 51.22, 23.

To make an end. If the publishing hereof, may really make for any bodies
benefit, it is no matter, how it may make for my credit. If thou art grieved,
it is needful for thee to be eased, there is no need, that I be praised. That
the thing is so small, it is medicamen parabile, thy expense will be the less,
I mean not only of thy money, to have it, but of thy time, which is more
precious, to read it and ponder it. I shall be a Physician of no cost, if I be
of no value. If I have no leaf for medecin, I may have yet, some fruit for
meat. And Sampson said unto his Father, get her for me, for she pleases me
well, but he knew not that it was of the Lord.

Thy fellow Servant in the Kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ. John Humfrey.

Pro. 16.7. When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to be
at peace with him.


AMongst the many evils which the prudent foresees and hides himself, Pro.
22.3. they are not the least which arise from enemies. For as the top of
earthly pleasures which may be cleanly used (the most of pleasures being dipped
and drencht in sin) is the enjoyment of friends: So does the very bottom and
dregs of those troubles which are bitterest to us in the World, lie many times
in our engagements with Adversaries. I know Philosophy would place a man in the
higher Region, above such things as these are, that they should not reach him,
as if to be wise were to be beyond commotion: But Divinity that speaks more
feelingly, and sets forth man as he is, a poor impotent frail creature, subject
to feeling, to infirmities, and sufferings, gives other rules, and draws him
forth out of himself unto God for the cure, ease, and asswaging of them. Thus
here are we to please him, that we may have peace with our enemies.

In the words there are two things. A bitter soar, and a precious remedy. The
soar is that which most of us all, are, have, or may be, too well experienced
in, that is the grievance of enemies: The remedy, I wish we were all as well
versed in likewise, and that is, the pleasing of the Lord. When a man's ways
please the Lord, he makes his Enemies be at peace with him.

The observation or matter the words afford is this.

Doct. That the best way for a tender Christian, that lies under the soars of
displeasure, discomposures, troubles, injuries, or prejudice of Enemies, is t
apply himself unto God in that course as does best please him, and so rest upon
his dispose, to bring about his peace for him.

Let a man look over the Spirits of most, and it will pity him to see what
things, or means, they fly unto, under such risentments, whereas if they would
have their recourse hither, all would be quiet: Their Enemies shall be at
peace, or their hearts be at rest; Even as things are, that were violenced
before, when they come to their Center; and as the furious waters, that keep
such a noise, and rushing in their way, as soon as they do but fall into t he
Ocean (unto which indeed they owe the Tribute of themselves) you hear no more
of them. The waves of death compassed me about, the floods of ungodly men made
me afraid. I will call upon the Lord, so shall I be saved from my Enemies. 2 Samuel 22.5.4.

For Explication. Here are three things in this observation. The Person. His
Grievance. His Redress.

1. The Person, and that is the tender Christian. There are diverse sorts of
tempers. Some are more hardy, that feel not these impressions from any thing
that can fall on them by others: And these are so, either by nature, which is
to have an healthy Soul, and be well born; Or by Wisdom, when men have with
much culture got a rule over their Spirits, by reason that they can pluck out
the sting of any affection, it shall not hurt them, Sed nobis non licet esse
tam diseratos, Or by stupidity and dullness merely of temper and complexion,
which has this hap, as to bearing and contentment, to reap t hat benefit many
time, which others cannot with tall their virtue and studies; For as it is easy
for things of grosser metarl to endure a knock and blows, when finer curious
metal'd things, must have much art to endure the least hurt or fall, and not be
broken: So is it with finer, and courser Spirits; Of these I speak not. There
are other tempers therefore that are tender, that when wrongs, reproaches,
injuries or troubles fall on them, they wound them, and grieve them; I do not
know Sirs, how it may fare with many of you, but of such a Spirit I am sure,
was holy David himself, who tells us often, that he was so affected here with,
That his Soul was sore vexed, and his eyes consumed with grief because of his
Enemies. Psalm. 6.3.7. A Christian spirit I take not to be a stupid spirit, or
one that is wholly unmoved, or unwounded, but a spirit that being touched, and
wounded, can fetch its balm in Gilead, its healing from God.

2. The Grievance, and this is the soars of Enemies, all that trouble, anguish,
vexation, especially, that comes on the mind, and mischief to our Persons, by
their harsh, injurious, bitter dealing with us. These Enemies are either open
Enemies, or secret Enemies, and that in words, or in deeds. They shoot their
arrows, says the Psalmist, even bitter words, Leviter volant, graviter
vulnerant, and the poison of Asps (in another place) is under their lips, to
show how deeply some things do wound, and how fast they stick upon many of
those who have tender hearts, and fain would live in peace. The best of them,
is but as a bryar; and the most upright of them, sharper than a thornhedge.

3. The Redress, and this lie in the applying our selves unto God, or having
our recourse unto him. Est profecto Deus (faies Plautus in his Captivi) qui
quae nosgerimus, videt et audit: been merenti been erit, male merenti par erit.
O our God (says good Hezekiah) will thou not judge them? for we have no might
against this great company that comes against us, neither know we what to do,
but our eyes are upon thee. 2 Chronicles. 20.12. This is more at large, particularly
the redress lies in two things, the taking that course that will best please
God; and then resting the Soul, for the issue, upon him.

The ways or course best to please God are either Absolute, as to the whole
stream of our lives, or Respective, in reference merely hereunto.

The absolute course, or ways best to please God, I would thus define. It is
such a conversation, as being grounded upon Faith in a cleansed heart, and kept
clean through the Spirit of grace, does renounce all sin and cleave to what is
good, or does deny our selves, and cleave unto Christ in all things, according
to the will of God.

Herein are 7 things. 1. The foundation of such a course, or holy life, and
that is Faith (a true, a sound Faith, dogmatical and fiducial) Heb. 11.6. Act.
15.19. 2. The subject wherein this faith resides, and from whence such a life
must proceed, that is, the heart. To. 10.10. Act. 8.37. 3. The qualification of
this subject. It must be cleansed, that is sanctified by the infusion of the
habits of grace. Heb. 10.22. Io. 1.13. and kept clean, to wit, by a daily
ridding our lusts, and preparing out grace, that the vessel may not be to
rinse, or the tools to whet, when the work, is to be doing. Psalm. 57.7.2 Chron.
19.3.2 Cor. 7.1. 4. The efficient, by whom all is wrought, that is the Spirit.
Romans 8.13.2. Cor. 3.5. which as freely given, I farther call the Spirit of
grace. 5. The matter wherein this whole conversation consists, and that is two
things, (for these two comprize all) Self-denial, which is a renouncing sin
altogether, and every thing else (though it be life it self, as to preparation
of mind) so far as it shall stand in opposition to righteousness and truth.
Mar. 8.34, 35.2 Tim. 2.19. and the love of Christ, or cleaving to him (as Ruth
did to Naomi, that forsook all to follow her) which includes the embracing and
pursuing whatsoever is good and acceptable to him. Mat. 22.37, 38. Io. 4.15.1
Tim. 1.5. 6. The extent hereof, or universality, the sure note of sincerity, in
all things. Psalm. 18.22. Psalm. 119.6. Act. 24.16. 7. And lastly, The rule by
which, our whole life must be squared, and that is the will of God, or Law of
the ten Commandments. Psalm. 19.7, 8, 9. Gal. 6.16.2 Tim. 3.17. There are these
particulars in this absolute course, which has been the matter of other
Sermons. See Mr. Rogers 7. treatises. treat 2.


The respective course, or ways best to please God in reference peculiarly
hereunto in short are, to take such a course only and do no otherwise,
whatsoever we suffer, in seeking ease under our Enemies, than we have warrant
for, from the word, and can approve our selves therein unto God. And this is
the course, (as the first thing in the redress) whereunto my discovrse is to
bend, which I shall therefore particularize, in the Use when I come to it.

One thing only is to be noted in the way here, and that is, that this same
religious life in the main, before set down, whereby a man walks uprightly with
God in the whole current of his life, without this peculiar regard to men,
whether they are Enemies or not, has the advantage of this Text, to wit, that
among many other blessings belonging to it, God will deliver such out of their
troubles. Psalm. 34.19. and give them peace or victory with their Enemies. This
the Text it self intends, I doubt not, but my discourse is not to run at that
large. Let it suffice to say only hereunto. Job fears not God for naught.

The second thing then, in the redress upon this, is, when we do thus, without
any farther explicating, which here needs not, The resting, (I have said)
casting or rouling the Soul on the Lord, as to the success, assuring our
selves that he is a ready help to all such, and will bring about in the end
that which he sees best for us. Indeed a man is to look out, what God requires
of him in such or such a case wherein he is, and so to do it. If he does not
this, how can he trust in God? If he does, what is there more on his part then,
but to leave the matter to him? Oh! Let me tell you Friends, it is a sweet
thing in a difficult and vexatious business, to have that, which is ones own
duty in order to an effect, to be done, and then to stand only and see what God
will do, in the remaining work, that is behind, and left in his hand. And the
King said (whose case yet here was not so ripe) carry back the Ark into the
City, if I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again,
and show me both it, and his habitation, but if he thus say, I have no delight
in thee, behold here I am, let him do to me, as seems good to him. 2. Sam.
15.25, 26.

FOr Confirmation or Proof. We may turn unto two or three Texts. In Psalm.
112.7, 8. we have the righteous man described. His heart is fixed trusting on
the Lord, and he shall see his desire upon his Enemies. Two ways we have
intimated here, to have ones desire or victory over Enemies, the one is, to be
a righteous man, that is, to have our ways please God, and the other, to trust
in him to bring it about for us. Look into Psalm. 37.5. There is a Text not long
in the words, but much in the concernment of it. Commit thy way to the Lord,
and he will bring it to pass. It is pity to see what ado many do keep in
their affairs, in their troubles, as to the issue, what will become of them,
when they should only commit their cause unto God and he would bring it to
pass. Commit thy way unto God, includes two things, the one is, to take such
ways as we are sure are agreeable to his Will, we cannot else commit them to
him, and the other is, when we have done, and do so, to cast all our care and
burden then, as to the event, upon him. Commit thy ways to the Lord, trust
also in him, and he shall bring it to pass. Duty indeed is man's, the success
is Gods. See Psalm. 55.22. Mat. 6.31, 32. 1 Pet. 5.7. To this purpose, it is
most observeable of Jacob. Genesis 32. when Esau is coming out against him, it is
said, there appeared one he wrestled with till break of day, compare it with
Hos. 12.4. One would have thought now, Jacob should have gone about to wrestle
with Esau, but he wrestles with God, and having power with him, Esau comes and
falls down conquered at his feet. And thus likewise did Joseph, David, Daniel,
and the three Children in their troubles. If it be so, say they, our God whom
we serve, is able to deliver us from this fiery furnace, and will deliver us.
Dan. 3.17. It is true, we look not now for such miracles, nor, (God be blessed)
for such burning trials, as these were, yet is there something like, which
still abides the Children of God in that furnace of reproach and obloquy, which
wicked men do heat with the popular breath, and then cast in their names and
honor, of whom nevertheless, while they keep up close with God, I may even
say, as we read here, they come out again, in their Coats their Hosen and their
Hats, and not a Hair of their good names are sindged, or the smell of the fire
passes on them. I mean, as the fire had no power over these here, no more shall
the malice of men, have power, over the good names, peace, or Spirits of those
that fear God. Psalm. 37.76. Psalm. 62.1, 2, 3. This is a kind of mystery of
Religion, that a man must have his recourse to the Lord, and deal with him, to
prevail with our Enemies.

FOr the Gronnds or Reasons. There are these four, and they are firm.

1. From the Sovereignty of God, who is the disposer of all things, and so has
the hearts of our En enemies in his hands to turn them as the Rivers of waters.
Pro. 21.1. A man has to do with ones Servant and he ruffles with him, and
will not do this or that, but is cross, well, says he, I Will tell your Master
(with whom happily he is great) and he shall make you. The Children of God many
times, they have many a brunt, and ruffling with the World, In these brunts
now, they go unto him, who is the great Lord of all, of whom the whole Family
of Heaven and Earth is named, and he takes an order, he takes a course for
them. Troubles upon the mind, many times like Mastiffs on the body, while we
struggle with them in our own strength, are but enraged, and get more hold-fast
on us; but let the Master of the house once rate the curre, let the Lord of all
but speak a word to call them in, our troubles all come off presently, let go
their hold, and lie down before us. O God, says David, the proud are risen
against me, and the assemblies of violent men. Psalm. 86.17. and then closes his
Psalm sweetly. v. 17. Show me a token for good, that they which hate me may see
it, and be ashamed, because thou Lord have helped me, and comforted me.

2. From the Covenant. As there is a right of dominion, or power, which God
has over all for our relief, which is the first and great foundation of our
applications to him. So is there a second, like to that, A right of Will too,
which we have, for our trust to him herein. This is a part of the Covenant, an
express branch of it. By my self have I sworn, Genesis 22.16, 17. I will bless
thee, and multiply thee, and thy seed shall possess the gates of thy Enemies.
The gates of Cities are their strength and the meaning is, that God will
protect, defend his people, and give them victory when it is fit. Hence is he
said to be not only a Sun but a Shield, Psalm. 84.11. and a buckler, as well as
an exceeding great reward. Genesis 15.1. See more Psalm. 89.23, 24. Luke 1.71, 72.
It were well, that many a good Christian did know or consider this, when they
have need of it; I am sure David who understood the nature of the Covenant
better I think than most of us, has no expressions, more frequent, than such
as these, which are not for nothing doubtless, that God was his Rock; his
habitation, his fortress, his strong Tower, in reference to his Enemies.

From the nature of those ways that please the Lord, which are such, as are
winning attractive, and reconciling even of Enemies. The fruits of the Spirit,
says the Apostle, Gal. 5.22, 23. are love, gentleness, goodness, meekness,
temperance; who is not won by such ways as these? Her ways, says Solomon,
are ways of pleasantness, that is, not only pleasant to those that walk in
them, but pleasant even to those that behold them, for so it follows, and all
her paths peace. Pro. 3.17.

4. From the advantage of Faith, which is the chief part of those ways, or
without which, our ways cannot please God. Heb. 11.5. It was the opinion of
the Stoics as Seneca, and Cicero in his Paradoxes, That he that was truly
wise, is not capable to suffer injury, for in regard (say they) that such a
one, places all his goods, or happiness, in the mind, in virtue, se contentum
esse, omnia sua secum portare, whereof they being not liable to suffer
diminution from any thing without, nothing can disturb, hurt, or injure them.
If Philosophy now will teach us thus much, sure Divinity will teach us yet
more, and that not only to retire within a man's self, against the blows of
misfortunes and Enemies, but to remove our selves again yet father, out of our
selves unto God, and so to hide and lay up our selves in him. Faith is a grace
that does this, and so secures and safe-guards the Christian against all
evils. We must enter into our selves says Albert) to ascend up into God. It
is a famous Text therefore in Habakuck, when the people are carried away in
captivity, and surrounded with the greatest misery that could befall them by
Enemies, it is said there, that the just man shall live by his Faith. Hab. 2.4.
This outward life, or life of sense, may many times doubtlesle be troublesome
enough, when yet there is another kind of inward life, a life of Faith in our
retiring, and rouling the Soul upon God, wherein this same just man here lies
hush, and safe even in the ruins of the world, sifractus illabatur orbis,
impavidum ferient ruinae. The Heavenly soul, though it may sometimes, as it
were descend to the body, and ask what ails it? should have such apprehensions
for the most part of these outward things, as it will have, when it is
separated from it; And hence (as some think) is Love said to be as strong as
death, because the love of God draws forth the Soul as it were out of us, to
live with him. And hence happily is it likewise, St. John tells us that Faith
overcomes the World. 1 Io. 5.4. Faith Enables the Soul to set at nougt all the
Worlds threats and allurements whatsoever, while it proposes greater fears and
rewards in the life to come and overcomes the world two besides ways: The one
is by a resignation of our selves and all things else into the hands of God;
the other is, by an activity, and attractive virtue it has on the attributes
of God, to set them a work, to bring about our advantages for us. There is
nothing so hard, but either the refignation of Faith, or activity 8 of Faith,
will overcome, or yield peace in it.

I proceed to the uses, and they are three. Instruction. Support. Direction.

Use 1. For Instruction. And that is twofold to wit, concerning those false
ways we are not to take; and concerning those right ways we are to take, to
get peace, under our Enemies.

For the former. 1. There are some that fly to reproaches, they are offended,
and they rail and spit their malice, and so are eased. Thus Shemei dealt with
David. But this is directly against our Savior, who being reviled, reviled not
again, 1 Pet. 2.23. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, and yet as a sheep
before her Shearer is dumb, so he oopened not his mouth.

2. There are others, that seek father to revenge. Well say they, such a one
has done me this that ill turn, but I will be even with him, and this
satisfies them; But this is directly against the Apostle, To. 12.19. Dearly
beloved, avenge not your selves.

3. There are many when they cannot otherwise deal with their adversaries, they
betake themselves to their shifts; Excuses, transferring the blame upon others,
lying, dissimulation, flattery, imprecations, and such like Servilities; all
which are, as one I remember, well expresses it, but a daring, or a kind of
braving Heaven through cowardice to men, and is expressly forbid in such
places as command truth and sincerity to our neighbor, and that we should not
be the Servants of men. This in short then for the false ways, which who so
follow forsake David, who still flies in these streights go Gods Precepts (
Psalm. 119.22.42.61.69.78.95.) and imitate Saul, who when he could not be heard
of God goes to a Witch; Samuels mantle, being easier assumed, than his virtues.

For the Later. The true and right ways, are in general, what is said before,
but in particular (which is reserved hither) thy course is this. Thou must
examine thy self impartially, whether the fault be on thy own part, or on the
part of thy Adversary, and so behave thy self accordingly.

If the fault be in your self, two things you must do.

1. You must seriously take aside your Soul and humble it before God. O Lord
thou know my foolishness, and my sins are not hid before thee. Psalm. 69.5.

2. You must go and seek reconciliation with your neighbor. This is so
expressly enjoined, that if a man should bring his gift to the Altar, and
remember that his Brother has ought against him, he must leave his gift, and
go and first reconcile himself unto him. Mat. 5.23, 24. And in Luke 17.4. If
thy Brother Trespass against thee and turn again, and say Irepent, thou shall
forgive him. Here is the duty of the offending party, he must be sorry and seek
forgiveness; and the duty of the offended, that hereupon he must forgive and
be friends with him. I will add, if the party will not forgive thee, or be
friends, upon this, woe indeed be to that party, it were better that Party had
never been born. If you will not forgive your Brother his Trespasses, when yet
you are sought unto, and upon Christ's account, how shall our heavenly Father
ever forgive you your Trespasses? Mat. 6.15. They shall have Judgment without
mercy that have shemed no mercy, Ia. 2.13. Nevertheless for thy own part, thou
art not to cease to be a Christian still, though they be unchristian, but to go
on, and have patience when thou can not have peace. And this, is to proceed
so far, in some cases at least, where the matter requires, as for thee, to be
content yet, according to thy Lord, that if they will sue thee at the Law, and
take away thy coat, for quietness and Christianities sake even to let them
have thy cloak also. Mat. 5.40.

I know this is a hard lesson to the most of us, our Stomachs are so high, we
cannot easily submit to these lowly ways of Christ. Mat. 11.29. We are ready
indeed to say, to those with whom we fall out, I scorn to submit to such a one
as you, I scorn to be beholding to you; but it would better happily become come
those that fear God, to say I scorn not but to submit^, when indeed, I have
done the wrong, I scorn but to acknowledge my fault, and seek forgiveness, and
give satisfaction. This were truly, the more worthy and Christian Magnanimity,
and will be judged so I suppose one day.

If the fault be wholly in thy Adversaries, so that thou with Jeremy, art
passively, not actively, a man of contention, Ier. 15.10. Then are there these
three things yet for thee to do.

1. Thou art, under the resentment of all thy injuries or troubles, to look up
and acknowledge them to be of God. Affliction arises not out of the dust, Job.
5.6. and God raised up Solomon an adversary. 1. Ki. 11.23.

2. Looking up to him here, as just, and these instruments in his hand, thou
must lay down all revenge at his feet. O Lord! thou should say, here be my
Enemies, and here be ways I might be avenged on them, and thou see, how
sweet it would be to flesh and blood, to take the same; But if this will
displease thee, Lo here for thy sake, do I sacrifice all these desires, all
these thoughts, and lay them down stain before thee. The Lord shall smite them,
or their day shall come, but God forbid that I should stretch forth my hand
against them, seeing thou have assumed that prerogative, ( Deuteronomy. 32.35.) to thy
self. It is good for a man to put his mouth in the dust, to bear it on him, and
quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. 1 Samuel 26.10, 11. Lam. 3.25.30.

3. Thou must for all this, seriously endeavor, and use the means whereby if
possible, thou may again win thy brother, or gain his Soul. There is two
ways to do this.

The one is, to go to him in the Spirit of meekness, and rebuke him. We have a
remarkable Text for this, Mat. 18.15. If thy Brother trespass against thee, go
and tell him his fault between him and thee, if he shall hear thee thou have
gained thy Brother. The place by the way, speaks no doubt of personal offenses,
as (...) and (...) denote, whether they be such as be great or less, done in
the private or in the public, I will not dispute, only I suppose the trespass
to be such as is wounding to the conscience, so that thou go to him, not so
much for thy injury, as that God is offended, and sin is upon him, though the
wrong be indeed private unto thee. Now if he shall hear thee, that is, be
convinced by thee, thou have gained him, that is, by reducing him to repentance
for his sin, and wrong against thee, thou convertest him to God, and closest
thy self with him. It follows, But if he will not hear thee then take with thee
two or three more, the reason of this is added, that by their testimony, thy
words may be established, and if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto
the Church, that is, I suppose, such as have authority (wheresoever seated I
enquire not neither) to rebuke him publicly; but if be neglect to hear the
Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen and an Publican, that is, to our
present purposes, let him alone to the judgment of God, thou have done all a
private Christian can do. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on
earth, that is while you leave the man to the judgment of God, as thus bound by
you, seeing he will not be brought to repentance that you may forgive him,
shall be bound in Heaven, this is most fearful and patheticall; and what you
shall loose, that is upon his repentance forgiving him, as you ought, (upon
pain of Gods severity, v. ult.) shall be loosed in Heaven, that is forgiven
also of God; which is a most sweet effectual motive unto this excellent duty.
Again (as speaking of the same matter) I say unto you, if two or three of you
shall agree on Earth, as touching any thing that they shall ask, that is, if
these two or three that come with you, or you your selves, that are reconciled,
do as is fit upon reconciliation, fall to prayer together unto God, as to the
forgiveness of these Trespasses, and removeall of your grievances, wherein you
are agreed, and so join in love again, it shall be done for them of my Father
which is in Heaven. See here how amply and blessedly this matter is set forth.
Not that I will deny this Text to be taken, both usually, and properly, of
Church Discipline, but that it may also be thus interpreted, of private binding
and loosing, for the more vigourous enforcing the much-wanted duty of fraternal
correption, I assent to St. Augustine, Chrysostom, Theophilact, as they are
quoted by others.

The other is, to prosecute him after this with all the offices of neighbourly
kindness and Christian Charity. I say unto you love your Enemies. Mat. 5.44.
And if thine Enemy hunger feed him, if he be thirsty give him drink, for hereby
shall thou heap coals of fire on his head and the Lord shall reward thee. Pro.
25.21, 22. These coals of fire, is a metaphor probably, from Goldsmiths, which
they use in their metals, and so import not, (we may conceive) the using means
barely to aggravate our Enemies Judgment, which yet, it may indeed
consequently do, but the using means directly and immediately to melt him, to
wit, that these coals upon his head, may fall into ashes on his heart, and he
repent in them

And these are the ways we are to take. I know many may be apt to think, there
be others, more brave, and befitting them, who look uppon't, as poor, abject,
and mean for them to stoop, or seek to any, whom they had rather overcome with
gallantry and scorn. But as we read of Daniel, and his companions, who having
purposed in their hearts, not to defile themselves, looked more fair, fat, and
lovely, in their countenance, with their own pulse and water only, that was
lawful for them, than they could have done with the portion of the Kings meat:
So will the ways of God, how coarse soever they may seem to the Stomach of a
proud man, make a person, let them but the tried, come off with better liking,
and show fairer in the eyes of those with whom he has to do, than all those
ways of height and bravery, which do pass, for the most noble and royal in
the World. Whereof yet I think, I may even apply that of our Savior. Yea are
they that justify your selves before Men, but God knows your hearts, for
that which is highly esteemed amongst Men, is abnomination in the sight of God.
And that of Solomon, Ahaughty heart goes before destruction, but before honor,
humility. Luke 16.15. Pro, 18.12.

Use 2. For support or consolation, to all those that thus set themselves to
please the Lord. Three things may comfort such, as to our purpose.

1 That howsoever thou have Enemies and troubles in the Earth, yet the order
and dispose of them all, is of God. 1. In their rise. They are but what he has
designed long since. 1 K. 12.15. 2. In their measure. He that has said to the
Sea hitherto shall thou pass and no farther, he dothlikewise bound and limit
the raging of the People. Psalm. 65.7. 3. In their ends. He has many gracious
ends oftentimes hereby, To prove thee. To humble thee. To discover thy sins. To
file off thy rust. To clear thy innocence. To exercise thy graces, which are
many, patience, hope, love, gentleness, etc. To make thee weary of the World.
And in the whole, to draw thee nearer to him

That howsoever he disposes of thee as to enmities without, yet cannot all that
thy Enemies do, ever take away thy peace within, thy peace in thy conscience,
thy peace with God with whom thou walk. It is observed by Josephus of Herod,
which is seen likewise in his History of him, that he was a man, Ever, and most
highly successful in his affairs abroad, as in his coming off with Caesar,
and in his wars: but he was unfortunate still in his own house, as in his
jealousies abort his Sons, and Wife, with the sad effect of those things. It
fares quite contrary now with the good Christian, who may indeed have his
plagues, mischiefs and troubles in the World, but he comes off well still with
his matters at home, he has his quiet however in his own breast. I remember
good Eli has such a speech, If one man sin against another the Judge shall
Judge him, but if a man sin against the Lord who shall entreat for him? 1 Samuel
2.25. From this passage I gather by way of contrary, it is nothing in
comparison, with what men we fall at odds, so long as we have but God still to
be our Friend

3. That thou have here so firm a bottom to rest upon, to wit, that whatsoever
thy Adversaries are, God is engaged to take up the matter between thee and
them, for thy present satisfaction or final good; so that thou art only, to go
on in thy duty, and cast all thy care upon him. He shall lift up thy hands from
thy loins, when thou lifts up thy eyes unto him. When Israel shall serve the
Lord, then shall Strangers (that is his Enemies) no more serve themselves of
him. Ier. 30.8.7.

Use 3. For direction. And there are seven or eight directions, which I shall
humbly offer you about this matter.

Direct. 1. Let thy heart be settled in expectation, that thou shall have
injuries and enemies in the World. Woe unto you, says Christ, when all men
speak well of you. Luke 6.26. It is not for a man to say I will go live here,
ore there, and so carry my self that I will have the love of every one, and so
be happy. The man that says so, is scarce acquainted, either with himself,
that is, his own vanity, or with the diverse complexions and spirits of others,
who many times, will even make this an occasion of their enmity, as of their
envy, that indeed they can find none, Qui pravos peccare non vult, ejus similis
est, qui non vult ficum ficus far, infantes plorare, equum hinnire. which is
englished for us Luke 6.44. Besides the Scripture is express that all those
who will live godly must suffer persecution. 2 Timothy 3.12. The prudent
Christian, is not therefore to build his designs upon this, that he shall have
no Enemies, or upon supposall he shall avoid all troubles, but that he shall
have them and bear them. For the expectation from within, being less, counts
the ignorance more than the cause which brings the torment, says the Book of
Wisdom, chap. 17. v. 13.

Direct. 2. Making account that thou shall have Enemies, labor to keep thy
Soul within it self, that it be not drawn forth or engaged by those enmityes.
Fret not thy self because of evil Men. Pro. 24.19. Neither be thou envious at
them, when they prosper and bring their devices to pass. Psalm. 37.1, 7. Si
cujus impudentia (sive quocunque vitio) offenderis, percontare te ipsum, an
possit fieri, ut nulli sint in mundo impudentes? Non potest autem hoc fieri; Ne
igitur postula, quod fieri nequit; Est enim hic unus ex impudentibus iis quos
esse in mundo oportet. That is, Art thou offended with any ones enmity, malice,
envy, impudence, or the like! Ask thy self whether it can be, that there should
be no envious, malicious impudent, or naughty persons, in the World? Now this
cannot be. Do not thou therefore require what cannot be; And be not so offended
man, for this is one of those froward, envious, naughty impudent persons that
must be in the World. Cease from anger, and forsake wrath, fret not thy self in
anywise to do evil. It is all one, whether one be my Enemy, or not, so long as
I am unmoved (or not fretted) at it; but if once the Spirit comes to be
engaged, every little word or action is a wound, which discomposes and troubles
us. It is a good expression therefore of our Savior. Luke 21.19. In patience
possess your Souls. Passion makes a man that he is not apudse, that he is not
himself; Patience affords him the use of his reason, and his strength. The City
of Ai Ios. 8. is a figure of passion; While the men of Ai are drawn forth and
engaged with their Enemies, their City behind them is all on fire: So is it
with passionate men, when they come to return home to their own bosom, all is
in a combustion, and they are quite lost. He that has no rule over his own
Spirit is like a City broken down and without walls. Pro. 25.28.

I will enlarge here. It is never good to strike so, as if we miss to fell
ones self with the striking. Suppose with a blow (says Seneca) thou should hit
thy Arm into thy Enemy, that thou could not draw it back again, such is the
engagement of passion. It is the anger of a wasp, and not of a man to smite so,
as to lose thy sting, and leave thy strength behind thee.

Direct. 3. Set a watch then to this end at the doors of thy heart, that none
of those things do enter, or at least be not harbored there, that will engage
or interesse our passions under these Enemies. Such are these.

1. A delicacy, tenderness or weakness of mind, not able to bear blows. If
thou faintest in the day of adversity thy strength is small. Proc. 24.10.

2. An over-eagerness of heart set upon one thing. The covetous man, who is
thus described, one that minds earthly things. Phi. 3.19. is presently in a
fewd, if any accident hinders his gains. The man set upon his reputation,
cannot endure the approach of the least matter, breath, or undertaking that is
but like to touch him there. If you take away Michaes God once what has he
more? Iud. 18.24.

3. Pride, ambition, vain glory, which follows upon this. When Saul sought to
slay his adversary, Go, says he, and take knowledge where his haunt and
lurking king place is. I. Sam. 23.22, 23. If I were now sent out upon such an
err and here, to find how we might best come to be rid of the soarest troubles
we have by adversaries, I should bring word with the certainty, Pride is the
haunt, were you must come upon them, to prevent and slay them. Only of Pride
comes contention. Pro. 13.10.

4. Curiosity, with her two companions, garrulity and credulity. Take no heed,
says the preacher, unto all words that are spoken, lest thou hear thy Servant
curse, or speaking evil of thee, for oftentimes also thine own heart knows,
that thou thy self likewise has spoken evil of others. Ec. 7.21, 22.

5. A suspitiousnesse and jealousy of others evil intentions. 2 Samuel 10.3.
More especially, an opinion that we are contemned. Thou should rather think
any thing by them, says one, that they act out of envy, design, or the like,
rather than this. When God himself (who has passions we must know attributed
to him after the manner of men and so thereby we are to learn what our selves
are) comes once to think himself to be despised (though he might bear before
with all their other malice long) his wrath arises withoutremedy. 2. Chro.
36.16.

6. An overfondnesse, or stiffnesse to ones own conceit, which is expressed in
Pro. 3.5. by a leaning to ones own understanding, that is, such a positure, as
it were of the Soul, relying hereupon, that if it fail, theman is gone. To
which I may add on the other hand, an over-easinesse, or yielding too much unto
others, either in their persuasions, Proximus sum gomet mihi; or in their
threats; for Fear, as an asoresaid Author notes well, is nothing else but a
betraying of the succors which reason offers. Wisd. 17.12. These are the
things then, amongst others, which are great engagers of the mind, and must be
avoided.

Direct. 4. Be sure to live righteously and inoffensively to others, and then
others injuries will be inoffenfive unto thee. To do no body injury is the best
way to bear a great many. It is a speech of Antoninus de se ipso lib. 7. that a
good man should be able to say as the gold, the diamond, or the like, let other
folks think of me, speak or do my me, what they will, the gold is gold still; I
must be a diamond, a good man still. (...). See thou a rock, how the waters
beat and dash against it, and yet that stands all the while unmoved, offering
no violence unto them: So does the righteous man in the midst of injuries. And
this comparison our Savior uses, Mat. 7.24, 25. The wise man, says he, builds
his house upon a Rock, and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the
winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell not, because it was founded
on a Rock. Which may be enriched with his own example, who was the greatest
sufferer of all sorts of injuries, a man of sorrows, yet always doing good,
and so went about, the most quiet meek innocent lamb upon the Earth. Is. 53.7.

Direct. 5. Being safe upon thine own guard of honest dealing toward them,
labor to steel thy self so against thy Enemies, that thou may be hard
enough for them, by not caring for them. A serious Christian may say many
times, Here be people, were malicious, they are angry with me, and do me all
the discourtesies still they can, but I am hardenough for them, I care not for
it. Then came his Disciples and said, know thou not that the Pharisees
areoffended? but he answered, let them alone, Mat. 15.14. (...) Does any one
despise me, let him look to it; I will look only that I neither say or do any
thing to deserve despising, says the forename Pious heathen, worthy of his
Empire.

Direct. 6. Take heed that this hardiness, this not caring of thine, or
passing over the injuries of others, be Christianized with those cautions that
you may not thereby displease God. There are four at least of these cautions
with which it must be joined.

1. With Innocence. It is not for a man to give occasion of offense, and not to
care then, this were like a Gallio not a Christian, Acts 18.17. Mat. 18.7.

2. With an holy grief and anger as to the sin against God, when yet we pass by
the injury to us. And Jesus locked round about on them with anger, being
grieved for the hardness of their hearts, Mar. 3.5.

3. With a conscience of discharging our duty in seeking to gain them to
repentance. If thy brother trespass against thee, thou shall rebuke him, Lu.
17.3. And Mat. 18. before.

With a due regard also, in some measure to our own good name. A good name
(says the wise man) is as a precious ointment, Ec. 7. 1. The loss of our
reputation may possibly hinder us from doing that good, which otherwise we
might do. God may have more service done happily by our good name than without
it, and we must not therefore let Gods instrument get a crack if we can help
it; though we are at any time to part with it, for his name, that is above it.

Direct. 7. Fortify thy noblest part, that is thy judgment, with argument and
reason, that may blunt, if not turn the edge, of the sharpest provocations. I
shall out of my penury cast you in some.

1. It is a royal thing to do well, and suffer ill for it.

2. The best victory that a man can have in the world is to conquer himself.

3. A man ordinarily is no farther hurt by another, than he opens the wound
himself by his own conceptions.

4. Thou should be always ready to say thus, If any one has indeed done me
wrong, the evil is with him, he has the worst of it; but perhaps he has done
me none. (...)

5. A strong mind is better shown by tearing than doing. To be angry and
enraged, is not valor, but infirmity; Even as it is weakness (says one after
Seneca) in old men and Children to run when they should but go. And in this
sense the words of the Prophet are true, though it be true it is not altogether
the Prophets sense. Their strength is to sit still, Is. 30.7.

6. To think ones self despised, or, an opinion of contempt, which of any thing
sinks depeest with most, is but a betraying that want of worth a man knows by
himself, and makes him lesser than him, of whom he thinks himself to be
contemned.

7 Take wit in thy anger, is a good Proverb though it be not Solomon's. Phocions
speech, O Athenians, if Alexander be dead to day, be will be dead to morrow,
Plutarch applies well to passion: If thou have just cause to be moved now, thou will have the same when thou have staid longer. Pause, and consider, if it
prove to be none hereafter, thou have none now neither. Peccavit, sed non
sponte. Ipse quoque in multis delinquis. (...). Ne hoc quidem satis scis an
peccent. Ut maxim stomacheris, tamen vita hominum momentanca, ac paulo post
omnes morimur, that is, Has he offended thee? He did it ignorantly, against
his will. Has he offended? thou thy self also do offend. thou do ill, and
art but such another as he. Has he offended? Nay thou art not certain that
indeed it is an offense. Has he offended? Why, though thou storm never so
much, he and thou both are mortal men, even momentary both, and soon must to
the grave. There the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary be at
rest. Job. 3.17.

8ly. The injuries we receive are either deserved or undeserved; If undeserved,
they are but, as water thrown upon a rock, that fall off again of themselves:
If deserved, they ought not to provoke us, only to repentance.

9ly. The provocations that are given are either from worthy persons, or
unworthy; If from unworthy why should thou set thy wit against theirs? Answer
not a Fool in his folly: If worthy, then will they deserve thy forbearance, and
reconciliation.

10. Let thy enemies be what they will, either their injuries be greater or
less; If they be little, then thou should think them little, and not be
moved; Lesser injuries (I have said sometimes) are like the buzzing of flies
about the face, which a wise man may beat off with his hand, but not be angry
at them. If they be great ones, the more is thy bravery and magnanimity to wave
them. The discretion of a man deferreth his anger, and it is his glory to pass
over a transgression, Pro. 19.11.

Direct. 8. If thy reason for all this cannot guard thee from receiving of some
wounds and impressions through the bitter dealings of thy adversaries, learn
thou the art of closing them again, by the sweetness of Christianity. Now there
are these sweetnings and lenitives here, when the Lord shall please to supple
the heart with them.

1. By Prudence, Christian prudence, or that wisdom from above, which is first
pure, then peaceable. Thus Abigail dealt with David, 1 Samuel 25. Ja. 3.17.

There is indeed a double sweetness that God has in his hands to give to his
people, as he sees it most fitting for them, in regard of their enemies. The
sweetness of victory which he works either by giving them a hand over them;
(sometimes Gods Children are put to it to contend, and do prevail) a head over
them, (as here;) or a heart over them, (which is best;) And the sweetness of
Satisfaction, when he does not bring up their conditions to their minds, but
does bring their minds to their conditions, which is as good, and more
Christian; so that though the cup does not, the bitterness of it passes from
them, and they find it in the bottom but the sweeter to them. I put these
together, the last I intend most.

2ly. Then, By pity, spiritual mercy, compassion. I mean not that toward our
selves, the bemoaning our own case, How do I suffer! which though in has some
ease, is too feminine: but that which is toward our enemies. Alas! think
thou, how do these people sin against God and wound their own Souls? They think
to spite me, and malice me, but do but (even cruelly) torment themselves. Poor
Souls! I pity them. How does God, as it were, make sin righteous, whiles envy
and wickedness does thus punish it self? Maleficus suam quisque effert crucem.
Now as soon as thou find thy heart but begin to give, relent, or yearn thus,
press it, pursue the vein that is sprung, follow it upon thy spirit, while it
comes, let me tell thee once for all, thou must be at pains, and in earnest with
thy soul, in the things as we go along, or else thou art but like to lose their
effect; and then, when thou have gotten up thy self unto this, that indeed thou
do thus, all that anguish thou did feel before in thy sufferings, under thy
Adversaries, spends it self herein; I say this thy compassion on, or here
rather over them (which their very sin it self, their present torment, their
vengeance to come, or perhaps something else, as their vain rage, folly, deadly
exasperation, that hitches more, does excite) swallows the same up quite, and
sets thy spirit, as it were above them, and all their hurt. For these
affections or passions of ours, I perceive, like the Elements, when they will
not be annihilated, will yet melt, and resolve (or go) into one another.

3ly. By a search and reflection on our innocence. Guilt indeed will make the
least scratch to rankle, but Innocence soon heals. Preserve me O Lord, says
David, for I am holy. It is spoken in reference to his enemies, and is not a
justification of the person, but of the cause. Judge me, try me, if there be
any such iniquity in me, O it is sweet to be able to say thus, Plead my cause
for me, They pursue me wrongfully. They that hate me without a cause are
multiplied, they are my adversaries because I follow the thing that good is.
These and the like expressions, are the pantings of a soul, that is wounded by
enemies, and fetching salve from its own integrity. It is the time of Jacobs
trouble, but he shall be saved out of it.

4ly. By consideration of our own dealings with God. And this methinks I feel
while I am speaking, to enter, touch, and go to the quick. Thou art one happily
that carriest thy self fairly, and not only innocently, but kindly to such a
person, yet the more thou seek to win him, he is exasperated, and becomes
thy enemy. Well now, Here Lord say thou, here is a looking-glass of my
dealings toward thee. Thou have been gracious toward me, and folowedst me
daily with thy mercy, yet do I stand out against thee, and go on in my stubborn
ways. Oh that as I see my own perverseness in his, which is grievous unto me, I
may cease both to be offended with him, and my offense toward thee. And David
said, Let Semei curse, let him alone, for the Lord has bidden him, 2 Samuel
16.11. The Lord certainly had dealt very kindly with David all along but David
had fallen very foully from God, and God had justly brought him into his present
condition for it: and now when he sees this man unto whom he had happily never
done and hurt in all his life, fall thus foul on him, he reflects upon his own
carriage toward the Lord, and that rebukes, and quiets him. Truly Sirs, a
Christian many times may even be beholding to you for your injuries, when they
are but made through grace, an admonition to him of his sin, and return unto
the Lord.

5ly. By lowliness, or humility, which is a most Christian grace, and excellent
virtue. Who am I that am but Dust, and what is my fathers house? Am I not
nothing, and worse than nothing? and why should I take it ill, to be vilified,
and counted as nothing? These people reproach me and speak evil of me, but
should they know all my self know by me, Alas! they do not speak of me half so
bad as I am. I will yet be more vile, and base in my own sight. 2 Samuel 6.22.
Let a Christian surely get his spirit once to this pitch, and he may perhaps
hear the noise of reproach and injury like bullets whizzing over his head, but
he shall never feel any wound at heart, or be hit by them. They have said to
thy soul, Bow down that we may go over, and thou have laid thy body as the
ground, and as the street to them that went over.

6ly. By magnanimity, or Christian courage, joined with this spirit of
meekness, in the discharge of our duty. The heart must be unbroken, humility
else is an afflicting thing. This consists in a free reproof or rebuke of our
neighbor, before commended. And it is a sweet Text to this same effect, which
I would not have out of the Bible for any thing. Lev. 19.17. Thou shall not
hate thy Brother in thy heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and
not suffer sin upon him. It may fare sometimes with a Christian, that the
bitterness of some men, has sunk so deep in his thoughts, that he cannot get
it off, and finds no ease. Now it pleases God to give him a heart, to go to
them, as a Christian, upon the score of this Text, and tell them of their
doings, and this presently empties his breast, even as it were from one Vessel
to another. Such is the bofome and design God toward us, in many of his
commands, that our duty becomes our cure, and that, even when nothing else will
do it: As if the Lord had first thought in such and such cases, what were best
for us to do for our good: and them appointed that to be done to serve him by
it.

7ly. By forgivenes, or condonation. Christians, I will tell you one thing, how
you shall have the pleasure of revenge, as to your enemies, without the evil
of it; that is, forgive them. Forgiveness indeed is a thing which may proceed
from generousness or height of Spirit, which puts the injuries we receive from
others, quite beneath us, and so has this effect, I mention. Or, it is such,
as proceeds from a patient submission of the Soul to the will of God in long
suffering and forbearance toward them, which has in it more feeling, and more
comfort, as also much more of a Christian. Thou may say, here are these
wrongs done against me; and here be my sins against God. If he forgive ten
thousand talents unto me, shall not I forgive an hundred pence for him? Mat.
18. Forgive me O Lord my Debts, as I forgive my Debtors. Let all bitterness,
wrath and anger be put away from you, with all malice, and be ye kind one to
another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake
has forgiven you. Ephesians. 4.31, 32.

8ly. By a religious, pious or holy appeal, or recourse, of the soul unto the
judgment of God which is to come. It is thy duty indeed to forgive thy
enemies, and this thou would do; nevertheless there be some things happily
stick so close on thee, thou can not pass them over so easily as thou
desire. Thou can not think it fit, thou can not find in thy heart, that
such persons, or such things, should go unpunished. Besides, thou art amused,
and afflicted, as many good men before thee have been, to see the wicked
prosper in their malice, and the innocent oppressed. Well now, thou should
consider that there is a day of the declaration of the righteous judgment of
God, when he will certainly render to every one according to their works. Thou
would fain indeed be presently satisfied, thou would have those, who have
wronged thee, presently submit, and make restitution, but thou should rather
chide thy unbelieving heart, that cannot be content to stay till that day, when
it will be better for thee, and worse for them, if it be not done till then.
Hence do we read of our Savior, that when he suffered, he threatened not, but
committed himself to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2.23. And hence have
we the precept, Avenge not your selves, given with this reason, for it is
written Vengeance is mine, I will repay faith the Lord; Which, seems to me to
import no less than this, that though we are both to forgive, and pray the Lord
to forgive our enemies, (as including their repentance, the only way to be
forgiven of him, which will be suitable enough therefore therein even to thy
greatest passion christianized:) Yet if they do not, but continue in their
ways, the pious Christian may with a kind of mourn-full joy relieve his Soul
herein, that there is a day of recom ence coming, when God will glorify his
righteousness, and then thou shall have full satisfaction. It is a righteous
thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you
who are troubled rest, when the Lard Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven. 2.
These. 1.6, 7. Psalm. 103.6. Lo here is a full measure for thee, even pressed
down, shaken together, and running over.

9ly. By Charity, and thy good Deeds, See back in the Instruction. Be not
overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. To. 12. ult. Si quis limpido,
et dulci fonti assistens, convitium faciat, ille quidem ^ob id, non cessat
puram aquam scaturire, that is, picture me a base fellow at the head of a most
pure fountain, reviling and casting stones at it, so much as he can to trouble
it, and yet the Fountain running for all that, the same sweet waters as it did
before, even for this very person himself when he is weary to drink of them:
and then you have methinks but a fit emblem, to set forth a Christian right,
in this matter.

10ly. By prayer, which is the means to exercise most of these. Prayer, (says
Luther) is the Leeches of my cares and troubles. Now these two last, Charity
and Prayer, are put together by our Savior. Do good to them that hate you, and
pray for them that despitefully use you. And they tend to our peace, either in
regard of the winning over the heart of our adversaries to us whilst we go to
God to convert them, and use that behavior our selves which should draw them,
that is no here so proper, as before: Or in regard of putting our own hearts
into that frame, temper and condition, we should stand in, as to the sight of
God toward them, that yields us those melting reflections, and pathetical
openings of our case to him, that does not only bring relief, but more then
compensat our grievances by them. The wicked (says David often) are risen
against me: For my love they are my adversaries, but I give my self unto
prayer, Psalm 109.2, 3.4, And again, This poor man (that is himself Psalm
34.6.) cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles.

Indeed in it were not for this, that a man, who walks uprightly and is
oppressed and overwhelmed Ec. 4.1. Psalm. 103.6.) had a God to go unto, to
unbosome his grief, to open his Soul, and tell all to him, for he will hear
thee even as long as thou will, what should he do? how could he many times even
live? his heart would be broken, if it might not thus break, melt, and pour out
it self before him. I cried unto the Lord, I powered out my complant before him,
I showed before him my trouble. Psalm. 142.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Psalm. 62.8. Psalm.
84.4. It is true, there is some kind of relieving lieving, sometimes in our
complaints to others, Heaviness in the heart of a man makes it stoop, but a
good word makes it glad, Prove. 12.25. But what is that to the answer of God in
our Prayers, when he shall speak the quieting word to glad us himself? Thou
shall call, and the Lord shall answer, thou shall cry, and he shall say, Here I
am. Isa. 59.9. Surely there is as much between these, as to the true heat and
comfort thereof as there is between the warm sun and the sparklings only of the
Horse shoe upon the flints, when a man rides cold, and wet in his Journey. As a
good fire and a clean hearth, in a cold Winters evening, so is a good God and a
conscience amidst afflictions.

I. H.

FINIS.

