The Humble Remonstrance OF THE General Council of Officers Met at Dalkeith the
fifth of May, 1653.

IN Behalf of themselves and the Forces in SCOTLAND:

Showing Their hearty Concurrence with his Excellency The Lord General Cromwell,
And his Council of Officers at White Hall, In Dissolving the late Parliament.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the sign of the Black-spread Eagle at
the West End of Paul's. 1653.

The Humble Remonstrance of the General-Councel of Officers met at Dalkeith the
fifth of May, 1653. in behalf of themselves, and the Forces in Scotland;
showing their hearty Concurrence with his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell,
and his Council of Officers at White Hall, in dissolving the late Parliament.
COnsidering the late Declaration from your Excellency and General Council,
showing the Grounds and Reasons for the Dissolution of the late Parliament, who
were chosen by the People for the Common good, and to procure the Wel-being of
those by whom they were entrusted, to remove Oppression, and Arbitrary Power,
and all Obstacles to the Peace and Freedom of these Nations, whose Interests
they ought to have preferred before their own particular: and yet after so long
expectation of some fruit of what they have formerly Remonstrated and Declared
unto the People, and so many years continuance, falling short of that good they
might have done, they should still so strangely (to the breach of those
Gentlemen's Engagement to your Lordship and your Council, mentioned in your late
Declaration) endeavor to perpetuate themselves, and thereby still to enslave
the Nation, who cannot but bless the good Hand of GOD in stirring up your
Hearts to bear witness against those evils and corruptions amongst them, which
too manifestly abounded, and are clearly evident, to the sadning of the hearts
of good men; and esteem it a wonderful Providence that directed you to so
necessary and acceptable a Work. We trust that the LORD who has not only led
you through many Difficulties from time to time, even to this present
Undertaking, but herein given you Wisdom and Courage once again to put forth
your selves in the Great Work of the LORD and his People in reviving those
Rights and Privileges that have been so long stifled; whereby the hearts of
thousands are refresht, as it appears by the good resentment that is had
everywhere of it: and we are assured and confident that the LORD will lead you
by the Right hand of Love, and make you walk in eaven paths, teach you Wisdom
and Righteousness, and enable you so to manage those weighty Affairs (which he
has now so seasonably called you unto) as that the hands of all good People
may be strengthened by you, and an happy Reformation produced in a greater
measure and shorter time, then was ever like to have been by the perpetual
sitting of those men whom the Lord has been pleased to lay aside. And herein
we shall not only pray for you, and rejoice to see those things brought forth
by you, waiting upon the Lord, and studying Righteousness and Peace; but shall
also, as far as the Lord shall enable us, with our Hearts and Hands, and all
our might, be ready to join with you, and to own you in the further prosecution
of this Great Work, with which we hope neither our Lives, nor any external
Comfort shall come in competition.

And we doubt no^ but all honest hearts in these Nations as in the ARMY) which
have not bowed their knees to Baal will (to a man) second you in making good
every syllable of what has been formerly declared. And at length we hope the
LORD will settle the Nations in Peace, and in the mean while raise up your
Spirits to tread upon and scorn those vile things which have polluted the hands
and hearts of many that have gone before you, and to act to the praise of his
great Name, and the comfort and exceeding refreshment of all his People through
the World.

We shall not say much more at present, but desire that you may go forth in the
strength of our GOD; then shall the Work of the LORD prosper in your hands, and
those mighty Lions which have lain in the way of a Pure and Righteous
Reformation, be removed. And we trust our Vows and Promises shall be no more
forgotten, nor shall we be led back again to stoop to any Egyptian yoke of
Bondage, either in Spiritual or Temporal Kingly Power.

Signed in the Name, and by the Appointment of the Commander in Chief, and the
General-Councel of Officers of the Forces in Scotland, William Clark, Secret.
Dalkeith 5. May 1653.
Imprimatur,

Gilbert Mabbot.
May 13. 1653.
FINIS.

