The humble Representation of his late Majesty's and Princes Domestic
Servants, signifying their Distressed Condition, and necessitated Designment
for Relief.
Whereas by the sad distraction of this Nation, and the fall of our late
Sovereign and Master, We, with our Wives and Children, have been exposed to the
greatest miseries of want, some of our Society being famished to death, and
most of us, with our Families, likely to perish, if not timely relieved, after
many ways attempted by humble Petitions, and all earnest solicitations, being
still helpless, and now altogether without hope of relief, we have made this
our last refuge, even to cast our selves and our Families upon the Charity of
Pious disposed Christians, in confidence, that God hearing our loud cries, and
graciously pitying our sad distress, will move their hearts with a relieving
bounty. And to prevent the abusing of any man's Charity through Imposture, by
some pretending themselves to have been the late Kings Servants; and others
taking upon them as employed in their behalf; We the late Kings Servants, about
the number of fifty, have joined our selves in a common Collection of the
private and Charitable Contributions of those whom God shall move with pity for
our relief (our Families many of them being very great:) And have obtained the
favor of some worthy Persons of known integrity, to oversee the equal
distribution of what is Collected, according to each persons place, necessity,
and condition. And to take off all suspicion of deceit in the Collection, the
Collectors employed in our behalf, are to receive by Box and Seal, what shall
be contributed to our relief, or indorsed on the backside of the Papers in
words at length.

These three Doctors are pleased to be Overseers, to see things equally
carried, according to each man's place, necessity, and condition. Emm. Uty, S.
th. D. Samuel Baker, S. T. P. Samuel Collins, Med. D.


THese are to certify, that we whose names are underwritten, do either upon
our own personal examination know, or upon others indubitable information
believe, this undertaking of the late Kings Servants for their relief, to be
really true; and therefore do recommend their very miserable condition to
others Charitable Contribution.

Earls, Barons, etc. Bishops, Deans, Doctors, and Ministers. Hen. Dover Ja.
Armachanus, Bishop of Armath Anthony Faringdon, B. D. Br. Sar. Bishop of
Salsbury To. Mossom, Eccl. S. Pet. Brune Ryves, S. th. Pr. Henry Virtue
Barkshire William Fuller, D. D. George Hall. Lodovick Wemes, S: theol D. Bryan
Walton, D. D. To. de Kellam Ja. Margetson. D. D. Jeremy Tailor, D. D. To. Bruce
Ri. Dukeson, D. D. George Gillingham, D. D. W. Maynard George Wild, D. D. Tho.
Swadlin, D. D. Salton H. Bernerd, D. D. Tho. Folwer, Knight. John Hewyt, D. D.
Joseph Hodgey, D. D: Henry Starling, D. D. Sa. Sibbales, D. D.


