The humble REPRESENTATION AND PETITION OF THE OFFICERS of the ARMY, TO THE
PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth of England. Presented to them Wednesday the 5th
of October, 1659. by Maj. General Disbrow, accompanied with the Field-Officers
of the Army, and subscribed by above two hundred and thirty Commission-Officers
in and about London.

Together with the Parliaments Answer thereunto.

Wednesday, October. 5. 1659.
ORdered by the General Council of the Officers of the Army of this
Commonwealth, That this Representation and Petition be forthwith printed and
published.

Tho: Sandford, Secretary.



LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills dwelling in Aldersgate Street next door to the
Peacock. 1659.

The humble REPRESENTATION AND PETITION OF THE Officers of the Army, To the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England,
Shows,
THat having had by Your order some late Votes of Parliament communicated to us
by Lieutenant General Fleetwood, our Commander in chief, occasioned by a Debate
in Parliament, upon the Petition and Proposals of the Officers, under the
Command of the Lord Lambert in the late Northern expedition; We have inquired
diligently into our hearts and ways, with reference thereunto; and finding
nothing amongst us but faithfulness and integrity to the Parliament and this
Commonwealth, we cannot but be sensible that there has not wanted some
persons, who have endeavored to beget misunderstanding between the Parliament
and Army: and to that end have represented our Actions and Intentions so, as it
is taken for granted there has been irregularity amongst us, at which we fear
you have taken offense. Whereas we are persuaded, that if there had not been an
anticipation, it would have appeared to all unprejudiced Spirits, that neither
we, (who for the generality of us, were utterly ignorant of that whereat the
offense is taken) nor our faithful brethren of the Northern Brigade, who Signed
the said Petition and Proposals, did Design or Intend any thing tending to the
interruption of the Parliament, the prejudice of the Peace of this
Commonwealth, or any other by, or sinister respect, not becoming the Trust
reposed in us. Wherefore being sensible of the evil Use that persons abroad may
make from the least apprehensions of Difference between the Parliament and
Army, and that we may as much as in us lies, remove all occasions of Surmize,
justify our own innocence before you, and frustrate the expectations of any,
who by blowing up the Coals of Dissension, hope to warm themselves thereby:

We have thought it our duty to present our naked thoughts to You, and hope You
will find so much of integrity and approved faithfulness in us, for the welfare
of this Commonwealth, as may continue a firm confidence of us, and engage Your
zeal against all such as shall go about to reproach Your faithful Army, or any
Member thereof for the future: especially considering that the Peace of these
Nations, next under God, depends so much upon a Cordial and Affectionate
Agreement and Union of the Parliament and Army, and an un-interrupted good
understanding of each other, and therefore we do humbly and plainly declare,

1 That notwithstanding what any persons may suggest or say to the contrary, we
are not for, but against the setting up of any Single Person whatsoever in
Supreme Authority: and for a demonstration hereof, we may appeal to Your own
judgments upon our late Actings; wherein, since our Declaration of the sixth
of May last, we have with all industry and faithfulness, endeavored to render
our selves serviceable to you and this Commonwealth, and have cheerfully
observed your commands; some of us with our lives in our hands in your late
service, wherein to our great encouragement the Lord has once more appeared to
own You and Your Army, and the good old Cause for which we have contended. And,
at the late return of this Parliament to the discharge of their remaining
trust, We did with simplicity and plainness in Our Humble Petition and Address
presented to you, manifest Our hearts and desires, and that with much unanimity
and fullness of consent, which we apprehended was well accepted by you.

2 That we have not since changed our principles, (leading to a well regulated
Commonwealth, wherein the Liberties of the people thereof, both spiritual and
civil, may be sully secured, and persons of known integrity, piety, and
ability, employed in places of trust and concernment) but resolve by the
assistance of God to remain constant to them. And make it our humble prayer to
God, that he would incline your hearts effectually to prosecute the same; and
make you instrumental in bringing forth such a foundation of Government,
whereby all the good people of these Nations may rationally expect that such
Liberties and Rights shall be preserved to them and their posterities. And we
can truly say that it is in our hearts earnestly, to desire that God would
crown you with the honor of making these Nations happy by such a settlement,
as may not be liable at every change of Governors to have the peace thereof
disturbed, by introducing new Governments.

3 Whereas a Petition and Proposals were lately drawn up by the Officers of the
Brigade that (under the Command of Major General Lambert) hazzarded themselves
in your service with good success, whereby through the blessing of God upon
them and others of your faithful friends and servants, the peace of this
Commonwealth is still continued; And the said Petition was sent up to some
Officers here, to be presented to the Lord Fleetwood, which has been by some
interpreted to evil and sinister ends, and from thence suggestions derived, as
if there were intentions to violate the Parliament, to set up a single person,
or another General, in order thereunto; We do sincerely profess (what ever the
designs of any persons may be to promote such causeless jealousies) We have had
no other then faithfulness and candor in our hearts and actions toward the
Parliament, nor do we apprehend (with submission we speak it) any reason or
cause of offense to be conceived against Your faithful servants, who lately
gave so ample proof of their fidelity and courage.

4 We cannot but esteem our selves unhappy to have been so misrepresented to
the Parliament, as should occasion such a public admonition upon record; And
considering what evil use may be made of these things by the public Enemy,
and to the end they may be disappointed of their hopes, and all such persons
discouraged as shall go about for the future, to promote jealousies, or by
misinformation to beget divisions betwixt the Parliament and their faithful
servants the Army, and that a good understanding may be preserved between them,
We humbly pray,

I. That the Officers of the Army, and particularly those who have reason to
bear the marks of your favor for their faithfulness in the late Northern
expedition, may stand right in your opinion and have your countenance.

II. That whatsoever person or persons shall for the future groundlesly and
causlesly inform the House against your Servants, thereby creating jealousies,
and casting scandalous imputations upon them, may be brought to examination,
justice, and condign punishment.

III. That it being an undoubted Right of the people to have a Liberty in a
peaceable and submissive way, to petition the Supreme Authority, which liberty
has been by your selves asserted, allowed, and approved of, we cannot but also
assert the said Liberty, and humbly conceive that your faithful Servants of
the Army have no way forfeited their Rights as Freemen: And that therefore
they hope it will be no offense for them to submit their humble desires to the
Parliament. And we hope and pray you will not discourage them from so doing.

IV. That you would be pleased to take into your serious consideration the
necessitous condition of the poor Soldiers of your Armies, and that all
possible care may be taken for their timely supply, their wants being such as
earnestly call for it; And that some speedy and effectual course may be taken
to provide for the maimed Soldiers, and the poor Widows and Orphans of such as
have been slain in your Service, that the blessing of the desolate may be upon
you.

V. That such who have freely offered themselves in the several Counties and
Cities of these Nations, to own and stand by you and your Cause in the late
Insurrection, with the hazard of all that is dear unto them, may have your
encouragement, and be employed in places of Trust and Command.

VI. That (it being a thing granted by all, that without the due execution of
martial Discipline, the peace, union, and good government of an Army cannot be
preserved) the discipline of the Army may be preserved inviolable, and in
particular that no Officer or Soldier of your Armies may be Cashiered or
dismissed from their places without a due proceeding at a Court Martial, or by
his own consent, except in Cases of Reducements or Disbandings.

VII. That it being judged necessary by the Parliament for the keeping of the
Army under such a Conduct as may render the same serviceable to the
Commonwealth, to appoint a Committee of Nomination, for the proposing of
Officers to the Parliament for their Approbation, we humbly pray, that no
Officers may be brought into the Army but such as shall first come under the
consideration of the said Committee, and be by them presented.

VIII. The office of the Commander in chief of the Army being of so great
concernment to the peace of this Commonwealth, and his Commission at present
(as we conceive) expiring within a few months, we humbly pray, that the
consideration of that matter may come before you, and some such effectual
course taken therein, as may prevent our fears, and the hazard of leaving the
Army to confusion.

IX. And that you would retain a good opinion of your Army, and, against all
discouragements whatsoever, proceed in the carrying on of that good work
entrusted in your hands for the glory of God and advantage of these Nations. In
the prosecution whereof through the help of our God we shall be found
(notwithstanding all endeavors to the contrary) faithful to you and this
Commonwealth.

Wednesday October. 5. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That the Petition and Representation of the Army,
and the particulars thereof be taken into consideration on Saturday next.

The Officers being called in again, M. Speaker, by the direction of the House,
gave them this Answer.

Gentlemen,
THe Parliament has read your Representation and Petition, and taking notice
of the good expressions of your affections and faithfulness to this Parliament
and Commonwealth which are therein, have commanded me to return you the thanks
of this House, and in their Name I give you thanks accordingly. I am likewise
commanded to let you know, that the Parliament has already taken into
consideration the relief of the poor Widows, Orphans, and maimed Soldiers, to
whom Pensions have been formerly allowed, and a way for satisfaction of the
Arrears due to the Officers and Soldiers, and shall endeavor to bring the
same to a speedy effect. The other matters of your Petition are appointed to be
taken into consideration on Saturday next.

Thomas St Nicholas Cler. of the Parliament.


