THE HUMBLE PETITION OF THE Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
LONDON, IN Common Council ASSEMBLED, Presented to the Right Honorable THE
LORDS and COMMONS in Parliament Assembled: WITH The Answer of the Lords to the
said PETITION.

Printed by RICHARD COTES, Printer to the Honorable City of London, August 8.
1648.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lords and Commons In Parliament Assembled.
The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London in Common Council assembled.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners being deeply sensible of the sad, miserable, and
deplorable condition of the King, Parliament and Kingdom, by the long
continuance of a bloody and unnatural War, (whereof they had great hopes to
be freed) after the Common enemy was subdued; the Army of our Brethren of
Scotland withdrawn; and the Kings Majesty placed at Holdenby, by consent of
both Kingdoms, (in order to a happy composure of all differences both in Church
and State;) But contrary to expectation, your Petitioners, to the great grief
and sorrow of their souls do find the Government of the Church to be still
unsettled; Blasphemy, Heresy, Schism, and profaneness increased; The relief of
bleeding Ireland obstructed; The War (to their great astonishment) again
renewed; The people of England thereby miserably impoverished and oppressed;
The blood of our fellow Subjects (spilt like water upon the ground;) Our
Brethren of Scotland (now entered this Kingdom) in a hostile manner; His
Highness the Prince of Wales commanding at Sea a considerable part of the
Navy, and other Ships under His power, having already made stay of many
English Ships, with Merchandises and Provisions to a very great value. By
reason whereof, Navigation will be destroyed, Seamen desert us, Merchants
enforced to leave off trading, Clothing and other manufactures of this Kingdom
fall to the ground, Wool which is the staple Commodity of the Land remain
unsold, the Mint stand still, Customs and other profits by Merchandising will
be very much abated, if not utterly destroyed; Corn, Salt, Cole, Fish, Butter,
Cheese, and all other provisions brought by Sea to this City and Kingdom
stopped; The innumerable number of the poorer sort depending only upon
manufactures, wanting work and bread, (as is greatly feared) will in a very
short time become tumultuous in all parts of the Kingdom; And many enforced to
remove themselves and families into Foreign parts, and there settle the
manufactures of this Kingdom never to be regained: And which will unavoidably
(in a very short time) totally ruin the people of this Kingdom.

Your Petitioners humbly conceive no visible way can prevent the apparent ruin
of these Kingdoms, but the speedy freeing of His Majesty from that restraint
wherein He now remains; and by a Personal Treaty, restoring to the King His
just Rights; to the Parliament their undoubted privileges; to the People their
Native Freedoms and benefit of the Laws, being (the Birthright of every
Subject) and by the due attendance of the Members of Parliament in discharge of
their trust to the Kingdom; and in observing the self-denying Ordinance.

The Premises considered, your Petitioners do humbly pray, That the Kings
Majesty may be speedily freed from that restraint wherein he now remains,
and humbly invited unto a Personal Treaty, for the settling of a safe and
well-grounded Peace; And that therein the Union between the two Kingdoms may
be preserved; That in the interim all acts of hostility both by Sea and Land
may by command from King and Parliament cease; and Trade free without
interruption; That the Government of the Church may be speedily settled
according to the Covenant; distressed Ireland releived; the People of the Land
(by disbanding all Armies) may be eased of their intolerable burdens; The
Liberty of the Subject restored; the Laws of the Land established; the Members
of this Honorable House enjoined to attend the service of the Kingdom; that
the Self-denying Ordinance may be effectually observed. And that this Honorable
House would be pleased, speedily to take into their serious consideration the
sad condition of such Merchants, whose ships and goods are under the power of
that Fleet, which is now with His Highness the Prince of Wales, and suddenly
to find some expedient for their releasment.

And your Petitioners shall daily pray, etc.
Die Martis, 8 Augusti, 1648.
THe Lords have commanded me to let you know, That they do thankfully accept
your often renewed expressions of your ardent zeal and care that all possible
means should be used for the procuring a safe and wel-grounded Peace; wherein
they do so far sympathize with your desires, that they do assure you, you may
with all confidence expect their constant and industrious employment of their
utmost endeavors for the obtaining of so great a blessing, whereunto they hope
Almighty God will give a happy success. And for the particulars contained in
your Petitions, they will take them into speedy consideration, that you may
reap all satisfaction and contentment thereby, so far forth as lies in their
powers, as they are bound in their duty they owe to the Common wealth, and as
they are obliged to the renowned City of London for their incessant
demonstrations of their affection and service to the Parliament ever since the
beginning of these unhappy distractions.

Io. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

