SIR EDWARD HVNGERFORDS VINDICATION, FOR THE SVRRENDRING of Malmsbury in
Wiltsshire to the Kings forces, after it was taken by SIR WILLIAM WALLER As it
was sent in a Letter from the said Sir EDWARD HVNGERFORD to a worthy Member of
the House of COMMONS;

And now published for the satisfaction of all such as desire to be truly
informed of the whole passages in the winning and loosing of MALMSBVRY, within
less then a weeks time in April last

LONDON. May 6. Printed for Francis Leach, Anno Dom. 1643.

SIR EDWARD HVNGERFORDS Vindication, for the surrendering of Malmsbury in
Wiltshire to the Kings forces, after it was taken by Sir William Waller.
SIR,
I Have not heard that either the letter subscribed by Sir William Waller, Sir
Arthur Haslerigge, and my self at Malmsbury, to certify the Parliament of the
taking of that town, or mine, (within a few days after) relating the hasty
deserting of that town unto the enemy; was ever read, or came to the view of
either House of Parliament, Wherefore to avoid mistakes or mis-understandings,
that may happen by Common fame, I shall briefly give you the true relation both
of taking and deserting of the said Town. Upon the Tusday senight before
Easter, about one of the clock in the afternoon, Sir William Waller came
before it, and at the first onset took the Suburbs, but the Town held out
longer, being fiercely assaulted by our men, all that afternoon, till about
ten of the clock at night, and as well defended by the Enemy within then being
weary on both sides there was a pawse for a few hours, after which our drums
beating an Allarum, the enemy began to treat, and upon Wednesday by seven of
the Clock in the morning, Sir William did peaceably enter the Town, where
besides three hundred prisoners that was taken, there was an Iron Saker, some
Muskets, and some Pikes, and some few horses taken, but little or no
ammunition.

I was appointed to take the charge of that Town and accordingly expected to
have it left withal things for defense, but much business happening, and Sir
William Waller hastening out of Town upon his design toward Gloucester,
before any consultation, could be had concerning the settlement thereof, upon
Thursday I went out of Malmesbury to wards Tedbury, with Sir William Waller at
what time the Town was left with more Prisoners then Soldiers, without
Ammunition and money, and by the way mentioning to Sir William Waller, the
dangerous condition of that Town if he left not there a very considerable
party, especially in case he removed to any remote place, without forceing the
enemy first from Cirencester, who was there at that time very strong both in
horse and foot, whereupon Sir William Waller did that evening at Tedbury order
3. Barrells of Powder to be presently sent unto Malmesbury, and appointed Major
Clyfton to repair thither, to join with Major Trayle, in the ordering of the
forces there, that Captain Talbot with his Troop should presently go thither,
to guard the Prisoners from thence the next day to Bath and Captain Waldon
with his parcel of Dragooners, near upon 20. to remain at Malmesbury, I
conceiving that the said Sergeant Major Clifton sent thither by Sir William
Waller was a Commander able and fit to give direction and secure the Town, I
left all my forces with him at Malmesbury, and went my self to Bath attended
only with my own servants, speedily to send more Ammunition Men and Horse,
whereof there was not at Malmesbury a sufficient number for Scouts, as also to
get money for the payment of the Garrison at Malmesbury, whilst I was about this
work, had gotten my horses together, made up two companies ready on their
march toward Malmesbury, with Ammunition which was wanting there, for
Ordnance, and a supply of other Ammunition, news was brought that Malmesbury
was abandoned, (and for ought I could understand) rather upon the conceit then
sight of an enemy, the cause of this conceived to be, from an apprehension of
the power of an enemy near them; the small force they had then in the Town
(not exceeding one hundred and Twenty Soldiers) to make resistance, the
backwardens of the Country to come in to bear Arms or to assist with money
who seemed very forward whilst Sir William Waller was present but altered
their minds so soon as they did see him with his Army, to be departed from
them, my Soldiers generally discontented, that they had not Pillage as others
who took less pains (as they thought) and lost no blood, over burdened with
duties, being but a few in number, and howerly raised with Allarumes.

The Captains at odds amongst themselves, Major Trayle that should have
reconciled all, not so careful as he ought, Major Clifton that was sent to
join with him, gone away from thence to Bath, these two being the able
Commanders, especially trusted for the defense of the Town, One of the
Officers also amongst them, did much increase their fears, and seeing false
Alarumes, and after as their number decreased, did help to disarme the
remainder; also two of the Captains that should have encouraged them, told
them that they were all but dead men, if they did not fly forth presently,
they being the first that showed them the way by their example; after this the
soldiers could not be stayed, butein spit of their Captain and Officers which
were left, who sought to keep them in, they ran away so that within a hour
or two, there were scarce ten soldiers left in the Town, thus was
Malmsebury left at eleven of the Clock upon Satterday at night, no enemy
entering until seven of the clock next morning being Sunday.

At this present the enemy has in Garrison there, four hundred foot, and
Curston his Troop of Horse, Collonell Bawfeild, is appointed Governor
thereof, and this is the true relation of the winning and loosing of that
Town, within less then the space of a week, (as will be testified by many of
very good credit) wherewith I shall entreat you to acquaint the House, that
they may not suffer their servants in the Country to undergo an ill oppinion,
who have not deserved the same, which is all that I have at this time, to
recommend unto you, but that I am.

Bath. 28. April 1643. Your humble Servant. Edward Hungerford.

FJNJS.

